A PITVOVS LAMENTATION OF THE MISERABLE ESTATE OF THE CHVRCHE of Christ in
England, in the time of the late revolt from the gospel, wherein is contained a
learned comparison between the comfortable doctrine of the gospel, and the
traditions of the popish religion: with an instruction how the true Christian
ought to behave himself in the time of trial. Written by that worthy martyr of
god Nicolas Rydley, late Bishop of London. Never before this time imprynted.

Whereunto are also annexed certain letters of John Careless, written in the
time of his imprisonment.

Perused and allowed according to the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions.

A Lamentacion of the Church.
ALAS, what mysery is thy church brought unto (O Lord) at this day? Whereof
late ye word of the Lord was truly preached, was read and heard in every
town, in every church, in every vyllage, yea almost in every honest man's
house: alas now is it exiled and banished out of the whole Realm. Of late
whoo was not glad to be taken for a lover of Gods word, for a reader, for a
ready hearer, and for a learner of the same: and now (alas) who dare bear any
open countenance toward it, but such as are content in Christ's cause and for
his words sake to stand to the danger and loss of all that they have?

Of late there was to be found of every age, of every degree and kind of
people, that gave their dilygence to learn as they could out of gods word,
the articles of the christian faith, the commaundmentes of god and the lords
prayer. The babes and young children were taught these things of their
parents, of their masters, and wekely of their curates in every church: and
the aged folk which had been brought up in blindenes and in ignorance of
those things which every christian is bound to know, when otherwise they
could not, yet they learned the same by often hearing their children and
servants repeating the same: But now, alas, and alas again, the false prophets
of Antechrist which are past all shame, do openly preach in pulpets unto the
people of God that the cat^chisme is to be counted heresy: whereby their old
blindness is brought home again: for the aged are afraid of the higher
powers, and the youth is abashed and ashamed even of that which they have
learned, though it be Gods word and dare no more meddle.

Of late in every congregation throughout all England was made prayer and
peticion unto God to be delivered from the tyranny of the bishop of Rome and
all his detestable enormities: from all false doctrine and heresy: And now
alas, Satan has persuaded England by his falshed and craft to revoke her old
godly prayer, to recant the same, and provoke the fearful wrath and
indygnation of god upon her own pate.

Of late by strait laws and ordinances, with the consent of the nobles and
commonaltie, and full agreement and counsel of the prelates and clergy, was
banished hence the beast of Babylon, with laws, I say, and with oaths and al
means that then could be devised for so godly a purpose: But now alas, all
these laws are trodden under foot: the nobles, the commonaltie, the prelates
and clargie are quite changed and all those oaths though they were herein made
in judgment, justice and truth, and the matter never so good, does no more
hold then a bond of rushes, or of a barley straw, nor publyke perjury no
more fearethe them then a shadow upon the wall.

Of late it was agreed in England of all hands, according to Paul's doctrine
and Christ's commandment, as Paul says plain, that nothing ought to be
done in the church in the public congregation, but in that tongue which the
congregation could understand, that all might be edified thereby, wheather it
were common prayer, administration of the sacraments, or any other thing
belonging to the public mynisterie of gods holy and wholesome word: but alas
all is turned vpsidedowne. Paul's doctrine is put aparte: Christ's
commandment is not regarded: for nothing is heard commonly in the Church
but in a strange tongue that the people does nothing understand.

Of late all men and women were taught after Christ's doctrine to pray in that
tongue which they could understand, that they might pray with heart, that
which they should speak with their tongue: Now, alas, the unlearned people is
brought in that blyndenesse again, to thyncke that they pray, when they
speak with their tongue, they can not tell what, nor whereof: their heart is
nothing myndefull at all, for that it can understand never a whyt thereof.

Of late the lords supper was duly ministered and taught to be made common to
all that were true Chrystians, with thanks giving and settinge forth of the
Lords death and passion, until his returninge again to judge both quick and
deadde: But now alas, the Lords table is quyte overthrown, and that which
ought to be common to all godly, is made private to a few ungodly, with out any
kind of thankesgeuinge, or any settinge forth of the lords death at all, that
the people is able to understand.

Of late all that were endued with the light and grace of understanding of
gods holy mysteries, did bless god which had brought them out of that
horrible blyndenesse and ignorance, whereby in times paste being seduced by
Satan's subteltyes, they believed that the sacrament was not the sacrament, but
the thing it self, whereof it is a sacrament: that the creature was the
creator, and that the thing which has neither life nor sense (alas such
was the horrible blyndenes) was the Lord him self, which made the eye to
see, and has given al senses and understanding unto man. But now alas,
England is returned again like a dog to her own vomit and spuynge, and is
in worse case then ever she was: for it had been better never to have known the
truth then to forsake the truth once received and known. And now, not only
that light is turned into darkness, and gods grace is received in vain, but
also laws of death are made by high court of parliamente masterfully to
maineteine by sword fire and al kind of violence that heinouse Idolatry wherein
that adoration is given unto the lyueles and dum creature, which is only dew
unto the euerlyuynge God: yea they faye they can and do make of bread both man
and god by their transubstantiation. O wicked invention, and Satan's own
brood.

Of late was the Lords cup at his table distributed according to his own
commandment by his express words in his gospel as well to the laytie as to
the clergy, which order Christ's church observed so many hundredth years
after (as all the ancient ecclesiastical writers do testyfie) without
contradictio^ of any one of them that can be shewid unto this day. But now,
alas, not only the lords commandment is broken, his cup is denied to his
servants, to whom he commanded it should be distributed, but also with the
same is set up a new blasphemous kind of sacrifyce, to satisfye and pay the
price of sins, both of the dead and of the quick, to the great and
intolerable contumely of Christ our savior his death and passion, which was
and is the one only sufficient and everlasting auaylable sacrifice
satisfactorie for all the electes of god, from Adam the first, to the last that
shall be borne in the end of the world.

Of late that commandment of god, thou shall not make to thy self any
graven image, nor any similytude or lykenes of any thing in heaven above, or in
earth beneath, or in the water under the earth, thou shall not bow down to
them nor worship them: this comaundment of God (I say) was graven almost every
where in churches, was learned of every body both young and old: whervppon
Images that provoked the simple and ignorant people unto idolatry (as the wise
man says) were taken out of the churches, and straytly forbidden that none
should any where either bow down to them or worship them: But now alas
gods holy word is blotted and rased out of churches, and stocks and stones
are set up in the place thereof. God commanded his word so to be ordered
that it might be had in contynuall remembrance at all times and in every
place: and on the otherside he forbad images and idols so to be either made or
set in any place where any should bow or worship them: But now alas, that
which god commanded is not passed upon, and that which he forbyddeth is
masterfully maintained by falshed and craft, and wickedly vpholden.

Of late al ministers that were admitted to the public office and mynistery of
gods holy word, in their admission made a solemn professyon before the
congregation that they should teach the people nothing as doctrine necessary
to attain eternal salvation, but that which is gods own holy word or may
be thereof grounded without any doubt: whereby vanished and melted away of
themselves many vain yea wicked traditions of man, as wax before the fire:
but now at one brunte they are revived and are in full hope all to return
again in as great strength as ever they have been. And how can any man look
for any other thing, but when you have received the head, you must also
receive the whole body withal, orelles how can the head abide? The head under
Satan of al mischief is Antichrist and his brood, and the same is he which is
the baby lonical beast. The beast is he whervppon the whore sytteth, the whore
is that City says John in plain words, Apoc. 17.
which has the empire over the kings of the earth. This whore has a golden
cup of abominations in her hand, whereof she makes to drink the kings of
the earth, and of the wine of this harlot has al nations drunk, yea and
kings of the earth have lain by this whore, and merchants of the earth by
virtue of her pleasant merchandise have been made rich.

Now what city is there in all the whole world that when John wrote, ruled
over the kings of the earth? or what City can be read of in any time, that
of the city it self, chale^ged the empire over the kings of the earth, but
only the city of Rome, and that sense the usurpation of that see has grown
to her full strenghe? And is it not red that old and ancient writers
understand Peter's former Epistle to be written at Rome, and it to be called of
him in the same Epistle, in plain terms, Babylon? by the abominations
thereof I understand all the whole trade of the Romish relygion under the
name and title of Christ, which is contrary to the only rule of al true
religion, that is gods word. What word of god has that dy^elishe drab for
the mayntenaunce of her manyfolde abominations, and to set to sell souche
marchaundise wherewith (alas the madness of man) the wicked harlott has
bewitched almooste the whole world? Did not Peter the true Apostell of
Christ, of whom this stinking strumpette bears her self so high (but
falsely and without al just cause) did not he I say, give all the world
warning of her pelf and trashe, of her false doctors and apostles (for this
whore and beast will be called Dominus Apostolicus, who so ever say nay) after
this manner in his later epistle? There was among the people in times past false
prophets as there shall be also among you in time to come false teachers,
which shall privily bring in pestylent sects, even denyinge the lord which
has bought them and redeemed the^, procuring to them selus swift damp nation,
and many shall follow their dampnable ways, by who^ the way of truth shall
be rayled upon, and through covetousness by counterfaite tales or sermons they
shall (says Peter) make merchandise upon you. etc. And does not John likewise
in his revelation, after he has reconed up a great rablemente of this whoores
mystical merchandise, at the last (as though he would knit up al in plain
words, without any mist at al, setting out the whoores marchandyse) reckon up
among the rest, and concludes saying, Et animas hominu^, yt is to say, and
the souls of men too? Where, upon I pray you else rose this true proverb in
latin, Omnia Rome venalia, al things for money are set to sale at Rome? Was not
that a worthy commendation of Christ's vicar in earth that was written of our
holy father, one of the Alexanders a bishop of Rome, thus I wene, in latin?
Vendit Alexander cruces: altaria Christum,
Vendere iuri potest emerat ille prius.
These two verses in laten, I have red thus of one translated into english
rhyme.

Alexander our holy father the pope of Rome
sells for money both right and dome
And al kind of holiness ye holy father does not stick
to set to sell, ready money for to get.
And eke Christ him self he dare be bold,
to chop and change for silver and gold.
And why should any think this to be sore,
for what does he sell but yt he bought before?
I grant these verses to be light gere, and the verse is but rude, but alas
such conditions were more wicked and leude then any wit could express. If
these had been but the faltes of one or a few in number, they had been less
pernicious, and might have been taken for personal crimes, not to be imputed
unto that see, but now alas the matter is more the^ evident to all that has
godly understanding, that these crimes be grounded upon laws, be stablished by
costom, and set forth by all kind of wicked doctrine, falshed, and craft, and
therefore are not now to be esteemed for any one man's or of a few men's
personal crimes, but are now by laws, costome, and doctrine incorporated into
that wicked see, and makes in deed the body of the beast whereupon the
abominable whore does sit.

But you would know which be those merchandise which I said this whore
sets forth to sell, for the which al her false prophets with all their
iuggelyngs and crafty gloses can not bring one ^ote of gods word. Surely
surely, they be not only all these abhominatio^s which are come into the
church of England already, whereof I have spoken somewhat before, but also an
innumerable rablement of abhominatious and wicked abuses which now must needs
follow As popish pardons, pi^grymages, Romish purgatory, Romish masses,
Placebo and dirige, with trentalles and Scala coeli, dispensations and
immunities from all godly discipline, laws and good order, pluralities,
unions, and ^ot quottes, with a thousand moo. Now shall come in the
flattering friars, and the false pardoners and play their old pranckes and
knavery as they were wont to do. Now you shall have (but of the sea of rome
only, and that for money) canonysing of such saynctes as has stood stout
in the popes cause, shrinynge of relicques and from any kind of wickedness (if
you will pay well for it) clear absolution, a pena et cupla, with thousands of
years, yea at every poor bishops hand and suffragan ye shall have halowing
of churches, chapelles, altares, superalteres, chaleces, and of all the whole
household stuff and adornament, which shall be used in the church after the
Romish guise, for all these things must be esteemed of such high pry^e that
they may not be done but by a consecrate bishop only. O Lord, all these
things are such as thy apostles never knew. As for coniuringe (they call it
ha^owing, but it is coniuryng in deed) of water and salt, of chrysteninge of
belles and such like light things, what need I to speak? for every priest
that can but read, has power (they say) not only to do yt but also has such
power over Christ's bodi as to make both god and man once at ye least every
day of a water cake. After the rehersall of the said abominations, and
remembrance of a number of many mo, which (the lord knows) yrketh me to
think upon, and were to long to describe: when I consider on the other side
the eternal word of god that abides for ever, and the undefiled law of the
Lord, which turns the soul from all wyekednesse, and gives wisdom unto
the innocente Babes, I mean that milk that is without all gu^le, as Peter
does call it, that good word of god, that word of truth, which must be graven
within the heart, and the^ is able to save men's souls, that wholesome sede,
not mortal but immortal of the eternal and everliving God, whereby the manne
is borne a new and made the child of God, that seed of God whereby the man
of god so being borne can not sin, as John says (he means so long as
that seed does abide in him) that holy scripture which has not been devised
by the wit of man, but taught from heaven by the inspyration of the holy
ghost, which is profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct to instruct and
give order in all righteousness, that the man of god may be whole and sound,
ready to perform every good work: when (I say) I consider this holy and
wholesome true word that teaches us truly our bounden dewty toward our
lord god in every point, what his blessed will and pleasure is, what his
infinyte great goodness and mercy is, what he has done for us, how he has
given his own only dear beloved to death for our salvation, and by him has
sent us the revelation of his blessed will and pleasure, what his eternal word
wills us both to believe and also to do, and has for the same purpose
inspyred the holy apostles with the holy ghost, and sent them abroad into all
the world, and also made them and other dysciples of Christ, inspyred by the
same spyrit, to write and leave behind them the same things that they
taught, which as they did proceed of ye spyrit of truth, so by the confession
of all them that ever were endued with the spirit of God, were sufficient to
the obteyning of eternal salvation: and likewise when I consider that all that
man does profess in his regeneration when he is receued into the holy
catholyke church of Christ, and is now to be accounted for one of the lively
members of Christ's own body, all that is grounded upon Gods holy word, and
stands in the profession of that faith, and obedyence of those
commandments which are all contained and comprysed in Gods holy word: and
furthermore when I consider whom our sauyoure Christ pronounces in his gospel
to be blessed, and to who^ Moses gives his benedictions in the law, what
ways the Law, the Prophets, the Psalms, and all holy Scryptures both new
and old does declare to be the ways of the Lord, what is good for man to
obtain and abide in Gods favor, which is that says that justifies before
God, and what is that charity that does pass and excel al, which be the
properties of heavenly wisdom, and which is that undefiled religion that is
allowed of god, which things Christ himself calls the weighti matters of
the law, what thing is that which is only auaylable in Christ, and what
knowledge is that that Paul esteemed so much that he counted him self only to
know, what shall be the manner of the extreme judgment of the later day, who
shall judge, and by what he shall judge, and what shall be required at our hands
at that fearful day, how all things must be tried by the fire, and that that
only shall stand for ever which Christ's words shall allow, which shall be the
judge of al flesh to give sentence upon al flesh, and every living soul,
either of eternal damnation or of everlasting salvation, from which sentence
there shall be no place to appeal, no wit shall serve to delude, nor no
power to wythstande or revoke: when (I say) I consider all these things and
confer the same again and again, all those ways wherein stands the
substance of the Romish relygion, (whereof I spoke before) it may be euydente
and easy to perceive, that these two ways, these two relygions, the one of
christ the other of the Romish see in these latter days, be as far
dystaunte the one from the other as light and darkness, good and evil,
ryghteousnes and unrighteousness, christ and Belial. He that is hard of
belief, let him note and way well with him self the places of holy
Scryptures which be appointed in the margent, whereupon this talk is grounded,
and by Gods grace he may receive some light. And unto the contemner I have
nothing now to say, but to rehearse the saying of the prophet Esaye, which
Paul spoke to the Jews in the end of the acts of the apostles. After he had
expounded unto them the truth of Gods word, and declared unto them Christ out
of the law of Moses and the Prophets from morning to night all the day
long, he said unto them that would not believe, well (said he) spoke the holy
ghost unto our fathers saying, go unto this people and tell them ye shall hear
with your ears and not understand, and saying you shall behold, and not se
the thing, for the heart of this people is waxed gross or, dull, and with
their ears they are hard of hearing, and they have shut together their
eyes that they should not see, nor hear with their ears, nor understand
with their hearts, that they might return, and I should heal them, says the
lord God. Alas England alas that this heavy plague of god should fall upon
thee, alas my dear beloved country, what thing is it now that may do the good?
Undoubtedly thy plague is so great that it is utterly incurable, but by the
bottomless mercy and infinite power of almightye Godde. Alas my dear country
what haste thou done that thus thou have provoked the wrath of God to pour
out his vengeance upon thee for thine own deserts? Can thou be content to
hear thy faults told thee? Alas thou haste heard often, and would never
amend. England, thy faults of all degrees and sorts of men, of the
magestrates, of the mynisters, and of the common people, were never more
plainly told, sense thou barest that name, then thou diddeste bear them of
late even before the magestrates in king Edwardes days, but thou hardest them
only and did amend never a whit. For even of thy greatest magestrats some
(the kings highness then, that innocente, that godly hearted, and pereles young
christian prince excepted) evermore unkindly and vnge^tly against those that
went about most husely and most holesomly to cure their sore backs, spurned
privily, and would not spare to speak evil of them eue^ unto the prince him
self, and yet would they toward the same preacher outwardelye bear a ioly
countenance and a fair face. I have heard that Cranmer and an other whom I
will not name, He means him self.
were both in high displeasure, the one for shewinge his conscience secretly
but plainly and fully in the duke of Somersets cause, and both of late, but
specially Cranmer for repugning as they might against the late spoil of the
church goods, taken away only by commandment of the higher powers without
any law or order of justice, and without any request of consent of them to
whom they did belong. As for Latymer, Lever, Bradford, and knoxe, their
tongues were so sharp, they rypped in so deep in their galled backs, to have
purged the^, no dout, of the filthy matter that was festered in their hearts,
of insaciable covetousness, of filthy carnality and voluptuousness, of
intolerable ambition and pride, of ungodly lothsomnes to hear pore men's
causes, and to hear gods word, that these men of all other, these magestrates
the^ could never abide. Other there were very godly men and well learned yt went
about by the wholesome plasters of gods word, how be it after a more soft
manner of handling of the matter, but alas all sped in like. For all that could
be done of al hands, their disease did not minishe, but daily did
increase, which no doubt is no small occasion in ye state, of the heavy plague
of god that is poured upon England at this day. As for the common sort of other
inferior magestrates, as judges of the law: justices of peace, sergeantes,
common lawyers, it may be truly said of the^ as of the most part of the
Clergy, of curates, vicars, persons, prebendaryes, doctors of the law,
archdeaco^s, deanes, yea, and I may say of bishops also I fear me, for the
more part (although I dout not but god had and has ever whom he in every
state knew and knows to be his) but for the most part I say, they were never
persuaded in their hearts but from the tethe forward, and for the kings sake in
the truth of gods word, and yet all these did dissemble and bare a copye of a
countenance as if they had been ^ound within.

And this dyssimulation Satan knew well enough, and therefore desired and has
ever gone about that the high magestrates by any manner of means might be
deceued in matters of relygion, for then he being of counsel with the
dissimulation in the wordly, knew well enough that he should bring to pass and
rule all even after his own will.

Hypocrisy and dissimulation S* Hierome does call well a double wickedness, for
neither it loves ye truth, (which is one great evil) and also falsely it
pretends to deceive the simple for an other thing. This hipocrisy and
dissimulation with God in matters of religion, no doubt, has wholly also
provoked ye anger of god. And as for the common people, although there were
many good where they were well and diligently taught, yet god knows a great
number received Gods true word and high benefits with unthankful hearts.
For it was great pity and a lamentable thing to have seen in many places the
people so lothsomly and so vnreligiously to come to the holy communion and to
receive it accordingly, and to the common prayers and other divine service,
which were according to the true vein of gods holy word, in all points so
godly and holesomely set forth, in comparison of that blind zeal and
indiscreet devotion which they had before times to those things whereof they
understood never one whyt nor could be edifyed by the^ any thing at all. And
again as for alms deeds which are taught in gods word (whereby we are certain
that god is pleased with them, and does and will require such at our hands,
which are a part of true religion as S. James says, and such as he says
himself he sets more by then by sacryfice, as to provide for the
fatherless infants and orphans, for the lame, aged, and impotent poor nedy
folk, and to make publyke provision that the pouertye that might labor,
should have wherewith to labor upon, and so be kept from shameful beggary
and stealing) in these works I say, how wayward were many, in comparison (I
mean) of that great prodigality, whereby in times paste they spared not to
spend upon flatteryng friars, false pardoners, painting and gilding of stocks
and stones, to be set up and honored in churches plainly against gods word.
And yet because no place is to be defrauded of their just commendacion, London
I must confess that such godly works in sir Dobs knight then lord Mayor his
year, began maruelious well, the Lord grant the same may so likewise
persevere, continue, yea and increase to the comfort and relief of the nedy
and helpless, that was so godli begone. Amen.

All these things do mynyster matter of more mourning and bewaling the
miserable state that now is, for by this it may be perceayued how well
England has deserved this just plague of God.

And also it is greatly to be feared, that those good things whatsoever they
were that had their beginnynge in the time when Gods word was freely preached,
now with the exyle and banishment of the same, they will depart again.

But to return again to the consideration of this miserable state of Christ's
church in England, and to leave farther and more exquisite searching of the
causes thereof unto gods secret and unsearchable judgments, let us see what is
best now to be done for Christ's little selye flock. This is one Maxim and
princyple in Christ's law: he that denies me before men, him shall Christ deny
before his father and al his angels of heaven. And therefore every one that
looks to have by Christ our savior everlasting life, let him prepare him
self so, that he deny not his master Christ, or else he is but a cast away
and a wretch, howesoeuer he be counted or taken here in the world.

Now then saying the doctrine of antechriste is returned again into this
realm, and the higher powers (alas) are so deceived and bewitched yt they are
persuaded it to be truth, and Christ's true doctrine to be error and heresy,
and the old laws of antechrist are allowed to return with the power of their
Father again, what can be hereafter looked for by reason to the man of God and
true christian abiding in this realm, but extreme violence of death or else
to deny his master. I grant the heart of princes are in Gods hands, and
whether soever he will he can make them to bow, and also that christian
princes in old time used a more gentell kind of punishment, even to the^ which
were heritikes in deed, as degradation and depositio^ out of their rowmes and
offices, exile and banishmente out of their dominions and cou^treyes, and also
(as it is red) the true bishops of christ's church were sometimes intercessours
for the heretics unto princes that they would not kill them, as is red of S.
Augustine. But as yet Antechristes kyngedome was not so erected at that time,
nor is now accustomed to order them that will not fall down and worship the
beast and his image, but (even as all the world knows) after the same manner
that both John and Daniel has prophesied before, that is by violence of death,
and Daniell declares farther the kind of death accustomably should be by
sword, fire, and imprysonment. Therefore if thou O man of God, do purpose to
abide in this realm, prepare and arm thy self to die, for, both by
antechristes accustomable laws, and these prophecies, there is no appearance or
likelyhode of any other thing, except thou will deny thy master Christ,
which is the loss at the last both of body and soul unto everlasting death.
Therefore my good brother or sister in Christ whatsoever thou be, to thee that
can and may so do, that counsel that I think is the best sauegarde for
thee, both for thy bodi, and most suerty for thy souls health, is that which I
shall show thee herafter. But first I warn thee to understand me to speak to
him or her which be not in captivity or called already for to confess christ,
but is at liberty abroad. My counsel I say therefore is this, to fly from the
plague and to get thee hense. I consider not only the subtelties of satan, and
how he is able to deceive by his false persuasions, if it were possible, even
the chosen of God, and also the great frailty which is often times more in a
man then he does know in himself, which in the time of temptation then will
utter it self: I do not only consider these things I say, but that our master
christ whose life was and is a perfect rule of the christian man's life, that
he himself avoided oftentimes the fury and madness of the Jews by departing
from the country or place.

Paul like wise when he was sought in Damasco, and the gates of the city were
laid in wait for him, he was conveyed by night, let down in a basket out at
a window over the wall, and Helias the prophet fled the persecution of
wicked Iesabell. And Christ our Savior says in the Gospel, when they
persecute you in one city fly unto another: and so did many good great
learned and verteouse men of god, which were great and stout cha^pions
nevertheless, and stout confessors and mainteyners of Christ and his truth in
due time and place. Of such was the great clarke Athanasius. But this is so
plain to be lawful by gods word and examples of holy men, that I need not to
stand in it. Having this for my ground, I say to thee O man of god this seems
to me to be the most sure way for thy sauegard, to depart and fly far from
the plague, and that swiftly also: for truly before god, I thinck that the
abomination that Daniel prophesied of so long before, is now set up in ye holy
place. For all antechrists doctrine, laws, rytes and religion, contrary to
Christ and to the true serving and worshypping of god, I understand to be
that abomination: therefore now is the time in England for those words of
Christ: Tu^c, inquit, qui^n ^udaea runt fugiant ad montes. Then, says he,
mark this christ's (then) for truly I am persuaded and I trust by the spirit
of god, that this then, is commanded: Then, says Christ, they that be in
Iewry let them fly into the mountains, and he that is on the house top let
him not come down to take away any thing out of his house, and he that is
abroad in the field, let him not return to take his clothes. Woe be to the
great bellied women and to them that give suck, but pray says Christ, that
your flight be not in winter nor on the sabbath day. These words of Christ
are mistical, and there fore have need of interpretation. I understand all
those to be in Iewryspiritually, which truly confess one true living god, and
the whole truth of his word after the doctrine of the gospel of Christ. Such
are they who^ here christ bids in the time of the reygne of Antechrystes
abominations to fly unto the mou^tains, which signifies places of safegarde,
and all such things which are able to defend from the plague. That he bids
him that is on the house top not to come down, nor him that is in the fyelde
not to return to take with him his clothes, he means that they should speed
them to get the^ away betime, least in their tarying and trifling about
worldly provision, they be trapped in the snare, or ever they be aware and
caughte by the back, and for gain of small worldly things endaunger and cast
them selves in to great perilles of more weighty matter. And where he says woe
to the great bellyed women, and to them that give suck: women great with
child, and nigh to their lying down, and to be brought to bed are not able
to travel, nor also those women which are brought to bed, and now gives
their babes suck: by these therefore christ spiritually understands al such
to be in extreme danger (which this word woe signifies) all such I say, as
are so let by any manner of means, that they no ways be able to fly from
the plague. That which christ says, pray that your flight be not in winter
nor on the sabbath day: In winter the common course of the year teaches us
that the ways be foul, and therefore it is a hard thing then to take a far
journey for many inco^modities and dangers of the ways in that time of the
year: and on the sabbath day it was not lawefull to journey but a little way.
Now Christ therefore meaning that we should have need both to speed our
journey quicklye, which can not be done in winter for the incommodities of
the ways, and also to go far, which can not be done on the Sabbath day: he
bids us therefore pray that our flight be not in winter nor on the sabbath
day, that is, to pray that we may fly in time, and also far enough from the
danger of the plague. Now the causes why we should fly, follows in ye same
place of s. Mathewes gospel, Math. 24.
which I now pass over: thou may read them there.

And in the 18. chapter of the Revelation, the angel is said to have cried
myghtely with a loud voice, fly my people out of Babylon least you be
infected with her faults and so be made partners of her plagues: for her
offenses and sins are grown so great that they swell and are come unto the
heaven: certainly the time does approach and the lords day is at hand. Hear,
I beseech you, also holy Paul, that blessed apostle: he plainly forbids us
ducere iugum cum incredulis that is, to join or couple our selves with the
unfaithful, for what fellowship can there be (says he) of righteousness with
vnrighteousenes, 2. Cor. 6.
what company has light with darkness, or what agreement has christ with
Beliall, or what part can the faithful have with the unfaithful, or how does
the temple of god agree with images or idols, for you are the temple of the
living god: as god has said, I will walk and dwell in them. I will be their
god, and they shall be my people, wherefore depart from amongst them and get
you from them, says the lord, and touch no unclean thing and I will receive
you and be to you in the stead of your father and you shall be unto me as my
sons and daughters, says the almighty Lord.

This counsel to depart the realm, I do not marvel if it do seem to diverse
(even of them I mean ye bear favor to godwarde) dyuersly. Many (I trust)
that he learned shall think the counsel good. Other there be per adventure that
will think it rather a thing to be more tolerable and yt it may be in deed by
gods word lawefully done, rather then to be cou^sayled to be done, for they
will (peradventure) say, we should counsel a man always to do that which is
best of all, and of most parfectio^, but boldly in Christ's cause to spend a
man's life, is best of all, and of most perfection, and to fly it may seem
to smell of cowardnes. In many things, that which is best for one at some
times, is not best for all at all times, and it is not most perfection nor
meet for a child to covet to run before he can go. I will not make here a
discourse in this matter what might here be objected, and what might be
answered again: I leave that to the witty and eloquent men of the world.

This is my mind which I would thou should know, o man of god, as I would
wish and I do pray to almighty God it may be, that every true christian
either brother or sister (after they be called and brought in to the
wrestlynge place, to strive in Christ's cause for the best game, that is to
confess the truth of the gospel and of the Christian faith in hope of
everlasting life) should not shrynke nor relente one ynche, or give back what
soever shall befall, but stand to their tackle, and styrke by it even unto
death, as they will Christ shall stick by them at the latter day. So likewise
I dare not wish nor counsel any, either brother or sister of their own swinge
to start up into ye stage, or to cast themselves either before or farther in
danger then time and need shall require: for undoubtedly when God sees his
time, and his pleasure is that his glory shall be set forth, and his church
edefyed by thy death and confession, means shall be found by his fatherly
universal prouydence, that thou without thine own presumptuouse prouocatio^,
shall be law fully called to do thy feate and to play thy part. The miserable
end that one Quintus came unto, may be a warninge and a fearful example for
all men to beware of presumption and rashness in such things (as Eusebius
writes in Ecclesiastica historia) for evermore. Lib. 4. Cap. 15.


But a third sort of men there be which also will be counted favorers of gods
word and are, I fear, in number far mo and worse to be persuaded to that
which is the godly mean. I mean of such as w^ll peradventure say or think
that my former counsel which was, to (...) the infect^on of the antechristian
doctrine by departure out of the realm, is more then needs, and other ways
and means may be found both to abide and also to be clear out of danger of
the foresaid plague. If that could be found in deed truly agreeable to gods
word I would be as glad to hear it (god is my witness) as who is the other.

Yes peradventure will some say, thus it may be. Thou may keep thy self,
thy faith, and thy religion close to thy self, and inwardly and privately
worship god in spirit and in truth, and outwardlye see thou be no open medler,
nor talker, nor transgressour of common order: so mayeste thou be suffered in
the common wealth, and yet use thy relygion witho^te offense of thy conscience.
In other countre^es somwhere this peradventure might be used, but in Eng^ande
what shall be, god wot, but it was never yet, so far as ever I have known or
heard. And also how can it be, but either thou must transgress the common
order and the Romy^he laws and customs which have been used in ^ngland in the
times part of popery, and now (it is certain) they return again: I say,
thou must either be a breaker of these rites, laws, and costomes, and so
bewray thy self, or else if thou be in deed a man of God, thou shall offend
thy conscience, for in obseruinge of them thou shalt be compelled to break
gods law which is the rule of conscience to the man of god. For how can thou
resort every holy day to the church and bear a face to worship the creature
for the creator (as thou must do) and peradventure confess it to with thy
mouth and to sprynckle thy self with their coniured water? Thou must be
co^tributor also to ye charges of al their popery, as of books for antechristes
service, of lyghtes of the roode lofte, of the sepulcher, for setting up and
painting of images (nay in deed of idols) and thou must bear a face to
worship them also, or else thou must be had by the back. Thou must serve the
turn to give the holy loves, as they call it, which is nothing else but a
very mockery of the lords holy table. Thou must be a co^tributor to ye charges
of al ye disgised apparel yt the popish sacrificing priest, like unto Aaron,
must play his part in. Yea when the pardoner comes about, or the flatteringe
friar to beg for the mayntenaunce of supersticion, except thou do as thy
neighbors do, look not long for to live in rest. If any of thy household
dye, if thou will not pay money for ringinge and singing, for requiem masses,
dirige, and commendations, and such like trumpery of the antechristian
religion, think thou that thou shall be reckned for a catholyke man or for
Amicus Caesaris? A hundred things mo may be reckned, and many of more weight
and of more evident superstition and Idolatry, then some of these which I have
now rehearsed, which god knows be ill enough: but these are enough to declare
and to set before thine eyes the thing that I intend, that is if thou abide
and wylt dwell in England, thou must either do these and many other mo
contrary to gods word, which forbids not only the thing which is
evil, but also says, Ab omni specie mali abstinete vos, abstain from al
things that has any appearance of evil: or else if thou will not do them,
how thou can live in England in rest and safe from the stake, truly I can
not tell. But peradventure (as a man is ready to find and inuente some color
to clooke his conscience, to do that thing that his heart desires) thou
will say, though at any time I shall be forced to do any of these things
and such like, yet will I have no confidence in them, but outwardly with my
body: I will keep my heart unto god, and will not do that of mine own mind
willingly neither, but to avoid an other inconuenyence: I trust therefore God
will hold me excu^ed, for he shall have my heart, what can I do more? O mi
friend beware for gods sake, and know that the subte^ties of Satan are deep. He
that is not able by gods word to perceive them, is heau^ly laden, prai
therefore with David: Lord let me not have a mind to inuente excuses for to
cloak my sin. Exam^ne my dear friend, these thy wily ways with the word of
god, and if the^ do agree, thou may use them, if not, know, though they may
seem never so fine and goodlye, yet in deed they be of Satan's ^roode^ Gods
word it is certain, that forbyddeth to worship the creature for the creator,
for that is heinous idola^ry, and against the first commandment of god, and
it is also against the second commandment of the first table, to bow down,
or to do worship unto any images of god or of any other thing, and gods word
requires not only the belief of the heart, but also* the confession of the
mouth: and to bear part of the charges to the mayntenaunce of things
vngodly^, what is that but in thy so doing a con^ent to the thing done? Now
consenters and the doers gods word accounte^h to be giltye both. And it is
not lawefull by S. Paul's doctrine which was inspired him by the spirit of
god, to do il that thereof the thing which is good may come. Thy ha^t, thou
say, god shall have, and yet will thou suffer thy body to do the thing that
god does abhor. Beware O man, take heed what thou say. Man may be
deceived, but no man may deceive God, for he is called and is trewely (...)
that is to say, the searcher of the heart. Now to give god thy heart is to give
him thy whole heart, to love him, to dread him, and to trust in him above al
other things. He that has my commandment says Christ, and observes and
keeps them, it is he that loves me, and to dread god above all other, is
rather willingly to incur the danger and peril of all fearful things,
then wyttinglye to do that thing which is contrary to his blessed will and
commandment: and to trust in him above all things, is assuredly to trust
to his promise of his reward, and of his tuition and of his goodness and
mercy, and to prefer that above al things in ye world, seem they never so
strong, so wise, or so good. Now how canste thou say truly, that God has
thy heart after this manner of sort (which is to have thy heart in deed) when
thy deeds do declare far an other thing? Thy body, o man, is gods, and all the
parts thereof even as thy soul is: he made them both and Christ with his
blood has redeemed them both, and is lord of both, for he has boughte the^
both dear, and dare thou suffer any part of either of them to do service to
Satan? Surely in so doing, thou committest sacrilege and do rob God, thou
de^ilest the lively temple of the living god if thou suffer thy body to do
satan service. Do you not know says S. Paul, that your body is a lively
temple of god? and may a man then take and use any part thereof but in the
service of God? No surely it is not lawful so to do so yt man of god, neither
with hand, tongue, nor foot, nor any part of the whole body.

Does not Paul command to the Romans, which pertains to every Chrystian
soul: As you have in times past (says he) given your members to do service
unto uncleanness and wickedness, from one wickedness to another, so now give
your members to do service unto righteousness that you may be sanctified. And I
prai thee good brother, what do thou think is, to bear the marcke of the
beast in the forhead and in the hand that s. John speaks of? I know we ought
warely to speak of gods mysteries which he showed by the spirit of prophesying
to his servant John, yet to read them with reverence, and to pray for the
understanding of the same so much as god knows is necessary for our time to
know, I think it necessary and good. Wherefore what I suppose is to bear the
beasts mark, I will tell thee, and commit the judgment of mine
interpretation, as in all other things, to the spiritual man. I suppose he
bears the beast of Babilons mark in his forhead, which is not ashamed of the
beasts ways, but will profess them openly to set forth his master the
beast Abaddon, Apo. 9.
And likewise be bears his mark in his hands that will and does practice the
works of the beast with his power and hand. And likewise I will not let to
tell thee, what I think to be sygned in the forhead for the servants of God,
whereof John also speaks, reckening up many thousands so to have been sygned
of every tribe. I suppose he is signed in the forhead for the servant of god,
whom god has appointed of his infinite goodness, and has given him gra^e and
strength* stoutly to confess him and his truth before the world. And to have
grace and strength to confess christ and the doctrine of the cross, and to
lament and mourn for the abhominatio^s of antechryste, I suppose is to be
sygned with Tau whereof Ezechiell the prophet does speak. Thus I suppose
these prophecies are spiritually to be understood, and to look for other
corporal marks to be seen in men's forheads or in their hands, is nothing else
but to look that there should come some brute beast out of Babylon, or some
Elephante, Leoparde, Lion, or Camel or some other such monstrous beast with
ten horns, that should do all the wonderful things spoken in John: and yet of
a beast speaks John, but I understand him so to be called not for that he
shall be any such brute beast, but for that he is and shall be the child of
perdicion, which for his cruelty and beastly manners is well called a beast.

The carnal Jews knew there was a promise made that Helias should come before
christ Messiah the anointed of god, to prepare his ways: they knew also there
was a promise of Messiah, that he should come and be a king and reign in the
house of David for evermore, but they understood all so grosely and so
carnally, that they neither knew Helias nor Messiah when they came, for they
looked for Helias to come down from heaven in his own person, and for Messiah
to come and raygne in worldly pomp, power, riches and glory, when as the
prophecies of both were spiritually to have been understood: of Helias that
he should come not in person but in spirit, that is, one which should be endued
with the spirit and gifts of grace of Helias, which was in deed John Baptist,
as christ himself did declare to his apostles: and of Messiah raygne, all the
prophets were to be understood of ye reign of his spiritual kingdom over
the house of Jacob, and the true Israelites for evermore. And so by that their
gross and carnal understanding they mystake both Helias and the true
Messiah, and when they came, knew neither of them both. So likewise I fear
me (nay it is certain) ye world that wants the light of the spirit of god,
(for ye world is not able to receive him, says John) neither does, nor shall
know the beast nor his marks, though he rage cruelly and live never so
beastly, and though his marked men be in number like the sand of the sea. The
lord therefore vouchsafe to open the eyes of the blind with the light of
grace, that they may see and perceive, and understand the words of god after
the mind of his spirit. Amen.

Here remains two objections which may seem ^^^yghty, and the which may
peradventure move many not to follow the former counsel. The former reason is?
a man will say, Oh sir it is no small mat^er ye speak of, to depart from a
man's own native country into a strange realm. Many men have so great
let^es, as how is it possible yt they can or may do so? Some have lands and
possessions which they can not carry with the^, some have father, mother, wife,
children, and kinsefolke, from whom to depart is as hard a thing (and all one
almost) as to suffer death, and to go to a strange country that thou
knoweste not, neither the manner of the people nor how thou may away either
with ye people or with the cu^trey. Oh what a hard thing it is to live among a
strange people whose tongue thou do not understand etc.

I grant here thou may heap a number of worldly incommodityes which are
surely very (...) en^ue the departure out of a man^es own native country, I
mean (...) of the whole realm into a strange land: but what of all these
and a thousand mo of the like sort? I will set unto the^ one saying of our
Savior Christ which unto the faithful child of god and to the true
Christyan, is able to counteruaile al these, yea and to way the^ down. Christ
our savior says in Luke: if any come to me and do not hate his father and
mother (he means and will not in his cause forsake his father and mother) his
wife, children, and brethren, yea and his life to, he cannot be my disciple:
and who soever does not bear his cross and come after me he cannot be my
discyple. And in ye same place he declares by two parables, one of a buylder,
and the other of a king that is a warrier, that every man that will not in
christ's cause forsake all yt ever he has, he can not be his dysciple. Look
the place who will, the matter is so plainly set forth, that no gloses nor
cloking of conscience to the man of god, can serve to the contrary. Many plac^s
there be for the same purpose, for the embracing of christ's cross, when
Christ and his cause lays it upon our back, but this is so plain that I
need here to rehearse no more.

The latter reason and objection whereof I spoke before, is of more force, and
includes a necessity which after the common saying has no law, and
therefore it is more hard to shape for it a good answer.

This may be objected of some. Alas sir I grant all these things do grieve me,
and because I understand they do not agree with gods word which is the rule of
my conscience, I loath either to look on them or to hear the^. But sir, alas, I
am an impote^t man, an aged man, a sick manne, a lame man, or I have so many
small infants and a lame wife, which all lives by my labor and by my
provision, if I leave them, they shall sterue, and I am not able to carry them
with me, such is my state. Alas sir what shall I do? And these causes may
chance to some men of god, whereby either it shall be for them utterly
impossible to depart the country, or else in departing, they shall be enforced
to forsake such in extreme necessities of whom both god and nature has
committed unto the^ the care. Alas what counsel is here to be given? O
lamentable state, O sorowefull heart that neither can depart, and without
extreme danger and peril is not able to tarry still. And these are they whom
our savior Christ saw before should be, and called them in his prophecy of the
latter time, great bellied or trauelinge women, and women that gives after
they be brought to bed, their small babes suck. The state of such as are not
able to fly the infection of the pestiferous plague of antechrists
abominations, Christ lamentinge and not cursing, says: woe be unto the great
bellyed and trauelynge women, and women yt gives suck in those days. For
these alas my heart mourns the more, the less I am able to give any
comfortable counsel but this, that always, as they look for everlasting
life, they abide still in the confession of his truth whatsoever shall befall,
and for the rest to put their trust now wholly in God, which is able to save
them against all apparau^ce: and commonly in extremities, when al worldly
comfort sayleth and the danger is at highest, then unto his he is wont after
his accustomed mercy to be most ready for to put his helping hand. Daniell
God suffered to be cast into the den of lions, and the three children into
the hot burning furnace, and yet he saved the^ all* Paul was plucked out of
the mouth of the lion, as be says of himself, and in Asta he was brought in
such trouble yt he looked for no other thing but for present death, and yet he
that rayseth the dead to life: again did bring him out of all his troubles,
and taught him and all other that he in troubles for christ's cause not to
trust to the^selus but in almighty God. Of gods gracious aid in extreme perils
toward them ye put their trust in him, all scripture is full both old and new.
What dangers were the patriarks often brought unto, as Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, but of all other Joseph, and how mercifully were they delivered again:
In what perils was Moses: when he was feign to fly for ye safeguard of his
life? and when was he sent again: to deliver the Israelytes from the ser^yle
bondage? not before they were brought into extreme misery. And when did the
lord mightily deliver his people from Pharao his sword? not before they were
brought in such straytes yt they were so compassed en every side (the main sea
on the one side, and the main host on ye other) yt they could look for none
other; yea what did they* else in deed look for then, but either to have been
drowned in ye sea, or else to have fallen on ye edge of Pharao his sword. These
judges, which wrought most wonderful things in the delivery of the people,
were ever given when the people was brought to most miserye before: as
Othoniel, Aioth, Sangar, Gedeon, ^ephthe, Samson, And so was Saul endued with
strength and boldness from above, against the Ammonites, Philistines, and
Amalechites for the defense of the people of God. David likewise felt gods
help most sensibly ever in his extreme persecutions. What shall I speak of
the prophets of god whom god suffered so often to be brought into extreme perils
and so mightily delivered them again? As Helias, Hieremy, Daniel, Micheas,
and Jonas, and many other whom it were but to long to rehearse, and set out
at large. And did the lord use his servants otherwise in the new law after
christ's incarnation? Read the acts of the apostles and you shall see no. Were
not thapostels cast into prison and brought out by the mighty hand of god? Did
not the angel deliver Peter out of ye strong prison and bring him out by
the iron gates of the city and set him free? And when I pray you? even the
same night before Herod appointed to have brought him in judgment for to have
slain him, as he had a little before killed James the brother of John. Paul
and Silas, when after they had been sore scourged and were put into the inner
prison and there were laid fast in the stocks, I pray you what appara^ce was
there that the magestrats should be glad to come the next day themselves to
the^, to desyer them to be content and to depart in peace? who provided for
Paul, yt he should be safely conducted out of all danger and brought to Felix
ye Emperors deputy? when as both the high priests the Pharisyes and rulers of
ye Jews had conspired to requier judgment of death against him, he being
fast in prison, and also more the^ forty men had sworn each one to other
that they would never eat nor drink until they had slain Paul. A thing
wonderful, that no reason could have invented, or man could have looked for,
god provided Paul his own sisters son a young man, that disaponited that
conspiracy and all their former coniuratio^. The manner how the thiuge came to
pass, thou may read in the.23. of the acts. I will not be tedyous unto
thee here with the rehersall thereof.

Now to descend from the apostles to the martyrs that followed next in
christ's church, and in them likewise to declare how gracious our good god
ever has been to work wonderfully we them, which in his cause have been in
extreme perilles, it were a matter enough to write a long book. I will here
name but one man and one woman that is Athanasius the great clerk and godly
man stoutly standing in christ's cause against the Arrians, and that holy woman
Blandina, standing so constantly in all extreme pains, in the simple
confession of christ. If thou will have examples of mo, look and thou shall
have both these and a hundred mo in Ecclesiastica historia of Eusebius, and in
Tripartita historia.

But for all these examples both of holy scripture and of other histories, I
fear me the weak man of God incombred with the frailty and infirmity of the
flesh, will have now and then such thoughts and guawmes (as they call the^) to
run over his heart, and to think thus: all these things which are rehearsed
out of the scripture, I believe to be true, and of the rest truly I do think
well, and can believe them also to be true, but all these we must needs grant
were special miracles of god, which now in our days are ceased we se, and to
require them at gods hands, were it not to te^pt god?

Well-beloved brother, I grant such were great wonderful works of god, and we
have not seen many of such miracles in our time, either for that our sight is
not clear (for truly God works with his, his part in all times) orels because
we have not ye like faith of the^ for whose cause God wrought such things: or
because after that he had set forth the truth of his doctrine by such miracles
then sufficientlye, the time of so many miracles to be done was expired
withal. Which of these is the most special cause of all others, or whether
there be any othere, God knows: I leave that to God. But know thou this my
wel-beloued in God, that Gods hand is as strong as ever it was, he may do
what his gracyous pleasure is, and he is as good and gracious as ever he was.
Man chau^geth as the garment does, but god our heavenly father is even the same
now that he was, and shall be for evermore.

The world without doubt (this I do believe, and therefore I say) draws
toward an end, and in all ages god has had his own manner, after his secret
and unsearchable wisdom to use his elect, sometimes to deliver the^ and to keep
them safe, and sometimes to suffer them to drink of Christ's cup, that is to
feel the smarte, and to feel of the whyp.

And though the flesh smarteth at the one, and feels ease in the other: is
glad of the one, and sore vexed in ye other: yet the lord is al one, toward
them in both, and loves them nolesse when he sufferethe them to be beaten,
yea and to be put to bodily death, then when he woorketh wonderes for their
marvelous delivery.

Nay rather he does more for them when in anguish of the torments he stands
by them and strenghneth them iu their faith, to suffer in the confession of the
truethe and his faith, the bitter panges of death, then when he opens the
prison door and lets them go lose: for here he does but respit the^ to an
other time, and leaves them in danger to fall in like peril again: and there
be makes them Perfect, to be without danger, pain, or peril after that for
ever more. But this his love toward them, how soever the world does judge
of it, is all one, both when he delivers and when he suffers them to be
put to death. He loved as well Peter and Paul when, after they had (according to
his blessed will, pleasure and providence) finished their courses, and done
their services appointed them by him here in preaching of his Gospel, the one
was beheaded, and the other was banged or crucified of the cruel tyraunte Nero,
as the Ecclesiastical historye says: as when he sent the Angel to bring
Peter out of prison, and for Paul's delivery, he made all ye doors of the
prison to fly wide open, and ye foundation of the same like an earthquake to
tremble and shake.

Think thou O thou man of god, that Christ our Savior had less affection
to the first martyr Stephen, because he suffered his enemies even at the
first conflicte to stone him to death? No suerlye, nor James John's brother,
which was one of the three that Paul calls Primates or Principals amongst ye
Apostles of Christ. He loved him never a whit ye worse then he did the other,
although he suffered Herod the tyrants sword to cut of his head, Nay does not
Daniel say speaking of the cruelty of Antechrist his time: Daniel. 11.
Et docti in populo docebunt plutimos, and ^uent in gladio, and in flamma, and
in captiuitate, and in rapina dierum etc. Et de cruditis ruent (...) co^flentur
and e^^ga^tur and dealbentu^, etc. That is, and the learned (he means truly
learned in gods law) shall teach many, and shall fall upon the sword, and in the
flame (that is, shall be burned in the flaming ^yer) and in captiuitye (that is,
shall be in prison, and be wo^^d and robbed of their goods for alonge season).
And after a lyttel in the same place of Daniel it follows: and of the learned
there be, which shall fall or be overthrown ye they may be known, tried,
chosen, and made white: he means, be furnyshed and scou^^d a new, picked and
chosen; and made fresh and luster. If that then was foresene for to be done to
the godly learned, and for so gracious causes, let every one to whom any such
thing by the will of God does chance, be merry in God, and rejoice, for it is
to Gods glory and to his own everlasting wealth. Wherefore well is he yt ever
he was borne; for whom thus graciouslye God has provided, having grace of
God and strenghe of the holy ghost to stand steadfastly in the height of the
storm. Happy is he that ever he was borne, whom God his heavenly father has
vouchsafed to appointe to glorify him, and to edify his church by ye effusion
of his blood. To die in Christ's cause is an high honor, to the which no man
certainlye shall or can espire, but to whom god vouthsafeth that dignity: for
no man is allowed to presume for to take unto himself any office of honor,
but he which is there unto called of god. Therefore John says well, speaking of
them which have obtained the victory by the blood of the lamb and by the
word of his testimonye, Apoc. 12.
that they loved not their lives, even unto death. And our savior Christ
says, he that shall lose his life for my cause shall find it. And this manner
of speech pertayneth not to one kind of christians, as the worldly do wyckedly
dream, but to all that do truly pertain unto Christ. For when christ had
called unto him the multitude together with his dysciples, he said unto them
(mark yt he said not this to ye disciples and apostles only, but he said it to
al) whosoever will so low me let him forsake or deny himself and take up his
cross and follow me: for whosoever will save his life shall lose it (he means
whosoever will to save his life, both forsake or leave him and his truth) and
whosoever shall lose his life for my cause and the gospels sake, shall save it:
for what shall it profit a man if he shall win the whole world and lose his
own soul? his own life? or what shall a man give to recompense that loss of
his own life and of his own soul? Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my
words (that is to confess me and my gospel) before this adulterous and sinful
generation, of him shall the son of man be ashamed when he comes in the glory
of his father, with the holy angels. Know thou O man of god, that all things
are ordained for thy behofe and to the furthera^ce of thee, toward thy
salvation. All things (says Paul) works with the good to goodness, even the
enemies of god. and such kind of punishments whereby they go about to destroy
them, shall be forced by Gods power, might, and fatherly providence, for to
do them service.

It is not as the wicked thinks, that poverty, adversity, sycknes,
tribulation, yea paynefull death of the godly, be tokens that God does not
love them: but even clean the contrary, as all the whole course of scripture
does euedently declare: for then he would never have suffered his most dear
beloved ye Patriarchs to have had such troubles, his prophets, his Apostles,
his Martyrs and chief cha^pions and maintainers of his truth and gospel^, so
cruelly of the wicked to have been murdered and ^^in. Of the which (some were
racked as the apostle says) and would not he delivered, that they might
re^e^l^ better resurrection. Some were lived by mockings and scourgings, yea
more over by bonds and imprison mente: they were ^oned, they were he wen and
cut in ^u^der, they were tempted, they were slain with the sword, they wandered
up and down in sheep skins and Gotes skins, being forsaken, afflicted and
tormented, such men as the world was not worthy to have, wandringe in
wildernesses, in mountains, in dens and caves of earth. All these were
approved by the testimony of faith, and received not the promise, because god
did provide better for us, that wyth^u^e us they should not be consu^mated. They
tarry now for us undoubtedly lo^ging for the day. But they are commanded to
have patience yet, says the lord, a littel while, until the number of their
fellow servants be fulfilled, and or, their brethren which are yet to be
slain, as they were.

Now thou O man of God, for our Lords sake, let us not for the love of this
life, tarry them to long, and be occasion of delay of that glorious
co^summation, in hope and expectation whereof they departed in the lord, and the
which also ye living end^ed with Gods spirit, ought so earnestly to desire and
to groan for with all the creatures of God. Let us all with John the servant of
God, cry in our hearts unto our savior Christ: Veni domme Jesus, come Lord Jesus
come. For then when christ which is our life, shall be made manifest and apeare
with him in glory, the^ shall the children of god appear what they be, even
like unto Christ: for this our weak body shall be transfygurated and made like
unto Christ's glorious body, and that by the power whereby he is able to subdue
unto himself all things. Then, that which is now corruptible, shall be made
incorruptible: that is now vile, shall the^ be made glorious, that is now
weak, shall rise then mighty and strong, that is gross and carnal, shall be made
fine and spiritual, for the^ we shall see and have ye unspeakable joy and
fruition of the glorious majesty of our lord even as he is.

Who or what then shall let us to ieopard, to leopard? yea to spend this life
which we have here in Christ's cause? in our lord God his cause? O thou
therefore man of god, thou that art laden and so let like unto a great
bellied woman* that thou can not fly the plague, yet if thou lust after such
things as I have spoken of, stand fast what soever shall befall in thy masters
cause: and take this thy letting to fly, for a calling of god to feighte in thy
master Christ his cause. Of this be thou certain, they can do nothing unto
thee, which thy father is not aware of, or has not foresene before: they can
do no more then it shall please him to suffer them to do for the furtheraunce of
his glory, edifyinge of his church and thine own salvation. Let them then
do what they shall, seeing to thee O man of God, all things shall be forced to
serve, and to work with thee unto the best before God. O be not afraid and
remember the end.

All this which I have spoken for the comfort of the lamentable case of the
man who^ christ calls the great bellied woman: I mean to be spoken likewise
to the captive and prisoner in Gods cause: for such I count to be as it were
already summoned and prested to fight under the banner of the cross of
Christ, and as it were soldiers allowed and taken up for the Lords wars,
to do to their lord and master good and honorable service, and to stycke to
him as men of trusty service in his cause even unto death, and to think their
life lost in his cause, is to win it in eternal glory for evermore.

Therefore now to conclude and to make an end of this treatise, I say unto
all that love God our heavenly father, that love Christ Jesus our redemer and
Savior: that love to folowethe ways of the holy ghost, which is our
comforter and sanct^^er of all: unto all that love Christ's spouse and body,
the true catholic church of Christ, yea that love life and there own souls
health: I say unto all these, harken my dear brethren and sisters, all you
that be of God, of all sorts, ages, dignities, or degree: harken to the word
of our savior Jesus Christ spoken to his Apostels and meant to all his in
Saint Mathewes Gospel: Math. 10.
Fear not them which kill the body, for they can not kill the soul: but
fear him more which may destroy and cast both body and soul into ^ell
fire. Are not two small-sparrowes ^old for a mite and one of them shall not fall
or light upon the ground without your father? All the hears of your head be
numbered. Fear them not, you are much more worth then are the littel sparrowes.
Every one then that confesses me before me^, him shall I likewise confess
before my father, which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, I
shall deny him likewise before my father which is in heaven.

The lord grant us therefore of his heavenly grace and strength, that here we
may so confess him in this world amongst this adulterous and sinful
generation, that he may confess us again at the latter day, before his father
which is in heaven, to his glory and our everlasting comfort, joy and
salvation.

To our heavenly father, to our savior and redemer Jesus Christ, and to the
holy ghost, be al glory and honor now and for ever Amen. ()

CERTAIN Godly and comfortable letters of the constaut wytnes of Christ John
Careless, written in the time of his imprisonment, and now first set forth in
printe. ()

Anno Domini. 1566.

Thomas Pirry to the Christian reader, in commendacion of that worthy man of
god John Careless.
MUch care did careful Careless bide,
in time of Romish rage:
When flesh and blood with fire was tried,
to make men's faith to swage.
But god be thanked for his grace,
who did him so defend:
that in the truth he ran his race,
and made a godly end.
No man more careful for the cross,
of Christ his sauinge health:
no man more careless for the loss,
of friends and worldly wealth.
When he was hated and abhorde,
of Cayphas and his sede:
he cast his care upon the Lord,
and Careless was in deed.
For why? he knew that worldly power,
no farther could proceed:
then god, whose word does still endure,
already had decrede.
And that the Lord would in the end,
work all things for the best:
when of great mercy he should send,
his soul to joyful rest,
In hope whereof he careless was,
and ready to the stake:
if god so would, he did not pass:
such end on earth to make.
But gods will was he should not die,
such death in open sight:
wherefore in prison joyfully,
to Christ he yield his sprite.
Psalm. 54. Cast thy care upon the lord: and he shall nouryshe thee, he will
not suffer the righteous to fall for ever.
The grace and free mercy of God in Jesus Christ, the sweet consolations of the
holy ghost, the guide of all Gods dear children be with you, strengthen and
comfort you my derely beloved sweet sister K. E. now and ever. Amen. AL be
it, my derly beloved sister in Christ, that as yet we did never see one an
other personally to any knowledge, yet by the virtuous report, that I have
heard of you, and also by the large loving token that I have received from
you, my think that I do even presently see you, and behold your person,
faithfully walkinge in the fear and love of god, ioying and rejoicing with you
in ye spirit as though we were swetly talking together of Christ's verity.
The lord god do I humbly beseech in the bowels and blood of our lord and
savior Jesus Christ, that he will strengthen us both, with his holy and mighty
spirit, that we may constantly continue in the confession of his truth unto the
end: that like as we now see one another presently in spirit, we may also
see one another personally in the glorious presence of God, and his holy
angels. where undoubtedly, we shall know one an others personage, to our great
joy, felicity, and endless comfort. And now therefore dear sister K. be strong
in the Lord our god, for doubtless the time of trial is at hand: a great
persecution with cruel murtherynge of gods dear saints is like to be very
shortly in this woeful wicked realm of England. Therefore dear sister, for the
love of God, prepare you to the cross with all diligence, and make your self
ready to die with Christ, that you may also live with him for ever. There is
no remedy, if you will be Christ's disciple, you must needs take up your
cross, and follow him, for the disciple must not look to be above his master,
nor the servant to be better entreated, then his lord. If we were of the world
(good sister) no doubt the world would love us.

But for as much as Christ has chosen us out of the world to serve God in
spirit and veritye, let us be well assured the world will hate us and
persecute us, as it has done our lord and master Christ. But yet let us be
of good chere, for Christ has overcome the world. The pain is but short
that we can feel here, but the pleasure is perpetual that we shall feel else
where. Let us set before us the example of Christ, which abode the cross and
despised the shame, in respect of the joy that was set before him: Eue^ so let
us consider, for whose sake we suffer, whose cause we defend, and what
glorious reward we shall have at the day of our victory, and then doubtless the
consolation of these things will make sweet all our sufferinges, and sone
swallow up all the sorrows that we are sowsed in for Gods sake. I could recite
diverse texts of the scripture to confirm this point. But I need not, for I am
well assured that you do know them most perfectly all ready. The lord give you
strength and assiste you with his holy spirit, that you may continuallye
walcke in all points according to your godly knowledge: And then shall you not
do as the most part of our Gospellers do now a days, the more is the
pity. There are a great many in England, that do perfectly know, that the
idolatrous mass is abominable, diuelyshe and detestable in the sight of God.
And yet, alas they be not afraid to pollute and defyle their bodies, which
ought to be the temples of the holy ghost, with being present at it, so synning
against God and their own conscience. But dear sister K. do you fly from it,
both in body and soul, as you would fly from the very devil himself. Drink
not of the whore of Babylons cup by no means, for it will infecte the body and
poison the soul. Be not partakers of her sins (says the angel) least you
be partakers of the plagues, that shortly shall be powered upon her. O what an
array is this? that so many that know gods truth, will now turn again and
defyle them selves in the filthy puddle of antichrists stinking religion. They
go about to save their lives with their double dissimulatio^, but doubtless,
they shall lose everlasting life by it, if they do not repent in time and
turn unto the lord. But dear sister, my trust is, that you do utterly
abhor the coming to any such thing. I hope that you will not by any means
turn back into Egypt now, but that you will boldly venture through the
wilderness of troble and persecution, that you may come into the land that
flows with all kind of heavenly pleasures and joyful delectatio^s, and
possess the same for ever. Let us consider, how that every one of us does owe
unto god a death by nature, and how sone the Lord will require it of us, we
know not. O how happy are we then, if god of his goodness appoint us to pay
natures det with suffringe for his truth and Gospelles sake, and so making us
his faithful witnesses with the prophets, apostles, martyrs, and
confessors, yea with his dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, to whom he does
here begin to facion us like in sufferynge, that we might be like him also in
glory. Thus my derely beloved sister, I have been bold to trouble you a littel
with my rude and simple letter, being made in haste as it does apeare. Yet I
desire you to take it in good woorthe, as a token of my pore zeal unto you,
and to accept my good will. And if it please god to spare me life and
liberty. I trust hereafter to write unto you more largelye. Fare ye well
dear sister K. E. the Lord bless you and all youres, and power upon you the
heavenly dew of his grace. The lord endue you with plentiful knowledge of
his veritye, and fill you with his holy and mighty spirit, that you may
continually rejoice in the co^fortes of the same now and ever. Amen. Pray,
pray, pray, with steadfast faith.

Your daily Orator Ihon Careless prisoner of the Lord at al times abydinge his
most merciful will and pleasure.

Another letter of the same John Careless sent to the same party.
Grace, mercy and peace, from god our eternal and most dear loving father,
with quyetnes of conscience in our sweet lord and only savior Jesus Christ,
with increase of knowledge, health, strength, and spiritual joy in and through
the mighty operation of the holy ghost our everlasting comfort, be with you
now and ever, my most dear and loving sister K. E. to the good perfourmance
of all that he has so graciously begone in you, in such sort as may be most
to his glory^, the comfort of his pore afflicted church, and to the eucrease
of your own everlasting joy in him. Amen.

AS I am by no means hable, (my dear heart in the lord) in the least point
to recompense any part of the great love, faithful friendship and manifold
kindness, that you have so largely extended unto me: even so am I not able to
declare, how much, and how depelye I am continuallye bound to give god most
humble praise and continual thanks for you, and on your behalf. Before God I
speak it, I can not with pen express what joy and comfort my poor afflycted
heart has conceived of you, and that in mo respects then I will or can now
declare. Ah my dear sister K. whose humble heart and lowly spirit does to me
presently appear in your most godly and loving letter, blessed are you, and
all such meke handmaides of ye lord. For doubtless you shall be eralted in that
day, when ye proud persons of the world, and high minded Pharaseys shall be
cast down. God for evermore be blessed, who has given you (contrary to
nature) such a meke and humble heart. For upon al such (he says himself) his
holy spirit shall rest, which promis is full well verified on you: which holy
spirit of his, is the good guide and leader, yea the only teacher and
instructor of all the lords dear elect children. And as it has truly
taught you to cast your self down (as it is most convenient) even so will it
raise you up again (as I doubt not but it has already done, and set you upon
a high rock of stone, whereon you shall stand sure, and dwell safe for ever: I
mean upon Jesus Christ, on whom your faith is fyrmely built, so that the
gates of death or hell, shall not finallye prevail against the same. Selah.
But as I do right well on your part admit the similytude of ye faithful wife
of Cana, which came to Christ for to have her daughters health, with who^ you
may be well compared, both for faith, and humble mekenes: even so I will in no
wise allow, that you should so much exalt me (a most vile wretched sinner,
yea slime, earth, and ashes, and a very lump of Adams dunge) as though^
there were some thing in me, in respect whereof you should think your self
unworthy to call me brother, Alas, what am I (in respect of my self) but a
deep and a damnable sinner, yea such a one, as daily does deserve not only
this long enprisonment, and death which now knocks at my door, but also
Gehenna and hell fire, if God for his son Christ his sake did not forgive
the same, I mean my sin, which partlye has provoked God to plage all this
Realm. Therefore my dear sister, if you think your self unworthy to call me
brother, let it be only in respect that I am most unworthy of that name.
Otherwise you must consider, that you may (and I trust dailye do) boldly call
Jesus Christ the eternal son of God your most dear and loving brother, who
by his death has brought you life, and has made you the child of God, and
fellow heir with him, of the kingdom of heaven, whither he is also ascended
for your possession taking, and has thereto left with you in pledge his pure
and holy spirit, as a sure earnest penye of the same, wherewith I am right suer
we are both sealed unto the day of redemption. That spirit certifyeth our
spirit, that we are the true adopted sons of God, and therefore we may
boldlye call him dear father: then must I needs be your brother, and so I
pray you call me: god make me worthy of that name. And where as you dear heart,
do desire to be refreshed with the fruitful water of life, which flows forth
of the holy ghost, the fountain of al grace: I say with Christ that blessed is
your hungry soul, for it shall be well satisfied with that heavenly manna,
which makes the eaters thereof to live for evermore. For God has given you
his spirit, which has taught, and does still teach you, what you ought to
believe, and how to live according to the same, as hitherto you have done, your
light so shininge before men, that god has been and is greatly glorified by
the same. Therefore be you certain and suer, that God will likewise glorify
you with him self in everlasting glory. For as ye lord did know and elect you
for his before the foundation of the world was laydi^: so has he called you
by the sincere preaching of his holy gospel. And as he has truly called you,
so does he most mercyfullye iustifye you of his free grace and favor. And as
he does iustifye you, or repute you righteous in his syghte: so will he
glorify you with a crown of immortality in his kingdom for ever. Read the
eight to the Romans for your consolation: and put your trust in God, who
cares for you, and will keep you in his safe custody, free from all the
assaults of your cruel adversary: though in his myscheuous members he do
transform himself into an aungel of light, most craftelye to deceive, yea
^uen the very elect, if it were possible for him so to do. I perceive dear
sister ^k. that you have met with some of the grievous wolves, which are fearslye
entered in amongst the sely sheep of Christ to scatter them. I know well that
you have been sore assaulted of the Papists. But I am sure they shall not
prevail against you. For their cruel tyranny and all the rest of their
diuelyshe doings, is so directly against the word of God in all points, that
they can not beguyle you though they would never so feign. Perchance you
have also been troubled with our spronge up heretykes the Arrians and
Anabaptists. God keep you and all his dear children forth of their wicked
company: for verily they are a crafty kind of men, and many a gentle heart
and simple soul, they do full sore abuse, and depely deceive, bryngyng them
far from the sincere faith of Christ, and from the pure understanding of his
holy word, though in their outward appearance they would seem as holy as any
flatteryng friar. If any such come about you to persuade you from that
everlasting truth, which was taught you in the days of our late good king
Edward, by those worthy witnesses which have sealed ye same with their blood:
let the^ not come within your doors, neither bid the^ once god speed, If I were
sure that any such blind prophets did go about to lead you in to the dike of
darkness, I would take a little more pain for your sake. I have sent unto my
good brother Henry Jones of Witney, a true and christian confession of my
faith, the which I would wish you to read, and in all points to be ruled
thereby. My good brother Richard Brice will help you to it well enough: I have
spoken to him and to my brother Henrye also. Ah dear sister, these be the
dangerous days, in which Christ did prophecye, and Paul, and Peter also,
that many false Prophets should appear, and bring in damnable sects, even
deniyng the lord that boughte them, as these diuelishe Arrians do, in denying
Jesus Christ to be the ternall son of God, of one substance and equal with the
father. But my dear heart in the lord be of good chere. For though this time of
darkness, be never so dangerous to the cage of unclean and hateful birds,
that can not abide the light, that is to say, the congregation of Satan which
had no lust to believe the truth, and therefore God has sent them strong
delusion to believe lies: yet the sure ground of Ged, remains still, and has
his seal, which is the spirit of truth: The lord knows them that are his,
and has committed them unto Christ his keeping, who will lose nothing of that
which his father has given him, but will raise it up at the last day. yea for
his chose^ sake, the Lord has said, these sorrowful days shall be shortened, of
which most happy number, whose names are registered in the book of life, my
firm faith is, that you are one, as by your steadfast faith, and fruits of the
same, it does appear. And whereas you say that my simple letters have been a
stay and comfort to you, I am most glad thereof, and do most heartily praise God
therefore: that God of his great mercy will use me poor miser of the world,
as his instrument or mean to do good to any one of his dear saints. And I
do most heartily desire you to forgive me my great negligence toward you, in
that I have not more oftener written letters to you, seeing that you do so well
esteem them as you do. But if god spare me life, I will be a littell more
diligent to write unto you, then heretofore I have been. And as for my pore
prayer, as you have been, so shall you continually be sure of it. I trust you
do also remember me in youres, as your large and loving deeds do declare no
less. Ah good sister what do you mean to send me fo rich a token. Alas you
make me sorry to se how careful you are for me, and what great cost you have
bestowed upon me a most unprofitable member in Christ's church. But verily I
do perceive whereaboute you go. You are minded to bring God a great deal into
your debt, and to put your money unto a godly usury, according to the sainge of
the wise man: He that has pitye upon the pore (says he) lends unto the
lord, and look what he lays out, it shall be paid him again. The lord
recompense your pitiful heart, which is so careful for the children of God in
the time of their captivity. God be blessed who has made you so chereful in
geuinge, and diligent in well ^^ing, for verily the time is at hand, that you
shall reap without ceasing, the fruit of eternal life. Therefore be of good
chere, for they that now sow their good sede with tears, shall the^ reap their
full sheues with gladness, and god shall wipe al tears from their eyes for ever.
Cast all your care upon the lord, and commit your soul and body unto him as
unto a faithful creator: for doubtless dear sister, he co^tinuallye keeps you,
and cares for you. The most and principal thing that God requires of you,
is, that you be fullye persuaded, that he cares for you, and that he is your
god and most dear louinge father, and will be so for ever. Without this faith
and true persuasion, you can not please him, you can not commit and betake your
self wholye unto him, you can not truly fear him, or love him in deed, you
can not call upon him, or heartily pray unto him. Therefore let this be your
alone and continual endeavor, to be confirmed more and more of this, that God
is your most bear louinge faher, through* Jesus Christ, that he has a most
tender care over you and for you, as always he has had, and alwais will have,
both in soul and body, for this life and for eternal life, howsoever things
appear and seem unto you. According as you believe, so shall it be unto you, and
as you think God will be unto you, so shall you feel him: Think therefore
swetelye of the lord and his goodness, and pray for the increase of faith,
which God grant unto us both for his mercies sake. Amen. Thus, most dear
and faithful sister, for this time I make an end, commyttinge you and all
yours, to Gods most merciful defense, who bless, keep, and preserve you,
now and ^or evermore Amen. Fare you well in Christ good sister.

your pore brother and daily Orator Thou Careless prisoner of the Lord at al
time abiding his most merciful will and pleasure. pray, pray.

An other letter sent from the same John Careless to the self same woman.
The everlasting peace of GOD in Jesus Christ, the continual aid and
strength, joy and comfortes of his most puer, holy, and mighty spirit, with
the increase of faith and lively felinges of his eternal mercies, be most
effectuously wrought in your heart, and graven in your mind, my dear friend and
faithful loving sister K. E. to the full finishing of all the good works which
he has most graciously begone in you, that the same (by all means) may be to
the setting forth of Gods glory, the commodity of his pore afflicted Church
and to your own everlasting comfort in him. Amen

AS the dailye occasions which happen to me, dear sister in the lord,
puttinge me in remembrance of my most happy departure and final deliverance
to be at hand, do move my pore heart to much spiritual mirth and gladness in the
lord, even so does the daily remembrance of you, and other the dear saints
of God (whom I shall leave behind me) engender much sorrow and sadness, even to
my very soul, to se in what a miserable world you must remain, subject to
our deserved plages both spiritual and temporal. In respect whereof, as I
daily make mention of you in my cotinual prayers, that God will protect you
under the wings of his mercy, from al things that may be hurtful either to
soul or body: so have I thought it good, yea, and my very bounden duty, to
write these few lines unto you, as well to comfort you, what soever cross it
shall please the Lord to lay upon you, as also to warn you to walk
circumspectly, as the child of light, least at any time the darkness should
overtake you, as it is like to do those foolish virgins, which have let
their lamps go out already, ye bridegromes coming being so nigh at hand, as
suerly it is not far hence, as it appears both by ye prophecies of the holy
scriptures, and also by daily examples, whereof we have experience. God for his
Christ's sake give us al grace diligently to watch and pray, that we may be
ready prepared for that long desired day. Amen. My dear sister K. call to
your remembrance always the great love and merciful kindness that God your most
dear loving father has from time to time extended unto you, specially in
that he would vouchesafe to give for you his own only and dearly beloved son,
in whom was and is all his whole pleasure and delighte, unto the very death
of the cross, yea and that when you were his very enemy, the child of wrath,
the bond servant of Satan, and a very fierbrand of hell, and should have so
remained for ever. Consider also, how he has given you with his sweet son,
al things necessary either for body or soul, yea all that ever is in heaven
and earth, and has made you by him, heir unto himself, and owner and
possessor of all that ever he has. In consideration whereof, you ought so to
love him again, that nothing should be able to separate you from him: yea of
very love only you ought to serve him in such holiness and righteousness, as is
accept before him, all the days of your life: and also to abstain most
willinglye, from all things that be detestable in his sight, what danger so
ever should ensue to you for the same. But in deed, my dear heart, to be plain
with you, I do hear to my great grief that the due consideration of this
great love and infinite mercy of god, has not yet effectuously wrought al
these aforesaid things in you, according to my lo^ng expectacion: but it is
informed me by credible persons* that you, notwithstanding the great love of
God toward you, and the excellent knowledge he has so graciouslye given you
before many other, do yet many times defile your faith, or marriage garment,
with coming into the company of filthy idolaters, at the time of their
Antechristian service. Truly if it be so, it is a token that the great
abundant bottomless love and mercy of God toward you, has not yet in such
sort ben considered of you, that it has (as it ought to have done) swalowed
up all the vain love of the world. Ah, where is true faith become, and lively
seling of Gods mercy, that were wont to make the children of god diligent to
keep Gods commandments, and merilye to bear his cross? But perchance
you do not think it a breaking of Gods commandments, to go to the Idols
temple, and to be present with the papists at their supersticious service.
etc. But god forbid you should be so ignorant, after so many instructions, in
so great and weightye a matter. For surely the unknown sickness is most
dangerous evermore, as experience teaches. But I verily think, at the least
wise I hope, that your knoweledge is so great in these things, that the
danger in being partaker with the wicked, is not hid from your eyes. Therefore
your fault is so much the greater, and the sorer punishment is due for the
same. But my undoubted trust is, that almighty God our most dear louinge
father, will not leave you in your weakness, but will raise you up again, by
true and earnest repentance, and give you such grace and strength of his
spirit, that henceforth you shall be so far from cominge to any of their
abominable superstition, that you shall be able well to persuade this bearer,
and many other the saints of God from the same. I know dear heart that this
thing which I requier of you, will bring a great cross unto you, as well at
the hands of your husband, as of many other your worldly friends and foes. But
let not that discourage you any thing at all, sith you are one of the chosen
children of God, to whom his cross does specially belong. Let not tribulation
for righteousness sake, seem a strange thing unto you: but rather rejoice and
be glad, that God will vouche you worthy of so great dignity. For truly it is
the greatest honor, that God can bring his elect unto in this mortal life: I
mean to make them his witnesses to ye world, and to make them worthy to
suffer for his sake, which thing is not permitted to the highest Angel in
heaven: albeit I believe they would more rejoice thereof, then in all the glory
they have. Oh why are we then so loath to come to this great promotio^, seeing
it is the very ordinance of god upon all his dear children, as S. Paul
affirms, saying: To you it is given not only that you should believe in Jesus
Christ, but also that you should suffer for his sake. Again he says: all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. Oh what cause have we
to rejoice, if it please God, by suffringes to make us some thing comfortable
to the passions of our sweet Christ, who first suffered for us, and afterward
entered into his glory? We have in this world nothing so much to rejoice in,
as that we are made meet to be under the cross with Christ. For thereby are we
assured, not only that the glorious spirit of god rests upon us, but also
that we shall reign with Christ, and be glorified together with him, who
has testified with his own mouth, that they be blessed which suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs (says he) is the kingedome of
heaven: into the which we must also enter by many tribulatio^s. Happy is he
(says christ) that endures to thend. Apoc. 2.
Be faithful unto death (says the holy ghost) and I will give thee a crown
of life. etc. But what mean I to make so long a circumstance unto you, my dear
heart, who knows al these things as well or better then I? Oh that you had
the grace and strength to do al things according to your knowledge: I mean,
concerning the fleing from Idolatry, and suffering for the truth. As for all
other things, I know you are unspotted, praised be god for you. Oh that you
durst pledge me of the same cup, (if need do requier) whereof the lord of our
glory has not refused himself to drink before us, and has left us an example
to follow his fotesteps, that he might crown us with his own glory, and most
precious gifts. Oh lord help thy dear children that would feign come unto
the, and look not narowly upon our sins, which are the cause of our long
absence from thee, but cover them for thy Christ's sake, with the mantell of
thy manifold mercies, which far surmounteth al thy works, that we may not be
ashamed, but rejoice at thy most glorious coming, ye which do thou hasten
according to thy promise, for thy chosens sake. We have dear sister, been of
long season acquainted with this earthlye old man of ours to much, which is
full of sin, and presses down sore our understanding, that it is needful for
us to be tried through many trybulations, that the rust thereof might be worn
away, that we might be made mete vessels for the lords own use, and be
sanctified to honor. Happy is he that endures chasticinge. Which blessing
(my good sister) God offers unto us at this present, yea, and him self also
as our most dear louinge father. Let us willingly embrace him therefore, and
give thanks unto his name, that has triumphantly gotten victory over al our
ennemies, and is now pleading our cause on the right hand of God his father, in
the kingdom of heaven, where he keeps possession for us. To whom if we direct
our eyes with a steadfast faith, we shall not need to fear, neither death,
sin, nor hell, for their whole power is taken away, and Christ's
righteousness makes au^swer for us. Yea he is wholly ours with all his merits,
mercies and most sweet sufferinges, and we are his for evermore: so that we
may boldly say, the lord is our help, and therefore we will not fear what man
may do unto us, for he is but flesh, and his breath is in his nostrels: but
the strength of the lord, and the power of his word endures for ever: unto
the which let us steadfastly trust, and then shall we not be confounded. My
dear friend and faithful sister K. think no unkindness in me, that I write thus
boldlye unto you: for verily it is of pure love and a true heart that I bear
unto you, as I am most depely bound, yea double and treble. I have plentifully
reaped your temporal things, god recompense you for it. And ought not I the^
much more to sow unto you some of those spyritual things, wherewyth God has
blessed me? yes truly: and everlasting woe and damnation were most due and
suer unto me, if I did it not. God for his christ's sake, forgive me my great
negligence in this behalf toward you, and all the rest of his dear children,
whom I love in the lord, as mine own soul, and thank God most hartelye,
that you do me likewise, which am most unworthy of the same. God give me the
spirit of prayer, that I may therewith supply some part of my duty toward
you: for verily I am far in your debt, and so am like to die. But my suer
trust is, that my good God, for whose sake I lose life and goods, and al
earthly commodityes, will abundantly recompense you with his blessyng, both
spiritual and temporal, and in the end bring you unto me, in the place of
perpetual joy and quietness, where we shall rest from al our labors, and remain
together for evermore. There shall we most perfectly know one another
personally: though in this life we are not like to do so, for I am already
proclaimed heretic at Paul's cross, I praise god most heartily for it. For
now I know I shall shortly be with him, for whose sake I am so called: and
shall be yet more sole^nely ye su^day after Trinity sunday, doctor Harpesfield
says* I thank him for his pains. For he has given me good warning to
prepare my self ready against the day of slaughter: which time is not yet in
their hands, for all their bragges and proud bostinges, but in the good will
and determination of my most dear God, and louinge father. And right suer I
am, that they (I mean my enemies) and if all the devils in hell do help them,
can not shorten my life one minute of an hour, otherwise then GOD has
appointed, for his glory and my eternal profit. Therefore upon him will I cast
all my care, and be careless, according to my name, in spite of them all, and
tell them I will, when I come before them, that God does laughe al their
doings to scorn, and shortly will bring all their counselles to naught, to
their own utter confusion, if they be not converted. For which thing let us
pray to him, which only is able to do it, and will, when he sees his good
time and pleasure. In ye mean space, the same LORD give us his peace and
patience, with plentiful consolation and joy in the holy ghost: who govern,
guyds, lead and conduct us unto the very end. Thus yet once again I commit you
unto Gods most merciful defense, who ever have you, and all youres, in his
blessed keeping. The blessinge of God be with you evermore. Amen.

youres for ever most vnfeynedlye, John Careless, prisoner of the Lord, at all
times abidinge his most merciful will and pleasure.
Pray, pray, pray.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by William Powell, dwelling in Fletestrete, at the sign
of the George, nere to Saint Dunstons Church.


