A RIGHT EXELENT and pleasant Dialogue, between MERCVRY AND AN ENGLISH
Soldier: Containing his Supplication TO MARS: BEVVTIFIED with sundry worthy
Histories, rare inventions, and politic devises. Written by B. Rich. Genesis 1574.

printer's or publisher's device

THESE BOOKS ARE TO BE sold at the corner Shop, at the South west door of
Paul's Church.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and my very good L. Ambrose, Earl of Warwike, Baron
Lisle, of the most excelent order of the Garter knight, General of the Queens
Majesty's Ordinance, with in her highness Realms and Dominions, Bernabe Rych,
wishes long life, increase of honor, with all happy success.
WHEN I HAD FINISHed this little treatise, (right honorable) I called to mind,
the order of Writers, who usually are accustomid to dedicate their labors to
some noble personage, to whom they do bear some zealous afection, or any
other dewtiful good will, which example I determined to follow, purposing to
present this same to your honor, but when I called to my remembrance my own
ignorance in the knowledge of writing, and the slender fe^ce of that I had
written, it utterly discouraged me, so that I was at a controversy in my
self, what I might do: in the end, presuming more of your Honorable and
curtious inclynation, then on my own skill. I have auentured to present your
Honor with this little book, which I have entitled* A Dialogue between
Mercury and an English Soldier, containing his Supplication to Mars* wherein I
have descrybed* certain noble facts and other high exploytes, achiued by great
and mighty Princes, and other valiant Captains, also not forgetting to
manifest the great abuse that is generally used, in the setting forth of
Soldiers, in the time of service which I my self have seen and marked, and
although I do know my self to be the simplest of a great number, and the worst
able to perform this that I have taken in hand, yet I have presumed to
consecrate the same and the rest of my beneuolent mind to your Honor, for to
whom may the facts and exploytes of noble personages be rather offered, then to
him whose valiant acts has made him famous in his Country, but in specially
to the stranger, who has felt the force and puissaunce thereof, to whom may
the orders, ^ests and courses of martyall affairs, be more aptly remembered*
then to him who can thoroughly deem of such labors, and has passed so many
brunts in the same. Most humbly desiring your Honor to accept this same, as the
base and barren style of a simple Soldiers device, rather then the learned
lines proceeding from such as has been trained up in Scoles, beseching God,
long to preserve your Honor, with wished increase, and to prolong your days,
with most happy delight.

Your Honors most humble, at commandment Barnabe Rych.

VAL. MAX. The happy and quiet estate of blessed peace, does only consist in
the bosom and custody of knowledge in wars.
To the gentle and friendly READER.
ALthough, gentle Reader, I have done as the Iay, who decked her self with the
feathers of other Byrds, to the end, she might seem to be the more glorious,
yet I doubt not but if every Byrd should pluck his fether from this my devise,
it would not be left altogether destitute, nor so utterly naked, but there would
yet remain something worthy to be perused, although I do know my abylitie to be
such, as it is to far insufficient to satisfy thy learned delights, the which
has somewhat abashed me to become a writer, yet I doubt not, but where my pen
through ignorance has in any place erred, if there thou would vouchsafe,
but to supply my want of skill with my zealous pretense, and my well wylling
mind, it would serve for a mends, sufficient to counterpaise a greater faught,
then I trust I have committed: my good will you see, and I doubt not but when
thou have perused the matter thoroughly, thou will perceive my good pretense,
and bear with my lack of knowledge. As for those carping correcters and
curious scanners, such as will sooner find three faughts, then they be able to
amend one, I may compare them to those, that in the day of battaill, dare not
come to the fight themselves, but will convey themselves to a hill, or some sure
place to behold other men's doings, judging who fights best, but it is an old
proverb, he that passes through a Town, and will throw a stone at every cur
that barketh, shall have in the end, but a weary arm, I esteem not therefore of
the^, nor of their judgments, but only submit my self to the friendly
reports of the wise and learned, and of every other well disposed Reader,
nothing doubting, as I have said, but such will bear with my inabylitie, and
except of my good will, which is all that I crave, and thus farewell.

In commendation of the Author.
NOT boldest bloods alone, where guide is gone,
Does show the brauest brag upon their foe,
Unless that Art and rule, does lead them on,
As by a fine forecast, the charge must go.
For head withouten heed, still chops upon il chance:
and conduct is the ka^e, that does the charge adua^ce^
Read Rich, a book enricht with goodly store,
VVher naught that worthy war can wish does want,
Each stratagem so stately set, thou needst no more,
Rich has enricht his woork as naught is skant.
Let Langius lie* and Machauel go make his moan:
Mars and Bellona bids thee read but Rich alone.
G. Argal.

John Bettes Gent. in the commendation of the Author.
If Lawyers by the law to hye estate do clyme,
Or Marchaunts by their marting often, great gain do get in time,
Or if the silly soul which still the plough does ply:
By toil does reap to serve his turn, in quiet ease to lie.
Or if the brutish Beast for pain does pleasure find,
In resting of his weary lims, at times to him assignde:
If all these reap reward according to their kind,
How much more oght he the^ to have of thee a willing mind
Who first to task did take this noble work so rare,
By painful practice to unfold to thee as to thy share:
The whole effest of war, and whereon it proceeds,
VVherin thy se^f may easly guess how Auerice sows his seeds
In pyling up of pelf vain glory to maintain,
Without regard of Mars his law or of his worthy train:
And farther may thou find abuses many ways,
In those which do profess the Art, and count them selves as stays
Who rather seeks in time of war to gayn, then they
Their Countries right would once d^fend without some hope of pay
Good Reader note this well, more then I can express
How fain he would in covert wise, these mischiefs s^ne redres
But aye the time his skill, to weak to work his will,
His would the ^ainest man on li^e, but could does grant him nill
Well since he has dischargde the duty of a friend,
Yield thou a gentle ear to hear, his labor to the end:
And seek not curiously his work for to disprayse
But seem to mend that is amiss, in rude and rustic phrase
Lo, this is al he craves, in guerden of his pain:
Thy friendly fartheraunce and report, he seeks no other gain.
THE AVTHOR TO HIS BOOK.
WHy should you make such have abroad to be,
a mean whereby to purchase me defame:
Yet might thou still abide and stay with me,
and I thereby remain deuoyd of blame:
But if I once permit thee scope to trudge,
I know not I, what every man will judge.
The book to the Author.
What doubts be these that thus does dull thy brain
or what conceiptes does yet thy mind pursue:
I know no cause thou should me thus restrain,
but give me scope to such as list to vow:
Then they no doubt, will thank thee for thy pain,
as I suppose thou seek no greater gain.
The Author.
I crave no more in deed, but the good will
of such, as shall thy simple sense behold:
But this I doubt my rude and slender skill,
may give them cause to judge me over bold:
So I in steed of thanks may purchase blame,
so vain a ^oy to set forth in my name.
The Book.
And who so ready ever fault to find,
as witless head, that least of all does know:
For none so bold they say, as bayerd blind,
nor none more riefe their doultish domes to show:
VVher wise men yet will deem thy doings right,
what carst thou then for Zoylus cankerd spite.
The Author.
Well yet my book, I give thee this in charge,
the manners mark of such as thee peruse:
If thou perceiuest their tongues do run at large,
in fynding fault the Author to accuse,
Tell thou them then, I meant not to offend,
what they mislike, desire them they would mend
And thus farevvell.

A Pleasant. Dialogue
IN May, when all Creatures commonly rejoice, being prycked forth by my own
desire to leave the house, and walk the pleasant Pastures, which was to my
great contentacion, by reason of the sweet and delectable Verdeur which
Tellus, Imphes does yield in that blessed season: thus as I^romed up and down,
I fortuned to find a fair Meade, which was gorgeouslye aryed all in grieve,
bedecked with Flowers of diverse and sundry colors, on the farther
sidewherof, I might behold a gallant Gro^e, out of the which there came such
Heavenly Hermony, as at the first it caused me to think Orphei again had
been returned frequenting his accustomed order, but as I drew nearer, I knew
it to be the tunes of sundry Birds, which as it seemed reioysed them selves
in that pleasant plot, with their sweet and delectable lay: Thus as I was
come up under the side of the Woodde, I found a fair Tree, whose spreding
bows shadowed the place, where I laid me down of purpose to hear more of
those pleasant notes: but as Cyllemus merry pipe, brought Ergus to a nodding
nappe, so I think those Hermonical soundes yielded me the like: For I was no
sooner laid, but Morpheus immediately assailed me with a strange and
troublesome dream, for to my thinking I heard the sudden sound of Trumpettes,
Droms, and Phifes, and musing with my self, what it might mean, I might see
diverse bands both of Horsemen and footmen being armed, which in very comely
order, with auncientes brave displayed, came marching toward me, and when they
were come to ye place where I abode, putting themselves in troop one by the
assent of all the rest, vttred these words following: Although of this our
sudden repair unto thee, thou had no intelligence, yet some part of the
cause we are assured thou know very well, which should make me to be so
much the shorter in that which I have to say: the^ know this, we have by our
general assents appointed thee as our trusty friend, wylling thee with all speed
to prepare thee in manner of a messenger to the mighty court of Mars: where in
our behalf thou shall make presentacion into how many extremities we the
unfortunate Soldiers of England are even now lately fallen into: otherwise
then has been seen or heard on, and with a contrary alteracio^ of time past
so clean changed, as there is difference between white and black, has not
the name of a souldior here before been had in such reverence and accounted of
such value, as they have been honored of every estate, is not the profession
of so worthy service now become so odious, and the name so reprochful, as they
be disdained, and y^ of each degree: who has been heretofore more carefully
provided for, more worthily maintaind, or more justly preferred: who is now so
slenderlye esteemed of, so lightly accounted of, and so little cared for, where
they have been loved, they be now despised, where before al other they have
been had in estimation, they be now as abiects to al other, had in no
reputacion, but what should I stand to use longer circumstance. To find a
present redress in these causes we have as I told thee before, appointed thee
our messenger to make these matters known to mighty Mars him self, who is our
only refuge, our whole hope of comfort and chiefest help at need, not
doubting but by these means to find such happy redress as we shall have
just cause to extol our mighty Mars, as also to yield the continual thanks
for thy diligence used at our requests.

Thus when I had heard the sum of their pretense, I answered as follows: If
I were as sufficient to discharge my self of that credit, which you would
commit unto me, as I feel my self wylling and ready to the uttermost of my
power to pleasure the simplyest of this noble company, as the hope that you
have in me should not be frustrate, so I should not be driven to seek
excuses, as now I am forced, requesting your pardons herein: First, because I
know there be many whose experience will much better serve to satisfye your
requests, than I know my own to be of, and there be some that I know
would accuse me of ignorance or presumption, if it were known that I should
attempt in any such matter, but in especially when I consider my own
insufficiencye, it utterly discourageth me: But I rather think your Message
should be executed by some famous Orator, or some excellent Rethorisian
which should not be unfurnished with pleasant terms, or such a one as
could tell a learned tale as occasion did serve, and not by such as I know my
self to be, who is able to say no more than what you have already taught
me: Wherefore I trust you will except these as reasonable and lawful excuses,
and not as any surmised shifts, whereby to avoid that service which I know
my self to be unworthy of.

When I had made this answer after a little conference had amongst them selves,
thy replied in this manner.

As we think thee sufficient enough to perform any thing that we have yet
desired, so we are not come hither esteeming thee best able of any other to
satisfye our request: but we presuming to have found thee as wylling to have
used thy diligence, at our desires, as we were ready to desire thee, gave us
the more occasion to press thus much upon thee, and where thou say there
be some that would accuse thee of ignorance or presumption, if thou
should yield to our requests, we assure thee there be as many others that
might Justly accuse thee of folly if for the reproachful tauntes of Momishe
mates, thou should omit any thing that tends upon good or commendable
occasion, but what nicite has now overtaken thee, that thou would persuade
us to send some Oratoure or such like, and that we must now use such
eloquence to prefer our causes: thou must consider we would neither send the
to Pallas nor yet to Apollo, nor yet to any other captious wight that will have
greater regard to the terms, then he has to the tale, for who is so
scrupilouse that will look for eloquence to come from soldiers or to think
that they must paynt out their matters with any curiouse philed phrace,
unless it be some curiouse philed fool, which knows not what appertains
to a soldier, but to drive thee out of these doubts we have framed a
supplication to Mars, where in we have included the whole sircumstaunce of our
pretense the which in our behalfes thou shall present, receiving thy answer
without using many words: thus minding to use no farther perswatio^s of
encouragement if this that we have said be not sufficient we leave the rest to
thy own discretion.

Yes surely said I, it is enough and your words has so thoroughly persuaded
me that even now I remain at your pleasures ready pressed to answer the sum of
your pretense, as far as my ability will any ways serve me, yet craving the
pardons of such as be beter experimented considering it rather proceeds from
a desire to do well, then of any presumtuose mind. Then they delivering me the
supplication which they had framed, one of them said as follows.

Well then we mind no longer to deteine the but would rather wish the to
make as great speed as conveniently thou may: we have no more to say but
we desire the sacred Gods to farther thy pretense and thus till our next
meeting we leave thee.

Then putting them selves again in order, too my farewell, certain voll of
shot discharged in hope of my good speed.

Thus they marched away again in such gallant sort, that who had seen them
might well have deemed (though their estimacions were impaired,) yet their
noble and valliant hearts was no whitte diminished: But suddenly as they were
vanished from my sight, I began to bethink me of my undertake, attempt, which
when I had well considered, I cursed my own follye that would so rashlye
condiscende to take in hand, I knew not what: for neither wist I where Marses
Court should be, neither knew I by what devise I might get thither, the
remembrance whereof brought me almost to a kind of desperaration, how I
might prosecute, or by what means I might perform my promise: but when I had
called to mind the goodness of the Gods, who commonly be assistaunt to all
distressed wightes: I began somewhat to comfort my self in hope, likewise to
find some favor vsyng this peticion as follows, If the humble supplications
of wretched wights, may any thing prevail before you, the celestial Gods
vouchsafe most humblye than I beseech you, that my pytyfull plaintes might so
move you to help me in this distress, that through your mighty powers, and
providence divine: I might yet in the end bring my attempt to some happy
effect.

But as I continued in this contemplacion I might behold one standing by me
clothed all in white, holding in his hand a rod, which seemed all of massye
Gold, by which sign I did know it to be Mercury, who in this wise said
unto me.

The Gods has listened to thy prayers, and in some part yielded to thy request:
arise therefore and with speed prepare thy self to follow me, with that me
thought on both my shoulders there were suddenly grown a pair of wings of
maruailous bigness, and as I perceived my guide softly to soar away, I
assayde with my self how I could follow, which me thought I could do
even at pleasure, and as well as though I had been practiced in flying many a
day before, and after we had thus flyed a while together, I looked about,
and I might underneath me behold Cities, Towns, Castelles, Wooddes, diverse
Hills, and Valleys, wherein I took great pleasure and delight and much
reioysed with my self to see these new and unacquainted things but with in
short space we were so mounted that I had clean lost the sight: of
altogether which was below and then I might perceive a merueilouse, huge and
sumtiouse Castle, standing on a plesaunt plotte directly over against us,
toward the which my guide began to bend his course and I following him till we
were come in manner to it, where upon a very fair green we stayde our
selves, Marcial exercises.
and as I stood gasing about I might perceive great rowts of people that
ishewed out and in at the gates and almost on every part of this castle they
were using many exersises some were running at the tilte, others at the turny
others were pushing with the pike, some were throwing of the darts, some were
exercising the Caliuer in manner of skirmishe, and many were on horseback, the
one having the other in chase,

These sightes made me greatly to muse, but my guide I think of purpose to
cut me from my farther imagination, said: Lo, The description of Mars his
Court.
here quod he the Court of Mars, where thou may behold those blessed
wightes, who spent their passed days in defense of their Country and right,
only to attain praise and noble fame, and not for filthye lucours sake, or
hope of any Gold gain: Where now their just deserts is quitte with like
delight, what though their bodies intombed be in clay thou see their spirit
do here remain in everlasting bliss, for here no years may make the^ old,
no barehead skul, no wrinkled browe may here be found, no visage here may ought
anoy the^, nor yet Morpheus once assail them, no Borias blastes may hurt them
with cold, nor the fiery flames of Aetna hill oppress them with heat, no
Cerberus is Porter in this place, nor the grieslye groans of Promotheus at no
time here are hard, they never see the greedy gripe to tyer on Ticius heart, to
be short they never feel of any woe: but still continue their days in most
happy and blessed estate, every one using his own delights, even as it has
pleased the Gods to appoint. Why then said I thou Gods son since it has
pleased thee to reveal these matters unto me, vouchsafe likewise (I beseech
thee) to satisfye me in this that I see upon the Towers and Tur^ets, which as
they be innumerable, so they are beset with an infinite number of Ancients:
In the which as I do guess, the Arms of diverse Countries be displaid: But on
the one part of the Castle, I may behold diverse Auncientes, bearing the
Arms of England, they be likewise environed with a great number of others,
al bearing Saint Georges Cross, yet in them the Arms of noble men and
Gentlemen, and amongst them many which my self did partlye know, now it
seems unto me, those Auncientes should pertayne to such as were valliaunt
Princes, courageous Captains, and expert Soldiers, and that their Arms and
coullors be there displayed, in sign of their immortal fame, and that as well
of the inferior Gentleman, as of the most mighty Prince.

Thou have rightly deamed said the God, and like as thou see their Arms and
coullours advanced in the tops of the Towers, so their noble acts and
valliant Conquestes be liuelye described on every wall within that Princelye
Palace, to their perpetual remembrance: But now with speed prepare thy self
to finyshe thy pretense? behold the place where thou may perform the rest
of thy desires, go thy ways therefore, and at thy return thou shall not fail
to find me here aspecting thy good hope.

I wist not then how to requite the curtesey of the God, nor yet what
reverence I might use at my departure, in the end with a homelye manner of
giving thanks, I took my leave directing my course toward this glorious
Court, and as I softlye passed gasing here and there, I might perceive a great
company of Gentlemen all bravely mounted on horseback, who for their disports
were running at the King: amongst whom there were some that I my self had
very well known and perfectlye again had called to my remembrance as I saw
them ride: The first of them was Captain Dercy, brother to the right
honorable Lord Dercy, whose soldier I sometime was at New Haven, where the
Gods aspecting his virtuous disposition bereft us of this noble Gentleman,
although to our grief and sorrow yet to his continual comfort and
consolation, where he now has resydence amongst the most renowned wightes.

There were in his company Captain Sanders, and the valliaunt young Souch,
whom I likewise had known at Newhauen, with many others.

But when I was come near to the gates of this Princely pallas, it made me
much to muse to see the strangeness of the sight, for beside that it was huge,
and of a maruailous Cirquet, so the order of fortification was so exceeding
above the common form of any humane skyll, as I will not presume to take upon
me to discipher.

The description of the wales.
The walls were all of brass, impalde with massy Gold: in every port and lope
were Canons coucht that glistered like the Sun. The Porter that kept the gate
looked with a most stearne and griesly countenance: his name they say was
Courage, by whom I passed into a base Court, the bewty whereof was such as it
showed it self to be a place to far unfit for any mortal wight. There
were about ye walls in most lively manner discribed many worthy Cumbats, and
diverse valiant conquests atchiued by sundry marciall wightes, as Giants,
serpents, Dragons, Lions, Bulls, Boores, and many other horrible monsters,
subdued by Hercules, Theseus, Jason, Persey, and others.

From thence I passed into an upper court which was of such excellency, as it
easelye might be deemed to be a place celestial. There was likewise described
many famous Histories: first I saw ye seege of Thebes, where Amphion sanke down
into hell, and of many a knight which lost their lives before the ancient town
of Troy, and how by treason, the brazen horse was set on flaming fire. the^
might I see the overthrow which Hanibal gave to ye Romans in Ca^nas field,
where Consul Emmelius lay bathing al in blood, and of many a notable policy
put in practice between the said Hanibal, and Scipio, and how before Carthage
they were in arms to try who should have ye Empire of the world: then saw I
Xerxes, whose army though for ye multitude they drank rivers dry, yet was
clean subdued, and quite ouerthrown, and how by the valiance, and prouesse of
ye noble Milciades, iij.C. thousand men were put to flight: yet saw I Darius
with all his huge host, subdued by Alexander ye great, I might likewise behold
diverse noble conquestes which were achieved by sondrye English Princes and
other valiant captains and soldiers of England, to long here to be reherst,
but al next to the entry into the Hall, there was curiously described ye
victorious acts of the most renowned Prince, King Henrye the eight, how he
discomfited the whole power of France at the time of the seege of Turwin, when
as he retained the Emperor Maximilian with all his retinue: who came to the
camp wearing, a red Cross as one of the Kings soldiers and after how the
town was taken and left all rased: then saw I Turnay surrendered to the King,
and of many a noble exploit done before the strong and forcable town of
Bullein and how it was likewise taken by this noble Prince.

These with a number of other histories were there so liuelye displayed all in
Imagery of pure goulde so curiously inamiled as they rather seemed to be even
now a doing then the monumentes of things, that were done and paste. And as I
was determined to have gone into the hall, I heard a great noise of trumpets,
sownding in manner as they use to do at triumphs: and as I looked toward the
gate, I might behoulde a goodly personage that was entering, who for his
Iesture countenance, and every other grace, seemed to be even the God of
battle him self, he brought with him four Champions, all armed, saving on
their heads they had eueryone a Garland in sign of victory, and as I
earnestly stood and beheld them, I called three of them perfectly to my
remembrance, for that I sometime had known them: The one was Captain Vahan,
sometime Controuler of Newhauen, the other Captain Cromwell, and the third
Captain Rondall: the fourth I did not know, which caused me to go to one
that stood by, of whom I curteouslye desired to know who this fourth should
be, who in this wise said unto me.

Why, what art thou quod he, or how long have thou been here a Courtier, that
do not yet know the noble Captain Audley, whose prouesse and valiaunce, as
it has made him famous to every inferior person, so he is likewise honored
of each renowned wight.

Why then quod I, vouchsafe likewise I pray thee, to show me the meaning of
the rest from whence do they come, or what is the cause that thus be brought
in manner of victors, or as though they had achieved some haughty attempt.

By thy words quod he, it seems thou art yet vnaquaynted with the manners
of this house, otherwise these matters would not seem such nouelles unto thee,
when it is generallye used by as many as does frequent this place for their
own disportes, to put in practice sundry experimentes, and diverse Marciall
exercises, where he that best deserves shall receive such honor as is dew
to his deserts, as now these four Gentlemen which at this present has
showed them selves at all assayes, more worthy then the rest, and be now
brought in by Warlyke Pollicye, who is hye Steward of this house in this
triumphant manner, by whom they shall receive that honor which to them of
right by custom does pertain: when he had thus satisfied my demand, and
that I did know him to be Warlike Policy, which before I suspected to be
Mars.

I requested his advise what means I might use to come to the presence of the
God of battle, showing him that I had a suit to prefer, and that I was in
deed a stranger and wanted friendly advise.

Well quod he, if that be thy want, the best advise that I can give is this,
that if thy cause require any haste, it were good thou made speed to the
place where thou might have quick dispatch, Mars (...) now in Venus court.
which is not here, for Mars is now in Venus court whither thou were best to
repair, the sooner to know an end of thy desire.

When I understood this I was so at my wits end, as almost I knew not what
to do, but when I had given him thanks for his courtesey, I had thought to
have gone again to my guide, who had promised to tarrye for me to request
farther advise, but first I went into the hall, where there was such a
thundering noise of trumpettes, Droms, and Phifes, as was maruailous to hear.

In the midst of this Hall there stood a Wagon, the which was called the
Chariot of deadlye debate, there was painted about it many tragical
discourses, and sundry Ciuyll dissencions: I might see the great controversy
between Julius Caeser and Pompey, which could not be appeased with the lives
of three hundred thousand men, likewise between the houses of Conde and Guise,
and also between the houses of Lancaster and York, with many other which here
I omit.

There was sitting in this Chariot, three personages most terrible to behold:
the first was War, who sat all armed holding in the one hand asword, and in
the other consuming fire: he was accompanied with Famine on the one side, a
most horrible creature, whose yrksome looks were able to daunt the greatest
courage of the most haughty minded wight: on the other side sat Murder, ^he
fruits ^f war.
whose hands and raiment were al imbrued and begoared with blood.

This Chariot was ever drawn by four ylfauoured and unseemly monsters whose
names were Malice, Strife, Contencion, and Discord, the Wagoner was most
pestelent slave, called Envy, who with a Goade did still prick them
forewarde: But as I passed up a little farther, I might behold that most vglye
and detestable creature Ruin, whose dreadefull sight did much afraye my mased
mind: This monster Ruin is evermore a follower and a hanger on of War,
Ruin (...) follower (...) war.
for into what place so ever War makes entrye or has any abiding, Ruin
presently follows, and there likewise will make his residence.

This yrksome sight did so much abhor me, and so thoroughly discourage me,
that where before I had a kind of Martial desire to serve as a Soldier, as
occasion did permit, I now protested to my self not only to leave the
exercise of so vile a profession, but also to deseuer my self from the
fellowship of any such as were followers of so filthy and hateful a service,
minding no farther to follow my suit, which before so carefullye I sought to
accomplish, but got my self forth to my guide of purpose to desire him to
bring me to the place, where at the first he did find me, and so to leave
me.

But because it so chaunsed, we fell into a discourse of many matters: I have
put it in order of a Dialogue, for that it might be the better understood.

FINIS.
The Speakers.
Mercury. the Eng. Soldier. BY thy sudden return, it seems thou have had
quick dispatche, but how thou have sped I pray thee let me know that thou
art come again in so short a space.

Soul. As my return seems to thy Godhead to be quick and speedye, so the
horrible sight which I have seen since my departure, seems to me as
fearful, and displeasaunt, and for that I understand that Mars is now in
Venus Court, I can be well contented even there to leave them, and thus to
cease my suit, considering the fruictes of their service which did first
procure me to take the matter in hand.


Mer. Why how chaunseth it, that thou art so suddenly altered, I perceive thou
art fallen into some dislyking, but what is the the cause I can not yet
perceive, nor from whence these sudden fyttes should proceed.


Soul. Even of this when I now have plainly seen what fruits by war are
gained, both by him and his accomplices. First the Chariote of deadelye*
debate, drawn by malice, strife, contencion and discord, driven by envy,
fraught with sword, fire, famine and murder, making open scope and way for
ruin, is Pluto himself asocyated with a more loathsome company? no sure the
Furies of Hell are not to be compared to these monsters above all other most
to be detested.


Mer. But what is this to the Soldier, thou have yet showed no reason why he
should be despised.


Soul. Even as War with his companions are carefully to be eschewed, and
that of all Estates, so the Soldier, who is as it were a minister of these
mischiefs, is likewise to be abhorred, and that of every honest mind. Warr^
greeuou^ plague (...) swyftly (...) be shun^



Me. War in deed amongst mortal men is grievous, swiftly to be shunned, but
it is many times used as the scourge of the Gods to punish the Malefactions of
the impius, and therefore not to be avoided, example of Troy and Troyeans
brought to destruction only for the filthye fact of Paris, but touching the
Soldier, because he is an instrument of War, and therefore should be
rejected, might as well be said, because fire whose nature is to consume
whatsoever it touches, and therefore should be utterly extinguished, and
clean put out, yet no man doubts but if it were so as in Summer, it would
be wanting about diverse necessaryes, so in Winter a great number might starve
for cold.

A Soldier may rightly be compared to a sword, wherewith a man may for
want of government anoy his companions, indaunger such as be about him, hurt
his friends, yea, or maine, mischief or kill him self, where at the first
they were ordained as necessary instruments, wherewith to defend the enemy,
which else would seek thy life, and to revenge thy wrongs, and iniuryes,
which be offered by thy Foe, now if they be otherwise abused contrary to the
meaning of the first institucion, the fault is not to be imputed to the
sword, but to the follye of such as for want of government can not use them,
neither may swords yet be spared, but to be accounted as instruments most
necessary.

But what should I stand to use examples, how many Cities, Towns, Provinces,
yea, and sometime whole kingdoms has been rewynated and utterly confused
where soldiers has been wanting, but here omitting all other: I will yet
refer thee to pervse in Chronicles, the time that Brithricus raygned King of
England, in whose time the Danes first entered his Land, robbed and spoiled
many of his Successors, and in the end brought the people to be servile and
bond, using their wives and goods at their pleasure, and thus continued the
space of two hundred fiftye and odd years, to be brief, I think there is no
man so simple which does not conceive how necessary and needeful the noble
Soldier is.


Soul. The more is the pitye, that Kings and Princes can not foresee unto how
many misfortunes they commit them selves, their people and country, when they
first take in hand to prepare them to the field, which if they did, I think
they would rather desire to govern their own with quietness, than to seek
by force of arms to be conquerours of others: But O unhappy Prince, that is
so ungracious to embrace so cursed a crewe as war brings with him: but O
thrice unfortunate country and people, that harbors such a company of
unlucky Guess.

Wars has been from the beginning, and shall continue until the worlds end.
Well yet thou see wars has been even from the beginning, and so shall
continue to the end, especially when there be so many prouocations to stir
them, and so many vices imbrast almost of every Prince to move them, as
Ambicion, Pride, Vaineglory, Blooddinesse of mind, Covetousness, and such
other, these be the chief occasions of any foreign war, ciuyll war is
likewise procured, when the Prince is rygorous, cruel, a tyrant, ouercharging
their subjects with Taxes, Subsidyes, unreasonable customs, or other grievous
exactions, and as these vices be general in Princes, so there are as many mo
as common to subjects, whereby many times co^mocions are raised, as contempt,
rebellion, disobedience, mutiny. etc. And yet wars are not wrongfully
attempted but many times proved upon right and reasonable cause.

Thou see the noble Soldier may in no wise be spared, Soldiers may not
be spared if it be but to defend the invasions of others.
but even as thou have said unhappy Prince, and unfortunate Countreye that
once retayneth wars, so may thou likewise cry, O most wretched Princes, and
O most miserable Countreye which is unprovided of sufficient and expert
Soldiers, if it be but to defend the rigours of such as would invade.


Soul. In deed we have a saying, that Weapon many times makes peace, and so
paraduenture where the Country is well replenished with Soldiers, and other
necessaries appertayning to war, may be an occasion that the enemy will
be the more cyrcumspect to stir any strife, thus I perceive the Soldier is
very necessary, but yet in my mind more needful then profitable.


Mer. It might seem as great vanity to go about by any circumstance to prove
how needful and profitable the souldyer is as if a man by great curiosity
would go about to prove ye sun were bright whose glittering gleames are known
to every man and daily seen through the whole world but whither ye soldier be
as profitable as he is needful, I will refer it to thy own discretion, First
when the departing from his quiet house, To how many inco^uenie^ces a
souldyer commits him self in his contries defense.
his loving wife and dear children, may never stay him, when the sight of
his enemies may nothing daunt him, the hasarde of losing life or lime can
never fear him, when troublesome toil and continual travail can once
withhoulde him when excessive watch and ward may never weary him, when hongar
and thirst may any white discourage him, when cruel could, homely lodging,
may at any time restrain him, when all these with a number of other
extremities may once withdraw him from the serving of his Prince and defense
of his country.

How many commodities are gained by the souldyer.
Besides this in what security either of life or living were those that be
honest and of good disposition were it not for law, to what effect were law,
were it not for Justice, of what assurance were either Law or Justice: were
not the Prince to maintain them, of what maintenance or power were that Prince
that were bereft of souldyers, for is it not many times seen, that neither
Justice, policy nor wisdom, may longer continue obedience in subjects
toward their Prince, but must be subdued by force of martial power: to be
short in what assured state were that Prince or country, which is vnreplenished
with noble souldyers to defend them from the tyranny or others.


Soul. Thus I perceive the souldyer is worthy to be maintained if it be but to
withstand the malignitye of others, according to the saying of Cicero, who
says, Fortis et magnauimus est habendus no^ qui facet, sed qui propulsat
iniuriam, but when thy Godhead seems to prefer the soldiers as the
principal pillar where on does consiste the Chiefest defense of King and
country I remember Cicero likewise used an other sentence which says, Cedat
arma coge concedat aurea lingue, whereby it seems the souldyer must give
place to the wise and politic counsailer.


Mer. To answer this objection sufficiently would ask to long discourse and
no man doubts but the souldyer in all attemptes is or should be governed by
counsel unless occasion does sometime fall out when he must put in
practice his own experience, Who can give better counsel in Marcial causes
then the experimented Soldier
but who is able in any occasion touching marciall causes, to give better
counsel than the experimented Soldier, as Alexander magnus says, a
Souldioure is worth his keeping in the time of peace who has honestely served
bys Prince in the time of war although for age he can not travail, his
counsel yet may not be spared.

But to show thee in part what counsaylers they be which Cicero means, and
how the souldyer does give him place, I will show the.

Cato perceiving the Romans to degenerate and wax sluggish, over they had
been in times past, and instead of feats of arms exersised other vayn toys
and other ydell devises, fearing that by this nicitye, the Carthagians might
take occasion to contend with them for the empire, brought it in question that
for their better securitye it should be most convenient that Carthage
should be utterly destroyed, although that Scipio were of the contrary
opinion, affirming that it should seem very unlawful for the Romans to
commit so heinous a fact, but he rather thought it to be most expedient that
the Romans having such an enemy whom they might fear, might be the more
occasion to continue peace and amitye amongst themselves, and the greater
prouocasion whereby to incite their youth to prowess and actiuitye, in
conclusion, Cato prevailed, and Scypio after a long assault, did take it, and
utterly destroyed it.

Thus by the counsel of the wise Cato Rome was delivered of a dangerous
neighbor, but the glory and renown remained only to the Noble and
valiant Captain Scypio, in many such like causes, Soldiers gives place to
the counsel of the wise, but is nothing thereby diminished, but the rather
increased and augmented.

But because thou may the better perceive in what estimacion the noble
Soldier has been a^counted of and how their counsels has been allowed
with wise and noble Princes, How old Soldiers has been accounted of with
noble princes.
I will show thee an example the which in ancient historyes is yet to be
seen, in these words following.

Dionisius when he went to Conquer other Regions, there were many of his
folowers which being overcome with age and extreme travail, would neither
tarrye without a King, neither follow their Captain, wherefore coming to
their Prince with Tears, they desired him to take pittye of them, to whom he
said: My brethren and fellow soldiers lay your cares a side, you have
followed me a great while, you have often and long fought for me, and with
me, I will now call others into their fortunes: It is now time for you to take
your rest, and this shall remain a reward for ever, for your labors and
travails, settle your selves here and possess you this fat Land, which by
your valiaunce I have Conquered, I do now release you from all Warrelike
labors: I will have you to carrye the name of oulde Soldiers, and to be
called here as your office shall be to govern the common Weal, to reprove
the ill, to praise the good, and from all other labors you shall be free to
what people or country so ever you come too, the King shall find you meat
Drink and Cloathe, you shall be most honorable with all men, Princes
shall offer you presents, and shall give you their own Garments, what so ever
you say shall be allowed for truth: You shall hate Liars, and you shall
judge Traitors, and those that have ill Women you shall punish with infamy:
the whole Land shall be free for you to have safe trauayling, and safe
dwelling, if any man shall offend or grieve you with word or deed, he shall
dye by the sword.

I do farther appoint that my very friend Spertembam shall be King of the
Indies amongst you, who shall appoint you necessaries and yearly stipendes who
shall maintain your privileges, and he shall hold you most honorable about
him, and you and your heirs shall counsel him, in whom if succession shall
want: let the election of the Indian Kings be amongst you, and your Children.

It is to be supposed Herroldes of Arms took the original of this.
Thus Dionisius comforting and persuading his Heroas, departed with his army out
of India, whose office is to be assistaunt to Kings, to be a comfort to the
common weal, to advance virtue, and to punish vice, being no other of them
selves but old Soldiers, the which after many and great mischiefs endured,
and after many wonderful Wars ended with most glorious Triumphs, there
strength drawn from them, and tired with age, are released from the toyling
labors of wars, and called to the court for counsaylers.

Octauius Augustus was of the same mind, and so likewise was Marcus Anthonius,
and Marcus Crassus: Thus the Romans when there Wars were ended, did still
determine of their old Soldiers.

But why stay we so long about so small avail, if thou mindest to prosecute
as thou have begone: behold Venus Court is not so far hence, but that we
may walk thither even at our pleasures debating on these causes by the way as
we go.


Sou. Yes surely if the Gods permit, I will now do my Message, and the rather
when thy Godhead has so throughlye persuaded me, and so earnestly defended
the soldiers cause, Souldier^ in Engla^^^ had in small account.
we want such atturneis in England to plead in their behalfes where I think
of all other Countries they are had in least estimation.


Mer. I think in deed a Soldiers credit in England is but of a small
valewe, yet not so small, The orde^ of apoin^ment vsd^ with less regard.
but their order of appointment in the time of service, and that as well of
Captains as of other private Soldiers, is used with as little regard,


Sou. I do not understand the meaning of these words, but I perceive they
tend to some dislyking, which although peradventure some small abuse may be
committed in the choice of our Soldiers, yet for Captains I think there be
none admitted but such as iustlye may not be accused of any insufficencye.


Mer. Then omitting to speak of soldiers till some other occasion, I will
some thing say of two sorts of Captains, which in time of service are as
busye as the best to attain charge, and as it is great pittye that the one
sort should be parmitted, so it were very good if the abuses of the other
might be reformed, and the greatest cause that stirs both these sorts to
service, as may be supposed, proceeds of one mocion, which is the gripell
desire they have of Princes pay.

The first sort which I mean be such as will presume to take upon them
conduction being altogether unable and clean void of experience, Unfit
captains.
no not so much as to place two hundred men in right order of array.

The other be such, which although they be seruicable enough, yet in the time
of service will make a common profit by powling and pilling his Soldiers, yea,
and sometime will not stick to deceive the Prince by a slye devise or twain:
Such Captains in times past there has been appointed, and such Captains
be most ready to make means to be appointed, and it is now grown to a
general order in England, that in the time of service, he that can best
carrye favor with this or that noble man, he is sufficient enough to take
charge, there pertaines no more to a Captain, but if he may get my Lords
good will by means whereof there has been some appointed which if they came
to the place where good service should be, some were to far unfit to
perform the duetye of a Captain or else such whose greatest care is how he
may deceive both Prince and soldier of the pay.


Soul. Although it has pleased thy Godhead to enter into this familyer
discourse, yet before I will presume to proceed any further, I crave most
humbly pardon, least peradventure in using many words some hap to be
amiss, for that every honest mind of duty is bound as much as in him lies
to defend any infamye or reproach, wherewith his Country is charged, so it
might fortune that I in respect of God will to defend those accusations which
here thou have pronounced against our English Captains, might fall into such
rash reasoning as might not well beseem me, and so forgette that reverence
which to thy Godhead by right does appertain.


Mer. As I am well pleased at this instant to argewe and debate these causes
with thee, so it shall nothing dislyke me, for any thing that thou shall say,
but would rather wish thee to speak freelye, whatsoever thou think may
best serve for thy purpose.


Soul. Then I doubt not but to make such reasonable answer in our Captains
behalfes, as may very well be permitted for good and sufficient excuses, and
now to speak of those first kind of Captains which here thou condempnest to
be presumptious, because they will attempt to take a charge: notwithstanding,
their small experience thinking the greatest mocion, that should stir them to
it, proceeded of desire, of gain, now it might be very well supposed, that if
any Gentleman have sought that place of credit: it rather proceeded of
valiaunce, or of a noble courage, then of any covetous desire, or yet of any
presumtious mind, for noble hearts undoubtedly can but desire noble atempts
and I am assured we have no small number of Gentlemen, whose experience
peradventure, though it be not so much as some others, which has seen the
order of service, yet I dare bouldlye affirm their noble and valiant hearts
are no whit inferior, no not to those whose experience does best serve, and
whose service has been of longest continuance, and the noble captain
Cabrias (as stories makes mention) was wont to say that an army of fearful
Dear, having a Lion to their Captain, were more to be feared, than an army
of Lions having a dear to their captain. By this he ascribes valiance to be
the principal point that to a captain appertains: and Salust says, that
wit and will joined together, makes a man valiant, and who would think
that any such should be vnwylling, that in the time of service will make so
many friends to get a captains room.


Mer. But now if any such have sought that noble Run, which are in deed
neither wise nor valiant, and that are mentioned unto it, by will without
wit, although these may be hardlye excused of hope of gain yet of
presumpcion, he may not be excused or at the least he may be worthily
condemned of overmuch folly.


Sou. This is most certain it can not otherwise be, but I think we have no
such in England.


Mer. As I will not seem to accuse, so I do not mind to excuse, but be it in
England or else where, he that will take upon him the room of a Captain,
without having experience, does play Phaetons part, or may be compared to
some rash fellow, who at adventures will take upon him Mariners art, and yet
was never at the Sea, fearing nothing but bearing all his sails ataunt while
the wether is fair, and at length comes some sudden storm or ungracious gust
that turns Ship and all on their heads, sometime paraduenture for want of
making sail when time did serve, some contrary wind or ungracious tide may
hoyse to some Rock or Sand, which the ignorant man knows not how to
avoid.

So many times a skillesse Captain may overthrow himself and his company by
making to much haste, sometime suffer his friends to perish for being to
slack, for be he never so valiant in his own person, or never so wise in
other causes, yet if he have not experience to know the time and place where
hardiness may prevail, and how he should bestow his strokes in time and
place convenient, through policy it is provided that strength may be subdued,
Pollicye of more effect then force or strength.
and many mo fields have been lost for want of policy, than for want of
strength, and many Towns won by slightes, where force could not prevail,
and even as if Cato himself would take upon him conduction of a Ship without
good and sufficient experience, as I trust it were no blasphemy, to say that
Cato were but a folishe Pilate, so he that will take a charge without
knowledge to govern it, No wisdom for a man to take upon him that he can not
ski^
I trust will not be offended though he be learned: an indiscreet Captain,
for wisdom wylleth no man to make attempt of that which he is not able to
compass, but in especially in so dangerous a cause, where through the
defaute of one ignorant Captain a whole army may sometime be over thrown,
whereon may depend the state of a Kingdom, and the ruin of a country.

Neither is ^e to be esteemed coragious or yet valiant, that will so wylfully
take upon him to rule, and so ignorauntly seek to govern, but rather to be
accounted wilful and foolish hardy.

But now something better to persuade thee, what a captain should be, I will
show thee diverse opinions: first Cato says, that captain is stark naught
which cannot rule him self, than he is much worse, that not knowing how to
rule him self, will yet take upon to govern others: Isocrates says, the
greatest virtue in a soldier, is obedience toward his captain, but if such
Captains might be permitted, Isocrates was deceived: for an unskillful
Captain, may have a skylfull Soldier, and then the greatest virtue in a
captain were obedience toward his soldier: Cirus King of Persia was wont to
say, that no man ought to take upon him to govern unless he be better than
those that he takes upon him to rule. Alexander, when he took upon him the
Conquest of the world, admitted none to have charge that were under three score
years of age, only because he would have none to be leaders that should be
ignoraunte or unskillful: for Socrates says, the boldness of the ignorant
ingendreth many evils: And Agesilaus says, the lack of experience causes the
lack of courage.

Thus thou may perceive that such as were wise, would not permit any
skillesse or ignorant Captain.


Soul. But yet in my mind it were great pitye, that Gentlemen should thus be
discouragde, for every man must have a beginning, and every man must have a
time to learn before he may come to be a soldier, and how should a man come
sooner to practice, then by seeing of service, and such as be Gentleman
paraduenture will disdain to serve unless as a captain, which place if it
should be denied them, might be a hindera^ce to their well disposed minds,
giving themselves from ye noble profession to follow some other idle devises,
which else might prove to be noble and worthy soldiers.


Me. Agesilaus ye king of the Lacedemonia^s being but a Child, when solemn
Games were plaide for the exercise of children, in which he that had the
ordering and rule thereof, had appointed him but to a mean part and room,
albeit he were the heir aparent to the Crown, said in this wise, good enough,
for I will show that it is not the room that dignifieth ye person, but it is
the person that dignifieth and renowneth the room.

So it is not the room of a captain that dignifieth the unworthy person who
is not able to execute it, but it is the valiaunce of him that is appointed to
the place that dignifieth and renowneth the room.

But if there be any that be so precise that would think they should so
much imbase their credit, if they should serve unless as a Captain at the
first dashe, I muse they can not as well conceive what a mockery it should be
when they come in the place of service, when they shall be found to be but
usurpers of the name, and scant able to execute the room of a simple soldier.

The opinion of a Spaniard Italia^ and Frencheman.
The Spaniard who for the nobleness of his mind is far surmounting above all
other, yet if he be the son and heir of a Duke he will not take upon him
to conducte others, before he has first served and thereby learned experience
how to order his charge aright, the Italian is likewise of the same mind.

The Frencheman uses this proverb, that he will not take upon him the room
of a Captain, before he be able to command his soldier, and not his
soldier to command him.

Thus thou may perceive that amongst such as be daily practiced in service,
it is thought great follye in him that will take upon him the room of a
Captain, and not able to execute it.


Soul. Peradventure if Wars were as general amongst us, as it is amongst
them, as the Gods forbid it should, we would learn no observations, neither
of Spaniard, Italian, nor Frencheman, they should be no spectacles for us, for
use they say makes perfectness, and amongst them wars are so generally
frequented, that it were great shame if they should be ignorant in any
observation, order, or discipline.


Mer. It is as great shame that the orders of arms and discipline of war
should be unknown to any Gent. though he never came where service was, the
disiplin of war to be learned without goinge to the filde.
yet he should not be ignorant in the laws and orders of Arms, which are
to be learned without going to the field, as may appear by Alfonsus King of
Aragon: who being demanded whither he were more bound to his Books then to
his Weapons and arms, answered, out of my books I have learned boath arms,
and the order of arms: and did not Lucullus by the study of his Books,
become one of the noblest Captains of all the Romans.

So there be many books the which if Gentlemen would sometime vouchsafe to
peruse, would thoroughly instruct them in such obseruacions as were used by the
most renowned Captains and Soldiers, to the great furtheraunce of such as
mind to serve, and to what exercise may a Gentleman better endeavor himself
unto them, to learn to serve: for as Vigesius says, the way to win honor
is rather to practice in time convenient the art of War, then to win
treasure, and lack experience, least he should say, why have I not learned to
serve and defend: and Gelo King of Silice, at a certain banquet, when
according to the use of the Countreye, the Lute was carried from one to another,
in order for that amongst the Greeks it was counted a thing of great
commendation to him that could use it well, but when it came to the Kings
course to play, he commanded that his Horse should be brought into the
banqueting house, and forthwith he easily and lightly leapt upon him,
signifying that although the Lute were a desent Pastime to be used by
Gentlemen, for recreation, yet he showed that Chiualrye was more to be
commended and before all other exercises principally to be preferred.


Soul. And may a man then learn to be a perfect Soldier that shall seek
no other experiment, but as he shall be directed by his Book? I have heard
this reason many times before, but I could never yet be persuaded to believe
it, and yet there be some which by that experience only will take upon them as
they say them selves, to use any derection in the field, and in as good order
as he that has served twenty years a soldier.


Mer. But I would wyshe that such a soldier might rather be believed by his
own report then to suffer him to make trial of his cunning before his enemy
in the field, and although it be most certain that the practice of many
books may be greatly beneficial to the knowledge of martial affairs, so
there is no kind of sickness, neither any manner of disease that is incident
to man, but in books there are such certain and approved medicines as the
best Doctors will allow of, yet he were a desperate pacient, that in an
extremity of sickness, would follow the advice of him that has but read
only, and never had other practice. The Mariner at the Sea, when by force of
weather he is driven to some unknown coaste, then to know the place he is
in, and from thence to shape his course, has no other help, then the
Cosmographiere has prescribed unto him, which rules although they be most
certain to work by, yet a wise man would be loath to be carried to Sea by him
that has no other skill than his cosmographie only, yet notwithstanding as
it should be great furtherance to him that would practice Physic to pervse
other men's opinions, which has write touching the nature of Herbs and
Plants, and as it should be much avayleable and for his redyer
understanding that would be a Nauigator, to ouersee such rules as are
prescribed by the Cosmographier concerning the art, so he that would be a
soldier and one of Mars his troop, shall find it most commodious, as well to
help his memory as also to kindle his courage, to read of martial feats,
apparteyning to the purchasing of honorable victories, fame, and renown.

And like as I would not wish him that has but read of Physic, to take upon
him to minister to the diseased, so I would not advise him that has but book
experience, of him self, to use any order or appointment although his
counsel in some causes may very well be followed.

And as I know that by certain rules of Arithmaticke a man may sodaynelye
frame any manner of battle of any proportion, the number of men once being
known, or to know what cirquet of ground will serve to inbattayle so many
men, with such like, so it is possible for him yt is desirous in a very short
space, to pervse in books the manner of any wars, which has been these many
hundred years, and by what means many noble victories has been obtained, and
what policies has been used by such as were famous Captains, some to
assawght, some to defend, etc. But yet he that should see but one field
fought, shall gain more experience then the other by readyng of all those
books.


Soul. but now concerning those second sort of Captains, which thou say,
be such as by sleyghtes does deceive ye prince, and pyll his Soldiers in the
time of service, I think there be none that be so unkind to his prince, that
will practice such deceypt, nor so unnatural to his country men, to seek the
hynderaunce of his poor soldiers, whom they ought as carefully to provide
for, as they would do for them selves.


Mer. They should do so in deed: but it has sometime otherwise fallen out,
and poor soldiers has been by devises, cut from their wages which the Prince
has allowed them, and to deceive the Prince it is a small matter accounted of
amongst some, and by a general shyft they use, which is to want of his number
of men which the Prince gives allowaunce, for such Captains, by report
there has been, and it were not amiss, if the practice were not so common.


Soul. I think there be none whose conscience is so large, that can for pities
sake, seek to deceive his soldier, and as for deceiuyng of the Prince, if it
be by no other means then has been yet expressed: I think may easily be
answered, for I have known them myself that have wanted of their number of
soldiers, but yet not of purpose to deceive the Prince, neither yet to enryche
them selves by saving of their pay, for if they have wanted ten or twelve of
their number which they have been allowed for, they have yet had twenty or
thirty Gentlemen, to whom they have given doubell pay, the better to
maintain them selves in the Princes service, and the rather to encourage both
them and others to serve, for it is generally seen, that a Gentleman will
soonest prove a soldier of any other, and show him self most valiant in
the field: and when Xerxes king of Persia, was in manner put to the worse, but
of.300. Lacedaemonians where he him self had with a very great multitude, he
confessed him self deceived, in that he took with him many men, but few
soldiers, for he perceived that it forced not so much how many there be, as
how well assayed, picked, and tried they be, and it may be, that these
Captains be of Xerxes mind, they had rather bring ye smaller number of chosen
soldiers, then the greater company of ordinary men, as they be appointed.


Mars, although this excuse seems to be reasonable, yet for some causes it is
not tolerable, but yet as thou say sufficient yenough to pourge them from
any pretended deceit toward their Prince.


Aug. And who would suppose that any Captain would seek to deceive his
soldier, on whose report hangs the greatest part of his credit, for what
greater infamy may come to a Captain, then to be defamed by his own
soldiers, and such as has served him.

But it has been the custom in England, as I have heard, that in the time of
service in what Shiere soever soldiers were leuyed, their Captain, was
likewise appointed in the same Shiere, some Gentlemen of great worship, and of
fair revenues who had been able, if cause had so constrained, to have served
the Prince, and rather would have spent a thousand pound amongst his soldiers,
then to have sought to defraude the^ by any manner of means, this gave some
encouragement to men, when they did know their Captain to be of countenance
amongst them, The reputacion of the Captain causes obedience in soldiers.
it did likewise breed due obedience in soldiers, when they were in the
wars, their Captain being such a one as had government amongst them, to
minister justice when they were at home in the time of peace, to be brief, it
caused every one to endeavor him self to use his best service, and to please
his Captain, to the end that when the wars were fynished, it lay yet in the
Captains possibility at their return, to requite them either with good or
ill according as they had deserved.

The Captain likewise when he considered who they were that served under him,
and that he remembered them to be his neighbors, and such as were dwellers
about him, yea peradventure many of them his own tenauntes, he for his own
credites sake, and to avoid defamation, would so order him self toward
them, as they should have no cause to exclayme, this by report, has been the
order till now of late, and in my simple judgment it were very necessary if
that manner of appointment were still observed.


Mer. but now thou must consider the alteration of the time, for in those
days Gentlemen were as desirous to become soldiers, as they are now studious
to become Lawyers: but it is now come to an other pass* for in the time of
service there are very few, Note.
whose experience may serve them to take charge, but such as are partly
constrained to it by need, then where the Captain is needy, and the soldier
more needy, there must needs fall out some absurdity in service, and by these
means the orders of service in the wars are altogether corrupted, and a
great way from the ancient manners altered, whereby has grown these sinister
opinions, which makes men to hate warlyke service, and to fly the
conversation of such as does profess it.

And as for the greatest part of such as be endued with worldly possessions,
has a further desire to follow other vain and idell devises, then they have
to serve and defend their country. If they find the Prince a horse to the
field, they thynk them selves to have been at great cost, and it is done so
grudginly amongst a number of them, that they cared not if he might pass
musters, if he were not able to go a mile out of town, such is their
impudency as they have no reason to deserve of things apperteynyng to their
own security.

Did not Philip king of Macedonia, take occasion to conquer the Greeks, when
he perceived them to neglect the feats of arms, geuyng themselves to other
pleasant pastymes, and to be occupied about triflyng matters, forgetting the
just regard of their own defense and safegarde of their country, how many
examples might here be alleged to show how dangerous it were for a Prince and
his Realm, to be driven to trust to the service of strangers for lack of
sufficient skylfull men of their own, for their defense.


Soul. But how greatly are we bound to praise the goodness of the sacred
Gods, through whose divine powers we now enjoy a most worthy Princes, who
although during the time of her Majesty's reign, by her politic government,
she has still continued her country and subjects, in a most peaceable and
quiet estate, yet what a zealous desire she likewise has to have her people
instructed in the knowledge of war, and to have things in a readiness
apparteyning to the same, may very well be perceived by her noble proceedings
from time to time, to the great comfort of all true English hearts.

Mars, Plutarch says, as a wise Marryner prepares in caulme to look for a
storm, so ought the mind when it is most at quiet to doubt of some
tribulation: and Alexander Seuerus, a quiet wit and a clear understanding,
takes heed of things that are past, prudently waying things that be
present, and things that are to come: and Xeno says, to see, is but a small
thing, but to forsee is a token of good wit, and how many examples there be
which wylleth the wise in the time of peace to provide for war, were over
superfluous here to be rehearsed: but forsamuch as we have used this long
discourse of Captains, and that as Valerius Maximus says, the pleasant and
quiet state of blessed peace, does rest in the bosom and custody of the
knowledge of wars, I do not therefore think it a miss to recite unto thee
many good instructions apparteyning to the same, and because as Xeno says, No
man ought to be chosen for his years or riches, but for his virtues sake, I
will first begin to show thee to how many virtues noble Captains have been
disposed, To how many virtues noble Captain: have been disposed.
and because mercy and pity be two principal virtues wherewith Captains
should be endued, for which cause the Lacedaemonians used before they should
go to the war to make solemn sacrifice to the Muses, to the end they might
by them attain as well how to use victory gently, as of Mars to become victors
manfully, I will begin with Agesilaus, that worthy King and Captain, who was
wont very often to warn his soldiers, that they should not torment their
prisoners, but to use them as men.

For children taken in the war, he provided yt they should be brought
together into some place where they might be in safety: the same provision and
care he likewise had for such as were aged or impotent persons, least because
they were not able to follow, they might be torn or devoured by wild beasts,
and this humanity gatte him the hearts and wonderful beneuole^ce even of his
enemies.

King Demytrius was of such exceeding clemency, that when he had reco^quered
the Athenians, which sediciously had shronke from him, and perceiving that they
were ny famished for want of Corn, he calling the^ together in an open
asse^bly, granted them freely a great quantity of Corn, and as he fortuned
in his speking to pronounce a certain word amiss, one of the assembly
interrupting him in his speaking and showed him how to pronounce that word
aryght, trewly quoth he, for this correction, I grant you other.50000.
busshells.

Tigranes king of Armenia being taken by Pompei throwing down his Crown and
kneling at his feet, was taken up by that noble Captain being moved with his
submission, was restored again to his former dignity, saying, it better
pleased him to make a King, then to destroy a King.

Augustus when he conquered Alexandria, being moved with pity, in the sight of
the Citizens which hoped of nothing more then death, said, for the bewty of
your city, for the memory of Alexander, for the love I bear to Pryus your
Philosopher, and for the pity I bear to you all, I spare to you your lives
and City.

Metellus beseiging the great City Centobryca, when the bulwarks were broken,
the walls ready to fall, and victory even at hand, that the women of the town
brought forth their children in their arms, craving mercy at Metellus hands.
Who although the victory and conquest were even at a point, yet was himself
conquered by their pitiful requests, and thus removed his siege.

Alexander being out in warfare, the winter time sitting by the fire, and
perceiving a soldier almost dead for cold, made him sit in his own place
saying, if thou had been borne in Persia it had been treason for thee to sit
in the Kings seat: but to him that is borne in Macedonia it is lawful.

An other time when he was in the wars in Persia, meting an old man by the way
in ragged and rent clothes, alighted from his horse, and caused the poor man
to mount up in his room.

An other virtue wherewith a captain should be endued, is continency, for
th(...) which that noble Captain Scipio wa^ greatly to be praised, who being
in Spain* a virgin of excellent beauty, and also o^ noble parentage, which
ravished all men^ eyes, being brought unto him, he delivered her to Luceius, to
whom she was espoused, and likewise gave unto him for a dowry, the gold that
her parents had brought to redeem her, by the which magnificence, the whole
nation of Spain was overcome, and submitted them selves to the Romayne Empier.

The same Scipio triumphing like a valiant victor after the winning of Carthage
and that Numantia a noble young virgin, that for her passing beauty and great
admiration of person, was presented unto him as a rare gift, Scipio a long time
amassed at her sight, yet thinking with him self how unfitly it would fall
out, for a noble conqueror, to be conquered by a woman* he him self brought
her home to her father, to Campania, saying: Were it not that I am a
co^querour, I had not ben able to have brought home thy daughter. Alexander
Magnus, with so great continency regarded a virgin taken in war of excellent
beauty, and for as much as she was espoused unto a Prince of the next nation,
he would not once behold her face, sendyng her forthwith unto her spouse, by
the which benefit he allured and won the hearts of all the nation: the like
humanity, he also used toward the wife of king Darius, whose beauty at that
time of al other did excel.

The examples of justice has likewise ben much beneficial to noble Captains,
and has sometime made more with them to subdue their enemies, the^ force of
arms, as when Camillus had besieged the Phalisciens, the schoolemaister under
pretense to walk abroad, brought the Phalisciens children without the walls,
and delivered them to Camillus, and said, the city must needs grant to all
thy request, to attain again those so dear hostages: Camillus who abhorred
to see his falsehood, having regard to his own fame and renown, caused his
hands to be bound behind him, delivering him to the children with rods, to
drive him home to the town, by which benefit he attained his desire, and the
Phalisciens for his justice, willinglye yielded themselves.

King Pirrhus physician came unto Fabricius, captain of the Romans, and
promised to poiso^ Pirrhus, so yt he would give him a reward worthy of so great
an enterprise, Fabricius thinking he had no need to purchase his victory so
wickedly, detected the Physician to the king, which faithful act compelled
Pirrhus, to seek the Romans friendship.

The Emperor Augustus Caesar, building places of defense in the coasts of
France, commanded that the wood should be paid for, wherewith he made his
leases, and that the rent should be truly paid, for the fruits of al those
places which he had enclosed with his trench, by mean whereof he gat such a
name of justice, that he made more easier, the conquest of ye same province.

Covetousness has been ever abhorred of noble Captains, as may appear by
many examples, for when Cineus the Ambassador of the Epirotiens* brought unto
Fabricius a great sum of gold for to present, he would none of it, saying,
that he would rather rule them that had gold, then have it him self.

Julius Ceaser having all the substance and treasure of Pompey brought before
him, took nothing from his soldiers but Pompeis Letters.

Alexander when he had conquered Darius having a great Chist of treasure, to
the value of 200000. li. besides other Jewels of inestimable value, would take
nothing but a litel book named the Iliades of Homer.

After ye L. Mummius had taken Corinth and had not only adorned Italy, but also
all the province with rich tables and costly Images, he of so great spoils
took so little to his own use, that the Senate was feign for very need to give
dowry to his daughter of the common treasures.

After that Lu. Scipio had accomplished his worthy enterprises and noble feats,
in Spain, he deceased in great poverty, and left not behind him so much
money as should suffice for the dowry of his daughters, to who^ for very needs
the Senate was feign to give a dowry of the common treasure.

Nicostratus a Captain, being required by Archidamus that* if he would not
deliver Cromnus he would not only give him a huge mase of money, but also the
fairest Lady that was to be found amongst the Lacedaemonians to wife: who
answered that Archidamus was nothing like to Hercules, for he went about the
world to destroy those that were evil, but contrary, the other those that were
good.

When Decius Brutus made war into Spain, and had subdued al Lucitania except
one City called Cinania, and demanding of the citizens what money they would
give to be at peace, who answered our Auncitours left us swords to defend,
and not money to redeem, from so couetouse a Captain as thou show thy self
to be.

Many times when Captains has been rigoriously bent, yet perceiving the
parties to be wise, have changed their fury into linitie, which has redounded
to their great commendation, as when Cirus having taken Cresus commanding
forthwith to be burnt, who going to the fire cried out with a very lamentable
voice saying: O Solon Solon, King Cirus wondering at these words, and what
they should mean, bad one of his servants ask him the cause that with so
great sorrow, he cried and named Solon, the^ Cresus drawing a great sigh
answered in this wise: Solon sometime amongst ye Athenians was a very wise man,
unto whom I once when he was with me, did show unto him all my power and
treasures, which done, I asked him whether he thought that ever any adversity
or misfortune, might hap unto me, being fensed with such power and riches,
against all chau^ces of fortune, or force of enemies. But to this answered
Solon, rebuking me for my secure and careless mind, and said, no man in this
world, (O King Cresus,) is so happy and fortunate in this life, that he can be
called thoroughly in every part blessed, before he dye, neither is there any
man I answer thee, be he never so mighty, but some adversity may chance
unto him, and overthrow him, or he be aware, but at that time trusting
retchlesly (alas) upon my happy luck, and suckcesse of things, despised his
words, neither could I fear this so exceeding a fall as now I find: wherefore
because first I understood the sentence of Solon, now before my death I named
him, and I do wish all men in prosperity, not to be unmindful of misfortunes
and calamities, that may chance, lest they become over haughty of their
present felicity, and greedy to attempt things heddily, that by occasion may
be their utter confusion.

These things when Cirus the King had hard, he was not a little touched with
pity and clemency toward him and said, he would not hereafter show him
self to hard upon Cresus, which was sometime a right mighty King, for he
remembered that he him self was also a man, and that it might chance him to
have need of other men's aid and mercy, after that he com^^aunded Cresus to be
brought unto him, whom he entertained like a noble Prince, and used his advise
and counsel, in all his affairs, and procedinges.

Porus a King being vanquished by Alexander in the field, Alexander asked of
him how shall I entreat thee Porus, who answered Kingly again, Alexander
demanded if he required any thing else, altogether quoth. Porus is comprised in
this word, Kingly. Alexander meruailing both at the wisdom and at the noble
stomach of the man, enlarged hid dominions over that they were before.

When a certain Iudian which was noised to be so cunning an Archer, yt he
could shout through a Ryng* and was taken prisoner and brought to Alexander* who
willing him to make a proof of his cunning before him, which thing he refused
to do, the King there with being very angry, commanded he should be put to
death: as he was led away, he said to such as led him, that he had not used
his feat of showting many days, and therefore feared least he should have
failed, when Alexander was informed hereof, that be (...)sed not for spite,
but rather for fear of disworship wondering at this man's mind so desirous of
glory, which rather desired to dye, then to have lost his fame and renown, he
let him go, not with out a great reward.

What time Philip King of Macedonia, had an Army lying at Cheronia, Diogenus
coming thither, anon was taken by the Souldyers and brought to the King, who
angerly cried out, a spy a spy, to whom Diogenus forthwyth answered, in
deed Philip I am a spy, and am come hither to espy thy madness, which not
being contented with the Realm of Macedonia, by the incroching of other men's
Realms, put thy self in danger to lose both thine own kingdom, and also
thy life: the King wondering at the man's frank speech, and bold language,
commanded he should be let go without any hurt to be used toward him.

Although there be many other examples, which could not be prejudicial for
Captains to note, and to have in remembrance, yet here I let them pass,
remembering thee but with this one example of Fabius Maximus, he having certain
of his Soldiers taken by Haniball, sent to the Senators for money to redeem
them, his suit being denied, commanded his son to go straight to Rome, to
sell all the lands and living which he then possessed without the City, and to
bring him money, wherewith he redeemed his Soldiers, and brought the^ frank
and free to Rome saying, he had rather want patrimony in his country, then
love to his country men. And now having something showed how a Captain of him
self should be adicted, which as L. Paulus says, should be to be aged, and
aunsient in manners.

Now it follows how a Captain ought to train and practice his Soldiers, and
although I know experimented Captains, How Captains should instruct their
Soldiers.
need no such instructions, yet for thee, or other, that be young Soldiers, it
can not be hurtful.

A Captayn ought first to teach his Soldiers, how to keep the order of array,
and to instruct them, that they may know how to march, to learn them to
understand the sounds of Drums, and Trompets, whereby they are commanded what
they ought to do, and because it chau^ceth of ordinary, that when men be redye
to join in fight, they come to gither with great shoutes and rumor, by reason
whereof ye commandments of the Captains, may not many times be hard, nor
understand: it is therefore requisite to make them to obey to signs, as by
casting his arms a broad, when he would have them to march wider, by bringing
his arms to gither, when he would have them to march close, by holding up his
hand, when he would have them to stand still, by turning him self toward
them, if he would have them turn, and thus to instruct them how the fight is
begun, how they should retier, and being overthrown, who should sucseede in
their places, and thus to make them practiced which more avails then strength
and multitude, as may appear by Marius, who being at his liberty to chose one
of the best Armies he would, either that which had bin with Metellus, or that
which had been Rutilius, he chose the least which was Rutilius Army, because it
was thought to be the better trained.

Epaminondas Captain of the Thebians with 4000. trained men, overcame the Host
of the Lacedaemonians, in which was 24. M. footmen, and 16. hundred horsemen.
14. M. Greeks, which number came to help Cirus against Artaxerxes overcame in
battle.1. C.M. Barberouse Aliens.

Therefore I say that Captains should use great diligence in ye trayning of
their men, considering that an Army is not to be chosen for the multitude, or
because in ye same be hardy men, but because they be well trained, and in their
orders well appointed: thus having practiced his men ready for to fight, it should
be well done then, if time or place might serve, to bring them to some light,
skirmish with their enemies for their better encouragement, and to make the^
know the better what to do: but yet as near as they may, to chose such a
place as their small experience may not be hurtful unto them.

But here omitting to speak of skyrmishes, because they be diversely used, and
upon sundry occasions procured.

I will show thee now, what observations were used by such as were noble
Captains, before they would attempt to proceed in battle, and by what
inventions they have escaped, when they have bin dau^gerously beset, and how by
many devises they have attained diverse noble vyctories. etc.

And first to speak of their opinions, concerning to join in battle, it was
a general use, amongst such as were the best aproued Soldiers, never to bring
their me^ to fight, except they had advantage, or else brought to it by
constraint.

The advantage grows as well by the situacion of the place, as by order, or
having of more and better men.

The necessity grows when they shall perceive by deferring of battaill, it
must needs fall out to their great discommoditie, as when famishment were ready
to assail the^, or when the enemy looks for some new supply, or such like,
in these causes it were to attempt Fortune where she may favor, rather then by
deferring, to see their certain rewine.

Vygesius counsayll is, never to bring an Army to fight, except they hope to
have the victory, for what greater sign is there to lose, then not to believe
to be able to win, wherefore to encourage Soldiers to fight, their has been
sundry practices.

Examples of encouragement.
L. Sylla, in the wars against Archelaus Mithridates leefetenaunt at Pirea,
perceiving his Soldiers had little courage to fight, he so weried them with
continual labor, that they were glad to desyer to fight, that the wars might be
finished.

Cyrus king of Persia, mynding to concitate the minds of his people, to weary
and anger them, with payneful labor, held the^ all one day at work and
utterly tired the^, in hewing up a certain Wood, on the morrow after he made
for them a very plentitious feast, demanding in the feast time which day lyked
them best, and when they all allowed the pastime of the day present, and yet
(quoth he) this pleasure must be obtained by the other days pain, for except
you first overcome the Medes, ye can never live in freedom and at pleasure,
whereby they took great courage to fight.

Q. Fabius, who knew very well the Romans to be of so lyberall and honest
nature, that by dispightful and contumelious dealings, they would be sone
moved, vexed and grieved, loking also for no right nor equal dealings of the
Percians, who were his enemies, sent unto Carthage Imbassadours to entreat of
peace, which was consented unto, upon certain conditions, which when they were
brought and perceived to be unreasonable, and full of pride, the Romans army
was straight styrred and encouraged to fight.

When Agesilaus had pight his field, not far from Orchomeno, a City that was
in league with him, and perceived that many of the Army had their treasure and
chief riches in the Camp, he commanded the Towns men to receue nothing into
the Town belonging to his Army, to the intent his Soldiers might fight the
more fiercely, knowing they should fight both for their lives and goods.

Fabius Maximus fearing that his Host would not continue the fight manfully, by
reason they might quickly fly to their Ships, commanded they should be set
on fire before he would begin the battle.

When Agesilaus had taken certain of the Persians, whose aport was very
terrible as long as their clothes were on, he striped them stark naked,
showing their effeminate bodies to his Soldiers, to the end they might
despise them.

Gelo. the Tyran of Siracuse, entering war against the Percians, after that he
had taken many of them, brought forth the weakest, and most uncomely persons
naked, in the sight of all his Army, to persuade them that they were but
wretches, and men worthy to be despised.

Some have constrained their men to fight through necessity, taking away from
them all manner of hope, of saving themselves, unless they did overcome.

Shame has sometime constrained Soldiers to fight again afresh, that have
been ready to have given over.

As when M. Furius Camillus beholding his Army to stagger, and stand at a
stay, caught violently the Standerd bearer, and drew him with his hands upon
his enemies, when very shame made the rest to follow.

Likewise L. Silla when the Legions reculed and gave place unto Mithridates
Host, led by Archelaus with his Sword drawn, ran forth into the foreward,
and called to his Soldiers and said, if any man inquyre of you, where you left
your Captain, answer fighting in Boetia, for shame whereof, they followed him.

But yet the greatest incouragemente that may be used, is by persuasion, for
that effect of speaking to him that has knowledge to persuade or diswade,
preuayleth more then any other thing, to kyndel the minds and humayne passions
of a man, it takes away fear, it increases obstinatenesse to fight, it
discovers deceipts, promises rewards, shows ye perils, and ye way to avoid
the^, it reprehe^deth, prays, thretneth, it incourageth the minds and
fylleth full either of hope or else despair, as might apere by Epaminondas,
who being redye to enter battle with the Lacedaemonians, to the end, that the
strengths of his Soldiers might be helped with some fervent affection, he
pronounced in his Exortation, that the Lacedaemonians had determined, if they
gat the victory to slay all their men, to make their wives and children bond
for ever, and to beat down the City of Thebes flat to the ground, with which
words, the Thebians were so moved and agreued, that at the first brunt, they
overcame the Lacedaemonians.

Note
It is likewise much requisite for Captains to know the disposition of the
Captain of the enemies, whether he be rash, or politic, whether he be fearful
or hardy, whether he be more puisant with footmen or with Horsemen, whether he
will assail thee in the Evening or in the Morning, and so to provide for
themselves.

When Hanibal did perceive that Fuluius the Roman Captain was negligent, and
that he attempted many things unadvisedly, in the dawning of the day the mist
being somewhat thick, and the Air much obscured, he made a few of his
soldiers to show themselves to those that kept watch in the Romans Tents,
while Fuluius adressed him thetherward with his Host. Hanibal on the otherside
invaded his Camp, and so brake out in the back of the Romans, and slew their
Captain, with viii.M. of their valiant men of Arms.

Alevvred King of Brytaine when the Danes were entered his Realm, of purpose to
understand their orders, put himself in ye habit of a Mynstrel, and by these
means, he came into their Camp, whereby he took occasion to give them a great
overthrow.

When Iphicrates of Athens, had knowledge that his enemies did eat at one
certain time of the day, he commanded that his men should take their repast
somewhat more tymely, then ranging forth in battayl at the same instant that his
enemies should have fallen to their victuals, he so delayed them, that he
neither would give them battle, nor yet suffer the^ to depart, when it drew
toward night, he reculed back again, but yet keeping his men still in their
Harnise: but his enemies being weried not only with long standing, but also
with long fasting, made have to refresh them selves, and to take their repast.
Iphicrates again, brought forth his Army, and set upon his enemies, whom he
found all unready, and out of order.

It behooves a Captain in some causes as much as in him lies, Policy in
Captains for some causes to forbear to fight.
to abstayn from fight, that is, when either famishment or other natural
necessities, has brought the enemy into some utter desperation, which caused
the Lacedaemonians being certified by their spies, that the Messenians were set
on such a rage as they came to battle with their wives and children, which
caused the Lacedaemonians to defer the fight.

Likewise when Caeser in the civil war, had enclosed the Host of Affranius and
Petriens, within a Trench that they were pyned with thirst: insomuch that they
became desperate, destroying all that would withstand them, or proffered with
them to fight, which Caeser perceiving; kept in his men, supposing it not meet
time then to begin.

But now to show upon how many occasions noble victoryes have bin attained,
it would ask to long discourse considering they be so infinite, yet for that
many times it has bin found to be of great importance during the time of
fight, to spread certain rumors, How many victoryes have been obtained.
affirming the Captain of the enemies to have bin slain, or to have overcome,
on the other side of the Army or such like I will not forget: considering it
has bin the cause of many victoryes to such as has used it.

Iugurth in the battle against C. Marius by the same policy made the Romans
to recule, so did Mironides of Athe^s against the Thebians, whereby he got the
victory.

When Valerius Leuinus fought against Pirrhus and had killed a rascal Soldier,
he held up his Sword all blody, and made both the Hosts believe that he had
kyld King Pirrhus, wherefore his enemies supposing them selves to be destitute
by the death of their Captain, all abashed with that lie, gave over the fight.
When Claudius ye Emperor of Rome, came to recover tribute of Gwider, King of
Britain, who in the stead of tribute gave unto him strong and forceable
battle, Hamo a Romayne Captain, Arming him self, in a Britains Armor, by
means whereof, he came where Gwider the King was, and flew him, which being
perceived by Aruiragus the Kings brother, took on him the Kings
Cognoscaunce, and thus being taken for the King, continued the fight, whereby
he obtained the victory against the Romans.

When a Barbarouse Alien in battle, had brought word to Q. Sextorius that
Herculeius was slain, he straight slew him with his dagger, least he should
have borne those news any farther, and discouraged ye Army.

One special regard ought to be had amongst Captains, when they be in fight,
which is not to bring the enemy into any extreme desperacion, or so to enclose
them, that despair should cause the^ to fight, which caused Haniball, Not good
to bring the enemy into desperation.
when he had enclosed the Germa^s at Trasimenus, by which co^straint they
fought exceeding fercely to open his Army, and to make them away to get out,
beating them down as they fled, without any loss of his own men.

The like used, L. Marcius a Romayne Knight, when he had enclosed the
Carthagine^ces and so did Agesilans with the Thebans.

When Themistocles had vanqished the power of Xerxes, he would in no wise
agree, that the Bridge should be broken, over the which they should return
saying, it were better to drive them out of Europa, then to enforce them to
fight in despair.

Captayns should have regard with what order they follow, for he that with his
people disparted pursues his enemies, What regard should be used in the
pursuit.
may hope to give his enemies the victory, as appears by Q. Fabius Maximus
Consul, being sent to succor the Sutrines against the Hetrusciens, so ordered
the matter, that when the whole power of his enemies set against him, then
desembling as he feared them, and as though he fled, got the higher ground, the
other following him out of order, were by him not only vanquished, but also
bereued of their Camp.

The like respect ought to be used, What diligence should be used after a
victory obtained.
by such as should fortune to be Conquerours, and not through affiaunce of
their victory, to leave them selves disordered, least it might happen unto
them, as happened to the Percians, for when T. Martius a Romain Knight being
governor of the residue of the Host that remained after the death of the two
Scipyons, perceived that the two Hoastes of the Percians lay at hand, not many
miles a sunder, he encouraged his Souldyers to set upon the Host that lay
next him, at midnight, being careless and out of order through affyaunce of
their victory, and flewe them, leaving not so much as a messenger to bear
tidings of the miserable mischaunce, and then giving his Soldiers a little
space to rest them, the same night with all speed preue^ting the fame of any
thing don, invaded the other Army, and thus twice in one night enjoyed like
chance of battle, and every where distroying the Percians, he restored
Spain again to the Romans.

And now for the better safety of the pursued, Examples of such as has been
pursued.
and to cause such as follow to slack their pursuit, Triphon King of Syria used
this mean to scatter money by the way as he fled, which so hindered Antiochus
Horsemen that pursued him, that he thereby escaped. When the Gaulls should fight
with Attalus, they delivered all their Gold and Silver to be kept of certain
men that might scatter it abrod, if it happened them to be put to flight, to
the intent they might the more easly escape their enemies, being let with the
gathering up of the pray.

When Q. Sertorius was put to flight of Quintius Metellus Pius, he supposed not
a thing sure enough only to flee, but also warned his Soldiers to disparte
themselves diverse ways, and told them whither he would have them resort. Some
has used to prevent the worst to begin the fight, a little before night, to the
end that if they were overthrown they might yet through the darkness of the
night the better escape away.

Though many other matters might hear have bin expressed, yet I omit them, and
will something show thee how carefully the discipline of war has bin
continued, and how precise the antiquity has bin in punishing those that has
broken their prescribed orders, or has proceeded any farther then they have
bin limited.

Papirius Cursor being dictator, Examples of disciplyne.
required that Fabius Rutilius Master of the Horsemen should be beaten with
rods and beheaded, because he fought against his commandment, notwtstanding
he had ye upper hand neither would he forgive the punishment for the
contencion or intercession and request of the Soldiers, and fleeing to Rome
pursued him, neither would he there remit the dreadful punishment, until that
Fabius and his father fell down on their knees, and that also the Senate and
people made intercession for him.

Manlius caused his son which against his commandment had incountred with
his enemy that challenged him though he got the victory to be beaten with rods,
and have his head stricken of.

The Romans punished with death him that lacked in the watch, he that
forsook the place that was given him to fight, he that carried any thing hid
out of the Camp, if any man should say he had done some worthy thing in fight
and had not done it, if any for fear, had cast away his weapon, and when it
happened that a Legion had committed the like fault because they would not put
all to death, yet their names were taken and put to gither in a bag, and so by
lot they drew out the tenth person, and put those to death.

When Marcus Cato after a token given, had loosed from the Coast of his enemies
where he had layne a certain space, and saw one of his Soldiers left on the
Shore, crying, calling, and beckning to be taken in, he cast about with all his
Navy to the shore again, and commanded the same Soldier to be taken and
straight put to death, willing rather to make him an example to the other, then
that he should be slain by his enemies, with reproach and infamy.

Alisander of Lacedemonia corrected a certain man, A necessary example for
English Soldiers
because he strayed from his company, and when the man said he strayed not
from the Army to rob or steal any thing, he answered, I will that thou show
no likelihode of robbery. A very good lesson to be learned, as well of English
Captains, as also of English Soldiers, but inspeciallye of these new levied
bands which are no sooner two miles from home, but fall presently to robbing,
spoiling, and evil entreating their own Country men, to shameful to be
suffered, and to much to be borne withal, whether this that I say be true or
no, I stand to the report of such as has dwelte in their way, where they have
had occasion to travail* but the greatest fault of this, is to be imputed to
the Captain, who has so little care that he will suffer it, or so simple
government that he will not amend it, but such Captains are meet to govern
such Soldiers, when Haniball should pass a long journey by land, he caused
his Soldiers Swords to be sealed up in their Scabardes, to the end the^
should use no disorder by the way. The Army which was led by M. Scaurus was of
such abstinence that it is left in memory, An example worthy to be remembered.
how the Appell Tree which was enclosed at the foot of the Camp, in the
morning when the Host removed, was left standing without touching of the
fruit.

What diligence should be used when Captains march through unknown places.
There rests now to show thee, what diligence Captains should use when they
have occasion to march through unknown places, wherein with out great
foresight, he is in more peril then when he is in fight, wherefore Alexander
used to have such places discribed in mapes which should be hanged in the Camp
for all men to behold, whereby they might learn to know the places, the
distaunces, the ways, the Hills, the Rivers, the Fennes, and all the
qualities of them, but inspecially where the country is woody or hilly,
Captains ought to beware of ambushes, which being not foreseen may quickly
overthrow them.

Ambushes have many times bin discovered by the raising of great dust, or when
Doves or other Byrdds has bin seen to slye about in flocks turning to and
fro, and has not seemed to light, in these respects there ought to be wise
scowtes to see and vewe the Country clear.

And as they may enter into these dangers by marching unawares, so may they
likewise by craft of the enemy be trained into the^, as were ye Fideniens by
Romulus, who laying a part of his Army in secret, ambushment approached unto
them, from whom he fayning him self to fly, brought them hastily again
pursuyng him where his Ambushmentes lay, who assayling them on every side easly
slew them. They ought therefore to take heed and not straight way to believe
those things which are nothing reasonable, and that they are not as they
import. Some to entrap their enimyes has set before them a pray, if many of
the one side be driven away by a few of ye other, or if a few on ye one side
assaught many of the other, or if some sudden flight should be made, not
standing with reason, let them in these causes take heed and judge the worst,
so shall they be sure to be the less beguiled.

By what means many has passed Rivers or strayghts.
To pass Ryuers or straightes, there has been diverse means used, some to pass
Ryuers have cut out a Trench like a rainbowe, filling it full of Wood, and
setting it on fire, by these means have passed.

This policy was used by Q. Sextorius in Spain, likewise by Pelopidas a
Thebian, against the Thessalonians.

When Cressus might not wade over the River Halis, neither yet could make Boat
nor Bridge, he cast a ditche behynd his Army, and so turned the course an other
way.

Caeser being in France and having to pass a River, and his passage being
let by the enemy on the other side, who were still ready to receive him,
marched many days along the River, and the like did the enemy, wherefore
Caeser incamping in a woody place fit to hyde men, he took out of every
Legion iii. Cowardes and made the^ to tarry in the same place, commanding them
that so soon as he was deperted they should cast over a bridge and fortify it,
and he with his other men kept on his way, but when he supposed the Bridge was
ready, he returned passing the River without any great let.

When Pericles of Athens, being driven by them of Peloponesus into a place
environed with stepe Hills, where was but two ways to escape out, before the
one way where he intended to get out, he caused a ditch to be cast of great
breadeth, under pretense to shut out his enemies, and to the other side he led
his Host, as though he would there have broken forth, wherefore his enemies
believing he might in no wise escape yt way where he him self had cast ye
ditche, withstood him with all their power, on ye other side, the^ did Pericles
cast Bridges prepared for the nonce, over the ditche, and that way conuaid out
his Army, where there was no man to let him. When Spartacus was enclosed by L.
Varinus Proconsul, he pitched up stakes here and there, before the entering of
his Camp, and set thereon dead carkases clad and Harnised like men, to make a
show unto them that were far of, that watch and ward, was diligently kept,
leauyng also fyers in every quarter of the Camp, under the which deceiptful
color he deceived his enimyes, and conuayed away his Host by night.

Darius to deceive the Scithes at his departing, left Dogs and Asses in his
Tents, whose barking and braying the enemies hearing, thought Darius to be there
still.

With the like error the Genowayes blinded the Romans.

Of such as has bin invaded.
And now to speak something of such as has bin invaded, some has sent their
own men with their enemies Aunsyentes to spoil and burn their own Country,
whereby the enemy believing them to be some of their own company, or some that
were come in their aid, running forth with out respect, has bin thereby made a
pray.

By this means Alexander having a company of Epirotes against them the
Illiriens, sent forth certain of his men in the Illiriens apparel giving them
commandment to wast and destroy his own country, Epirus the which when the
Illiriens espied, they now careless began to run forth on every side to
pillage, and thus they were intised and brought into daungerouse places where
many of them were slain, and the rest put to flight.

Some have suffered the enemy to take many Towns, to the intent that by
putting in the same Garrisons he might by that means deminish his power and be
made weak, and then by assaughting them they have overcome them.

Where Soldiers has bin found to be fugitive or to run to the enemy, Where
Soldiers has bin fugityue*
I think there may be no better mean then that used by Haniball, who knowing
certain of his me^ to be fled ye night before, and wist well that ye enemies
spies were in his Camp, he pronounced openly that those runagates were gone by
his commandment to harken and spy what his enemies pretended, this being
known to ye Romans spies, returned and told these news to their company,
whereupon these runawaies were taken and their hands cut of, and thus they were
sent again to Haniball. When Hanno Captain of Carthage in Cicilia understood
that Gaulls which he had hired about 4000. would leave him and go to the
Romans: because they were behind unpaid for certain months wages, and
durst not punish them for fear of sedicion, but promised very liberally to
recompense the injury they had by prolonging ye time, which something appeased
them, and at convenient he sent his most trusty Steward to Otacilius consul,
fayning as though he had fled away for a controversy between his Captayn and
him, in a certain count making, and showed him the next night he might take
at advantage 4000. Galleys which should be sent to get pray and pillage,
Otacilius neither giving credit by and by to the runaway, neither yet thought
it a matter to be despised, laid an ambushment for the^ of the most piked men
that he had, which incountring with the Galleyes, satisfied the drift of Hanno
double, they slew many of the Romans, and were themselves all slain.

What circumspection should be used for fear of spies.
Noble Captains has used great circumspection in their affairs, for being
prevented with spies, wherefore above all things it behooves him to be secret.

One demanded of Metellus pius, being in Spain, what he was minded to do the
day following, who answered, if I wist the shirt on my back did know it, I would
surely burn it.

When one asked Lucinius Crassus what time he would remove his Army, he
answered, art thou aferd thou shall not know that by the Drum.

But forasmuch as in all this time, there has yet bin nothing said appertayning
to thee besieged: I will therefore show thee something what respects they ought
to have, and so will end.

To show thee what provision of victual, Vhat regard should be observed by the
besieged.
Artilery, shot Powder, and such other firnitures they ought to be provided of,
were but in vain here to make rehersall, considering they be things that
every man understands, and is requisite to be provided before the siege does
come.

I think it should as little need to advertise them to beware of treasons, for
those examples are likewise as general.

But this ought to be had in regard amongst them, that the enemy take no
comodity of their cattle, victual, hey, straw, or any other provision in the
Country near about them, for these things ought rather to be destroyed,
the^ to be left as provisions wherwithall to serve the enemy

The besieged ought to have a special care to have good watch to be kept, yea
even in those places where they think they may take least hurt, for many Towns
have bin lost when the enemy has assaulted it, on that part which the besieged
has thought to be invincible.

By this policy Fabius Maximus wan the City Arpos, by the same means Marius
in ye war against Iugurth obtained a castle.

Let them likewise take heed for being drawn out of the Town by any deuyse,
as if the enemy fayneth to fly, or to make some other staall, for by these
means many has bin deceived.

Haniball by these means obtained the City Hymera Himilco of Carthage, at
Agrigentum laid privily in wait near to the Town, part of his Army, and
commanded that when the Towns men were issued out a good way of, they should
set green^ wood on fire, and in the morning very early with the other part of
his Army he wen^ to intise out his enemies, and making a^ though he fled
reculing back, drew the^ a good way from the City, then they tha^ lay in
ambushment near the walls as the^ were commanded, set the green Wood on fire,
the Agrigentiues beholding the smother, rise up, supposed verily their City had
bin on a fire, thus fearfully running back to defend it, they were incountered
by those that had layne in ambushment, and thus between them and the other
which pursued they were discomfited and slain.

The besieged are sometimes beguyled by signifying unto them some victory
gotten, as did Pelopidas of Thebes, who pursuing to conquer two Towns at one
instant of the Magnecians and which stood not far a sunder, he commanded that
four Knights should come from the one siege to the other, with Garlands on
their heads, as though they brought tidings of victory, and to help forth this
dissimulation he ordained that a Wood which stood between both the Towns
should be set on fire to make a show as though the Town had burnt, besides
that he caused certain men to be brought as prisoners in Towns men's apparel,
by which assurance he so amassed the besieged, that they thinking them selves
half overcome, yielded up.

There be many other practices wherewith the besieged has been beguiled, Many
devises where by the beseged has been deceived.
some time when it has bin known to the enemy, that there should come aid to
assist them, have therefore appareled their Soldiers under the aunsients of
those yt should come, and thus have deceived them.

Sometime by taking of those that have gone aforaging sending others in their
apparaile: Sometime by sending Soldiers under the color of market men,
dryuing beasts laden with trashe.

Sometime by turning from them their water, or else by poisoning of the same,
as did Clisthenes of Cicion, the water that served the town of Criseans.

Sometime when a Captayn has found a City to be strong have therefore
conquered round about it, all the Towns and Casteles of purpose, to send in
aboundau^ce of people to the same City which they desired, and by these means
have spent their victuals, when famishment has caused them to yield.

Sometime when Towns have bin well replenished with men, which being known to
the enemy that came to besiege it, have turned to other places, and by these
means have brought abought, that the towns men on trust that their chief
city was strong enough, have emptyed themselves to defend others, whereby it
has been made easy to be won.

Fabius Maximus, wasting and destroying ye country of Campania, to the end he
would leave his enemies as bare as might be, he departed from them in the seed
time to the intent they might sow the residue of their Corn, and when it was
sprung up, he returned and trod it to naught, and thus by famyn got them to
yield.

Thus I have briefly showed thee such sleyghtes as has been used by the
noblest Captains, the knowledge whereof would not a little norish the
imaginations of such as should peruse them, there rests now to show thee
certain general rules, which are no less worthy to be noted, then profitable
to be followed, and thus they begin.

That whatsoever is profitable to thee, Certain general rules.
is hurtful to thy enemy, and that which helps him, hinders thee.

He that in war most labors and exercises his Soldiers in warlike trauails
shall always sustain lest peril, and sonest hope of victory.

Those counsels are best which the enemy knows nothing of, till they be
executed.

Occasion or sudden hope in battle helps more, then virtue or strength.

To know in war how to take occasion, helps more then any other thing.

Never conduct Soldiers to fight the field, till their minds be settled.

The greatest part of prudent Captains rather receue the vyolence of the
enemy, then to go with vyolence to assaught.

It is hard to overcome him that can truly judge his own strength, and what
power his enemy is of.

A few men well practiced, more avails, then great numbers imperfect.

The well chosen place does sometime more avail, then valiaunce or strength.

He that with disorder follows his enemy unwisely, may of a co^querour,
become sometimes a loser.

He which is unprovided of necessary victual, is overcome with out weapon.

He that asseyeth more in his horsemen then in his footmen, or in his footmen
more then in his horsemen, must chose his ground there after.

If thou think thy cou^sayl to be known to thy enemies, it stands thee in
hand to change thy pretense.

Consult with many what thou ought to do, but what thou myndest to execute,
keep secret to thy self.

Good Captains never fight the field, except they be driven unto it by
sudden hap, or great need.

The greatest policy is to grieve thy enemy rather with hunger then with
weapon.

It is necessary that Captains be well furnished with three kinds of trusty
people, that is to say, spies, scowtes, and guides, there trusty service
brings good assurance to an Army, the lack of them is great hinderaunce to
invasion.

Learn what may prevent thy enemy and profit thy self.

Captains ought rather to say with pity this I can do, then with tyranny this
I will do.

To use victory gently is more famous, then to conquer cruelly.

The hardy courage, lyberall heart, and good persuasion, makes a Soldier more
profitable to the battle in the day of fight, then the coward Captain folish
and unthankful, with multitudes of treasure.

Though many other matters might here have been expressed, yet thus much at
this instant, touching captains shall suffice.


Soul. The goodness of thy godhed does so graciously abound, that it makes me
persevere in demanding, being not afraid to be reputed presumptious, and
because it has pleased thee of thy own benevolence, thus thoroughly to
instruct me in the knowledge of martial feats, and the service in the wars
on the land, yet forasmuch as the knowledge of the service at the Sea has
ever likewise been accounted a most honorable service, but in specially with us
in England, considering the greatest part of our defense, does something
consist in the knowledge of the same, that it would therefore please thee to
inform me likewise in some thing appertayning to that noble service, and of
what government Captains should be, that ought to take such charge in hand.


Mer. Touching the noble service at the Sea, it were much better for me to be
sylent rather then in speaking, that I should seem to speak to little, the
which of necessity I should be constrained, or else to speak to small effect,
considering that neither by word there may be expressed, neither with pen there
may be prescrybed any certain derection that might greatly profit the skillest
man, for the knowledge of that service is not to be attained, Service at the
Sea not to learned but by serving on the Sea.
but only by serving on the sea, and it behooves such as should be Captains,
or to take charge that way, to have some skill in Maryners Art, ye which at the
shore is not to be come by.


Soul. And yet I have known some which I am well assewred, came never at the Sea,
that has been able to discourse of Navigations in a more perfect manner, then a
great number of those that be accounted for skillful Masters.


Mer. And yet those perfect talkers should be found as ignorant to execute
their own prescriptions, if they were brought unto the Sea, as thou show thy
self to be deceived in my meaning, to answer me thus in a clean contrary
matter, for it forces not so much in a man of war to have knowledge in the Art
of Navigations, as to be well experimented in many other causes, but because the
variacion of thy answer falls out so fit, to talk of Masters skill, I will
show thee therefore how the Masters should be chosen, whereby thou may the
better perceive the meaning of my former words. First thou must understand there
are, as they be termed, two sorts of Maryners, in whom there is likewise found,
two sundry skylls, that is, Art in the one, experience in the other, then first
to speak of the artificial Nauigator, who best deserves the greatest
commendation, be such as use to trauail to far and unknown countries, who
sayleth altogether by the use of his instruments, who knows by the eleuacyon
of the Pooles, by the Altitude of the sun, the place where they never came in
before, with many other things, which to the unlearned, might seem very
strange, and the perfect manner of this Art is in deed to be learned by him,
that never came at the Sea, yet not to be executed but by him that has
experience withal.

The second sort be those that be commonly called Coasters, and be such as
has little skill in the use of Instruments, but their help is only by
knowing of the Land where they happen to fall, or else sometime by sounding of
the Depth, or by knowing what ground they have under the^ in the place where
they sound, and such other like, as experyence has taught them, so that where
there is occasion of service at the Sea, there must respect be had to the place
when the service should be done, and thereafter to make the choice of the
Master.

But forasmuch as English men are not greatly troubled with Wars, on the
Sea, but only upon their own Coasts, the last sort of Maryners are therefore
thought most requisite to be appointed for Masters, the reason is, because
England is environed with Holand, Sealand, and France, on the one side, and
with Ireland on the other side, and the distaunce of the Chanyell is so narowe
between Land and Land, that it is a great chance that a Ship being between
either of these places, should not once within xxiiii. hours fall, either with
the one, or with the other, and then the perfect coaster that can ryghtly
deserne to make and know the land, is for many occasions the meetest man to
serve in these afayres: and because the Masters charge is especially to keep
the Ship in good security when storms and tempests happen to fall,
considering there is here no Sea rome to try it out, but must seek some place
to herbour themselves, as wind and weather will give them leave, I have
therefore briefly showed how to make choice of such a one as might be most fyt
to answer the purpose.

But now to return to our former talk, considering that the manner of the
fight should altogether be ordered by the captain, therefore, as I said before,
it is needeful for him to have some skill in Mariners Art, else shall he never
be able to judge what he ought to do.


Soul. I would think there should be no great policy in Sea fight, but when
they meet, he that has the greatest number of Ships, and the best appointed,
by common reason, were like to have the victory.


Mer. Nay not so, for there is yet an other helper, which as it passes the
common reason of such as want experience, so it preserves him that can attain
it, from any great danger of his enemies, were they never so many, and that
is, to have the advantage of the wind.


Soul. But then where the greater force has bereft the other of that
advantage, and thereby have gotten himself double benefit, is there no other
help then but to yield?


Mer. Thou must understand, the order of Sea fight is this, when enemies meet,
the stronger will seek to assail the weaker, the weaker then for his better
security seeks as much as he may, if he can not get from him with a sail,
to get the wind, which if he may obtain, the greatest fear is past, but if he
be prevented, he must then determine to defend himself by blows, which with
wise government, he may well do, for although the having of mo Ships, or the
greater company of men, is in deed a great advantage, so their danger is a
great deal more when they shall be driven to assaught, and the other but to
defend, for as great policy, and as much advantage may be used in the
defense of a Ship, as in the defense of a Castle, where one thousand men
with good dyscresion, may repulse ten thousand, that should assaught them.

To show thee any farther of their orders of ^ight, it would fall out to as
small effect as this which I have already told thee, and therefore I would wish
those that are desirous to have knowledge in that service, to seek it at the
Sea, where it is to be had, and otherwise to be come by, to any perfection.


Soul. Although thus ignorantly I follow still in my order of demanding, and
seeing thy godhead so liberally to offer that which I should have been ashamed
to have asked, it gives me therefore the greater encouragement, in specially
when it proceeds rather of a desire that I have to be satisfied my self, then
of any obstinacy or any other wilful contencion, and because I do now call to
my remembrance some part of our former discourse, wherein thou seem to
mislike in our choice of English Soldiers, as far as I can perceive by other
of thy instructions, there ought greater regard to be had, in appoynting of the
Captain, then in the choice of the pryuate Soldier, considering that it only
rests in his dilygence, to train and make his Soldiers perfect and ready at
such time as need shall require.


Mer. what respect should be had in the choosing of a Soldier, I will a
little over pass, and will first show thee how Soldiers be chosen in
England when occasion does serve, which commonly falls out in this manner.

The Prince, or Counsayll, The manner of chosing Soldiers in England.
sends down their warrant, to certain Commissioners, of every such Shyer
where they mind too have such a number of Souldyers to be leuyed and
appointed, the Commissioner he sends his precept to the hye Constable of
every Hundred, the hye Constable of every Hundred, he gives knowledge to
every petye Constable of every Parrysh within his cyrquet, that upon such a
day, he must bring two or three able and suffycient men, to serve ye Prince,
before such Commisioners, to such a place, the pety Constable when he
perceyueth that wars are in hand, foreseeing the toils, the infinite perilles,
and troublesome trauayles that is incident to Souldyers, is loath that any
honest man through his procurement, should hazard him self amongst so many
dangers, wherefore if within his office, there hap to remain any idle fellow,
some dronkerd, or sediciouse quariler, a priuye picker, or such a one as has
some skill in stealing of a Goose, these shall be presented to the service of
the Prince, and what service is to be looked for amongst such fellows, I
think may easily be deemed, and I will something show.

First by the way as they travail through the Country, Their usage as they
trauail thorough the country.
where they chance to lie all night, the goodwyfe has spedde well if she
find her sheets in the morning, or if this hap to fail yet a couerlet, or
Curtins from the bed, or a Carpet from the table, some table clothes, or table
Napkins, or some other thing must needs pack away with them, there comes
nothing amiss if it will serve to by drink.

And likewise as they go by the way, woe be to that Pyge, Gose, Capon, Hen,
Sheep, or Lamb, that fortunes to come in their walk.

Then in the end, The best service that is to be looked for amongst them.
when they come in the place of service, where generally there are no such
loose ends in common to be found, because they must have something to keep
them selves in ure, then his fellows shyrtes, his sword, his dager, his
Caliuer, his Moryon, or some other part of his furniture, must suffice the
turn.

Whether this that I have said be true or nay, I stand to the report of such
as has had the leadinge of new leuyed bands.

Thus through the simplicity of a Cunstable, the Princes service is abused,
the manners and discipline of the aunsient orders corrupted, and the name and
estimation of the noble Soldier utterly despised.

What farther inconvenience might come of this appointment, Note this well.
I think those that be wise may very well foresee, when such evil condicioned
people, in whom there remains neither Religion, neither obedience, neither
fidelity, or good meaning, neither any other one spark of virtue, who being
in place where so many good laws are prescribed, and may not yet be restrained
from their vile and filthye conditions, and yet shall now be put in trust to
defend the Princes quarraile, wherein does consist the only security of
those that were the setters of them forth, if they had reason to consider of it.


Soul. I will not seem to contend, but such order of apoyntment there may
be, and such Soldiers peradventure may be found in these new levied bands,
but this I dare boldly affirm, that such Soldiers as has been trained, or
that knows what to service does pertayne, or any other in whom good service
might be found, would as greatly despise to be detected of any such infamy, as
any other that does counterfeit the greatest civility.


Mer. How Soldiers ought to be chosen.
Then to proceed how Soldiers ought to be chosen, the first and greatest
respect that should be had, is to have regard to his manners and condicio^s,
otherwise there might be chosen an instrument of mischife, and a beginner of
disorder, then consideration must be had of his sufficiency, which is to be
coniectured by the years, by the composition of his members, by the grace of
his countenance, by the lustines of his body, and by the quicknes of his
spiright, which may be supposed by the liveliness of the eyes.

And because such has ever been thought most expedient to serve for soldiers,
which might best endure all manner of travails, and such as has not been
accustomed to any great ease, the which conditions, as many do suppose, is most
common to be found in the husband man, or laboring man, and although this
supposition is not to be denaied, yet I do not allow of their choice, that would
chose husba^dmen to serve for soldiers

First, because the laboring man may in no wise endure to be pinched of his
victual, I mean to be brought to some short alowance, as those that use or
frequent the wars, may sometime be brought scarsly to make on good dinner in a
week, sometimes in a month, sometime in more, as occasion does fall out:
although I know, therbe many ye will think me to be much deceued, and would
au^swer, ye husbandmen might best away with this scarsitie, considering ye they
be brought up to hard and simple fare, which although it be true, yet proof
has showed the contrary, where any such has been appointed, and experience has
taught such as have marked it, that where any such want has happened, those kind
of people have first showed themselves to be worst able to endure it.

And in wars it goes not so much by him that can fare hardly, as by him that
can longest continewe with least meat.

For to fare hardly, there is no man how dayntely so ever he has been brought
up, but hunger will teach him to away with a courser diet.

But he is to be allowed for a Soldier, that if occasion does serve, can be well
contented to satisfy himself with some small petaunce, or that may endure
with some little quantity, whose courage will nothing dismay, if they may have
but wherewith to suffice Nature, and this abstine^ce proceeds only of the
valewer of the mind, and is not to be found in the husband man, or laboring
man, who although they may away with simple fare, yet they must have their
bellies fyld, they can not abide to be pinched of their victual, for if they be
brought but to some small restraint in comparison what noble Soldiers will
endure they presentlye show themselves to have no manner of courage but even
as men that were more then half dead in whom there is to be found neither hope
nor comfort.

An other cause why I would refuse such for Soldiers is this, because the
order of service in these days consists much in the quickness, nimblenesse
and readiness in Soldiers and this celerytie is not to be found in Husbandmen,
or laboryng men.

Furthermore they are utterly void of one of the greatest graces that to a
Soldier does pertayne.

Which is to be delightsome in the wearing of his apparel and in the keeping
of his furniture: for like as there was yet never any excelent Artificer which
has not had a special regard in the keepyng of such Instruments as
apertayneth to his faculty in a neat and decent manner, so questionless he he
will never prove to be good Soldier, that has not delight in the keeping of
his furniture, wherewith he is appointed to serve in a brave and galant order.

And in my opinion one of the greatest respects that may be used in the
choice of a Soldier in whom there has bin had no manner of trial, is to have
consideration in his order of apparel, for he that takes not some felycitie
in the wearynge of his garments in good order and fashion, will never take any
pleasure in the keepynge of his furniture, and to be short will never prove to
be a good Soldier, for what vnseemlyer sight may there be when a Soldier
shall come into the Feelde with his Armor all rustye, the joints vnriueted,
the Leather and Buckels all broken and tied together with points, his Sword
half without a scabard, his Pyke head vnuayled, and sewtable to the rest, his
Caliuer so vernisht with rust, that the Cock will not play, and then his game
will not go, as they term it, his Morryan with one cheeck off, and an other
one, or else hanginge a swashe like a Hog new hunted, and although that every
band has of ordinary Armorers, and other that be appointed for the mendyng of
any the premesses, yet the pinishnesse is such, or rather the slouthfullnesse
of a many of lubbers so great, that they cannot vouchsafe to carry them where
they might have such fautes amended without any other trouble.

Wherefore, I would not wish that any such kind of people should be permited
to serve for soldiers, for what greater incouragment may there be to the
enemy, then when he shall encounter with such a one as both by his apparel and
the rest of his furniture does show himself to be but of some base mind, or
of some other simple condytion, and noble Captains has ever sought al means
and occasions to discorage their enemies, and not to incorage them. Wherefore
the Romans were accustomed to garnishe their soldiers with Feathers, to the
end the show of their Army might seem the more teryble to their enemies.

Likewise the first invention of the wearynge of Scarfes in the wars, was
used as well for terrifinge the enemy with the bravery of the show, as also
for necessaryes very meet and ready to bind up a wound when they should
not come by clothes at a souddayne where with to serve the time.

Thus much touching the choice of Soldiers at this present shall suffice, yet
not forgetting to give them these few precepts. Which is principally and above
all things to be obedient to their Captain, to practice the use of such
weapons wherewith they be appointed to serve, to be secret, to be silent and to
be courageous.

And now behold where ye court of Venus does show it self to be but even,
here at hand, and therefore there is better time to end our talk, then when
we shall end our journey.


Soul. But if without presumption I might but demand this last question
wherein I greatly desire to be satisfied, and this it is, whether the Calyuer,
or the long Bow as we term them hear in England, be of greatest force I
have hard this question diverse times to be argewed on and some that have bin
supposed to have had good experience have preferred the Caliuer to be of
greater force in service then the bow which I think few wisemen will believe,
and our enemies can witness to the contrary that from time to time have felt
our Archers force, and how many noble victoryes have bin by them achiued,
Cronicles are full, and Histories can well make mention, and I am of that mind
that one thousand good Archers would wrong two thowsande shot, yea and would
drive them out of the Feeld and there be a great many of that opinion beside my
self.

What has bin don in time paste makes nothing to the purpose for the time
present for the order of the wars is altogether altered, and in an other
manner then they have bin in time past, but now to answer to thy demand and
breefly to satysfye thy desire, thou must first consider to what perfection
shot is lately grown unto over it has bin within these few years, when
paraduenture if there were one that sarued with a Halfehaake or a Hagbus as
they termed them which were pieces to small efect, unless it were even hard at
hand, there is now ten for that one, which serves with the Caliuer or Musket
which, pieces ar of a new inuension and to an other effect. So likewise they
have a better composition for the making of their powlder and the Soldier is
grown by practice to a greater celerity in the using of his piece then in time
paste he has been of. Thus the effect of the one by practice is increased, and
the force of the other by nature is deminished, for ye strength of men is
generally decayed, whereby they are not able to draw so stroung a bow, nor to
shoot so strong a shot as in the old time men have bin accustomed.

But to the end thou may the better perceive wherein the advantage or
disadvantage does grow. I will use this comparison (whereby) I doubt not but thy
own reason shall persuade thee.

Suppose one thousand Archers should be leuyed within any two Shiers in
England let them use no further regard in the choice then of ordinary they are
accustomed: In the service of the Prince, let these Archers be appointed with
such livery Bows as the Country generally uses to allow, let these Archers
continnewe in the feelde but the space of one week, abidynge such fortune of
weather, with their Bows and Arrows, as in the mean time might happen. I
would but demand how many of those thousand men were able at the weeks end to
shoot above x. score. I dare undertake that if one hundred of those thousand
do shoot above ten score, that.ii. hundred of the rest, will shoot short
of.ix. score, and is not this a piece of advantage think thou? when every
Calyuer that is brought into the Feelde will carry a shot xviii. score and, xx.
score, and every Musket.xxiiii, and xxx. score.

Besides this every Bushe, every Hedge, every Ditch, every Tree, and almost
every Moalhil is a sufficient safgarde for a shot, where the Archer is little
worse, but on a plain, when the shot will convey them selves into every
couerte, that the Archer shall not see whereat to shoot, and yet he himself
remain a fair mark for the other, or else can use no service.

Now whether part has the advantage, I think may well be deemed, and whether
weapon is of greatest force, a man may eas^ye perceive, when the shot shall
be able to prejudice the Archer, who shall not be able to shoot half the
ground toward him again. Farther when the Shot shall take advantage almost
in eueri ground to shroud himself, where the Archer must remain an open mark
upon the plain or else to occupy his Bow to small efect.

But let it be that one thousand Archers and one thowsande shot should meet in
the plain Feelde where no vantage were to be taken by the ground, and admit
they were joined in skirmish, within.viii. or.ix. score where the Archer is
able to shut twice to the others once, whereby the Arrows coming so thick
amongst them, will so astone them that the contrary part shall not well know
where at to shoot.


Mer. But those that frame this argument has little practice in the use of the
Calyuer, and less experience in the order of a skyrmishe for if a thousand
Archers were brought into the Feelde I trust all would not be brought to
shootte at one instant for if they were, some of them would shoot to small a
veil, as he that has experience can well say.

And yet if there were no other advantage to be used in skirmshe, but who can
shoot fastest he that is a ready shot I dare say, would be loath that an
Archer should shoots above, viii. times to his.v.

And this advantage in often shootyng is not so great in the one but the
difference is much more in ye other, consideri^g their force for where the one
does but gaulde the other does either main or kill.

But to show thee what farther advantage the shot has of the Archer thou shall
understand that where the Archer may shoot both wide short and gone, the other
may shoott but wide only. But because thou may the better perceayue my
meaning thou must consider that when the Archer shoots any distance of
ground, the Arrowe comes compass of a great height, so that when it comes
where it should endanger, which is, with in the compass of man's height it
falls presently to ye ground and has but as it were one lightyng place and
paraduenture may come directly over one man's head and fall right at an other
man's feet which stands but.iii, yeardes behind, where if it had fallen but one
foot shorter, it had indaungered the first so if it had gone but one or two
foo^e farther it had hazarded the last.

Thus as I have said the Archer though he shoot right yet he may shoot both
over and under, where the other can shoot but wide only, considering that the
shot is still carried away within the compass of man's height, which advantage
to such as has reason to decerne it arighte shall perceive, that one shot
from the Musket or Calyuer, is of greater possibilytie to indaunger then five
that shall come from the best Archer that is brought into the Feelde.


Soul. I understand the meaning very well, and do now perceive the Calyuer
indeed to be of greatest force, and yet I had a great deal rather believe it
my self, then to undertake to make a great many of others to believe it.

But now I perceive we may hang our Bows upon the walls for I can not
perceive how they will now stand us in any great steed to serve in wars.


Mer. Nay not so neither, was it any part of my pretense so absolutlye to
obiecte the Archer nor yet to make him of so small effect, but that his service
is to be commended, and not to be forborne, for so it might as well be said
what should Horsemen do in the Feelde where the enemy has picks to defend
them against whom they could yet never prevail: yet no man doubts but
Horsemen are seruisable for many causes, although it be not to run against the
Picks, so likewise Archers may do very good service, although it be not to
encounter with shot.

But my words tended to this end that I would not have thee to be ignorant
in the use of so principal a weapon, but rather would wysh it might be
practiced, considering it asks time, or many may have the ready use of it,
for like as it is a special Weapon to him that can use it in good order, so it
is as defused, and untoward to him that has not the practice of it, and shall
sooner indaunger himself, or his Friend that stands next unto him, then
hurt his Enemy. Therefore I would wyshe that those which should use this
Weapon, to be very expert and wary in the use and orderyng of the same.

And now behoulde, we have at length approached to our desired place, lo here
the Court of Venus, where for a time I will leave thee to finish thy pretense.


And as I was devising with my self, what reverence I might use to the God for
his great curteysies, he was suddenly vanished from my sight, I wist not
where, and it was no time for me then to stand upon my new determinacions,
but prepared my self to this sumptuous Court. To the which when I was
approached nere, my mased mind was fullye fraught with great admiration, not
so much to see the rarietye of the work, and the strangeness of the
buylding, as to see such sundry shows of diverse stoanes of price, of
variable hew, the which in every wall was there ^o curiouslye couched, as it
surely passed any art of hand*

There was dyrectlye over the entrye of the gate, two fearful examples of
Justice used upon two obstinate persons which had been rebels to the Laws
of Venus.

The one was that scornful ymphe Narcissus, whose bewtye enamoured the heart
of every Dame that did behold him, and whose pride disdayned that any at all
should so much as touch him, for which contempt he him self was as iustlye
deluded, as before he was accustomed to delude, and mock with others, for like
as his bewtye had inflamed the hearts of many a Lady, which had beheld it,
even so it was ordained by the providence of the Gods, that in beholding the
Image of his own face in a clear well, his own bewtye, which before had
bewitched so many has now so beguiled him self, that he there miserably
consumed with love with his own shadow.

The other showed how the Lady Anaxarete, a wylfull Dame, whose stoany heart
would never rewe on Iphis cause, who seeing him self to be bereaved of al
manner of hope did hang him self before her gate, the Gods now seeing this
woofull chance transeformed this Dame to a hardyned stoane for her ungentle
fact.

There was over these two stories, a verse in Latin written in lettes of
gold, which might be Englished thus.

Lo, here the dome of Rebels such
which erst our laws contemnde:
Whose paruerse minds, and haughtye pride,
are justly thus condemnde.
And when I was come into the base Court, I gave my special regard to the
manners of such as passed by me to and fro, whose gestures as they were diverse,
so there orders of apparel and manner of array was as contrary and varyall, for
who had thoroughly marked them, might partlye have deserned the effects of love
by their orders and conversation.

There were some that were arrayed all in green, Snters at Venus Court
or like delightsome coulors, by whose lustye cheer, they seemed to be such as
had the world at will, wantyng no part of their desyers.

There were other likewise appareled in blew, using a more demuer countenance
there were some that were appareld all in yellowe, by whose frantic
conversation there might be deemed some suspytiouse mind, there were other in
russet, using a very modest cheer, some in tawny, whose doleful looks
bewrayed some secret grief

There were some that were arrayed all in black walkyng by them selves in
solytary sort, wringing of their hands, beatynge of their breasts, yeeldynge
many piteous sighs, who had beheld them, might well have deemed a lively
pattern of a desperate mind. And when I was come into the upper Court, the
beauty thereof, was not so far exceeding, but the Music which I hard in every
corner, was as sweet and delctable: from thence I passed into a sumptious Hall
which was richly hanged with clothe of Arres work, wherein was wonderfully
wrought many a famous History, tending all to the aduancemente of the Gods
Venus, and of Cupid her son, shewinge how it has caused the strong and
mighty to become feeble and weak, the Cowarde and dastarde, to be valyant and
hardye, the wild and savage to be humble and meek, the fierceste and furyous
to be gentle and lowly, the wise and learned to be foolyshe and fond: and not
only men that has bin thus transformed, but even the Gods them selves, has
become subject and thral, and constrained to obey to Venus and her laws.

In the vppermoste part, the Gods Venus was first described, sittynge in
her Wagon, wherein she is drawn by her too Doves, there was standing by her a
basket heaped with hearts: which was most pitifullye consumed in Flames of
scorchyne fire, saving that the Gods having Water standing by, would now and
then delay the rage and furious heat: In the fore part of the Wagon stoade
the blind boy Cupid, wounding with his arrows the hearts which houered in the
air, in secure and careless sort. Then there was likewise showed how the
mighty Jove, when he went to vewe the Heavens and earth, to see if ought had
perished through Phaetons wylfull fact, in which suruaye, as he espied the
form and bewtye of Parrasis, a Nimphe of Dianas troop, with whom he as
carefullye sought to accomplish his desire, as before he had regard to the
repayring of the Heuens and the restoring again of the Earth to the former
estate where it was decayed.

There was also showed the whole storye how Appollo was in love with Daphne,
Mercury with Hearse, Bacchus with Guosida, Virtunmuus with Pomena, Pan with
Sirinx: And how many of them for their better speed has taken upon them
sundry shapes, and transformed themselves as Iuqiter to a Bull, Phoebus to a
cuntry clown Mercury to a Goat, Saturn to a Genit and Bacchus to a Grape, and
not the celestyall Gods, that have bin thus by love subdewed alone, but also
the Gods of the Sea, and even Pluto himself, the God of Hell, has not bin
able to resist this mighty strocke of Cupids pearsing dart.

There was also to be seen that monstrus and ougly Giant Polipheme, whose
wild and savage kind gave terror to every thing that did behold hyme, and
yet he was by love so surprised and over come, that for the time he clean
forgate his wilderness and mourtherous heart, and frames himself in form of
woers trade.

There was also how the noble Herculus became from a mighty conqueror, to
sit in woman's attire, at the wheel and Cards, and served Omphale Queen of
Liddia, and farthermore, how both Aristotle and Socrates, in despite of their
Philosophy, the one became a slave to Hermia the other a subject to Aspasia.

There were many other Historys, which all together tended that neither
wisdom learning, polecye, strength. valyaunce, nor any other sleighte, may
once withstand or prevail against the asaults or conflictes of love. There
was in the uppermost verge of this clothe artificially wrought in great
Letters, a verse in Latten, the some whereof contains to this effect.

If neither God ne man my snares,
has yet escaped free:
What wight art thou, wilt then resist,
against my laws and me.
Dewring the time that I stood thus pervsinge of these descryptions, there
wear many Gallaunte Ladies and other beautyfull Dames, which passed by me to
and fro, amongst which there was one who perceiving me to be a stranger, very
courteously salutynge me demanuded if I had any suit to prefer to the Gods
Venus, wherein she might pleasure me, for that she was accustomed as she said to
prefer each lovers cause, and to assist them in their suits.

To whom when I had given most humble thanks, I courteously entreated her to
show me her name, which as she said was good countenance, whom every louinge
wight has in great veneration.

When I perceived Fortune so favorably to assist me, I thought it had binne but
mere simplicytie for me to forsake the Ladies fryndly offer. Wherefore in brief
discourse, I showed her the whole cause of my coming thither, which as she
understood taking me by the hand, she led me up a pair of stayers, and
brought me into a merueylous large and beautiful chamber which was
replenished with lusty Gent. and mani other brave and gallaunt dames and as
they were dispearsed in many companyes, so they were using as many amorus
exercisses, some were recityng of tales, and tellyng louinge Historyes, some
were singyng to the Lute and Virginalles, many amorous Ballades, some were in
the Pauyans and Galliardes, and happy was he that before his Lady could do
the lustiest trick, with many other like pastimes.

The which when I beheld, I began to imagine in my self, and in my mind to
say O blessed and happy wights, how fortunate are your days, in what pleasure
and delight spend you your blessed time in respect of soldiers, whose hard
terms and miserable conditions, are far otherwise allotted, when they must
march in ye Feeld after the stroks of dredful droms, you may dance upon the
risses after the steps and sounds of Inruments, when soldiers be in the feeld
dealing of bloudye blows, you may be your Ladies chambers delyng of amorus
kisses, sweet imbracyngs, and louinge countenances, when Soldiers must be
content to take their lodgings in the wild feelds: and open air, and yet not
assuered to lie all night in quiet, you may be in your warm and soft feather
Bedes, embracing your delights, abidyng no unrest unless it be to satisfye
your own amorous desires, when Soldiers must be rowsed to give some earlye
assault you may keep your Beds, unless you some times, arise to give your
Parramours the hunte is up, under the windows, most happy therefore (I say)
is your estates, and as I continued in these cogitacyons, commending in my
mind both love and lovers trade.

There was one that as it were in the nick began to tell a strange and
tragical History, the which I gave good heed which tale when he had finished,
I was thoroughly resolved to how many mischifes vain men commit them selves,
whose love is so inordinat, that nether bite nor bridle is able to restrain
the furye thereof, and for as much as I have used this tedious long discourse
of wars and marciall causes, I think it not amiss to recreate your weryed
minds with this so strange a Historye, whereby you shall perceive whether
this gross affection, vain hope, and blind love, may carry men unto, and of
what force the Arrows of blind Cupid be, and what fruit they bring to them
that practice the same how it not only passionatly their minds with most
outragiouse, and intolerable afflictions, but also so far ouerwhelmeth them
that they many times, throw them selves head long into the gulf of mortal
destruction, and into the depth of shame and infamy as this history more
euedently appears which in this wise ensues.

IN Province a Country which all men know, no whit inferior to any in all
Europe, whether it be for the situation thereof as being replenished with rych
and fair towns, or for the fertyllytie and pleasantness of the soil, or the
courtesye and ciuillytie of the people inhabityng or dwelling in the same.

There is a little town or village not far from Nice which they call
Lagrasse, situated in a fair long plain and in so pleasante a place, as any
man may with eye behold in that plain to the merueilous ornaments and
deckynges of the buildyng, the goodly grass grows so thick and green that
were it not for the continual grasinge of the cattle in the same, it would
always appear a contynuall spring time, besides throughout this grassye and
flowery plain you may behold the goodlye Lemons, Orange and Pomegarnet Trees
charged and laden with their fruits, deckynge the country so rychlye in such
goodly order that it seems only nature has traueled to the adournyng
thereof, and besides these all other kind of fruits does so inoble and adorn
this teretory or place, that it seems to resemble the famous wood of Thesalien
remembered or spoken of by Heredotus Plinius, Strabo, Elias and in his third
book of Hystorys diverse, and not forgotten of the the Poets which place is
frequented, and assailed of the passers by, especially of the Inhabytantes,
which bid (as it were battle) to the Trees and fru^es

Which Plain is set between two small Hills on eueryside, shadowing the
flancks of this frutful Valley, which is waterd with brooks or Rivers: that
with their pleasant murmur or sweet soft noise, do floate about this
pleasant verdure natural, re, ioysinge the eyes of man, and serve for the
pasture of the flock of sheep and herds of cattle, of all the country
theraboute, In this same earthlye Paradise, and not far from the said town,
stands there a Castle named Chabry, the Lord whereof not long before espoused
the Daughter of one of his neighbors called the Lord of Mas, of whom our
Historye hererafter shall make ofton mention, This young Lady governed her
life so modestly all the time of her youth, that her honest chastity was no
less commended of all that knew her, then the chaste Lucrecia or Penelope.

But be it, whether the hypocrisy so long hyd in the wicked heart of this
Lady, could not any longer cover the wickedness thereof, without showing some
proof of the fruts of the same, or whether that the grenenesse of her Husbands
years, being now for age come into a scortchy dryness, and without moisture,
had lost his strength, or (possible) led by the natural appetite of such as
love to change, being now upon the point of their age, of a young virtuous
and chaste Lady, she was now become an old harlot, and being tender, and in
the years of her youth gave unto all a more hope, (that is to say) showed more
effect of her honesty, then her age did in ye mortifica^ion of these heats,
proper to the follye of that unbridled youth, to the which they bind their
affection, and the effect of little description, according as they say
commonlyg that of a young holy Hermit, oftentimes we see the chaung, to be
transformed into an old Devil.

This Lady now coming to years and Children, began to muse of love, and to
desire of her Husband that which could not be twice had, and that which she
her self had not so much desired when those flames are most exceedinge in the
greennes of her years, she not contenting her self now with the frosen and rare
imbracementes of her Husband, she began to excogitate the means to satisfy
her unbridled desyers, and by that means began the mischife which after
caused the ruin of her self, and the perpetual dishonor of all hers.

These are, as you may see, the effect of this wrecthed beast, carnal pleasure
to bring to man the plague or pestilence, under the vizor of a clear and
wholesome air, and to plong and drown the seely ship when the saylours shall
think themselves most in queit harbor Who will not confess here that love is
as it wear a certain rage, madness or fury, seeing that she does cause to
do violentlye, that which ought to refrain and bridle those immodesties, and
foolysh passions, that she does suggerate or put into our minds. Now there was
dwelling in this Lagrasse, a certain Docter of the laws, an advocate and a
Citisen of the said town.

This Docter, for that he was of counsel with the Lords of Chabry, in process
of time had so good credit both of the Lord and Lady that oftentimes he entered
into the chamber of the Lady, her Lord being absent, and would there consult
with her in her Bed, whereof the Lord was nothing suspicious, but it came that
on a day, (during the absence of the Lord of Chabry) this Doctor came to
visyte and see this Madame, lying yet in her Bed, where he bent him self to
behold and contemplate more lively the bewty of the Lady, whsoe lively colloure
her Age had nothing altered: And with an intent far otherwise then he was
wont to ouersee the profess the Lord of Chabry: She which saw the Doctor
youthfullye disposed: And as sufficientlye able to furnishe the affairs
appertayning to the bed, as of matters in the Law which touched the house,
was nothing sorye to see this Goat to behold her so unshamefastly, but more
bold than any common harlot, made no conscience to discover that part of her
body, the which honestlye any shamefast woman could not, nor ought to
discover, And that with countenance and eyes so Lascivious and indiscreet, that
he that were least practiced in the affairs of love, might easelye have known
and perceived, what prouendour the Horse nayghed for, Judge then if this Lawyer
sufficiently practiced in such deceyptes, knew or perceived that, she most
desired, or if he forgot to commend the bewty or proportion of the well shape
in members of this unshamefast Alcine: Which in smyling wise spoke unto him:
Alas Master Tolonio (for so was he called,) Is it not, unto me, great
damage? That my Lord is so discrepite and old, that I can not now any more
enjoy that thing, that it may content my pleasure and appetite, being my self
in such disposition as you see? truly this good man cares for no more but
to mumble his Prayers and small Suffrages, in the evening till he be as could
as Ise, which does whollye cool in me the heat of my first desires: And if
at any time I do advance my self, to stir up in him, or to awake the
forces of the flesh, alas it is no purpose, so that (will I or nyll I) I must
be feign to kiss (as it were the Sheet) with so great displeasure, as I
should have of contentment, If I had a man worthy of me, which could
accomplish this appointment, which is due in Marriage.

The Doctor hearing this, right easelye understood unto what end she had
discoursed this fair Tale: Answered, Madam, I suppose your Ladyship has ever
proved and known me for the Loyal and faithful seruitour of your house:
Nevertheless, I believe (under correction) that my Lord is not so far
spent, that his age should let him to give yet some contentacion, to any
Gentlewoman, how young or lustye so ever she were.

The dishonest Lady hearing him say so, answered: Tolonio, men judge
commonly of things at random, as they have taken root in their cogitacions,
through their own only opinions, but those which have known the effects,
and which have experimented tho contrary, may speak without reproach, and
according to the truth of that which others hold not, but by thought only,
you esteem my Lord so valliaunt a Champion: that (by your words) there is no
armor which he is not able to peerce, But I which do feel, his weakness,
cowardice, and small force, may speak thereof more certainelye and assuredly,
to my great grief, to the end, that you taking compassion of my
sorrowfulness, may seek the means to succor me, and to deliver me from
this grief of sickness, that I do endure: Madame said he, think not, that
for the increase of your anoy, I have spoken so boldlye, for I will rather
chose death, the most shameful and ignomious, that any man could imagyne or
think, then to have given to your Lady ship, the least occasion of sorrow:
And I would to God, Madame that my travail or dylligence, might serve for an
ease, or abatement of your Ladyshiyps trouble, you should then right well
perceive that Tolonio is not of the number of those, which promysing much and
performing little, but I give you to understand, (if it please your Ladyshippe
to use me) that of al those of your household, there is none more ready to
obey, or do service unto your Ladyshippe, be it that therein I should offer
or sacryfice mine honor, or life, yea, and I shall think my self happy to
employe and spend either the one or the other, in the service of so famous and
high a Lady: And saying so? seeing him self aloane in her Chamber, took the
hand of the Lady and kyssed it, with great affection: The Lady seeing the
matter sort to that effect, even as she had before excogitate, or thought in
her fantasye to execute, pressing hard the hand of this Gentleman, spoke unto
him very curteouslye: My Lord Tolonio, if fortune were to you so favorable,
and rendered me so much yours, that you should think or believe to have
part of my good grace and favor, what thing would you enterprise or attempt
to inioye: and please her which so lyberallye, and without any other respect,
either of life, or honor, would leave unto you her heart in gage, and her
body to dispose at your pleasure.

A Madame, said the Doctor, the fear that I have, that so great goodness
shall not chance or come unto me, (although I do earnestlye desire the
same,) makes my heart to faint: And on the other side, the pleasures of my
conceptions lyfteth me up so high, that there is nothing so difficult or
hard, that I would not wyllinglye take in hand to attain the same: Pardon
me Madame I beseech you, if I have been bold so lyberally to discover unto
you, that which I thought to keep secreete in mine own heart? And blame and
accuse your self, that having power over me, have made me to say more then
I had determined to manifest, vanquished of a passion so extreme.

And say you so said this dishonest lady? truly that was the very scoope or
point whereunto I did most aspire, and since it is so, that I may Assure my
self of your fidelity and faithful love, I pray you also to trust and
believe assuredly, The infamous Docter, and coursed Lady have agreed together.
that I am and wilbee holy at your commandment, and that which I have
promised in word you shall see it come to pass by the effects, the plays
and pastymes accomplished both of the one and the other party, the two
detestable adulterers made their match to give them thenceforth to pass the
time as plesauntly as could be thought: Euenso this disloyal varlett obeyed
the unbridled pleasure of this unshamefast woman heaping sin upon son, for
beside the abominable syn of defyling Another man's bed, he committed
felony and treason against him which put assured trust in him, He committed
Felonye and Treson.
and at the wages of whom he did ordinarilye live. Here may we see what the
malice and wretchedness of those is, which under the cloak of good letters
and learning and colored (nay rather stuffed) with a certain vain
knowledge to descerne and Judge Justice from injustice, make profession to
overthrow all Justice, to pervert all order of honesty, and to deceive under
the title of good faith, the consciences of the most simple.

Thus our unhappy world (or rather) the malice of this our cursed time has
made to budde and spring of men that are learned, Deuells, which vomiting a
certain false Philosophy have infected the air with their corruption, and not
contenting them selves to abuse the flesh, and to bring the life of man under
the Adulterouse Infamy of beastly, carnal and filthy pleasure, have (as it
were giauntes) addressed them selus to battle against the heavens.

So truly the houshoulde Servant evil effects toward his Lord and
master is more to be feared, then a thousand enemies Running and wandering
abroad as ths Lord of Chabry experimented by the means of this master
Lawyer the which abusyng the Lady and she her Lord and husband, both of them (I
say) to the end the more at their ease to continewe their insolent whoredom
and abominable life, made their match together, to murder him, and even as
they had devised so they brought it to effect.

For this corriuall of his Lord, The adu(...) Lady hi(...) one to ki(...)
husband.
corrupted and hired a varlet, already inclined and accustomed unto such
detestable exercises, and made him to promise him that he would murder the
Lord of Chabry, and to that end he gave unto him a good sum of money, this
minister of mischief hoping also for some further gain, made no more a do,
but watched the hour, time, and occasion, when without noise he might bring
to end his determinate purpose, which came him well to pass, for one day
fynding the poor Lord walking alone within a certain close, which lay near
to his house, this Murderer accompanied with another like him self, came all
disfigured, and without speaking any word, they both ran upon this
unfortunate Gentleman, and most miserably killed and mangled him, and fled
from the place where the fact was committed before any man understood of the
miserable death of this Lord, which was the cause that the murderers were not
surprised nor known. And less it was that any had the least suspicion, that
the Lady his wife, or her Proctor Tolonio had devised that treason, and caused
this poor Innocent to be murdered. But this mischievous woman after the knew
of the death of her Husband, She fayneth desperation.
half in despair (for such she faygned her self to be) cast her self upon
the mangled and bleeding carcass of her Husband, maynely crying out, not
sparing to tear her apparel, and the hears of her head, watring ye face of
the deceassed with faint fears, began to feign a voice apt to express the
inward dolor of a passioned spirit, Ah wicked woman.
in saying: Ah* misfortunate Gentleman, is it come to pass that thy fate and
destiny should conduct thee to this misfortune? and that in the time of these
thy latter years, in the midst of thy friends, and in thine own house, to
have been murdered so traitorously? Ah that I my self had not been partaker
of this thy great misfortune, that I might have been companion in grave with
him, the love of whom shall never depart, out of my soul: Ah cruel Murderer
(who soever thou art) what floudes of tears thou shalt make to be distilled,
and how much blood will thou make to be effused to appease and pacify the
ghost of my good Lord and husband? I beseech the Gods that thou may never be
able (thief and traitor what soever thou be) to escape the hands of him,
which having sword in hand shall avenge me that am thus miserably afflicted
by thy only means. Ah my friend, said she (embracing the body all
discheuered of her dead husband) how should this traitor know thee, which
has thee so vilanously outraged and slain. Alas poor children, what a father
have you lost, and I poor widdowe desolate, the sustentation of mine honor,
and the support of all my family? In this mean time the Doctor, having made
suit after the murderers of his good Lord, and returning from the pursuit of
them which lodged in his own house, was very joyous to see this Lady so well
to play her part in this Tragedy, of the which she her self was the very
first author, approaching unto her, having ye tears in his eyes, said unto her:
Well Madame, said he, will you now (as they say) cast the Hatchet after the
Helm. My Lord is dead, and think you to raise him up again by your
vehement lamentations and cries? Take patience, I pray you, in that adversity
that it has pleased God to send us, and employ and assay your self to take
vengeance upon those which you shall find to be culpable of the death of your
Husband. In the mean time take order that his Corpse may be entombed as
apperteyneth to a Lord such as he has bin in his life time, which thing was
forthwith executed, for they buried him very honorably, with the lamentations
and tears of all his subjects, in the chapel of the Castle, and in the
sepulcher of his Predecessors: Also the poor Subjects sore lamented their
Lady, seeing the incomparable sorrow and mourning she made for so soden loss
of her Lord. And they all supposed that willingly she would have made a
sepulcher of her own body to have buried her husband, if it had bin lawful
for her to have caused him to be burned to have drunk his ashes, as sometime
Artemisia did of ye burned Relikes of her dear Mansole. Mansole.
O feminine cautel, and crafty hoore, who is so sapient and wise that can be
able to keep him self from being deceived with thy crafty and fraudulent
deceipts: Alas there is no malice, deceit, treason, mischief, or cruelty,
that is comparable to the treason, mischief, or diuelishnesse of a woman that
has once forgotten the virtue and good grace that oftentimes does accompany
the feminine Sex. What greater argument of sutteltie and craft would you in
this woman than to see her desperately to deplore that which inwardly makes
her spirits to leap for joy, at which instant her eyes are constrained to
pour out rivers of tears, and her tongue to tell forth abundance of
lamentable words: After the burial of the Lord of Chabry, for that she would
not be thought to have faygned the great amity that she had always pretended
to bear toward her Lord, caused to make diligent information against those
that had perpetrated and committed this heinous murder: but the Commissaries
and witnesses were those them selves which had imbrued their gyltie hands in
the blood of the poor Innocent. The Doc(...) ouerseeth (...) treasury (...)
goods of (...) innocent l(...)
Even so and by this means was this fact kept secret for a certain time:
During the which Tolonio reuisited all the pieces of the Treasure of the
house, without forgetting her unto whom he most was affectionate, and for the
inioying whereof he had made so prodigious an enlargement of his conscience,
the which was such as did prepare the way to all mischeefes, yet more great
and detestable (if possibly it might be) than the evils and faults before
committed. Consequently follows this Lady (being made widow by her own
treason) who had four sons, The Lady had.4. children.
two of ye which did never depart ordinarily from the Castle: now the eldest
of the two was not so gross or dull of spirit and understanding, but that he
knew and easily understood that this great priuitie and secret familiarity
of the Doctor with his Lady and mother, passed ye bounds and bars of honesty,
and further than the honor of his mother might well suffer or bear: whereof
if he were pensive and sorrowful, I leave it to the judgment of all noble and
gentle hearts, and for that cause this young Gentleman determined in him self
to utter the same by some means to his Lady and mother. Being steadfastly set
and arrested upon these terms and deliberations, seeing this Doctor gayning
more and more the favor of his Lady and Mother, and that the Lady abusing
indiscreetly her great honor, could not live at rest without the presence
of her Tolonio, he came on a day to his Mother, unto whom addressing him
self with an honest shamefastness, intermedled with a just anger and
disdain, being alone with her, said unto her very reverently: Madame, The
eldest son adm^nished the mother of (...) wicked b^hauiour
the reverence that I owe to the place that you hold on my behalf, and the
duty and obeisance that God will and has commanded that children should
bear to those that have begotten and borne them, makes those words which I
have premeditate in my mind, long time before to declare unto you, to stycke
as it were in my mouth, not able to utter the same before you, whom the matter
that I have to open to your Ladishippe, does touch before all other, and
would to God that the thing that I have conceived in my mind, as a thing
most assured, were so false, as I wish it to be estraunged and far from my
opinion, and yet further estraunged from the truth and verity, then truly I
should not be so afflicted in my heart, and constrained to be such an Orator
as I am to you, the office whereof I would willingly be dispoyled of if
greater and more just occasion did not offer her self for me, to perform it:
but Madame seeing that the passions of every one are free, and that the spirit
of man is not restrained (notwithstanding any captivity ye body does suffer)
but to the liberty of his own imaginations, I humbly beseech you, not to
think strange, that the extreme love that I bear you, and the honor of your
house co^mandes me to say unto you, yt is, yt your greatness and the blood of
the late Lord of Chabry, are or ought to be, in my judgment, lettes and
stoppes unto the over great familiarity that ye advocate Tolonio has
ordinarily with you, which are the mother of such children that deserve not
that such a villain should spoil that gentle blood whereof they are sprung,
and which with great difficulty shall endure this abuse, without auenging
them selves according to the quality and greatness of the crime.

Pardon me Madame, I pray you, for speaking so boldly, seeing affection does
so transport me, and the blood that can not disse^ble or lie, cause me to
feel the injury yt you do unto us, if this our great familiarity have so
deep root, as I suppose it has: I swear unto you by God that ye only
respect of your honor has caused me too look unto it more nearly, and to
provide for the same, with discretion, but if ye have no regard nether of your
own reputation nor of the honor of your children, I will so provide, that M.
Doctor shall go serve his prosesse in some other place. The blubbering and
malicious woman, seeing the countenance, gestures, and words of her son,
knowinng his passion to be more the^ vehement, and knowing also his humor
doubted in her self, least he should execute upon Tolonio, the vengeance of
the secret death of her husband. For this cause, blushing with cholor and
rage, and pouring forth abondaunce of tears, set her self upon the ground
so amassed and confused, that she was long time inmoueable and as though she
had been spechlesse: in the end having overcome her affections and dissembling
her anger, answered her Son, with a trembling voice followed with an
infinite number of sighs and sobbes, almost stopping her words: Alas, said
she, what is he now that shall take upon him the defense of the honor of
this desolate wyddowe, Mark her strange inventions and persuasions.
seeing her own children are the first that bring her honesty in doubt and
question? where shall we find faith, loyalty, good opinion and assurance, if
the proper blood descended from our Entrayles, does so conspire against our
selves. O miserable is the condition and state of our Sex, that when we think
to have certain and sure rest, even at that time fortune does sort and allot
to us her privy watches and ambushes, to turn us from the ease that we before
pretended. O my son, my son, are you of the number of those which judge so
rashely and at randon? Make you so little account of the reputation and
constancy of Ladies of honor? Measure you their chastity with the foolish
reprehensions which flow out of the brains of vain talkers and evil
speakers? Alas, it is not only at this day, but ever has been accustomed that
virtue is on every side besieged with slander, envy, and false imposition of
crimes: it is not I alone that endure these bitter and almost insupportable
injuries and false accusations, which now feel my self falsely slaundered of
that villainy whereof I never thought. They are not the Ladies of my Chabry,
which suffer them selves to be so transported unto the fond appetites of the
flesh, neither is it from henceforth time that I should think of these
follies, unto the which I never gave my self in my young years* Are you
offended to see Tolonio speak to me in secret? Do you think it evil that he
enters familiarly into my chamber? Know you not that it is he only which
knows all the affairs of the house, and did execute the same in the life time
of your late Father my L. and husband? Ah wretched and unfortunate woman that
I am, to see my self so suspected, who never thought nor aspired to any other
thing tha^ to ye encrese of your wealth: and Tolonio more unfortunate to travel
and take pain for the love of you, which promise none other thing unto him for
his reward than present death: No, no my son, Tolonio is a very honest
Gentleman, and has been ever so taken and accounted of, only speak unto him
of it, and you shall see if that at your simple commandment he do not forsake
the house without returning, at any time hereafter to anger you, and then shall
you know that our affections are far otherwise then you think, and that the
favor I show him, is rather for your profit and advancement, than for the
pleasure that you falsely suspect in me, which being your mother, ought rather
to be worthily commended of diligence then to be accused wrongfully of
incontynency. The young gentleman hearing the excuses of his mother, and seeing
her so beblubbered with tears, and attached with dolor, ^ feigned ^veeping.
although he could not blotte out of his fantasy that whche he had conceived
for certain truth, answered: Madame, I know not whether I am more moved to
joy or sorrow, seeing I am sorry verily to see you so outraged with dolor and
grief that the passion thereof redoundeth upon mine own soul, in such sort
that the remembrance thereof does penetrate even to the profunditie of my
heart: and again joyous to have known you such as you have always been, and
as I trust you will continue hereafter, I desire none other testimony hereof
but your own honesty and virtue, unto the which I will adioyne mine, heart and
your promised word, as a symbol or token that I confess that I have done you
great wrong, and you most just occasion to complayn you of me: nevertheless
if you measure the affection that is in me, and the reason which causes me
thus to speak, and withal behold with what modesty, I have unto you made
this narration, you would accept it in as good part, as with good heart I
have declared it to you. Pardon me Madame for my boldness, with protestation
that from henceforth I shall be more wise and sage to speak, and better
advised to suspect the thing that may turn to such consequence. She appeased
her self, at the least she feigned her self contented, attending till
opportunity might serve, yt she might execute upon her son, the tragedy
alredie begone upon the father, for she did not trust the words of the simple
and virtuous young man, thynking him of faith to be as slippery as she her
self was, for such is the custom of the wicked, to balance and way the life
of others by their own wicked deeds. This new Progue, or rather Tigresse,
altogether set upon the shedding of Innocent blood, infected with most wretched
cruelty, which had altered the sweetness of her good nature into a rage most
desperate, for the love of her Doctor, determined to dispatche the world of
her son (whatsoever should come of it) to the end she might live more at her
ease, and without any that should control her life* Now within the said
castle of Chabry, there was a high Galarie, A rare inue^(...)ion to mur^her
her son.
between two lodgings, the planks whereof were very evil joined, and the
timber half rotten, whereupon this young Gentleman for his pleasure ordinarily
was acoustomed to walk, as well for the pleasantness of the air, as for the
fair prospect it had into the fields, but especially into a most pleasant
Garden, replenished with all sorts of herbs and fruits that man could
devise to imagyne, which was the cause that the Pageant which before she had
premeditate, was the sooner brought to effect. This detestable mother then,
one euenyng caused the knave her Doctor to vnnayle two or three bordes of the
same Galarie, and to disioyne them from the ioystes whereupon they were laid,
that he that should tread upon them should fall down headlong upon the
rocks in the dytches that lay underneath. As it fortuned to this young
Gentleman no less unhappy in an ungracious mother, than his Father had been
in a wicked wife, for the day after that this trap was thus prepared he failed
not to come into the Galarie, where having made two or three turns, set his
foot upon the end of the disioynted boordes, and sodaynely fell down upon
the Rock: so was he most mischieuouslye brayned, and his members all to
bruzed and broken with the fall, dying before he almost felt the apprehention
of death. Oh cursed fact.
Who would ever have once thought that the Mother had been so follonious,
cruel, and unmerciful, as to see (by her own vile and wicked means her own
son bruised, mutilated, and deformed, seeing that this name and title of
mother is so sweet, and amarous, that the hearts of the most stubborn are
thereby mitigated or mollified, and we see that every one holds their own so
dear and in such price, that the very beasts them selves, pricked by nature
(although incapable of reason) have such affection toward their young ones,
that they fear not to* oppose them selves to all perils, to conserve and
defend them: Also the greatest comfort or good that man may have, being in
the continual waves of the Sea of this troublesome world, is to see him self
as it were regenerate and borne anewe in his children, and in the propagation
and increace of his seed: and yet this she devil and mad fury of hell,
having already lost the affection that the spouse or wife ought unto her
husband, put also in oblivion the natural love she ought to have borne to the
fruit of her body engendered.

After the fall of this young Gentleman, you should have heard nothing within
the house but lamentations and cryings, one crying his Brother, another
bewayling his Cousin, another lamenting the sudden and unlooked for death of
his Master: but all this was nothing in respect to that which this detestable
Murdresse did, for she tormented her self so desperately, and of such sort,
that you would have thought all the world should have sunk, she feigned her
self to be so exceeding sorrowful. So this same Megera, under a huge heap of
dolours she covered the extreme joy of her heart, and under the show of a
certain exterior sorrow, nourished the venomous honey which lay hid in her
stomach. The obsequies of this young Gentleman were celebrated somewhat
pompeously, and his body was buried by his father, to the end he might
participate both in tome and misfortune, him which had begot him. The Lady
seeing her self discharged of a great hartebreaking, not having any more her
Son in her company, to survey or mark^ her dealings, began now more
familiarly and boldly to intertayne and embrace her Doctor, not fearing so
much as she did in the life of her eldest son. But the second son, not
knowing any thing of the occasion of the death of his brother: and where before
he had not taken any great regard of the fond government of his Mother, began
now to suspect her, and declared the same so well in countenance, that he
could not speak one only word to Tolonio, but such as contented him not,
and such as made to appear the evil will that he bare to this infamous
knave: and if perchance he spoke at any time to his mother, he did it with
such disdain, that he could not well behold her with a good eye, whereof she
being maruellously vexed and as angry as was possible, did deliberate and
determine to bloody wholly her renown, and to fill her whole house with
parricide and murders intolerable, tending to that end to celebrate the
nuptial song of her wicked marriage. And so this ungentle harlot conspired
against her second son, and so swear his death as she had done the other,
with the minister of her abominable wickedness Tolonio, which took upon him
the charge, and promised to bring to effect, that which she before so earnestly
desired. This worthy Lawier brought up in the schole of Pluto, and rather
learned in his laws, than in the laws of Emperors and Pretorierum Edicts or
ordinances of the Senate, addressed him to a wicked companion of his, that
before had murdered the Lord of Chabry, the which he very easily corrupted,
for an evil heart and a mischeeuous nature can not but show the fruits of
their corruption and malice. This knave having received a certain sum of money
of this Doctor, assured him to make him a good account of that he hoped for:
and he failed not of this promise, for certain days after, they being on
hunting, as the most part of ye servants were following the chase of the Hare,
the poor young man resting him self upon a high rock, from the which the
going down was very perilous, for the headlong steepness thereof upon the
one side. This murderer which all the whole day had not ceased to ride and
follow by trace to find occasion to perform his enterprice, very glad to see
that he had found so good opportunity, came behind him, and thrust him down
from the top of the rock so forsibly, that this poor Gentleman was deprived
of this mortal life, before he could perceive who it was that had advanced
him self so outragiously to finishe and end his days. Nevertheless (this
cursed Hagge of Hell borne to spoil and tormente her own children, thinking
to keep secret her detestable and abominable filthiness, and to appear a
woman of great honesty before the world, which had made no courtesy to
sprinkle the earth with the blood of Innocents, which cried vengeance both
against her and against her Varlet, which had been the cause and mouer of all
these murders. After the funerals of this young man, seeing that all her
servant began to suspect of their privy dealings, and doubted of their over
much familiarity, she communicated and conferred with her beloved Doctor, of
the end of all their enterprises, that is, how they might bring it to pass,
that they might join together in marriage: but Tolonio (being already married
to a wife as sage and virtuous as he was vile and mischeeuous) deliberated to
make some secret riddaunce of her by death, how dear soever it cost him.
Wherefore he certified his Lady and lover, who liking very well of his device,
prayed him to hasten and dispatche the execution thereof with as much speed as
he possible might. This wicked and covetous Doctor did this, not for any great
or extreme love he bare unto her, when he desired so much to marry: for he
knew very well that commonly they are wont to intertene and embrace traitors,
to aid them with their diuelishe and subtle inventions: even so Tolonio
knowing that the Lady of Chabry was rich and well monied, purposed (his wife
being dead) to marry her, to have the spoil of her goods, and then after
(peradventure) to make her to tread the same pathe, traced by so many
murders, committed by the means both of the one and of the other:
Nevertheless he did not yet know which way to perform his wicked desire. O
wicked and unbridled covetousness, how have thou depraved and bewitched the
spirits of men at this day? Truly the father is not well assured of his
son, the neighbor does fear the ambushes and deceipts of his neighbor.
And the Prince oftentimes is in danger of his person, environed and compassed
on every side with his guard and ministers: for the foolish desire to have,
blinds so rightly the senses of man, that he betrayeth his Lord to enriche
him self: and he to the same end does sell his friend, another aduaunceth
the death of him, for whose life he ought continually to pray. And the thing
is come to such disorder, that even the sacred or holy things them selves,
have felt the poison and venime of this cursed beast, the which how far
forth she extends her forces, so much does this world become more
mischeous, and men more traiterous and disloyal. Now to return again to our
bloody Lawyer, which did nothing but as it were build castles in the air
upon the deliberation taken in the death of his wife, for he held (as they say)
the wolf by the ears, not knowing how to leave him, nor yet with what
assurance to hold him, without the danger and peril of his person. First he
deliberated to assay by poison to end her days, but that way seemed unto him
very dangerous. Then he cast in his mind to make her to be murdered by him
which had before by his commandment committed the murder on the person of
the Son of the L. of Chabry, but that way lyked him not, for the chaste dame
seldom or never went out of her own house. Finally led by his own foolish
appetyte, and left in the hands of the devil, he determined to use none
other means for this exployte, but his own proper hands. And therefore one
night being in bed with his wife, wrything a table napkin with force about her
neck, strangled her, and as she was upon the end and last gasp of her life,
the varlet, (thinking to make his matter good) made an outcrye, saying to the^
that came in, that the rewme falling into ye throat of his wife, choked her,
and brought her to that point that she was past remedy of life, the which
thing was easily credited and believed of them that came in, and had passed
without further question or account to be made of it, but that the father of
this miserable deceassed came to this cry, the which the night before had
supped with his daughter, leaving her as whole and sound, and in as good case
as ever she had been in all her life before. Now the Father beholding the
vysage and throote of his miserable Daughter, perceived by and by that he
had ended her days by violente death, and that the Rewme that had chooked
her, was either the hands of her Husband or of some other by his appointment:
which he perceived by the blackness and swelling about her face and throat.
Nevertheless dissembling this anger, and covering his mourning, he purposed to
aduenge him self in such sort, that he would make him an example to all
murderers of their chaste and honest wives. And the better to attayn his
purpose, he said unto Tolonio, My son, I pray thee take order for the
preparation of her Obsequies and Funerals, according to the demerites of both
our houses, and in the mean time I will go into the Town, minding to make
quick return, and to aid you in any thing that shall be requisite. The
Advocate occupying him self about the pomp and preparation of the Funerals of
his wife, his father in law half transported with dolor and grief, went to
seek out ye criminal Judge of the Town, whom he prayed to come to see the
most detestable fact that man could imagine to think, and of which he would
have compassion, if he were not more cruel than Timon the Athenian, which for
his fierce and cruel nature was surnamed the common enemy of mankind. The
Magistrate, as well to be ready (as his office required) to render to every man
justice, as to see what new thing that should be, whereof he had made to him
relation, followed him, accompanied with a troop of Sargeants and neighbors
to back him, and arrived at the house of Tolonio, wondering out of measure,
seeing the dead body in that order, and yet more marvelled, understanding the
father of the deceassed to use to him these or such like words: Sir, if this
present spectacle be not strange unto you, or if the tears of a sorrowful
father loosing his child so mischieuously, move you not to compassion, I
suppose that all impunitie of vice and sin has place on your behalf. I
know nevertheless, that at the first blushe, you will think strange of that
I pretend to say unto you, but the thing being well and exactly understood,
you shall be made certain of my uprightness, and of the iniquity of him,
which has so grievously wounded my heart, that I fear it will cause my
death, the which I would rather have wished a thousand fold, than to see
this lamentable and piteous Tragedy upon my daughter, whom, I say, has bin
traitorously slain in her bed by the detestable murderer which you see,
and whom amongst all other I had chosen for the loyal spouse and husband of my
daughter, and the successor in time to come of the goods that God has given
me: You see sir the evident signs and open marks how she has bin strangled,
and it is well known that she laid her down as sound and merry as any of us.
Alas sir have pity on my desolate house, venge with ye sword of Justice the
injury done to my daughter, and the heartbreake that afflicts the soul of
the father: punish with extremity the most mischeeuous deed that ever was
done in this country, to see so strange and barbarous cruelty of a husband,
a man of such quality and knowledge, yea the husband of one of the most
virtuous Dames that might be found, and nevertheless without just occasion
has murdered her as unjustly as he is mischievous and abominable. Alas si,
the only hope I have, is that even the Gods will make you to know the wicked
acts of this ungracious man, and thereupon to extend justice, have let me to
venge the wrong that I assure my self to have received of this homicide. And
willing to continue his talk further, his tung failing he began to weep, in
such sort that the Judge moved to pity, said unto the Doctor: You hear that
which your father in Law says against you, nevertheless I see you not answer
one point of those accusations that he has laid before you. But the infamous
and adulterous murderer, judged by the testimony of his own wicked
conscience, and condemned by the memory of his filthy and abominable factes
paste, could not express nor utter one only word to refute and reprove the
accusation laid before him by his Father in Law. The Judge having marvelled
as much as was possible of this, knowing the Doctor to be a man very
Eloquente, prompte, and ready in aunswers, doubted exceedingly of his case:
and thus pondering and weying the matter within him self, he immediately
desired the judgments of diverse expert and well learned Physicians and
Surgeons, which all said that the deceassed was dead by the violence of some
one that had strangled her. Then the Judge laid hands on the lover of the
Lady of Chabry, and sent him to espouse and marry the hole of the prison
house, in leu to enjoy the free imbracements desired in the premeditate bed of
his wife promised, whom he would have made lieftenant of his wife deceassed.
The next day the corpse was set in a public place, where both men and women of
all estates did deplore her with infinite tears, not without cursing a
thousand times the cruel fellon, which had caused to die so virtuous chaste, and
honest a wife, notwithstanding the corpse was buried honorably in the collegeat
church of the place, with such lamentations and tears, that it appeared that
a very Matron of the City had finished her days. The Father ceased not too
pursue the prisoner for the death of his daughter, and that with such diligence
that the prisoner was heard, and confessed the crime without question or
constraynt, which stroke such horror into the heart of the Provost, that he
wrote thereof to the Lords of the Parliament of Aix, before whom the case was
brought. The Lady of Chabry having understood the discourse of this
Imprisonment, and the voluntary confession of the Doctor, knowing her self to
be gyltie of the whole matter, and fearing the sequel and future mischief,
least he should open and discover all her practices, and should confess all
the murders perpetrated in her house, deliberated with her self to flee away
before the tempest, least the lightnings and thunderboltes thereof should fall
upon her head. Therefore taking with her a good round sum of money, with
the best of her Jewels, she retired to Poget in the territories of the D. of
Sauoy. In the mean time the Doctor was led bound toward the famous City of
Aix, where his process being made, and he newly examined, confessed further
all the enormities and detestable sins that he had committed with the L. of
Chabry, without omitting any of the heinous murders, the occasion of them, and
the names of the persons by whom he had bin aided concerning the same. The
Court seeing the abomination and greeuousnesse of the crime, condemned him to
be led back again to La grass, where he should be executed in the public
place of the Town, according to his demerites. This being don he was led back
to the place where he was borne, and put again into prison, within the which
hearing the day of his death to approach, bathed in tears, knowledging his
sin, and earnestly repenting him of his faults, kneeling down upon the
earth, and addressing his blubbered eyes unto the heavens, began to speak in
this sort: Ah cruel fate, that from so high degree of honor and reputation, am
now in one moment fallen into the depthe of infamy and perpetual shame. O
what a notable example may they take in me, that put their confidence in the
subtlety of their judgments and humayne prudence? what a looking glass is
offered to those yt put necessity to ye mobilitie of fortune? what a lively
picture am I, to advertise secret sinners to acknowledge their faults, seeing
that at the end the wicked livers (although they have long enjoyed the
contentments of their cruel appetites) they shall yet at the last be
discovered with their iniquities, leaving (as I do) their renown defaced, and
their life (which finally shall end) ignomious, the memory whereof shall be
left to the posterity. This is the rod that beats my soul, this only
thought is to me more grievous tha^ the death, the which I have demerited, as
being the most mischievous and most cursed creature that ever nature brought
forth. This his oration thus ended, he was led to the place of execution,
where he ended his wretched life, to the great contentment of his father in
law, and all the dames of the country, saving that mischievous and miserable
dame the Lady of Chabry, which knowing that diligent inquisition was made of
the place whereunto she was retired, and that they went about by all means to
recover her, to the end to do justice on her, not knowing her self
sufficiently assured in Poget, determined to take the way to Genes: and so
having taken and transported her baggage, took his journey, accompanied with a
gallant, who robbed her of that she had: after being in these extremities, she
addressed her self to an honest widdowe, where declaring her extreme
necessity, this good widdowe received her very beningly, and perceiving her by
her demeanours to be some Gentlewoman, committed unto her her daughters in
government. In this house she poorly (but much more honorably than she
deserved) finished her dais. Thus in such sort she which al her life had
commanded and ruled a great troop of servants and maids, was now constrained
to obey unto such a one, which was much inferior to her: and again she
which in her young years had been delicately and with great care nourished and
brought up, now drawing upon the end of her days, she suffered perpetual exile,
subject to the pleasure of another, pressed and ready (as she did in deed) to
die out of her country, and to receive sepulcher in another place, then in the
Monument and tomb of her Progenitors. This is then the end of the dishonest
love of these laciuious adultrers: behold the fruits of a tree so detestable
and pernicious. These are the pleasures that in the end accompany these
inordinate lovers, see how the lowryng eyes of beautyes vading Joys has so
inchaunted these Venerians, that now quite forgetting all grace and goodness do
plunge them selves in the pit of perpetull shame and infamy: behold whither
this outrageous and beastly lust covered with the name of pure and earnest
love, is able to draw these gentle subjects, to cause them to commit most
heynouse murders, to imbrue their hands in the shedding of innocent blood.

This History thus finished, my thought was very strange, but in specially to
be told in Venus Court, which te^ded so much to the deprauation of her Laws,
wherefore I asked of Lady Countenance, what he should be that had used such
lavish speech: who answered, that it was one Bandelio, an Italian, not far
unlike in conditions, to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who many times used by
words to inuay against that which actually he so much frequented, so there be
many which with sharp and bitter words, will outwardly seem to reprove such as
yield themselves to love, and yet in their deeds show themselves so earnest
professors of Venus and her Laws, as they worthily demerite to be shryned
Saints. But above all these devises, I had a special regard to the bewti of
the Chamber which was wonderful to behold. In the middle of the Roof there was
artificially wrought, a knot of massy gold, in manner four square, and in the
midst of this knot was placed a stone of a marvelous bigness, whose
brightness did so excede, that it daseled my eyes, I was not able to behold it
in every square, there was likewise set a rich Emeraud, from the which there
issued forth a Vine, in manner of a fret, which spreading all the Chamber, as
was wonderful to be hold, the branches and leaves were all of pure Gold,
curiously Enameled, instead of Grapes, the Rubyes there did shine which were
correspondent to the residew of the work, the hangings were al of Arras, very
richly wrought. In which was expressed the pitiful History, of Romeus and
Iuletta, Gismonda and Guistairdo, Piramus and Thisbe, Liuio and Camilla, and of
many other loving wightes, who in regard of Venus Law, had endured many bitter
torments, and yielded themselves to martyrdom.

Having passed this Chamber, we came into a Gallery, which in curiosity, or
workmanship, in every respect, was as far exceeding the rest, as Phoebus Rays,
of light, excedeth every other Star, in the upper end whereof, there were many
worthy Dames, whose bewty might welbe compared to the place. Well now, quoth
Lady Countenance, thou must make quick dispatch, be hold where Mars and Venus
are now here in place, with ye I espied where Mars was laid in Venus Lap,
before whom, kneling on both my knees, said as follows.

O mighty Mars, O dreadful God, His request to the Gods.
to whom it wholly does belong, to give victory, and conquest, the only stay
and comfort, of every valyant heart, lo hear the Supplicacions, of poor
dystressed wyghtes, the which in their behalfes, I humbly here present, whereby
thou may perceive the sum of all their grief.

With which words he arose, and I kissing the Supplication, delivered it into
his hand, which when he had thoroughly perused, said as follows.

And are Soldiers then so slenderly accounted of, Mars makes aunsweare.
be they so lightly regarded now in this peaceable time, who in the time of
wars, must offer themselves to the slaughter, for their Countries defense,
well ungrateful Country, and most unthankful people, I perceive your quiet
state, does make you to forget both me and mine, but take heed you be not more
suddenly overtaken then you be aware of, when you will wysh, you were as well
furnished with expert Souldyers, as you are provided with other warlike
provisions, your enemies be as secret as they be malicious.

And as he was abought to proceed in farther talk, the Gods Venus suddenly
arose in a great rage, as it seemed, turning her self toward me* Venus checketh
the Soldier.
and said as follows.

A sir, and is this the cause of your repayer to my Court, I now perceive
right well, the wholl cyrcumstaunce of your pretense, because your unbridled
mynds have been of late restrained, whereby you have wa^ted some part of your
ungracious wills, you have therefore amongst you made a byl of complaynte,
thinking your selves to be greatly injured, when in deed you are but justly
plauged, and yet nothing in respectt, according to your deseruings, your
malicious minds, are not to me unknown, you hate the good hap of any one that
is not of your own profession, it greueth you that any should be preferrid
before you. You think ye princes before all others, should bestow offices and
promocio^s upon you, to be short you despise al other in respect of your
selves, and yet you your selves would not be despised, you hate al, and you
would be beloved, how evident these matters be, I think may well be perceued,
when it pleases you to bestow so many nice names, and other rope ripe terms,
upon such as be my subjects, and professors of my Laws, giving them the
title of Carpet knights.

But if al be Carpet Knights which has submitted to my behestes, I trust you
may put the greatest part of your most renowned Soldiers and Captains in the
number.

Was not Hercules that noble conqueror, conquered him self by love with
Dianayra, was not the fierce Achiles in like manner with Polixena, and Troilus
with Cressid, was not Alexander when he should have given battle to the
Amazons coming to a Rivers side, where beholding ye Queen he was so subdued,
that their fierce and cruel fight converted to wanton amorous words. Was not
Haniball in like manner stayed in Capra, and Julius Caeser in Alexandria. But
here over passing a great number of others, is not your god of battle him self
obedient to my will, and yet a many of you who in respect are but reprobate
persons, would prefer your selves to be more worthy then any of these.

These words thus pronounced by the gods, did dau^t me so with such
despair, that I ne wist what aunsweare I might make, which being perceived by
the God of battle, said as follows.

Mars takes up the matter
Well well Lady dear, if I should answer these causes effectually,
peradventure I might use greater vehemence in words then I willingly would,
but yet I would not wish that any of these before named should be regestred,
amongst that effeminate number, although I am not ignorant that not only these
but also many other valiaunte Captains and noble Soldiers, has bin obedient
to the laws of love, for who commonly are more subject to love then the most
valiant minded wight, and who sooner disdayned by a number of scornful dames,
who will rather except of those that are in deed but Metamorphisis having but
the shapes of men, or that are as Hermaphroditus half men, half women, such
as will ly rolling in a Ladies lap kissing her hands, feeding her ears with
philed flattering talk.

But how should these womanlike minded men, or any other of these loving
worms, enjoy their delights in such quiet manner, were not the noble Soldier
to back them, who is the very Wall and only Bulwark to defend them.

Wherefore dear dame you have no just cause thus to exclayme on Soldiers, on
whose valiauncy, principally depends the quiet estate of such as be your
subjects and professors of your law, which else might remain a pray for every
man if causes were thoroughly considered.

Well then quoth. the Gods Venus, Venus is persuaded.
what simplicicie might be imputed unto us, between whom there has bin such
familiarity, and that of so long continuance, and should now seem to contend
about so slender occasion: again it seems unto me as good reason, that as
great frindship and familiarity should be continued between such as be our
professoures, on either pa^te, as there is love and amity between us our
selves, and for my part from henceforth I will yield my self beholding unto
Soldiers, promising them my fartheraunce in any thing, wherein I may pleasure
them.

These joyful news did breed in me such a sudden alteration from despair,
The Soldier awaketh.
to comfort, from dolful doubt to assured hope, from mourning to mirth, that in
the midst of al these surmounting joys, suddenly awaked, perceiving my self
to be but deluded by a dream which I have thus rudly penned, desiring the
gentle reader to bear with my infirmity, and to mend that is amiss.

FINIS.

