AN EXPOSICIon in English upon the Epistle of. S. Paul, to the Colossians,
wherein the letter is purely declared, with many good exhortacions to flee vice,
and to take virtue, as shall appear clearly to the faithful reader throughout
all this Epistle: written by Lancelot Ridley of Cantorbury.

Anno salutis humanae. M.D.XLVIII.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM

The preface to the Reader.
GRace, mercy, and peace, from GOD our father of heaven, be unto all the^
that loves GOD and his word, and be true setters forth and promoters of Gods
holy Gospel. Amen.

Because the word of God is the spiritual food of our soul Matthew. iiii. and
as necessary for the soul to feed it, as corporal food is to feed the body,
ye more necessary, because it feeds the soul, a more plenteous thing then
is the body, and gives life eternal with GOD the father, whereas the food of
the body feeds the body for a short time and brings not eternal life with
God the father. And this spiritual food for the most part lies hid, in the
letter of holy scripture, unknown to many that reads scripture, because they
do not understand that thing they read, although they do understand
English, and the scripture in many plain places, yet there be in the holy
scriptures, many dark places and hard sentences to be understand, which
requires more help then the bare text in English, either by diligente
searchyng out the true tra^slacion of that place, out of that toungue that it
was first written in, that is, out of the Hebrew or the Greek tongue, in the
which the holy scriptures was first written: either by co^paryng of one place
of holy Scripture with another, and expoundyng one place by another, or by
diligent obseruyng the circumstances and sentences, going before and coming
after, or by help of some learned aucthor, or godly learned man in holy
scriptures, to whom more knowledge was given of GOD, both by great study, and
also by humble prayer, made in faith for the same to God the aucthor of all
wisdom and divine knowledge, by which means, the mysteries of holy
scripture, be known and showed to man of God.

That the spiritual food of this Epistle to the Collossians should not be
hid, but part of it made more open and plain to the simple, not learned in the
Latin toungue, I as one of the least in learning (quid em^ musca cum
Elephantis) have set furthe this rude exposicio^ in this Epistle of saint
Paul to the Collossians as it has pleased God to give me grace and knowledge,
as I did before in the Epistle of sa^cte Paul to the Ephesians, and to the
Philippia^s, studiyng always to profit all men (if I could) and to hurt no
man, as knows God the judge of conscience, and of all secret thoughts: And
to excite other better learned then I, and of more health of body then I have,
to apply their study and wit, to set forth in English some part of holy
scripture, that the simple people might be moved more to read the holy
scriptures, and take more profit of them, then they do now by readyng only
of the letter, and not understanding the true meaning of that they read, but
rather ready to take it amiss, then after the true sense of the holy ghost:
and so by taking ye scriptures amiss, comes great error and heresies, evil
and preposterous judgments, false trustes and vain hopes, and all for lack
of true knowledge of holy scriptures, as Christ said to the Sadduces Mat.
xxii. Erratis, ignorantes scripturas, you err, not knowing the scriptures: So
ignorance has been and yet is, the cause of many errors and heresies, and
that men run into dampnacio^ iudgyng evil good, and good evil, sweet sour,
and sour sweet light darkness, and darkness light, to who^ the Prophet Esai
did threate woo everlasting saying. Esaie.v. Woo be to them that call good
evil, and evil good light darkness, and darkness light. etc. So ignorance
is yet ye cause of these evils, although the Bible be in English, suffered to
every man and woman to read at their pleasures, to honor GOD, to edify
theimselfes and other with all, ye, commanded to be read every day at
Matins, Mass, and Euensong, yet there remains great ignorance, corrupt
judgments, blindzeales, not after the knowledge of God, and will remain still
(except I be deceived) and except the holy scriptures be made more plainer
to ye lay people unlearned, by some commentary, exposicion, or annotacion,
that the lay people may understand the holy scriptures better and know the
will and pleasure of GOD, by them opened and plainly declared.

Therefore let ignorance the mother of al errors and heresies supersticion and
Idolatry, be clearly put a way, by knoweledge of Gods holy sacred word
truly opened and declared, by some exposicion made by sobre, sad and
discrete learned men, that of holy scriptures truly expounded, nothing may be
gathered, but spiritual food to feed the soul, or else I fear greatly,
that many will gather poison for meat, and errors for truth, interpretyng the
holy scriptures after their own mind and affeccio^, and not according to the
mind of the holy ghost, by whom it was written: But now I trust that all
ignorance Idolatry, and supersticion, and blind zeal, shall fall away by
little and little, the causes of them take away, and the true knowledge of Gods
word had, and such Godly Homilies, showing so much Godly wisdom, and true
knowledge of necessary verities for our salvation, as was never showed before
our days, to the people of this realm: for the which, glory is to be given
to GOD, laud and praise to the kings Majesty, and to his most prudent and
honorable counsel, that so tendereth the health and the salvation of the
people of this realm, that they would have al Idolatry, supersticion, and
feined religion taken away, and Christ's true honor and glory set furthe and
grounded, that all men might honor and worship God truly, with that honor
that he would be honored, appointed not of man but of God, in his holy
scriptures given to us, to know God, to love God, and to fear God, to know
our duty to God, and to our neighbor, and to do it in deed the better,
according to the will and pleasure of God, to whom with the son, and the holy
ghost be all honor and glory now and ever. AMEN.

The argument of the Epistle:
THE Apostle after his Christian salutacio^, gives GOD thanks for these
Colossians, that they were come to the true knowledge of Christ by the word of
God, preached to them by Epaphras, and had received faith hope, and charity,
as their works declared: he prays to God for their increaceme^t in spiritual
knowledge and Godly living, showing the benefits of Christ the head of the
Church, to them and to all men, willing them to stand sure grounded upon
Christ the sure foundacio^, and that they would not shrynke from Christ and his
doctrine, by no crafty means of pseudapostles that craftily went about to
deceive them by false doctrine, by supersticion of Angels, by Philosophy, by
tradicions of men, by elements of the world mixtyng the law with the
Gospel, affirmyng Christ not to be only the aucthor of health, nor the way
to ye father, to be made by Christ but by Angels, supersticiously obseruyng
the Son, ye Moan, and the Sterres. Therefore the Apostle, monisheth them to
beware of these pseudapostles, and of their deceiuable doctrine and to stick
to Christ and to his true doctrine, as a sufficient doctrine to bring to
health and salvation, by Christ alone, with out help of the Angels, of the
law, or of any other thing. He exhorts them to remember Christ's death and
his resurreccion, and to dye from sin and evil manners, and to walk in a
new life, showing to diverse states and degrees of men, their offices and
duties, exhortyng them instantly to fervent prayers, endyng his Epistle (which
he would should be red as well to the Laodicians, as to the Colossians) with
christian salutacions, wishyng the grace of of God ever to be with the^ AMEN.

The first Chapter to the Colossians.
PAVLE the apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God and Timothe his brother,
to the Sanctes that are at Colossa and to the faithful brethren in Christ:
Grace be with you, and peace from God the father and our lord Jesus Christ.

Saint Paul the true Apostle of Christ Jesus, keeps the manner used in
Epistles written: First he saluteth the^ with a christian salutacion, then he
shows his matter. And first he sets his own name, that the writter of
this Epistle might be known the Epistle more esteemed and loved, and had in
more authority of al them, to who^ it should come and be red emonges them,
and that they should know it to be written of no false Apostle sekyng his own
glory and profit, but of a true Apostle of Christ Jesus, that above all
things sought Christ's glory, and the health and salvation of other.

2 Apostle of Jesus Christ.) Paul here shows his office yt he was called to,
that he was Apostle sent, not of man, but of God Gala. i. not to please man but
God, sent to preach, not men's pleasures fantasies, or dreams, inuencions,
tradicions, or decrees of men, but he was the Apostle of Jesus Christ, that he
should preach Christ and his doctrine, puerly and syncerely, only sekyng the
glory of God, and to please GOD, and to declare Gods will unto the people by the
pure preaching of Gods word, and by it to bring to Christ and to eternal
life, by true faith in Jesus Christ: And in this that Paul said, he was the
Apostle of Jesus Christ, he reproves all false Apostles, and al them that
study to please men more then God, that be more earnest to setfurthe man's
law, then Gods law, and more sorer will punish the transgression of man's
law then the transgression of Gods law, ye, this place reproves al the^ that
seeks more their own glory, pleasure, and profit then the glory of Christ
Jesus, or the profit of their neighbor: ye, this place co^dempneth all them that
preaches or speaks only for their belly sakes, lookyng only to themselfes,
and caryng for no man else, caring neither for God ne man, so they be well
themselfes, living in all carnal pleasures and deliciousnes.

3 By the will of God.) These words he adds to show that he was an Apostle
of Christ, not by his own will, merit, or deseruyng, but by the will of God
and not of man, that he should give all glory to GOD, for his vocacion and
conversion from his naughtines, and not to him self. And in these words, he
teaches us two things, to come of God, and not of man, the one is, that true
Apostles come unto us, not by will of man, or when man thinks it good, but by
the will of God, that all laud and praise with thanks, might be given to God
for true Apostles, sent unto us to deliver us, from all fables, lies, errors,
heresies, supersticio^s and Idolatry, and to bring us into the way of truth,
in the which we may walk to life eternal. The other thing is, to know the
goodness of God, that will not suffer his elect people, to lack faithful
preachers or ministers, of Gods holy will and pleasure, for the which things,
great thanks are to be given to God.

4 Timothe his brother.) The Apostle in this salutacion, joins with him
Timothe (whom he calls brother, both by creacion and adopcion, and also in
setting furthe of Gods word) that these things he writes to these faithful
Collossia^s, might be regarded more and had in more authority, better
believed and better loved of them all: for the true record of many faithful
makes much with the simple Christian, and makes men believe better, if many
bear like record or witness, of the thing spoken: so saint Paul, although
his word should have been believed to be true, without other witness, because
it was the word of the holy ghost, which spoke by the mouth of Paul. i.
Cori. xiii. Seek you says he, a proof of him that speaks in me, which is
Christ: yet he joins with him Timothe, that these Collossians should the
better believe his words, esteem them and regard them better, so often times
does the preacher or teacher of Gods word, use the testimony of other, that
his words should better be believed and esteemed.

5 To the saints and to the faithful in Christ, that are at Colossa.) Now
he shows to whom he wrote this Epistle, he wrote it to the sa^ctes, that is,
to the faithful in Christ Jesus, such the holy scripture calls saints,
although they be a live, living in this world, and not canonized of the
Bishops of Rome, which will none other to be called saints, but such as
they have allowed for saints, well paid for their labors and pains, and yet
some of them allowed for saints, do not appear to be saints before God,
sanctified by Christ's blood, and by true faith in Christ, and good works
approved of God. So we see that holy scripture calls good men living in this
world saints, and these saints he would we should, desire to pray for us
here, and we for them.

6 Grace be to you and peace from GOD our father and our Lord Jesus Christ.)
Here is declared, what thing the Apostle desired and wisshed to them: he
wisshed to them no evil things but good things, not worldely honors or
riches, pleasures or volupteousnes of the flesh, not kyngdo^s or high Empires,
dignities, high honors, or promocions in the world, as carnal men desire to
their carnal friends, but he desires spiritual gooddes, as grace and favor
of God, peace with God in their conscience, which things comes of God our
father, and not of our selfs, merits, or of dignities of our works, but of
God the father alone, and of our lord Jesus Christ. In this salutacion the
apostle shows, what manner of salutacion Christians should use, one to another
in their wrytynges, and what things they should desire, and of whom.

We give thanks to GOD and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, always for
you when we pray, for we have heard your faith in Jesus Christ and your
charity toward all saints, for the hope laid up for you in heaven.

Now the Apostle begins to show the cause wherefore he wrote to them, and
first of all, he gives thanks to god for their hope and charity, and other
gifts of God, given to these Colossia^s, only of gods mere mercy and
goodness, desiryng God to increase these gifts, every day more and more in
them. By this example we be taught to give thanks to god, for his benefits
given to other, and to be glad with other for these divine gifts, and to
desire them to be every day more and more increased. And in these words he
reproves them, that thanketh not God for his holy gifts, given to the^ and to
other, ye, he reproves the^, that envy Gods goodness in other, and be sorry
that other be rich, co^nyng, learned, or have more knowledge then they, such
there is many now a days, whom it greueth much, to se so great knowledge of
Gods holy word and truth, showed to the world as now is, for the which
thing, they should give thanks to GOD for it: as here the holy ghost teaches
us, and not to be sorry for it, or to murmr or spurn against the prick, as
many wisshyng all these new me^ of the new doctrine (as they call it, when it
is in very deed the old doctrine of Christ, and of his Apostles) in a fire
or at the devil, condempnyng themselfes to the devil and to hell fire, calling
or thynkyng Christ's doctrine error and heresy, and condempnyng it for evil,
which is good and wholesome, and true doctrine able to save our souls.
Jacob.i. Let men therefore beware, and condemn not truth for falsed, and
call not good evil or evil good, light darkness, and darkness light, least woe
everlasting fall upon them, for so doing and calling. Take heed you ignorant
men, that you fall not into this daungier of eternal dampnacion, threatened by
the Prophet. Esaye.v. to all them that call good, evil, and evil good,
light, darkness, and darkness light, sweet, sower, and sower sweet, etc. Learn
that the holy ghost in Paul, moves us in our prayers, to give thanks to GOD
for his benefits given to us, and specially for the gift of faith, and of
charity. Secondly, he shows what is the office of Christians to do, when
they here faith and charity given to men of god, that they should give thanks
to God for them. Thirdly, we se the office of faith and of charity: a true
faith has charity annexed, and works by charity at all opportunity, given
in time convenient: charity shows her self, by helpyng and releuyng the
poor faithful: Finally faith and charity, be the two chief things of
Christ's religion, for the which we should give thanks to God, as gifts most
necessary for our salvation, without the which, we cannot please god, nor be
saved.

2 For we have heard of your faith in Jesus Christ, and of your Charity to
the poor saints.) Here is declared the cause why Paul gave thanks to God,
it was that he heard their faith in Christ Jesus, and their charity to the
poor, to be spread abroad, for virtue used cannot be hid long, but it will
show it self, so a true and a lively faith cannot be hid long, but it will
burst up into good works: as here Paul heard their faith, and yet faith
cannot be heard nor seen (for it is an invisible gift of God) nor yet showed,
except it show it self by good works, which declare faith, and shows
where it is, that it may be known and heard where it is, for a true faith in
God, is not idle or dedde: in that he names first faith, and then Charity,
he shows that faith must goo before charity, or else that work of
Charity, that spryngeth not out of faith, pleases not God, for it is
impossible to please GOD without faith. Heb. ii. Faith is toward God,
charity to God and to our neighbor: charity does consist in works and deeds,
and in ferue^tnes of heart and mind, to work when power and ability will not
serve, nor is power given to work.

3 For the hope laid up for you in heaven.) This place is of aucthors diversely
expounded, some make it agree with that that goth before, after this manner: We
have heard of your faith, and of your Charity to the poor saints, and
faithful christians, done to them for no other cause, but for Christ's sake,
not lookyng for any praise, glory, or profit, to you, of man, for these
works, but only for Gods sake, and because of hope of immortality, and
glory with God, that you trusted to be partaker of, not for the worthiness of
your work, or almose dooen to the poor by you, but only of the promise of
God, whose free gift is life everlasting, and not for the worthiness or
dignity, of any work or deed, done by any mortal man. And this sense saint
Peter. i. Peter.i. does appear to allow: saying thus. Blessed be God, and
the father of our lord Jesus Christ, which after his great mercy, has
regenerated us, into a lively hope, by the resurreccion of Jesus Christ from
death. So for hope of eternal life, we must do good works, surely trustyng
to come to that life, only of Gods mercy and goodness, and not of dignity or
worthiness of works, for the fre gift of Gods life eternal. Roma. vi. Other
refers this place, to the words that goes before, that is to these: We
give thanks to GOD for you, that you have not put your trust and hope, in
worldly things, or in corruptible riches, but in heavenly things, lokyng more
for heavenly treasure, then any worldly dignities or riches, only to be given
to you of Gods mercy, for Christ's sake, for whom you suffer much trouble, and
adversity in the world, that ye might be partaker of Christ's glory in
heaven, according to that which is promised, that if we suffer with Christ,
we shall reign with him. Romans viii. Which you surely trust and hope for,
nothing doubtyng, but GOD will perform his promise, and for that hope, you
willyngly, gladly, and of love, show Charity to the poor, and helps them
to your power, not lokyng for a reward of men, but only of god. Some other by
hope, understands GOD and his glory hoped for which glory is called hope,
because it is sure keped, as Job says.xix. This hope is put in my bosom,
that is the thing looked for by hope. i. res sperata. Other some thinks by
hope, may be understand God alone which is the rewarder of all that hope in
him, and will reward al good works dooen for his sake, love or commandment
alone, without all other respect, trustyng to Gods promises. And here
perauenture some will ask a question: whether we should do good deeds, for
hope of eternal life, or no? To this question may be made answer thus, that
we must do good works, appointed us of GOD to do, principally for God and for
his love, because we are his creatures, made to do good works, and to walk
in them, lookyng for that reward that he has both freely promised, will freely
give, according to his promise, to all the^ that with a sure faith and
constaunt hope, do persevere and continue in the ways of the Lord, keeping his
commandments. Secondely, for the rewards sake promsed us of God, we must do
good works, so that in all our works, we must most chiefly and above all
things, look to the will, pleasure, love, and glory of GOD. Thirdely, to our
profit, glory, or life to come, we must so in all our works look for the
glory of God, that skarce once we should remember our profit or glory to
come: for if we seek more our own profit and glory, then the glory of God, we
be but mercemarii hirelynges, unworthy that glory and immortal life, in the
world to come with Christ, which glory, cannot be bought by works of us,
but we must come to it only of the free gift of God, and of his mercy and
grace. Roma. vi.

Of the which before you hard, by the true word of the Gospel which is come
to you, as to all the world, and as it fructifieth throughout ye whole world,
so it does emonges you, since that day you heard and have known, the grace
of God by the truth. And as you have learned of Epaphras, our well-beloved
servant, which is for you a faithful minister of Christ, which showed to us
your love in the spirit.

The Apostle showed before, their mercifulnes to the poor saints, and
faithful in Christ for hope of reward, laid up for them in heaven: now he
shows how they got that hope, that it was by the true preaching of the
Gospel, which Epaphras preached unto the^. Learn here how hope of heavenly
reward, and life comes, that it comes by preaching of the Gospel of
Christ, which is called here, the true word of the Gospel, and the truth
it self. If hope of heavenly reward, comes by ye preaching of the Gospel,
as it does in deed, then what hope of heavenly reward can they have, where
as the word of the Gospel is not peached? or what hope of heavenly life have
they, that will not here the word of God preached? That contempneth and
despises it, and estemeth it no better, then a foolish tale of Robyn Hoode,
Guye of Warwick, or Beuis of Hampton, surely no hope at al. Learn here also,
how necessary a thing for our salvation, is the preachig of Gods word, that
without it, seldom be given, faith, hope or charity. For faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Roma. x. And hope comes by the true
word of the Gospel, as here is showed, and Charity spryngeth out of true
faith, and sure hope. The Apostle garnisheth the Gospel, with his due laud
and co^mendacion calling it the true word, that deceives no man, and the
truth it self, that none should doubt of it but that every man that loves the
truth, should be glad to here the Gospel, preached or taught, because it is
the truth, and puts away all falsed, lies, errors, and heresies.

2 And as it fructifieth throughout the whole world, so it does emo^ges you.)
He says, the Gospel to fructyfye and increase throughout all the whole world
as emo^ges the^, that they should more rejoice and be glad, as all good men
reioyseth, when the Gospel gooeth forwards and fructifieth, and evil men be
sorry that the Gospel is purely and sincerely preached, received, and believed:
but they give thanks to God for it. Here we learn to be our office, to be
glad to here the Gospel of God, to be preached sincerely, and to give God
thanks for it.

3 Sense that day you hard and have known the grace of God, by the truth.)
He shows how long the Gospel, has fructefied emo^ges them: even sense that
day, they heard the grace of God, and knew it by the true preaching of the
Gospel. And here we may learn diverse good lessons: First, that faith is
sure and firm, that comes by the word of truth. Secondly, that the sincere
preaching of the gospel, not to be vain or frustrate, although it is not
known, how it does fructify, and in who^ at the first, to him that
preaches, yet it goes not away in vain, as the Prophet Esaie says.
Thirdely, the benefits or the grace of God, be known by the pure preaching
of ye Gospel of truth and not of me^, or of a multitude of men, that call
theimselfes the church, when it may be doubted of, whether they be any membre
of the church or no, seeing their works be so contrary, to Christ's true
Church. Fourthely, learn that the grace of GOD, and his benefits is surely
known, by the truth of gods word. And here it seems, that saint Paul would
have us, to learn and know Christ, and the grace of God, by no other thing,
but by the truth, and to judge every thing, by the truth of Gods holy word,
for the holy ghost is the most surest declarer of himself. Learn also that
Christ, and the grace of GOD, and Gods benefits is there unknown, where as
the word of God is not preached, and how can God be loved, feared, or dread,
where as he is not known? Or how can there be any health, or eternal
salvation, where as is no love, fear, ne dread of God? And if it be life
eternal (as it is in deed, witness saint Ihon. xvii.) to know GOD the
father, and his son Jesus Christ, then it must needs follow, that it is
death, not to know God the father, and his son Jesus Christ and Gods
benefits to us, for Christ's sake, these benefits be unknown, where as the
word of God is not taught, therefore se how necessary it is for our
salvation, to have the word of God plenteously preached, and truly taught,
that God might be known, loved, feared, and dread, and his will and pleasure
fulfilled of al men. Finally, learn here how far be they from health, life,
and salvation, that will not here the word of God, but contempneth to here it,
ye, dispiseth it, and the true preachers of it, slanders, backebites,
persecutes, and as much as in them lies, goes about to let, hinder, and
utterly to stop and quench the word of God, and to bring to death, the
faithful ministers of Gods holy word, the necessary food of our soul, and
yet of the ignorant, it is thought poison, and death of the soul: God turn
the hearts of such, and make them his servants.

4 And as you have learned of Epaphras, our well-beloved servant, which is for
you a faithful servant of Christ.) Now he shows who it was, that first
preached the gospel, to these Colossians, not Paul himself, but it was
Epaphras, a disciple of Paul's, and a true minister of Christ, in the sincere
preaching of Christ's Gospel, and this Epaphras, returnyng again to Paul, in
prison for the Gospelles sake, showed to Paul of the faith, hope, and of the
charity of these Colossians, for the which things, Paul comme^deth the^,
not that they should be proud, but that they should increase daily more and
more, in these holy virtues and gifts, with thanks to God. Na^ uirtus laudata
crescit. Virtue commends increases. Learn here what servants, or
chapilaines, should Bishops have about the^, surely such as this Epaphras
was to Paul, one that loved his Master, in all goodness, and Godliness, and for
the truth sake: a man that loved God and his word, that was glad, when he
hard the word of God, to be purely preached abroad, and to bring forth Godly
fruits, as faith, hope, and charity, and of great gladness, showed these
fruictes to other, that other might glorify God, and give thanks to GOD, for
the Gospel preached, and to make other to follow these Colossia^s in faith,
hope, and charity, and in other Godly virtues. I fear me that all Bishops
and noble men, has not alwaie such servants, or chapilaines about them and
with them, that be favorers and lovers, of Gods holy word, but rather enemies
and adversaries to it, ye, haters of it, slaunderers, liers, and evil
reporters of faithful ministers of Gods word, reportyng such evil upon
preachers, as the preachers never did speak, nor thought, ye, parauenture
such things, as true preachers has and does, ever abhor and detest: Ye,
parauenture such things, as the preachers has spoken again, and forbiddyng
to be done, spoke or thought: and such evil toungues, liyng to please their
Masters, by their false liyng has brought, many good and faithful
preachers, to be had in hatered, and evil esteemed of many Bishops, and noble
men, which of ignorance has persecuted, ye, parauenture put to death
faithful ministers of Christ's Gospel, whose innocent blood, shed for
Christ's Gospel sake, God will punish, except they repent and amend, and to
call to God for mercy and grace. Therefore let bishops, and al noble men,
and noble women, be not hasty of credence, to report, evil or preachers, and
monishe their servants, to beware what they report of preachers, and that
they report no other thing of them, then that they can prove by honest men,
as they would have their masters favor or profits by their Masters, then
should evil reports, and false slau^ders, cease of true preachers of Gods
word, then should faithefull Ministers of Christ's Gospel be known, from
the false ministers, and true preachers favored and esteemed of men, as they be
worthy, then should God be the more glorified, his word better trusted and
believed, God better known and loved, and so come into health, and to eternal
salvation by Christ, whereas now the contrary done and suffered, many works
their own and everlasting death and dampnacion, persecutyng Christ's faithful
Ministers, thynkyng parauenture, then to do a sacrifice pleasant to God, when
they do persecute Christ, in his members, as Paul did, before he was
converted, as it is written. Acts. ix. Philip. iii. I pray God they may be
converted with Paul, and to play Paul's part, that they may be preachers,
teachers, and setters forth of Gods holy word, as earnest as ever holy saint
Paul was, and seek Gods glory, and the salvation of other, as Paul did.

Therefore, and we se^ce the day we hard, have not ceased do pray for you,
and to desire that you might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will in all
sapience and wisdom, and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk
worthelye, pleasyng God in all things, fructifiyngi al good works, and
increasing in the knowledge of God, strengthened with all strength after the
power of the glory of him, to all tollerance and patience, with joy, geuyng
thanks to the father.

Now the Apostle goes forward, in his prayer he had bego^ and says: that he
gives thanks to God, and has not ceased to pray to God for them, that they
might be fulfilled, with all godly wisedo^, and spiritual knowledge, that they
might walk worthily, pleasyng God, and bring furthe all good works,
increasyng in the knowledge of God. In this prayer, the Apostle teaches us, one
to pray for another, and to give thanks to God for his benefits given to
men, and specially for faith, hope, and charity, as here Paul did. Secondly,
here we may learn, not to cease from prayer, to God for other. Thirdely,
this place teaceth us, what we should desire to other, above al things,
surely this thing, that they might have knowledge of God, and of his benefits,
which is so necessary, that no man can be saved without it. Fourthly, hereis
showed, for what end and purpose Godly wisedo^ is necessary, that it is
ordained for this end, that men should walk worthily, according to their
vocacion, every man in his state and degree, that he is called unto of God.
Always studiyng to please God, and not himself, the world, or the flesh, the
multitude of the people, but God always. For he that seeks to please men, high
or low, himself or the world, he cannot please God. Non potest quisqua^
duobus dominis seruire: No man can please two Masters, of contrary affeccio^s
and minds: Finally, Godly wisdom is ordinated, that men should fructify in
all good works, that is: do all good works, which thing they cannot do,
till they be taught which are ye good works that pleases God, and how they
should do the^, and for whose sake, and for what end good works should be
dooen. This place reproves al the^, that be sorry that there is so much
knowledge, of gods holy word, had emonges the people as is, saying: it was a
merry world, when every manne, woman, or child, could not prate of Gods word,
and sense that time there was never no merry world, curssyng, and banning, and
wisshyng to the Devil, such as brought in this new learning, as they call
it: so by theimselfes you may see, and by their own words it is plain, they
call gods word new learning, and the preachers and setters forth of it
heretics, worthy fire and a fagotte to burn them, saying: they would go.xx.
mile bare foot, to burn such heretics, so by ignorance, they speak and
work their own dampnacio^. And as Christ said to the Sadduces. Math. xxii.
So may men say to them, erratis, ignorantes scripturas, you err, and fall
into errors and heresies, deceiuyng your selfs and other, because you are
ignoraunte of the holy scriptures: although you call other heretics and
deceivers, yet you be the heretics in deed, and deceivers of ye people,
worthy that punishment, that you wisshe to other, except you repent and
amend, and reform your judgments, words, and deeds, and call to God for
mercy and grace and seek for better, and more truer knowledge in Gods verity
and truth, and have a better mind to it, and to the true preachers and
setters furthe of it. This place also reproves, all the^ that do abuse Godly
knowledge, and use it for their carnal liberty, sensual pleasure, worldly
honor and dignity, ease, rest, profit, and for their belie sakes, such do
not serve God, but their belies, whose end is death, and their glory here,
shall be in time to come, to their confusion, shame, and everlasting death.
Phili. iii. if they do not repent and amend, for Godly wisdom is given, that
they should serve and please god and not theimselfes, or their belies. And
such belly beasts, be the cause, that the word of God is evil spoken on,
because they do abuse their knowledge, and turns it to their carnal
pleasures, proffites, or glory. But such, let them put away ignorance, and
take unto the^ Godly wisdom, and knowledge, and study to live after Godly
knowledge, or else their knowledge, shall be to their more condempnacio^, as Luke
says, the servant knowing the will of his Master, and not doing it, is
worthy great punishment, and many plagues to be laid upon his back.

2 Fructifiyng in all good works.) Godly wisedo^ here desired wills us to
fructify in all good works, that is: It would we should bring forth, al manner
of good works, and not one work alone, as some there be, that think it
sufficient for them, to have done one good work, as some to have builded a
Chau^try some an Abbay, some a house of Friars, some a Nunnery, some an
Hermitage, some a Guylde, some a Candle, some a Torche, ever to burn in such
a church before this Image, or that Image, which be works not commanded of
God, nor yet required of man, to the which, no promise of reward, is promised
of God: but Godly knowledge, taken out of scripture, teaches me^ not only to
do one good work, but to do all manner of good works appointed in holy
scripture, to be done. This place does seem to declare, that holy scripture is
able to show, all manner of good works, and that there is no work to be
called good, except it be commended, and also commanded to be done in holy
scripture. And this saying of saint Paul reproves those men, that thinks
the holy scriptures, cannot teach all necessary truths, sufficient for our
salvation: and those men saint Paul.ii. Timothe. iii reproves, saying: the
holy scriptures to be able, to instruct me^ in righteousness, that he may be
made perfect, and ready to do al manner of good works: He excepteth none. If ye
holy ghost had thought other works, then holy scripture speaks of, to have
been necessary for our salvation and that such works of necessity ought to
be done, he would not have said (I think) the holy scripture to instruct us,
and to make us ready to do all good works.

3 Increasyng in knowledge.) The Apostle would we should be fulfilled, not
only with all wisdom, and spiritual understanding, but also he would we
should increase in knowledge, and every day be better and better learned: and
have more and more knowledge of Gods holy word. Here we may se, that every man
be he never so well learned before, yet he may learn, more wisdom and
knowledge, of Gods holy word. Ye, we se it is every man's duty, every day
to learn of Gods holy word, more and more knowledge, and to increase in the
same. This place sharply reproves all men that will not learn knowledge of
gods holy word, and specially priests, that will not learn, but rather
spend their time idly, at Cards or Dise, then they will look upon the new
Testament, or of the old Testament, and will be no better learned, then they
were the first day, they were made priests: Ye, this place reproves all them,
that will not hear sermons, Lectures of divinity in English, or in Latin, or
in that tongue they understand, ye, this place co^dempneth all them, that
think it is enough for the rude people, to say their Pater noster, and Aue
Maria, and the Credo, and with them to be contented, and needs to learn no
more knowledge, when saint Paul would we should, every day increase more and
more, in knowledge, and spiritual wisdom: and as they increase in knowledge of
God, so he would they should increase in Godliness, and in virtue, that they
might be strengthened with all Godly power and strength able to bear all
adversity patiently, geuyng thanks to God in their state, living uprightly in
their vocacion.

which has made us able to the fellowship of saints in light, which has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
kingdom of his well beloved son, by whom we have redempcio^, and by his blood,
forgeuenes of sins.

Now the Apostle turns him to the chief matter and cause, for the which he
wrote this Epistle, that it was to show health, and eternal life, to be given
to us all freely, by Christ, without respect, merit, or dignity of our
works, or of any thing that is in us. And first, he shows part of the
benefits, that we have received by Christ: First, yt when we were unable to
think, to will or to do any good work or deed, he made us able, and did give
us power to think, will, and do good. Of the which we may learn, that all
power to think, will, or do good, comes not of our selfs, but of GOD, the
aucthor of all goodness, as saint James says. James.i. Second, we be made
partakers of the inheritance, of saints in light, that is: of that heavenly
inheritance, that holy saints be of, in light and in glory, and thus we be
made, not by our selfs, but by Christ, when we were before, far from it,
having no right ne title, to challenge or claim, ye heavenly glory, for our
inheritance. Now by Christ we have right title, to claim it for our
inheritance. He adds in light, as he would say, our inheritance was before
in darkness, now it is in light, of the father of light, by Christ. Thirdly,
God has delivered us, from the power of darkness, and translated us into the
kingdom of his well-beloved son, Jesus Christ, for whose sake alone, we were
delivered from all power of darkness, that is of the devil, the aucthor of
darkness, and from al works of darkness, as from sin, death, hell and from
everlasting dampnacion: also the father of heaven, has taken us away from all
darkness, and blyndnes of ignorance, of Gods holy word, and brought us into
his truth, and into the light of the verity, of Gods holy word, now openly
preached and showed, thanks be to God. We were some times as says saint
Paul. Ephe. ii. The children of the Ire of God and of darkness, but we are
now made the children of God, by adopcio^ and of light, as children of light,
let us walk in all justice, verity, and goodness, before we were in darkness,
and did walk in darkness, in much Idolatry, supersticion, and feined holiness,
thynkyng that we pleased God very well, when we highly displeased God,
committyng Idolatry, and much supersticion, going and wanderyng about, from
one Image, to another, puttyng trust and confidence in them, and sekyng health
of body, or of soul, of ded stocks and stones, wherein was no health nor
holiness: but from this Idolatry and darkness, God has delivered us, and
translated us, into his Kingdom, and made us iunct heirs with Christ, to be
partakers of his glory, and that not for our merits or deservings, but only
for the merits of Christ Jesus, that suffered for us: By whom we are redeemed,
from all captivity and thraldom of the devil, from death or hell: thus
Christ Jesus, our only savior and redemer, paid that rau^som for us, that
we were never able to pay.i. Timothe. ii. And by Christ's blood shed for us we
have remission, and forgeuenes of our sins: and not by the Bishop at Romes
Pardons, bulls, or indulgence, pilgrimages to Peter of Rome, or to James at
Co^postella, Thomas Becket at Cantorbury, or to Etheldrede at Ely, the Images
of our Lady at Walsyngha^ or at Ipswyche, or to any such like pilgrimage,
erected and keped for filthy lucre sake, to the dishonor of God, and to the
great hurt of them, that trusted health salvation, or life, in such
pilgrimage, I will not speak of the great Idolatry, there committed. Note
that remission of sins, is only by Christ's blood, and by nothing else.
sa^guis Christi nos mundauit, ab omni iniquitate..i. Io^is.i. The blood of
Christ has washed us from our sins. and saint Ihon. Apocalipsis.i. says,
that Christ has washed us from our sins, in his blood, so redemption and
remission of sin, is only by Christ.

which is the Image of the invisible God, first begotten before all creatures,
for by him were all things created, which are in heaven and in earth able to
be seen, or not able to be seen, whether they be thrones, or Lordshippes, or
policies, or Potestates, all things by him, and in him, are created, and he
is above al things, and all things are by him.

Now the Apostle describes very plainly, what Christ is, by whom we have
redemption, and by whose blood we are purged, from our sins. He says that
Christ is the lively Image of God the father, that cannot be seen of
corporal iyes, and that he is the brightness, of the glory of the father, and
the true image of the substance of the father, Hebre.i. That is, he is equal
to the father in deity, power and substance, and in all things as he is God.
Phili. i. To the which Christ, the father has given all things, and in him
are laid up, all the treasure of the wisedo^ of the father. This Christ, is
the first begotten of all creatures, yt is, he was before all creatures: for
the son was in the beginning, and the son was with God and God was the
son, and all things was made by him, and without him was nothing made, Ihon.
i. And this son, was in glory with the father, before the world was made, as
saint Iho^ says.xvii. speaking of Christ. Which speaks to his father
after this sort. Father, glorify me with the same glory, that I had, before
the world was created. Christ is called the first begotten son of the
father, not because he was the first borne, and other borne after him, but
because he was before all other creatures, and by who^, all other was created,
and has their being, whether they be in heaven, as Angels, Archa^gelles,
thrones, and other Potestates and powers, or they be in the earth, in the
water, or upon the earth able to be seen, or not able to be seen: al they
have their creacion, and being by Christ, the only natural son of God the
father therefore of duty, all things created, are bound to be obedient to
our savior Jesus Christ, by whom we have our creacio^, our being, redemption,
iustificacio^, sanctificacion, justice and righteousness, and all other mightes
and powers, that be good in us, for his sake only, and not of our merits or
deservings.

And he is the head, of the body of the Church, which is the beginning first
begotten of the ded, that he should be in all things the chief. For in him it
has pleased the father, all fulness to dwell and by him to reconsile all things
toward him, and by the blood of his Cross, to pacify al things, whether
they were in earth, or in heaven: that he should make peace through himself.

The Apostle goes forth, showing us what Christ is, he says he is the head of
the body of the Church, from whence do come all goodness to the body that is,
to the whole congregation, and flock of Christ, and that he is the sauer,
keeper, and defendor, of the whole body of the Church, and the prouider for all
necessaries to ye body, and that by him, is distributed to every part of the
body, necessary food, and that without him, all members do perish, that be
not fed by him, and in him, that do not receive health and life of him, that
be not preserved and keped by Christ and defended by Christ, the true head of
the church. So Christ is the head of the Church, and not the bishop of Rome,
as he names himself, and would be so called, which thing is high blasphemy to
god, not to be suffered among Christians, that any mortal man should, make
himself equal with Christ, and would be called by that name, that is equal
to God. God says: I will give my glory to none other. What other thing does
the bishop of Rome go about, calling himself the head of the Church, but to
take away from Christ, his honor and glory, and would have it given to
himself? which thing god will not suffer. Therefore let Bishops of Rome, cease
from that name, and call theimselfes no more, head of the Church, for that is
Christ only, as here Paul teaches, and all other let them beware, to call
Bishops of Rome, head of the universal Church of God, least they offend
God, and displease God, prouokyng God to pour upon them, his Ire and
vengeance: and smite them with eternal death, due to such tra^gressors.

2 He is the beginning, first begotten of the ded.) The Greek says, he is the
beginning, and the first begotten of the ded, as you would say, he is
beginning first fountain and aucthor, of our life, health, resurreccion, and
salvation, having al goodness in himself, and distributyng it to other, and
therefore not without a cause, he is chiefest in all things, to him is due, the
chief place in all things, for he is equal to the father, in deity,
substance, and effect, in power and might, and in all things.

3 For it has pleased the father that all fulness, in him should dwell.) Now he
shows by what means, Christ is called the head, of the body of the Church,
that in Christ does inhabit and dwell, al fulness of the goodness of god the
father: and by Christ, we receive of Gods goodness, as our redemption,
reconciliacion, remission of sins, justice, and righteousness before GOD,
eternal life and felicity, and all other gifts of God, we receive by Christ
only of Gods mere mercy and grace, and not of our merits or deservings, or
of our works, merits, or peticions of saints. Al fulness of ye father, is
called to dwell in Christ, not ye Christ now has received yt thing, yt he had
not before, for all goodness of the father, he had before, as Ihon.v. says: As
the father has life in himself, so he has given to the son, to have life in
himself, as the father raised ded men to life, so does the son. And. Iho.
xviii. Christ said to his father, glorify me with thy self, with the same
glory, that I had before ye world was created: but all fulness of the father is
called, to dwell in Christ, yt all men should know, all the goodness they have,
to come of God by Christ to the^, yt all that believes in Christ, should not
perish, but be saved, and should have life everlasting by Christ with the
father.

4 And by him to reconsile all things.) He goes forwards, describyng what
benefits, we have received by Christ: he says that al things, which were
out of Gods favor, to be reconciled again, to Gods favor and love: as all me^
which either for their original sin, or for their actual sin, were out
of Gods favor, and had offended GOD, should by Christ only, be reconciled to
Gods favor: and have remission of their sins, and be made partakers, of
everlasting life, and that only by Christ. So by Christ alone, all things in
earth, or in heaven, be brought again to Gods favor.

And you which was far of, and enemies in mind and in evil works, now he
has reconciled you again, in the body of his flesh, by death that he should
make you without fault, and without all spots in his sight.

Before the Apostle showed in part, what Christ was, now he turns his
sermon to these Colossia^s, and shows what benefit they have received by
Christ and that they should love Christ the better, be more thankful, and
give more thanks to God, for their health, life, and salvation, he shows
what they were before they received Christ's benefit: then they were far from
life and salvation, from God alienated, by many vices and sins, both
original and actual in heart, mind, will, judgment and in many evil
works, as in Idolatry, supersticion, fornicacion, adultery, errors and
heresies, for lack of knowledge, and of Gods grace, and by their naughty
living, in the which they were brought up in, and accustomed, from their young
age that they committyng, great and abominable sins, in the sight of God,
they thought themselfes not to sin, for they knew not, what was sin, nor
the daungier of sin, nor yet God their creator and maker. Such there be many
in the world, brought up in ignorance, and blindness supersticio^ and
Idolatry, thinks supersticion and Idolatry to please GOD well, the cause
whereof, is evil bringyng up of their parents, without knowelege of God, and
of his will, and not taught to know God and his pleasure to be dooen, of us
his creatures, and servants, as we have promised in our baptism, by our
Godfathers, promisyng for us. And here he shows, some part of their states,
First, that they were far from God, from life, health, and salvation, by
reason of their ignorance, and evil bryngyng up, in vice and sin, from
their young age, unto that day, they hard the word of God preached unto the^.
And here we may learn not to stick much to those things, wherein we have
been brought up, from our young age, which parauenture, have been coumpted
virtue, and worshippyng of God, yet the truth known, they have been
supersticion and Idolatry, as was Pilgrimage, deckyng, giltyng of Images,
setting up of candelles before images: also again they were far from GOD, and
from the house of Israel, having no title to claim or challenge any part of
life, or salvation, ye, nothing knowing or myndyng life, and health, to
perteine to them, that were Gentiles, as is more declared at large. Ephe. ii.
But these that were far of, Christ has made them partakers of life, and of
heavenly joy, bliss, and eternal felicity with God. Secondly, they were
enemies to God and to their own salvation, both in mind, and in evil
works, they had their minds infected and poisoned, with evil opinions,
errors and heresies, evil and wicked judgments, and full of evil works:
Seruyng not the living GOD, true and just, but many false Idolles, ded Images,
stocks and blocks, and often times thynkyng themselfes, to serve the true and
living GOD, when they lived in all supersticion and Idolatry: but these enemies,
Christ has reconciled again, to the favor of GOD the father, in the body of
his flesh, by death, that by death of the Cross, which he suffered in his
humain body, for the redemption of al, both Jew and Gentile, that will believe
in him. And thus Christ's death, was a full and sufficient satisfaccio^, for
the sins of the whole world, and for all them, that shall be sanctified and
saved. Hebre. x.

2 That he should make us holy and blameles, and without spots in his sight.)
Here is showed, for what end and purpose, Christ reconciled us to the favor
of the father, that we should return again, to vice, sin, and to our old
naughty living? No no. But that we should be holy, and live Godly and
verteously, know Gods will and keep it: And that we should be fautles, that
no notable fault, crime, or sin might be justly imputed, to us of men, and
that we should so bear and behave our selfs, in all our affairs, that we
might be without reprofe, and that our faith, should be so pure and steadfast,
garnished with all manner of good works, that we ded from sin, should live to
justice, as saint Peter says. i. Peter.ii. Here we may learn, how pure
and holy a life, all men should live not only the Bishop, Pastor, and
priest, but also all lay men that desires to be fellows of salvation, and
glory by Christ.

If you remain in faith grounded and stable, and will not be removed from the
hope of the Gospel, which you have hard, that was preached to all creatures
under heaven, of the which, I Paul am made a minister.

Now he shows, how they shall be blameles, without fault and spott, in the
sight God, that is, if they shall abide in true faith and by no affliccion,
persecucion, prosperity, or adversity, decline or shrynke from true faith,
but be constaunt, and stable in it, founded upon Christ, the true foundacio^,
and corner stone, cleuyng unto Christ, and to his doctrine. And here the
Apostle reproves al unfaithful, that be doubtful, inconstaunt, and waueryng
in faith, moved and tossed, hither and thither, with every wind and blast, and
tempest of wether, of threatenynges of men, or hope of favor, or pleasures of
men. And specially here is reproved, all such as will be favorers of Gods
word, as long as hope of favor, pleasure, profit or commodity, do come by
the word of God, and when that hope is gone, they shrynke from the Gospel, are
ashamed of it, leave it, and forsake it, followyng men, the world, and their
belies, ye, and all the knowledge, they have by the Gospel, they turn it to a
carnal liberty, and to a worldly commodity, making the Gospel to be as a
cloak, to their coueteousnes, pomp, pleasure, insaceable minds, to get
riches, lands, and possessions, and to make themselfes rich, in worldly
possessions, and such there is many now adays, as Christ says. Math. xiii.
Multi ad tempus credunt, and in tempore tentationis recedu^t. Many for a time
does believe, but in time of temptacion, they shrynke from faith from God, but
these be not they, that be blameles, and without fault in Gods sight, but they
be worthy blame, and be spotted with many vices and sins, and shall not
escape punishemente, except they repent and amend, and be constaunt in
faith. Here is two things required of us, yt we should be without blame or
spotte, in Gods sight: the one is, that we should be constaunt in faith, the
second, not to shrink from the hope of these heavenly treasures, promised by
the Gospel, preached to all creatures under heaven. See the mighty power of
GOD, that made his word to be preached throughout all the world, in the
spite of all enemies to the Gospel, and magre to their tethe, and therefore
the Apostle was not ashamed, to call himself, not a lord, but a Minister of
the Gospel, called of God. And here he reproves, those bishops or hye
prelates, that will be called lords, and yet they be no ministers of the
Gospel of Christ: seldom or never preached Christ's Gospel.

Now I joy in my sufferynges for you, and fulfill that which are behind, of
the affliccions of Christ in my flesh, for his body sake, which is the
Church, of the which Church, I am made a Minister, according to the
ordinance of GOD which is given to me emonges you, to fulfill the word of
God: A mystery hid from the world, and from generacions, but now showed openly
to his saints, to whom God would make it known.

The Apostle, because he showed before, that the Gospel was preached,
throughout al ye world and that he was a minister of it, by the ordinance of
God: now he shows that he suffered many affliccions for it, and for the
health of them, to whom he preached it, and that he was not sorry for his
affliccio^s, but rather did rejoice in them, for the Gospelles sake, and for
the health of other, saying: now I rejoice in my sufferyng, and suffer mine
affliccions gladly, for the Gospelles sake, and for you Colossia^s, and other
of the Gentiles, knowing by that means, God woorketh your salvation. And in
these words Paul makes answer, to carnal men, that would obiecte to him
after this manner. If this doctrine that thou preachest be true, and come of God
from heaven, of the which comes life, and eternal felicity, as thou
say, how can it be that these, that be preachers and setters forth of it,
be most miserable of all men, least esteemed or regarded, cast in fetters and
in prison, be called heretics, lollers, deceivers of the people, sedicious
me^ and suffer some times, shameful death for his doctrine sake? To these
carnal men, saint Paul makes here answer, saying: that he suffers
slander, checkes and rebukes, imprisonment and fetters, not for his sins or
evil doings, but for the Gospelles sake, and for their sakes, to whom it was
preached, which came to health, by the Gospel preached, and therefore it was
no shame to suffer for the Gospel, but rather commendable, and that these
affliccions was not hurtefull, to the^ that suffered unjustly, but to the^
that afflicted other they were dampnable: and that God suffered evil men, so
to afflict the good, that the judgment to the evil, should be the more
greater, and that ye good should by much tribulacions, enter into joy and
bliss, after the example of Christ, and that the evil should be confounded,
seeing they could by no affliccions, hinder or let the word of God to be
preached, or to hinder it or let it, that it should sprede abroad and
increase: for the more the evil goth about by affliccions, persecucion or
death, to stop the word of God, the more it goes forwards, by that means,
God will not have his word, altogether stopped and hid, and often times it
chances, that by evil men, the word of God is promoted and setforwardes by
that means, by the which evil men, went about to hinder it: example in
Christ's death, and in the death of many other, for Christ's Gospel sake.

2 I fulfill that which are behind, of the affliccions of Christ in my flesh,
for his body sake.) This place has of some evil men, been wrested out of
tune, and from his true sense, to the great contumely of Christ's blood, as
they would say: that Christ's blood was not a full satisfaccion, for our
rede^pcio^, forgeuenes of our sins, but that to it some thing lacked, which
by our work, deed, merit, or affliccions, should be fulfilled and
satisfied, as they should say that Christ's passion was not sufficient, to
take away the sins of the whole world, and as Christ had not fully
satisfied, for the sins of all men, which thing to think or say, is great
blasphemy to Christ, and to his holy blood: God forbid that any any man,
should think so or say it. For Christ by his death, once for all, has fully
and perfitely satisfied, for the sins of al me^, and by one oblacion, made
them perfect that shall be holy. Hebr. x. He entered once into ye holy place
called sancta sanctorum, and found eternal redemption. Hebre. iiii. Wherefore
this is an undoubted truth, ever to be believed of all christians, yt Christ
by his passion and death, has taken away, all the sins of the world,
without our works, deeds, or merits, for he needs not our works, merits,
or affliccions, to purge man from sin, as saint Ihon says. i. Ihon.i. The
blood of Christ has purged us, from all our sins: and Ihon in the
Reuelacion: he has washed us from our sins, in his blood. Of these
scriptures it is certain, that they be injurious to the blood of Christ, and
blasphemers of Christ, that think our works or affliccions, to purge us from
our sins, or to satisfy for sins, for these be offices, only perteinyng
to Christ alone: And for our affliccio^s, they be not worthy the glory, that
shall be showed to the elect of God. Roma. viii. What blasphemy can be
more to Christ's blood, then to think that our little nothing, can make
perfect, that Christ left imperfect, or can satisfy or fulfill, that Christ has
not fulfilled, and fully satisfied, without our works, merits, deeds, or
satisfaccio^? What can we do, that could pacify Gods Ire and displeasure, or
deserve life everlasting? surely nothing. And where as Paul says here, I
fulfill that are behynd, or that does remain, of the affliccions of Christ, is
nothing else, but that saint Peter says i. Peter.ii. where he says, that
Christ has suffered for us, leauyng to us example, that we should follow his
footsteppes: that is, that we should suffer affliccio^s, after the example of
Christ, and the affliccions that we suffer, Christ says that he suffers
them, because we be members of his body, and Christ suffers when his members
suffers. Acts.ix. GOD spoke to Paul. Saul, Saul, quid me persequeris? Why
do thou persecute me? And so Christ is called to suffer two ways: one way
in his own natural body, as when he suffered upon the cross: another way,
when he suffers in his mystical members, in the bodies of his elect people
After the first way, nothing was left imperfect, as touching the me^bres that
remains, that Christ in them should suffer, unto the worlds end, and that
they by pacient suffryng, should enter into the kingdom of glory, and so saint
Paul here meaned, saying: I fulfill that which is behind, of the passion of
Christ that is: Christ did suffer, both to take away our sins, and also
for our example, to suffer, so I do now, suffer affliccions for the Gospels
sake, to give other example, to suffer patiently such affliccions, as shall
chance unto them, here in this world, for the truth sake, and for the
comfort of other, as he testifies of himself. i. Corin. i. Saying, whether we
are punished, or that we suffer, it is for your comfort and health. So Paul
suffered affliccions, for the example of the whole Church of God: that all
should learn of Paul, to suffer patiently for Christ's sake, for his word,
and for his Gospel. And so this is behind of the Passion of Christ, not that
any thing remained imperfect, in Christ's passion, which by our suffrynges,
should be made perfect: But that as Christ in his own body here suffered,
hunger, cold, thurst, many affliccio^s and death, so he does dow suffer in his
members, and that thing the Passion of Christ shows, that we should so do,
suffer with Christ, and arise with him. So as parteinyng to our redempcio^
iustificacion, and salvation, nothing remains, that was not fulfilled, in the
passion of Christ, but as touching the sufferyng of Christ in his members,
this remains to be fulfilled, in every one of them: as saint Paul says.
Omnes qui uolunt pie uiuere, in Christo Jesus, persecutionem patientur. All that
will live godly in Christ, must suffer persecucion and affliccions, here in
this world.

3 A mystery hid from the world and from generacions, but now showed openly to
his saints, to whom God would have it known.) Paul said, he was made, not
of man, but of God, and by the ordinance of God, a minister of the Gospel,
which Gospel was hid from the Gentiles, and from a great part of the world,
of a long time: From the beginning of the world, unto Christ's time, a few of
the Gentiles excepted, to whom it pleased God, of his especial grace, to show
his Gospel, his will and pleasure, and so did give to the^ faith also, by the
which they were saved. For what causes, GOD would not have had his word,
openly preached to the Gentiles unto Christ's time, it is not of us to be
curiously searched, nor inquired, it is enough for us, to know that, that was
his will, and for his glory, as holy scripture tells us, whether it was that
they had by their sins deserved, their blyndnes and da^pnacion (as they had
in very deed) or it was that God knew, the hardness of their hearts, and their
stiffeneckes, and that they would not have received it, before Christ's
coming, if the Gospel had been preached unto them, or that God reserved that
mystery, unto the coming of our savior Christ, that by him all goodness
should be known, to come to us by Christ, and in Christ, and all mysteries, by
Christ to be opened and showed, to our profit and commodity, and that
only of the goodness of GOD, of his mere mercy and grace, and not of our
works, merits, or deservings. And here we may learn two things, the one
is: that the mystery of the Gospel, to be openly showed emonges the
Gentiles, was hid from the beginning, and was not openly preached, to them in
Paul's time: Therefore thanks is to be given to GOD, of whose grace it was
showed so now in our days, that the verity of Gods holy word, is plainly
opened to us, more then it was in our fathers days the cause is not of man,
but of Gods goodness to us, not of our wisdom, policy, connyng, learning,
goodness, but only of Gods grace, and because it has so pleased him, to show
to us that truth, that was hid from ourfathers, that we should more thank,
and glorify God for the same, and use the light of Gods truth showed to us
better, and live according to the Gospel, opened to us now in our days.
Another thing we may here learn, that GOD shows his truth, and opens
the light of his Gospel, and of mysteries long hid, when it pleases him, and
to whom it pleases him, and not at the will or pleasure of man, that none
should think, he may understand the holy scriptures, when yt pleases himself,
or of his own might or power. Learn yt the knowleg of holy scriptures, and of
mysteries hid, comes of God only, and not of man, God using our diligence
and labors, as means by yt which, God uses to give his gifts, of sciences
and knowledge of holy scriptures.

which as the riches of the glory of this mystery, emonges the Gentiles,
which is Christ in you, the hope of glory whom we show, monishyng every
manne, and teaching all men, in all wisdom, that we should make every man
perfect in Christ Jesus, for the which thing, I labor with all force, after
the might of him, workyng in me by strength.

Now ye Apostle shows what was that mystery, that was hid from the world,
that it was the riches, of the glory of Christ, among the Gentiles, that is
Christ in you, that is: that the Gentiles received Christ by faith, and
salvation by Christ, was unto the Gentiles, such riches and glory, as passed
all other riches and glory, that no toungue could tell it, nor heart think it:
that was Christ to be with them, and all benefits of Christ, to come to the
Gentiles, by true faith in Christ, which is the hope of eternal glory.

2 The hope of glory.) He shows that Christ is our hope of glory, and none
else, neither his mother, Ihon, ne James: and here is declared, the effect of
saint Paul's doctrine, that it was, that all men should put their hope and
trust of glory to come, in no other, but in Christ Jesus, not in circumcision,
in no sacrifice, ceremony, or work of the law, in no deeds of men, not in
merits of saints departed, not in masses of Scala caeli, but in Christ alone
our savior.

3 That we should make every manne perfect in Christ Jesus.) Look to what end
saint Paul's doctrine does extend, that it was to make every manne (as much
as in him lied) perfect in Christ Jesus, and that they should lack nothing,
that perteined to eternal life and felicity, and that thing to be done, by
the word of GOD, that he preached and taught. This place makes against all
them, that would keep men still, in their infirmity and weakness, and would
have the^ always weakelynges, and not perfect men, ye, not to increase to
perfect men, but to be children waueryng with every blaste of doctrine, now
ready to receive this doctrine, now that, and not able to judge themselfes, in
manifest truths, contrary to the doctrine of saint Ihon: biddyng us to prove
the spirits, whether they be of God or no?

4 For the which I labor with all might.) The Apostle labored with all his
power and diligence, to bring al men, to perfeccion in Christ, and to a full
perfect knowledge of Christ, and of his benefits, that al men should know
perfitely their health, life, and salvation, to come to them, only by Christ,
and that there was no health, without Christ. And this he did, by the mighty
power of God, workyng in him, or by the ministracion, of that woorkyng Godly
word, which he preached: for God by his word, purely and sincerely preached
does work: therefore it is called a lively word, for it gives life. And
here we may learn, that the doctrine of saint Paul, and of other that
wrote the holy scriptures, not to be of man (although they that wrote or
preached them were men) but of God, and of his holy spirit, by whose
inspiracion they wrote, as Peter says. ii. Peter.i. Learn to attribute to
God, all things that be dooen well of us, and not to our selfs, as Paul did
here to God workyng in him, and by him.

The.ii. Chapter.
FOR I would you knew what care I had for you, and for the^ that are of
Laodice, and as many as has not sen my person in the flesh, that their
hearts might take comfort, seeing they be joined in charity, and in all riches
of certain persuasion of understanding in to the knowledge of the mystery of
God, and the father, and of Christ, in who^ are hid all the treasures, of the
wisedo^ and knowledge of God.

The Apostle here gets the favor, of these Colossians, and of the
Laodicenses, showing his hearts desire, was to confort the hearts of them, that
had not seen him corporally, by the spirit of God, and that they should agree,
and cleave together as me^bres in the body surely, by a true faith knowing that
all treasures of wisdom, and knowledge of God are laid up in Christ, whom if
they should have, they should lack nothing, who^ if they lacked, they should
have nothing, whatsoever they had without Christ. This place teaches one of
us, to be careful for another, that we might have comfort by ye holy ghost,
and by Gods word as Paul was for these Colossians, and Laodicenses: and it
reproves all them that care not for other, whether they flete or sink,
whether they have knowledge of Gods word or no, whether they be saved or
dampened. Ye, this place reproves al them that be haters of Gods word, that
care not for it, but conte^pne and despise it, that be contencious and
uncharitable, caryng not what chance to other, so they be well theimselfes,
live in wealth and pleasure. Learn, it is the office of a true pastor, to
edify, not to destroy, to feed, not to bring to death, to conforte men's
hearts in Christ, not to discomfort and discorage them, from Christ, or from
his holy word and Gospel.

2 When they shall be joined in Charity.) In these words is showed, how their
hearts shall be comforted: that is, when they shall be compacted and knit
together, so in charity, that one of them, cannot be separated from another,
that they be as sure one, coupled to another, as members in the body, be
joined together, and that they all think and say one thing, and that also,
when they be joined together, with a true faith, which he calls here
riches, of the sure persuasion in the knowledge of the misterye of GOD. And here
me thinks saint Paul, declares what faith is, that it is riches of sure
persuasion, in knowledge of Gods word, and that knowledge to be so sure,
that it cannot be false, or brought in doubt, for faith knows the truth of
gods word and promises, to the which it staieth surely, and will not be
moved from it. And here he shows, that those men, that be doubtful in their
doctrine, inconstaunt, or waueryng, have not faith. For true faith, comes
of sure knowledge of Gods word, and has annexed to him, hope, and charity,
and obedience, to do Gods commandments, al respects of worldly riches,
favor or pleasure, well or woe, set a part, example in Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
and other holy fathers.

3 In Christ be all treasures of wisdom and knowledge, laid up in score.) As
he would say, he that has Christ, he has al things, necessary for his
salvation, as all wisdom, knowledge, virtue, holiness, health, and life, he
wants nothing, he has a well of all goodness, ever spryngyng and flowyng
over, he has treasures, that cannot be spent or wasted. Here the Apostle
reproves arrogant men, and proud Philosophiers, that thinks humain
learning, and knowledge of man's learning, to be preferred, above the learning
of Christ. Ye, here he checketh all them, that be more studious of humain
sciences, then they be of Gods holy divinity. Ye, all they be reproved, that
will spend, days, nights, and years, in the study of humain Philosophy, and
will not give more study, to the knowledge of Gods holy word, by the which,
Christ is gotten by faith, and keped by faith. and he that has Christ, has
all things, and he that lacks Christ has nothing, have he never so much
human learning, Philosophy, or Poetry: as Tully and Demostenes, was found
in the end, as they had had, no learning, because they lacked Christ and Godly
doctrine, for all learning, must give place to Christ's doctrine, as most
chief, far excellyng all other learnynges.

This I say, that none should deceive you with entisyng words, although I am
absent from you in the flesh, yet in the spirit, I am present with you, ioyyng
and seeing your order and stedfastnes of your faith in Christ.

Now he shows for what end he said all treasures of wisdom and knowledge of
God, to be hid in Christ, that it was, that they should not suffer theimselfes
to be deceived, by no intisyng words of Rethorique, or of man's lernyng, or
by no other doctrine had it never so great pretense of holiness, or apparaunce
of wisdom, and by it to be brought to the degrees of humain Philosophy, from
the pure and clear spring and fountain, of lively water of the word of God. And
he exhorts the^, to abide and stick sure, to that faith they had received,
by Gods word, and that in no wise, they should turn from it, to Iewishnes,
or to the law, to the sacrifices, or Ceremonies of the law, as to think they
cannot be saved without them: when by Christ, they have all things necessary
for salvation: nor yet it is not necessary, to join with Christ any other
thing, as learning of Philosophy, works of the law, Ceremonies, Tradicions
of men, as without them, no man can be saved: For Christ is a sufficient
savior, without all these things: nor it is not needful to salvation, to
join any other thing with Christ, as necessary for salvation, without the
which, salvation cannot be had. This place does reprove them, that says,
men cannot understand holy scripture truly, without humain Philosophy, and
therefore, they say, that Philosophy is necessary, and that young men, brought
up in the Universities, must needs learn Philosophy: they will not suffer
them to study divinity, before they have spente, three or four years in
Philosophy, in Aristotle, or in Platoes works: that by Philosophy, they may
be hable to judge of divinity, and so it often times comes to pass, that
divinity is judged by Philosophy, and as the Heathen Philosophier, has
thought and judged of divinity: so many young men's judgments be, and so
the studious youth in Universities, be poisoned by humain Philosophy, in
their first studies: for as it is often times seen, that the vessel will keep
long the smell of that liquor, that was first put in it: so the studious
youth, first brought up in Gentile learning, keep long the Gentiles judgments
and manners: of these Gentile aucthors, they have red in their youth, and it is
a great grace, if ever they be brought from them, and that is a great
cause, why so many brought up in Ge^tile aucthors, have more swetenes and
pleasure, in Gentile learning, then in the learning of Christ, and of Gods
word, which they contempne and despise, for Gentile learning. Therefore I
think it most expedient, for Gods glory to be sprede abroad, and for the
salvation of many, and for true judgment to be had, that all youth should be
verteously brought up, after the knowledge of Gods word, that they might have
their judgments, truly formed and directed, after the knowledge of holy
scripture, and that they should be taught, by sobre, discrete, and learned men,
the true science of scripture, and how they should take it, and come to the
knowledge of it, with what humblenes and mekenes, often times, geuyng themselfes
too faithful prayer, desiryng the knowledge of holy scriptures of GOD, to the
glory of GOD, to their salvation, and to the commodity of other.

2 Although I am absente in flesh, yet I am present with you in the spirit.)
Note what affeccion Paul had, to these Colossians, he was present with them in
spirit, although he was absent in his body from them, he exhorted the^ to
continue in faith hope, and in Charity, and not to shrynke from the^, one here
bread so he studied to profit them, and to teach them the way to salvation:
and that is, to be present with them in spirit.

3 Ioiyng and seeing your order and surenes of your faith in Christ.) He
commends them for two things, and was glad to se in them stedfastnes: the
one was, that he reioysed to see the good and semely order, used emonges them:
a good order in dooyng of things, emonges Christians, is to be commended, and
where is no order, there is confusion: saint Paul. i. Cori. xiiii. Would all
things should be dooen, after a semely order, and after a decent fassio^, and
here he commends a good order, and reproves those, that keep no order nor
comelines. He commends them also, for their surenes of their faith in
Christ, that by no craft, or intisyng persuasion they shrynked from Christ, or
from true believe in Christ. He reproves here, inconstaunt men, and such as
will be moved, with every blast or doctrine. He comme^deth the^, not that they
should be proud, but that they should more and more, go forwards in virtue,
for virtue commended, increases much more.

As you have received Christ Jesus our Lord, so walk in him, that you may
be rooted in him, and builded in him, and made strong by faith, and as you
have learned, aboundyng in him, with geuyng of thanks.

The Apostle exhorts them to go forwards, and increase every day more and
more, in knowledge, in faith, in hope, in charity, as they have received
Christ, and faith in him, and all treasures of perfeccion and salvation to be
had in Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel: so he would have them, increase
in knowledge and in all virtue, every day more and more, and not to cease from
well doing, and good works appointed of God to be done.

2 So that you might be rooted in him, and builded and made strong by faith.)
The Apostle requires constancy, and surenes in them, that they should not be
moveable, with every wind of doctrine, but that they should have sure faith,
constaunt hope and be perfect in charity, in the knowledge of God, and of
Christ and as a tree, surely rooted in the ground, cannot well be plucked up, so
sure he would have them rooted in faith, and that they should build upon
Christ, the sure foundation, and not upon men, men's fantasies and
dreams, tradicions, religions of men, or upon men's good intentes, without
Gods word. Christ is the true foundation, that will not be moved, by no
wind nor wether. i. Cor. iii. Upon Christ we should build such works, as
be mete for Christ the foundation: and they be the works, commanded in
holy scripture, by gold, silver, and precious stones, signified. i. Cor. iii.
And not voluntary works, signified by wood, hay, stobble, which tried by
the fire, will not stand, but either smodder as hay, or else burn as wood
and stobble: but yet they that has done these works, shall be saved if they
repent and amend, and call to GOD, for mercy and grace, and do the works of
the spirit.

3 As you have been taught abundyng in knowledge, with geuyng of thanks.) He
moves men to increase in knowledge of Christ, and in true faith, and
Charity, and in these to excel, but alwaie with geuyng thanks to God, which
has given the^ power, to do good, that none should ascribe the good works he
does to him, to his might and power, but to God the aucthor of all goodness.
James.i. Learn that it is not enough, to have knowledge of Christ, and of his
benefits, but all men must increase, in the knowledge of god which knowledge
comes by Gods word. This place reproves the^, that loves not to read the
holy scriptures, that will not suffer them to be red, ye, scarce will suffer
the Bible, to be in their Parish Churches, much less in their houses.

Take heed that no man deceive you by Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the
tradicions of men after the eleme^tes of the world, and not after Christ. For
in him does dwell al fulness of the godhed corporally, and you are in him
fulfilled, which is the head of rule and power.

Now Paul shows the^ what they should escheue and flee, that they should
escheue all psudoapostles, and false deceivers, which by subtle craft, went
about to deceive them, and to pluck the^ from Christ, and from true faith in
Christ, to errors heresies, evil and pernicious doctrine, and that by probable
reasons, and persuasions, taken of man's doctrynes, of the wisdom of the
flesh, of tradicions of men, of Ceremonies, and of other vain, things, so
we know, it is the office of a good pastor, not only to teach good things,
and to exhort to the same, with all persuasions, but also to monish men, to be
ware of evil things as of evil doctors, and evil doctrine. As first, he
wills to take heed, that no man catch them, as their pray, and steal upon
them, as vnwarned of false and deceiptfull iugglers, that by crafty and
subtle means, go about to deceive them, and by carnal wisdom brings
them, from the truth to falshed, form verity to fables and lies, errors,
heresies, evil opinions, and corrupt judgments, and so pluck you from
Christ, to the devil, from light to darkness, from life to death. And here the
Apostle alludeth to such, as lie privily in watch, to take and snare other
unawares, and so they take them and carry them away, and make them, their
pray and bond men or prisoners: even so do these false teachers, seducers of
other, deceive the simple, by fair flatteryng words, pretending great
holiness, but (the truth known) they teach no holiness at all, but much
Idolatry and supersticion, false trust, and vain hope, lies for truth, and
death for life, sekyng health and salvation, where none is to be found: such
were they, that did not ascribe to Christ, fully our whole iustificacion,
sanctificacion, rede^pcion, remission of sins, and life everlasting: that
made men to run, hither and thither, to seek saviors, redemers, and helpers,
and not to God alone, and such be all they, that seek to come to the father of
heaven, by another way, then by Christ alone.

2 Let no man deceive you by Philosophy, and vain deceiuyng, after
constitucions of men, after the elements of the world, and not after
Christ.) Now he shows four things specially, by the which,
pseudoapostles, false preachers deceived them. The first he says, it was by
Philosophy, of the Heathen Philosophiers, invented and excogitated by manne,
contrary to Gods Law and will, measuryng all things, by natural reason, and
worldy wit, and that to be of no truth, that natural reason, could not
attein unto. And here he does not reiecte, all Gentile Philosophy, for there
is many things in Gentile philosophy, that be not repugnaunt to holy
scriptures, but agree very well to it, and those doctrines, are not to be
co^tempned: but that doctrine is to be refused and contempned that is contrary
to holy scriptures, that plucketh me^ from Christ, and from the study of holy
scriptures, and from the true judgment of holy scriptures. The Apostle would
we should, form our judgments, after holy scriptures, and our manners to
follow holy scripture, and not that we should judge, after the Heathen
Philosophiers, and have manners like to the Heathen, but he would have us
rectify our judgments, after Christ and his doctrine, and to gather good
manners, in all verity and truth, justice, and righteousness, of the verity it
self, and not of that doctrine, where as falsed is. And therefore I think they
do evil, and not after the counsel of saint Paul, which they them selfs
do, and wills other to do so, and specially studious youth: first to read
and study, humain Philosophy, and by statutes byndeth all youth, to study
three or four years Philosophy, and then after, to give their study to
divinity: but this is a preposterous order in study, and does much hurt, to
many young men studious, and peruerteth their judgments and manners, and
makes Heathen and Gentile manners, to be so graffed in youth, that scarce they
can be plucked our again, and some will never forget their Ge^tile manners,
they have learned of the Gentile philosophy, in their youth: and some be so
given, to the love of Philosophy, that for it, they conte^pne divinity, and
think the knowledge of Gods holy word, but a rude knowledge, and nothing so
great learning, as is the learning of Philosophy, for ye which, they forsake
all other learning, and sticks still to Philosophy, and in it co^sumeth all
their life: as some be drouned in Tully, some in Plato, some in Seneca, some in
one Philosophiers doctrine, and some in another, yt no learning sauoreth in his
mouth but that smells of this, or that philosophier, in whose learning he
has been brought up, in study of it, and will scarce by plucked, from the
savor of his wine, put first in new and young bottelles: and this is the cause
of much inpietie, error and heresy corrupt judgment, ignorance and
blyndnes, in the knowledge of Gods word. For if the studious youth of the
Universities, were as diligently, under sober, sad, discrete, and learned
men, brought up in the earnest study of Gods holy word, as they be in
Aristotiles, Plato, and Ciceros works, there should be much more Godly
learning, better judgments, and better manners, and much more better living,
then there is. What is ye cause of errors, but ignorance of scripture, as
Christ said to the Sadduces. Math. xxii. Ye err, not knowing the scriptures,
so do many err, because they know not the holy scriptures, and the truth of
Gods will, and the cause is they be brought up from their youth, not in ye
true knowledge of Gods word, will, and pleasure. Therefore me think, that hye
Maiestrates and Rulers, to who^ pertains, as well to procure the health of ye
soul, as of the body, of their obedient subjects, not only that they should
be learned, in holy scriptures, to bear good affeccion and mind, to holy
scriptures, and to see these things to be done, both in themselfes, and in
their subjects, that holy scripture wills every man, to do in his vocacion,
but also that their subictes should have, sufficient knowledge in holy
scriptures, that they might judge rightely, and live Godly, and that at no
time, they should declyne from Gods word and commandment, which every
man must keep, that shall be saved, and come to salvation and life by Christ.
The second, to beware they be not deceived, and that is vain decepcion, what
learning so ever it be, that deceives men, and brings them from the truth of
Christ, and from the verity of Gods word: that doctrine is called vain
deceit, for it brings into errors, heresies, false doctrine, whether it be
Logique Philosophy, Rethorique, or any other wisdom of the flesh, or of the
world, that has appearaunce of truth, or of holiness, and do not bring truth
with it. This place reproves all errors, heresies, lies, falsed, and all
supersticious doctrine, that provoke men alwaie, from Christ's doctrine, and
from the truth of Gods word. The third thing to be ware of, that by it they
be not deceived: is the tradicions of men, by the which, pseudoapostles went
about to deceive men: saying, tradicions of men, are either to be preferred
above Gods word and commandments, or at the least, equal with them. Ye,
they would have men's laws and decrees, kept and observed, above Gods laws,
and for the obseruacion of man's laws, they break Gods commandments, to
who^ Christ threatens woo everlasting. Math. xv. Saying: woo be to you
Hypocrytes, that have broken Gods commandments, for your tradicions.
Secondly, they taught tradicions, as necessary to salvation, and that without
the keeping of them, they could not be saved. Thirdly, they thought it dedly
sin, to omit man's tradicions and Ceremonies, and as like offense to break
man's traditions, as to break Gods commandments. Fourthly, they thought
tradicions of men, to purge men from sin, ye, to satisfy for sins and to
be full satisfaccions for sins. Fifthly, they compted traditions and
ordinances of men, to be holiness, to make men holy and good, to take away
sin, to deserve the grace of GOD, to bring holiness to the doers, ye life and
salvation. Thus deceivers and pseudoapostles, went about to deceive these
Colossia^s and other, by tradicions of men, which are not to be observed, as
necessary for salvation, purgers of sin, or satisfaccion for sin bringers
of holiness, or of eternal life: But as things indifferent, not to be compared
with Gods commandments, but to be observed, as far as they be helpers to
the keeping of Gods commandments, and the fulfillyng of Gods will and
pleasure, and for good order and quietness. The fourth thing to be ware of, is
the Elements of the world: by the Elements, some understand the Su^ne, the Moon, the Sterres, or the other elements, thinkyng that there was emonges the
Colossia^s, some that did worship these Elements, as Gods, and desired health
and salucaio^ of them, puttyng trust and confidence in them, praiyng to them
and desiryng of the^ prosperous things, and of the dispocicion of these
Elements, Prophesied things to come. The Apostle here bids them be ware,
they fantasy none such thing, by these Elements, which are no Gods, nor
are not to be worshipped as God, but as the creatures of God, made and
ordinated for the behaulfe and commodity of man, in this world: Other some
understands by Elementa mundi, the Ceremonial, and Judicial laws, of the
old Testament, thynkyng the^ to be necessary for salvation, and that none could
be saved, without ye obseruyng of them, as some thought Act. xv. And emonges
the Galathians. Gala. iiii. But Peter and James, and the residue of the
Apostles of Christ, thought legal Ceremonies and sacrifices, not necessary
for salvation, but salvation might well enough be had, without them, ye, and
without al Ceremonies. For Ceremonies now used in the Church, be no holy
things of themselfes, they make no man holy, they be no workers, nor works
of our salvation, they be ordinated, to signify and represe^t, other things
signified by them. And here the Apostle bids them beware, of such as did
call the^ to the law and not to Christ, to the Ceremonies or works of the
law, and of man decreed, and not of God commanded: and here he wills them
to beware, of all them that exhort men to Ceremonies, old customs, voluntary
works, laws, statutes, decrees, tradicions of men, rather then Gods
commandments.

3 For in Christ dwells al fulness of the Godhedde corporally.) Now he shows
the cause, why he moved them too follow Christ and his doctrine alone, and
none other doctrine, contrary to this doctrine: it was because all fulness of
God, as of holiness, virtue, wisdom, grace, mercy, peace, goodness, justice,
and of al perfeccion, did remain in Christ abundauntly and perfitely, that it
should not need to require, of any other, any goodness, holiness, justice, or
righteousness, but of Christ only and alone, of whom is all goodness, by whom,
and in whom, equal to the father in substance, deite might and power. By who^
they are fulfilled, with all goodness, justice, and righteousness, that they have
no need to seek any good thing of the law of works, of the law of
Ceremonies, or of tradicions of men, for they have Christ in their hearts,
rooted by true faith, in the which, is all the treasures of the wisdom of
God the father laid up for us, and in him does dwell all fulness of God the
father, and he has fulfilled all things, both the law, and the imperfeccion
of the law, he has taken it away, and made it perfect, and us by him to
perform the law.

By whom you are circumcised with circumcision not made by hands when you put
away the body of sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, buried
together with him by Baptism, in the which also, with him, you have rise^ by
faith of the work of God, which has raised him from the dedde.

The Apostle shows these Colossians, although they were Gentiles, to be
Circumcised by Christ, not after the Circumcision of the flesh, but by the
circumcision of the spirit of God, without the hands of man, which he
thought not necessary for them, but that without the exterior Circumcision of
the flesh the Gentiles might be saved, as well as the Jews, that was
circumcised in the flesh. And here he shows two circu^cisions, the one
outwardes, made in the flesh by men's hands, cuttyng away a round piece of
the skin of the secret members: and this circumcision, was not necessary to
salvation, after the Gospel was openly preached, after Christ's passion, but
was abrogated and left as indifferent, and not necessary to salvation: theother
circumcision, was the inward circumcision, by the spirit of God, by the which,
the whole body of sin, was mortified and put away, clearly by the spirit,
and by faith in Christ, and this circumcision is necessary to salvation: that
is, by the spirit of God, to dye from sin, and no more to return again to
sin, as Christ died once, and dies no more, so we should dye from sin,
and sin no more, but walk always in a new life, and put on Christ,
verity, truth, justice, and holiness, and walk alwaie in these virtues,
followyng Christ in all goodness, and Godliness, in verity and justice, and in
cuttyng away from the heart, all evil desires, thoughts, carnal affeccions,
lusts, and concupiscenses, which did arise of the flesh, and not of the
spirit of GOD, and this is the Circumcision of Christ which is our Baptism,
by the which, we be washed from all our sins, by the workyng of ye holy
Ghost in it, according to the promise of God, and therefore baptism is called,
the wasshyng of regeneracion, and renewyng of the holy ghost, to Tite.iii. In
the which baptism, we be purged from all our sins. Ephe. v By God inwardly
workyng by his spirit, that cutteth from the heart all evil thoughts, carnal
lusts, and affeccions: and this is called the circumcision of the heart,
signified in the old law, by the outward Circumcision of the flesh. And this
our baptism is come to us, in the stead of circumcision to the Jews, and is
as necessary, and more profitable to us, then was Circumcision to the Jews,
in the time of the old law. And as it was necessary by Gods commandment.
Gene. xvii. That all young men children, should be Circumcised the eighte day:
So it is no less necessary, that all young children should be Baptized: for
without Baptism, none can be saved. Ihon.iii. Math.xxviii. Mark.xvi.
Therefore the Anabaptists, are greatly to be blamed, yt would not have young
children, Christened, or Baptized in the water, and in the holy Ghost. Of
Baptism of young children, I have spoken. Ephe. iiii. Therefore I do not speak
of it, in this place any more.

And you when you were ded by sin, and by the vncircu^cisio^ of your flesh
together with him, he has quickened you again, forgeuyng to you all your
sins, and put away that hand writing, that was against us, contained in the
law written with the decre, that was contrary to us, and that took he clear
away, and fastened it to the cross, and has spoiled Rule and power, and has
made a show of them openly, and has triu^phed over the^, in his own person.

The Apostle here shows, ye thing that he showed, more at large. Ephe. ii.
That is, what we are of our selfs, mightes, and powers, and what we be by
Christ. By our own nature, received of Adam, we were ded by sin original,
and of our selfs by actual sin, but by Christ alone, we be restored again
to life, and God has forgeuen us our sins freely, without our merits, or
deseruinges, for Christ's sake only, and where we were Gentiles, uncircumcised,
now be Circumcised in our hearts, have cut away from our hearts, all
carnal affeccions, lusts, and appetites, contrary to the spirit of GOD. And
where as the hand writing was against us, that is where as the law written,
called hand written, did convince us of sin, that we could not deny, but we
were sinners, and for our sin, had deserved death, and we were worthy death:
yet it pleased God, only of his mere mercy and grace, to forgive us our
sins, and to make us heirs of the heavenly inheritance, and partakers of
his glory, by Jesus Christ. Also, where as the law did condemn us, for our
syn to death, it pleased God of his mercy, not only to forgive us our sins,
but also to take away that hand writing, that conde^pneth us for sin to
death and that writing was the law of God written, that showed all men to be
sinners, in the sight of GOD, and no man to be just (Christ only excepted)
in the sight of God, and for sin worthy death. The Apostle here uses a
Metaphor, of a writing or of an obligacion made, where men be bound to fulfill
the writing, or obligacion made. This writing is the law of God, it requires
that all men should fulfill the law: no man fulfilled the law (Christ only
excepted) wherefore al men was found by the law gyltie, and worthy death,
because they fulfilled not ye law, that they were bound to keep. This law,
Christ not only for himself, but for all them that believe in him, or shall
believe in him, to the worlds end, did fulfill, that it shall not be imputed
to them, that believe in Christ, any trasgression of the law, for Christ is
the fulfiller of the law, and we by him, and in him, Christ is the perfeccion
of the law, to al the^ that believe in him. To. x.

2 He has fastened it to the cross.) Now he shows when he delivered us from
sin, and brake in pieces the Obligacion, that condempneth us to death, for
sin: it was when he suffered death upon the cross for us, and took our
sins upon his back Esaias. liii. And in that suffryng he overcame the devil,
and all our enemies, sin, death, and hell, and the devil, and all wicked
spirits, whom he calls here, rule and power, and in token of victory, he
sprede abroad banners of victory, and the spoils of enemies divided, and did
triumph noblely over his enemies and that by no other power or might, but by
his own power and might, and strength, that al honor and glory, should be
given to God alone, and to none other for all victories had over our enemies,
to declare unto us, by whom, and in whose name and power, we shall overcome
our enemies, the devil, the world, and the flesh, that is, in ye name of
Christ, and by Christ alone, and not by holy water sprynkelyng, or by the
sound of an holy bell, by a palm cross, holy candle, or other sorcery or
witcherie, as some folishly and supersticiously has thought: for these cannot
drive away the devil, but rather the devil is kept, and maintained, by
such false trustes, vain hope and lies: for Christ drove not away the devil,
when he was tempted of the devil. Mat. iiii. With holy water, holy candle,
palms, or crosses, but by the word of GOD, resistyng all temptacions of the
devil, and so by the word of God, must we resist and overcome the devil.
Ephesi. vi.

Therefore, let no man judge you in meat or drink, or in part of the holy
day, as the new Moon or Sabbath days, which are shadows of things to
come, the body verily is of Christ.

The Apostle seems here, to gather a conclusion, of the words and sentences
going before after this manner: forasmuch as Christ has restored you ded, to
life again, and has circumcised your hearts, and forgeuen you all your sins,
and taken away that hand writing, that conde^pned you to death, for sin in
you ye, and also has ouercomed all your adversaries, yt was against you, or
would have accused yon, and has had victory over the^. And also you in Christ
have all justice, holiness, wisdom, forgeuenes of sin, redemption,
salvation, life, and all perfeccion, fredom from al captivity of the devil,
sin, death, or hell fire: from all servitude and bondage of the law, and
that by Christ only, that you having and possessyng Christ, by true faith,
have no need of the law, or works of it, that you should not think the law
necessary to salvation: that is, that you should not think, that without you
keep the law, and all the Ceremonies of it, you could not be saved, as some
thought, no man could be saved, without he were Circumcised in the flesh,
according to the old law. Gene. xvii. Commanded to Abraham, and his
posterity, during the time of the law: but against that opinion, saint Paul
throughout all his Epistles, laboreth and shows plainly, that Circumcision is
not necessary to salvation, but that without Circumcision, and works of the
law, such as believe in Christ, shall be saved, although they never were
Circumcised. Ye, also he declares plainly, the law and the works of the
law, as Ceremonies, and Iudicialles, not to be kept under the pain of
dampnacion, and as necessary to salvation, as without them, no man could be
saved, which saint Paul here improueth, and wills that no man should
judge another, good or bad, for meat or drink forbidden in the Law of Moses,
or for keeping of holy days, or not for keeping holy days, as Sabbath days,
feasts of new Moons, or other holy days, commanded by the law, which if
they be kept as indifferent things, they make no man good, just, or holy,
for keeping of them, nor yet they condemn no man, if they be necglected or
omitted, and left undone: therefore no man should judge another, good or
evil, for dooyng or omittyng these works, abrogated by Christ, and left to
us as works indifferent.

2 Let no man judge you, in meat or drink.) Now he takes away all
holiness, from meat or drink, willing that no man should coumpt holiness, to
be in meat and drink, or in absteynyng from the same, for the kingdom of GOD,
is not meat or drink, but justice, peace, and joy in the holy ghost. Romans
xiii. And here he would no man should judge another good, for absteynyng from
meat or drink, or evil, for eating of meat, and drinkyng of drink. This
place does show, that by Gods law, meat and drink are not forbidden, to be
eaten of any man, nor GOD cares not, what manner of meat a man eat, so he
eat it with sobriety, with geuyng of thanks to God for it, as to the only
aucthor and geuer of all meat, to all creatures for the necessities of man,
to feed the body, that it may be able to serve God, and to do the works of
the spirit. Learn, that it is not the meat, that enters into a man, that
defiles him, but that goes out from man, defiles man, as evil thoughts,
words and deeds, adultery, fornicacio^ murder. etc. Mat. xv. Also, learn
here, that there is no manner of meat, forbidden Christians, to eat by Gods
law, so they eat with sobriety, and with thanks geuyng to God: yet
Christians may not use alwaie, this their liberty, for three or four causes.
First, the ordinance of hye powers, which has decreed some days of
absteine^ce, from this or that kind of meat, to this ordinance of hye
powers, it becomes every one to be obedient, and to keep their ordinances,
as long as they would have the^ kept, as things expedient for the common
wealth, peace, justice and good order, or for good pollitique ends. As the
absteine^ce from flesh, the time of Lent, which is an ordinance admitted of man, and of hie powers and rulers, for many good causes and consideracions,
and when it shall pleace the hie powers, to abrogate and take away, that
ordinance of the fast of Lent, the hye powers may lawfully take it away, as
they shall think mete and expedient, for the common wealth, and yet no part of
Gods law taken away. Many causes I think did move the rulers of the common
wealth, to institute abstinence, from flesh in Lent time. First, because that
that time of the year, flesh is for the more part out of season, and not
wholesome for man's body, and for the more health of me^ in their bodies,
after Easter, when they shall eat flesh again. Secondly, that men should more
chastise their bodies, that they being fasting or keeping abstinence, should
with more earnest, and inward affeccion, pray to God for themselves, and for
other: for full belies, seldo^ give fervent prayer to God, or thanks hearty,
from his heart, to God for his benefits. Thirdly, that by abstine^ce, men
should the better mortify, and overcome al carnal affeccions. Fourthly,
because this time of Le^t, is a time for beasts to bread in, and they should
be spared that time, yt more store of cattle should be all the year after, and
so of more store and plenty, cattle should be better chepe. Fifthly, that by
abstinence of Lent, men should mortify their carnal affeccio^s, and be made
more pure, and clean in conscience, against Easter, yt they might at Easter,
receive worthily, the body and blood of Christ. For these and many other
causes, expedient for common wealths, I think this time of Lent was
instituted, of ye old fathers of the church, and not that the fast of Le^t,
should justify any man, make them holy and good, take away sins, or satisfy
for sins, or that the eating of fish should make a man better before god,
then ye eating of flesh by ye outward work in it self, as some has taught,
conde^pnyng them for heretics and lollars that eat but white meat in Le^t
season, never generally forbiddyn by any law, to be eaten in this Realm: for
in the North parts alwaie, the people did eat white meat in Lent season,
without any prohibicio^, to them by the law. But this false judgment of
Lent, that it should be, by Gods law commanded or that it was a Tradicion of
Christ, or of his Apostles, that it was necessarily to be observed, under the
pain of dampnacion, that it justified men, took away sins, made men holy,
or better then other, was a false opinion of Lent, not grounded upon holy
scripture: But this is come to ignorant men, by ignorance of holy scripture,
mete and worthy to be improued, and spoken again, of all true preachers,
pastors, and Curates, and of all men. And although God has not appointed to
us, any difference of meat in days, but says, that all manner of meat is
pure, to them that be pure, and that does eat with genyng of thanks, to the
lord for their meat. i. Timo. iii. And that it is not the meat, that
enters into a man, that defiles a man, but it is that goes out of the
mouth, that defiles a man. Math. xv. Yet there is three or four things, that
prohibeth men, to use their liberty in meat and drink. First, is the
ordinance of the high powers, to whom it becomes every subject, to be
obedient in all lawful ordinances, and causes, not contrary to Gods law.
The second, is the infirmity or weakness, of our brethren, whom we may not
offe^de, by our meat and drink. To. xiiii. The third, is a conscience
erroneous, thynkyng not lawful to eat meat, and yet against his conscience
does eat: that man that so does, offends God. Nam qui contra conscientiam
edit, peccat. To. xiiii. i. Corin. viii. His conscience erroneous, should be
rectified, and then let him eat with a straight conscience, rectified after
true knowledge of Gods word. The fourth, may be for health of man's body, to
preserve it from sickness. Fifthly, to mortify carnal affeccions, lusts, and
desires, and to make the body, obedient to the spirit of God, and to do the
works of the spirit. This is alwaie to be noted and observed, that no man use
his liberty, in meat, drink, and in other indifferent things, to fulfill
the desires of the flesh, which thing many does, by whom the word of God,
suffers evil, and is evil spoken of, emonges Heathen, ye, emonges
christians, and many be offended, iudgyng other with them. And such people
judge some to do evil, when in eating they do not evil, but that they may
do lawfully, by Gods law, and they that evil judges, offends God, and
not they that eat, with a rectified conscience, geuyng thanks to God knowing
all meats pure to the pure.

3 Or in part of the holy day, or new Moon, or of Sabbath days.) He
forbids one to judge another, for keeping of the holy day, or not for keeping
of it. Of the Sabbath day, it is written. Leuiti. xxiii. and for what intent
they were institute: they were ordinated, that the people should rest, from all
their bodily labors and come together, in a mete and convenient place, to here
the word of GOD, to learn to know God, and theimselfes, to glorify God, to
pray unto God one for another, to give thanks to God, for his benefits, to
them and to other, to receive the benefits, of the sacraments of God, and
that these days specially, men should cease from all servile works: that is,
from all sin, and to serve GOD truly, after that sort, as God has appointed
to be served, honored, and worshipped of all men, in his holy scriptures.
But alack for pity, no day God is served worse, then upon the holy day, in
many places, what eating, drynkyng, riotyng, and surfetyng, cardyng and disyng,
swearyng, and blasphemyng the holy name of God, is upon holy days, it greueth
every good man to here it, see it, or to speak of it, which is used more upon
the holy day, then upon the work day. I will not speak of the dru^kennes,
of the unthrifty spe^dyng, of men's substance, upon the holy day, ye, more
then they can get, the whole weke before: ye, parauenture some thing of the
week following, shall be spente, or it be gotten, and that when no need
requires. It is no merueill, though God does suffer such unthrifts, some
time to need necessary things, in punishment of their sins, and yet
parauenture, such unthrifts and drunkers, thinks they keep the holy day
well, if they abstein from handie labors. I will not speak of adultery,
fornicacio^, slaundryng, backbityng one another: of craft, falshed, deceit
usury, perjury, contencion, and debate, used upon the holy day, by the
which, the holy day is broken, rather then by handie work, necessary to be
done, upon the holy day, and yet the holy day not broken, but kept: God
grant that the holy day may be spente, as Gods word wills and
commands. Also he wills, that no man shall judge another, for feasts of
new Mones: Feasts of new Moons, was celebrated every monethe, as soon as the
new Moon did appear: for it does appear, that these Colossia^s, worshipped
the Moon as a GOD, and gave Godly honor to it, which thing the Apostle
forbids, and wills the^ not to honor the Moon as a God, for it is no God,
but the creature of God, ordinated for the commodity of man: nor to keep holy
days, to honor the new Moon, nor yet to do any sacrifice, to any Idolle, as
the Heathen did. Al such false worshippyng of creatures, for God, is here
forbidden, as things unlawful, displeasyng God: or to keep holy day in their
names or for their sakes, to do sacrifice to them, to honor them, or worship
them.

4 Which are shadows of things to come, the body verily of Christ.) As he
should say, difference of meats in days, keeping of holy days, as of ye new
Moon, of the Tabernacle, of Pasche, of Pentecoste, and such like, are but
shadows of things for to come, and when the bodies do come, of which they
were shadows, then cease the shadows: when the thing comes it self, then
cease the figure, the thing it self is come, let us care no more for the
figure, we have the body, fare well the shadow: These figures and shadows in
the old law, they figured Christ the savior of the world to come they
figured yt he should, sprynkle his blood upon the Cross, for the redemption,
and salvation of the world, Christ is come, and has shed his bloudde for our
redemption, and by him alone, we be saved: therefore shadows and figures,
must now cease, and no more be coumpted, as necessary to be kept, to our
salvation, for without them, we be brought to salvation, that is, by the
mercy, grace, and goodness of God the father, for Christ's sake alone, and not
for our merits, or deservings.

Let no man make you shote at a wrong mark, after his own chosyng, walkyng in
humblenes and supersticion of Angels, in those things which they have not
seen going vainly, puffed up, of the mind of their flesh, not obeiyng their
head, of which the whole body by joints, and couples, fixed and joined,
receives nourishement, and does increase by the increasement of God.

Now more at large he monisheth them, to be ware of pseudoapostles, and
crafty deceivers, whom he sets furthe in their colors, mouyng them to be
ware of the^, that study to pluck away from them, their reward they look
for, and to give them pain for joy, shadows for the things, figures for the
verity, darkness for light, shadows for the bodies, yearthly things for
heavenly things, carnal things, for spiritual things. Note here how false
Apostles, and deceiptfull iugglers, go about to deceive them, and turns
away from men, their heavenly reward: such be they, that teach Moses for
Christ, works of the law, for the Gospel, and works of the spirit, for
true faith in Christ, Ceremonies, and man's ordinances, and traditions of
like necessity to Gods commandments, to be observed, or else of more
necessity. And in this, these false Apostles, are more to be blamed, that they
do it of a set purpose and mind, advisedly intendyng, to deceive other, and in
this their malice, is more to be noted and reproved, that they study to
deceive other, and to pluck other from the verity, of ye Gospel, into
heresies: such be they, that stiffly defend works of the law, to be kept of
necessity of salvation, as Circumcision, Ceremonies, and other men's
tradicions, to be observed of like necessity, as the commandments of GOD,
and more esteem man's tradicions then Gods commandments, those be they,
which Paul in this place, bids us beware of, for they goo about to pluck
away from us, our heavenly reward.

2 By humility and supersticio^ of Angels.) Here he shows by what means
they went about to deceive them: that was, by humility, pretending great
humility and mekenes, contempt of the world, of worldely honors and
promocions, contempt of carnal pleasures and riches, in habit, countenance,
and going, sad and deuoutely, pretending great holiness and perfeccio^, and
nothing else but holiness, they would be seen to men to have, and yet they were
inwardly, Hypocrytes, dissemblers, full of hatered, malice, and envy, full of
pomp and pride, coueteous and vainglorious, ye, very greedy Wolfes, clothed
in shepes skynnes, that they might, by that means, the sooner deceive the
simple: as ye devil tra^sfigureth himself, into an Angel of light, that he
should deceive the sooner, the simple: so the Wolf comes clothed in a sheep
skin, and so sooner deceive the sheep, then if he came openly, as a Wolf in a
Wolf skin: So fained holiness, and pretensed sanctite, deceives many. Also,
pseudoapostles went about, to deceive these Colossians, by religion of Angels,
as the old translacion has: Erasmus, by supersticion of Angels. What saint
Paul means here, I cannot well tell, except he mean, that false Apostles,
phantasied some hye honor and worship, to be given to holy Angels, if they
kept the law, given by the ministracion of holy Angels: and those to
displease the Angels that kept not the law, given by Angels: and holy
Angels to honor the^, that observed the Law so they taught: the Angels of
God, to venge their injuries and displeasures, in the^ that did not keep the
law of Moses. So these pseudoapostles taught it, to be a worshippyng of
Angels, to observe the law, and the works of the law as necessary to
salvation, which thing, saint Paul coumpteth here, no honor nor worship of
Angels, but supersticion of Angels, a pretense to honor Angels and do dishonor
them, and most rebuke to Angels, that can be done. Or else this place, may be
otherwise expounded, after this manner, that some pseudoapostles, among these
Colossians, studied to deceive them: saying, they were the Angels of God,
sent from God above, and that they had received, certain visio^s of angels,
and of holy spirits in some oracles, wherein they were showed the will and
pleasure of God, and what god would have done of men in the earth, and that
was, that they must needs keep the law of Moses, and the works of it, or
else they said, they could not be saved, which thing, saint Paul improueth,
in all his Epistles, but most plainly it is improued, and conde^pned of the
Apostles of Christ Act.xv. Such pseudoapostles, was emo^ges us some time, that
said, holy Angels, holy spirits, and souls of men departed, to have appeared
unto the^, that they should goo this pilgrimage, or that pilgrimage, to this
Image or that image, in such a place, yt they should cause to be said or
song so many Diriges, so many Masses found such a fou^dacio^ for Masses for
prescript prayers purchase such pardons, and such indulgences: and many like
Reuelacions, has been showed to men, as pseudoapostles said, by the which
means they deceived many, of a long time, but thanks be to God, their
deceipte is known, in a manner to all men, how vain and foolish it was, and
how ungodly, and how perilous and contrary to man's salvation and how it came
not of God, but of the devil, and was invented of men, and maintained for
lucre sake.

3 In those things, which they have not seen.) As he would say, this deceiuer
feineth himself, to have seen in vision many things, which he has not seen,
and to have heard many things, which he has not heard, and to have larned
many things, which he has not learned, as some have feined them, to be in a
trance, and in it to have seen, the joys of heaven, the peines of purgatory
(as they liyng, called it) and of hell, and by what means, men should have
been delivered out of purgatory, when they did see, or heard none such
things. And for this end, they feined such sightes, for lucre sake, and that
they should be coumpted of men, not as mortal men, but rather as Gods, and
men worthy that holy Angels should come to them, and speak to them Gods
will and pleasure, and that they were worthy, to be canonized for saints,
and of all men esteemed holy men: and yet saint Paul, calls the^ here
deceivers, and to go proudly, as those that play in stage plays, Princes, or
Kings, or Gods, being no such thing, as they pretend to be. In this
place, the Apostle seems to me, to make an answer, to the saying of
pseudoapostles, seeing that they be the Angels, and messengers of god, and
that they do exhort men to those things, that God commands by his holy
Angels, that is, to the keeping of the law, and of works of the Law, and
that they that kept the law, did honor Angels, and the breakers of the law did
not honor, but despised Angels, and God also, whose messengers the Angels
was, and that they were sure, their doctrine to be true, because they had it
of the Angels of GOD? To this saint Paul answers, saying: that they
exhort men, unto that thing they know not, which they nether have seen, nor
hard, for they know not (says he) the law, and the works of the law, to be
shadows and figures, given for a time, till the body and verity did come, and
then to cease and to be no more, as necessary to salvation: now the body and
verity is come, which is Christ our savior, which these shadows and figures
did represente. Therefore, the law is not now to be kept of necessity, to
salvation, and that is the chief matter, that saint Paul here laboreth, so
diligently to teach, and to have it persuaded to al men. Se how earnestly
evil men, went about in Paul's time, to teach false doctrine, and how they
said, they had it of Angels, and the true worship of God and of Angels to be
in it, and God and his holy Angels to be dishonored, if their doctrine were
not kept. Paul says, they knew not what they spoke, and that they walked
vainly, and to no profit, and yet they were proud men, proud of their
doctrine, auauncyng them selfs of it. Like to them has been in our days,
teachers of pilgrimages, of Masses of scala caeli, patrons of purgatory,
mainteiners of worshippyng of Images, and defenders of them, they were they of
who^ Paul speaks i. Timo. i. They knew not what they spoke, and affirms
to be true, which they knew not to be true, nor of what foundation, it has
his truth: all such deceivers, saint Paul here sharply reproves. He
says, they goo proudly, bearyng an hye countenance, as all the world were
theirs, as all learning should hang at their sleues, and they only and none
else, to be defenders of faith, and of al godly learning, and yet saint Paul
says, they go in vain, they profit neither themselves, nor other, they be
pufte up, with the wisedo^ of the flesh, and think themselves to have all
learning, when they do not understand, those things they speak of and
affirm, with great audacitie and boldness as they were in Gods bosom: they
seek not the glory of God, but their own glory and profit, and they feign them
to have had, visions of angels, of holy saints, reuelacions, for pilgrimages,
Pardons, paintyng of stocks and blocks, such was the holy maid of Kent,
whose craft and deceit, is known almost to all men how she deceived many.

4 They do not obtein the head, in who^ the whole body by joints, and couples
joined, increases by the increaseme^t of God.) Here is ye cause showed, of
their deceipte, the cause is, that they have not Christ, they seek not
Christ, the head of the Church, they have not Christ, always before their
iyes, they seek not his glory, but their own glory, they refer not all
things they have received to Christ, but to other, as to angels, to
spirits, to the^ selfs, their merits, or to the merits of other, and not to
Christ, which is our whole health, life, perfeccion, and salvation, in who^ is
all goodness laid up for us, and without whom, there is no goodness coming to
us, and in Christ all good things increases, to a full perfeccio^, and without
Christ, no good thing increases, or comes to perfeccio^.

wherefore, if you be ded with Christ, from the Elements of this world, why as
living in the world, are you holden with such tradicions, as though you lived
in the world? Thou shall not touch, thou shalt not taste, nor handle, which
all things do hurt to man, because of the abuse, of the commandments and
doctrines of men, having a pretense of wisdom, by supersticio^ and humility
of mind, and damage of the body, and not by honor, to the satisfiyng of the
flesh.

Paul moves these Colossia^s to return no more to think, the law or
works of it, necessary to salvation, or dampnable to omit it, after this
manner. If you be ded with Christ, from the Elements of the world: that is,
from the law, and from the Ceremonies, sacrifices, and Judicial
commandments, why as you were under the law, do you so much regard the
law, and think you shall be dampened, if you keep not the Law? Has not
Christ redeemed you? And brought you to health, to life, and to salvation,
and to all perfeccion, that you need no help of the law, to obtein any
holiness, goodness, or any perfeccio^? The law brought you to no holiness nor
could give you no holiness, why will you then forsake Christ the aucthor of who^
all goodness comes, and run unto the law, and require of it justice, and
righteousness, that cannot give to you those things? Therefore, for as much,
as the law is abrogated by Christ, why will ye turn to it again, and think
it necessary for salvation? For by Christ, is life and salvation, without all
help of the law. As Paul here reproved ye Pseudoapostles: saying, no man
could be saved, without the law, and the works of the law, and those
things that were commanded in the law: so he reproves those men that say,
men cannot be saved, except they keep man's tradicions, as necessary for
salvation, as Gods commandments, which thing, Christ reproves in the
Phariseis. Math. xv. Calling them Hypocrytes, breaking Gods commandments,
for their traditions, which they preferred, above Gods commandments, or else
made the^ equal, with Gods commandments. Paul here does not condemn,
Civil ordinances and statutes, that proves Gods word and glory, that
causes peace, and concord, equity, and justice, and a good order, emonges
the people of God, and that moves men, to virtue and godliness, all such laws
or Tradicions, he approves, but he will that no Ordinance of man, should be
preferred, above Gods Law, or made equal with Gods commandments, nor
justice, holiness, righteousness, to be required of man's Laws, Tradicions, or
of Ceremonies, invented and made by man.

2 Thou shalt not touch, thou shalt not taste, thou shalt not handle.)
Paul speaks here, in the person of Pseudoapostles, which study to bring,
Christians from Christ, to Ieweshnes again: saying, thou shalt not touch
unclean things, as ded bodies, or leprose (by the which is signified in the
law, sins, or unclean vices, yt they should not be committed, thou shall
not taste this meat, for it is unclean, and forbidden to be eaten. Meats of
themselfes, was never unclean: But they were called unclean, for two causes,
the one was, that the law did forbid, to eat them, and so they were called
unclean: the other was, for significacio^ of an unclean thing that was
signified by it: But now, no manner of meats, is unclean, to them that be
clean Tite. i. omnia munda mundis. All things are pure and clean, to them
that be clean, and are to be received, with geuyng of thanks to God, except
Maiestrates do command the contrary, or the infirmity or weakness, of our
brother, or our erroneous conscience do will the contrary, for these causes, a
man must abstein from his liberty in meats and not use it at all times. Men
should not put holiness, in abstinence from meat, or sin in eating soberly,
with geuyng of thanks to God, for the kingdom of God, is not meat and
drink, but justice, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Romans xiiiii. Even so it
was with us, in times paste. Was it not forbidden, to touch this holy vessel,
under pain of suspension, or dedly sin? And to eat meat permitted of God,
was it not coumpted worse, then to break Gods commandments? As upon the
Fridaie, to eat white meat, as eggs, butter, and Chese, was esteemed as
great an offense, as Theft murder, adultery, these was not coumpted so
great an offense, before God, as to eat flesh, upon the Fridaie, or in Le^t
time, although he yt did eat flesh, was sick, or by Maiestrates lice^sed,
that was cou^pted such a great and abominable offense, before God that GOD
could not, or rather would not, forgive that offense, and such was more
abhorred of men, then he that had committed theft, murder, and adultery:
but thanks be to God, for right knowledge now given, and let every one use
their knowledge and Christian liberty, to Gods glory, to the profit of their
neighbors, and not to satisfy the carnal appetites, lusts, and desires of
the flesh, for if we live after the flesh, we shall dye. To. viii But if we
shall mortify, the affeccions of the flesh, by the spirit of God, we shall
live. To. viii And optein life eternal. Gala. vi.

3 All these do perish in the use, after the precepts and doctrine of men.)
He speaks of meats, which after they be eaten do perish: that is, they go
into the belly, and some part fedeth the body, and other part goes into the
excrementes, and those meats, bring in sin, and death, if they be eaten, or
absteined fro, as necessary for salvation, or cou^pted dedly sin, to eat
them now, after the Gospel showed, for it is not the precepts, or doctrine
of man, that makes a man holy or unholy, but it is the keeping of Gods
commandments, that makes a man acceptable to God, which no man can do,
without Gods favor and grace. Meat is abused, if men do put holiness, justice,
virtue, righteousness, life, and salvation, in meats, or in absteinyng from
the^, or think sin in eating them soberly, with thanks to God: as some has
put, great holiness in fish, and sin in eating of flesh, when as holiness
before GOD, is no more in eating of flesh, then of fish, so he that eats, do
not contempne any ordinanunces, of hye powers, and without offense, of the
weak in knowledge, and for to serve God, with all goodness: so things that be
indifferent, of theimselfes, if they be taught as necessary to be kept for
salvation, or that it is dedly sin, to omit them, then they are called to
perish. For then they do hurt, then they are not taken, as they should be
taken: and therefore the Apostle says here, that they do perish, because
they are not taken, as things indifferent.

4 Which has a pretense of wisdom, by supersticio^ and hu^blenes of mind,
and by hurt of the body.) He says, that the doctrine of Pseudoapostles, had a
similitude, or likeness, or apparaunce, of holiness, but not holiness in deed,
and that apparaunce it had, by three things specially. That was, of
supersticion, of humblenes of mind, and of great punishment of the body.
Supersticion, was, when they feined to theimself, a way of holiness, which
they followed, making them holy, followyng that voluntary Religion, or
Godliness, invented by theimselfes, by men or by man's Tradicions, Doctrynes,
or Ceremonies, thynkyng yt to be, a more truer worshipping of god, then to
worship God, as was appointed, to worship God, in holy scriptures. And of
this sort, there was very many, that were coumpted holy, and more holy then
other was, only for keeping of man's tradicions and ordinances, as of this
sort, was many Religious men, called holy, rather then for keeping of Gods
commandments, which they skarcely knew, and yet they were coumpted holy
men, before the world: but this holiness, was no holiness before God, but plain
supersticion, and to this holiness, I would say supersticion, men was more
ready to, then to be holy before God, in keeping Gods commau^deme^tes. The
second cause, why the doctrine of pseudoapostles, appeared holy, was because
they that preached, appeared humble and meke, before the world, and contempners
of the world, and of worldely honors and riches: dispisers of carnal
pleasures, and lusts, was thought to care for no worldly thing, but for God,
and for heavenly things, and yet they were inwardly, vain glorious, and would
be coumpted holy, and good, just, and righteous, that had deserved heaven,
and heaven to be their own, for their merits, and deservings, and only for
keeping, of man's tradicions, ceremonies, and other inuencions of man, of the
which, comes no holiness before God, but supersticio^. The third thing,
whereby Pseudoapostles appeared holy, was by their great pain, labors, and
abstinence they took in their bodies, as by great fasting, long praiyng, and
great watchyng, risyng at Midnight, or Cock crow, long Matyns, and
Euensonges, and other many Ceremonies, by the which, their bodies were
castigate, and tormented many ways, with hard beds, and little time restyng
in them, wearyng heir clothe, next their skynnes, iron about their middle,
beatyng themselfes oftetymes, with whippes, and scorges and suffer other, to
scorge them with whippes, yt they might suffer pein in their bodies, that by
that means, they might deserve heaven, and be worthy, the glory eternal: but
by that means, they could not come to eternal glory, with God the father,
which requires none such things, at their hands, to come to heaven: But
GOD requires, that they should be followers of Christ, and suffer patiently
affliccions, that God sends to them, or chance to them in the world, and to
have a sure faith, and trust in Gods mercy, grace, and favor, and only by the
mercy of GOD, to come to salvation, for Christ's sake only, and not for their
own works, deeds, or merits, or other their punishments, had in their
bodies, by the which, they obtein no justice, holiness, nor perfeccio^ before
God ye faither, although, parauenture before the world, they were cou^pted
holy, for those things. But what have these pseudoapostles, obtained before
God? Any justice, holiness, Godliness, by their supersticion, feyned humblenes,
and by much maceracio^ of their bodies? Surely no holiness, nor justice with
God, nor yet no honor in Gods sight, but rather dishonor, sin, and wickedness,
for they have sought holiness, where no holiness was to be gotten, as of meats,
drynkes, holy days, Ceremonies, of men's Tradicions, fantasies, and
inuencions, of chastyng the body, out of measure, contrary to Gods law, for
they do not give the body, such moderate sustenaunce, as was necessary for it,
to preserve it in health, to serve the spirit of God and to bring furthe, the
works of the spirit.

The.iii. Chapter.
THerefore if you have ryse^ with Christ, seek those things that are above,
where Christ is sittyng, on the right hand of GOD. Care for those things,
that are above, and not upon yearthly things. For you be ded, and your life
hid with Christ in God: when Christ shall be showed your life, then you with
him, shall be showed in glory:

The Apostle exhorts these Colossians, and in them, al christians, to all
holiness, and Godly conversation of life, and that of the resurrection of
Christ, willing all men to dye with Christ, and to arise with Christ. As
Christ died once, he dies no more, so should al men die, from all syn, and no
more to return again to sin. To arise with Christ, is to arise from syn, by
true penance, and to walk in a new life: a new life, knows no old sins, no
carnal affeccions, no works of darkness, it abhors hypocrysy, and
supersticion, and all Idolatry, all filthy lusts, desires, or pleasures, it
does seek justice, not of ye law nor of the works of the law, nor of
ceremonies, or Tradicions of men, of man's Religion, nor yet in these
things, puts any holiness, or justice, nor thinks not Gods honor or
worship, to stand in outward things, but GOD to be a spirit, and would be
worshipped in spirit, and in truth, by true faith in Christ, and not only
with a worship, appointed to worship God, of man, and not of god alone.

2 Seek those things, which are above, where Christ is sittyng, at the right
hand of the father.) If you be rise^ with Christ it is your duty, not to
seek yearthly things, as worldely honors, and promocions, dignities, or
worldly riches, but above all these things, to seek those things that are
above, that is, the heavenly joy, and bliss, life, and eternal felicity,
and the ways to come to them, that is, by true faith in God, by sure hope,
and perfect Charity, and by other Godly works, appointed of God, to be done
of al the^, that shall come to that place where as Christ is sittyng, on the
right hand of God the father, to certify us, that all they, which shall
arise with him, shall come to yt place, where as Christ is, and that by Christ
only.

3 Seek heavenly things, and not yerthly things.) That they should more
earnestly, set their minds, upon heavenly things more then upon those
things, that are upon the earth, or partein to this present life, by yearthly
things, he understands all the law, works of the law, as Circumcision,
Sacrifices, Ceremonies, diuersties of meats, days, apparel, and all the
works of the law, commanded under pein of death, to be kept, which thing,
saint Paul does not admit. Finally, by yearthly things, he understands all
things, in this present life, that plucketh men's hearts and minds, from
God, and makes the^, to set more by them, then by God or by his word, or by
heavenly joy, and the way to come to the heavenly joy.

4 For you be dedde, and your life hid with Christ.) Now he shows the
cause, why they should seek things above, and not beneth, or yearthly things,
for they are ded from yearthly things, that they should live to Christ, by
true faith, and Godly conversation of living, for their life's are hid in
Christ, and with Christ shall appear, when he shall come in great glory,
companied with all the holy angels of heaven, to judge the quick and the
ded. Therefore in Christ, let all our trust be put, and desire of him only,
health, life, and salvation. And if any should move you, to despair of the
life to come with Christ, for affliccions, or adversity, that should chance
to you in this life, remember that your life, is hid in Christ, and does not
appear, to be called a life, but rather a misery, both for the shortenes of
it, and also for the transitory pleasure of it, but then it shall be showed, in
the glorious coming of Christ, as a rightous judge, both of quick and ded. Now
ye se that the life of the faithful is hid here in Christ, and is kept by
humblenes of the Cross, as the faithful had no life, but in the last day, it
shall be showed, to be a joyful and blessed life, which now appears not
blessed. This place makes men sure, of the life to come in another world
which, carnal and worldly me^, thinks not of, nor yet believes to come, and
it moves men, to have sure faith, and constaunt hope in Christ, and of the
glory to come in Christ, and by Christ. Also it teaches the life, of faithful
men to appear, here in this world, to be nothing less then a life, ye, good
men does here appear, as they were utterly forsaken of God, and abiectes of
al men, and yet God has reserved for them, a glorious life in the world to
come, and for hope of that life, here all adversities, are to be borne
patiently.

Therefore, mortify your members, which are upon the yerth, as whordo^,
uncleanness, unnatural lust evil concupiscence, and coueteousnes, which is the
worship of Idols, for the which, the ire of God is wont to come, upon al
intractable children emonges who^, you walked some time, when you lived emonges
them.

Now he moves them, to kill and mortify, all vice and sin, that virtues
might be set in their places: and first, he wills them, to mortify their
yearthly members, that is, all the works of the flesh, which be rehearsed.
Gala. v. Worthy to be eschewed for they exclude men from life, and brings
death to the doers except they repent, and call to God, for mercy and grace.
And first, he wills men to put away whoredom, aduoutrye, fornicacion, and
all uncleanness of the body, for these vices displease God, provoke God to
power, his Ire and Vengeance upon men, and upon the world. Gene. vi. Ephe. v.
They kill the body, bring to it many incurable sickness and diseases, and they
bring shame to men in the world, loss of goods, riches, and inheritance often
times death of the body, by whores, and finally, they shut out men from
heaven. These vices are mortified or killed, when we forsake them, and flee
them, and al occasions of them, be put away from us, and we give no place to
them, nor yet to no occasion of them, but that we mortify them, by little and
little, by the workyng of the spirit of God, which makes that sins,
although they be in us, and we can not be without them.i. Iho. i. Yet they
reign not in us, nor we be not obedient to the desires of sin, and that not
of our selfs, but by the spirit of God. But what thing shall move men, to
forsake sin, and mortify the desires of syn? Surely nothing more moves, to
abhor sin, then the remembrance, how filthy a thing sin is, how it
displeases almighty God, what shame, confusion, and pein, sorrow, and woo
everlasting, it brings with it, how it destroys, both body and soul, what
vengeance of God it provoke, to be powered upon ye whole world: for God is
the God, that wills no sin to be done, nor will suffer no sinners, to dwell
with him in his tabernacle. Again, to remember, what joy, what bliss, and what
eternal felicity, comes to them, that kills all sin in them and
abhors it, and studieth to live Godly, in all goodness. Sins are to be
mortified first, by true penitence, and repentance for sin, forsakyng
sin, and abhorryng it, and never intendyng to return again to syn. Secondly,
by true faith in God the father, trustyng surely, in his mercy and grace,
that he will forgive him his sins, not for his deeds, works, or merits,
but only for Christ Jesus sake. Thirdly, by walkyng unfeignedly, in a new
life. Whoredom is here rekened, first, to be mortified, because it is most
dangerous, yt vice, hihgest provoke God to power his vengeance upon men,
because men often times estemeth it, as least of all sins, and yet most of all
sins, it sonest kills both body and soul, and shuts out men from
heaven. i. Corin. vi. Gala. v. And God will punish fornicators, and
adulterers, Hebre. xii. So he will that al manner of aduoutery, and fornicacion,
should be clearly put away, and all occasions of them. He wills also that
men should mortify, all coueteousnes, and all insatiable desire of money, of
worldly riches, and goods, and would not that any should love money, more then
GOD, nor make his God of his money, as the coueteous man does, setting all his
mind and heart, upon the gooddes of the world, loving them better then God,
taking more pein, to get the gooddes of the world, then the true knowledge of
God, and of his holy word, rather forsakyng God, then his riches, and more
sorry, for loss of worldly riches, then for loss of God. Such coueteous men,
unmerciful, shall not possess ye kingdom of heaven, for they love darkness,
better then light, and therefore they shall goo to darkness, and to everlasting
pein.

2 For the which, comes the vengeance of God, upon al intractable
children.) Mark here for what things, comes the vengeance of God upon men,
not for white meat eaten in Lent season, or for eggs eaten upon the Fridaie,
but for fornicacion, aduoutery, uncleanness, evil lusts, and concupiscences,
coueteousnes, and such like, forbidden by Gods law, which provoke the Ire
God, and his vengeance. Learn that pein follows sin, that none think,
that they may lawfully sin, or that they shall escape unpunished for sins,
for God loves no sin. Psalm.v. And he will not suffer syn to be unpunished.

3 Emonges whom you walked when you lived emonges them.) He shows that these
Colossia^s was poluted with those great vices; some time when they lived as
Heathen Gentiles, knowing nothing of God, but now they are washed, and purged
from their sins, by Christ alone, and not by their works, deeds or
merits. Here we may learn those that was some time evil, and filthy
sinners, now to be good and just men, to conde^pne the old saying: once
evil and ever evil, for if yt saying should be always true, none of us al
should be good, for we were al once evil, by nature we are the children, of the
Ire and wrath of God, and the children of darkness, now by Christ, we are made
the welbeued children of God, through his mercy and grace, for Christ's sake
alone.

Now truly put away all ire, indignacio^, malice evil speaking, filthy spekyng
from your mouth, lie not one to another, after that you have put of, the old
man with his deeds, and have put on a new man, which is renewed to
knowledge, and his Image which has made him, where as is no Gentile or Jew,
Circumcision, or vncircumcisio^, Barbarous or Sithian, bond or free man, but
all in all is Christ.

Here the Apostle moves men to put away al sins, that virtue may be set
in their places. And first, he wills all ire, indignacion, malice, rancor,
envy, slaunderyng of other, filthy spekyng to clearly to be banished, from
me^nes mouths and, that no communicacion, should be had emonges men, but such
as becomes saints. Ephesians. v. That GOD might be glorified, and other edified.

2 Lie not one to another.) Here is forbidden all liyng, craft, falshed, or
deceipte, in byyng and sellyng, in the which, is used much craft and deceit,
and used of so many, and so often, as it were a lawful thing, and not against
Gods law, one to deceive another, in byyng and sellyng. It is no small vice,
that brings men to hell, and to death: liyng, craft, and deceipte, brings
to death. Therefore, they are to be eschewed, and fled of all christians, how
so ever proffitable they be, or appear to be to men. And this thing, is
greatly to be lamented, emonges Christians, that after such knowledge of Gods
truth, had emonges us, that so many have delight in liyng, in craft, and
falshed, for lucre sake, ye, this is more to be lamented, that such evil men
be not ashamed, to confirm their lie, craft, or falshed, with an oath, calling
God to witness, of their lies, craft, or falshed.

3 After that you have put of, the old man with his deeds.) Now he shows
the cause, why they should eschew sin and vice because they have put of, the
old man, withal his concupiscences, lusts, and desires, by true faith in
Christ, that they should walk no more, after the old man, and his affeccions,
but that they should, put one a new man, that is, the spirit of God, and
walk after him, and bring furthe the works of the spirit, every day by all
their life time, having their hearts and minds, ruled by the same spirit.

4 Which is renewed to knowledge, and to the Image of God, that has made him.)
Here is showed, how we shall put on the new manne, and be renewed in him, it
must be by knowledge of GOD the father, which, has made us, like to his
Image. Gene. ii. Which regards not persons, nor cares not whether, he be a
Jew or a Gentile, Scot or an Englisheman, servant or Master, a man or a
woman, but Christ is all in all things, that is, he that has Christ, has
all things, as all holiness, justice, and righteousness. If the new man be put
on, by knowledge of God, whom put they on, which know not God, nor his word?
If men be renewed in the spirit of God, by knowledge of God, in who^ are they
renewed, that knows not God? But in the spirit of the devil, how can they
follow Christ, and do his commandments, that know not God, nor yet his will
by his word? Gods will and pleasure, is known by his word, therefore, learn
how necessary a thing it is, to know God by his word, for the salvation of man consists, in this true knowledge of God. Iho. xvii.

Put you on as elect of God, holy and well-beloved, the bowels of mercy
ge^tlenes, modestnes, mekenes, softnes, sufferyng one another, and mutual
forgeuing one another, if you have any complaint against any, and as christ
has forgeuen you, so do you.

The Apostle moves these Colossians, and in them all Christians, to have the
same virtues, that the elect of God to eternal salvation has, and in them
to walk, and increase every day, more and more, and these virtues shows to
us, who be elected of God, and who not, as far as manne can judge, by
outward things. The elected of God, to everlasting joy and bliss, they fle
and hate all vice and sin, they love virtue, and Godly living, and in it do
walk, al their life time, by true faith, and works of the spirit.

2 Bowelles of mercy, gentleness.) He shows what virtues, the elected of God
should put on: he wills them to put on, the bowelles of mercy, that is,
that they should have like pity and compassion, as has mothers, toward
their children. The inward parts of mothers, be moved to help, when they here
or se their children, want necessaries, and they will help their children to
their powers: so should every one of us, be affected one to another, as the
mother to her child. This place reproves all cruel men, that be
unmerciful, that care not for other, so they be well themselfes, and live in
all wealth and pleasure. Also he wills that they shouldbe gentle, meke,
modest, sober, descrete, soft, humble, and lowly to all men: and here is
rebuked stubburne, sturdy, froward, ouerthwarte, cruel, and all froward manners.

3 Sufferyng one another.) He moves them, to suffer all injuries and wrongs
patiently, and one to bear with another, and ready to forgive displeasures
and injuries dooen one to another, and not to give check for check, or taunt
for taunt, nor to avenge himself of injuries, but to forgive, and to prate for
them that do us injury or wrong, after the example of Christ: but of these
things, more largely is spoken. Ephe. iiii.

Above al things have Charity, which is the bond of perfeccion, and the
peace of God, may triumph in your hearts, in the which you are called in one
body, and be you thankful.

Emonges all virtues, Charity excels, for it is the bond of all perfeccion,
and knitteth all virtues together, and by the which Christians be knit
together, by such a bond of charity, as can never be losed: for as members
be knit in the body, by joints, so Christians by Charity, and one cannot be
separated from another, for it byndeth members of Christ together, and it
makes perfect the whole body. Again of the contrary, ire, hatered envy,
debate, strief, and contencion, plucketh the body in pieces where as by
Charity, all members are made perfect.

2 And the peace of God, may triumph and have vyctory in your bodies.) That
is ye peace of God, may overcome in you, al ire and envy, hatred or malice,
injury or wrongs, and let him think he has victory, that is, in peace with
his enemies, and adversaries, that has done him injury or wrong, not desiryng
any vengeance of him, but praiyng to God, that he may repent, and amend his
naughty life, remittyng all injuries freely, from his heart: and this is the
peace, not of this world, nor of the flesh but it is ye peace of God, which
God works in peaceable men, which shall be called the children of GOD. Math.
v. And to this peace we be called of God, that we should think al one thing,
and that after Jesus Christ, and that we should be one, thankful, kind,
and loving to another.

The word of GOD may dwell in you abundauntly, with all wisedo^. Teach and
monish one another, with so^ges and praisynges, and spiritual Psalms, with
thanks, syngyng in your hearts to the Lord. And what soever you shall do,
in word or in deed, do all things in the name of our Lord Jesus, geuyng
thanks to God, and the father by him.

The Apostle moves them, that they should receive the doctrine of God, and
that it should not, only of them be learned, but also, that it should dwell
in them abundauntly, and be surely fixed in heart and memory, and that one of
the^, should teach another. And here Lyra says, that it is required of us, yt
we should have all understanding of holy scriptures. Glosa interlinia. But how
or when, will they have the understanding of holy scriptures, that will not
read holy scriptures, nor yet here them red, or skarse can suffer, that other
read holy scriptures. This place reproves them, that would not have lay men,
to read holy scriptures, that they might understand them: If it be not lawful
for lay men, to read the holy scriptures, nor yet to study them when shall
the word of GOD, dwell in them abundauntly? For the true knowledge of scripture,
is gotten by readyng, studiyng, hearing the^ read and declared: and here he
speaks, as well to lay men, as to priests, for he would have all men
perfect, in the knowledge of the truth, that they might live after the truth.

2 In all wisedo^, teaching and monishyng themselves and other, in all wisdom,
necessary for salvation. Here note what diligence the Apostle requires, that
one should teach another, in the true wisdom, and every one according to his
vocacio^, with great reverence, honor, and Godly fear The word of God is to
be entreated, and handeled, with great wisdom and sobernes, and not rashly,
foolishly, boldly, or indiscreetly, and therefore, he adds with all wisdom,
both of God and of man: the word of God seeing it is holy, and shows unto
us, the eternal will of GOD it requires a man, all dedicated to God, which
may use often times, fervent prayer to God, and the which has the fear of
god before his iyes alwaie, willing at no time to do that thing, that should
displease God, in word or in deed. Two things the apostle requires of us,
doctrine and monicion, but there be some that be called and appointed, and
they openly may teach, and monishe, exhort in public co^gregacions of men.
Other there be, that be not openly called to be preachers or teachers, and
they privately may teach, and admonish, and openly in their private houses, to
their wife, children, and servants.

3 Teach and admonish, one another.) Those things says S. Ambrose, should
be taught, which sound Christ, which smell Christ, and sets furthe his
glory and doctrine, and this not only sung or said by mouth but also in the
heart, with a fervent zeal to GOD, and that in songs, praisynges, and in
spiritual hymns, with thanks geuyng to God, for his benefits. But how
should lay men, sing spiritual songs, lauds, Psalms, and Hymns, to GOD in
their hearts, except they should learn them, or read the holy scriptures,
theimselfes? This place shows, that it is lawful for lay men, to read holy
scriptures, and to learn, that they might rehearse spiritual songs, when they
work upon their handie labors: and it conde^pneth all them, that thinks it
is not lawful, for lay men and lay women, to read holy scriptures, and have
them by heart, that they might sing, laud praise, and thanks to God.

4 What soever you do, in word or in deed, do all things in the name of our
lord Jesus.) Now is declared for what end, should all our words and deeds
be dooen, that they must be for the glory of God, that the name of God, might
be glorified in all men, and thanks given to God for his benefits. This
place reproves all hypocrytes, and dissemblers, that seeks their own glory,
more then the glory of God, that study to please men more then God.

You wives obey your own husbands, as it is mete in the Lord. You me^ love
your wifes, and be not bitter again to the^

Of ye mutual duty between man and his wife, I have spoken at large. Ephe.
v. What be the causes of Godly Matrimony, and what is the duty, of either
of them, to the other. Now saint Paul says, it is the office or duty of
the wife, what estate or degree so ever she be, to be obedient to her husband,
in all lawful and honest causes, and that willyngly and gladly, studiyng alwaie
to please him, in the lord without all murmuryng, or grudging against him, and
that for the ordinance of God, which has ordained, that wifes should be
obedient to their husbands, whatsoever they be, poor or rich, noble or
unnoble. If any would think to be Master, over their husbands, by reason of
their noble stock and kynred of their riches, lands, or possessions, let them
know that Gods law and ordinances, byndeth them to obedience to their
husbands, and he that resists the ordinance of God, takes unto himself
judgment. Roma. xiii. Therefore, let every one beware that they break not
Gods ordinance, for they that break his ordinance, they shall not escape
unpunished, if they here in this world do not repent, and call to God for
mercy, and forgeuenes of their sins, in true faith.

2 You men, love your wifes, and be not bitter in ire against the^.) The
duty of the husband is to love his wife, as his own body, and as Christ has
loved us: then no man should hate his wife, for he hates not his own body,
not to hasty, angry, or check, or bitter in words, or deeds, or do that
thing, that should justly anger, or displease her, and to over se, and wynke at
many fautes in his wife, and study with gentleness to reform, that he proves
to be amiss, for so he would his wife should do to him, and so to bear the
infirmities of the weaker vessels, and not to be churlishe, froward,
ouerthwarte, or with bitter words, soundyng to the dishonestie of his wife,
and of himself, to provoke his wife to anger, to grieve or vex her, or
otherwise to do not his duty to her, to put her away, and take an whore,
and use company with a drabbe, and a harlot, contrary to Gods law and will,
which thing God will not suffer, long unpunished, be they never so stout, or
hye in the world. But of the duty of man and wife, one to another, I have
babled very largely, according to Gods word. Ephe. v. as I trust, and
therefore I pass it lightly, here in this place.

Children, obey your fathers and mothers, in all things, this pleases God.
Fathers, discorage not your children, not to much, least they be amassed, and
can give you no answer for fear.

He teaches the duty of children, to their parents, and again of parents,
that is of fathers and mothers, to their children. It pertains to children,
to be humble, lowly, gentle, and obedient to fathers and mothers, in all
things lawful and honest, and in all things, that be not contrary to Gods
law, and in nowise to resist, to speak again the^, except pare^tes require
unlawful things, it is the duty of children, to honor their fathers and
mothers, to help, succor them, and releue them, if they may better then
father or mother, when any occasion shall be given to their children, to be an
helper and co^forter, to their fathers and mothers: and this thing pleases God
better, then al pilgrimages making, giltyng of Images: ye better then all the
Bishop of Romes liyng Pardons, for this is the commandment of God, the
other be not of God, but of members of Gods adversary, that is, of the
devil.

2 Fathers, discorage not your children to much.) It is the duty of fathers
and mothers, not to discorage their children to much or by their threatenyng
words, beatyng, bunchyng, knockyng upon them, to dawe their children and to
make them dawe pates, so fearful and amassed, that they dare not speak a
word, nor give a right answer, and all for fear of their parents, to
fearse over their children. For as to much pamperyng and cherishyng of
parents, be the destruction to their children, so be destruction to
children, to much fearsenes of parents, to their children: therefore fathers
and mothers, must use a moderate mean, not to fearse, nor yet to soft, but if
their children do offend them, or do a fault, let them be corrected with
admonicions, and promises of rewards, if they will amend, and fault no more,
for if children should not be corrected for their fautes, they would be to
wanton, to shrode, curssed, and unhappy, and full of all evil, therefore it
is true, that Salamon says. Qui parcit uirge odit filium. He that spares the
rod, hates the child. And the Philosophier says, that an evil, in the
beginning, may sone be remedied, but if it have long continued, often times it
is incurable: therefore, resist an evil at the beginning of it, and so it may
the sooner be healed, but of these duties, that is, of the parents to their
children, and of children to their parents, I have showed my mind more
largely, in the Commentary to the Ephesia^s. Ephe. vi.

Servants obey by all things, them which are Masters after the flesh, not
with service, lowely before their iyes, as you study to please men, but with
simplenes of heart, fearyng God. And what soever you shall do, do it of an
hartines, as you served God and not manne, knowing that you shall receive of
God, a reward of inheritance, for you serve our Lord Christ. Furthermore, he
that has sinned, shall bear his sin, and there is no respect of persons
before God. Masters give equity and equalnes, to your servants, knowing that
you have a Lord in heaven.

In the former part of this text is taught, the duty of servants, to
their Masters, who^ they serve in this life, whom they serve, whether it be
for meat, drink, apparel, and wages, or for those, and for learning, of some
honest science, or for other necessary causes: And in this latter part is
declared, thoffice of Masters, to their servants. The duty of servants
is, to obey their Masters, in all lawful, and honest things, to use them
lowly and mekely, to their Masters and to have their Masters in reverence, with
all diligent service study to please them, not only in their iye sight, with
faithful, trusty, and profitable service, study to please their Masters, but
also in their absence, and when their Masters, do not over see them. This
place reproves many negligent servants, which will be faithful, just,
true, and dilligent, in their Masters labors and business, as long as their
Master is present, and does look on them: but if their Masters be absent, or
away from them, or do not over se them, they care not how little work they
do, they care not, who do more then they, ye, they will be pickyng, and
stealyng, and liyng, all such be here reproved by the holy ghost, speaking
here in saint Paul, and Ephe. vi. More at large: such negligente
servants, deceive not only their Masters, but also theimselfes, for they
displease GOD highly, for servants should serve their Masters here in this
world, as faithfully, justly, and truly, as if they served God, for in deed
they serve God that serve their Masters, as here is commanded, that is, to
serve them, in all verity, and truth, faithfulness, and justice, with all
diligence, in all humblenes of heart, and mind, in word and deed, fearyng
GOD, and their Masters, dooyng alwaie their Masters business, to the most
profit and pleasure, of their Master in GOD, knowing surely that they so
doing, serve GOD and if they do not so, that they displease God, when they do
not their business, as they should do, but parauenture will murmr and grudge,
to do that their Master commands them, or will give him again a froward
answer, and make ouerthwarte words, froward and stubburne or when they go
from their Masters, with a dogs pater noster, murmuryng with theimselfes, I
cannot tell what, against their Master, patteryng, thynkyng their Master, to
put the^ to great peines and labors, such evil servants there be with
other, that will pick, steal, and lie, and have many naughty co^dicions,
which, all are to be amended in servants, that servants might serve and
please GOD, doing their Masters lawful commandments, and receive of God
areward, better then any gold or silver, lands, or possessions, life eternal:
Which God gives as well to servants, as Masters without respect of
persons.

2 For you serve your Lord God.) This thing should make all servants, to
think all labors or peines, that they be put to in their Masters service, to
be easy, that they seruyng their master, and doing with all gladness and faithful
diligence, their Masters commandment, that they serve God, the father of our
lord Jesus Christ, what time soever it be, by day or by night. And who
should be werie, in the service of God: this is his true service: as for the
other service of God (called Gods service, divised by manne, let other judge
whether it be Gods service or no) this I am sure, that the servant,
occupied faithfully and justly, is occupied in Gods service: And again, they
that do not their Masters lawful commau^deme^t, shall be punished of God
which, both rewards and punishes, without respect of person. Let every
servant, do his duty to his Master, and so is God pleased.

3 Masters, do you equity and al equalnes to your servants.) You Masters,
do your duties to your servants, let them have sufficient meat and drink,
and other necessaries, let them not be idle, but set them to some honest
works, lay not to much lode upon their backs, more then they are able to
bear, remember that they with you, shall be fellows in the heavenly
inheritance Se more if you please. Ephe. vi.

The.iiij. Chapter.
BE instaunt in prayer, watch in it, with giving of thanks, pray also for us,
that GOD might open to us, the door of his word, that we might speak the
mystery of Christ, for the which I am bound, that I might show it as it
becomes me to speak.

Of prayer, he has spoken of before in the first Chapter, how they should
pray, to whom they should pray, what they should desire in their prayers, and
of who^, and for whose sake, they should be heard. Now he moves them to be
constaunt in prayer, and in them us all, and to watch in prayer, with geuyng
of thanks to God, for his benefits, of who^ comes al goodness, and finally,
he desires them to pray for him. This place moves us to prayer, and to be
instau^t in prayer, and to pray often times, with fervent mind and hearty
desire, and that we should desire other to pray for us, being a live, as
Paul here was, and it reproves our slothfulnes in prayer, and such as love
to pray little, and will not other to pray for them, the prayer of a just man,
is much worth with God, for it is hard if no impediment be in him, for whom
prayer is made, or if it be desired of GOD, according to his will.

2 That God might open to us the door of his word. For what thing he desired
them, to pray for him, it is showed, that God, should open his mouth, that
he might speak the word, not of man, but of God, as it did become him to
speak. Here we learn two things, the one is, that to speak the word of
God as a man should do it, is the gift of God, and not man's will and
pleasure: the other, that it must be desired of GOD, by faithful prayer, both
of the preacher, and also of the auditors, and that no man of his own might
and powers, can speak the word of God, as he should do, except that God
shall first open his mouth, and give him grace to speak, as he should do, to
the glory of God, and to the profit of other.

3 For the which, I am bound.) Paul was in prison, when he wrote this
Epistle, to these Colossians, and he was not ashamed, to name his fetters and
bonds, he was in, when he wrote this Epistle, for it was not for his own
sake, but for the Gospels sake. These be the sweet delicates, that true
preachers, and setters furthe of Gods holy word should look for in this
world, but in the world to come, is eternal delicates prepared for them if
they stand sure, to the holy Gospel of GOD, and shrink not from it, by no
affliccion or persecucion.

walk wisely toward strangers, redemyng the time: your communicacion, let it
be alwaie favorable, seasoned with salt, that you may know how it behooves
you to answer to every man.

The Apostle gives them monicion, to walk as it becomes, toward
straungiers, that is, wisely as it becomes wiseme^, in God, in all truth,
justice, and righteousness, not as vnwisemen but as wiseme^. Ephe. v. So that
strangers, or foreiners, can have no just cause to speak evil of you, nor
of your manners, redemyng the time, diligently sekyng opportunity, to do good
to all me^, or if in times past, you have been evil, now be no more evil,
from hencefurthe, studiyng alwaie to profit other.

2 Let your communicacion, be always with favor, seasoned with salt.) What their
words should be, here is showed. First, he wills, that their words should
be alwaie with favor, that be pleasant, gentle, meke, and with sobriety, that
they may be thankful to the hearers, that sets forth Gods glory,
promoteth his word, that bring the love and fear of GOD, and that be
profitable, and confortable in God, and in all goodness, to the hearers. This
place reproves, all idle speakynges, and talkynges, of the which, comes no
profit to man, nor glory to God it checketh vain speakynges, evil speakynges,
and all speakynges, that tends to the hurt or damage to other.

3 Let your words be seasoned with salt) Salt was commanded to be had, in
all sacrifice. Leui. ii. (By ye which, was signified heavenly wisdom.) Salt
seasoneth all meats, it draws out corrupt blood and humors, it perceth to
the bone, it is a sharp eager thing, gnawyng sore. So must our words be
seasoned with salt, that is, spiritual wisdom, that seasoneth all things,
and makes every man sauery, and good, willing, and glad, to please God, and to
seek those things, that brings to heaven, so it be comes our words, to
be seasoned, that they may sound nothing else, but Godliness, Godly wisedo^,
Godly honor, and glory the love of GOD, the fear of God, with geuyng thanks
to God, for his benefits to us, so our words should alwaie declare, that we
be Christians, desirous to know Christ, and his doctrine, and to follow it in
our living, and to move other, by our good example, both in word and deed,
to be followers of Christ. This place reproves, foolish and vain words,
rash talkyng, withour wisdom, by the which, often times comes much hurt.

4 That you may know, how it becomes you to answer to every manne.) Now
is declared, what he means by salt, surely nothing else, but that he would
have men, to have that wisdom that they might know, how they should answer
to every manne, that their words might be tha^kefull and profitable: otherwise
men must answer to princes, then to subjects, that not one answer, is mete
at all times, to the weak, and to the strong in faith, the weak must be
fed with milk, the strong with strong meat, but alwaie let your answer
be, to the glory of GOD, and to the profit of other. Learn that of holy
scripture, which is signified by salt, you may learn all wisdom, how you
shall answer every man, in all Godliness and goodness.

Of all things perteinyng to me Lychycus, shall certify you of them our
well-beloved brother, and faithful Minister, and servant in the Lord, whom I
have sent unto you for this purpose, that he might know how you do, and comfort
you hearts, and with him Onesimus a faithful brother which is of you: of al
things they shall show you what are in doing here.

Paul commends to these Colossians, two men: the one is Tichicus, the other
is Onesimus which, some time was an unprofitable servant (for he stale his
Masters goods, and ran away from his Master Philemon) but now he is a
profitable servant, and a brother in the Lord, and a faithful Minister unto
me. By these two as appears, Paul sent his Epistle to these Colossians, and
he says, the Tychicus should certify them of all things, perteinyng to his
own state, and why he was cast in prison, and for what cause, and how he was
used in prison. Also Tychicus does come, that he might know your acts and
deeds, and commend your works and reprove, if any thing be amiss, and show
you how, you should leave evil doing, and do well, and also that might comfort
your hearts in God, in all goodness and truth: And as for Onesimus, some time an
evil servant, to his Master Philemo^, it is long sense, that he was sorry for
his offense, and euersence that time, he has been a good man, a faithful
servant in Christ, a true Minister unto me, in the Gospel, and how
unprofitable, soever he was before, now he is a profitable servant, and will
recompense, all that was amiss dooen by him. Learn here, that GOD is
merciful, to penitent sinners, and that he forgeueth their sins, calling in
true faith, for mercy to God. Also that the common proverb is false that is,
he that is once evil, is ever evil, which saying is evil, and worthy
reproach. For this Onesimus was once evil, but now good: So we all were once
evil, but now by Christ, we be made good. Romans v.

Aristarchus my fellow (in prison and bonds) saluteth you, and Marcus the
susters son to Barnabas, of who^ you have received commandments, if he
shall come unto you, receive him, and Jesus which is called Just, which are
Jews. These only be workers with me, to the kingdom of GOD, which have been
to my conforte.

That remains of this Epistle, Paul occupies it with salutacions, and here
he saluteth them, in the name of three specially, that was of Aristarchus (of
whom it is written. Acts.xix.) Of Marcus the susters son of Barnabas, and of
Jesus, and these three, was of the Circumcision, that is, of the Jews, which
he commends above all other, at this present time, both for the faithfulness,
in helpyng forward Gods word, and also for conforte to him in prison, that
they visited him in prison, and also did give to him all necessaries.

2 Marcus the susters son of Barnabas, saluteth you.) He saluteth them in the
name of Marcus susters son to Barnabas, desiryng the^ to receive him gentely,
with all humility, into their company, and take him as one, very welcome to
them. Behold, Paul did not forgette his friends, but commends them to his
fre^des, desiryng kindenes to be showed for kyndenes, and benefits done in
this world, and specially he wills, kyndenes and benefits to be showed, to
the faithful preachers, and setters furthe of Gods holy, and blessed word.

3 Only these be workers with me, to the kingdom of GOD, which have been to
my comfort.) These three, Aristarchus, Marcus, and Jesus, nothing fearing the
cruelnes of enemies to Gods word, did visit Paul in prison, or was with
him prisoners, for the Gospel, as Paul was: they comforted Paul in prison,
they helped him, they provided for him necessaries, and so they were
confortable to him, and also woorkers with him, to the kingdom of God, that
was, in promoting Gods holy word to the uttermost of their powers with all
faithfulness and diligence. Mark how few did embrace the Gospelll, and did
stick to Paul in prison, or to his doctrine, of the which we gather, the
authority and verity of doctrine, not to be esteemed of the multitude of
men, that believe it, or openly without al fear of man or loss of gooddes, or
favor of me^, do profess it, for here Paul speaks but of three that was
workers, to the kingdom of God and yet Paul's doctrine was of God, and of
eternal verity.

Epaphras saluteth you which is of you, a servant of Christ, alwaie
earnestly labouryng for you in prayers, that you may stand perfect and
co^plete, full in all the will of God. I bear record to him, that he has
great care for you, and for them that are at Laodice, and for them which are
at Hierapole.

Paul goes furthe, with his salutacio^s, and now he saluteth them, in the
name of Epaphras a prisoner with Paul, by whose labors and preachynges, these
Colossians heard the Gospel, and believed it. This Ephaphras ceased not, to
pray for these Colossians, that they might be perfect, and filled in all the
will of God, after true knowledge. This Epaphras shows thoffice of a true
pastor, that it is his office to preach the word of God, purely and sincerely
to his flock: Secondly, to pray to God earnestly for them, that they might
stand sure, against all assautes of the devil, the world, and the flesh,
and that they might be fulfilled, in all knowledge of the will of God, and do
it: and as he was careful for his flock: so should other pastors be
careful, for their flocks committed to them.

Lucas a phisicia^ (derely beloved) saluteth you, and Demas. Salute the
brethren, which are at Laodicia, and Nimpha^ and the company that are in her
house. And when this Epistle shall be rehearsed of you, look that it be read in
the Church of Laodice, and that which is written from Laodice look that you
read it.

Paul remembers here Lucas, which was a continual fellow with Paul, in all
his Pilgrimage, and progress of his preaching, and a perpetual fellow of his
bonds, as Paul writes. ii.. Timo. iiii. Where he says, that Lucas is with
me alone. Mark, that when all forsaked Paul, Lucas remained with him alone,
that he should be to us, an example of constancy, and of sure faith, that we
should not forsake the faith of Christ, for affliccions, prisonment, and
bonds. This Lucas is he, that wrote the Gospel, called the Gospel of saint
Luke, and the Acts of the Apostles. Learn here, what fellows and Ministers
Paul had, that we may know that it helps much to true Godliness, and to
get good manners, to have company, with good and Godly men, of whom nothing is
heard, but that is good and Godly, soundyng alwaie to goodness.

2 Demas saluteth you.) This Demas, when Paul wrote this Epistle to these
Colossians, does here appear, not as yet to have shrynked away from Paul, or
from his doctrine. Therefore in the Epistle to Philemon (which does appear,
to have been written of Paul, when he wrote this Epistle) he calls Demas an
helper to him, but when Paul was cast in prison, and in danger of his life,
for the Gospelles sake, then al left Paul, and this Demas conueighed himself,
away from Paul, as it is written ii. Timo. iiii. Says Paul, Demas has
forsaken me, embraced the present world, and went to Thessalonica. Learn in
Demas that there be many now a days like to him: as long as with Paul all
things was prosperous, he was a faithful minister to Paul, and a faithful
disciple of Christ, but when he saw Paul cast in prison, he forsook Paul
and his doctrine, and followed the world, such there be in the world, that
will be favorers of Gods word, as long as pleasure, profit, favor of me^,
honor, glory, and riches, do follow the word of GOD, but if affliccion,
persecucion, loss of gooddes, riches, lands, possessions, or such other
adversity should follow the favoring of Gods word, then many shrynketh away
from it, and follows the world, as this Demas did, of such speaks Christ.
Math. xiii. Many for a time does believe, but in time of tribulacio^s, they
shrynke away. Therefore he that stands, let him look that he fall not, let
him not trust to much, to his own might or power, for if he do, he shall
deceive himself, and have a fall as Demas had.

3 Salute the brethren, which are at Laodice.) He desires the^ to salute in
his name, the brethren that are at Laodice, and Nympham, and the whole
congregation or company, in her house, which, he calls a Church: for a
small congregation, of faithefull Christians, may be called a Church. Note
that the whole house for the most part, do favor the Gospel of God, where as
the chief of the house do favor it, as this good Nimpha did favor the Gospel,
with all her household.

4 And when this Epistle shall be read of you, look that the Epistle, written
from Laodice, may be read emonges you, and this of the Laodicenses.) The
Apostle will this Epistle, first, to be read emonges the Colossians, and then
to the church of Laodice, that all might here it read, and be edefied by it,
and take some of the Godly lessons, taught in it, and he wills it to be
read, both to the church of ye Colossians, and of Laodice: of the which we
may gather, the holy scriptures, not to be communicated only, to one
co^gregacio^ of people, but to be mete for all Christians, that they might
come to salvation, by faith in Christ, Also, where as Paul here wills, an
Epistle of the Laodice, to be read emonges these Colossians, some thinks
that he would, the Epistle that he wrote to the Laodiceans (which Epistle I
have seen in Print) to be read to these Colossians. Other think, that he
would have red, emonges the Colossians, the Epistle that he wrote at Laodice,
and that they say, was the second Epistle to Timothe.

And tell Archippus, look that thou take heed of that Administracion, that thou
haste taken in the lord, that thou may fulfill it.

Now last of all he monisheth them, to admonish Archippus, the Bishop of these
Colossians, that he would look diligenty upon his cure, that he had taken in
hand, that he should know, that it was the Lords business, that was committed
to him: and that of it he should give a cou^pt to the Lord, in the last day.
Learn that Archippus was a Bishop, appointed to these Colossia^s, rather then
to other, and not as Paul was a Bishop, having like cure over all people.
And as it was Archippus duty, to have cure and care for all his people, and
diligently to watch, to do his duty, and to minister every thing in due
order, to the glory of God, and to the profit of other, so it was the duty
of these Colossians, to minister to Archippus, all necessaries for his living.
i. Corin. ix.i. Timothe. v. Matthew. x.

Salutacion by the proper hand of Paul: Remember you my bonds. The grace of
GOD be with you. Amen.

Paul shuts up his Epistle sealyng it with a salutacio^, written by his own
hand, as men writing Epistles uses to do, seals the Epistle, setting to
his own hand written, that it might be known, who wrote that Epistle, and be
the better loved.

2 Remember you my bonds.) In these words he signifies to them, that he
suffered bonds for their sakes, that they should walk in the way of the
Lord, and obtein eternal life, and that they should not be ashamed for his
bonds, which was to the glory of God, and to the health of Christians. And
in these words, he moves them to pity over him, and that they should offer
up fervent prayers, to the lord for him, and that they should not suffer him,
to want necessaries, seeing he was in bo^des for their sakes and health.

3 The grace of GOD be with you. Amen.) Last of all, he desires the grace of
GOD, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be alwaie present with them. In desiryng
grace of God, he began his epistle, and with desiryng of grace to them, he
ends his Epistle, signifiyng, that without the grace of God, we can begin no
good work, nor yet finishe it well, but by the grace of God, which would
have every man saved, and come to the knowledge of ye truth. To God the father,
and to his son Jesus Christ, with the holy ghost, be all honor, and glory,
now and ever. Amen.

EXCVSVM LONDINI, IN AEDIBVS RICHARDI GRAFTONI, TYPOGRAPHI REGII.

Anno salutis humanae. M.D.XLV.III.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM


