ornamental border containing device of William Middleton (McKerrow 106)

A TREATISE AGAINST the folishnesse of men in differringe the reformation of
their living, and amendment of their manners, Compyled by the godly learned man
John Riuius, and translated into English by John Banks.

TO THE MOST HONOrable, and his singular good lord, the lord Marquis
Dorsette his lordshyp, his humble orator Wissheth grace and health.
WHEN I weye with my self, and diligently examine the similitude in S. Paul
where he compares the Church of Christ to a natural body (most honorable
Lord) I find that he can not justly be taken for a membre of the same, which
does not employ his studies to this end, that he may likewise confer some
thing thereunto in his vocation and calling, as in the natural body every
membre helps the whole: For we se, that there is in a natural body such an
affection, and desire of every membre to help and maynteyne the other, that not
only the senses be redye to do their part and office, as the eye to see, the
ear to here, and so likewise in the test of the senses, but also all the
other parts of the body do so much care for the whole, that they shun no
danger, though it be never so great, to help and succor the same. If any man
than, which bears the name of a christian, shall spy for the any thing, that
may conduce and profit the mystical body, and does not his endeavor to the
vttermoste to bring the same thereunto: verily he is to be thought an
unprofitable membre, not worthy in my judgment to be accounted of that
membre, of whom Christ is the head. Surely it might be a great shame for us
Christians, if we should not (having such light of the gospel, as we have)
endeavor in some wise to profit the commonwealth of Christ, when we shall call
to mind the excellent saienge of the most divine philosopher, which is, that
we be not borne for our selves only* but part of our birth our native
country does challenge unto it, part our parents, and an other part also our
familyars, and friends. Plato did know only by the light of natural
reasone, that al excellent and good gifts came of god, and were given to
the intent that a man should therewith help, and profit others. Of the which
opinion were also all the philosophers, which had tasted of honest discipline
and learning.

Who so ever therefore does think him self to be a membre of the commonwealth
of Christ, which is his mystycall body, he must needs much more be enforced
of Christian knowledge and charity to employ his labors in bestowing those
gifts, which god has given him, to the profit of others. Now than seeing
that among the me^bres of this same mystical body many of them be oppressed
with grievous diseases, as desperacyon, to much affyance in them selves, and
trust in their own works, and other gross erroures, as supersticion,
idolatry. etc. whereby the most just wrath, and indygnation of god is provoked
against them, truly he were very unnatural, and should t^stifie that he had
not tasted of the spirit of god, which neither moved with thexample of the
hethen nor with love toward the brethren considering the great dangers,
that might ensue here upon, would take some pains, and endeavor to procure
medicines, so far forth as in him lies to ease, and help the same. We have
exaumples hereof, wherewith we might be much moved continued by the most
gracious workyng of god, even from the apostels time. For the holy fathers, and
martyrs beside their great travail in confutynge of heresies (which was,
and might be a sufficient testimony of their zele, and diligence) have left
also sondrye monumentes, and works as well parteynynge to the ordering of men's
manners and behauyour, as also to the confirmynge of their consciences. And not
only they but also men of this our age: for what godly wits has god stirred
up? And how diligently have they applied their studyes, and bestowed their
talentes in garnishynge good learning, and setting forth the sincere and pure
word of god? and to pass over them, that have taken excedyng great pains in
foreine, and straung countries, even here in England, god has moved many with
sundry gifts, some to be able to set forth works of their own, and to hunte
the Romyshe fox, and some always with open mouth to cry out against him, and
other some to translate of other men's. etc. And hereunto has god also reised
up the hearts of noble men, that they do not only assist, and defend them,
that bestow their labor herein, but also help forward with the same them
selves: among whom I may most worthily recompt your lordeshyp, which has been ever inclined to the setting forth of true godlynes, and religion, and to
the rotyng out of false and fey^ed supersticion. whereunto god has also
provided for you always ministers for the same. I therefore (though my talent
be but small) moved with these, and such like examples, thought that I could
not be justly rekened or taken for a membre of the mistical body of Christ, if
that, when all true chrystians be so busily occupied, and labor so dilgently
in the lords harvest, I should be found idle, and unoccupied, like to the
servant in the gospel, which hyd his talente, and brought it not forth to
profit others. This last winter therefore, when I read over two little books,
which D. John Riuius an excellent learned, and godly man, compiled in the
latyne tongue, the one of the refourmacion of man's manners, and living, the other
of encouragynge them to dye, that be vexed with sickness: and marueylynge much,
that such two books could be kept hyd so long, and not translated into
English, containing such a profitable and necessary matter, so apt and
convenient for our time: I thought that I should not be evil occupied if I
translated the same in to English that they might be made commune, and profit
the more, which when I had finished, musing with my self unto what patron I
might best direct the same. I found none like to your lordshyp, whether
your manyfolde virtues or your zele to advance the glory of god be considered.
And verily it seemed to me, that it could not honestly be dew to any besides
your lordshyp, for so much as it was done in your lordshyppes house. The one
part of my labor which is now finished, I bring, and humbly present to your
lordshyp at this time, not because you have any need her of for your self, but
because if it should be commended by your lordeship, it might be the better
received, and profit the more. For besides thopinion that men have conceived
of other virtues, where with your lordeshyp is endued, they have also conceived
a singular opinion o^ the zele your lordshyppe has to set forth the pure word
of god, and to rote out false and feined supersticio^: which thing may apere
very plain, (as they also gather) both by other things, and also by thorder
taken in your lordeshyppes house, concerning the true worshypyng, and due
serving of god. wherefore seeing that the thing of it self is so profitable
and necessary, undoubtedly it can not be but very well received of all men, if
your lordshyps commendacion be there unto added, which thing if it come to
pass, I doubt not, but as it has profyted much in the latin tongue, so shall
it sumwhat also do good in English. For although it is not so finely
translated yet I trust that the mind of the authore is so expressed that mine
industrye and labor herein, can not justly be reprehended, and fault found
withal of the tentyll and favorable reder, whom I shall in this place most
heartily require for to accept this my doing, and interpret every thing
herein, as he ought to do, for so much as this is even the first fruits of my
wit: and in so doing (if I shall perceive that this my labor shall profit
the same) I shall be much encouraged to go forward in such like studyes, as
may most conduce, and hereafter to enterprise greater things. But fearyng
lest I have been to tediouse to your lordshyp, and deteyned you longer, than
becomes me to do, from the sweet and comfortable reading of Riuius. I
commytte the book into your lordeshyppes hands, besechyng the everlasting and
immortal God father of our Lord, and redemer Jesus Christ, that he will grant
you daily, more and more increase of knowledge in his truth, and keep your
heart awake contynually to glorify him, that by thexample of your lordshyp
others may be styred up unto godly living: and that he will assist you, and
further you in all your godly affairs, which with the son, and holy ghost
reygneth for ever: to whom be given all praise, honor, and glory. So be it,

Your lordeshyppe his humble orator John Banks.

A TREATISE AGAINST the folishenes of men, in differrynge the reformation of
their living, and amendment of their manners.
IF SVCHE men, as will be taken for Christians would flee and abhorte so much
the deeds of the Epicures, and Saduceis, as they pretend* to detest the name,
and profession of them, verily they would refrain, and temper them selves
from wyckednes and mischief, and would use and exercise virtuous and godl^
living, no less than they now lyu^ obstinately in vice, and behave them
selves in all their doings both wickedly, and ungodly. And again the^ would
none otherwise observe, an^ keep the commandments of al^ mighty god, than
they now neythe^ fear him, nor dread him at al. Bu^ undoubtedly, there is not
one almost, which does so much abhor the thing it self in his heart
(which thing may plainly appear by our daily conversation, our manners, and
all that ever we do) as we eschew and flee the name. For how can those men be
assured, in their conscience, that souls are immortal, which for the most
part live, as brute beasts do. Or that there be rewards reposed for the
godly in heaven, or punishment ordained for wicked men in hell, which do in no
manner thing fear to transgress, and break the commandment of god? and do^
fall headlong into all kind of vice, and enormities, as though they did
imagine, that either god ^s but a ^estyng stock, and a feined thing, or the
sowles and bodies do dye both at once? And to grant, that (...) be some men,
which do both fear (...) and doubt not, but that he will both reward, and also
punyshe every one acordyngly, as he has deserved (of the which sort there be
but very few) Now I beseech you, what man is there, whom either the fear of
gods justice does withdraw from vice, or yet does induce, and bring in mind
to refourme, and amend his life? wherein thou may justly lamente, and
bewail the folly and state of us al, and much wonder at our blyndenes, or
rather madness, which in such shortness, and uncertainty of life do so behave
our selves, that we have no mind of any reformacion, or amendment of our life,
when we be crooked for old age, and have than skarsly one day to live: so far
of is it, that we go about, or entende^ that thing, when we be yonkers, and
in our floryshyng age. When I remember with my self, that such^ is the folly
of men, or madness rather as I may well call it, in deferring the reformation
of their life:

I think it meet, and necessary to search the causes out, why we are so
slow in that weyghtie thing, whereupon our salvation does wholly depend: for
when we shall have sought forth the causes, and declared what they be, I doubt
not, but that it shall be easy for us to find also some remedy for the disease.

The first and principal cause.
I Think therefore that our unbelief is the chefest and principal cause
hereof. For if we supposed not, that those things were fables, which are
mentioned in scripture every where of the last dowme, and of the voice of the
Archangell, and of the trumpe of god, and of the judgment seeate of the Lord,
whereat all men must stand of the punyshmente of the wicked, of the
everlasting and blessed life, which the godly after this miserable life
shall enjoy, of the resurrection of the bodies, and souls, either to be
partakers together of certain joy, or else of certain pain, without al
question we would not live thus as we do, and ^fferre the reformacion of our
life, but would live far other wise, and after an other sort, than we do: for
what myslyuer would not quake both body and soul, when so ever he should
remember the last dowme, sith that he shall in the same make a reckening of all
things, which he has either intended, thought, said, or done, and there
shall speak his own matter without any assistaunte, or man of law. Oh
terrible judgment to the wicked, which should never fall out of their
remembrance: for sith that the just, and godly shall uneath be able to stand
in this judgment, where shall than the wicked and ungodly appear? In this
judgment the son of god shall sytte upon all sorts of men, being than an
vpryght, severe, streyghte, and an intractable judge, which is now our
mediator, and advocate with his father. Al kind of men shall be called unto a
rekening, how they have passed over their days here in earth. The secrets of
hertes shall be disclosed, and showed abroad. The testimo^ie of every man's
conscience shall give against him self: shall accuse and condemn him. And to
be short, god will punyshe the ungodly by his ^ust severity, and most
fatherly, and mercifully preserve, and save the in^ocent; that is: as Paul does
inter^rete it: god will render, and give to every man acordingly, as he has
deserved. But in this judgment, not only the outward act shall be
condemned: As adultry, fornication, whordome, wytchcrafte, murder, sklander,
theft, robbery, sacrilegie, banketynge, riotinge, drunkenness, usury, and other
such like, as baudy, and unhonest talking, fond, folyshe, and rash ^anglyng
without measure, liynge, idle words, vicious communicacion, and infinite other
of the same sort, wherewith so^euer godly ears are offended, bu^ also the
unseen, and hyd ententes o^ the heart: such things, as we hau^ wyckedly either
wyshed or thought^ moreover the naughty affections o^ the mind, which be
contrary to the word of god, as anger, grudge, h^tred, ennimitie, malice,
envy, pryd^ covetousness, and desire of other men^ goods. etc. Who would not
than the remembrance of this judgment withdraw from vice, and stay, lest
he should fall all together, which is persuaded assuredly, that it shall be. One
of the old writers has a very good and notable saying. whether I eat or
drink (says he) or what thing so ever I do, the terible voice of the
archangell sowneth in mine ears. Arise you dead men, come unto your dowme:
which when I remember, I quake both body and soul. If the flesh then
stirs up any man unto beastly lusts, and bodily pleasures, or unto
gluttony, or ^urfettynge, or unto any such vice, ^et him by and by call to his
remembrance the dreadful day of dowme. If prosperity (as it does very often)
cause a man to be hauty and proud, if riches make a man fearse, and his
minded: if honor, promocion, or high dignity cause a man to think^ much of
him self, and to despise others, let him straight way remember the judgment
seat of the lord. If anger prycketh any manne to revenge his quarrel: if
grudge, and malice trouble the hertes of any: if covetousness enforces a man to
rob and deceive others: if the world does provoke any man unto ambycion,
pride, or ryote: if the devil by his suttyll, and false means, and craft
drive any man to speak blasphemy against god, or unto any other such
myschefe, let him think none other, but that he shall appear before the
judgment seat of the lord and shall there plead for him self. Let him fear
the sentence, that the judge shall pronounce, which does condemn the wicked
to hell fire. would god: would god I say, that this day of dowme would never
fall out of men's minds, Than surely^ every man would do, as he should do.
Kings and rulers would have their only, and special care upon the weal of
the communaltie committed to their charge, and would defend their Lybertye,
and uphold, and maynteyne both their private, and public ordynaunces, and
laws. Of the other part the commons would show them selves loyal and obedient,
toward their liege and soueraygne head, and king, and would not disdain to
have him rular over them, nor refuse to pai their rentes towles or trybutes:
but otherwise would render unto him as well due reverence and fear, as also
honor. etc. Every man would love his wife, as his own self: the wives would
reverence their husbands, and be in subjection unto them, as unto their lords
and heads. Parents would trade, and bring up their children in godly
education, and discipline, and as Paul wylleth in the fear and knowledge of
god: Again children would be obediente toward their parents in the lord,
and would ernestly follow their ways, and busely do their commandment.
Servants would be ready at the commandment of them, which as apperteyneth unto
the flesh are their masters and that with all honest reverence, and godly
fear, and symplicitie of heart: as also Paul exorteth. Again masters would
be meke, and gentil toward their servants, being well assured, that they
have also a master in heaven. Pastoures and mynisters would attend the lords
flock, as they are bounden. Rich men would relieve the poor with their
goods* wydowes would pray night and day, without ceassynge. Poor men would
take patiently, and well in worth their poverty, sithe that it is the will of
god, that it shall so be. The married man would live, as though he had no wife.
The unmarried man would refer all that ever he does unto the glory of god: what
will ye more? every man would do his office and duty in his calling, as he
ought to do: if the remembrance of the last dowme were ever before his eyes,
when god will require a reckenyng of our whole living, and of all our doings,
and will give to every man accordingly, as he has deserved, either reward or
punishment. We see daily with our eyes in a great and fervent plage time, when
death is every hour present before men's eyes: how careful they are, and how
diligentely they go about the reformation of their life: specially if they be
not such as do usurp falsely the name of Christistians, What? Ought not we
than much more to go about the reformacion of our life, at all times, all
hours, and every moment of the hour, and to repent unfeignedly, and bewail
our wicked and synful life, and pacify the wrath and indignation of god
against sin, sithe that by casualitie, and uncertain chances death is
imminent and at hand every hour? A wise man therefore will so lead his life
always, as men use commonly in the dangerous plage time, when they are, as it
were awaked out of their dream, and be careful, and go ernestely about the
reformacion of their life, and purpose to change it into better, and to
eschew vice, exercise justice and equitte, and finally to pacify gods wrath,
which is worthily stered, against us for our sin, by true repentance, and
remorse of conscience* I pray you, ought not every man, when there is no such
danger, nor fear of any plage, to be the like that before in the hot and
dangerous plage time he determined to be? Every man will grant that the hour
of death is uncertain, and that it is a thing most certain that we shall dye,
what a great folly is it than to fear death so much, which is every hour at
hand: nor to think at any time of the reformacion of our life? but thus it
is. We feel, and acknowledge the most just wrath of god aaynst syn in
adversity, as in plage, famine, yearthquake, dangerous dissases of the body,
but in prosperity, when we have the world at will, we fear not to abuse the
goodness of god. In this state we remember not death, which is iminent every
hour nor the last dowme, nor the terrible (...) of the Ar^hangel, of the
which S. Paul makes mention unto the Thessalon.) nor the sown of the lords
trumpe, nor hell, or everlasting pain, nor the unquenchable fire, nor the
darkness where there shall be weeping, and gnasshynge of teeth. Which things
verily we ought to remember at all times, whether it be in the morning at our
vprisynge, or at night when we go to rest, or at dynner, or supper, or when we
bathe our self for our healthes sake, or do any serious and weighty business,
or finally when we refreshe and recreate our minds with some honest pastyme.
But the ungodly can not be persuaded none other, but that these things are
fables, which the scripture sets forth of the last dowme, of the judgment
seat of the lord, of the voice of tharchaungel, of the trumpe of god, of
hell, and of everlasting torment and pain. And like as the heathen in times
past were persuaded, that these things were feyned, which the poets feyned
of Tartarus and Phlegethon, of Minoe and Radamanthis, of hell, and the region
of the deuelishe, and of the punishment of the same: whereupon Seneca took
occasion to say, that the poets deluded and feared us with vain menasses and
fears: So verayly a great part of men think, that these are but tales, and
contemn them as vain thretenynges, which are set forth to us in holy
scripture, of hell, of eternal death, of the fire, wherein shall be waylynge
and gnashynge of tethe, of the resurrection of the soul and body together, to
partake either joy or pain, when otherwise all these things do imprynte in
the hearts of godly men, and such as live in the fear of the lord, a
wonderful fear and horror. And are (as the po^te says) names, which even
sown fearful in our ears. Thou have the first and chefest cause, why we for
the most part all of us in this wise differ the reformacion of our life.

The second cause.
Now let us proceed unto an other cause, which is the hope of the mercy of
god: this hope is great in very dead, but yet it is such as they may well
enough deceive themselves with all. For of their hope they have no sure trial
at all. With this hope I say, the continual enemy of mankynge keeps man in
sin wonderfully, and by setting forth to him the mercy of god, brings him
unto this pass that he fears not the justice of god at all. But verily I say
unto you, that like as god grants forgeuenes at the first to the
repentaunte, and most fatherly shows his mercy unto such as be converted unto
him: so does he also sharpelye punyshe those men which do continue obstinatly
in vice. Such men then as repent not unfeignedly, conceive a false hope of the
mercy of god. But the devil notwithstanding by setting forth to men this hope,
brings this thing to pass, that they live on forth quietly, and securly in
vice and wyckednes, nor thyncke ernestely with them selves at any time of any
reformation or amendment. Yea, they des^ise thabundaunce and riches of the
bountifulnes and long sufferyng of god, being ignorant, that the goodness of
god does induce, and lead unto repentance: as Paul testifye^* In this place
also let us call that thy^ unto remembrance, which our savior speaks of in
S. Mat. Repent, because the kyngedome of god is at hand: And also that which
the lord spoke by the mouth of his prophet Esai. Unto whom should I have
respect, but unto such as repent, and are low in spirit, and fear my
commandments? In S. Luke also he declares the same thing: Except ye
repent ye are al of you utterly cast away: And in the acts. Peter says in
this wise: repent therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be taken
away Here I might allege infinite places of scripture, which make very plainly
for this purpose, that no man, which does not unfeignedly repent, can conceive
certain hope to have remission of his sins, which I will omi^ at this time.
For as I have said already, he looks in vain for to hau^ forgeuenes at gods
hand, which truly repents not with his heart* And although there is no
time o^ repentance late in gods sight: As appears by thexample of the thief
which is spoken of in scripture: Also god will not the death of a sinner but
that he repent, and live: yet who may not se, how dangerous a thing it is
to differ the reformacion of our life, since that there is no man (as the poet
says) in such favor with god, that he can assure him self of the next morrow
following. For many times death crepeth, and steleth upon us: when we look
least for it: so that than there is no time of repentance left, nor space to
reform and amend our lyuiug. Here I think it needs to speak of those
things which Plinius makes mention of in his natural history, touching
sudden death, sense that there is nothing almost in our time more common than
the same. For not long ago two old men of our country: which dwelte both
in one city, dyed sodaynlye upon a certain night, when they did resort unto
a certain woman: that they were wont to company with all: the one dyed of a
sudden passion: the other was thrust through with a daggar: And nere another of
them ever spoke word after that time: Now* let every man judge for him self,
in what danger these twain dyed. And though it be a thing common as well to
the godly, as ungodly, to dye suddenly. And the just can not be, but in good
state, what death so ever they dye: yet verily a man can not devise, how
horrible a thing it is for one to dye thus, which is with out repentance, of
how many have we herd which were slain out of hand by multyplyenge words
among other ruffyans in tauernes which have been taken in bed with other men's
wives, or have been other wise suddenly cast away by one means, or other, in
gamnyng or otherwise? to pass by those, which have broken their necks of
horseback: have peryshed sodaynlye by shypwreake: and have been oppressed with
the ruin and falling of houses upon them, or with some other such chances?
Let us then admit this, that god would have the sinner to repent rather than
to dye: as he undoubtedly would: yet by reason of uncertain chances we can not
without great danger diferre the reformation of our life: yea though we put our
hope firmly in the mercy and goodness of god. we must repent therefore while
we live upon yearthe, and be lusty and have our health: but the world is
clean contrary. For we se daily that the yongeman gives him self to belly
chere, drinkinge and riotte: he flaterethe him self, and says to him self
that he may live many years, and therefore myndeth not any thing the
reformation and amendment of his life: but differreth and puts that thing
of, until his old age: whereunto whether he shall ever attain, or never: it
is hard for any man to say: For tell me one of many thousands, which has
lived until that age, but for his pleasure let us admytte that he may live so
long as he would wyshe. What does he than? I pray you, goes he about any
reformation or amendment of his life? No no. This is ever more his saying: I
will amend to morrow, to morrow. And thus with such delayinge he flatereth,
and deceives him self at length: for he is uncertain, even as al other be,
whether god will permit him to live until the same night, or not: much less
is he certain of the next morrow. Thus whiles a man differreth the
reformation of his life, often times death suddenly steals upon him: As we
may daily se by experience: And yet we can not be admonished and warned by
other men's perilles and harms to take heed. The devil leads us on forth,
and feadeth us in such wise with vain hope, of the mercy of god, and of
longe^ life.

But here though it can not be denied, nor ought to be denied, but that the
repentant receives of gods mercy at all times: nor that he needs to fear or
fall into desperation, which is at the very point of death: yet I reckon, that
there is none so folish that he will chose that thing which is ieoperdsome,
and leave the other, wherein there is no daungere at all. Wherefore that no
such fear or grudge of conscience remain, let us goo about the reformation
hereof betimes: nor differ it in any manner wise: sithe that we are uncertain
of the next morrow following. And as towchynge the mercy of god, let us
remember continually the saying of Ciprian. So much as god is (says he) ever
bountious, and merciful for his fatherly love, and tenderness toward us: so
much ought we to fear and dread him, for the majesty of a judge: that he
bears.

Thus shall it come to pass, that through the fear of gods wrath we shall be
withdrawn, and brought from vice, and shall not yet through the hope of his
mercy be deceived, and corrupted in security. A world it is to consider, how
the popyshe prestes, flatter them selves with this self same hope of gods
mercy, which keep concubines all the days of their life: and lyue-vnder the
pretense of single life in most shameful whordome, and abomination: nor
think ernestly with them selves of any reformation at any time: or of
dischargynge them selves of their whores. And though they be guilty in their
own conscience of this their vicious and abomynable living, yet they go to
their mass sacrifice every day and do also resort and presume unto the lords
table, as they do take it to be. They eat the lords bread unworthily: and
drink unworthily of the lords cup. Oh lord: how dangerfull and horrible is it
to live in that state, wherein if death should prevent a man: he were utterly
condemned, and cast away both body and soul. Those than, that after this
manner keep whoores all the days of their life, and do in the same thing
obstinately continue, nor purpose at any time to dismis their strumpets: nor
truly do repent and cry god mercy with sighynge and tears, for their wicked
and sinful life, do flatter them self falsely with this hope.

But here peradventure some man will obiecte this, and say. What? good sir, do
they not cry god mercy oftentimes? and beseech him to have mercy upon them: do
they not daily say in their euensong? Convert us (Lord) and turn thine anger
from us? Also in the later end of their matines, lord have mercy upon us. I se
farther they pray in many other places, that it will please god to have mercy,
spare and forgive them? I here your reasons very well: Nor I entende not to axe
you the question or reason with you in this place, how they pray? or with what
entente of mind: or what zele, or what feruentnes of spirit? But admit, that
they pray with an ardent devotion, and a mind erecte, and lift up to god:
with most ernest affection, what can ye conclude hereupon? For what profyteth
it them, onles they discharge them of their harlots in that mind, purpose
never to receive them again, and in that purpose to live chastely, and
continue even to thend? But for so much, as they do not repent (as we see
plainly) surely we need not to doubt, but that they either hold it to be a
fable, which is taught in scripture, of the last judgment, or else fondly
flatter them seues with this hope of the mercy of god.

Oh ill favored, and horrible face of that the popish church. Such as should
rule, teach, and instruct others, not so much by their learning, as example
in living, become so dissolute, that in them others take great cause of
offense. Mark diligentely the lay men, when they repair unto the mystical
table of the lord: how reuere^tly, with what preparation in confessyng their
sins. etc. with what godly behauour and devotion they come? how diligently
la^ure they, and endeavor that no grudge remain behind in their conscience?
how certainly purpose they thense^orth to amend that, which is amiss, and to
refourme their living? but consider now, what our whorishe masmongers commonly
use to do. Verelye (as one of their order witnesses) they come from
thimbrascinge of a whore unto the altar, and that not ones or twyse, but often
and daily, without any punysshemente or shame. They pass not for any
reformation, they mind not to discharge them of their whores. No sign of
repentance follows of the reknowlegynge of their faults: and to say the
very truth, they seem to be in name only christians: in dead very heathen,
and publicans. Than some man will are of me, whether there be any hope that
such shall be saved, or not. Verily to speak my conlcyence: I think that they
can co^ceyue no hope of the mercy of god, because S. Paul affirms unto the
Hebrews, that god will judge whorkepers and adulterers: And does plainly deny
that those shall be the inhericers of the kingdom of god. Now if the prestes
of Balaan persuade them self, that Paul did speak the truth, as it can not
be denied but he did: can they in such abomination, and fylthy living,
conceive any hope of salvation: considering that they neither do repent
unfeignedly, nor purpose to discharge them of their minions? but if they do
not believe S. Paul, we take them to be christians amiss, for they are no more
to be taken for Christians than the heathen and publicanes are, like as our
savior says. By what law or authoritte do the bishops the^ suffer such
abominable livers to continue within their jurisdictions and dioceses? why
license they such men by their authority to preach in churches: wherefore do
they wynke at such abominacion, and permit them for bryb^s to use yearly such
whordome? This thing is so manifest, that it can not be denied, so filthy, and
cried out on, that it is not lawful to bear with it. And it can not be
covered, or cloked any longer. Though than they will say, that they are not
plainly ungodly: because they attrybut^ honor to the name of god, yet it is
manifest, that they can not be, taken for godly: because they give them se^ues
to such things, as are most contrary to godliness, like as Hilarious
affirms, where he writes of such. And surely such are they also, which are
not grieved and offended with the abominable living of those, and openly do
detest the undefiled and pure bed, as S. Paul calls it: that is, the honest
and laweful matrimony of the mynisters of the congregation. Oh terrible thing
to be hard: oh miserable and lamentable state of the congregation. O lord
Jesus, come and succor thy church, which so long as the popisshe kingedome
endured, had such pastors and mynisters, as were almost faythles. But some man
will peradventure contrary me, and say, that they believe to be saved by
Christ's benefit: well, that I stand not in this point with you: admit that
it be so as ye say. Now believe they S. Paul, where he affirms that
whorekepers and adulterers shall not be inheritours of the kyngedome o^ god? I
think not the contrary, but they believe it, for we ought not to think the
contrary. Sithen then these men be of that number whom Paul denies shall be
inheritours of the kingdom of god, or the holy ghoost rather. (The thing must
be granted of necessity, which can be denied in no wise) how can they
promise them selves salvation, in Christ By this reason then they believe that
they them selves shall be saved: and whorkepers, such as they are in very deed,
shall be condemned: Lord for thy mercy what ignoraunte blyndes is here, what
lack of judgment is this? do they not se plainly, that the^ speak
contraries? If they may hau^ any sure hope to be saved, then tha^ that Paul
writes unto the Ephe^ans: is false: but if that be a great^ ouersyghte, and an
absurd thyng^ to affirm, these men can conceive no certain, and assured
hope, or trust, that the father is pleased with them for Christ's sake. Than
what trust is this? how think they, to be saved, They that have but small
sight in Logique, may easily se, how strong, and pythy our reason is. The
first part in logique termed Mayor, is taken out of S. Paul: for he says,
that whoorekepers, and adulterers shall not be inheriters of the kyngedome of
god: The second part called Minor, is confirmed, and verified by the whole
world: for they pronounce with one assent, that our Romanistes are such: Of
these twain then the Catholic may frame such a conclusion: that all the
pack of papists living in abominable whoredom are banished men out of the
kyngedome of heaven: All men though they be but sklender logicians se very
well, that this is a necessary conclusion, which is brought in and gathered of
the former prepositions, which are manifest true, and granted of our
adversaries. This argument is fashioned in the first figure, and fourth mode.
Therefore the popish pristes living in such abominable whoredom can conceive
none assured hope, and trust of salvation, nor have true faith, as they
feygne, though they brag and spread abroad certain incredible tales of
their faith: but some man will peradventure obiecte, and say: that it may
come to pass, that such as live wickedly and ungodly this day, may to morrow,
or after, when it shall please the goodness of God repent, and acknowledge their
sins and after the reknowlegynge thero^ live innocentely, and in the fear o^
god: therefore we ought not so lyght^ to despeire of the salvation of any man. I
have weyed your reason dyligently: and no doubt of it, we may se, how such
men study the reformation of their life, and how truly and unfeignedly they
repent. For where have you seen heretofore of many thousands but one, which
having such remorse of conscience, has forsaken his whore, and fullye
purposed never after that time to company with her? I wot well enough what I
say: for it is evident and known. There is scarsely one of every thousand that
casts thus with him self, for to amend his living, and to forsake his
whore in good ernest, and with his heart. But now to leave these things: how
stynkyng and abominable is the outward face of that popyshe church: wherein
the superintendaunt^s, (...) ministers do live in such open abomination, so
that others are not a little offended therewith? What a thing is it, when
whorkepers must exhort men to chastytie: the impenitent to repentance, the
wicked to godly living? yet this thing is done daily, as we may se: not only
in vyllagies, but in great cities: and peradventure also in some regions, but
without al question it is done in all lands, all places, where so ever the
pope is supreme head: the bysshopes them selves lokynge on, permittynge, and
almost approuyng it: which thing because they sharply punyshe not, as by
their office they are bounden to do, but for brybes suffer men to live in most
abominable whordome, they encourage them to take pleasure, and delyght in the
thing, and do set them forward, who^ they ought to bridle, and keep back:
yea they be the cause, that though the priests live in such abomination, yet
they think it no sin at all, and them selves do minister to the same
occasion by sufferinge them to continue obstinatly in such whordome. Of the
which one thing, as of their other cure and office, they shall render a
straight account, and reckenynge, but here some man will axe me, what were the
bishops duty in this behalf: I will tell you, it were none other but this:
not to wink, and dissemble in such abominacyon (as S. Paul exorteth) neither
yet to permit it, or bear with it. First they should admonish them and
reprove the vice of whoredom. Than if they profyted nothing by so doing, the
next remedy were to put them out, and let them have nothing to do in the
congregation, and to excominicate the^ out of their temples and sacred places,
And to cast out of the assembles of faithful men, such as are adjudged to hell
fire: and to give them (as Paul wills) into Satan's hands to mortify their
flesh, that in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ they might be saved. I say
that this were their office: if they should execute the same, and approve their
doings in the lords sight, which is the self same judge, that will require,
and have an account of all their doings.

They should show them selves authors and example gyuers of good works, and
an example of the faith full as well in their communication and conversation, as
also in love, spirit, faith, and pureness of life. But sith that now a days,
the bishops commonly show them selves such to the inferior sort of the
clargie, yea and rather worse than the same is, by their example they do^ not
only cause, but also encourage the ignorant fools to offend more boldly a
great deal then other wise they would, for they think that they may boldly
by the bishops example do so. Yet I wonder much at it, that they can not be
awaked, and sterred to repentance, sense that they have so many, and sundry
occasions thereunto: For their office is to viset, comfort, confess and
assoyle the sick: To minister the sacrament of the body, and blood of the
lord, and the last unction, to be present with the sick at their death and
departure: To sing dyryges, in the which there is mention made so many times
of the day of anger, of the day of calamity, of the sorrowful day: of the
fearful judgment of god, of eternal condempnation: of the these, which
repented late, in the which also they seek, and pray, that they feel not the
peines of death, nor be bound with the cheine of sin. And besides all this
they give attendaunce to the beer, and ^inge the funeral mass, and burye the
dead, omittyng no ceremonies: yea, even when they walk in their temples, and
churches, they may behold, and read Epitaphies graven upon graves and tombs,
whereby they might be admonished, not only of me that be dead, but also of
death it self: which dayelye and hourly hangs over their heads: also of
the last dowme, of the judgment seat of the lord, and such other.

Moreover in their Requiem mass they are warned of the coming of Christ: of
the resurrection at the last day, of the voice of the archaungell, of the
trumpe of god. etc. Therefore sith that these things can not be a warnyng
sufficient for them, and cause them to repent, of two things, the one must be
the cause without question: either that they think those things to be but
fables, which be taught us in scripture, of the last dowme, and are in the
Epicures opinion, that sowles be not immortal: or else that they flatter them
selves, as I have showed with false hope of the mercy of god.

The third cause.
I Find that the third cause hereof, is the custom of sin, which is in a
manner, made natural in long continuance. For like as it is hard for a man to
alter nature, so custom, if it be ones roted, can not easily be plucked up
and expelled: And therefore it is that learned men do call custom an other
nature. It is not very much disagreynge fro this purpose, that a certain man
says. Such vices as we have accustomed our selves to, from our tender age, can
not be without great difficulty weded out afterward, which thing though it
be very certain and true, yet who sees not how fondelye fathers bring up
their children in cokeryng, and pamperyng them? for from their infancy they be
given to no^e other thing, but to delicious fare, and to the beallye pleasures
of the body: They refrain not from unseemly and baudy talking: they swear
and blaspheme god: they go ruffelynge in their gorgeous gear and trype in
their purples: They wear cotes of diverse colors, hose cut and pounced out
with sarcenets. Yet I omit the gardynge of their cotes, which is very
folyshe: for there comes no profitte at all thereof, furthermore what thing
so ever they do, they do it fearslye, hardely, and boldly: There is in them
no myldnes, nor sobrenes: They exhibet not dew honor to their parents: they
do not reverence aged men, nor suffer their egalles, and companions: what will
ye more: they think, that what so ever they do, they may do it without blame.
There is in them no shame, no fear of god at all, that can withdraw them fro
vice: They pass for no honesty, and virtuous living, and less a great
deal for religion and doing their duetye to godwarde. Yea parents them
selves now a days with evil example corrupt their children, so that they can
not by their corrections bring them into fear of them, nor by they^
commandment withdraw them fro that, that they set their minds on: when
surely they should do nothing, when their children are present that were not
lawful to be done, nor say any thing, that might not honestely be spoken.
Their living should be so godly and virtuous, that therewith their children
might be moved to such like: their manners, and conversation should be such, that
thereby their children might learn, when so ever they had respect, unto the
same, both what they should follow and enbrace: or fle and eschew. But when
the father does expreslye declare that thing in his own manners, which he
reproves in his children, does he not, whiles he blames them, accuse him
self? What face can he have to find fault with his children. which with his
ill example corrupts them? How can he seuerelye reprove any vice in his
children which may find in him self vices more worthy to be reproved?
Wherefore let parents remember, that it is their duty, and very requiset in
them, to live without blame, and virtuously: and that for diverse causes, both
lest they be example to their children of naughtynes: and that they may ius^ly
reprove vices in the^ last of all that through their slack negligence the
aucthorite of fathers be not diminished. Thus much is declared by yt, which the
poet says: How can thou take the aucthorite of a father in correctynge thy
children, when being an old man thou thy self committeste offenses both more
heinous, and worthy of reproach. Such a like thing Nausistrata says in
Terence, where she reproves her husband, because he was grieved with his
son, which haunted the Stews: and yet he was a great deal more to be
blamed him self: what just cause have thou (says she) to chyde him? To these
is Artemones saying in Plaut. agreeable. Is it meat for a father to give ill
example to his children, art thou not ashamed. Let us note also, what was
brought in the declamacion of the young man against his father, who^ he
accused of madness: father says he, the I blame, and none but the for all my
riote, and because thou brought me not up under the law of a well ordered
house, nor kepeste me in fear and awe, wherewith I might have been wtdrawen
from such vices, as raygne most commonly in young men. Yea thou was a setter
on, and leader unto such unthriftiness. But this Tobye an holy man and derely
beloved of god did not, which taught his son (as his history declares) even
of a child both the fear of god, and also to refreine from vice: he was him
self an example of godly living, to his son: he busied him self to declare
him such one to his son in every condition as he wyshed to have him. But now
a days when youth should be traded and brought up in good learning and gods
word, how be they occupied: verily I am ashamed to speak it: yet I will not
dissemble with them, for very conscience sake I am enforced, and driven to it
sore against my will, I take god to record. Most part of teachers (I do not
speak generally of all) do give their scholars so much of the bridle, and
such lybertye, and al to procure and win the love, and frendshyp of their
parents, or at lest not to displease, and offend them, that they put it in
their choice whether they will learn, or not, neither refrain they them fro
vice by sharp correction, nor cause them to profitte by grave admonitions:
They trade them not in the knowledge, and fear of god, nor instruct them in
modesty and other virtues, besides that such innocence and streyghtnes
appear the not in their own manners, as is requisite, nor such humanity, and
gentylnes, as should be in such, as bear the person and resemble fathers, but
to much slackenes, and negligence, as they were companions, and play ^elowes
rather then teachers, and instructours. And by such liberte with out
punyshemente, their scolers become not only dispisets of their masters and
teachers, but also fearse, selfwylled, negligent, sowleyne, and stubbo^ne. Yt
is neadles to speak ought of their prodigious apparel, of their indecent and
vnsembly behauioure: of their bostynge, their bragging, and iettynge up, and
down with their rapers, and hispanyshe clokes: of their prodigal, and large
spending, even when their techers look on, and se it well enough but dissemble
and wynke at it, more over of their contynuall riottynge, feastynge,
banketynge, playenge, daunsynge, quaffynge all the night long and watchynge
that I speak not of other good fellowship, that is among them? Of this, which
I say I am certain: for their dissolute living is such, that it can not be
covered, nor hyd, nor yet excused in any manner wise. Wherefore sith that
masters, permit and give such liberte to the youth, whereof they have the
charge and ouersyght, as to frequente, and use such naughtines, and to fall
headlonge into all kind of enormities, which should most busely, diligently,
and streyghtly bridle and snaffle their impudent boldenes and suppress and
bring down their fearse and great hertes, and restrein and break the wild
riottous youth with good lessons, grave warnynges and corrections: what hope
may there be conceived of such, when they shall come to mo years, and be more
at their own swing, and liberty? Of all lykelyhod it should be thus, that he
which from his chyldhod has been trained in vice, shall not without great
difficulte become virtuous, and godly afterward, nor that he, which of a
child has been an vn^hrift, shall be easily reformed, when he comes to full
years, and man's state: it takes such place in us, whereunto we have been
accustomed from our tender age, like as the poet says. Again such things
the mind^ forgets not lyghly, as it has learned of long time: I would wysh^
with all mine heart, and I pray god* that al towns, and cities would w^ ponder,
and wey this matter, an^ would not be led by affections in choosing a teacher,
and men for their youth, nor have in this behalf respect to kynred, and
frendshyp, or to the commendations, and requests of friends. Surely this is a
great and weyghty matter, so that men ought not to admit, and take a master
for every jack gentilmans request: consideringe that here upon rests the
whole wealth of a realm. He should be an honest and learned man, which were
able to teach, and trade them in the knowledge and fear of god, and also in
good learning, and moral virtues. But nevertheless it can not be expressed,
how far men be in this* point deceived, which do not place and prefer well
learned men, such as are for their honesty, and virtuous conversation and
living, well tryed^ and for their conditions and man^s praise worthy, and
known to be very diligent, and peynfull in teaching and for these admit a
sort of unlearned curyfauours, such as seek for none other thing, but to be in
favor with noble men, and to be reputed worthy of preferme^t, and me^ men to
teach, and bring up their children in good letters, and tongues when in very
dead they be no more apt for that purpose then a cammel to dance: as we say
commonly in our English proverb. Such folyshe dreams they teach, as no
learned, or politic man being unlearned could hear, but he must be
constrained to laugh: what rude fellow of the country may not judge it, weyenge
it diligently, to be very fond^ and folyshe. Such is their ignorance in all
kind of good learning: And though they be thus, yet they have wonderful
means, to cover, and clooke it. But for as much, as they can be of none
authority, and reputacion for lack of learning (for these things be atteyned
by none other mean, but by learning only) they give their scolers in their
studies to much liberty, and by reason thereof corrupt, and mar their
young, and tender wits. And this they do for none other ^hyng, but to flatter
them, and curifauoure. But let us return unto our purpose. Sith therefore
that both parents, and also masters, and teachers do not only meynteyne,
but cheryshe, and cocker young ^abes, and children i^ such folly, and be^e with
the in such vice: and give them leave to do, what so ever they list, nor at
any time endeavor to tame, and snaffle their wyld appetites, what marvel is
it, if they be, found thus naughty and vicious, when they come to their full
years, and man's state, which have of children ben trained, and enbred, with
such vice? Specially if this be also considered, that custom is altered in
continuance of time in to nature: as we have declared here tofore. If these
men therefore at any time do fully purpose to repe^te them and refourme their
living: as when their conscience moves them, or the burden of their syn
prycketh them? yet custom has so prevailed in the^ that whether it be against
their will, or not their knowledge, they daily fall into worse, and worse
enormities, and like mad men dyfferre the reformatyon of their life. Consider
now I pray you, what ioly iunkers and lusty brutes these will be, when they
shall come to be citizens, and intermedlers in matters of the common wealth:
which by their fathers have been thus cokered, and by their teachers so nisely,
and softly used: nor have been kept strayghtlye to their learning, as they
should have been? what other thing but this, is the cause of it, that there be
now of days so many adulterers, deflourers of mayde^s, baudy and pernicious
ruffyans? that we have such plenty of dissers, charders? and that such wicked
and abomynable lyuers are sprede about in every quarter, but only naughty
education, and bringing up: well than, such as impute this thing to the new
learning, had need of a purgation to pourge their brain, and the powers of
their wit: for be like the humors fall down in such abundance, that their
sight is stopped: so that they are not able to judge of things. No no, the new
learning hereof is not the cause, but naughty bringing up, as I have declared:
the slacknes and vnredynes of the maiestrate to do, and execute his office: for
in this place I speak not of kings, and princes: If magistrates I say, would
sharply, and straightly punyshe offenders without any berynge with them, nor
favor other part in any wise: then we should se better order every where and
among all states of men. If the law which was made by Julius, and is named
commonly Iulia lex, were called again, which does punyshe adultri with death,
nor permits fornication to lack just peine, and deserved punishment: if
also such as abuse the name of god, as they that speak blasphemye against god,
and swear by Christ his cross, his wounds, and blood: If they that use
rauernes, playenge, and walk up and down in time of a sermon: if
dissobediente children, that exhibit not dew honor to their parents: If
thieves, morderers, dissers, raueners robbers, vserers, iuglers, dronkerdes,
gluttons, and such as have spent, and made a way their living in belly chere,
and unthriftiness. If sklaunderers, scolders, such as be perjured and reporters
of vain tales: And finally if al offenders were streyghtly punyshed, surely
there should be both less occasion given to offend, and also good men should
not have so great cause to complain of the manners of men of this age. Let the
magistrate therefore remember his office, and think that he must surely give
an account at the day of dowme. Let him learn of Paul that he bearethe
not his temporal swearde for right naught, for he is gods minister, appointed
of god to punyshe offenders: As it appears plainly unto the Romans.
Forasmuch then, as Paul declarethe that a law was ordained not for just men,
but the unrighteous: for the disobedient, liars, such as intyce other men's
servants from them, and are perjured: forasmuch also as the magistrate in this
behalf is as it were a minister of the law, certes he can not be slack in
executynge his office, without great reprofe. Let potestates therefore, those
I mean, that are in office, and have authority, restrain this liberty to
offend, without punishment, by one mean or an other, which thing if they do
not execute: they do very naught: and it will be undoubtedly laid to their
charge, at the last day. Who so prohibiteth not men to offend, when he may, in
a manner commands them so to do: I fear me greatly, lest the heathen men's
severity, and streyghtnes, in punyshyng vice shall be a reproach to us, and
accuse at the last dowme our negligence, and slacknes herein. There was among
them punishment ordained, and appointed by the law for all offenders, and
trespassers: They had their sonmers their examiners, and judges, which did most
rigorously se vice, and wickedness punyshed. Thus were fearse and wild fellows
for fear of punyshement kept back from the outward act: for fear of
punishment, they brydled, and brought their wild affections into subjection:
for fear of punishment, they conquered, and overcame their lusts: and so
ran not headlynge into vice? But now a days by a reason of liberty without
punyshemente, and slackenes of men in office, which forgive offenders at the
first, nor do punyshe vice so severely, as they should do, a blind man may se,
how much the (...) order, and polycy^ is fallen away, and decayed: No man
causes lych^ry to be punyshed: no not adultrye, and fautes, which are very
heinous. No man correctethe the dysobedyence of children toward their
parents, the styfe rebellyon of inferyoures against heads and superiors, the
detractacyon, and refusing of laweful impery, and authorite. No man makes a
restreynt for superfluous apparel: No man represseth the light and mad
conceyte of men, and pride not only for their gorgious, and kyngelyke
arraymente, but also for the dyuersitie of colors, for cuttynge, and gardynge
their garments. No man restreyneth their large expenses, and costs in their
breakefastes, their dinners, and sumptuous suppers: And though they drink both
night and day, there is nothing said to it. No man punyssheth carders,
diessers, vserers, engrosers, skolders, cursers, the perjured, and such as
speak blasphemye against god: And yet I have not touched the common stews in
every city, the liberty permitted within the bishop of Romes dioceses to
keep whores: and impunitie of all vices, and enormities. Men in authority
therefore should wtoute all de lay punyshe such: not that it is an offense to do
so, but that all occasyon to do ill might be removed: and taken away. In
punishyng three things, be chyfly to be considered: first that thou study his
reformation, whom thou punysshest: Than that by his example thou make a^erde
others from committing the like offenses: Thyrdly, and last of al, that by
weadynge out the naughtye and un godly, the innocente may live at rest and in
quietness. Hitherto statutes have profited nothing: we must now therefore take an
other way. And here let ^s consider that the magistrate bears not his sword
for a show: As Paul witnesses: when need requires therefore, let him draw it
to punyshe and cut away vice, and let not men long cry for their redines and
promptnes in executyng their office, which are in authority, and do
intermedle in such matters that in as much, as perteyneth unto the outward
policy* we be not found wors, than the Heathen, and give, and ministre by our
slacknes to the enemies of the gospel, and Christian name occasion to
sklaunder, and speak ill by our religion, as it happeth many times: How would
ye have the turks to think, that our relygyon is good, sith that the
professors and teachers of it are so vicious, and abominable undoubtedly they
may justly, and by good right hit in our teach and obiecte to us so many
riottours (as one certain man say the) so many dronkerdes, aduouterers,
fornycatours and whoryshe ruffyans, so that we in very dead may be greatly
ashamed of our behalf. They will and may much against our vices: they will
also as they justly may, find fault with and reprove our superfluity: They
will and may lay to us for a reproach, our beastely and voluptuous living. And
thus by reason of our vices, and our ill living, the word shall be diffamed: And
as Paul says, the name of god shall be sklaundered among the Heathen, for our
sakes. And though riot is a vice of every time, and age, and has so ben, and
belly chere also, as breakefastes deyntye dynners, sumptuous suppers, excess
in meat and drink* aduoutry fornycation violent wrongynge, and oppressynge of
the pore, by powers: the neglectyng of good laws, and ordinances, which we
find, that every learned man reproved in men of his time (like as Seneca
affirmed, that none age was ever void of all blame) yet in our time vices have
wonderfully encresed, and not only vices, but also the impunitie of vice,
which is the origin, and cause of vice. Good order is nowset at naught, youth
is corrupted by to much lybertye, all kind of wyckednes is grown up, and
increased wonderfully, so that ungodliness self, and Epicurisme seems to have
invaded, and occupied a place among men, and possessed a kyngedome, among
Chrystyans. Men do little regard good laws, and ordynaunces: but do al
together follow pleasure, and carnal lybertye. Wherefore it were the office,
and dewty of kings, and bishops by their authority to withstand such
enormyties and to remedy them: sith that for this cause they were exalted, and
called unto such an high dignity, and god would that they should excel in
might, and power. He commands them to have their people in subjection, and
to look over them, as though they were set up on an high mountain, to espy
out vices and enormities, and most rygorously to restreyne, and punyshe the
same, and to defend the godly, and fear the naughtye from their vice by
severe punishment, and to defend and meynteyne justice and truth, and set forth
and dilate the religion, and glory of god: Wherefore let them remember their
office, and though they can not clean extirpate, and abolyshe such
enormities, as have crepte in, and are roted in men's hertes: yet at least let
the^ go about to restreine the same And though it consists not in them to
make other men godly, and Christians (for that is the work and office of the
holy ghost) let them yet in devour to bring this to pass, and effect, that
we be not found either Pagans or wors, then they be. And let magystrates
charge parents straightly with this thing, that they do se their children
traded and brought up in good learning, and also in the knoweledge, and fear
of god even from their chyldhod. For surely the magistrate ought most of all to
tranayle in this thing, sith that it is a thing so profitable for the commonwealth, and the preservation of towns, and cytyes rests in this one thing
chefly. If they lo^ed but to this one thing dylygentlye, and executed their
office herein, we should not be troubled with such vices, as have heretofore
reigned, and yet raygne in many places: which thing undoubtedly can not be
provided for, by any statutes, or laws: but only by this mean, which I
have showed, that is to wit by the godly education, and bringing up of
youth. For sith that laws punyshe offenses already committed: godly education,
lets a man to commytte any thing worthy of punyshemente: Laws do but
correct vices, godly education keeps them far of and suffers no such
thing to be: it is very euidente, that godly education does more profyt the
commonwealth, then laws, and Statutes do. It is commonly seen in our time,
that such as have been brought up in vice, are not refreined, and brought in
fear by the punyshement, which the law ordeyneth and appoynteth for vice,
and enormities. This was the cause therefore that prudent, and wise rulers were
wont to labor, and travail herein chiefly, and have their specyal care on
this one thing not alonely how to punyshe vice, but how to preuente and take
away the causes thereof. Which thing because they did se, might the best be
brought to pass, if youth should be brought up in good learning, and in the
fear of god: and if fathers employed their diligence, and endeavor to the same
end: they thought it best to labor, and travail chefly therein: But from
this dygressyon let us return again unto our purpose.

The fourth cause.
I Find that wealth, and prosperity is the fourth cause which does inebriate
the minds of men, in such wise that they neither remember god, nor constantly
purpose to refourme and amend their living: Therefore one ancient writer
says very well: that like as of prosperity riotte proceeds: even so of riotte
comes both other common vices, and also ungodliness, and the neglecting of
gods word and co^mandementes. And Seneca affyrmeth, that into great welthe
and prosperity, as it were continual dronkennes, men fall into a certain
soote, and plesaunte steape. Also Paul unto Timothe commaundethe that this
admonition and warnyng be given to the rych, that they wax not proud nor put
their affyaunce in uncertain riches, but in the living god to do good, and be
rich in good works. This verse of Publius may also be verified of the
inordinate rych men. Fortune makes him a fool, whom she kockereth to much.
For how, such pass for no manner of thing, which have this world at will:
it is euydent enough, and nedeles it is to speak thereof. This securytie is
verily the mother of al vice, for by the same a man is made vnse^sible, so that
in his conscience he feleth not the anger, and wrath of god against sin: by
security men's minds are brought on a dead sleep that they be not a whyt
perced with the fear of the punishment of god, or withdrawn from vice, nor
yet awaked with the fear of death, or of the last dowme. Our savior does in
Luke artificially paynt this security, where as mention is made of the rych
man, which when his land had enryched, and made him welthy with a frutfull,
and plentyfull crop, did not go about to refourme his living, and to repent,
nor to bestow alms upon the poor, but studied how for to enlarge his barnes,
and to make more room for his corn: and thus delayted the matter with him
self. I will bring in, and gather upon heaps all my corn, and lay up al my
substance, and riches and speak to my soul in this wise Now thou have my
soul a great deal laid up for the, which will last the* the space of
many years: Now therefore take thy rest, eat: drink and be of good chere.
But in this security, and this imagination what herd he of god? Thou fool,
this night require they thy soul of the: markest thou not, how death comes
suddenly upon him, thinking to have had all the commodities, and pleasures of
the world: as ease, rest, delicious fare, pastymes, delectacions, and
sauegarde of all his goods? For this cause then, as Paul says: commaundethe
us to awake, and be in a redines at al times against the coming of the lord:
which might be a fair and sufficient warning for us, if we take head of it,
for like as it befell and chanced in the time of Noe, when the flood over
went, and drowned the world, some eating and drinking, other some wedding,
and doing such business as they had to do: As it also chanced, that the
Sodomites were al destroyed with fire and brymstone from above, after that Loath
departed out of their city, so verily the last day shall come sodaynely, and
at the twincklynge of an eye, even when men look least for it. Therefore S.
James to vanquishe, and drive ou^ such security out of men's hertes speaks
to rich men in this wise. Ye rich men mourn, and owl for the miseries, that
remain for you, and hang over your heads. Your riches putrify, worms, and
mothes corrupt your gorgious apparel: your silver and gold gathers rust,
and cancte: deliciously, and wantonly ye have lived on earth: Ye have spente
your days in ryottynge. etc. In this place call to remembrance the rych man
in the gospel, which in the days of his life went gorgiously arrayed with his
veluets, purples, and silks, but after his death he was grievously tormented in
hell, whereof prosperity and wealth was the cause, which did not permytte and
suffer him to repent, and refourme his living. Our savior also declares
the same thing in S. Mathewe, where he says that it is hard for one that is
rych, to e^ter into the kingdom of heaven, eftsoons it is more ease for a
cammell to pass through the eye of a nedle, then for a rich man to enter
into the kyngedome of god: which Mark in a manner expowneth: Children, saying
how hard a thing is it for such one, as puts his trust in riches, to
enter into the kingdom of god? Christ also him self calls riches, and
worldely pleasures, brambles, and briars, wherewith the seed of gods word is
choked, that it can not grow, and bring forth fruit. Therefore this is the
cause, why god sumtymes visits with adversity and pun^eth them, whom he has
derely beloved: to root out security, and to stere up in men the fear of
god, and the calling upon his name: for in prosperity men do clean forgette
him: Also to cause us to acknowledge and confess our sins, and repent
therefore, to lift up and erecte our minds to the imbrasing of heavenly
things, and the contempnynge of worldely things. For commonly these vices
reign in rych, and well thy men: and those that live in this world at their
own ease: I mean sluggyshnes, which is reckened one of the.vii. deadly
sins: idleness, lythernes, sudden privation of sense, and feeling, and
neglecte, and little regard of things perteyning unto god: in godly and
virtuous exercises, vnlustines, slowenes, dulnes, feyntnes, and as it were a
dead sleep except thou will call it rather that disease which engenders in the
body a co^tynual desyer of slepyng. This security is such an abominable vice,
that I am not able with these names and infynyte other to declare how heinous
it is, and what I think of it. Scripture declares that wealth makethe us not
only secure, but oftentimes ungodly, where upon Moses said thus. But when
he was become fat, and filled, he waxed wanton: when he was made gross corsye,
and vnweldye, he did clean forsake the lord his god, and creatoure: he
regarded not the rock of his salvation: They provoked him in strange gods.
etc. Like as Dauyd after that he had conquered his enemies in every land,
falling in to this self same security, and thinking that al things were
sure and in safegarde, did not only become an adulterer, but also defiled his
hands with shedynge the blood of an innocent man: and the very same which in
the persecution of Saul showed, and proved him self a godly man, by
prosperity was clean altered? Let him therefore, which stands on his feet,
beware lest he fall. Yea, when Dauyd had committed this cruel morder, as
though there had been no danger therein, because god is merciful, he went
unto the tabernacle dayelye as other did, he kept the Sabbath, and other
feasts which were at that time observed among the Jews: he offered up
sacrifice, and finally was quiet, and took no care. But after that god by his
prophet Nathan denounced his punishment, and vengeance: and had made him
afearde, and had grievously threatened him, he came to him self, and then
called to mind, what an offense he had committed against the lord his god:
Then pondered and weied he the greatness of his sin, and repented unfeignedly.
Then he confessed his sin openly, and cried for mercy unto the god of
Israel. Then wyshed he to be washed from his sin, and iniquity, and to be
pourged fro the fylthines, whereof his syn was the cause And yet in the mean
while refused he not the punyshement which god by the prophet threatened to
him: nor forsook any pain or punyshemente for his offense and trespass: would
god, that such like security might not also be found in many of us, which
do live so quietly and in such security, as though al were sa^e, and there
were no danger: we confess not our sins: we fear not the judgment of
god, nor his exceeding great wrath against sin: so far of is it, that we
bewail our sins and have remorse in our conscience for them as we should
have, like, as the holy martyr of god Cyprian says. But to return again
unto our purpose, and couclude in few words No man can be saved onles his
sin be remitted: No man's sins are remitted, but theyrs which cry, and
pray to god for the remission thereof: No man desires remyssyon, which would
not be gladly reconciled, no man would gladly be reconciled: which repents
not: No man repents which feels not the wrath of god against sin, and
confesses the same which thing he that lives in security, does not. By this
reason therefore it is euydent that prosperity is also a cause of delayenge the
reformation of our life.

The.v. cause.
THe.v. cause is the hope of longer life: for albeit there is no man, though
he be never so young, that is assured, that he shall live until night tide (as
Cicero shows) yet verily thou shall scarsly find any man so old, and aged,
which persuades not him self that he may live a whole year. The old father
in the commedye cries out, and says: Move, and exhort ye me, which am lxv.
years old, to marye again, and join unto me an old dotynge woman? But now
a days ye shall so a more strange thing: for men that be.lxxx. year old
will marye, and take to wives young maidens, and damselles that are not
over.xv. year of age. They have such hope to live longer and longer: as though
they were young men, and in there flowrishing age, but with what co^sideracio^
they thus do, experience oftentimes shows. Some man will meruail par
adventure, that old men should be so foolyshe, as to be come wowers. In this
place I will not reasone, either to, or fro: but I dare be bold to say, that
such old men, as marye young damselles after this manner, have undoubtedly
hope to live a great time longer. This hope therefore may be an other of the
causes: why we differ the reformacion of our life, and remember not, that we
have an acco^ptes to make at the last day. It is to be wondered, that men do
put of, and differ thus, such a great and weyghty matter, and look no more of
a thing, which profits so much, and is so necessary unto salvation. I
fear me greatly lest the Heathen shall in the last judgment be a reproach to
us Christians, in that we are so flowth full, and have almost mind at no time
to refourme, and amend our living, and torecken up our offenses and repent:
when verily many of the^ after Pithagoras rule, customably, yea they went to
rest, reckened, and called to remembrance what thing so ever they had said, or
done, good or badde, the day before: which Virgil speaking of a godly, and
virtuous man, paynteth out to us very artificially, and lernedly. He never
slepte, before that he called to remembrance all things, that he did that
day: whether it were good, or bad: he examined, what was done amiss: what was
done in time, and what out of time, he demanded certain questions of him
self in semblable wise, why had thou not respect in this point unto
honesty in that point unto reason? what thing has this day escaped the ^
why have thou purposed constantly that thing, which were much better to be
left undone: why have thou sorowed in thine heart to have done good to the
poor? why wyllest thou that thing, which it was not commendable, nor honest
to will? why preferredst thou profytte to honesty why speak thou ill by
any, or gave an ill sign in thy countenance, why haste thou followed rather
thy folyshe fantasy, then right reason. Virgill shows that when he had
thus reuolued, what he had done all the day long: whether good, or bad; he
rebuked that, which was evil, and praised, and commended the good. In this
place I can not let pass that which Seneca speaks, concerning this form,
and trade. Sextius (says he) at the evening, yer he went to rest, accustomed
to axe of his mind certain questions semblably: what ill and naughtye
condition haste thou this day amended. What vice have thou with stand? what
art thou ^etter now, then when thou did arise? And after he adds this.
What better form can there be, than this: to examine the whole day again in
this wise? Must not there follow after such a rekenyng a sweat, sownd quiet,
free, and pleasant sleep, when the mind is either praised: or warned: and is
taken to be a judge, and examiner of it self? I my self use this trade,
daily, and reason in this wise with my self: as I have showed. When the day is
past: I examine the whole again, and ponder, and wey depely both what I have
said, and done: I keep nothing in secret: I omit nothing, for why should I
be affrayed, sith that I may freely say take head: do no more so, for at this
time I forgive the. In thy communication with such a man thou dyddest reason
conte^tiously: hereafter I wa^ne* the, dispute not with the ignorant. Thou
warnedst such a man more freely a great deall, then thou ought: and more
offendedest him, then correctedest him. Henceforth consider not only: whether
thou speak truth, or not, but whether or no he can bear it, to whom it is
told. Seneca spoke these things, and many mo in this sentence, and meaning,
which I would wyshe, that christians would not only remember but also purpose,
and cast to follow and to bring up, and trade their children in this form of
exercise. Certes onles I am very far deceived, we should then endeavor to
lead our life more agreably to our profession But now of the contrary let us
consider our exercises, and how we use to reckon our fautes, and examyne the
whole day again at night yer we go to rest: how are we occupied? Verily we
keep ioly ^here one with an other, our tables are furnyshed with deyntye
dishes: And we are not content to drink, and swyll in, all the day long,
ercept we banquet, and drink also at night, where upon what vices proceed, we
be none of us ignorant: And at last when we are not thorowlye satisfied in
drinking, we arise from the table in such case, that we can not stand on our
feet, but stagger, and stumble at every thing, and must be led home, and
stayed on other men's shulders. Oftentimes we fall into such beastlynes, that
we must be taken fro the table and laid in our beds by others: And there we
lie like brute beasts drowned, and buried with wine, and sleep. I can not
with more propre words set forth this abomination. And this is a thing that
is done daily. But scarsly ones we do in a whole year recompte, and reckon
with our selves, how we have lived, and axe forgeuenes of our sin, and
purpose to be reconciled to god. And if peradventure we purpose so, yet truth
it is, we continewe not therein: so far of is it that we do daily every man
try and examyne his own conscience, and consider how he lives, yer he go to
bed: And being offended and displeased with him self seeks god to have mercy
upon him, with syghing and weeping, or putting his affyau^ce and trust in god,
trusts and promises him self that is better in Christ: or if he purpose to
live godly, continues therein: And yet for all this we dare boldly sleep,
and take our rest in that state, in which if any man should dye, as no man is
sure, that he shall live until the next morrow, following, we were utterly cast
away, and condemned both body and soul. But alas these things we remember
not: In such wise we flatter our self with hope of longer life, wherewith
sith that so many men be deceived, how chyldyshe are we, or rather how do we
dote, which do persuade our selves, that we be exempted, out of the nombre of
those, as it were by some synguler, and propre privilege.

The.vi. cause.
THe syxte cause remains: and that why welthy, and rich men within the
bishop of Romes dominions differ the reformation, and amenmente of their
life, the cause is hope of forgyuenes of sins by the Popes Pardons, and
bulls. Also a certain false trust to relese the pains of purgatory by
masses, dirigies said yearly, prestes, and monks prayers, and also by the
works and alms deeds done by their friends alive, as fasting, prayenge,
watchynge, and going of pilgrimage and such like. For like as certain men
affirm that pardonnes have strength to obtain temyssyon of sins: so are
they not ashamed to say that in what moment of the hour so ever a penny, or
money gynglethe in the box, the soul at that very instant does depart out of
purgatory: and more over they think that the dead are eased by the good
works and merits of men alive: which Hilarious upon Mathewe does deny And so
does Hierome, as he is alleged in the common law, affirm that in this present
life one may help an other, whether it be with his prayer, or good council.
But at what time we shall appear before the judgment seat of the lord,
every man shall bear his own burden, besides this in what state so ever a man
dies, he shall be judged in the self same state. Then how detestable is the
sluggyshnes of such men, as live thus quietly, and securely in vice, and
wyckednes? which would ywysse, if they regarded ought their salvation and
souls health, keep some mean and not so excede in vice as they do, and
remember the last dowme: As for an example, to speak perticularly: the
uncharitable man would study according to gods commandment, to be at
atonement, and agremente with his neygheboure: whorkepers, and adulteres would
remember, that god will judge them: As Paul declares: Also murderers, such as
minister poison to others, all sorts of liars would have before their eyes the
lake burning with fire, and brymstone, wherein their part shall be, as we read
in the revelations of John Covetous men, drunkerdes, sklaunderers of their
neighbors would remember, that such as they are, shall not be inheritours of
the kingdom of God: As Paul witnesses both unto the Cor. and Ephe. Rych men
would bear in mind the saying of Christ, that he which puts his trust
in uncertain riches, shall not enter into the kingdom of god: finally al men
would remember the endeles, and unquenchable fire of hell, which Christ
threatens in his word to the wicked, and ungodly: every man would fear the
voice of our savior to the folyshe women. I know you not, and to the slow
servant: cast the unprofitable servant into the outward darkness, where
there shall be weeping and gnasshynge of ^eath: Also to the man that came to the
marriage without his weddyng^ garment, bynd him both hand, and foot, and cast
him into the outward darkness. Also to the wicked, and ungodly at the last day,
depart fro ^* ye ac^ursed into everlasting fire. O good lord what obstinate,
and styffe fellows be these, that such saye^ges do nothing stere? we may call
them that believe them not, Epicures: the^ that deride, and have them in
mo^^ag^, unhappy, and such as regard them not, mad, and little considering
their souls health. But all those regard them not which think that when they
have brought out a rablement of the popes pardonnes, they may freely sin, and
offend with out punishment, and by reason thereof dilay, and put of from time to
time the refourmation and amendmente of their life. There be many also that
differ the same, because they worship Barbara: And those be in this fond,
and folyshe opinion, that they think verily, and believe steadfastly, that they
shall not dye impenitente, and without howsle, as they term it, if they worship
her. This supersticious worshyppynge of ^. Barbara was placed almost in all the
papystes hertes: therefore they ordained yearly a fasting day for her. And
paynters portraied her in the one hand bearyng a chalyce. And in the other holy
bread. This is also an other cause, because men provide long yer they dye,
that they may be received into the famylye of the Francyscanes, and be buried
in one of their robes after their death. For men be of such a folishe
persuasion, that they think the devil to have no power over them, when they
shall have g^tten that holy hyue over their heads because the Monks
communycate with the robe both their own merits: and such good works also,
as are done throughout the whole order, as requiem masses, sol^mp^ service,
singing* praieng, preaching, suffrages, fastings, watchynges, pylgremages, and
such like. For the Monks did set ever aparte that thing, which was thought
sufficient for their own salua^ion, and the rest if that any remained, they
did not communicate for right naught, but sold it for money. This is therefore
another cause, why that such men as have boughte out with money the merits of
Monks, dyfferre in this wise the reformacyon of their life. But now it is
nedeles to confute in this place this gross error, concerning the popes
pardons, and worshyppynge of saints, and communicatynge of merits: sith that
other men before us, and we also our self have done it in other places. Now
thou have herd gentle reader, as I think the principal causes of dilayenge
the amendment of our life. But besides these there are yet certain other, as
it were secondarye causes: As to accompanye with the wicked, and ungodly, and
such as stand in no fear of God, and esteem not, nor regard virtuous
innocencye, and those things, which are agreeable to our professyon for such
men's compani, al those must diligently eschew, which have any care of their
souls health: For as a certain man says full truly: ill company rorrupteth
good manners. And if thou accompanyest with the evil, incontynuaunce of time
thou shalt thy self be come evil. Let parents therefore remember, that it is
their deuty to look to it, that the evil, and naughty accompanye not their
children: and to try exactly the manners of such, as ar their playfelowes. For
such they prove most commonly, as their play fellows be. So that here this
may be a good lesson for us: if a man will not be fyled, let him touch no
tar, which signifies naughtye company in this place. Let us mark also,
what an Hethen man says: we take and receive our condicyons of such as we
accompany withal. And as certain vices of the body be contagyous and do
infect the^, who^ we touch, so transferreth the mind vices unto such, as we
daily accompanye with all, and are our famylyers. The dronkerde provoke his
fellows to wine drynckynge. The unchaste goes about to overcome the chaste.
The couetouse man allureth his co^panyons unto auaryce. etc. Who so will live
godly therefore: let him eschew evil company. For if therebe any, that
accompany such, and be daily conuersaunt with them at the tavern, and at
other places, where they resort. They do never lightlye purpose to refourme
there living: No. They can not without much dyfficultie be brought from their
company at any time. And this is the cause, that though they here Gods word
preched never so much: though they be admonished and warned by men in
auctorite never so often, and though^ they them selves eue^ fully determine,
and purpose to reform, and amend their living, because they fear and dread
the punisshement of god: yet I can not tell how the devil it chaunseth, they
differ continually the amendment of there life: they repent not: nor return
into the way again. And thus peradventure death may come upon them in such
securite, and oppress them. For even as death is most certain: so the day,
and hour of death is uncertain: And for this cause we be commanded in
Scripture to awake and watch, and be in readiness for the last day every hour
which thing is planely set forth in Luke: where it is said semblablye be in a
redines: because the son of man will come, when ye shall least ween. There is
also another cause: why the lay sort commonly dyffer the reformacion of their
life: forther there be certain men good souls, and favorers of gods word
withal their heart (we may not judge the contrary) but not so wyttie in this one
poyntt, as were nedeful: which set forth wonderfully, and beat into men's
heads the grace, and goodness of God: the forgyuenes of sin: and many such
other things, which perteyne unto salvation: And for this purpose allege
scriptures very diligently: But of a new life in Jesus Christ, that we be made
holy, and revived by the holy ghost, they never speak word or very little.
But he that will be taken, as a christen man must, as Paul wylleth him, be dead
to sin, and a live to ryghtuousnes, he must lay of the old man, and put on
him the new man. He must be as perteinyng unto his conuersacyon even as one,
that professes the Gospel of Christ. He must not be an aduouterer, a whor^
hu^ter, an envious fellow to his neighbor ward. He must not be covetous, given
to filthy gain, and lucre, malicious, or proud. The father gives the holy
ghost to those, that believe and call upon him: which will awake the heart of man,
and stere up in it new mocyons, and as it were regenerate his will: and move
him to do good works: to live virtuously and agreablye to our professyon, as
we have declared in other places more at large. How much thynkest thou, be the
lay people moved with such saienges, as these are. What? if thou be an
adulterer, an whore keaper, a couetouse man, or such: believe only, and thou
shalt be saved: why should thou fere the law sith that Christ has
fulfilled it, and satysfyed for the sins of the whole world? veresy such
saienges do wonderfu^e offend the ears of Godly men, and give occasion of
much ungodly living: and besides that, cause men, that they think but little of
any reformacion. Ye mary it is the cause that they continue obstynatelye in
vice, nor that all one, but also be encouraged there unto. Surely it takes
away all the occasion of reformacion. Well Paul did not thus: which did not
only preach the fayeth in Christ to Felix, and Drufille hes wife (as Luke
declares in Thactes) but also reasoned profoundlye of justice, temperance, and
the last judgment, so that Felix herynge him dispute so exactely, and to the
purpose was much abashed. He also testifies in thactes that he did not
preach repentance only to the Heathen, but also gave them warning, that
they should do works worthy of repentance. Now I have showed you the causes
why we difer the reformacio^ of ou^ ^fe. It remains therefore, that we show
in like manner brefely, what be the remedies for the same, which partelye we
have done alredye.

The remedies.
THauthoritie therefore of god, and our Lord Jesus Christ shall be of much
force, and power against our unbelieve, concerning the last judgment, the
punysshement of the wicked, and the everlasting bless, of the godly: unless
we will rather be taken for Christians, than be Christians in very deed:
specially if we dilyge^tly wey, and call to remembrance those things, which are
mencyoned every where in scripture concerning the same things. As this saienge
in Saint John. The hour shall come, when they, which are in their graves shall
(...) his voice. And such as have done well, shall arise unto life: but they
that have done the contrary, shall arise unto condempnacyon: Again, the will
of my father which sent me, is this, that whosoever sees me, and does believe
in him, shall have everlasting life: and at the last day I will raise him. Our
savior also in Mathewe, speaking of the last judgment declares, what
sentence he will pronounce of the godly, and says thus: O ye, which are the
blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world: but the ungodly shall here this. Auaunte y^ the
accursed: go ye fro me into everlasting fire: which is ordained for the devil,
and his Angels. Again: these shall go to everlasting fire. But the just, and
Godly to everlasting life. Oh what a terrible voice is this of the judge,
that adiudgeth (...) wicked to everlasting fire. If the fear of judgment
here in earth makes such aferde, and astonished, as are gyltye: much more must
the fear, and dreed of the heavenly judge make them astonished: and the gylte
of their own conscience. If that thou dredest here in earth the judge, from
whom thou may appeal unto an other, much more have thou cause to dread the
sentence of that judge, from whom there can be none appealynge at all. This is
his sentence. Go fro me: O ye the accursed. How heavy, and dredful a thing is
it to be banysshed out of gods sight, which in goodness far passes, and
surmou^teth al things* how miserable a thing is it to be excluded out of the
kingdom of God* which is such, that we can not ymagine the pleasure of it,
much less, atteine unto it in words? How lamentable a thing is it to be
priued of the company of saints, and godly men? But we shall not only be
secluded out of the kingdom of heaven, that most joyful, and blessed
habitacio^, but shall be also appoyncted to infinyte peynes in hell, and
unquenchable fire, which passes our fiere so many degrees in heat, that in
comparison of it this is very yse. There shall we accompany continuallye
deuylles without all hope of a better state. Think thou if men remembered
these things that they would live so wickedlye, as they do? undoubtedly* they
think little. As Peter declares in thactes, that god the father, has ordained
Christ to judge the quycke, and dead: which thing also Paul notes both
unto Timothe: and also unto the Corin. These be his words. Al we must appear
before the judgment seat of the Lord: there every man to receive accordingelye
as he has done here in earth: either good: or the contrary, In this judgment
(as he also declares) what thing soever has benne hyd, and covered, shall be
reveled, and dysclosed to the whole world: which thing how terrible, and
shamfull it will be to the wicked: no tongue is able to say, or mind to think.
For if here in earth a man had rather be swalowed quick into the ground, than
have his fautes opened, and showed before a great multitude of all states of
men, which might be witnesses of his wretchedness: what hertes shall the
deuelysshe have than: think we, when all things, which they have either
purposed, co^ceued, or wrought shall be dysclosed, and told to the whole world,
to the Angels in heaven and to all saints, and other. If we judge it a
shameful thing to be led into prison here in earth: how much more shameful a
thing will it be to be cast into everlasting fire? If it be a terrible thing to
be banyshed here in earth or to suffer death: how much more terrible will it be
to be exiled and out lawed fro the kingdom of heaven: and the body, and soul
to be punyshed with endless death? If it shall be a glad, and joyful herynge, when
the son of god commands the godly to partake, and possess the kingdom
prepared for them from the beginning of the world: of the contrary, how
heavy news will these be to the wicked: when they shall here them selves
adjudged to the unquenchable fire ordained for the devil, and his angels? If
those things we believe to be true, which the scripture sets forth
concerning the last judgment, and pain of the wicked: Why live we so, as
though there were neither heaven nor hell? If we believe the^ not: why will we be
taken for Christians. Let us therefore put away, and expel these domestical
vices,.i. lithernes, and slugyshenes: for our strife is not bout the Goats
woole (as it is said in the common proverb): But all the whole matter is about
our salvation, and the atteynement of the heavenly and blessed life. Now
therefore let us refourme our living: now I say, whiles we have the whole
time for forgiveness, and have him our medyator and advocate, which at the last
day shall judge us. Let us not defer the amendment of our life, until such time,
as our sin shall seem rather to have left us, then we to have forsaken it.
Let us daily, and hourly remember the day of dowme, the terryble voice of the
judge, which commands the wicked to depart, and auaunte from him: Let us
remember also the pains of hell, and of the endless fire. Let us remember the
shortness and vncertainte of life: certain death and yet that the hour thereof
is most uncertain: so that in such vncerte^te a man can not promise him self
that he shall live, but one moment of an hour: a great deal less a day or
twain Therefore this is an excellent, and a very notable saying of Seneca. For
as much as thou know not, when, or where thou shall die: therefore look thou
for death in every place: and at al times. In this wise I will conclud then,
that the shorter, and vncertener man's life is, so much the more should we
repent, and refourme our living, whiles we have yet time.

The second remedy.
Now to say some thing in the second cause, we should not in any wise
differ the reformation of our life, for that hope and trust, which we have
in the mercy, and goodness of god: Christ came to call sinners: But to repent
the^ of their former life, and not to syn more freely, and more at liberty. As
god is merciful so does he mercifully forgive: But the repe^taunt, and not the
obstinate in sin. Christ bare our sins on his own body to the cross: as
Peter says: I do not deny: but what follows? that we mortifyenge our flesh
should live to ryghtuousnes. Christ gave him self for us: as Paul reme^breth
unto Titu^. I deny not, but what does immediately follow? That he might redeem
us from our sin, and pourge a chosen people for him self to do good works.
Christ pourged us by his blood shed from sin: As John declares in his
Revelations? I grant that to: but not that we should pollute our self again
with the fylthynes of syn. We have Christ our advocate with the father. But if we
repent us of our former life, and so resort unto him for succoure. Thou wylt
peradventure say, that I may well enough here after bewail my synnefull
life. To this I answer: How know thou, that thou shall live but a moment?
much less can thou have ^ope to live, until thou may repent, and refourme
thy living. Consider with thy self what the lord said to the rych man in the
gospel: that in prosperity promised him self many years to live. O fool:
they shall require this night thy soul of the. Thou haste need to take head,
lest the same chance also to the. Thou say: but I hope better. But what if
this hope begyle you: for here I may cry out. Oh deceyptfull hope. Now if it
hap so, which thing god prohibit: thou shall peryshe, and wylfully cast thy
self into everlasting destruction. This thou wylt not again say, but that in
such uncertainty of life it may well come to pass. What follye then is it by
dilayenge to put that thing on syx, and seven, which at the first thou
myghteste provide for, without al danger? why do thou not repent betymes,
rather then hope thus with such ieoperdy. Thou will say to me. God is
merciful: Truth it is, but he is also just. Then sith that thou trustest so
much in his mercy: why fear thou not likewise his justice. The lord
speaks by his prophet semblably. I will not the death of a sinner, well, but
what follows: that he be converted, and live. Therefore be converted unto the
lord (as Ioell exorteth the) with all thine heart, in fasting, sighing, and
tears, be converted unto the lord thy god. For he is bountiful, gentle,
long sufferynge, and of much mercy: As the same Ioell says. This thing did
also Ezechiell declare: Where he says. If the sinner shall repent him of his
sins, and keep my commandments, and execute justice, and judgment, he
shall live, and not dye. Is it my will (says the lord god) that the sinner
rather dye, then be converted, and live? Also Esaye. Let the sinner forsake his
ways, and the just change his wicked thoughts: and turn unto the lord, and
the lord will have mercy upon him: let him be converted unto the lord god of
hosts: because he is great in mercy. The Prophet declares, that God is good,
and merciful, but to the repentaunt, those that acknowledge and confess their
sins. Therefore first repent: return again unto health: require forgyuenes
of thy sins with bitter tears, and weapynge, be offended and displeased with
thy sins even with all thin heart. Forsake thy former paths, be converted
unto the lord god: and then thou may undoubtedly conceive a sure hope, and
trust to be saved. Then thou have no cause to despeire of the goodness of god,
and of the forgyuenes of thy sins. And in the mean time call this to
remembrance, which is spoken by our savior that there is greater gratulacion,
and gladness for one repe^taunt sinner: than is for.xcix. just men in their
own sight: Let this also stere the, because the Angels be so glad, and wyshe
so heartily thy salvation. I have been wonderfully moved, and delyghted with the
saying of the Psalmist. The lord is good, and merciful, long sufferynge,
and of much mercy. Note also what as he says in an other place. Those thou
hate (Lord) which work iniquity, and thy countenance is fixed on the
which do evil: A man will peradventure say to me, that John affyrmeth, that
who so believes in the son has everlasting life: But the very self same
John^, does in an other place plainly pronounce, that who so synneth is of
the devil: And again, who so says, that he knows god, and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar. But thou wylt say that Johan the baptist testified
this thing of Christ: that he is the lamb of god, which takes away the
sins of the world. But what is joined immediately there unto: repent you of
your former life: eftsoons, bring forth such fruytes, as the repentaunt
should. But thou wylt yet go further with me, and say, that Peter: As we read
in the acts, says: We believe that by the grace, and fre goodness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, we shall be saved. That is plain also, but what adds he
thereunto: repent therefore, and be converted: to the intent that your sin may
be taken away and forgyuen you. Thou will say again to me, that God so loved
the world, as we may reed in S. John, that he gave his only son that whosoever
ever should believe in him, should not perysshe, but enjoy everlasting life:
But now by your patience, here me: what Math. says. Every man, that says
to me, Lord, Lord, shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: but only
they, which do the will of my father, which is in heaven. If thou beleuest S.
Paul, where he says: that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners:
believe hi also, where he says that sorcerers, adulterers, whorekepers,
murderers, robbers, theaues, proud, and covetous men, dru^kerdes sklaunderers,
sowers of sedicyon, envious folks, and such other shall not inherit the
kingdom of god: if thou beleuest him, where he says thou: no not Paul, but
the holy ghost, rather speaking in Paul: believe him also in the the other: And
than undoubtedly thou shalt conceive none hope of the mercy of God in such
fylthy, and abomynable living, nor yet look for to be saved by Christ. For
faith grounded upon gods word confesses this thing: that like as God is
merciful to the repentaunt, so he is grievously offended with such: as continewe
obstinatlye in syn. By the hope than of the mercy of God thou should not
dyffer, the refourmacion of thy life: and therewith deceive thy self: but
return into the way again: and then myghtest thou assuredly promise thy
self very largely of the mercy of God. For like as no man does truly, and
unfeignedly repent, except he trusts to have remission of his sins: So
verelye (as Ambrose says) no man can assure him self of forgiveness: except
he does repent, before I proceed any further, I will recite one place out of
Jesus Sirach. Thou shalt not say: says he: I have offended, and what heavy
thing has chanced to me? for the Lord is easy, and gentyl: heap not thou
sin upon sin, setting fear apart. Thou shalt not say: his mercy is
great: he wylbe merciful to me, and forgive me my trespasses: for as he is
merciful: so is he also angry: And his anger will cease at no time against the
wicked. Dylaye not therefore to be converted unto the Lord: nor put that thing
of from day to day. For the vengaunce of the lord comes suddaynely, and in
time of punysshemente he will dedestroy the: hither to Sirach.

The third remedy.
But an ill costome, that thou have had in syn, lets the to reform thy
living, and to repent, for it is commonly seen, that men be given for the most
part to such vices, as they have been enured with all from their tender years,
and men do not easlye forgette those things, wherein they have of long time
ben trained, As Ciprian says, when does he learn to be moderate in his living,
which is: and has benne long time accustomed to his deinte dishes, and his
sumptuos suppers? or when humbles he him self to base and simple apparel,
which has gone in his damaskes, and veluets all the days of his life? It must
needs be that wine drinking with the sweet taste therein, as it commonly comes
to pass, shall entise a man to it: pride shall puff him up: anger sett^ him
on fire: raueinye unquiet him, cruelty prick him: ambition delight him,
pleasure overthrow him headlonge: and such like: so that it seems to be a
thing of much difficultye, to overcome this custom, yt is in such wise
altered into nature. Yet we must attempt it, if we have any regard of our
souls health. Thou do demand of me: how should I attempt it. Surely if
that thing, which by an ill custom has prevailed in a man, the same thing be
expelled, and driven away by some honest, and virtuous exercise: and if that
thing, which thou graffed, the other root out: what thing is so difficile, and
hard which by man's wit, and reason may not be atcheaued? Seneca says: that
the mind never attempted the thing, which it brought not to pass: A certain
redynes of the mind therefore is required: if a man will vainquishe and master
such a custom that is in a manner invincible: rather then contention, and
labor: And yet these twain must not be lackinge: if thou will pluck up by
the root such a thing, as sticks fast. Therefore set upon the thing with a
good heart, and having thy special trust in god, that he will aid the, begin it:
and undoubtedly thou shalt have good success. It will seem a thing very hard:
yer thou beginnest: and in a manner impossible to be atcheaued: but when thou
shalt once have attempted the thing, thou shalt perceive, that that thing,
which thou thoughtest could not be brought to pass without much difficulty,
shall be easly won. And so by experience we try that thing light and easy:
which at first seemed wonderful hard. If thou shall do thus: that which the
poet spoke by the servants of Mnesteus, shall be truly verified of the.
Success nourysheth them. They may do enough, because they have opinion of
the^ selves, yt they are able. Set but boldelye upon the thing, as I have told
the, trusting by Gods assystaunce to bring it to pass: and then undoubtedly
this meditation, and purpose to live in the fear of god will please the every
day more, and more. Virtue, which in beuty far passes all other things, will
rauishe ye. For there is nothing more goodly, or amiable. To be short: thou
shalt rejoice very much, that thou have begun to pluck up, and drive a way
such a naughty custom, which had taken such place in the. Then thou wylt
confess that our saviors saying in Mathewe is true, my yoke is pleasant, and
my burden light. It is much agreing with this same, that Hierom says in one
place: The path of virtue is sharp, rugged, and unpleasant, by reason we are so
much trained in vice. If this custom were not, then the pathe of virtue should
seem to us smoth, very plain and plesaunte. He also spoke in an other pl^ce,
bot^ truly, and also elygantly. If Stilpo the Philosopher, though he was
naturallye dysposed to be a drunkerde, and thereunto was very much inclined:
and was given naturally to be (...) yet so over came, and may^tered by good
dyscyplyne, that natural incly^ation: so that he was espied to be drunke^: or
desirous to acco^plyshe his pleasure at no time: wh^ may not thou in semblable
wise vanquishe by little, and little a naughetye custom. A pagain did overcome
nature: shall not a Chrystyan then break the force of custom: specially if he
earnestly mind it, and take heed: and if he apply him self to ye thing
rather, the^ follow his appetites, and if in consideracion of man's wekenes he
axe, and require gods assistaunce, and help with ardent prayer, and by alms
deeds, as it were beg gods grace, desire the holy ghost to be given him,
which will stere up in him new motions, and further his endeavor in virtuous
living, but let us go forth with our purpose. Let them remember, which because
of wealth, and riches pass for no repentance, the threateninges of our savior
in Luke: where it is said. O ye rich men woe be to you: because ye possess your
comfort: woe be to you: that be filled because ye shall hunger: woe be to you
which laugh: because ye shall mourn. Let them remember that thing, which Christ
spoke to the rich man in the Gospel. Thou fool. This nigh^ require they thy
soul of the. Let the^ remember also that thing, which we recpted in other
places concerning those, which were sodaynelye drowned with the fludde, and
destroyed in Soddome with fire, and brymstone from above: concerning also the
rich men: whom saint James commanded to owl, and mourn for such miseryes as
hang over their heads: And concerning the ryotoure, decked with veluertes:
as Saint Luke declares: which after his death was greuouslye tourmented in
hell. Let us therefore drive out, and put to flyghte this quietness, and
securyte. Let us not forget God in prosperity. Let us fear, and dreed the
wrath of the celestyall judge, before whose judgment seat we shall be compelled
to stand both little, and great, and shall there every man speak in his own
quarrel without a man of law: and his own conscience which is a sure and
certain witness of al his saie^ges and doings, shall accuse, and conde^pne him,
prosperity most commonly causes a man to advance, and set forth himself.
Riches do make a man sollem, fearse, and proud. Therefore let us always suspecte
fortune, and take head, lest this tra^sitorie wealth be the cause of
everlasting miserye, and of losing of the heavenly wealth: what will ye have us
to do than? What ye shall do: Paul declarethe to you in the epistle to the
Corinthians: where he says. This remains now: that those, which have
wives, so live as though they had none: and which mourn, as though they
mourned not: and which rejoice, as though they reioysed not: and which bye, as
though they possessed naught: and which use this world, as though they used
it not: for the shape of it is not permanent: by which words the Apostle
declares thus much, that we should not pass much for worldly things, as
wives, wealth, pr^speritie, adversity, or such like: and that our care should
be al together about heavenly things: Paul does not without a good
consyderation command Timothe to warn rych m^ that they be not proud, nor
put their hope in uncertain riches, but in the living god. And the Psalmist.
If thou have riches at will: set not thine heart upon them. In this place we do
not plainly condempe riches (for many times godly men are rych: but the trust,
and affyaunce, that men have therein, and the hawtines, and pride: which proceed
there upon: for riches as we said, make men hawtye, and proud: And therefore
it was very well said in the comedy: because he was set up, and enryched, he
became fearse and high minded: let him than, which possesses riches, and has
good luck in the world, give thanks to god, which is the geuer, and beware,
lest he be any thing proud thereof. Let him suspecte prosperity, and the
flickerynge of fortune. And also let him take head lest by a certain
security possessyng his heart, he do forget the lord god: it is a shame for
him, if he appear to have no sense, nor fealynge of the wrath, and indignation
of god against sin: And if sluggishenes accompanied ever more with
slouthfulnes, and lyddernes, take place in him. Surely it is to be fered,
except a man take good head, lest if he acquiet, and settle hi^ self in this
worldly fely city and ha^ynes, he shall conceive false joy, (...) him self
with hope of a contynuall prosperity, set the fear of god a part, and by
that means be suddenly cast away: sith that then the last day comes upon a
man ever, when he looks least for it. Therefore let us have evermore before
our eyes that thing, which is taught us in the gospel, when they shall say
peace: all things are in safegarde, then sodeyne death comes upon them. Let
us not therefore fall on stepe: As Paul warns us, but awake, and be sobre. Let
us not say: we shall have peace, nor any evil shall happen to us: or like as
they did in Esaias: We have taken trewse with death: and are at a covenant with
hell: when the whyppe or plage of god shall come: it shall not light upon us.
There are very many testimonies of the wrath, and indignation of god against
sin, and examples of the punishment of the wicked, both in the prophettes,
and Apostles: wherewith a man may be much moved, when it chances him to read
them to put away this security, that we be in, whiles we abound in riches:
which I purpose not to speak of in this place, lest I should be to tedious to
the gentle hearted readers. For all the rest therefore let us call to
remembrance that thing, which Moses in the creation of the world speaks of
mankind which was destroyed with water: and of Soddom, and ^omorra, which were
turned into ashes. Let us remember these things also, which we read both in
the profane histories of great destructions of people, and also in the old
testament of the destruction of the people of Israel: how they were often in
subjection to the Barbarians: because they neglected, and broke gods
commandment: Also of the fall, and destruction of the City of Jerusalem. For
all these things are written (as Paul declares unto the Corinthyans for our
learning, which are fallen into the later end of the world. It were to long
at this present time to show how grievously god has punyshed at times men for
sin: and we nead not to speak pertyculerly of every one. Therefore one
example shall suffyce for this purpose. Therefore sith that the noble Dauyd,
king of Jerusalem, and one especially beloved of god became not only in
security, an adulterer, but also added thereunto the death of an innocente man,
and was therefore grievously punyshed of god: even after that he had repented and
was restored into gods favor (for he was plaged with the death of his son
newely borne, with the insurrection of his people against him, his heuye, and
sorrowful chasyng out of Jerusalem: with the destruction of his concubynes, the
falling of the people from him, and last of all with the destruction of his
cytezens. Such is the wrath and indignacion of god against sin. Since (I say)
that this holy man escaped not Gods vengance, and punishment for his sin:
and that after that he was reconsiled to god (as it appears plainly in the
book of kings) what shall become of them (think thou) which do not repent a
whit, but do securely continue in wyckednes, and heap syn to syn. Let us now
therefore moved with thexample of this godly man, shake of us sluggysshenes,
and drive out this drousye securite, which causes us to acquiet our selves
in our riches. Let us live continuallye in the fear of the lord God, and
seek our salvation with tremblyng and fear, let us not suffer our selves to
be snared with any fleshely lusts, or pleasures, but let us resyst at all
times with our continual prayer the temptour the devil. And thus much shall
suffyce for this part.

If any through hope of longer life dyffer the reformacyon of their life, the^
doutles deceive them selves, and do vaynelye look, and hope for that thing,
which they do most earnestly desire: And they do ymagyne vain, and
fantastical dreams: and what will ye more, they wyllingly, and wittingly do
perish, which I take to be the lewdest, and most fondest thing, that ca^ be
thought. If these thiges, which Hethen Philosophers wrote of the shortness, and
vncerteyntye of man's life, move the nothing: As man's life is even as it were a
buble of the water. And this life is, as a shadow: let that thing move the,
which the holy father Job spoke. The days of man's life are but short. And. S
James the faithful servant of god. The life of man is as it were, a vapoure
appering for a short time, and after euanishing away: let this also move the,
which was spoken by him, that never made lie: by our lord, and savior Jesus
Christ: for he gives the warninge, and us all to watch, forsomuche as we
know neither the day, nor hour. Ye and if these will not serve, let experience
move the: for thou sit many times by thy friends lieng sick, without al
hope to recover there health. Thou art present with them at their death: Thou
hear their grievous groans, and payneful panges. Thou see them brought
forth on beers, laid in their graves, and thou thy self do often times
burye them. Again thou herest men in every place lamenting, and bewayling
their friends death. Thou redest Epitaphies, verses written upon dead men's
graves: oftentimes thou metest men in morning weed. etc. which things might
put the in mind as well of the shortness of life, as also of death, which at no
time is far of: If death of strangers does not move us, we should be moved
with the death of our familyar friends, with our own proper dangers, that
befall to us all most daily, with our own syckens, wherewith we be not ones or
twyse visited. And for so much as we wey not our wekenes in consydering the
affliction, and plagyng of others we should remember it, and acknowledge it by
reason of our own aduersitye, and syckenes, wherewith God plageth us often
times. Which things if we consider, we shall perceive that we have very little
cause, or none at all to flatter our selves with hope of longer life. But in
this place some man will peradventure say to us: what? may we not amend and
refourme our living sone enough in our old age? Than I pray you, what should
we do in the mean time, but live merely, and iocundlye? good sir I here you
well: but tell me, I shall desire of you by your pacyence: what man is sure to
live until that age. Think thou to have occasion, when thou will, to
repent: which when thou myghtest commodiouslye, would not take it? Nay:
thou art far deceived: believe me, thou art deceived For surely god, which of
his inexplycable goodness would that the sinner should live rather, then dye,
when he thinks time, does call the unto repentance: and stands at the
door as S. John shows in the Reuelacions, and knocks. Open the door
therefore, and let him in. Here him which calls upon the, and follow him,
whyther he calls the. Dyspise not the riches of the free grace, and goodness
of God lest thou lay up for thy self against the day of anger, the wrath, and
indignacion of God: As Paul says: unto the Romans. Forget not Paul his lesson
unto the Cor. we beseech you: brethren, receive not the grace of god in vain.
I herd the in an acceptable time, and am thy fort in the day of salvation, and
health, by which words thus much is declared to us, that when the time of
repentance is offered, we should not let it escape us in any manner wise: And
that there be not like times, and like occasions given, and offered every day.
Paul has also unto the Galathians a saying, that we may very fytly apply to
this purpose. Whiles we have time, let us do good works This was also very
truly said of the old doctor: he yt has promised his mercy to the
repentaunt: has not ascerteined him of the next morrow folowinge, which
dyssembleth. Thou have need therefore to take heed least by dayeng, and puttyng
of the reformacion of thy life, for hope of longer life, thou willingly tempt
the Lord, thy God, which of his goodness moves the unto repentance, for this
thing we are forbidden to do by scripture: and the express commaundme^t of
God, which is written in Deutero. It chances oftentimes, yt through brawlyng
by some occasions given, in playeng, and drinkinge a man is soddeinelye slain,
so that there is no time then left to repentance: when otherwise we have
time, and space granted us by the specyal grace, and goodness of God, wherein we
may repent, and be converted unto health. Let us not therefore abuse this
exceeding great benefit of our most bountious, and merciful father, which looks
for an occasion as it were to have mercy, and compassion upon us: Let us
repent, and reform our living by times, least we be sodeinly prevented with
the day of death, and seek for space of repentance, and find it not As the
church sings. For verily he that has promised mercy to the repentaunt (As
we said once, and must eftsoon say) assured not the sinner of the next morrow
following. But you will say, that the sinner may repent them sone enough, and
cry god mercy, when he begins to sycken. I grant it you: but consider now
I beseech the: how many impedimentes and lettes are in that time, which a man
can skarsly withstand, for to omit the business about making of his last will,
and testament: the care for his wife, and children: the pain, and grefe of the
sickness, and such other, which may appear peradventure, but light matters: how
much thynkest thou yt in that time Satan labors: and what wiles, and
deceites does he invent, and imagine to drive a man unto desperacyon through
the multitude of his sins. For at no time so much as then the devil labors
to set before our eyes, and to call to our remembrance what evil thing soever
we have either thought, purposed, said, or wrought: and such offenses: as are
otherwise grievous of the^ self he makes to seem a great deal more heinous:
And to be short he goes about by all means, that ever he can, to leave us none
hope of forgyuenes, and to drive us to despeire of the mercy of God by reason of
the multitude, and greatness of our sins. There is more over the vexation, and
grefe of conscience: There is present before our eyes death it self: we
bethink us of the last judgment, of the judgment seat of the lord, and of
hell fire, who: or what man is able to reckon up every let, which causes a
man, that he neither thinks, nor yet can think of repentance in such
anguysshe. Therefore dyferre not in any wise the reformacion of thy life, until
the last day: if thou be wise: For it is very perilous, and danger full so to
do: that I add not how, that such repentance, as is constreined by
necessite, and the fear of hell, and does not proceed of our own free will,
does but little further, and help unto salvation. But this will be objected:
that before God there is no time of repentance late. I grant that in very
dead it is so: for God will no longer remember the fautes: and offenses of a
sinner, then he shall repent, and be sorye in his heart for his iniquyty: And
the Prophet says in an other place, that god will, that the sinner rather
repent, then dye. But what if sudden death so opresse a man unawares, that he
can not have space to sorrow, and bewail his sin, every man must look for
that thing, which hangs over the heads of al men, and may happen
indifferentlye to every one. Call to remembrance the sodeyne death of them,
which were in the tower Siloa: which thing we read in Luke: Again, what if
a man shall fall into such a disease, and syckenes, as shall take his wit and
reason clean from him? as we see daily by experience. Well if it so happen, as
it may well enough: all hope of repentance is gone, and brought to naught,
whereunto the sinner, when he prolonged, and put of fro day, to day: the
reformation of his life, had most respect. Think not contrary, but that thing
which fortuneth to others: may also fortune to the. For as Publyus says very
well: That thing, which chances to any one, may chance to every man,
wherefore put away this vain, and dyceyuable hope of longer life: think
not to have occasion when thou wylt: prescribe not to thy self a time to
repent in, lest by so doing thou increase thy folly, or madness, as I may call
it in differrynge the reformation of thy life. If thou be wise: repent, while
thou may sin. For if thou purpose to repent, when thou can syn no
longer: thou shalt not seame to have left sin: but it the. And it is to be
feared, lest when thou myghtest, thou woldeste not, that when thou woldeste
thou shalt not. The judgments of god are unsearchable in punyshynge the
vice, and wyckednes of man. For like as of his infinite mercy, and of his
exceeding great goodness he gives space of repentance to such, as are
willing, and ready to receive it: and bears with sinners: until they come
unto them selves again, and be reformed: so verily when he does se any man,
that he is utterly lost, and a child of perdityon, and illudeth his long
sufferaunce: and justly deserves punyshement: he does no longer uphold him,
because he runs headlong into wylful destruction but blinds him, being
desperate, and without hope, and as the scripture says, hardens his stony
heart, nor afterward looks for any amendment, or gives him an occasion, as it
were to repent, and amend his living. God does appoint for every man his
day, and end, beyond the which a man can not in vice proceed, nor surely god
will prolonge the punishment of sin any longer: which thing might much move a
man to repent and to refourme his living, and to set aside all dilayenge, and
to yield him self to the mercy of god offered unto him. But now let us go
forward: because I have declared sufficiently of this part. Such as do by a
certain trust, and confydence, that they have in the popes pardons differ the
refourmation, and amendment of their life, lean upon a rea^n, and weak
staff, and stay them selves by an unsure hold: none other wise then they also
do, which worship Barbara of Nicomedeus, and give a straight charge to their
executors for to se the^ brought forth, and buried in a Franciscane friars
robe: For what mencyon is there made any where in scripture of such, either in
the old testament, and the Prophets, or in the new testament and the
Apostles? Or where read we it, that there was any such thing observed in the
prymatyue church: or received, and approved by a general counsel, as a thing
either necessary, or yet profitable unto saluation^ Therefore he that bewayleth
not his sines before death, shall not be saved, though he be bolstered with
thousand thousands of bulls, and pardons. If thou wylt not then come in to
despeire of thy souls health, repent the of thy former life, setting such
trumperye ware a part, and when thou shall reknowledge thy sins, be sorry
with all thine heart, and unfeignedly require the mercy of god with prayenge,
and weeping, let thy refuge, and resorting for succoure be unto the merit of
Christ in a sure and undoubted hope, and trust that god the father will be
merciful to the for Christ's sake, whom for our sake he delivered to dye a
most sharp, and shameful death. Thus it shall come to pass, that god will
have mercy upon the^, and forgive the thy sins, and receive the into his
favor for Christ's sake. For we have him an advocate with the father he
prays contynually for us, and reconcileth us to the father, which is
grievously offended with our vice, and naughtynes: he appeaseth the wrath and
indignation of the father: as Ioi declares in the first Catholic Epistle,
Let us therefore lay away from us these popyshe pardons, and this supersticious
worshyppyng of Barbara, and a Fransciscane robe to be buried in. For in these
things no man can conceive any certain hope of salvation: Let us resort for
succor unto Christ him self: for he is our mediator, and advocate as I said
before: he is the very throne of grace: he appeased the wrath of god the father
for the sins of the world he is the lamb of God, which was ordained a
facrifice for sin, from the beginning: as we read in the Reuelacions of S.
John: what will ye more. He is our righteousness, santificacion, and redemption:
As Paul declares unto the Cor. Do not therefore defer the reformacyon of thy
life for the hope, and trust which thou put in Pardons, and other such
triftles, consideringe that our life is so short, and uncertain: And since that
death by reason of uncertain chances hangs daily, and hourly, over our
heads, it may well enough come to pass that in this present moment, when thou
least lokest for it: it may creape, and steal upon the: without al dout if
thou considerest, how short the time of a man's life is: at no time it can be
very far of: how daungegerous a thing is it then to live in that state, in
the which if thou should be prevented suddeinely by death, thou were utterly
cast away, and condemned both body, and soul. Therefore for the auoidinge of
such danger, and ieperdy, live ever in the fere of God, confess, and
acknoweledge thy sins: resort for succor unto the mercy of god: axe humbli
forgiveness of thy sins: and trust assuredlye, that by Christ thou art saved.
Repair of tentimes unto the minister of the congregation: desire, that thou
may be comforted, and assoyled by him, and that thou may be stered to
remember the promise of the forgyuenes of syn: and may be more assured and
certain of the mercy, and will of god toward the, come oftentimes unto the
Lords table: eat of the body, which was once offered for the sins of
mankind: eat of it accordingely as he did institute it: and drink also of
the lords blood, which was shed for the remission of sin: and declaring,
and shewinge after this manner the lords death, and calling to remembrance the
benefit, which thou have receued thereby: render most herty thanks to him for
the same: sing sweet songs, and lauds before him, with a joyful, and
thankeful heart, as well at home in thine own house, as also in the assembles of
the faithful. As much, as ever thou may: withdraw thy self from evil
company: and accompanye the virtuous, and godly: for by them thou may be the
better. But receive such to be thy familiers, as thou may refourme, and make
better. For it is a great matter and very expedynt to consider, what manner of
fellows those are: which are our familiers, and daily companions: for like as
in accompanienge the naughtye, we be as it were infected by a contagyon: so
verelye by the company of such, as be godly, and live in ye fear of the
lord, our manners are corrected, and amended. With these therefore be conversant:
but with the other neither make, nor meddle Solomon in the proverbs
commands the same thing. And unto the Cor, S. Paul ernestlye counsels,
and exhorts men to eschew the fellowship, and company of the wicked: insomuch
that he would not have men to eat, and drink with them. These are his words.
If any man among you called brother shall be an whorekeper, covetous, a
worshypper of ydols, a railer, a dronkerde, or a rauener, neither eat, nor
drink with him And I grant that there are diverse other causes, why S. Paul
wylleth us, that we should eschew their company: either that we seem not to
allow their vices, or else, that when they perceive that all men for their vice
sake do flee, and abhor there company, they might be ashamed, and repent: But
verily the chefest cause this is, because he would not, that their famyliars,
and companions should therewith be infected. For like as a little leaven does
cause a great heap of doughe to sour: so verelye thexample of one naughty man
corrupts, and does mar a great multitude. And though it is a very herd
thing to leave the company, and familiaryty of such: as thou have before time
lived withal long, merely, and pleasant lie: yet verily thou must dyligently
apply thy self thereunto, and labor by all means, that ever thou can, to
withdraw thy self from their company: Attempt but the thing ernestly: and
with a bold courage: and I dare promise the such success in the thing, as
thou would not think. And because the beginning, as it is commonly said, is
the better part of the whole: and whosoever begins well, has (as Horace
says) the half of the whole dead, set upon the thing therefore, nor despeire
in an^ wise, when thou considerest with thy self, how hard and full of
difficulty the thing it self is. If it shall fortune the to call to remembrance
those feasts, which thou have kept with the^, the reresuppers, the ba^kets,
and quaffing, which thou have had with them often, and many times? If it fortune
the I say, to fall into any such fond, and folyshe ymaginacion: Again if thou
shall call to remembrance at any time sore against thy will al such good
fellows, as thou werte wont to jest, and prate withal merely: al such, as kept
the company in play, and at tauerues: even then in that same very moment call
also to remembrance the shortness of life, death, which is nighe at al times
the last dowme, the judgment seat of the lord, hell and dampnacion? And by this
mean thou shalt put away, one difficulty with an other. If thou shall reason
with thy self in this wise: my fellows which I have before now, ben merye
withal, call, and cry upon me: deinty suppers, bankets, and reresuppers,
allure me: what shall I now do? verelye if thou think but so with thy self:
what shall I do? straight way reason weieng, and debatinge the thing shall
overcome the, and thy will, and appetyte shall without questyon be made
obedient to reason, which moves, and exhorts men ever unto those things,
which be best and most profitable for our behofe. Take space therefore, when
the devil puts any such things in thy mind, to powder and wey the thing:
and lay away all folyshe nisenes of the mind: and let not the appetites
bear the suffragnitie in any wise fall not hedlong, whither ye deuel would have
the. What? do thy fellows provoke the unto wine drinkig? moderate thou thy
self, and keep measure: because in a certain place our savior speaks these
words. Take heed, lest your hertes be burdened, or ouerladen with meat: Also
Saint Paul says: ouercharge not your selves with winedrinkinge: for therein
is riote: and again drunkerdes, and rioters shall not inheryte the kingedome
of god. Also S. Peter, be sobre and awake: also Esaias: woe be to such, as do
arise in the morning to frequent and haunte tauernes. And in this place thou
must remember, that we be more bounden to be obedient, and submit our self to
the auctorytye of the word of god, and of his Apostles, then to do a pleasure,
and to gratyfye the desires of the wicked, and ungodly, and that we must
rather obey the good angel, which exhorts us, and does gide us unto al good
things, then the devil: which intiseth us to al kind of naughtynes: And that
we must rather withstand the evil spyryte, then repyne against the good.
Wherefore for the plesaunt company of thy playfelowes, be not cause of thine
own destruction, but rather withdraw thy self, so much, as lies in the,
from them: neither make, nor meddle with the^. Regard, and esteem if thou be
wise, more thy salvation, then the short delectation, that here thou may
have by thy naughtye, and wicked company of thin old companions. Se also, that
thou remember, and diligently wey this thing, that who so does obstinately
continue in vice, does neither unfeignedly repent, nor either is, or can be
taken for a Christian: for in him surely, whom sin pleseth, true faith can
not be, which he lacks also, that sins against his own conscience, or
commytteth any deadly syn. Wherefore let us not be named Christians, when we are
far of, and much differ from the thing it self: nor yet let us boste, and
set forth our faith in words, but let us in dead, and unfeignedly repent,
and with all our heart be converted unto the lord god. Let us labor to a
mende that thing, which is amysse, and by doing well, and as we should and are
bounden to do, recompense, such offenses, as we have already committed: and by
thus doing remove out of gods sight the remembrance of our former mysdoynges.
Let us refer, and imploye our studies unto these ends, that we may always
live in the fear of god, and according to ryghtuousnes: let us in our living
be innocent, vpryght, holy, chaste, sobre, and temperate in all manner of
things. Let us profitte the congregation, and help the poor members thereof:
and to be short, let us, as Paul exorteth us, live worthily, and as it
becomes such, as do profess the gospel of Christ, having yet for all this
our cheafest, and special trust in the goodness and mercy of god, and none at
al in our selves, Let us pray also with out ceasynge unto the father by our
lord, and sauyoure Jesus Christ, that he will vouchsafe to send his holy
spirit among us, for to lead, guide, govern instruct, sanctify, raise up,
comforth and strengthen us: like as in the gospel Christ has promised, that
the father will give the holy ghost to such, as require it of him. And in the
mean time by giving place to prau and wicked affections let us not against
our own conscience withstand the holy ghost, nor banishe, and grieve him: but
rather (as Paul exorteth us) let us walk in n^enes of life, and be no slaves,
nor servants to sin. Let us offer our bodies a lively, pure, and
acceptable sacrifice before god: Let us crucify, and kill the flesh with all
the ragious lusts and pleasures thereof, and keep our selves pure from the
world. Let us be renewed in spirit, and put upon us the new man, which in
ryghtuousnes, and true holiness is made like unto the image of god. Let us be
folowers of god, as loving children, and walk like as it becomes the
servants, and saynctes of the lord, one berynge with an other by love, and
studyenge to preserve, and maynteyne by the bond of peace the unity of
spirit, gentle, and loving one toward an other. Let us love our enemies,
pray for such, as curse us, do good to such as hate us, pray for them that
vex, and trouble us, give fode to the hungry, drink to the thristie, money to
the pore, and neady: Let us harbor the harbourles, cloth the naked, viset the
sick: show the way to him, that wa^dereth, instruct the ignorant, help
him, that is in perplexity, with our good counsel: comfort the
comfortelesse: make agreement among them, that are at varyaunce: let us also
condemn honors, forsake vain glory, pass for no riches. Finally let us
endeavor to oppress, and vanquyshe this natural enclination to vice, which is
graffed in us: And let us not only beware of this, that our hertes be not
burdened at any time with excessyue eating, or drynking, but also prepare
our selves some times by abstinence, and fasting for to pray, and in so many,
and sundry assaults of the devil, the world and the flesh, most arde^tly to
require the help of god. Neither let us be to proud in prosperity, nor cast
down in adversity: and what thing so ever we do, let us refer it unto the
glory of god: not respectinge so much our own pryuate profitte, and
commodity, as the common profit, and commodity of others. Let us moreover
behave our selves so, that we be no cause of offense to others, but that they
may rather by our example be moved and stered up unto virtuous and godly
behauyour: And to conclude: let us pray contynually with out ceasynge, give
thanks in all things: preace evermore unto heavenly things: and set the
vain things of the world at naught. But thou wylt peradventure say: These
things are hard, and of much difficulty. I will not deny that thing: But
surely they are things as well fytte, and agreeable to our profession, as also
necessary unto salvation. Wherefore in dryuynge out, and expulsynge this
folyshe nysenes of the mind, let us be very diligent: let us not pamper our
selves to much, nor flatter our own weakness, nor fail our selves wyllingly,
since that we are not yet destitute of the grace of god: Let us not wetyngely
fall into sin, but rather strongly resyst the devil which stereth us, and
provoke us thereunto. Let us not give cowardlye over at the first brunte.
What thing is not to be thought light, and easy, to atteyne that life, which
abounds withal good thing, and everlasting joy? Paul says by good
right. I reckon, that the miseries of this present life shall not be so great,
as the glory, which we shall have reveled to us: which thing is declared, and
proved by this place in scripture. For it is written, that the eye has not
seen, nor the ear herd: nor the things have not entered into the heart of
man, which god has prepared for them, that love him. What a great thing is
this? How scarsly can it be not only by any man's tongue vtterered, but
imagined in the mind, what a state that is, to be citizen of heaven, heir of
god, partener with Christ in his fathers heritage: to possess that kingdom,
which was before the creacion of the world prepared for the godly: to behold
evermore the highest felicity, and greatest good thing that can be: to see,
and have the most sweat contemplacion of gods countenance, to accompnye
aungelles: to be in the number of the blessed souls, in the fellowship of the
just: to praise god continually with himpnes which is the everlasting
spring, and fountain of al true glory: among aungelles, Patriarchs,
Prophets Apostles, and all the godly, which are partakers of the blessed, and
ever lasting life? what? be not all the pains, grefes, and calamites of this
life to be thought light, and easy, if thou compare them with the glory,
which shall be? Nor hable to deserve such a reward, as is ordained for the^
which bear those patiently, and take them well in worth? so that we may justly
be ashamed of our nise delicatenes? what man would, I beseech the wisshe to
tarry here in earth, and not to be dissolved rather with Paul, calling to
remembrance the kingdom of heaven, the immortal life, and joy, thendles
bless, the company of angels, the fellowship of al them, which lived here in
earth in the service, and fear of god, and be now pertakers of the blessed,
and everlasting kingdom of god. Let us not think therefore that these things
ar difficile, or hard, which Christ sets forth to hes disciples for that
e^ment hereof: since that of the contrary wise, whosoever does not keep gods
commandment, which is a thing necessary, and needful unto salvation, shall
not only be deprived of that blessed life, which we spoke of, but shall also
be cast i^to that regyon, and place, where the wicked abide, and shall be
grievously tormented in hell with such punishment, as is ordained ^or the
deuelishe, and ungodly, and shall be addict to hell fire, and endless death, and
cast into that deep darkness, where there is wailing, and gnashing of ^eth, and
where as they shall be most sharply, rigorously, and everlastingly punished, and
tormented: and shall be also in the fellowship, and company of deuyls, and the
wicked souls without al hope of better: that is to wit, in extreme
desperacio^, which pricketh, and vexes a man a thousand parts more, then
the pein, and punishment, which he abides. what man would not refrain him
self fro sin, which has those things before his eyes, the fear of hell,
endless punishment, everlasting de^h, the vnque^cheable fire, tormen^es, which
no man is able to tell, the company of devils, the fellowship of the ungodly,
horror, anguishe, continual tremblinge, and quaking, which is such that it ca^
not be conceived, much less described, and set forth in words. whom would
not the day of anger make a ferd? as both the Prophet, and Paul also unto the
To. calleth^t: the day of punishment and affliction, the day of miserye, the
day of mist, and darkness, the day of clouds, and tempestuous day, when god
will give to every man according to his deserts? would god the remembrance of
those things would never fall out of men's minds, but that we had them always
set before the eyes of our heart. Then men would be, except I am far deceued,
more dyligente in keeping the commandments of God. Then men would refreyne
from the outward act, and exercise justice. Then would they live in the
fear of God, and according to the rule, and prescripte of virtue. For
sometimes virtue has her just reward here in this present life, like as also
vice, and wickedness have their deserved punishment. And that I speak not at
this present time of the testimomye, which ones mind bears against him
self, and of the greafe of conscience, which we have intreted of in other
places, let us now consider those things which are put in daily practice, and
experience, so that they may not only be seen, but groped, and felt with
hands. For to speak of the most common, and most frequented vice among
men, what mischeuousnes I beseech you, proceeds not now a days of drunkenes?
for of this: as it is noted in the cronicle of the world: palenes of the face:
drousy and soore eyes, trembling hands, furious slepes, and nightly unquiet
proceed. Of this also the stenche of the breath: the headeache: feebleness of the
memory: and dulnes of wit come: many times also there ensuethe of drunkenesse,
grievous and very dangerous diseses: as the gout both of hands and feet: the
falling evil, as both Physicians do affirm, and also daily experience
proves. How oftentimes se we also whoredom punished in this world, with french
pockes? as also we se the immoderate pleasure of the body punyshed with paulsy,
dymnes of the syghte, and the dyssolution of the synowes. What? does not ryote
also bring many unto poverty, and beggars state? Is not adultry punished very
often by the law: and always is diffamed, and slaundered? Who^ has not anger
also oftentimes hurt here in earth? Who^ has not pride brough into hatred? Now
to what end should I speak any thing of envy? for is not it punishment enough
it self? does it not cause a man to trete, and chafe him self? For as Horace
says very well, the tirauntes of Sicilia did never invent a more grievous and
sorer punishment, the^ envy. Estesones: the enuyous man is not a little grieved
in his heart, when other men cheaue and prospere well. Does not the covetous man
take great care about the enter sing of his substance, and is he not trobled
again, and takes great though lest he shall leese the same? For neither that
thig, which he has, does suffyce him, nor yet he is at any time without fear
of ^esyng that, which he possesses: o^ else he thinks that it shall not last:
like as one man affirms. Do thou not now manyfestly see, how that vice,
and wickedness are punished here in earth? wherewith if we be nothing moved,
we should be moved with the punishment, which the Scripture threateneth to the
ungodly in hell, and to be provoked there with to refourme, and amend our life,
al procrastmacion, and dila^eng set aparte: if we take not these things to be
fables, which are mencyoned in scripture of thimmortalitie of the godly: and
of the endless pain of the wicked. I will tell the in few word^ what thing did
very much move, and stere me to refourme, and amend my life: because it may
also peradventure geaue occacyon to others to refourme their living. Thus
verily I thought with my self: O Riui. What if it should happen, that there
were none other way even in this moment, but present death? what I pray the,
thynkest thou, should become of the? for do thou persuade thy self, that
thou art meet, and redye for death? admytte, that thou do put thine whole
trust, as thou art bounden in the goodness, and mercy of God: yet think
thou, that therefore thou have no need to fear his justice? How many
thousands of Chrystians are adjudged to hell fire: both young, and old men:
women, married folks, and unmarried: of al sorts of men, of every time, and
kynrede, whose sins have been both less in nombre, and not so great, as thine
be? Oh fearful judgment, but just. How many Jews? how many worshyppers
of Idolles are tormented in hell: which if they had been converted unto the faith
of Christ, as we are through the infinite, and exceeding great mercy, and
goodness of god, would ^oth have lived more godly hear in earth, then we do, and
had also escaped everlasting death? Oh execrable unkindness: Oh blindness of our
heart what if thou should here such word, as the prophet Esaias brought unto
good king Ezechias: Set thine house in order, and make thy self ready: for
thou must dye, and live no longer: says the lord: what woldeste thou do in
this case. I beseech the? Then no doubt of it, thou woldeste wish to have
space to repent, and bewail thy sins: Then thou would cry god mercy with
weeping and syghing. But wherefore do thou not rather intend it every day,
and all thy life time long, sith that thou would do it in that present time.
When I co^sydered, and thought thus with my self, I was much awaked and stered
up unto godly living, and feared from syn, and in a manner enforced to cry god
mercy. This trade may such men follow: as think it good: where is there any
man in the world, which does not purpose to forgive his enemy before his does?
why does he not forgive him even now as well? where is there any man, which would
not be reconc^led to god with all his heart? why is he not as well reconciled
even now? Again where is there any man, which is not in mind to amend, and
refourme his living? Why then does he not the same even now as well? To be
short therefore: what thing so ever thou would do at the present hour of
death: do the same thing by the furtheraunce and help of god, whiles thou
lyuest here in earth, and art lust^e, and in good health: that is, to speak
perticulerly, repent, fear god unfeignedly, love him with all thine heart, with all thy might, and power: put thine whole affiaunce, and trust in him: call unto
him in adversity, give thanks in prosperity: praise, and glorify him at al
times: sing hympnes, and sweat songs of melody before him, remember him in
thy prayers, supplycations, and reques^es: commit, and be take thy self wholly
to his will, and mercy: Let hi be thine example in doing good to al men: and
endeavor to be sum what like him also in loui^g thine enemies: Take thine
adversity well in worth: be ge^ryl, and lowlye in prosperity, diligent in
thine office, moderate as well in thine apparel, as also temperate in eating,
and drinking: be also just in thy dealing, good to the poor, well aduyled in
company: Suffer also wro^ges, make love days, and peace among them, that are
at debate, and variaunce: be chaste, bashefull, sobre, and honest, and vpryght
in all thy doings. And because this thing does not consyst in the to do, thou
must therefore resort unto God for help: thou must acknowelege the weakness,
and unableness of man: Thou must hartelye, and loulye seek the father to
strengthen the with his holy spirit, which Christ in the Gospel promised
that the father would give to such as should require it of him with ardente
prayers. If thou shall require than, that thou may have the holy ghost
plentifully, abundantly, and rychly: as Paul says: Powered upon the by Jesus
Christ: by his might, and his help, those things, which we could not by
natural strength bring to pass, shall be right easelye atcheued. Let this
thing be only thine endeavor (...) to bridle thine affections, and beware
lest at any time thou embrase idleness or fail thy self. For the holy ghost
does not judge them to be worthy of his help, which be l^dder, and given to
ydlenes: and such as cantynde the^ selves none honest thing to be occupied
withal, but sit all the day long with their hands clasped together, like
vagaboundes: But he aydeth workers, and such as put to their own diligence,
and do labor for to van quishe, and overcome the redines, and inclination
unto vice, which is graffed naturally in us. Such I say does the holy ghost
help, as wrestle and fight contynually with the wicked, and evil affections of
the mind. Let us not therefore follow the example of the carter, which when his
cart stacke in the tough clay, called unto god for help, but he him self
stood lokynge about him, and did no manner of thing. This thing may also fear
us from committinge of evil, and may also stere us up unto godly living,
because god is present every where, whom thou can escape in no manner wise:
and he has set his angel over the to keep, and govern the, and to ma^ke, and
bear witness of that thing, that thou do. If thou would not for any
good, that a man should take the in doing that thing, which were not lawefull,
nor meet to be done: how much more should the fear and reverence of god
cause the to refre^e from such. Thou fear a man wonderfully, because he
knows, and is a wytnes of thy naughtynes: do thou then think that he
which ouerseeth all things, and nothing does escape, to be fit, that in his
^yght thou should permit thy self to do that thing, which thou would be
ashamed to commit in the syghte of a man, sithe that he shall ^es judge the,
which is a witness, and marker of all things, that thou do? A cer^ayne
Heathen man gives good counsel, that thou must so live, as though thou werte
in the sight of all men, and that thy thynking must be such, as though there
were one, that might se thine inward thought. For it is a great stay for a man,
when he bethinketh him that there is one present, which knows his inward
thinking. A great occasion of sinninge is taken away, when there is a present
wytnes by: This precepte, and this rewle did an Heathen writer give: which
verily every Christen man should think, that it touches him, and is a lesson
for him. If at any time therefore thou purposest any dishonest or unlawful thing,
consider thus with thy self, before thou enterprisest such a thing: what shall
I do? shall I purpose that thing in gods sight, which I would be ashamed to do
before me^. Shall I make the holy Aungel mine enemy by this offense, which is
set to look over, and rewle men: which would be looth to cause my friend to
forsake me. Shall I make the good spirit sorry, and the evil glad? Did Christ
redeem me therefore with the shedi^g of his blood, that I should become the
servant, and slave of sin, and of the devil? did he make me an inheritoure
of the kyngedome of heaven therefore, that I should lease by my negligence the
same godly, and heavenly inheritance? did he deliver me from sin, that I
should wyllyngly, and weatyngly fall into it again? Now where is that burning
love toward god? Now where is the fear of god? where is the shame, that
should be in me^? where is the faith, and mercy? shall I thus recompense the
benefits of god? shall I render this thank to Christ for the benefitte of my
redemption? does the holy ghost stere me no more, than thus? Do I come thus
unto ye lords table? do I look thus for the coming of Christ? shall death take
me in this state? shall I be seen before the judgment seat of the Lord in
this state? do I suffer after this sort the wild affections to bear the
suffragnite in me? the flesh to have the victory, and upper hand, and to
triumph over me, and sin to rain in my body? Am I a beast? have I not a man's
heart? that I thus cowerdly like a dasterde give place to such mocions, and
resist the^ not? do I chose ever the^ worse when I daily se the better? surely
if you would consider those things, and such like, which no man can nombre:
thou would not easly commit any dishonest, or unlawful thing. What thing
soever thou do therefore, what thing soever thou attemptest remember, that
there is God present, as undoubtedly he is, and that he beholds, and looks
upon what thing soever thou do, or attemptest: fere, and dreed him: And for
as much as he is always present, let that thing sum what stay the, and keep the
back from sin. For as they say he is a witness: He is a judge: he beholds,
what thing so ever ma^s mind compryseth. This is a judge, whom no man's
craftye conueyaunce can blind. This thing shall also much further, and
help unto godly living: if a man call to remembrance, that by baptyme he is
made the son and heir of god: and that he is also made brother of Christ, and
with him partener of his Fathers kingdom, which one thing far passes, and
surmounteth all other. For who would not be much moved with this thing unto
godly living, and would not abhor by a certain natural fear from vice,
which remembers that God is his father? wherefore forget not the benefyt of
him, which has made the by adoption his son: Love him: worship him, fear
him, reverence him: and in no manner thing offend or dysplease him: Be
obedyente to his will, and pleasure at all times, do his commandment, and
follow it in thy living expressly: do not think, that only the pertakynge of
his heritage does belong unto the, but also thimitacion, and following of his
goodness, and virtue: So that though thou be not able for to attain unto the
excellency of that goodness, which is in god by imitacion, and following yet thou
may in heart, and will approach nyghe thereunto, and think, that it is a
great shame for the to degenerate from the same. If thou commyttest that thing
by chance, at any time, which is against the will, and pleasure of the father
(like as naturallye we are all ready to fall) be so grieved therewith, that thou
could find in thine heart wyllyngly to punysshe thy self: and think with
thy self that thou have deserved, and art worthy of grievous pains, and
torments, because thou haste offended, and greaued thy father which is so
bountyfull: And see, that thou be never at rest, until thou shalt have made a
recompense with greater benefits, and by true repentance shalt have pacyfied
the wrath of thy most ientyl, and louinge father: so far of is it that thou
must wyllyngely trespase again, or permyt thy self to do or offend in any
thing, that thine own conscience reclaymeth, and gives against. And verily
whosoever remembers, that he is the son, and heir of God, the brother of
Christ, and pertaker with him of his fathers heritage, is not so much
terryfyed, with the fear of the last judgment, and of thendles punyshement in
hell, and of the unquenchable fire, as he is stered with the fear of his
fathers offense, and dyspleasure, and therewith withdraw from vice, and
wickedness, nor he is so much induced, through hope of the reward of
heaven, and of the everlasting joy therein, as by a certain wonderful, and
unspeakable love, that he bears toward his father, to live innocently to
hurt or harm no man, and to do good by thexample of his father to all men.
He that believes Saint Paul, where he says that our body is the temple of
the holy Ghost, dwell lynge in us, shall easlye temper him self from doyenge
naught, nor shall at any time pollute him self with the beastlye lusts of the
flesh. And fynallye who so doubts not, but that he is one of the number of
thelect and chosen, cease not after thexample of the Saynctes, to render
honor dew to God, and love, and charytye, to his neighbors.

But some manne will peradventure are, what the cause is, that, if we purpose
to repent, and live in the fear of God at any time, and after his will, and
commandment: or if we entend to live soberlye, and chastlye: yet we never
proceed, and go on forth constantlye with that thing, which we did well, and
Godly purpose, unto the which to make a brief, and short answer: I find,
that the natural inclynacion unto vice, which is graffed in us, and is grown
in the inward parts, and marrowe, is the chief cause hereof: I mean the
flesh that we bear about with us, wherewith the spyryte is at contynuall
debate, and strife: as Paul witnesses, We ought therefore to resyste, and
withstand at all times this ennemy of ours, which allureth us unto lust and
fylthy pleasures: unto belly chere and gluttony, unto wanton nysenes and
ryotte, and unto other vices, which are both fylthy, and dishonest and we ought
with Godly exercises trauayles, watchynges, hunger, and fasting, to refreyne
the violent rage of it: to subdue, and tame it with contynuall sobernes, and
temperaunce. For this is the cause, that our sauyoure commands us to beware,
and take heed, lest our hertes be burdened with excessyue eating. And Paul
forbyddeth us to ouercharge our selves with wynedrynkynge: He fears us also
from surfeytyng, and drunkenes, and commands us to be sober, and watch.
Again contynuall prayer is requisyt, wherein we must a^e the aid, and help
of God, without which all our endeavor in refraynynge the flesh, and
repressynge the vyolente rage of it, is in vain. But now, when we have thus
refrayned the mocions of the flesh: there remain yet two sore ennemies the
world, and the devil, with which we must fight contynuallye without ceassyng:
because they suffer us not to persyst, and continue in a Godly purpose, to
live vertuouslye. For the world moves us unto ambycion, pride, anger, hatred,
envy, malice, impacience, backebytynge, and unto other ki^des of wickedness,
which no man is hable to number. It offers many occasyons, and causes, and
with examples it corrupts us. The (...) uyll stereth us to neglecte the word
of God, to mystrust, and dyspeire of the mercy of God, to conceive a false
persuasyon of our selves, to persyst obstynatly in vice, to speak blasphemye
against God, to impugn his known truth, he provoke us unto hypocrysye,
superstityon, Idolatrye, and unto infinite, and innumerable kinds of
wickedness? thou axest, what were to be done in this point? Valiauntly we
must resyst, and withstand our enemies, and lay away from us al folyshenisenes:
we must with our most ernest prayer axe, and crave the aid, and help of god,
and thus if we put our affiaunce, and steadfast trust therein, we neade in no
wise to despeyre of the vyctorye. Let us therefore hear that thing, which S.
Paul says unto the Corinthians. This remains says he my brethren, that ye
be strong, and steadfast in the lord, and in the might of his power: put upon
you the whole armoure of god, that ye may be able to stand against the
assaults of the devil. For our strife is not against flesh, and blood, but
against rulers, and potestates, against lords of the world, the princes of
hell: and against their gyles, and deceytes. And speking afterward by name of
that same armoure he commands them to stand strongly under pight with
truth, having for their brestplate, justice, for their bu^lar, faith: where
with ye may be able says he, to extinguyshe, and quench all the fyry darts of
the devil. Moreover he commaundethe them to take upon them the Helmette of
salvation, the swearde of the holy Ghost, which is the word of God: and he
wylleth them never to cease of from prayenge at any time. I have now showed
the an ^rmoure, or as Paul terms it, a protection, to defend us against our
fearse enemy the devil, which surely lets no day escape, yea none hour,
or momente of the hour, wherein he does not set upon us, to overthrow us* For
as saint Peter says: He walkethe about continuallye like a rorynge Lion,
seakynge whom to devour: Wherefore being decked, and armed with the armoure of
Paul: Let us manfully resist the proud spirit: And S. James assures us,
that so we shall vanquishe him, and put him to flight: Let us resort unto god
for succoure continually, and pray, and seake of him, that he will not suffer
us to be led into temptacion, but for Christ's sake deliver us from that
tyraunte, which is an everlasting enemy of man kind. And let us take good
heed before all other things, that we wetingly do not fall into that sin,
whereunto he moves us, nor into wylfull destruction. Let us not cherishe, and
uphold our own folyshe delycate nisenes, but rather stoutly withstand Satan,
and in our supplicacions require of the immortal god, the father of our lord
Jesus Christ: that in such infirmity, and weakness he will help, and support
us. And for so much as the devil never sets on us openly, nor denounces
war before, but steals upon us, and like a wylye fox oftentimes speaks
fair to us for to compass, and deceive us, and laugheth upon us to endomage,
and hurt us, and allureth us unto the utter destruction of our sowles, we must
warely eschew his snares, which he has laid for us. Let us not give occasion,
nor offer a fit, and convenient time to him for to assault, and oppress us
unawares. Cyprian says that a man may the better beware, when he fears.
Therefore let us shake of us slouthfullnes, and set a part al security: and
as it is commonly said, let us fear the Scorpion underneath every stone, let us
not be without care in security, as though all were well, and in safegarde. No
man is sooner undone, than he, which is without fear, as an Heathen man
writes, and this security is the beginning of al myscheafe, and calamity. If
thou haste therefore ones tryumphed over thine enemy, and vanquished him, do
not straight way think, as though al danger were past, that thou shall live
continually in peace: thou must stand still in the front of the battle ready to
fight, as Ciprian exortethe: Thou must in this world do none other thing,
but fight contin^ally with the Devil, and keape of thee his darts, and
weapons with the buclarre of faith, and the sword of gods word. We must
fight, says he with avarice, with unchastity, with anger, and ambition: we
must wrestle continually with carnal vices, and the temptacions of the
world: for our soul, considering that it is seged with the whole army of
the devil, is scarsly able to stand against such a violent assault. For if
avarice be supplanted, lust puts out the h^ade. If lust be vanquyshed,
ambition succedeth: if ambicion be set at naught, anger is placed for it: and
thus pride puffs up the heart of man, wine drinking allureth, envy breketh
concord, ^elowsye dyssolueth frendeshyp, and amity. And like as we must not
be proud, being conqueroures, so when we are conqueted we must not straight
way despeyre, and lay away from us our weapon. What must we then do? verily
we must then fight more fearsly then ever we did before, for to remeue and take
away the former ignominy, and shame: and with valiaunte courage to quitte
our selves of the foil received at the hands of our enemy: like as a
certain noble man did, which is artificially peynted, and set forth in his
colors by an excellent poet: whose words these be of the same. When he was
beaten down unto the ground with great stones which his enemies cast down
upon him, he was not therefore vanquished and put to flight, but was then more
fearse, then ever was he before. For anger pricked him forward: and shame, and
his known prowess did stere, and insence him: albeit we must fight with our
enemy, having more affiaunce in god, then in our own strength. Now thou
perceyuest, what the cause is, why if we purpose to live godly at any time, we
continue not therein. A certain enclination unto sin, which is naturally
graffed in us, is chefely the cause: next of all, the world, which ministers
sundry occasions unto al kind of vice: Last of all the devil which casts
with him self contynually how to destroy us, nor cease at any time to
overthrow us either openly, or priuilye. God, and the father of our Lord,
and savior Jesus Christ encourage and strengethen us in this dangerous, and
contynual conflycte, with so many enemies, and supporte us with his help,
which are unable of our selves to resist the^, and with his holy spirit
confirm and establishe our hertes, that we may both overcome, and bring low
these fleshely mocions, nor be yet ouercomen, and brought down by the
te^ptacions of the same and that we may suppress our natural concupissence,
and resist the world, which gives diverse, and sundry occasious unto sin: and
that we may also withstand the devil which temteth us by all means possible,
and ^uenteth al manner of giles, and ways how to destroy us: and that not only
the servile, and bond fear, which the law brings, may revoke, and withdr^
us from vice by a certain seruyle dreed, and fear of the punishment of god,
and of everlasting torment, and pain, being fered with the wrath, and
judgment of God, and the terror of hell, but rather a great dele the liberal,
and honest fear, which natural children have to break, and transgress the
commandment of their derest father: which fear true faith verily does
inge^dre, may move us withal honest, godli, and reverent behauior at no time to
do, or atte^pte that thing, wherewith such a benign and bountiful father may be
grieved and offended: and that this thing may move us for to do well: of our
own free will, and to flee, and abhor vice, and to do our bounden deutye even
of a love, so that if we have at unawares suffered our selves to trespass, or
offend any thing by frailty, that thing may so grieve, and vex our
conscience, that we w^lde very gladlye, and willinglye punisshe ourselves, and
think, that we would be rather dead, than alive: because we have offended our
father, which is so merciful, and bountious. This thing also the everlasting
god grant for his sons sake our lord, and savior Jesus Christ, that
considering the shortness of our life, and the uncertain hour of death, we
difer in no wise the amendme^t of our life, but return rather unto salvation,
acknoweledge our sins, and repent, unfeignedly, and pacify with a soroful, and
contrite heart the wrath of ye heavenly father, and knocking our breasts with
the Publicane in the gospel, require humbli the mercy of god, and that we will,
and labor for to attain such things only, as are acceptable in gods sight,
and make a greter mendes for our offense committed, than thoffence it self is,
and by good works, and alms deeds recompense our fautes, and putting thus
our affiaunce, and trust in the goodness, and help of God, that we may live in
the service, and fear of god innoce^tly, as Christen men should do, chastely,
soberly, and temperatly: For the profytte of the congregacyon of Christ, and of
man's life, agreably to the professyon of Christen men, and herein may thus
still continewe, and persyst unto the last day.

These were the things, which I purposed to show of the folly of men because
they difer, and put of from day to day the reformation of their life, our
purpose did constreyne us to allege, and bring forth certain things, which
like as they will be plesaunt and well accepted of the godly, that love, and
fear god, so will they be to the other bitter, and unpleasant, which would be
taken for Christians, when they are none in very deed. We spoke many things
every where of the shortness of life, and of the uncertainty of death, which is
every hour at hand, by reason of uncertain chances, and oppresses us
oftentimes, when we least ween. But notwithstanding godly men do wyshe for
it, and when it pleases God, wyllyngelye, and desyrouslye enbraseth it. The
ungodly do not so: they fear it wonderfully. We spoke also of the resurrection
of the dead, of the coming of the lord, of the last dowme, when al men shall
be called to give an accomptes and reckening of their former life, which day
will be to the wicked very terrible but much looked for, and wyshed of the godly.
For then does their redemption approach: then the time of refreshinge, as we
read in thactes, is at hand, and as Tertullian says, the day of Christen
exultacion draws nyghe. We declared also, what peine and punyshement was
ordained for the wicked after this bodily death, and what reward and pleasure
was reposed in Christ for the godly. For then the godly shall come unto heaven
and shall there live in the greatest joy, that can be. How great joy, and
felicity must it neades be, for to behold gods countenance ever more, to be
gladdened with the continual, and most comfortable contemplation of gods
vysage, whom now we se but coueredly, as Paul says? How great felicity must
it neades be, to se him, as he is of him self, to abound with all good
things, to enjoy such great joys, and so many in number, as no man is able
to conceive, much less to utter, and express in words. But the deuelyshe
shall be cast headlong into hell pit, and there shall be tormented with endless
pain. Neither such is the vtteraunce, or eloquence of any man, that he can be
able to describe, and set forth in words, nor such is the sharpenes of any
man's wit, that he can conceive but even the least part of those peynes,
which the wicked shall abide, and suffer in hell: which are condemned by the
just judgment of god, unto everlasting fire. Finally we spoke of many other
things mo, which wylbe to the Godly very pleasant, and comfortable, but
otherwise to the wicked, and deuelyshe. As of gods wrath against sin, of
dryuyng out of our minds security in wealth, and prosperity, of repentance,
amendment, and reformation of our living, of the continual wrastlynge, and
battle; that we have with our extreme enemies the world, the flesh, and the
devil, and other such like, which it is nedeles now to rehearse: These things
are bitter, and vnplesaunte, but as I trust, healthfu. For Physicians cure
commonly grievous, and sore diseases with sharp medicines, as Cureius shows.
Also Cicero in an Epistle unto Octauian says, that no salues which are laid
unto sores, do so much grene the pacient, as do those, which are helthful. The
everlasting god grant this, the father of our lord, and redemer Jesus Christ,
that in this ^o wicked, and corrupt world, this our labor may keep the godly
in their office, and therein confirm, and establishe the^, if at lest wise any
will read this little treatise, having a zele: to the wicked also, that it may
ministre some occasion to return, and repent. And that the salve, which is
taken, and laid to the sick, and well nere desperate for healthes sake, may
have power to ease them, and work their salvation. This thing grant he
without whose help al our endeavor, and study is void and in vain, the
almightye, and everlasting God, to whom be al praise, honor, and glory, now
and ever. So be it.

Luke.xii Chap. Be in a redines therefore, because at what hour ye least
ween, the son of man will come.
IMPRYNTED AT LONDON IN FLETEstrete at the sign of the George next to Saint
Dunstones Church by Wyllyam Powell.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
