OF THE STATE OF EVROPE. XIIII. Books. CONTAINING THE HISTORY, AND RELATION
OF THE MANY PROVINCES HEREOF. Continued out of approved Authors. BY GABRIEL
RICHARDSON BATCHELOVR in Divinity, and FELLOW of BRASEN-NOSE College in Oxford.

OXFORD, Printed for HENRY CRIPPS. An. Dom. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD JOHN, Lord Bishop of LINCOLN, one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Visitour of Brasen-Nose College
in OXFORD.
Right Reverend, and my Honorable good Lord,
THE certain hopes, that Bishop Smith, our Founder of blessed memory,
conceaues in his Statutes of all his successors for the protection of his
College, gives me the meanest of that Society some heart to present these my
first, and weak labors to your Honors Patronage. But more bold I am upon
your imbred, and vnderived pronenesse to the advancement of Scholasticall
endeavors, whereof both the Universities, Colleges, Schools, Libraries,
enriched by your magnificent hand, are daily, and pregnant arguments. This
enlarging of the bowels of compassion toward learning in these later, and
straighter times, as it is a miracle for the rareness, so ought we all of us
both to power out our prayers to God for such ample dispensers of this goodness
to men, as also our utmost labors with all thankful acknowledgment to
preserve their memories. And if my self shall cast a mite into this treasury,
pardon (Right Honorable) a boldness that proceeds out of an amazed esteem of
this your own, and inimitable quality, as from a most humble devotion to your
everlasting honor, and happiness.

Your Lordships most humble devoted, GABRIEL RICHARDSON.

OF THE STATE OF EVROPE THE FIRST BOOK.
Containing a general survey of EVROPE, and of the Island of Great Britain,
with the present bounds, situation, and quality of England. The Inhabitants.
Their description, languages, and affairs of religion unto our times. The
Bishops, and Clergy. The civil government. The King. His title of Defendour
of the Faith. The Nobles, Gentry, and Commons. The great victories, and
Conquests of the English. Their no less disgraces, and losses abroad, by
means of their quarrels, and dissentions. The devision of the Kingdom into
Shires, Tithings, and Hundreds. The rank, and number of the Shires.

EVROPE.
THe universal Globe of the Earth our modern better experienced times have
found distinguished into five greater devisions, whereunto all the rest belong,
and are parts: the Newfound Lands of America, and Magellanica, detected by
late discoueries, and those of Asia, Africa, and Europe, lying in one
Continent, and only known unto ancient ages. Of these the least, but most
noble part, is Europe, the seat of Christianity, and of the Church of God, and
the nurse of victorious, and famous nations, the glorious Conquerours of the
World; wherein, banished from all other countries, mastered by tyranny,
baseness, ignorance, and barbarism, religion, civility, arts, knowledge,
liberty, and valor, at this day rest confined, the subject of this discourse.
The Etymology hereof is altogether Europa autem, neque an fit mari circumflua,
neque vnde hoc nomen acceperit, neque quis nominis author, ab aliquo mortalium
co^pertum est: nisi dicat aliquis ab Europa Tyria nomen accepisse regione^,
neque ante a sicut caeteras, nomen habuisse. Tamen illam ex Asia fuisse
constat, neque in hanc comme ass terram, quae a Graecis vocatur Europa, sed e
Phoenice tantum in Cretam, and e Creta in Africam. He^odoti Melpomene.
uncertain. The more exact bounds are upon the North the Frozen Seas of
Lapland, and Norwey; upon the West the Vergiuian, and Atlantique Oceans; upon
the South the Straights of Gibraltar, and the Sea Mediterranean from Africa;
and upon the East from Ideo quae in Europa sunt prius Collocavimus, eamque nos
a Libya Herculeo devisimus freto, ab Asia vero pelago interjacenti, ac palude
Moeoti, flumineque Tanai, ac eo Meridiano qui ad terram pretonditur incognitam
C. Ptolemei Geog. lib. 2. c. 1. vid. etiam Srab. Georg. lib. 2. C. Ptolem.
Geog. l. 2. c. 1.
Asia the Archi-pelago, the Seas Maggiore, and Zabache, the river Don, and a
line continued from thence unto the White Sea, or Baye of S. Nicholas. It is
situated betwixt the 36 and 71 1/2 degrees of Northern latitude, and the 5,
and 59 degrees of Longitude, accompting from the Meridian by the Azores. The
longest day at the town of Gibraltar in Spain, which is the most Southern
point, contains about 14 hours, and a quarter. At Wardhuis, the point most
Northerly, the greatest continuance of the Sun above the Horizon lasts 2
whole months, 22 days, and some 7 hours. It contains the distinct
Provinces, and names of Spain, France, Germany, the Low Countries,
Switzerland, Denmark, Norwey, Sweathland, Prussen, Leifland, Poland,
Lithuania, Podolia, part of the Tartars, and Russes, Hungary, Transsylvania,
Walachia, Moldavia, Bulgaria, Bosna, Servia, Rascia, Windish-land, Italy, and
Greece, seated in the maine land, and of Islands, lying in the Ocean, beside
some lesser, those of Island, Freisland, Great Britain, Ireland, Cadiz,
Mallorca, Menorca, Sardinia, Corsica, Sicilie, and Candia, with those many of
the Archi-pelago, divided amongst 9 greater Monarchs, the Emperors of the
Romans, or Germans, Russes, and Turks, and the Kings of Great Britain,
France, Spain, Denmark, Sweathland, and Poland, together with the free
Commonwealths, and inferior Princes of the Netherlands, Italy, the Switzers,
and Grisons. Ptolemie in his 2 Book sorteth these into the (c) more Western,
and the more Eastern Provinces, whose method I have here observed. In the
more Western devision he comprehends the British Islands, Iberia, or Spain,
Celto-galatia, or Gaul, Germany, Rhaetia, Vindelicia, Noricum, Pannonia,
Illyris, and Dalmatia, containing now the Kingdoms of Great Britain, and
Ireland, Spain, France, Germany, the Switzers, Netherland, Denmark, Norwey,
Sweathland, Hungary, Windischland, Krabbaten, Bosna, Contado di Zara, Dalmatia,
and Albania, with their Islands, whose descriptions, state, and sundry fortunes
follow in order.

GREAT BRITAIN.
THE Country has been thus distinguished from Britain in France, in regard
of the lesser extension thereof named the Lesser Britain. It is a famous Island
seated in the Ocean to the North-west of the Continent of Europe some 30
Italian miles (where the passage is the narrowest) from France, or the next
maine land, the Great Island (as Aristides Aristides.
calls it) another world after Solini Polyhist. c. 25.
Solinus, the Work of sporting Nature after Gerard Market. in Britannia.
Mercator, made more gracefully to adorn the Universe, the glory of Islands,
the Queen, and mistress of the seas, and the beauty of the West. The bounds
are upon the West part of the Western Ocean, with S. George his Channel from
Ireland; upon the North, the open and spacious Northern seas; upon the East,
the German Ocean from Denmark, Germany, and the Netherlands; and upon the
South the English Channel from France.

The figure hereof is Triangular, or Three-square, whose Basis might be the
Seacoast toward France.

It lies in the Northern halfe-part of the temperate Zone, extended from the
16 unto the 21 degree of Longitude, accounted from the first Meridian by the
Azores Islands; and from the 50 degree unto the 60 of Northern Latitude, or
from beyond the 18 Parallel, or the beginning of the eight Clime unto beyond the
27 Parallel, or beginning of the 13 Clime. The longest day at the Lizard point
in Cornwall (the most Southerly part) contains about 16 hours, and a
quarter. At Straithy head in Scotland (which is the point lying farthest to the
North) the same contains 18 hours, and 3 quarters. The length of the Island
from South to North after this account is some 620 Italian miles. The greatest
Breadth betwixt East and West according to a right line is about 250 of the
same miles. Camden reckons 320 miles, bending with the crookes, and turnings
of the Seacoast. The whole circumference he accompteth at 1836 miles. A
Parallel drawn over the middle hereof has (after Ptolemy) almost that
proportion to a Meridian, Ptol. Geog. lib. 8. c. 3.
or Greater Circle, as has eleven to twenty. It comprehends two Kingdoms of
England, and Scotland, of late years united under one Prince, of which
severally with their Islands.

ENGLAND.
The bounds hereof are upon the South, West, and East the same with those of
great Britain, and upon the North from Scotland the Tweede, and Solway Frith,
with the river of Eske, running into the Solway.

It is situated betwixt the 50, and 55 48/60 degrees of Northern Latititude,
and is subject to the 8, 9, and 10 Climes. The longest day in the most
Southerly point hereof is 16 hours and a quarter. At Berwicke (the point most
Northerly) it contains 17 hours, and 48 minutes. It has in length after
this computation 340 Italian miles.

The Air is close, thick, moist, and much subject to winds and stormy
weather, yet very healthful, sweet, and exceedingly temperate, not molested
with those vehement, and piercing colds of Winter, or scorching heats of
Summer, usual to regions of the same Clime, or of more Northerly Latitudes. In
regard hereof the people ordinarily here live very long (if not broken with
surfeits, and bad diets) healthie, and not much encombred with diseases. The
Country is plain for the most part, or rising with easy downs, seeming
plains a far of (Wales, and the English Apennine excepted) pleasant, and
most fruitful, flourishing with a perpetual greenesse of meadows,
corne-fields, woods, and grassie hills, and stored with all varieties both for
necessity, and ornament, which the colder Clime can bring forth. The cloth,
and wools hereof for quantity, and finenesse exceed those of all other parts,
much desired abroad, and cloying foreign markets with an over great abundance.
No Country yields such plenty of beeues, sheep, and cattle. Corn serves
here for both uses of bread, and drink; yet not with that superfluity that
much can be spared, through the luxury of the Nation, or their neglect of
tillage, and the injury of the great ones turning arable to green swarths,
overmuch addicted to pasturage and feeding. The hilly, and more barren parts
swell with profitable, and rich minerals of silver, copper, iron, sea-coale,
and allom, but more especially of tin, and lead. The seas swarm with fish,
but not much regarded by the Natives through their inexcusable sloth, or
glutted with their flesh, and store of land provision.

The Inhabitants most commonly are tall, and big of stature (compared with
Southern Nations) fair (especially the women commended for their lasting
beauties) proper, well proportioned, and surpassing others in a more apt
posture, and graceful carriage of their bodies, grave, witty, pleasant, well
spoken, generous, bountiful, or rather prodigal, spending above their rank
and means, lavish, and unconstant in their apparel, and liberal, dainty,
and neat feeders. In war they are accounted valiant (but not so hardy)
feirce, undaunted, fearelesse of danger, not accustomed to fly, resolute,
constant, and quickly disciplined. No nation has afforded more brave and
expert Seamen, with stout, and swiftships failing in all weathers, Seas and
Oceans. The Learned in all ages have been much deserving, and no less
esteemed, Beda, Alensis, Scotus, Occam, the two Bacons, Bradwardine, other
ancients, to omit those of latter times. From hence Germany, Poet. Germ.
Citat. a Camdeno (de Anglo: Saxonibus) v. etiam Comment. loachimi Vadiani in
Pompon. Melae lib. 3. (de Hispan. and Septent. I^^sulis.
and the Western parts were first recovered from ignorance, and barbarism,
overwhelmed with a deluge of the rude Northern Natitions. From hence more
especially France at two several times, by the British v. Caesaris Com. Bell.
Gal. lib. 6.
Druides under the Gauls, and by Alcuinus v. Trithemium de Ecclesiasticis
Scriptoribus. Annal. Gallicos. etc.
under Charles the Great, and the French, the first public reader at Paris,
the occasion, and Author of that most ancient, and flourishing University. At
this day in the judgment of impartial relaters amongst other learning they not
so much equal as exceed all others in Poetry, Oratory, close, deep, and
substantial penning, and composing of those subjects, which they undertake,
sermons and practique Devinity; but whose most and best writings being English
are not so well known abroad.

The Vulgar languages here spoken are the Welsh and Cornish, remanders (as are
the people) of the ancient British; and the English, originally Dutch, brought
hither by the Saxons, although now much differing from the present Dutch or
German, through a long disunion of the 2 nations, and the mixture hereof with
the Norman or French, and Latin.

The religion of the Pagan Britons was the same with the ancient Gauls v.
Caes. Com. Bell. Gall. lib. 6. and Taciti Iulij Agricolae vita^.
. who first planted the Christian, it is uncertain. The Magdeburgenses in
their 1 Century, and 2 book and Chapter bring in S. Paul hear preaching the
Gospel out of the 9 sermon of Theodoret ad Groecos Infideles* Surius S. Peter
in his 29 of June out of Simeon Metaphrastes. The second of these their
authorities I have not yet seen. The first of them (in the place recited)
relates no such matter.

An old manuscript in the Vatican remembered by Baronius makes otherwise Joseph
v. Annal. Eccl. Baronij. Anno Christi. 35.
of Aramathaea to have been the first, confirmed by Malmesburiensis in his
Antiquities Malmesbur. de antiq. Glaftoniae.
of the monastery of Glastenbury. Higher proofs in this we have none. Of
something better authority Nicephorus Callistus Nicephori Callisti Eccles.
Histor. lib. 2 c. 4.
, Dorotheus Dorothei Synops. de vita, and morte prophetarum.
, and the Menologie Menologium Graecorum 10 die Maij.
of the Greeks mention Simon Zelotes, who here should suffer martyrdom (the
time they set not down) contradicted by the Roman Martyrologium Romanum 28
October.
Martyrologie, and Martyrologium Bedae. S. Calend. November.
that of Beda, both which affirm that he dyed in Persia. Besides these,
Dorotheus Dorothei Synopsis, de vita and morte prophetarum.
names Aristobulus (remembered by S. Paul in the last Chapter of his Epistle
to the Romans) whom he entitleth Bishop of the Britons. Eusebius, Socrates and
all the more approved Ecclesiastical writers are wholly silent in this
argument. In the reign of the Emperors Antoninus Verus, and Aurelius Commodus
Bedae Eccles. Histor. Anglorum. lib. 1. c. 4.
after Beda (or more rightly of Commodus) under king Lucius Eleutherius being
then Bishop of Rome, the Gospel in Britain is first publikly received,
continuing from that time in full rest, and without molestation until the
tenth persecution under Dioclesian, and the holy Martyrdom of ib. lib. 1 c. 6.
and 7.
S. Alban, a Citizen v. Geldae Epistolam de excidio, and conquestu Brittanniae.
of Verolamium, amongst others put to death near unto that city in the place
where afterward was built (by great Offa) the famous Monastery of S. Alban, in
time occasioning the town, thus named. In what manner this Lucius was King of
the Britons, Nennius and Beda, who first tell the story mention not. Baronius
v. Annals Eccl. Coes. Baronij Anno Christi 183.
in his Annalls seems to stand doubtful betwixt three opinions. I either
that he commanded amongst the Britons beyond the Roman pale. 2, or that he was
some substitute king in the Province under the Romans. 3, or newly elected by
the seditious Roman Britons, rebelling then against Commodus. The second
opinion is the most probable (the custom of the Romans quaedam civitates
Cogiduno regi donatae vetere, and iam pridem recepta populi Romani
consuetudine, vt haberet instrumenta servitutis and reges. Corn. Tacit vita
Iulij Agricolae.
being considered, having aunciently kings for their subjects,) and that he
ruled over only a part of the Roman Province. That about, or before this time
the Britons had received the Christian faith, the words of Tertullian, living
in the reign of Commodus, and Severus, do Britanorum inaccessa Romany loca
Christo sunt subdita. Tertullian. adversus Iudaeos cap. 7. vide etiam
Theodoret. ad Graecos Infideles Sermon. 9 and Nicephori Callisti Histor. Eccl.
lib. 3. c. 1.
sufficiently witness. Under the Emperor Constantine the Great, borne in this
Island Bedae Ec. His Anglorum lib. 1. c. 8.
of Helena a British woman, religion here is first generally authorized, as in
all other places subject to the Roman Empire, clouded soon after with a black
darkness of Arian ibidem.
infection, begun in the reign hereof, and condemned by the first Nicene
council, but resuming greater strength under his son Constantius, who next
succeeded; and with a general plague spreading over this Province, together
with the whole Christian world. This tempest blown over, the Orthodox faith is
again endangered in the reign of Arcadius, and Honorius ibidem lib. 1. c. 10.
17. and 21.
by the heresy of Pelagius, a native of this Country, undertaking a proud
war (to use the words of my Author) against the saving grace of God: in whose
refutation S Austine much labored, who then lived; here routed out by the
authority, and religious, and learned endeavors of S. German, and S. Lupus,
Bishops of Auxerre, and Trois in France, at the request of the Britons sent
hither by the French Churcb; and lastly after sundry relapses, by S. David v.
Balaei Cent. 1. nu. 55 etc.
Bishop of Meneva, or Menew (since from hence called S. David's) in the reign
of Arthur king of the Britons. About those times flourished (amongst others of
that nature here, and amongst the Scots in Ireland) the famous Monastery of
Banchor, erected long before the time of S. Benedict, or of anyknowne order,
Bedae eccl. Histor. Anglorum lib. 2. 2.
and rule of Monks, consisting after my author of seven parts, or devisions
under their several heads, each whereof contained at the least 300 persons,
maintained by the labor of their hands without salary, or revenue. The ruins
hereof are yet seen upon both sides of the Dee in Flintshire in Wales, the
course of the river having since been altered. v. infra
In the year of Christ 449, Valentinian the third then succeeding in the
Western Roman Empire, the Saxons, or Dutch, at that time Pagans under their
Prince Hengist arrive in Kent, followed by fresh Colonies of the same Religion,
and Nation, seazing upon other parts of the Islands; by which means
Christianity is here again almost totally obscured, if not fully extinguished,
driven out with the native Britons, and confined only with in Wales, Cornwall,
and the Western Mountains. Their profane gods (if it be worth the noting)
were Tuisto v. Corn. Tacitum de mo^ibus Germ^^orum.
mentioned by Tacitus, and vvoden Malmesbur. de Gestis Anglorum lib. 1. c. 1.
etc.
and Frea by Malmesburiensis, in whose honor the second, third, and fifth days
of the week were named Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday continued since in the
flourishing time of the Gospel, and unto this present. The neighboring
uncharitable Welsh, Sicut e ^ntra Britones, qui nolebant An^lis eam, quam.
habebant, fidei Christianae notitiam pandere. etc. Bedae Eccl. Histor. lib. 5.
c. 23. v. etiam e^usdem Ec. Hist. lib 2. c. 2. and 20. et lib. 5. cap 24.
or Britons not vouchsafing their aid, and disdaining all commerce herewith,
offended with their injury, and intrusion, S. Ibidem lib. ^ c. ^3. c. et lib.
2. c. 1. 5. et 6.
Austine, a Monk of F^or. Histor. per Matthew ^um Westmon.
Rome, is sent hither from Gregory the Great, then Bishop of that sea, at
whose hands Ethelbert chief King of the English, and his Kentish Saxons
receive baptism; the first Archbishop of Durovernia, or Canterbury, arriving
here in the reign of Mauritius, Emperor of the East, and some 150 years
after the first coming of Hengist. Kent by divine grace being thus
illuminated, the other kingdoms of the English Heptarchy follow not long
after: The East Saxons, under their King Bedae Eccl. Histor. Anglorum, l. 2. c.
3. et 5. et l. 3. c. 22.
Sebert through the authority of King Ethelbert, and by the preaching of
Mellitus, first Bishop of London under the Saxons, relapsing soon after under
Selred, Seward, and the first and second Sigeberts, idolatrous princes; and
recovered to the faith under Sigebert the third, through the persuasions of
Oswy king of Northumberland, and the pious labors of S. Cedde the second
Apostle, and Bishop hereof after S. Mellitus: the Northumbrians Ibidem l. 2. c.
9. 10. 11. 12. 13. et 14. etc. v. etiam Eiusdem l. 3. c. 1 et 3.
under their kings Edwin, and Oswald, and by the preachings of Paulinus, and
Aidan, the first bishops of York, and Lindisfarne: the East Angles Ibidem lib.
2 c. 15. et l. 3. c. 18.
under their King Erpenwald by the instigation of Edwin King of Northumberland,
after three years apostasy (Erpenwald deceased,) confirmed in the Orthodoxe
religion through the industry, and holy reign of King Sigebert: the
West Saxons Ibidem lib. 3. c. 7.
under their King Kingils by the preaching of S. Birinus, the first bishop of
Dorchester in Oxfordshire, and through the godly zeal of Oswald, king of
Northumberland: The Mercians under their king Ibidem lib. 3* c. 21. 23. et 24.
et lib. 4. c. 3.
Penda, and Peada, and Wulsfhere, sons to Penda, by the preachings amongst
others Cedda, Adda, Be^ti, et Diuma permittente Rege Penda. Bedae Eccles.
Histor. Aug. l. 3. c. 21. et Cellach Trumhere, ^aromano, et Ceadda sub P^ada,
et Wulfhere. ib. l. 3. c. 24.
of S. Ceadda, an Apostle of the Mercians, and the first Habuit autem (Ceadda)
sedem Episcopalem in loco, qui vocatur Liccid feld, in quo et defunctus est, et
sepultus, vbi vsque hodie se quentium quoque provinciae illius Episcapor^ seeds
est ib. l. 4. c. 3.
bishop of Lichfield, brother to Cedde, the second bishop of the East Saxons,
and by the means of Oswy King of Northumberland: and the South Saxons Ib: l. 4
^. 13.
under their King Edilwalch by the preaching of S. Wilfrid, Arch-bishoppe of
York, living then here exiled, thrust out of his bishoppricke by Egfrid, King
of the Northumbrians, son, and successor to Oswy. The last Country
converted under the English, was the I Will of Ib. l. 4* c. 16.
Wight, subdued, and forced to the Christian belief by Ceadwalla, King of the
West Saxons. Great was the heat, and devotion of that first more good, plain,
and simple age, Churches, and Oratories builded, Bishopprickes erected,
Monasteries founded; then the only nurseries of learning, and reliligion, and
painful ministers euery-where planted, sincere, Ib. l. 3. c. 26. v etiam
Eiusdem l. 3. c. 5 et 28.
just, exemplary, without hypocrisy, faction, pride, ambition, and desire of
worldly gain, covetous only of the glory of God, and the promotion of his
Church, by whose holy endeavors (England then being too strait to contain so
earnest, and immense a Zeal) the neighboring Germans not long after took
flame, and were won unto the faith, in regard thereof, and of their common
Bedae Eccl. Histor. Anglorum. l. 5. c. ^1. et^2. Alberti Krantzij Metrop. l. 1.
c. 6. 7. et 8* Magdeburg. Cent. 8. c* 2* Baron Annal. Eccles. Anno Christi 697.
et 710.
language (which then was the same with the Dutch) chiefly above others
employed in this sacred work by the Bishops of Rome and the French Kings, to
whom the Country was then subject. Amongst these of more honorable memory
were S. Willebrord the first bishop of Vtreicht, S. Weiro bishop of Deira, S.
Pectheimus Bedae Ec. Hist. lib. 5. c. 24.
Plechelmus, bishop of Wit-herne, or Candida Casa, S. Swibert bishop of Werden,
S. Acca bishop of Hagustald, S. Marcelline, and others, the Apostles of the
Thuringians, Frisons, and the Lower Germans in the Regency of Pepin the Fat,
Maiour of the Palace of the French kings, S. Willebald the Apostle of
East-france, and first bishop of Eystet at the same time, and S. Willehade the
Apostle of the Saxons, and first bishop of Bremen, but more especially Saint
Boniface, or Winifride, the first Arch-bishoppe of Mentz, and the general
Apostle of the Nation (acknowledged thus by the impartial Dutch, and Popish
Relaters) about the year 710, and Papacy of Gregory the second, after many
relapses the establisher here of religion, and means of their more perfect,
and full conversion. The English we find not as yet enthralled to the Church
of Rome, although not without their errors, and much reverencing the authority
of that sea, from whence had proceeded their conversion, following quod vt
facilius, and maiore authoritate perficeret* Naitanus rex Pictorum) quaesivit
auxilia de gente Anglorum, quos iamdudum ad exempium sanctae Romanae, and
Apostolicae Ecclesiae suam religionem instituisse cognovit Bedae Eccles.
Histor. Anglo^um. l. 5. c. 22.
their doctrine, and honoring the same with their frequent pilgrimages, their
pension of Peter pence Flores Hist. per Mat. West. Monaster. An. 727. and 794.
and with the coule, and religious habits vid. infra.
of sundry of their Kings. The Welsh then, or v. Bedae Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
Britons were altogether averse from all acknowledgment hereof, neither obeying
the Legates of the Popes, neither yielding to their decisions, or conforming to
their rule, differing from them in sundry points. A maine controversy betwixt
them was the Ibid. l. 2. c. 2. and l. 5. c. 24.
celebration of Easter, of whom the Britons (from whom the Picts, and Scots
Ibid. l. 3. c. 29.
did not much differ) observed the 14 day after the Newmoone in March, or the
first Month, following the custom of the Church of Asia, and pretending the
practice of Saint John the Evangelist, and the Romans with the English, and
others, the Sunday after the 14 day, alleging an Apostolical tradition, a
scruple then much disturbing the peace of Christendom, and Concili. R^.
Palestin. Pontic. Gall^^. Osroen. et Ephesin habit. circa, An D: 198; Victore
Pontifice Romans and Severo Imperat. et Council. Nicen: ^: sub Imperat.
Constantino magno: v. Binij Council: Tom: 1 et Eusebij Ec: Histor: l: 5: c: 22:
disputed of in sundry Synods. No less was the controversy (but long
afterward, and amongst the English themselves, betwixt the married,) and
unmarried v Hoveden: Partem priorom in Rege Edgaro: ib: Rege Guilielmo Primo:
et Hen: Huntingdon: l: 7: Rege Henrico Primo:
Priests in the reigns of Edwy, Edgar, Edward the Martyr, and Etheldred,
Monarchs of the English-Saxons; as likewise after the conquest* of the Normans
(for until this time Priests were married,) adjudged against the married
Priests through the pretended miracles of S. Dunstan (a great vpholder of the
Monkish faction,) and the sentence of Pope Hildebrand in the year 1074, and
reign of William the Conqueror, and lastly (for yet notwithstanding the Popes
interdict the Priests still kept their wives) by Anselmus Arch-bishoppe of
Canterbury, and a Synod then held at London in the reign of King Henry the
first. In the reign of vid: infra.
great Egbert, and about the year 829 break in the merciles, and Pagan Danes,
through whom, and the many Popish errors, which already had crept in, religion
is again eclypsed. Their Idol was Thur, Adam Bremensis:
giving afterward the name of Thursday to the fourth day of the week. By holy
vid: Infra:
Alfred, Edward the Seniour, and Athelstan the second, they are at length
subdued, and for the time either expulsed the Country, or brought under the
English, and Christian yoke. By this time the long aspiring Papacy had gotten
the upper hand over the rest of the Churches of the West, and princes, people,
divine, and humane Laws here, as in all other places, are made subject to the
sole will, and free arbitration hereof. By Pope Alexander v. Infr.
the second, the Normans are authorized to usurp the Crown of England, Edgar,
and the Saxon line (the right heirs) excluded, and the oppressed English
disabled for making resistance, terrified, and kept in by Papal cursings. By
Innocent the third King John is made vassal v. Infra.
to the pretended Apostolic sea, surrendering his Crown, and resuming the
same again to be held under the fee, and tribute of the Popes. The Christian
world having been long abused, John Wiclef, Walsingham Hist. Regibus Edvardo
Tertio, and Richa^do secundo.
a soecular Divine of the University Oxoniensis Borealis. ib.
of Oxford, and Rectour of Lutterworth in Leicester shire in the reigns of
Edward the third, and Richard the second first to any effect opposes against
the tyranny hereof, and those errors, and impostures, which antiquity,
superstitious, and improvident zeal, and their ambition, and avarice had
obtruded upon religion, favored by John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, Henry
Lord Percy, the Chancelour Walsingham Hist. Regibus Edvardo Tertio, and
Richa^do secundo.
and body of the University, sundry Regulars, and Priests, the Londoners, and
multitudes of the Common, and Lay people, and besides England spreading his
opinions over the neighboring Germany, the author of the reformation of the
Aenaeae Sylvij Histor. Bohemicam. Ioachimum Camerarium de Fratrum Orthodoxorum
Ecclesijs in Bohemia.
Hussits amongst the Bohemians, withstood by the Praelates, and Monks,
thundered against by Bulls, of the Pope sent to the King, the Bishops, and
University, and condemned by the Council of Constance, the live bodies of
Husse, and Hierome of Prage, and the bones of Wicleffe in detestation of their
pretended heresy being burnt by the order of that Synod. The positions hereof
are to be read in the history of Walsingham, but v. supra.
mingled with many falsities, and untruths, through the malice of that relater
a Monk, and of those times no friends to his cause. What more rightly they
were, is better seen in the confession of the Hussits, or Bohemians, arising
from hence, and molded after his doctrine. Now begun the ancient, holy, and
grand-esteeme of the Church to assuage, and cool, superstition to be unmasked,
the Papal power to grow suspected, his censures to become more vile, the
wealth, and great revenues of the Monks, and Clergy to be envyed, and their
lives, and actions to be scanned, and looked into by a more narrow, and
censorious eye. In the reign of King Richard the second, Parliament: habit.
Glocestriae v. Hist. Walsingham. rege Richard. 2.
a petition is exhibited by Parliament for the taking away of all their
temporal possessions, not assented unto, and rejected by that plain, and well
meaning prince. The like is attempted by Parliament. habit. apud Westmon. 11.
Reg. Henrici 4. and Lecestriae an. 2 Henrici 5. v. Fabia n. Chro. an. D. 1410,
and Hen. 4. 11. and an. D. 1414, and 2^ Henr. 5. et. 8.
two other Parliaments in the reign of Henry the fourth, and Henry the fifth,
pretending their abuse, and better employment in the relief of the poor, the
maintenance of Esquires, Knights, and Lords, and the service of the King,
lastly diuerted (the suppression of Monasteries excepted, belonging unto
strangers) through the wisdom of Henry Chichlie Archbishop of Canterbury,
proposing the more honorable French wars, and declaring the undoubted right
of the Prince to that Crown. By king Henry the eight, provoaked by the
excommunication, and rash censures of Pope Clement the seventh, the Papal An.
28. Hen. ^
authority is abolished through the Realm, and the power, and title of
supreme head of the English Church assumed, and entayled upon his successors,
some abuses about images, and the Scriptures, and prayers in an unknown tongue
in part reformed, and Monasteries, and religious houses (stiff abetters of the
Romish Hierarchy) to the great astonishment of the world utterly razed, and
demolished, and their whole possessions, whether Temporalties, or tithes, and
offerings (the undoubted rights of the Church) escheated to the Crown, and
fold, or given to lay persons through passion, avarice, or his zeal against
the many vices, and enormities of the Monks, or to engage the laity (without
which possibly he could not have withstood so great a danger) in his war
against the Papacy, and Clergy, partakers with him of their spoils. Under
Edward the sixth, religion is more fully An. 5 and 6 Edvardi. 6.
established, and the Church purged from errors, and superstition, the Mass,
and the rest of the 6 bloody articles of his father abrogated, images pulled
down, the holy Eucharist administered under both kinds, and the Scripture, and
divine service read in the vulgar language, yet done not without much rapine,
and injury, committed under pretense of reformation, the sacred monuments of
the dead in Churches defaced, and Bishoppricks, Collegiate Churches,
Hospitalls, and Almes-houses being robbed of their revenues by sacrilegious
greatness during the licentious reign of that most hopeful, but young, and
pupil king, By Queen Mary (a great strength, to whose title was the
dispensatition, and authority hereof) Religion is again made vassal to the
sea of Rome, and An. 1 and 2. Phil. and Mariae,
the power and jurisdiction of the Pope restored, with condition
notwithstanding that the lands, and goods lately taken from the Clergy, should
remain to their lay possessours; without which caution, the Nobility, and
Commons in Parliament, (whose joint interest this was) would not give their
consent, persecution raging soon after with fresh fury, and the whole
kingdom flaming with fires, and gashly sights of burning Martyrs. Queen
Elizabeth of famous memory gave an end to these An. 1. Elizabethae.
long afflictions and unsettled state of the Church, the Gospel reestblished
with mature and grave advice, and confirmed by her many victories, and long and
prosperous reign, continued since by her glorious successor King James,
maintained by the authority of his royal pen, the faiths undoubted defender,
the Churches patron, and the true Cleargies friend; and with no less zeal,
and constancy by Charles, our gracious sovereign now reigning, heir of his
Fathers Crown, and Prin^ly virtues.

The Religion then here publicly allowed, is the Reformed, or Protestant,
whose brief The book of Articles.
sum is set down in the 39 Articles, agreed upon in a Convocation holden at
London in the year 1562, and confirmed by the Clergy of both Provinces. The
supreme head hereof is the prince by a common right, and prerogative of Kings,
and by decree An. 26. Henr. 8. and 1 Elizabeth
of Parliament enacted in the year 1534, and 26 of the reign of King Henry the
eight. The Clergy are Archbishops, Bishops, and inferior ranks, all
Regulars, or Monks excluded.

The Archbishops, v Bedae Histor. Eccl. Anglorum Malmesbur. de Gestis Pontifi.
Anglorum. Francis. Godvvin Epis. Landaven. de Praesul^bus Angliae.
or Metropolitan seas follow. Canterbury Cantuatiensis idem Dorovernonsis. Bed.
whose Diocese with that of Rochester is Kent, and whose Province in a manner
is the whole South-part of England, on this side Trent, and Humber, begun
about the year 596 by Ethelbert, the first Christian King of the Kentish
Saxons in the person of Saint Austine, the first Apostle of the English. The
Bishops hereof are named Primates, and Metropolitans of all England by order of
Convocation in the year 1534. Formerly during the Romish Hierarchy, Redit.
2816l. 17s. 9d.
they assumed the title of Legates of the Popes, and Primates of all Britain.

York, Eboracensis. idem Nordanhumbrorum. Bed.
whose Diocese is Nottinghamshire, and Yorkshire, and Province the part of
England upon the North of Humber, Dee, and Trent, founded about the year 652
by Edwin King of Northumberland in the person of Paulinus, Redit. 1609l. 19s.
2d.
Chaplain to his Queen Ethelburga, and the Apostle of these Northern parts
of the English.

The Bishoprics may thus be ranked under their seas Metropolitan.
Londinensis. idem Orientalium Saxonum. Bed.
under Canterbury, London, whose Diocese is Essex, Middlesex, and part of
Hartfordshire, founded about the year 606 by Sebert, and Ethelbert, Kings of
the East, and Kentish Saxons in the person of Mell^^us, the Apostle of the
East Saxons, and continued after a long apostasy by Sigebert, the second
Christian king hereof in the person of S. Cedde the second Apostle, and Bishop,
brother to Saint Ceadda, (for thus are the names distinguished,) the Apostle,
and Bishop of Lichfield, and the Mercians. The Bishops hereof are otherwise in
Beda named of the East Saxons. Redit. 1119l. 8s. 4d.
The extent of their jurisdiction has not any thing been altered since the
time of their institution.

Winchester, Wintoniensis. idem Occidentalium Saxonum. Bed. Dorcestrensis.
founded by Kenwald king of the West Saxons in the person of VVina a
Frenchman, taken out of the large Diocese of Dorcester by Oxford in the time
of Agilbert, the second Bishop of that sea, founded by King Kingills, father to
Kenwald in the person of Berinus an Italian, the Apostle of the West Saxons.
Agilbert forsaking England, discontented with this division, and the promotion
of VVina, the void Bishopric of Dorcester became united to VVina, and to the
sea hereof. By king Ina the South Saxons are likewise hereunto added upon his
conquest of that Country. The great Bishopric of Winchester contained then
by this means both kingdoms of the South, and West Saxons. By Ina about the
year 704* the Bishopric of Sherborne is taken out. Sherburnensis.
Selseiensis. idem Australium Saxonum. Bed.
Not long after, in the year 711, the Bishopric of Selsey for the
South Saxons. The Diocese after so many loppings, comprehends now the
countries only of Surrey, and Hantshire, with the Isles of VVight, Iersay,
Garnsay, and Alderney. In the year 733, Dorcester was again made a Bishops
see, but for the Province of the Mercians, taken out of the Diocese of
Lichfield. Out of Sherborne by Edward, surnamed the Elder, were divided the
Bishoprics of Wells for Sommersetshire, of Ramesbury for Wiltshire,
Ramesburiensis.
and of Kirton, and Bodman for Devonshire, and Cornwall. Of these Ramesbury
became united again with Sherborne in bishop Herman, Cridiensis. Bodmin.
and the reign of Edward the Confessor. Bodman during the Danish wars, was
translated to S. Germans, and lastly united with Kirton by the authority of
king Canutus. Of Kirton, and Wells hereafter. Red. 249^l. 9s. 8d. ob.
The Bishops of Winchester were otherwise in Beda named of the West Saxons.

Lincoln, Lincolniensis.
begun at Dorcester by Oxford in the years aforesaid, and brought hither by
Bishop Remigius in the reign of the Conquer^ur, according to the order of a
Synod at London, that the Sees of bishops in obscure and decayed towns should
be removed to the chief cities of each Diocese. It contained then the middle
of England betwixt the river of Thames, and Humber. By king Henry the first,
the bishoppricke of Elie is taken out. By Henry the eight those of Oxford, and
Peterborough. Red. 894l. 18s. 1d. ob.
It extends yet over Lincolneshire, Leicestershire, Huntingdonshire,
Bedfordshire, and Buckinghamshire, with part of Hartfordshire, the largest of
all the English bishoprics.

Sarisburie, Sarisburiensis.
begun at Sherborne by Ina king of the West Saxons in the person of Adelmus
about the year 704, and removed hither by bishop H^man in the reign of the
Conqueror. Red. 1385l. 5s. ob.
It contains now Wilsthire, and Barkshire.

Excester, Exoniensis.
begun at Kirton in Devonshire in the person of Adulfus, by Edward, surnamed
the Elder, Monarch of the English, and removed hither under bishop Leofricus in
the reign of Edward the Confessor. Red. 500l.


Wells, Bath. and Wellensis.
took out of the Diocese of Sherborne, and founded in the person of Athelmus
by Edward the Elder, Monarch of the English-Saxons. By John de Villula under
king William Rufus the Sea was removed to Bath. Under bishop Robert in the
reign of king Stephen the two Churches (of Bath, and Wells) after much
contention are agreed, and the Bishops are to assume the title of both
places, Redit. 533l. 1s. 3d.
continuing ever since. The Diocese hereof is only Somersetshire.

Chichester, Cicestrensis, idem Australium Saxonum. Bed.
begun in Selsey by Edilwalch the first Christian king of the South Saxons, in
the person of S. Wilfrid, the exiled bishop of York, or of Northumberland:
the Apostle hereof; after Wilfrid, and the conquest of the country by the
West Saxons, united to Winchester; about the year 711 in bishop Edbrith
divided again from Winchester, and restored to Selsey; and lastly from Selsey
removed hither, Red. 677l. 1s. 3d.
the chief town of the Diocese, by bishop Stigand in the time of William the
Conqueror. Eliensis.
It contains only Sussex.

Elye took of Lincoln, and containing only Cambridgeshire, founded by king
Henry the first in the person of Harvaeus, Red. 2134l. 18s. 5d. q. 31 qa.
sometime Bishop of Bangor in Wales.

Norwich, Norvvicensis. idem Orientalium Anglorum Bed.
begun at Dunwich about the year 630, by Sigebert king of the East Angles, in
the person of Faelix a Burgundian; under Bisus the fourth bishop divided into
two Bishoprics, of Dunwich, and North-Elmham; Domuc. Bed. Elmanensis.
in the year 955 after a long vacancy during the Danish tyranny, and
usurpation in the person of Athulfus restored, and united in one bishoppricke
of North-Elmham by Edwy king of the English-Saxons, by bishop Herfast removed
from North-Elmham to Thetford in the time of the Conqueror; and lastly hither
from Thetford by bishop Herebert, about the year 1086 toward the latter end of
the same reign, or the beginning of William Rufus. The bishops hereof are
otherwise by Beda named of the East Angles. Their Diocese is extended over the
Countries of Norfolk, Red. 899l. 8s. 7d. qa.
and Suffolk.

Lichfield, Coventrensis, and Lichfeldensis idem Merciorum. Bed.
begun amongst the Mercians about the year 656, in the person of Diuma a
Scottishman, by Oswy king of Northumberland, and Monarch of the English, after
his great victory obtained against Penda; and in the year 669, fixed here by
holy Ceadda, or Chad, in the reign of VVulferus king of the Mercians. In
Adulphus about the year 793, it was raised to an Archbishopric by king Offa,
but which dignity lasted not beyond his time. By bishop Peter in the year
1075, and time of the Conqueror, the sea is removed to Chester; by Robert de
Limesey in the year 1095, to Coventry, the residence of many of the succeeding
Bishops. In regard hereof these now use the title of both cities of Coventry,
and Lichfield. Their Diocese contained more anciently the whole Kingdom of the
Mercians, whereof they are otherwise named by Beda. Sidnacestrensis
By King Ethelred, brother and successor to VVulferus, the Bishoprics of
Worcester, Leicestrensis.
and Sidnacester, are taken out; not ^^ng after about the year 733, those of
Leicester, and Dorcester; and lastly by Henry the eight, the Bishopric of
Chester, whereof Worcester, and Chester remain at this present; Dorchester
was (as before) translated to Lincoln; and Sidnacester, and Leicester, became
united with Dorcester. Unto the jurisdiction hereof appertains at this day
all Staffordshire, Red. 550l. 17s. 2d, ob. qa.
and Darbyshire, with parts of Warwickshire, and Shropshire.

Worcester, Vigorniensis. idem Wicciorum. Bed.
containing Worcestershire, and part of Warwickshire, taken out of Lichfied,
and founded about the year 679, in the person of Boselus, by Ethelred King of
the Mercians, brother to Wulferus. The Bishop hereof is otherwise named of the
Wiccij by Beda, the more proper name of the inhabitants of the country in the
time of my Author. Red 1049l. 17s. 3d. ob. qa.


Hereford, Herefordensis.
containing Herefordshire, and part of Shropshire, founded in Bishop Putta
about the year 680. Red. 768l. 10s. 10d. ob. qa.


Rochester, Rhosfensis, and Castelli Cantuariorum Bed.
containing part of Kent, founded in the year 606 by Ethelbert, the first
Christian king of Kent, in the person of Saint Iustus. Red. 358l. 3s. 7d. qa.


Oxford, Oxoniensis.
containing Oxfordshire, taken out of Lincoln in the year 1541, by Henry the
eight, whose first bishop was Robert King, the last Abbot of the Monastery of
Ousney. Red. 354l. 16s. 3d. qa.


Peterborough, Petroburgensis
containing Northamptonshire, and Rutlandshire, taken out of Lincoln by Henry
the eight, whose first bishop was John Chambers, Red. 414l. 19s. 1^d.
the last Abbot of that Monastery.

Gloucester, Glocestrensis.
containing Glocestershire, founded by Henry the eight, and taken out of
Worcester, Red. 315l. 17s. 2d.
whose first bishop was John Wakeman Abbot of Teuxbury.

Bristoll, Bristoliensis,
containing that City, and Dorsetshire, founded by Henry the eight, Red. 383l.
8s. 4d.
whose first bishop was Paul Bush, a Batchelour of Divinity of the University
of Oxford.

S. David's, Menevensis.
begun at Isca Silurum, now Caer-Leon in Monmouthshire by Dubritius, formerly
bishop of Landaff, in the time of Aurelius Ambrosius King of the Britons, and
removed hither to Meneva, or Menew, named afterward S. David's, in the reign
of King Arthur by David, next successor to Dubritius, renowned amongst the
Welsh for his stout opposition against the Pelagian heresy, returning with
fresh rage after the departure of S. German, and S. Lupus, and lastly in those
parts extinguished through the great industry, and authority hereof, canonized
a Saint long afterward by Pope Calixtus. In S. David, or Dubritius it was made
a sea Metropolitan for the Britons, accounted thus until the Norman conquest
of Wales, although the Paul lost, carried to Dole in France, during a fierce
pestilence by bishop Sampson. Under King Henry the first, it became subject to
the sea of Canterbury. It contains now Pembrokeshire, Redit. 426l. 22s. 2d ob.
Cardiganshire, and Caermardenshire in Wales.

Landaff, Landauensis.
containing Glamorganshire, Monmouthshire, Brecknockshire, and Radnorshire,
whose first bishop (whereof we read in approved authors) was Dubritius,
beforementioned, a great oppugner of the Pelagians, Redit. 145l. 14s. 1d.
consecrated by S. German bishop of Auxerre, and after his remove to Caer Leon,
here succeeded unto by Teliaus, continuing the sea.

Bangor, Bangorensis.
containing Caernarvonshire, Merionethshire, Denbighshire, and Anglesey. When
the sea begun, we find not. The first known bishop was Hervaeus, afterward
bishop of Elye, appointed by king Henry the first.

S. Asaph, Asaphensis.
containing Denbighshire, and Flintshire, named thus from S. Asaph, the second
bishop, and called otherwise Lhan-Elwy by the Welsh, founded by Malgo king of
the Britons about the year 560. in the person of Kentigerne, Redit. 131l. 16s.
4d.
a Scottish bishop of Glasco, living exiled in those parts, and beginning the
Church, and Monastery thus named.

Under York Durham, Dunelmensis. Lindisfarnensis. Bed.
begun at Lindisfarne, or the Holy Island, by Oswald king of the Northumbrian
Saxons in the person of Aidan a Scottishman, the Apostle of those parts after
Paulinus, and removed hither with the body of S Cutbert, sometimes likewise
bishop of Lindisfarne, by bishop Edmund in the reign of Ethelred, Monarch of
the English Saxons. The three first bishops of Lindisfarne, Aidan, Finnan, and
Colman, all three Scottishmen, are otherwise by Malmesburiensis accounted
amongst the bishops of York, governing the Ecclesiastical affairs of the
Northumbrians after Paulinus during the invasions and cruelty of the Mercians,
and Welsh under Penda, and Cadwallo their kings, but not using the Paul,
Redit. 1821l. 17d. qa.
or assuming the title of Metropolitans, or of York. The Diocese hereof is now
only Durham and Northumberland. Carleolensis.


Carlisle, containing Westmoreland, with part of Cumberland, founded in the
person of Athaulphus by king Henry the first, Redit. 531l. 4s. 11d. ob.
taken out of Durham. Cestrensis.


Chester, taken out of Lichfield and Coventry, founded by king Henry the eight.
The first bishop was John Bird, Provincial of the Friar Carmelites. It
contains Cheshire, Lancashire, and Richmondshire in Yorkshire, with parts of
Cumberland, Redit. 420l. 1s. 8d.
and Flintshire.

Man, Sodorensis.
containing that Island, appointed by Pope Gregory the fourth. The bishop hereof
has no place, or suffrage in the English Parliaments.

Besides these there were Hagustald, Hagustaldensis.
whose first bishop after Malmesburiensis was S. Wilfrid beforementioned, or
Eata, or Tumbert, according to Beda after the expulsion of S. Wilfrid, and the
division of the sea of York by king Ecgfrid, extinguished in the time of the
Danish wars.

Lindissi, Lindisfarorum. v. Bed. Eccl. Histor. Anglorum lib. 4. c 12. videtur
hic idem esse cum Sidnacestrensi.
taken out of the great Diocese of Lichfield, and founded after Beda by Ecgfrid
King of Northumberland, upon his conquest of that country from VVulferus of the
Mercians, under bishop Leouinus after Malmesburiensis, united with the sea of
Leicester in the reign of Edgar Monarch of the English Saxons; and VVit-herne
Candidae Casae.
begun under Pecthelmus in the time of Beda; and continuing certain years
after. The town yet stands in Galloway, a part then of the English kingdom
of Northumberland, since belonging to the Scots. Amongst the bishops next unto
the Archbishops, the first place Act. Parl, an. 3^. Henrici 8. v. Pulton. c.
^0.
has London, next to whom are Durham and Winchester. The others are ranked
according to the time of their consecration. What were the seats of the bishops
before S. Austine, v. Malmesbur. de gestis Pont. Angl. Prolog. lib. 1.
and the conversion of the English, we cannot certainly determine. Geffrey of
Monmouth mentions three Archbishops (of London, York, and Isca Silurum, or
Caer Leon,) and 28 bishops, founded in the place of so many Arch-Flamins,
Galfrid. Monumeth. Hist. lib. 4. c. 19.
and Flamins (gentilisme abolished) in the reign of King Lucius, by Faganus,
and Duvanus, Legates of Pope Eleutherius, and the Apostles of the Britons. The
authority, and truth of the author has always bin suspected. More Bed. Hist.
Eccl. Angloru^ lib. ^ c. 2.
certainly Beda in a conference of the Welsh with S. Austine the first
Archbishop of Canterbury makes mention of 7 bishops of the Britons, but
without naming them or their seats. Ex provincia Britanniae, civitate
Londinensi, Restitutus Episcopus.
The first Council of Arles, held in the year 326, and the reign of the
Emperor Constantine the Great, names one Restitutus, a British bishop of
London, amongst the Fathers assisting in that Synod. Other names during these
more primative times we have not yet found in the subscriptions of Councels,
v. Binij Conciliorum Tom. t.
or any ancient and good authority Under Honorius, v. Binium.
the 4 Archbishop of Canterbury, the English are divided into Parishes,
increased through continual subdivisions, and additions of new Churches. The
number hereof are at this day 9284 in both Provinces. Hereof 3845. are Churches
impropriate, by Papal authority, annexed aunciently unto Monasteries, and
places of Religion, and at the fall of Monasteries for the greatest part of
their revenues escheated to the Crown, and made Lay possessions. These again
are of two forts. 1 with Vicarages, 2 and without, all whose rights as well
tithes, as offerings are detained by their Lay purchasers without any allotment
to the Priest by the Parliament, or the King in their sale, and conveyances
(which happened to such whose immediate Pastors had been the Monks) maintained
now by miserable, yet arbitrary pensions. My self have heard four pound by
the year offered to a Minister for serving together two pastoral cures of
this nature. The number of the Episcopal and Collegiate Churches (including
Westminster, and VVinsore) are 26, besides some others restored of late years
through the favor, and bounty of King James of happy memory. They contain
together almost so many Deanes, 60 Archdeacons, and 544 Dignities, or
Prebendaries. The suppressed Monasteries, (let it be lawful to remember those
dead ruins, sad spectacles of humane mutability) amounted to 645, besides 96
Colleges, 110 Hospitals, and 2374 Chanteries, and Free Chapels. Such has
been the affairs of the Church, and Religion.

The State is Monarchical, commanded by a King.

The Law whereby it is governed, is the Municipall, or Common, a Law proper to
the Nation.

The Prince is Haereditary, and independent, not ever invested by, or
acknowledging the Roman Emperors, or any superior earthly power, holding
immediately of God, absolute, and supreme over all persons, in all causes both
Civil and Ecclesiastical. King John distressed by a threefold war against
the Pope, the French, and his rebellious subjects, to appease the first,
enthralled the kingdom to the tribute, and vassalage hereof: but The
Commonwealth of England by St Thomas Smith knight. lib. 1. c. 9.
which art being forced, neither ever approved by the Parliament, or people,
was ever held as void. He is styled the Defendour of the faith, which title v.
Polydor. Virgilij Angl. Hist. lib. 27. etc.
was first given to king Henry the eight, by Pope Leo the tenth, zealous in his
cause against the pretended haeresie of Luther, opposed by the authority of his
kingly Pen, maintained since upon better right by his noble successors, the
chief patrons, and defendours of the Orthodoxe, and truly Catholic Religion.

The body, or Commonwealth subject to this Head, may be distinguished The
Commonwealth of England by S Thomas Smith knight lib. 1. c. 16. 17. 18. 19.
20. 22. 23. 24.
into a twofold order. 1 Artificers, tradesmen, daylabourers, and poor
husbandmen without land, who have no rule, and whose part is only to obey, 2.
and those who in the right, and under the authority of the Prince have their
parts in the government, judging, and determining causes, punishing faults,
electing officers, granting subsidies, and making Laws, of whom, and their
delegates assembled together, with the King, and Bishops, representing the
Clergy, the Parliament, or grand Council of the Realm consists. These
likewise are of two different ranks. 1 The Nobility, 2 and those under the
degree hereof. The Nobility are divided into the greater Nobility, containing
the Barony, or estate of Lords, and the Lesser Nobility, consisting of Knights,
Esquires, and Gentlemen, (the first whereof are not borne thus, but made by the
especial grace of the Prince for their good demerits, or hopes) whose
Deputies, and of the Burgesses, and Yeomen, (the ranks under the Nobility)
compose the house of Commons. These last, the Yeomen, or Freeholders (the
ancient wealth, and ib. chap. 23.
support of the kingdom, the strength, and substance of our wars, our
sometimes victorious infantery, the Conquerours of the French) are now much
decayed since the fall of Monasteries, whose tenants they were upon easy rents,
but more especially through the present depopulations, rackings, and injuries
of the Gentry, pulling down Towns, and farme-houses, and converting all to
pasturage, or their proper demaine, to the much impairing of the Princes
subsidies, and revenues, the wonted store of people, and riches of the Land,
the most important grievance of the times.

The Nation has always been much dreaded, and powerful in Arms, whilst
united, and in peace at home. King Henry the second by marriage, and war,
enlarged the English dominions over Ireland, and Aquitaine, and Guienne in
France. Richard the first advanced their glorious ensigns in Syria, Palestine,
and the East, and conquered Cyprus, exchaunged for the title of Jerusalem. By
Edward the first all Wales, and Scotland for the time are subdued. By Edward
the third the Scots and French in sundry memorable battles, holding captive
at the same time the persons of both their kings. Under the same Prince the
hautie Spaniards, through the high courage, and adventures of his son Prince
Edward, forced to the obedience of Don Peter their natural Lord. By Henry the
fifth all France on this side the Loire, left to his successor Henry the sixth,
crowned French king at Paris. Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, relieved all
her distressed neighbors, the Scots, France, and the Netherlands, oppressed by
foreign power, or through domestique broils, got the dominion of the sea, and
by continual victories gave first check to the greatness, and aspiring ambition
of the house of Austria, and Spain. But as their happy atchieuements, and
victories have been many, so their errors, and misfortunes no less, most
commonly loosing that through civil broils, and contentions (a mischief
incident to all flourishing estates, but most fatal to ours) what by true
valor, and honor they have gotten.

King John lost Normandy, and other English conquests, and possessions in
France, through the only malice, and treason of his disloyal Barons,
unseasonably quarrelling about their liberties, forsaking him in his wars,
and siding with his enemies.

Edward the second, Scotland (won by his victorious father) through a like
despite, and wilfulnes of his seditious Nobles, opposing against his
government, and withdrawing their service, and aid, too eager revengers of his
childish, and weak reign. Henry the sixth irrecoverably France, through the
faction of the house of York, abusing the people with pretenses for their
private ends, and lastly challenging the Kingdom, and turning our conquering
swords into our own bosoms.

The Land is divided into Shires, Hundreds, (which are the divisions of Shires,
and are in some places otherwise called Weapontakes, and Lathes) and Tithings,
the divisions of Hundreds. King quos cupiens compescere, and de huiusmodi
excessibus cohibere, totius Angliae pagos, and provincia^ in Comitatus
primusomnium commutavit (Alfredus;) comitatus in Centurias, i. Hundredas, and
in Decimas, i. Trithingas devisit. Praefectos vero Provinciarum (qui ante
vice-domini) in duo officia divisit, i. in indices, quos nunc Iusticiarios
vocamus, and in Vice-Comites qui adhuc iidem nomen retinent. Ingulphi Abbat.
Crovvland. histor. v. etiam Malmesb. de Gestis. Regum Anglorum lib. 2. c. 4.
Alfred was the Author of these divisions, as likewise of the name, and office
of the Vice-Comites, or Sheriffs, ordained for the more peaceable government of
the Country, and the more easy restraint of thieves, and robbers, much
increasing then through the occasion of the Danish wars. The word (Shire)
signifies with the ancient Saxons, a part, or division; as does the word
(Share) with the present English. What number hereof were first instituted by
Alfred, we find not. Malmesburiensis accompteth 32 of them in the reign of
Etheldred, Monarch of the English-Saxons, succeeding not long after: Kent,
Essex, Middlesex, Surrey, Sussex, Hantshire, Dorsetshire, Wiltshire,
Somersetshire, Devonshire, Cornwall, Hartfordshire, Oxfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, Barkeshire, Glocestershire, Suffolk, Norfolk,
Northamptonshire, Huntingdonshire, Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire, Warwickshire,
Leicestershire, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Shropshire, Herefordshire,
Lincolneshire, Nottinghamshire, Darbyshire, and Cheshire. Doomesday Book
adds Yorkshire, in the reign of William the Conqueror. Afterward were
added Lancashire, and the Bishopric of Durham (most probably sometimes parts
of Yorkshire;) and Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Northumberland beyond the
Tine, (the part now only retaining the name of the ancient Kingdom thus
called,) after their reunion to the English Crown, formerly possessed by the
Scots. The last were the 13 Welsh Shires, added by Edward the first, and Henry
the eight. Their whole number are at this present 52 in both Countries of
England, and Wales. 1 Surrey, Kent, Sussex, Hantshire, Barkeshire, Wiltshire,
Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Devonshire, and Cornwall, lying upon the South of
the river Thames, along the shore of the English Channel. 2 Glocestershire,
Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Middlesex, Essex, Hartfordshire, Norfolk,
Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, Bedfordshire, Northamptonshire,
Rutlandshire, Warwickeshire, Worcestershire, Herefordshire, Shropshire,
Cheshire, Staffordshire, Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Lei-cestershire, and
Lincolneshire, containing the middle part of the Kingdom, and included within
the rivers Thames, Trent, Merseye, Dee, and Wye, Humber, Offaes Ditch, and the
German Ocean. 3 Yorkshire, the Bishopric of Durham, Northumberland,
Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Lancashire, the parts upon the North of Humber,
Trent, and Mersey. 4. and Monmouthshire, Glamorganshire, Radnorshire,
Brecknockeshire, Cardiganshire, Caermarthenshire, Penbrokshire,
Montgomeryshire, Merionethshire, Denbighshire, Flintshire, Caernarvonshire, and
the I Will of Anglesey, containing Wales, or the western parts within the Dee,
Wye, and the sea of Severne. Their descriptions follow after that I have first
related the ancient estate of the Country, with the many chaunges, and
successions of people, and Kingdoms in their turns coming upon the stage
hereof, and occasioning the present names, state, and divisions.

THE SECOND BOOK.
Containing the Description of the more great, and famous Mountains, and
Rivers of Great Britain. The more noted Creekes, and Promontories. Their
ancient, and present names. The Etymologyes, and names of Britain, and Albion.
The ancient limits, and extent of Britain. The first Inhabitants. The conquest
of the more Southern part by the Romans. The estate, and description of
Britain during the Roman government out of Tacitus, Dion, Ptolemye, Antoninus,
and the Author of the Notitia, with others. The period, and conclusion of the
Roman Empire in Britain. The estate, and kingdom of the Britons, after the
departure of the Romans. The estate hereof after Cadwallader, and the
conclusion of the British Monarchy. The original, and history of the
Cornish, VVesh, and Britons of Cumberland. Their Conquests by the Saxons, and
Normans, and union into the kingdom, and name of England. The history of the
Scots, and Picts. The Conquest of the Picts by the Scots, and Union of the
Northern part of the Island into the name, and kingdom of Scotland. The
invasion of the Germans, or Dutch. The Iutes, Saxons, and English. The Saxon,
or English Heptarchye. The original, and fortunes of the kingdoms of Kent,
the South Saxons, West Saxons, East Saxons, East Angles, Mercia, and
Northumberland. The union of the rest into the Monarchy of the West Saxons.
The original of the name, and kingdom of England. The kingdom of England. 1
under the West Saxons. 2 under the Danes. 3 and under the Normans. The union
of the blood, and rights of the Saxons, or English, Scots, and Normans, and of
the whole Great Britain under one Prince in James our late Sovereign of
happy memory. The present estate of the Island, occasioned through so many
mutations. The kingdoms of England, and Scotland. The names, and Etymology of
the Shires of England.

THE MOVNTAINES OF GREAT BRITAIN
THE bounders, or land-markes, whereof I shall have occasion to make use in the
discourse following, are the Mountains and Rivers hereof, with the more noted
Promontories, and Creekes of the Ocean, whereinto the Rivers are disburdened.

The only Mountain, noted by ancient authors, was Grampius Grampius mons
Taciti in vita lulij Agricolae.
Mons, mentioned by Tacitus, containing now Braid-Albin, with other hilly
regions beyond the Frith of Dunbriton in Scotland. The woods, sometimes
covering this Mountainous tract, were named Saltus Caledonius.
Saltus Caledonius by Lucius Florus, and Sylva Sylva Caledonia Pli. Not. Hist.
lib. 4. c. 16.
Caledonia by Pliny, inaccessable thorough their intricate, and dark thickets,
bogs, lakes, and marshes, safe shelters of the Northern Britons, invaded by
v. Corn Tacit. in vita Iulij Agricolae.
Julius Agricola, the vid. Joan. Xiphilini Epitotomen Dionis, Severo Imperatore.
Emperor Severus, and the Romans.

In the part subject to the Crown of England, rise the Mountains of Wales,
taking up the Western devision of the kingdom betwixt the Irish Ocean, the
Sea of Severne, and the Rivers Wye, and Dee; strong fastnesses of the warlike
Silures, and Ordovices, with great obstinacy for a long time resisting the
Roman yoke, and not fully subdued until Julius v. Corn. Taciti Annalium lib.
12 Eiusdem Iulij Agrilae vitam. etc.
Agricola, and the reign of the Emperor Domitian, and afterward the
Rendez-vous of the distressed Britons, shunning the rage of the Saxons, or
English.

Beyond the river Trent begins another long Mountainous ridge, which
continued through the North of Staffordshire, then by the West of Darbye-shire,
afterward betwixt Yorkshire, and Lancashire, lastly by Cumberland,
Westmoreland, and Northumberland, does end at Cheviot, or the Scottish borders.
This is not known by any one name ancient, or modern. In Staffordshire, it is
named Moreland; in Darbieshire, the Peake; betwixt Lancashire, and Yorkshire,
Blackestone-edge, Pendle, Craven; betwixt Richmondshire, and Westmoreland,
Stane-more, in Cumberland, Copland, and at the borders of Scotland, Cheviot.

The other hills of the South (Blackamore, Yorkes-would, the Chilterne,
Cots-wold, Malvern, those of Sussex, Devonshire, and Cornwall, with others) are
rather to be accounted Downs then Mountains. Those many of Scotland seem all
branches of the Grampius.

THE RIVERS, CREEKES, AND PROMONTORIES.
THe Rivers issue from the Mountains, and hills. The more great, and famous are
the Thames, Severne, Trent, Yeure, or Ouse, and the Taye.

The Thames (Tamesis of Caesar,) Tamesis Caesar. Com. Bell. Gall. lib. 5. etc.
arises amongst the hills of Cotswold in Glocestershire, near unto a village,
named Torlton. Passing by the Towns of Creekelade, Lechlade, and Einsham, then
by Oxford, Reading, and London betwixt Kent and Essex it is disburdened into
the German Ocean. The part from the head unto the confluence hereof and the
Tame is more properly named the Isis, Isis flu.
or Ouse. The whole notwithstanding is vulgarly called the Thames. Lesser
rivers emptyed hereinto, Corinus flu.
are the Churne, springing in Cotswold near Birdlip, and by Cirencester took
in at Creekelade. The Windrush out of Cotswold, by Burford, and Whitney, took
in at Newbridge. The Evenlode out of Cots-wold, by Shipton under Whichwood
took in below Einsham. The Cherwell from the hills by Daintrey in
Northamptonshire, Tam^ flu.
took in at Oxford. The Tame out of Buckinghamshire, took in near Dorchester
below Oxford. Here begins the name of Thames. The Colne betwixt
Buckinghamshire, and Middlesex, took in near Stanes. The Lea out of
Hartfordshire, betwixt Middlesex, and Essex took in below Blackwall. The
Roding out of Essex, took in at Barking. Upon the other side of the River, the
Kennet out of Wiltshire beyond Marleborow, Cunetio.
took in at Reading. The Wey out of Hantshire, by Farnham, and Guildford took
in at Otlands. The Mole out of Surrey, at the White-hill diuing under ground,
afterward breaking out, and took in near Molesey. And the Medway, out of the
weald of Kent, below Rochester divided into the East, and West-Swale with the
Thames enclosing the I Will of Shepey.

The Severne, Sabrina Corn. Taciti Annal. lib. 12, etc.
(Sabrina of Tacitus,) issues out of the hill Plinlimon in Montgomerie-shire
in Wales. Having visited the towns of Shrewesbury, Worcester, and Gloucester,
below Bristow it falls into the Western Ocean. Chiefer rivers flowing into
the wider channel hereof, are the Terne out of Staffordshire, thorough
Shropshire took in at Wroxcester. The Avon, Avona.
by Warwick and Eveshom, took in at Teuxbury. The Avon (another river thus
named) out of Wiltshire beyond Malmesbury, took in below Bristow. From the
side of Wales, the Temd thorough Shropshire, and VVorcester-shire, took in
below Worcester. The Wye out of the Mountain Plimlimon, Vaga.
betwixt Radnorshire and Brecknockshire, afterward thorough Herefordshire;
lastly betwixt the Forest of Deane in Glocestershire, and Monmouthshire took
in below Chepstow. The Lug out of Radnorshire, took into the Wye below
Hereford. And the Munow betwixt Herefordshire and Monmouthshire took into the
Wye at Monmouth.

The Trent (Treanta of Beda) arises in Staffordshire beyond the town of
Newcastle, Trenta.
by Stone, Burton, Nottingham, Newarcke, and Gainsborough, received into Humber
(Abus of Ptolemy) at Aukbarow below Burton Stather. Abus Cl Ptol. Geog. lib. 2.
c. 3.
Rivers falling hereinto are in Staffordshire, the Sow took in below Stafford.
The Tame took in below Tamworth. The Dove out of the Peake, betwixt
Staffordshire, and Darbieshire took in below Burton. Derventio.
The Darwent out of the high Peake, thorough Darbyshire took in below Darbye.
The Soar, thorough Leicestershire took in below Loughborough. And the Idel
out of the Forest of Shire-wood in Nottinghamshire, below Bautree, deviding
into the Hekdike, falling in at Stockwith, and another stream, below
Santoft-ferrie, meeting with Thurne-dike, a part of the Dun, and took in at
Fokerbie.

The Yeure sourceth out of the English Apennine amongst solitary Mountains in
the Western part of Richmondshire. Vrus.
Continued thorough VVentsdale, below Burrow-bridge, and the meeting of the
Swale after the receipt of a small rivulet, thus named, out of the West Riding
of Yorkshire, Ousa.
it takes the name of Ouse, from whence by York, and Selbie at Blacktoft
below Howden, it falls into Humber. Greater rivers disburdened herein, are
the Derwent from Blackamore hills, betwixt the East, and the West-ridings took
in at Langrike ferie below Selbie. Svvala.
The Swale, out of Mountains in the Western part of Richmondshire near unto
the head of the Yeure, thorough Swaledale, and by Richmond, and Catarick took
in below Topcliffe at Mitton. The Nid from Craven hills, Nidus.
thorough Nidherdale took in below Knarsborow. The Wharfe out of the same
Mountains, thorough VVharledale, and by Wetherby took in at Cawood below
Tadcaster. Arus.
The Are from the Mountain Pennigent in Craven, thorough the West Riding, and
by Leedes, and Snath took in at Armin above Howden. The Calder from the
Western Mountains, received into the Are below Wakefield at Castle-ford.
Danus.
And the Dan, or Dun, below Sheafield, Rotheram, and Dancaster at Thurne
divided into Turnebridge-dike, falling into the Are betwixt Turnebridge and
Rawcliffe; and Thurnedike, at the I Will of Axeye meeting with the Idell, and
took into the Trent at Fokerby near to Burton Stather.

The Taye, Taus, seu Taum aestuarium Corn. Tacit. in vita lulij Agricolae.
the fairest of the Scottish rivers (Taus of Tacitus, and Tava of Ptolemy)
springs amongst the Mountains of Braid-Albin, below Dunkelden, and Perth, or
S. Iohns-towne at Dundee carried into the German Ocean.

Other better rivers, Cenio Ptolem. Geogr. lib. 2. c. 3. Damnonium, and Ocrinum
Prom. ib. Antaevestaeum, and Bolerium Prom. ib. Tamara. Tamarus Ptol. ib.
rectius Isca. Alaunius ib.
or mentioned by ancient authors, and having immediate intercourse with the
Ocean, are in Cornwall the Vale (Cenio of Ptolemie,) emptyed into the Baye of
Falmouth. More Westward lie the Lizard point (the Promontorie Damnonium, and
Ocrinum of Ptolemy,) and the Lands-end (Antaevestaeum, and Bolerium of the same
author.) The Tamar (Tamarus of Ptolemie,) betwixt Cornwall, and Devonshire
received into the English Channel at Plimmouth. The Ex (Isaca of Ptolemie,)
thorough Devonshire, took in at Exmouth, below Excester. The Avon (Alaunius of
Ptolemy,) with the Stoure, took in at Christ-Church in Hantshire. The Test,
and Alre, at Southanton falling into the great Baye hereof (Trisantonis Ostium
of Ptolemie.) Trisantonis ostium. ib. Magnus portus. ibidem.
Beyond is the Baye of Portsmouth (Magnus Portus of Ptolemie.) The Stoure,
below Canterbury falling into the German Ocean with two branches, or channells,
encompassing the I Will of Tenet, and the North Forland, a promontorie of the
Island (Cantium, Cantium Prom. ib. Idumanius, ib. Garienus. ib. Extensio Prom.
ib. Metaris aestua ib.
and Nucantium of Ptolemie.) The Blackewater (Idumanius of Ptolemie,) thorough
Essex, took in below Maldon. The Yare (Garrienus of Ptolemy,) out of Norfolk
took in at Yarmouth. In Suffolk betwixt this and Harwich lies Easton-Nesse,
(Extensio of Ptolemy.) Into the Washes (Metaris of Ptolemy) the Ouse arising at
Brakeley in Northamptonshire, and by Buckingham, Bedford, Huntingdon, Antona
Corn. Tac. An. lib. 12.
and Elye took in at Linne. The Nen (Antona of Tacitus) from the hills by
Daintrey, thorough Northamptonshire, and the Fens of Cambridgeshire took in
below Peterborough, and Wisbich. The Welland, by Stamford, and betwixt
Cambridgeshire, and Lincolneshire, took in below Crowland. Withama.
The Witham out of Lincolneshire, below Lincoln, and Boston flowing into the
same Arm of the sea. Into Humber the Ankam in Lincolneshire, by
Glamford-bridge, and Saxbye (my birthplace) took in at South-Feriby. The Hull,
took in at the town of Hull in Yorkshire, and with the sea, and Humber
encompassing Holdernes (the Promontory Ocellum of Ptolemy.) Beyond, Ocellum
Pro. Ptol. lib. 2. c. 3. ib.
under Flamborough head, quart of Bridlington was the Bay, named of the
Gabrantovici by Ptolemy. More Northwards against Whitby in Blackamore is the
Bay Dunum of the same Author. Gabrantovicorum Sinus ib. Dunum Sinus. Teisis,
and Teisa. Tuesis aestuar. Ptolem. ib. Vedra Ptol. ib. Tina. ib.
The Tees (Tuesis of Ptolemy) out of Stanemore, betwixt Yorkshire, and the
bishopric of Durham falling into the Ocean below Yarum. The Were (Vedra of
Ptolemy) accruing from two little rivulets, named Kell-hop, and Burn-hop, in
the Western part of the bishopric, took in at Monkwermouth below Durham.
The Tine (Tina of Ptolemy,) distinguished into the South Tine, arising in
Cumberland nere Alstenmore; and the North Tine, from Mountains in the Scottish
borders, through Tindale, and the Picts wall after the receipt of the River
Rheade from Rheadesquire-hill in the same borders (naming the valley of
Rheadesdale) above Hexham meeting with the South-Tine, and together betwixt the
bishopric of Durham, and Northumberland disburdened into the Ocean at
Tinmouth below New Castle. Alaunus. ib.
The Alne (Alaunus of Ptolemy) in Northumberland, Tvveda.
took in below Anwicke. The Tweede from Mountains in Scotland, thorough
Tweedale, afterward betwixt the two kingdoms took in at Berwicke. Into the
Sea of Seuerne, and in Devonshire the Taw, and Towridge, Prom. Herculis
arising near to Herty-point (Promontorium Herculis of Ptolemy,) Ptolem. ibid.
meeting together, and in one channel took in below Barstaple. The Parret in
Sommersetshire, below Bridgewater, and Huntspill falling into the Baye,
Vexalla, et Vzella aestuar. ib. Isca.
named Vexalla, or Vzella by Ptolemy. The Vske out of the black Mountain in
Brecknockeshire, thorough this country, and Monmouth-shire took in below
Newport. Ratostabius, et Ratostibius. ib.
The Taffe (Ratostabius, and Ratostibius of Ptolemy,) thorough Glamorganshire,
took in below Cardiffe. The Tovy (Tobius of Ptolemy,) thorough
Caermardenshire, took in below the town of Caermarden. Tobius. ib.
Beyond, in Penbrokeshire lies Saint David's head, Prom. Octopitarum. ib.
Tuerobis, et Tuerobius. ib. Stuccia. ib.
or S. David's land (the Promontorie of the Octopitae of Ptolemy.) Into the
Irish Ocean the Tivy (Tuerobis, or Tuerobius of Ptolemy,) out of Lhin-Tivy,
betwixt Cardiganshire, and Penbrokeshire took in below Cardigan. The Ystwith
(Stuccia of Ptolemy,) took in at Aber-Ystwith in Cardiganshire. Canganum, et
Langanum Prom. ib. Tisobis, and Toisovius. ib. Deva. Seteia aestuar. Ptol. ib.
Belisamum, et Bellisama Ptol. ib.
Beyond in Caernarvonshire lies the great Promontory named Lhein by the Welsh,
and Canganum, or Langanum by Ptolemy. The Conwey (Tisobis, or Toisovius of
Ptolemy,) betwixt Caernarvonshire, and Denbighshire, took in at Aber-conwey.
The Dee (Seteia of Ptolemy) arising with two heads from the Mountains beyond
Lhin-tegid, or Pimble-meere in Merioneth-shire, thorough Denbighshire,
afterward betwixt Wales, and Cheshire, took in below Chester. The Mersey,
Lonus. Setantiorum Portus, seu lacus Setantiorum. Ptol. ib. Ituna. aestuar. ib.
betwixt Cheshire, and Lancashire took in below Lirpoole. The Ribble,
(Belisamum, and Bellisama of Ptolemy) out of Craven in Yorkshire near the
Mountain Ingleborough, thorough Lancashire took in below Preston. The Lune
from the hills of Westmoreland, took in below Lancaster, Beyond, betwixt
Fournesse, and Westmoreland is the great Lake Winander-mere, Moricambe aestuar.
ib. Novius, et Nobius. ib.
not improbably Setantiorum (...), or the Lake of the Setantij of Ptolemy. The
Eden (Ituna of Ptolemy) out of Richmondshire, through Westmoreland, and
Cumberland, by Kirkby-Steven, Appleby, and Carlisle took into the Frith of
Solway. Deva, et Dea. ib.
The Leven, Eske, and Sark (bounders here of the English, Iena aestuar. ib.
Auravannus ib. Novantum Chersonesus. ib.
and Scottish kingdoms) emptyed into the Solway. The great Bay by Holme
Cultrain on this side of the Frith seems to be Moricambe of Ptolemy. In
Scotland the Annan, by Annandale took into the Solway below the town of
Annand. The Nid (Novius, or Nobius of Ptolemy) out of Logh-Cure, Rherigonius
Sinus. ib. Glota Corn. Taciti in vita Iul. Agric. Clota aestua. Ptol. ib. lib.
2. c. 3. Lelaannonius, et Lelanonius. ib.
took into the Solway near to Dunfreys. In Galloway the Dee (Deva, and Dea of
Ptolemy.) The Ken (Iena of Ptolemy.) The Rian (Auravannus, and Abravanus of
Ptolemy) out of Logh-Rian. Betwixt the two last lies the Mul of Galloway, the
Chersonese, or Promontoric of the Novantes of Ptolemy. Beyond, quart of Carict,
lies the Bay Rherigonius of the same author. The Cluid, at the castle of
Dunbriton falling into Dunbriton Frith, the Glota of Tacitus, and Clota of
Ptolemy. Epidium. Pto ib.
The Levin (Lelaannonius, and Lelanonius of Ptolemy) out of the Lake Lomond,
falling into the Cluid at Dunbriton. Beyond the Frith is Cantire, a long,
Longus. ib.
and narrow Chersonese, the Promontory Epidium, or of the Epidij of Ptolemy.
Bodotria Taciti in vita Agricolae. Boderia aestuar. Ptol. ib, lib. 2. c. 3.
In Rosse Lough Longas (Longus of Ptolemy.) Into the German, or Eastern sea
the Banoc, emptyed in the Forth, or Frith of Edenborough, the Bodotria of
Tacitus, and Boderia of Ptolemy, with the Glota or the Frith of Dunbriton the
furthest limits Northwards of the Roman conquests in Britain. Diva Ptol. ib.
The Dee (Diva of Ptolemy) out of Mar, Loxa. ib.
took in near to Aberdon. Celnius. ib.
In Murray the Spey. In the same country the Loss (the Loxa of Ptolemy.) Vara,
et vararis aestuar. ib.
In Rosse the Cillian (the Celnius of Ptolemy.) Betwixt this, Ila. ib.
and Murray lies the Bay named Vara, Viruedrum Prom. ib.
and Vararis by Ptolemy.) In Catnesse the Wifle (probably Ila of Ptolemy).
Veruvium Pro. ib.
Beyond in Strath-Navern are the Promontories Dunsby (Viruedrum of Ptolemy.)
Vrde-head (Veruvium of Ptolemy.) Orcas, et Tarvedrum. Prom. ib.
And Howburne-head (Orcas, and Tarvedrum, or Tarvisium of the same Author,)
the extreme parts of the Island to the North. Many of the riues have the same
names. How this happened we know not.

THE ANCIENT NAMES OF ENGLAND
THe v. Aristot^lis de Mundo c. 3. Athenaei. lib. 5. Lucretij de Rerum Natura
lib. 6. Caesaris Comment. Belli Gallici lib. 5. Strabonis Geogra. lib 4.
Ptolomaei Geogra: lib. 2. c. 3. and lib. 8. c. 3. Plinij Nature. Hist. lib. 4.
c. 16. Festum de verborum Significatione: Herodiani Histor. lib. 3. Gulielmi
Camdeni Britanniam.
more ancient names hereof in approved Authors were only those of Albion
Albion Aristotilis de Mundo c. 3. Ptolemaei Geog. lib. 2. c. 3. and lib. 8. c.
3. Plin. Naturalis Histor. lib. 4. c. 16.
and Britannia Caesaris Commen. Belli Gallici lib. 5. Corn. Tac. in Iulij
Agricolae vita etc. (...) Ath^naei lib. 5.
Britannia. Under the common name of the British Islands Aristotle quo in mari
duae insulae Britannicae sitae sunt, quam maximae, Albion, et Ierna Arist. de
Mundo c. 3.
in his book de mundo, and 3 Chapter comprehends both the Islands of Albion,
and Ierna, or Ibernia. The like does Ptolemy in the 8 book of his Geographie
Prima Tabula continet insulas Brit^nicas (Albion: and Iberniam) cum insulis
adiacentibus. Ptol. Geogr. lib. 8. c. 3.
and 3 chapter. Pliny in his 4 book and 16 chapter, observes all those
Islands, situated in the Ocean betwixt Germany, and Spain, before this times,
to have been all called by the general name of Britain. The common name then
of the Country, and of all the neighboring Isles first, and more aunciently
was Britain, or the British Islands. The particular name hereof was Albion,
devised first by the Graecians, sailing toward those parts, (for the
discoveries of the Latins, or Romans, at what time that we first hear of the
name reached not so far, being then a mean and obscure state, and confined
only within Italy,) either (as some conjecture) from Albion, a supposed son
of their Sea-god, De Albione, and Bergione Neptuni filijs vide Pomp. Mel. lib.
2.
Neptune, an Etymology not altogether absurd, the situation hereof being
considered, and the usual vanity of the Greeks in giving names to Countries
from their profane gods; or (which is more probable) from the word (...), after
Festus signifying White in the Greekish language, imposed in regard of the
white chalky cliffs of the high seacoast hereof, seen by the Mariners a far
of, trading in those Seas. Afterward (as in Ex adverso huius situs Britannia
insusla. Albion ipsi nomen fuit, cum Britanniae omnes vocarentur. Plin. Natura:
Histor. lib. 4. c. 16.
Pliny) the name of Albion left of, it took the proper name of Britannia, or
Britain. The first of Greek Authors, who expressly names it Britannia was
Athenaeus v. Athenaei lib. 5. in descriptione Na^is Hieronis.
in his fifth book. The first of the Latins were Lucretius, and Caesar,
followed by Strabo, Pliny, and all other succeeding Historians, and
Geographers, Ptolemy excepted, who in his second and eight books reviueth
again the long forgotten name of Albion. The word Britannia, or Britain
learned Camden deriueth from the word Brith, signifying Painted with the
ancient Britons, and the Greek word (...), signifying a Country, expressing
together a Country of painted men, given by the Greeks, the first
discouerers, from the manner of the inhabitants, who, after Herodian and
others, went naked, and had their bodies painted. Other Etymologies are absurd,
and more unlikely. The best (antiquity being herein silent) can be only
coniecturall, and very uncertain.

THE BOVNDS OF ANCIENT BRITAIN.
THe bounds of the ancient (since of an Island) were the same with those of the
modern Britain, upon the North the Duecalidonius Oceanus Ptol. Geographiae
lib. 2. c. 3.
Northern sea; upon the West the Irish, Ibernicus ib.
and the Vergivus ib.
Western; upon the South the English, or Britannicus ib.
British; and upon the East the Germanicus ib.
German Ocean.

BRITAIN UNDER THE FIRST NATIVES. Britanni Taciti An. l. 2. etc. Britones
Bedae Eccl. Hist. gent Anglorum lib. 1. cap: 12. etc.

THe vid. Caesaris Commen: Belli Gallici lib 5. Corn. Tacit. in vita Iulii
Agricolae. Dionis Cassii To: Hist. lib. 20: lan^^s Xiphilini Epitomen Dionis in
imp. Severo.
first dominion hereof, was under the native Britons (for more ancient
inhabitants we find not.) Of these the Caledonij Tacitus coniectureth
originally to have been Germans from their yellow hair, and the Silures
Spaniards from their curled locks, and more swarthy countenances. The
generality of the Nation he otherwise thinks to have been descended from the
neighboring Gauls in regard of their same religion, and like manners, and
language. Their descent from the Gauls is more probable as for the reasons
here set down, so for the situation hereof, being the next part of the
Continent unto them, and their way from Asia, and the East, from whence the
world was first peopled. Their original from Brute, and the Trojans is
altogether absurd, and fabulous, since not any more ancient Greek, or Latin
Authors, or barbarous monuments make mention hereof, from whom the compilers
of that story, might gather their relation; neither were the ruder natives then
so learned, or careful, that they preserved any memory of things done
Caeterum Britanniam qui mortales initio coluerunt, indigenae, an advecti, (vt
inter Barbaros) paru^ compertum. Corn. Tacit. in Iul. Agric. vita.
unto after ages. Their government (while they were free) was under Kings,
commanded by many after the fashion of barbarous Nations. Amongst these,
Caesar makes mention of Cassivellanus in his 5 Commentary of the wars of
Gaul upon occasion of his wars herewith; Dion of Cataratacus, and
Togodumnus, sons to Cynobellinus in the reign of Claudian; Tacitus of
Cartismandua, Queen of the Brigantes, in the time of the same Emperor. The
Caledonioj for a great part were a free state after Apud Caledonios populus
magna ex part principatum tenent. Xiphilini Epit. Dionis in Severo imperatore.
Xiphilinus in his Epitome of Dion, and life of the Emperor Severus, governed
by the people. What was their estate before Caesar, ancient Authors relate
not, neither (excepting only Lucretius) do so much as put down, and remember
the name of Britons.

BRITAIN CONQVERED BY THE ROMANS.
THe v. C. Iulij Caesaris Coment. Bell. Gall. lib. 5. Suetonij Tranquilli Iulium
Caesarem, Neronem, and Vespasianum; Corn. Taciti Iulium Agricolam: ejusdem
Annalium lib. 12. and 14, and Histor. lib. 3: Dion. Cassij Histor: lib. 55. and
60. Ioannis Xiphilini Epitomen Dionis Caesare Augusto, Severo, et Commodo
Imper: Herodiani Histor. Sever. Imp: Lu. Flor. Hist. Romans lib. 3. c. 10. Aelij
Spartiani Adrianum, and Severum Imper: Iulij Capitolini Antoninum Pium: Zosimi
Hist. lib. t, and 6. Ammiani Marcellini Hist. lib. 27, and 28. Aurelij victori^
Iulium Caesarem, and Imperatores Claudium, Severum, and Aurelium Alexandrum:
Eiusdem Epitomen Imp. Severo, Constantino, et Gratiano: M. Aurelij Cassiodori
Chronicon Imp. Claudio, and Severo: Eutropij Hist. Romanae lib. 6. 7. 8. 9. et
10. Imp. Iulio Caesare, Claudio, Vespasiano, Severo, Dioclesiano, et
Constantino Magno: Ruf^ Festi Breviarium: Antonini Augusti Itinerarium:
provinciarum Romans Libellum: Ptol. Geog lib 2. c. 3. Notitiam Imperij
Occidentise Guidonis P^^irolli in Notitiam Imperij Occidentis c. 72. 73. ^t 89.
Gulielmi Cambdeni Britanniam.
Romans were the first of certain, and known forreiners, and of these C*
Julius Caesar, who invaded Britain in the year of Rome 699, Cn. Pompeius, and
M. Crassus being Consulls, invited according to Suetonius through a covetous
desire of the fairer pearls hereof, and pretending (as himself witnesses in
his Commentaries) the continual supplies and aides of the Nation sent unto the
Gauls in their great wars hereagainst. After two iourneyes made, and some
victories gained, hostages taken, and a tribute imposed, he returned into the
Continent, rather (after Tacitus) affrighting the Ilanders by those inroades,
and discovering them to posterity, then making any conquest of them. The Romans
afterward being detained at home by civil wars, and the succeeding
Emperors Octavius Augustus, and Tiberius being careful rather to preserve
what they had gotten, then uncertainly to graspe at more; Britain is a long
time forgotten, and the conquest hereof intermitted. Caius Caligula had a
purpose to invade the Island, but being giddy-headed, and his mind soon
changing, this project is left of. In the year of Rome 797 Aulus Plautius is
sent hither from Claudius, solicited by Bericus, a Britain, through sedition
expulsed the Country, accompanied by the two brethren Sabinus, and
Vespasianus, who afterward was Emperor, followed not long after by the
Emperor Claudius in person, the success of whose war was after Dion the
taking of Camalodunum, a chief seat of the Kings, the death of King
Togodumnus, the subjection of the part hereof lying next to Gaul, and the
disarming of the Inhabitants; the first hereof that set firm footing, and
fixed a conquest in the Country. By Aulus Plautius left by Claudius to end the
war, and his successor Publius Ostorius Scapula, the Silures, and Iceni
being vanquished in several fights, King Caractacus taken prisoner, and a
Roman Colonie planted at Camalodunum; their conquests here are confirmed, and
enlarged, and the higher part of Britain reduced into the form of a Roman
Province. In the reign of Domitius Nero, the Britons provoked with injuries,
under Voadica, Queen to Pratasagus, the late deceased King of the Iceni, take
arms, and rebel, sacking the towns of Camalodunum, and Verulamium, and
killing no less then 70 thousand Roman Citizens, and their confederates,
overthrown shortly after, and slain in a great battle to the number of 80
thousand, and forced to a greater servitude by Paulinus Suetonius then
Leifetenant for the Emperor. By Petilius Cerealis, in the reign of Vespasian,
the great and populous Nation of the Brigantes are warred upon, and in part
overcome. By Julius Frontinus, his Successor, the warlike Silures after
stiff, and long resistance are subdued. Julius Agricola Propraetor in the
reign of Domitian set limits here to the Roman greatness, by arms, justice,
and better moderation, making a full conquest of the Southern part of the
Island, extended Northwards unto the seas Glota, and Bodotria, now the Friths of
Dunbriton, and Edenborough in Scotland, the furthest bounds this way of their
Empire, ordering the whole into a province, and civilizing the inhabitants,
teaching them letters, and the Roman habit, and manners. He also after Dion
first discovered the Country to be an Island, which until then was doubted of,
and not certainly known. The further parts beyond the Bodotria and Glota, as
more could, and unfruitful, and inaccessable in regard of their great
mountains, and woods, he left free to the more fierce, and barbarous Northern
Britons, whom he paled in, and shut out from the more civil and Roman by
sundry forts, and garrisons of soldiers, planted in the narrow neck of land
betwixt the two Friths. The Emperor Adrian not long after removed the pale
more Southwards, and the better to keep out the enemy drew a trench, or wall
of turfes of 80 miles cross the Island betwixt the two seas. The place Aelius
Spartianus, my Author, sets not down. Camden coniectureth it to have
been, where afterward stood the wall of Severus, extended betwixt the river
Tina, and Ituna, now the Tine and Solway Frith near Carlisle. Lollius Vrbicus
in the reign of Antoninus Pius, who next succeeded, beating back the
barbarous people, again enlarged the province beyond the wall of Adrian, (as
thinks Camden) unto the two Friths before mentioned, and the limits of the
Empire in the time of Agricola, and Domitian, which after Capitolinus, he
likewise entrenched with another new wall of sodds, overthrown not long after,
and broken down by the Caledonij in the reign of the Emperor Commodus. The
Roman Britons, continually molested by the barbarous incursions of the
Highlanders, or Northern; the Emperor Septimius Severus attempted the
conquest of the whole Island, which yet (the enemies keeping within their
fastnesses, and not offering battaill) after much toil, and the loss of 50
thousand men he could not effect, withdrawing within the pale of Adrian, and
more firmly to secure the province upon, or near unto the wall hereof,
raising a third wall, or trench, strengthening the same with broad ditches, and
towers reared along the wall. Afterward notwithstanding in the reigns of the
Emperors Dioclesian, and of Valentian the first, we find the Romans possessed
of the Country betwixt this wall, and the Bodotria; whence nevertheless they
were always beaten out, vseing it only as a counterscharf, by their
velitations there to keep the enemy from invading the more inland part of the
province. In this manner the Island in time came divided betwixt the Romans, and
the Northern untamed Britons, bounded, and kept asunder by forts, ditches, and
walls, continued, when the Romans prevailed, betwixt the Bodotria, and Glota,
when the Northern side had the better hand, betwixt the Ituna, and Tina. The
Northern Britons are all called in the Histories v. Joan. Xiphilini Epitomen
Dionis Severo Imperatore.
of those times by the general names of the Maeatae, and Caledonii. We after
do hear succeeding in their rooms the Picts, and Scots in the reign of
Constantius, and Iulianus, of whom we are to speak hereafter. The province
subject to the Romans was governed by their Propraetours, and other names of
Magistrates. In Xiphilinus we find it distinguished into the higher and the
lower Britain, whereof this contained the Northern part, and the other the
more Southern. The Emperor Severus most probably was the author of this
division, whom after his victory against Albinus, we read in the third book
of Herodian, parting the Island into two Praefectureships, or jurisdictions. The
author of the Notitia, after the times of Constantine the great (who altering
euery-where the government of the Empire, first thus divided it) names here
five juridicall resorts, or Provinces, Valentia a Roman Province of Britain in
the reign of Constantine the Great, but not named thus until the Emperors
Theodosius, and Valentinian the first: intimated by Ammianus Marcellinus in his
28 book. Recuperatamque provinciam, quae in ditionem concesserat hostium, ita
(Theodosius) reddiderat statu^ pristino, vt, e^dem referente, et rectorem
haberet legitimum, et Valentia deinde vocaretur arbitrio principis. ib,
Valentia (the part after Camden included within the two walls, and containing
now the parts of Northumberland and Cumberland, together with Scotland, unto
the Friths of Edinburgh and Dunbriton,) Maxima Caesariensis, Britannia prima,
Britannia secunda, and Flavia Caesariensis, whereof the two first were
consulary, and governed by Proco^suls, the 3 last Praesidial, commanded by
Roman Praesides, subject to the Vicar general of Britain, under the
Praetorio-praefectus of Gaul. The same number, and almost names are put by the
author of the book of the Roman Provinces, Britannia prima, Britannia secunda,
Flavia, Maxima, and Valentiana, Rufus Festus mentions only four Provinces,
Maxima Caesariensis, Britannia prima, Britannia secunda, and Flavia
Caesariensis, omitting Valentia, which probably at that time was lost unto the
Northern Britons. What parts these now contain, we cannot certainly define,
since their Authors do not bound them, either place any Cities in them,
whereby they might be distinguished. Not improbably with Pancirollus Britannia
prima comprehended at this day the South-East part of England; Flavia
Caesariensis, Cornwall, or the South-west part; Maxima Caesariensis, Wales, or
the countries within the river of Severne; and Britannia secunda, the
Northern parts unto the wall of Severus. After others Britannia v. Guil.
Camdeni Britanniam.
prima, contained the South part of the Island, included within the river
Thames, the British Ocean, and the sea of Severne, Britannia secunda, Wales;
Flavia Caesariensis the parts extended betwixt the Thames and Humber; and
Maxima Caesariensis, the part lying betwixt the wall of Severus and Humber. The
military affairs hereof were ordered by a Dux Britanniarum Notit.
Duke of the Britains, guarding the Northern and Western borders against the
incursions of the barbarous Nations; a Comes, or co^mes Britanniarum ib.
Earl of the Britains, commanding in the Inland parts; and an comes Littoris
Saxonici. ib.
Earl Littoris Saxonici, or of the Eastern coasts, quarting the Saxons in
Germany, with whose pyracies the Island was then continually infested. Under the
first hereof the Author of the Notitia, places the 6. Legion, 16 Cohorts, and
ten Numerus ide^ qui cohors. Zosomen. Hist. Tripart. lib. 1. Numerorum nomen
generale divisionu^ militarium com. God. Stevvichij in l. 2. c. 1. Vegetij de
re Militari. Horu^ meminit Zolomen. loco citato. Vegetius de re militari l. 2.
c. 1. et. l. 3. c. 9. et 15. et Am. Marcellinus. lib. Numerus hic videtur pars
minor cohorte
Numeri of foot, with 9 troops of horse, containing together after Pancirolus
his account about 900 horse, and 14000 foot, distributed into 34 garrisons
upon the frontires, and along the Wall before mentioned. The Earl of the
Eastern, or Saxon Shore, had command over the Second Legion, one Cohort, and
5 Numeri of foot, and 2 troops of horse. The Earl of the Britains had 3
Numeri of foot, and 6 troops of horse. The two last contained together after
Pancirolus about 9000 foot, and some 1000 horse. The whole number of Roman
soldiers aweing the Province toward the period of the Western Empire, and
about the reign of the Emperor Theodosius the second, (for of those times
especially the Notitia is to be understood) were (if Pancirolus mistake not in
his account) some 23000 foot, and 2000 horse. The ordinary Legions attending
here, were in the Itinerarium ascribed to Antoninus, Legio secunda August.
Itin. Antonin. Ptol. Geog. l. 2. c. 3. er Dionis l. 55.
the Second Legion surnamed Augusta, keeping their station at Isca Silurum, now
Caer-Leon in the county of Monmouth; the Legio Sexta Victrix ib.
6 Legion surnamed Victrix at Eboracu^, now York; and the Twentieth Legio
Vigesima Victrix Antonini, et Ptolem. ibid. Legio Vigesima Valentiana. et
Victrix Dionis. ib.
Legion, in like manner surnamed Victrix, at Deva, now West-Chester. Ptolemy
long before this, living in the reign of the Emperor Antoninus Pius,
mentions the Sixth Legion surnamed Victrix at Eboracum; the twentieth Legion
surnamed Victrix at Deva; and the Second Legion surnamed Augusta at Isca
Damnoniorum, now Excester. Dion Cassius (understanding this of his own time,
which was the reign of the Emperor Maximinus) remembers the Sixth Legion,
named Victrix, in the Lower Britain; and the Second Legion, surnamed Augusta,
and the twentieth Legion surnamed Valentiana, and Victrix wintring in the
higher Britain. The Roman soldiers then ordinarily guarding the Province,
were the Second, the Sixth, and the Twentieth Legions. Tacitus in the reign of
Domitius Nero, besides the Second, and the Twentieth, names here the Ninth,
and the Fourteenth Legions. But which were no ordinary guards, brought hither
upon the occasion of the great war hereof with the Britons.

From the wintering camps hereof, and of their wings, and aids many Cities,
and towns arose here, and were occasioned (as the like happened in other
parts of the Roman Empire,) whereof part flourish at this time, others through
age are now extinguished, or decayed, and reduced unto the estate of mean
villages, known only by their Roman coins, and other marks of antiquity,
dug forth of their ruins. Their more true place, and names, with the estate
of the whole Island during those first times, will better appear in the
following description hereof, gathered out of Ptolomye, the Itinerary of
Antoninus, and the Author of the Notitia, with reference to Tacitus, and other
approved Authors, beginning with Ptolomy.

THE DESCRIPTION OF BRITAIN UNDER THE ROMAN EMPIRE.
ALBION.
BY this name Ptolomy calls the Island, whose order I have observed. v. Clau.
Ptol. Geog. l. 2, c. 3. secundum editionem P. Birtij. Itinerarium Antonini
Augusti. Taciti* Annalium l. 12. and 14. eiusdem hist. l. 3. eiusdem Iulii
Agricolae vit: Dionis Cassii His. l. 60. Ioannis Xiphilini Epitomen Dionis
Severo Imperatore: Librum Notit. et interprerat. Guil. Camdeni in sua Britan.
The bounds hereof I have formerly set down.

The Inhabitants with their Cities, and Interpretations follow.

The Epidij, Cerones, Creones, Carnonacae, Carini, Cornabij, Logi, Mertae,
Cantae, Texali, Vennicontes, Vacomagi, and Caledonij, inhabiting the more
Northern part of the Island, beyond the Bodotria, and Glota, and containing now
together the Countries of Fife, Strath-eren, Argile, Cantire, Lorne,
Braid-Albin, the Sherifdome of Perth, Anguis, Merne, Mar, Buquhan, Murray,
Loquuabry, Rosse, Suderland, Catnes, and Strath-Naverne, or the whole North of
Scotland, from Straithye head, unto the Friths of Edinborough and Dunbriton.

Their towns were Banatia, Tamia, Orrea, Devana, Alata Castra, and Tuesis,
whose interpretations (as very uncertain) we let pass. The most do place
Alata castra where now is Edinborough. But whose errors their far different
situations do plainly manifest, Edinborough standing on this side the Frith,
and Alata castra in my Author much beyond amongst the Vaco-magi. This was the
only part of Britain which the Romans left unconquered. By the Roman
Historians it is otherwise called Caledonia, Caledonia Cor. Tacit. in vita ^ul.
Agric.
and the Caledonii Xiphilini Epit. Dionis, Sever^ Imperatore.
Caledonij, into whose general appellation those lesser names united, severed
from the Province, or the Roman Britons by the trench or wall of Lollius
Vrbicus, before mentioned, whose tract betwixt the Friths of Dunbriton and
Edinborough, called Grahams Dike by the Scots, is yet appearing.

The Novantae (on this side the Frith of Dunbriton) containing now Galloway,
Carick, Kyle, and Cuningham.

The cities were Leucopibia, now probably VVhit-herne in Galloway, and
Rerigonium, now Bergeny in Carick.

The E^govae.
Selgovae, now Lidesdale, Eusdale, Eskdale, Annandale, and Nidisdale, named
thus from their rivers falling into the Solway Frith.

Their towns were Carbantorigum, standing sometimes where now is
Caerlaverocke, the dwelling house of the Lord Maxwell.

Vxelum V^elum.
. The place is lost. Camden from the name conjectureth it to have stood upon
the river Euse in Eusdale.

Corda. It stood sometimes upon the Lake called now Loch-Cure in Nidisdale.

Trimontium. The Damnij, now C^luydsdale, the Barony of Renfraw, Lennox, the
Sherifdome of Sterling, and Menteth.

Their towns were Colanica.

Vanduara, now Renfraw.

Coria, not improbably where now is Camelot in the country of Sterling.

Alauna.

Lindum, now Linlithquo.

Victoria.

The Gadeni, now Teifidale, Twedale, Merch, and Lothien, or the part of
Scotland lying upon the German Ocean, betwixt the river of Tweede, and the
Frith of Edinburgh. Hitherto Scotland.

The Ot^lini.
Otadeni containing now Northumberland in England.

Their towns were Curia, now Corbridge upon the river Tine in Northumberland;
and Bremenium, (Bremenium of Antoninus) conjectured now to be Rochester in
Readesdale in Northumberland.

The people hitherto inclusiuely from the Novantae, were in the time of Dion
called all by the general name Maeatae Xiphilini Epitom Dionis Severo
Imperatore.
of the Maeatae. They Caeterum Britannorum duo praesertim sunt genera,
Caledonij, and Maeatae. Nam caeterorum nomina ad hos fere referuntur. Incolunt
Maeatae juxta eum Mitrum, qui insulam in duas parts dividit. Caledomi post eos
sunt. Xiphilini Epit. Dionis. ib.
together comprehended the Province, named Valentia v. supra.
by Ammianus Marcellinus, and the Author of the Notitia, and Valentiana by the
Author of the book of the Roman Provinces, included betwixt the two walls of
Lollius Vrbicus, and Severus beforementioned, debated for a long time betwixt
the Romans, and the Northern British Nations, and now recovered by one side,
and soon after by the other, yet by turns held by the Romans until here the
expiration of their Empire.

Xiphilinus here contradicting Ptolemy, observes the Postident vtrique
(Caledonii, and Maeatae) Montes asperrimos, and sine aqua, iteq, campos
desertos, plenosque paludibus: quodque moenia non habent, nec vrbes, agros
nullos colunt, et de praeda, et venatione, fructibusque arboru^ vivunt. Degunt
in tentoriis nudi, et sine calceis. Xiphilini Epit. Dion, ib.
Caledonij, and Maeatae, or Northern Britons not to have inhabited any Cities
or walled towns, living then naked in tents, neither do we find any mention
hereof in those great journeyes made by Julius Agricola, and the Emperor
Severus into Caledonia, and the North which gives suspicion the places
hitherto set down by my Author, either not at all to have been, or that they
were only some scattered habitations, delivered unto him by uncertain and
false relation, and named thus.

The Brigantes, (the Brigantes of Tacitus) containing now Cumberland,
Westmorland, the Bishopric of Durham, Yorkshire, and Lancashire, or the
parts of England, lying North of the river of Mersee, and Humber, (the County
of Northumberland excepted.) Here more properly begun the Roman Province, and
the Itinerary of Antoninus, which no where passes beyond the limits of the
Empire.

Their towns were Epiacum, now Pap-castle in Cumberland.

Vinovium (Vinovia of Antoninus.) The town is ruinated. It stood aunciently
where now is Binchester, a small hamlet nere unto Bishop-Aukland in the
Bishopric of Durham.

Caturactonium (Caturacton of Antoninus) now Catarick in Richmondshire.

Calatum, ( Calagum alias.
Gallatum of Antoninus) where now is VVheallep-castle, near Kirkbye-Thore in
Westmorland.

Isurium, (Isurium of Antoninus) now Ald-burrow in Yorkshire upon the river
Yeure.

Olicana, now Inkley in the same shire.

Rhigodunum, now Rible-chester in Lancashire.

Eboracum, Legio Sexta victrix (Eboracum Legio Sexta victrix of Antoninus,
Eboracum Eboracum Britanniae Municipium. Sext. Aur. Victoris lib. de
Caesaribus, Imperatore Severo.
a Municipium of the Romans after Aurelius Victor) now York.

Camunlodunum (Camulodunum of Antoninus.) The town now is not extant. The
ruins hereof yet appear upon a steep hill nere unto Almundbury, and the river
of Calder in the West Riding of Yorkshire.

The Parisi, part of the Brigantes containing now the East Riding of Yorkshire.

Their city was Petuaria, not improbably now Beverley.

The Cornavii, now Cheshire, Shropshire, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, and
Warwicshire.

Their cities were Devana editionis Mercatoris.
Deunana, Legio vigessima Victrix (Deva, Legio vigessima victrix of Antoninus,)
now West-chester; and Viroconium) Vroconium of Antoninus,) now Wroxcester in
Shropshire.

The Orduij alias
Orduices (the Ordovices of Tacitus,) now Flint-shire, Denbighshire,
Caernarvonshire, Merionithshire, and Mountgomerieshire, or North Wales.

Their cities were Mediolanium (Mediolanum of Antoninus,) now Lhan-Vethlin in
Mountgomeryshire, and Brannogenium, now Worcester. This last Town is misplaced
by my Author, belonging unto the Cornavii.

The Demetae, now Carmarthenshire, Cardiganshire, and Pembrokeshire, or
West-Wales.

Their cities were Loventinum, probably New Castle in Carmarthenshire; and
Maridunum, now Caermarthen in the same county.

The Silyres (the Silures of Ptolemy, Tacitus, and Antoninus,) now
Herefordshire, with Radnorshire, Brecknockshire, Monmouthshire, and
Glamorganshire, or South Wales.

Their city was Bullaeum now Buelth in Brecknockshire.

The Dobuni (the Bodunni sub ditione Catuellanorum. Dion. Cassij Histor. lib.
60.
Bodunni of Dion,) now Glocestershire, and Oxfordshire.

Their City was Corinnium, (Corinium of Antoninus) now Cirencester in
Glocestershire.

The Catyeuchlani (the Catuellani of Dion,) now Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire,
and Hartfordshire.

Their towns were Vrolanium (Verolamium of Tacitus and Antoninus, a Municipium
of the Verolamium Municipium. Taciti Annal. lib. 14.
Romans after Tacitus,) now Verulam by S. Albans in Hartfordshire.

Salenae. The place is now called Chesterfield, and Salndy, standing in
Bedfordshire near unto Temesford, and the river Ouse.

The Coritani editionis Mercatoris.
Coritaui, containing now Lincolneshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire,
Nottinghamshire, and Darbyshire.

The towns were Lindum, (Lindum of Antoninus,) now Lincoln; and Rhage ( Rate
rectius.
Ratis of Antoninus) now Leicester.

The Simeni corruptly for the Iceni (the Iceni of Tacitus,) now
Huntingdonshire, Cambridgeshire, Norfolk, and Suffolk.

Their City was Venta, (Venta Icenorum of Antoninus.)

The place where this stood is named Caster (where some ruins hereof are yet
seen) near unto the city of Norwich.

The Trinoantes (the Trinobantes of Caesar) now Essex, ct Midlesex.

Their City was Camudolun (Camulodinum of Dion, and Antoninus, Camalodunum of
Pliny, and Camalodunum a Colony Camalodunum Veteranorum Colonia. Cor. Taciti
Annal. lib. 12. v. etiam eirusdem Annal. lib. 14.
of old Roman soldiers after Tacitus, planted here by P: Ostorius Scapula,
Leiftenant for the Emperor Claudius) now Maldon in Essex.

The Cantii (Cantium of Caesar) now Kent.

Their Cities were Darvernum, (Durovernum of Antoninus) now Canterbury.

Rutupiae (Ritupae, the port of the Britons after Antoninus, and Ritupae the
mansion Prefect. Legionis Secundae Augustae Ritupis. lib. Notitiarum.
of the Commander of the second Legion, surnamed Augusta, after the author of
the Notitia. The place now is named Richborough, and is plowed ground near
unto the town of Sandwich.

Londinium (Londinium of Antoninus, Londinium Londinium copia negotiatum, and
commeatu maxim celebre. Cor. Tac. Annal. lib. 14.
a famous Mart-town after Tacitus, Lundonium, an Lundonium vetus oppidum, quod
Augustam posteritas appellavit. Ammian. Marcelli^^. l. 27 Valentiano, and
Valente Imperatoribus.
ancient town, more lately surnamed Augusta after Am: Marcellinus) now London.
It is misplaced by my Author, since standing on the further side of the river
Thames in the Country of the Trinobantes.

The Rhegini Rhegni editionis Mercatoris.
now Surrey, and Sussex, and the seacoast of Hantshire.

Their City was Naeomagus (Noviomagus of Antoninus, distant to miles from
Londinium.) Certain shadows, and ruins hereof, yet appear upon a woody
hill, named Woodcote, some two miles from Wimbleton in Surrey.

The Atrebatij, now Barkeshire.
Their City was Nalcua editionis Mercatoris.
Nalcaea (Calleva of Antoninus,) now Wallingford.
The Belgae, now Hantshire, Wiltshire, and Somersetshire.
Their Cities were Iscalis, now Ivelcester in Somersetshire.
Aquae Calidae (Aquae Solis of Antoninus,) now Bath.
Venta, (Venta Belgarum of Antoninus) now Winchester.
The Durotriges, now Dorsetshire.
Their City was Dunium (Durnovaria of Antoninus) now Dorcester.
The Dumnonij, now Devonshire, and Cornwall.
Their Cities were Isca, the station of the second Legion, surnamed Augusta,
now Excester. Antoninus more rightly places this Legion at Isca Silurum, now
Caer-Leon in Monmouthshire.

Tamare, now Tamerton in Cornwall.
Vxela VZela rectius.
now Lestuthiel in Cornwall.
Voltba, near Falmouth. The distinct place is not known.
Such was the face of Britain in the time of Ptolemy, living in the reign of
the Emperor Antoninus Pius, about the year of Rome 892, and some 95 years
since the first conquest hereof by the Emperor Claudius Caesar. Afterward
toward the waine of the Western Empire, the Country being grown more civil,
rich, and better accommodated through the long peace, and happy subjection
thereof to the Romans, we hear of sundry new Cities, or forts, in the part
which was the Province, not mentioned by Ptolemy, or any former author,
whereof some notwithstanding we guess rather to have been certain more
famous passages, through-fares, or lodging-places, standing in the high
military roades. Their names we have added out of the Itinerarium, ascribed to
Antoninus, together with their interpretations.

In the Road betwixt Iter a Limite, seu a Vallo Praetorium:
the Picts wall, and Praetorium, now Patrington in Holdernes in Yorkshire.

Vindomara, v. I tinerarium Antonini Augusti editionis Petri Bertij. Librum
Notitiarum. Gulielmi Camdeni interpretationes, Guidonis Pancirolli in lib.
Notitiarum Comment. c. 72 and 89.
(Vindobala of the Notitia, the station of the first Cohort, named of the
Praefectus Cohortis 1 F^ixagororum Vindob^lae Notitia.
Frixagori) now Wall^send, near unto the mouth of the river Tine in
Northumberland.

Derventio (Derventio Praefectus Numeri Derventionensis, Deruention: Notitia.
of the Notitia, the station of a foot company, named from the place by this
author the Derventionenses,) now Auldby upon the river Derwent in Yorkshire.

Delgovitia, now Wighton under Yorkes-would in the same County.

Betwixt the Iter a Vallo ad Portum Ritupis, Antonini Augusti Iunerarium.
Picts wall, and the Port of Ritupae, or Richborough near the town of
Sandwich in Kent.

Blatobulgium, now Bulnesse, a small hamlet upon the left shore and mouth of
Solway Frith in Cumberland.

Castra Exploratorum, probably old Carlisle in the same County.

Lugwallum, now Carlisle.

Voreda. The town I find not.

Brovonacis, (Braboniacum Praefectus Numeri Defensorum Braboniaco, Notitia.
of the Notitia the station of a foot company named the Defensores) now
Brougham.

Verteris (Veteres of the Notitia, the station of a foot company named of the
Directores, Praefectus Numeri Directorum Veteru^. Notitia. Directores sen
potius Duructores, pars Legioni^ Duructorum, euius in Maesia infetori meminit
Ptolemaeus, a Durocorto, seu Durocotto sic dicta (vnde desumpta erat) Remorum
apud Belgas civitate. Pancir.
now Brough under Stane-more.

The two last lie in Westmoreland.

Lavatris, Praefectus Numeri Exploratorum Lavatris. Notitia.
( Lavatrae of the Notitia, the Mansion of a foot company, named the
Exploratores) now Bows under Stane-more in Richmondshire.

Calcaria, now Tadcaster in Yorkshire.
Mancunium, Manchester in Lancashire,
Condate, Congleton in Cheshire.
Bovium, Bangor in Flintshire.
Rutunium, Routon in Shropshire.
Vxacama, Oken-Yate, a village in Shropshire upon Watlingsteete.
Pennocrucium, Penckridge, a village in the same shire.
Etocetum, the wall in Staffordshire distant about a mile from Lichfield.
Manduessedum, now Manchester, a small village upon the river Anchor in
Warwickshire.

Venonis. The place now is called the High Cross standing upon the military
way near unto Bensfordbridge in Leicestershire.

Bennavenna, Wedon on the street in Northamptonshire.
Lactodorum, Stony-Stratford in Buckinghamshire.
Magiovintum, Dunstable.
Durocobriuis, probably now Redborne in Hartfordshire.
Sulloniacis, Brockley-Hill near Ellestre in the same Countey.
Vagniacis, Maidstone in Kent.
Durolevum, Lenham in Kent.
Betwixt Londinium, lter a Londinio Lugvvallum ad Vallum. Itiner. Antonini.
and Lugwallum upon the wall, now Carlisle.

Caesaromagus, about Brentwood in Essex.
Colonia, Colchester.
Villa-Faustini, S Edmundsbury in Suffolk.
Iciani, probably Ich-borough in Norfolk.
Camboricum, Cambridge.
Duroli Pons, Gormanchester by Huntington.
Durobrivae, Caster upon the river Nen near Wamlsford in Northamptonshire.

Causennis, Bridge-Casterton upon the river Wash in Rutlandshire.

Sigelocis, Segelocum, and Agelocum ^ec tius
Litleborough upon the Trent in Nottinghamshire.

Danum (Danum Praefectus Equitum Crispinianoium Dan. Notitia. Crispiniani dicti
a Crispiniana Pannoniae oppido apud Autoninum. Pancirol.
of the Notitia, the mansion of a troop of horse, named by my Author the
Crispiniani) now Dancaster in Yorkshire.

Legeolium, now Castleford near Pontfreict.

Brocavum, the same with Brovonacis, mentioned before in the Read betwixt the
Picts wall, and the Port Ritupae.

Betwixt lter a Londinio Lindum. Itiner, Antonni.
Londinium and Lindum, or Lincoln.

Isannavatia, the same with Bennavenna before mentioned.
Tripontium, Torcester in Northamptonshire.
Verometum, Borough upon the hill in Leicestershire.
Margidunum, about Belvoir Castle.
Ad Pontem, Paunton in Lincolneshire.
Crococalanum, Ancaster in the same county.
Betwixt Clanoventa, Iter a Clanoventa Mediolanum. ibidem.
( Clannibanta of the Notitia, the station Tribunus Cohortis. 1. Morinorum
Clannibanta. Notitia. Morini pars Belgarum lib. 2. c. 9. Geog. C. Ptoleinaei.
of the first Cohort of the Morini) now upon the river Wents-Beck in
Northumberland, and Mediolanum, or Lhan Vethlin in Mountgomery-shire.

Galava, not improbably Walle-wic upon the Picts wall in Northumberland.

Alon (Alion Tribunus Cohortis. 3. Nerviorum Alione Notitia. Nervil pars
Belgarum. Ptolemaeus. 10.
of the Notitia, the station of the third Cohort of the Nervii.) The place is
now unknown. Camden from the name coniectureth that it stood upon the rivulet,
now called Alne in Northumberland.

Bremetonacis, now Overborough in Lancashire.

Betwixt Iter a Segoncio Devam Itinera. Antonini
Segoncium, now Caer Siont near Caernervon, and Deva, or West-chester.

Conovium, Caer-hean in Caernarvonshire.

Varis, Bod-vary in Flintshire.

Betwixt Iter a Muridonio Viroco^. ibidem.
Muridonium and Viroconium, now Wroxcester in Shropshire.

Vindonis, not improbably old Wilchelsey near Wilchelsey in Sussex. The place
is worn into the sea.

Brage, probably Broughton a village in Hantshire.
Servioduris, old Salisbury.
Vindogladia, Winburne in Dorsetshire.
Muridunum, not improbably Seaton in Devonshire.
Leucarum, Loghor in Glamorganshire.
Nidus, Neath in the same shire.
Bomium, Boverton in the same shire.
Burrium, Vske, in Monmouthshire.
Gabannium, Aber-gevenny in the same county.
Magnis, (Magi of the Notitia the station of a foot company named of the
Praefectus Numeri Pacensium Magis. Notitia. Pacenses dicti a Pace Iulia,
Turditanorum apud Lusitanosciuitate Pancirol.
Pacenses) now Radnor.

Bravonium.
Betwixt Iter a Regno Londinium, Itiner. Antonini.
Regnum, now Ringwood in Hantshire, and Londinium, or London.

Clausentum, now Southampton.
Pontes, Colebroke.
Betwixt Venta Iter a Venta Icenorum Londinium. Itinerar. Antonini.
Icenorum, or Caster near Norwych, and Londiniu^.

Sitomagus, Thetford in Norfolk.
Adansa, probably Coggleshall in Essex.
Canonium, Chemsford in the same county.
Durolitu^, not improbably Leiton upon the river Ley in the same shire.
Betwixt Iter ab Isca Silurum Callevam. ibidem.
Isca of the Silures, or Caer-Lheon in Monmouthshire, unto Calleva, or
Wallingford in Barkeshire.

Blestium, the Old town, a small village in Herefordshire.
Ariconium, now Kenchester near unto the city of Hereford.
Clevum, Gloucester.
Durocornovium, the same with Corinium, and now Cirencester in Glocestershire.

Spinae, now Spene by Newbury in Barkeshire.

Betwixt the Ab Isca Callevam alio itinere. ibidem.
same towns by another way.

Venta of the Silures, now Caerwent in Monmouthshire.

Abon, Avington a village town upon the Severne in the Forest of Deane in
Glocestershire.

Traiectum, the passage of the Severne near Aust in Glocestershire upon the
other side of the river.

Verlucio, now Werminster in Wiltshire.

Cunecio, not improbably Marleborough in the same county.

In the 3 Itinerary Iter a Londinio ad portum Dubrim. ib.
.

Portus Dubris (Dubrae Praefectus militum Tungricanorum Dubris. Notitia.
Tungticani, seu rectius Tungri pars Belgarum Prolemaei Geogr. lib. 2. c. 9.
of the Notitia, the station of a foot company of the Tungricani,) now Dover.

In the 4 Itinerary Iter a Londinio ad Portum Lemanis. ^tiner. Antonini.
.

Portus Lemannis (Lemannae Praefectus Numeti Turnacensium Lemanis. Notitia.
Turnacenses pars Nerviorum. Antonini Augusti Iriner, and Catalog. Provinciarum,
and Civitatum Galliae.
of the Notitia, the station of a foot company of the Turnacenses) now
Limehill in Kent a village near Hide.

Some of these Itineraryes are exceedingly crooked, and much about, the Author
observing rather the more noted, and chief places, then the next ways betwixt
his stages.

The vid. Librum Notitiarum. Guidonis Pancirolli in Notit. Commentar. c. 72, et
89. Interpretationes Gulielmi Camdeni in sua Britannia.
Book of the Notitia adds, which are not named by the Itinerarium, the
towns, or forts of Othona, the Praefectus Numeri Fortensium Othonae. Notitia.
Fortenses parS Legionis Fortensis quae inter* Legiones Comitatenses ab authore
recensetur. Pancitol.
station of a foot company, named the Fortenses. The place and name is lost.
Camden coniectureth it to have stood in Dengey hundred in Essex.

Anderida, the station Praepositus Numeri Abulcorum Anderidae Notit. Horum
meminit Zozimus Histor. lib. 8.
of a foot company, named of the Abulci, now Newenden in the Weald of Kent
upon the river Rother.

Portus Adurni, the station of a foot company, Praefectus Numeri Exploratorum
Portu Adurni. Notit. Exploratores dicti, quod consilia, and itinera hostium ex
plorarent. Pancirol.
named of the Exploratores, now Ederington, a small village upon the seacoast
of Sussex.

Branodunum, the station Praepositus Equitum Dalmatarum Branodunensium
Branoduno. Notit.
of a troop of Dalmatian horse, upon Brandchester, a village upon the
seacoast of Norfolk near unto Walsingham.

Gariannonum, the station Praepositus Equitum. Stablesianorum Garianno. ibidem.
of a troop of h^rse, named the Stablesiani, now Burgh Castle upon the right
shore of the river Yare in Suffolk, near Yarmouth.

Regulbium, the station Tribunus Coh. Vetasioru^ Regulbio. ib. Legendi forsan
Vetarasij, dictia Vetera Galliae Belgicae vr^e. Pancirol.
of the first Cohort, named of the Vetasii, now Reculver in Kent, a country
town upon the seacoast, and mouth of the river Thames.

These 6 with the Ports of Ritupae, Lemannae, and Dubrae before mentioned lay
in the part of the Province, named then Littus Saxonicum, or the Saxonshore by
my Author, continued now, (as does appear from hence) along the seacoast
from Sussex, unto Norfolk, and the Washes* of Lincolneshire, commanded with
their soldiers, and garrisons by a Comes, or Earl, Sub Disputatione Viri
Spectabilis, Comitis Litoris Sanonici. Notit*
thus entitled, and attending here the Saxons from the opposite coasts of
Germany with continual excursions molesting the Island.

Praesidium Praefectus Equitum Dalmatarum Praesidio. ^b.
the station of a troop of Dalmatian horse, now Warwyck.

Dictum, Praef. Numeri Nerviorum Dictensium Dicti. ib. Dictenses a loco, seu
stativis cognominati. Pancirol.
the station of a foot company of the Nervij, surnamed from hence the
Dictenses, probably where stood Diganwey, near Aberconwey in Caernarvonshire.
This last is likewise now entinguished, consumed with lightning.

Morbium Pr. Equitum Cataphractorum Morbio. Notiti. Cataphacti gravis armaturae
Equites.
the station of a troop of great horse, probably Moresby a village upon the
seacoast in Cumberland.

Concangij, the station Pr. Numeri Vigilum Concangijs. Notit.
of a foot company, named the Vigiles, probably Kendall in Westmoreland.

Maglova, the station Pr. Numeri Solensium Moglovae. ib. Solenses dicti a Sole
Siciliae oppido. Pancirol.
of a foot company, named the Solenses, now Macleneth in Montgomeryshire in
Wales.

Longovicus, the Pr. Numeri Longovicariorum Longovico. Notit.
station of a foot company, called from hence the Longovicarii, now the town
of Lancaster.

Segedunum, the Tribunus Coh. 4. Lergoru^ Segeduno. Notit. Lergi vnde nominati
non constat.
station the 4 Cohort, named of the Lergi, now Seghill in Northumberland upon
the seacoast.

Pons Aelii; the station Tribunus Cohort. Cornoviorum Ponte Aelij, Notitia.
Cornovij, seu Cornauij populus Britannicus. v. supra.
of a Cohort of the Cornovii, Pont-Eland in the same country.

Procolitia, the Tribunus Cohortis. 1. Batavo^um Procolitia. Notit.
station of the first Cohort of the Batavi, not improbably Prudhow Castle in
the same.

Borcovicus, the station of the Tribunus Cohor. 1. Tungrorum Borcovico. ib.
first Cohort of the Tungri, Borwic in the same county.

Vindolana, the Tribunus Cohortis. 4. Gallorum Vindolana. ib.
station of the 4 Cohort of the Gauls, Old Winchester, or Winchester in the
wall of the same county.

Aesica, the station of the Tribunus Coh. 1. Asturum Aesica. ib. Astures
Hispan. populus. Pto. l. 2. c. 6. vellegendum est Astorum ab Asta, Ligurum
Colonia. Pancirol.
first Cohort of the Astures, Netherby, a village upon the river Eske in
Cumberland.

Magnae, the station Tribunus Cohor. 2 Dalmatarum Magnis. Notitia.
of the second cohort of the Dalmatians, Chester in the wall near Haltwesel in
Northumberland.

Amboglanna, the station Tribunus Coh. 1. Aeliae Dacorum Amboglanna. ib. Cohors
ab Aelio Adriano Imper. e Dacis extracta, and inde nominata. Poncirol.
of the first cohort, named Aelia of the Daci, perhaps now Ambleside upon the
lake Winander-mere in Westmoreland.

Congavata, the station of the Tribunus Coh. 2. Lergorum Congavata Notit.
second Cohort of the Lergi, upon the river Caudebec in the same county.

Axelodunum the station of the first Cohort of Tribunus Coh: 1. Hispanorum
Axeloduno ib.
the Spaniards, now Hexham in Northumberland.

Gabrosentum, the station of the second Cohort Tribunus Cohor. 2 Thracum
Gabrosento. ib.
of the Thracians, probably Newcastle upon the Tine in the same county.

Tunnocelum, the station of Tribunus Cohor. 1 Aeliae Classicae Tunnocelo. ib.
Cohors, pars Legionis Classicae a Nerone institutae, and forsan restitutae ab
Aelio Adriano, and inde Aeliae cognominatae. Aliter Classica forsan est dicta
quod Classem^ Britannicam comitabatur. Pancirol.
the first Cohort, named Aelia Classica, now

Tinmouth in the same county at the mouth of the Tine.

Virosidum, the station of the 6 Cohort Tribunus Cohortis. 6. Nerviorum
Virosido. Notitia.
of the Nervij, Werwick upon the river Eden in Cumberland.

Condercum, the station Praefectus Alae. 1. Asturum Condetco. ib.
of the first wing of horse of the Asturians, now Chester upon the street in
the Bishopric of Durham.

Hunnum, the station Pr. Alae Savinianae Hunno. ib. Ala Saviniana a Savia
Pannoniae regione, vnde fuerat deducta. Aliter legendum est Al^ Sabiniana,
nominata a Sabinis, gente Italorum. Pancir.
of a wing of horse named Saviniana, probably now Seavensheale in
Northumberland.

Petrianae, the station Pr. Alae Petrianae Petrianis. Notit.
of a wing of horse called Petriana from hence, Old Perith in Cumberland.

Aballaba, the station Pr. Numeri Maurorum Aurelianorum Aballaba. ib.
of a foot company of Moors, Applebye in Westmoreland.

Olenacum, the station of the first wing of horse, Pr. Alae. 1. Herculiae
Olenaco ib.
named Herculea, now Linstock Castle in Cumberland.

Bremetenracum, the station Cuneus Armaturarum Bremetenraco. ib. Armatura^^
Equites erant, qui toti armis tecti. Pancir.
of a wedge, or troop of heavy armed horse, Brampton in the same shire.

Those last stations, and their garrisons, with those of Danum, Lavatres,
Veterae, Braboniacum, Magae, Derventio, Vindobala, Glannibanta, and Alion,
formerly mentioned, together with the 6 Legions, whose place is omitted by my
Author, were all under the command of the Duke of the Sub dispositione viri
spectabilis Ducis Britanniar^. Not.
Britains, guarding the Northern, and Western limits against the barbarous
people. Of these 22 were placed only along the wall Per lineam Valli. ib.
of Severus, or the Northern frontire (Vindobala, Glannibanta, and Alion, with
those which follow from Segedunum) manned with 16 Cohorts, and one Numerus of
foot, and 4 wings, and one troop of horse, and attending the motions of the
Picts, and Northern Scots. The rest for the most part were planted along the
Westerneshore in the parts where now are Cumberland, Westmoreland, Lancashire,
and Wales, as to keep in awe those mountainous regions, so to defend the
Province against the Irish Scots.

This was the state of Britain during the Roman government. In the reign of
the Emperor Honorius (the Legions being drawn out into the Continent, and the
natives left unto the spoil of the barbarous nations by Constantine,
Leiftenant of the Province usurping then the dominion of the Western Empire
against Honorius) the Britons (as in v. Zosimi Hist. l. 6. Imp. Honorio, and
Theodosio.
Zosimus) every where rebel, and shake off the Roman yoke, followed by the
neighboring Gauls, the Roman Magistrates, and officers being every where
thrust out. After this notwithstanding, and the death of the Tyrant Constantine
we find the Province yet under the Roman subjection, and the Legions returned,
commanded by Victorinus the last Roman governor in the Island. By Honorius not
long after Victorinus, the Legions are again recalled home for the defense of
Rome and Italy, invaded by Alaricus, and the Goths, at what time the long
languishing Empire of the Romans (after Beda) v. Bedae Eccl. Hist. Gent.
Anglorum. l. 1. c. 11.
here took end, about the year of Christ 707, and some 470 years after their
first invasion hereof by C. Julius Caesar. The Province at this time after Beda
extended Northwards beyond the wall of Severus unto the Friths of Edenborough
and Dunbriton, for thus we interpret the two arms of the East
Transmarinasautem dicimus has gentes (Scotos, and Pictos,) non quod extra
Britanniam essenr positae, sed quia a part Btitonum erant remorae duobus
sinibus maris inter-i acentibus, quorun^nus ab Orientali ma^i, alter ab
Occidenti Britanniae tetras long, late que irrumpit. Bed. Ec. Hist. Gentis
Anglorum lib. 1. cap. 12.
and Western seas, mentioned by my Author, the bounders then of the Picts,
and Scots, from the Roman, or Southern Britons.

BRITAIN RECOVERED BY THE NATIVES.
THe v. Epistolam Gildae de Excidio, and conquestu Britanniae. Bedae
Ecclesiasticae Hist. Gentis Anglorum lib. 1. c. 9. 11. 12. 13. 14. etc.
Malmesburiensis de Gestis Anglorum. lib. 1. Henr. Huntingdoniensis Hist. lib.
2. Flores Historiarum per Mat. VVestmonasteriensem. Fabians Chronicle. The
English A^nalls.
Romans having quite abandoned the Island, the dominion of the Southern part
under their king Vortigern returned unto the native Britons. These become lazy
and effoeminate through their long ease, and disvse of arms under the Roman
government, and being unable to withstand the fury of the Scots, and Picts,
pressing upon them with great violence from the North, at their earnest suite a
new Legion is sent from the Emperor Honorius, and the Romans, not now so much
their Lords, as confederates, by whom the enemy is beaten back. By the means
and persuasion hereof with better advantage to exclude these forragers a fourth
trench, or wall of turfes is raised upon, or near unto the wall of Lollius
Vrbicus betwixt the two seas of Edenborough, and Dunbriton, so often before
mentioned. They returning home, and the Scots, and Picts falling to their
wonted spoil, and outrages, another Roman Legion under Gallio of Ravenna is
obtained from the Emperor Valentinian the third, by whom again with great
slaughter the enemy is repulsed, and a fifth more firm wall of stone erected
more Southwards upon the old trench of the Emperor Severus, famous, and almost
entire in the time of Beda my Author; which done, the Legion departs again
into the Continent, busied in the defense of Gaul invaded by Attilas, and the
Huns. After this time the Western Empire miserably languishing, and drawing
toward its last period, the distressed Britons, destitute of their Roman
succors, although with tears, and much importunity desired Repellunt Barbari
ad mare. Repellit mare ad Barbaros. Inter haec oriuntur duo genera funerum, aut
iugulamur, aut mergimur. Episto. Britonum ad Agitium, seu Boetium Consulem
Roman. citat. a Gilda de Excidio Britanniae, and a Beda lib. 1. c. 13. Ec.
Histor. Anglorum.
of them, implore the aid of the neighboring Saxons, and English, inhabiting
the opposite shore of Germany, with whose valor through their long piracies
upon the Eastern coasts hereof they formerly had bin well acquainted. In the
year 449, and reign of the Emperor Valentinian the third in the I Will of
Thanet under two brethren Hengist, and Horsa, their Captains, ariue first
those Dutch rovers, who, the common enemy (the Scots and Picts) beaten home,
and suppressed by them, after the manner of foreign aides, when they grow too
strong for their friends, turning their swords hereagainst, by force, and
agreement with King Vortigern got seized of the country of Kent, which under
Hengist they erected into a kingdom, re-enforced, and followed by sundry new
Colonies of the same nations, planting in other parts of the Island, encouraged
by the good fortune of those first intruders, the weakness of the natives, and
the riches, and fertility of the land. Not long after this first inroade, his
brother Otha, and son Ebusa, are sent for by Hengist, by the good leave of
Vortigern, taking possession of the Northern parts beyond Humber, pretending
their defense against the Picts, and Scots, occasioning afterward the kingdom
of Northumberland. About the year 488 by Ella, another Saxon Captain, is
begun the kingdom of the South Saxons, named thus from their situation; In the
year 519, by Cerdicus the kingdom of the West Saxons; by Erchenwin about the
year 527 the kingdom of the East Angles; by Vffa in the year 575, the
kingdom of the East Saxons; Lastly by Crida in the year 582, the kingdom of
the Mercians. In this manner the more Eastern, and plain country being
subdued by the Saxons, the dominion of the Britons after stout, and long
resistance became straightened within the Severne, and the Western Mountains,
which after Florilegus happened by the reign of Caretius their King, succeeding
in the year 586, some 4 years after the beginning of the Mercian kingdom,
oppressed, and driven over that bounder by a joint war of the Saxon Kings. In
Cadwallader, their last Prince, ended the kingdom hereof, quitting his Realm,
and departing unto Rome, where he turned Votary, deceasing in the year of
Christ 689. The British Kings unto Cadwallader follow out of Matthew of
Westminster, for better authority we have not, or continuing their succession.
Vortigern elected King of the Brito^s after the departure of the Romans, noted
for his unchaste life, unnatural lust, slougth, and many vices, the husband of
his own daughter, in whose reign the Saxons first entered Britain. Marrying to
Rowena, daughter unto Hengist, he gave Kent by way of composition unto this
his father in law. By the permission hereof, another English Colony under Octa,
and Abissa, before mentioned, are planted in the North beyond Humber.
Exasperated against him, in regard of this his Dutch affinity, and friendship,
and the daily incroaching of the Saxons through his badde government, he is
deposed by his subjects in the year 454, succeeded unto by Vortimer. Vortimer,
king of the Britons, son to Vortigern by a former wife. Warring upon the
Saxons, he forced them back (after my Author) into Germany their first
country; after Fabian only into the Island of Thanet in Kent. Malmesburiensis
otherwise (whom I rather believe) makes mention of the death of Horsa, brother
unto Hengist, slain in fight by Vortimer, and of diverse battles then fought
betwixt the British, and English Nations, but in most whereof the English
still should have the better. He deceased in the year 460, after he had
reigned six years according to my Author, poisoned by his stepmother Rowena;
after 20 years war according to Malmesburiensis. Vortimer deceasing, his
father Vortigern reassumed the kingdom, pursued not long after, and burnt in
his castle named Genorium by my author (seated amongst the Welsh Mountains)
by Aurelius Ambrosius; by fire from heaven after Henry of Huntington. In this
last reign of Vortigern happened (after my author) the murder of the British
nobility, to the number of 460 persons perfidiously slain by Hengist (after
his return from Germany, recalled by Vortigern) at a parlee of the two Nations
in the town of Ambri near Sarisbury; at a banquet, or feast after
Huntingdonensis. Aurelius Ambrosius, son to that Constantine, who usurped the
Western Empire against the Emperor Honorius, about the year 464, called
home out of Gaul Armorique, and electesd king, Vortigerne being again
deposed. To this Prince my Author ascribes the erection of the monument, now
called Stone-henge by Ambresoury in Wilsthire, set up in memory of the
British Nobles slain there by Hengist in the reign of Vortigerne. Vter,
surnamed Pendragon, brother to Aurelius Ambrosius, succeeding in the year 498.
Arthur, son to Vter Pendragon, succeeding in the year 516. Of this Prince
Geffrey of Munmouth, and his followers, report wonders, not only false, but
for the most part monstrous and incredible, besides his great conquests against
the Saxons, advancing the Christian banner, and his victorious ensigns over
the chief parts of the continent of Europe, and subduing Princes, and people
which never were, or then were not in being. His high valor, and many and
great victories against the English impartial, and grave authors have
willingly acknowledged. Constantine, son to Cador Duke of Cornwall, by the
appointment of King Arthur, whose kinsman he was, succeeding in the year 542.
He was slain in battle after Fabian by Aurelius Conanus. Aurelius Conanus,
Nephew to Constantine, succeeding in the year 545. Vortoporius, after Fabian
son to Aurelius Conanus, in the year 581. These four last Princes seem
otherwise out of Gildas (who lived about those times) to have ruled together,
and not successively one after another, since spoken unto, and personally
reprehended by him in his invectiue Epistle de excidio Britanniae. We add
that Gildas in the same place expressly mentions diverse Kings of the
Britons, and names Vortoporius the tyrant of Dimetia, containing a part only
of the present Wales. In the reign of Malgo, and year 585 after my author,
or according to others in the year 582 under their king Creodda, or Crida,
begun the kingdom of the Mercians, the last and greatest of the seven
kingdoms of the Saxons, the victorious English by this time ouer-spreading the
whole East and Southern part of the Island, and the Britons confined within a
narrow compass along the Irish, or Western Ocean, much weakened doubtless
since the decease of king Arthur through the evil, and licentious government
of the Princes here mentioned, called tyrants by Gildas, vehemently taxed by
him for their cruelty, injustice, lust, and other sins, and impieties.
Caretius, or Caereticus after others, king of the Britons, succeeding in the
year 586. Set upon after my Author by the joint Arms of the Saxon Princes,
he was forced out of the plain Country beyond the river Severne, amongst the
Welsh mountains. Since this time the Severne was the furthest bounds Eastwards
of the British Dominions. The Author of the Welsh History makes mention of
one Gurmund an arch-pirate, and Captain of the Norvegians, assisting the
Saxons in this their war against Caereticus. Geffrey of Munmouth more absurdly
would have this Gurmund to have been a king of Afrique. Neither people, or
names were at that time extant. Cadwan, succeeding according to Fabian after
many years civil dissension in the year 613. Cadwallin, succeeding in the
year 633. By Beda he is named Cedwallo; by Malmesouriensis Cedwalla.
Cadwallader, son to Cadwallin, succeeding in the year 676. Moved with a
superstitious zeal, he went unto Rome to receive the habit of Religion, where
shortly after he died in the year 689, and Papacy of Sergius, Bishop of that
sea, the last king of the Britons. The like voyage during the Papacy of
Sergius, and Bedae Eccles. Hist. Gentis Anglor l. 5. c. 7.
agreeing in every circumstance with this of Cadwallader, Venerable Bede, (to
whom more credit is to be given) relates of Ceadwalla, king of the
West Saxons. With no better certainly the Scholiast of the Welsh history,
attributes this pilgrimage unto Edwal, son to Cadwallader. The relations of
the British affairs since the Romans, are very uncertain, and many times
fabulous through the impudent liberty of Geffrey of Monmouth, followed by the
vulgar Historians, and the ordinary vanity of other their Writers, more zealous
to maintain and increase the honor of their Nation, then careful to preserve
the truth.

After this sort the kingdom of the Britons begun by Vertigern, being
extinguished, and the weak remainders hereof shut up within the mountains of
the West, the Island became divided amongst many different, and for the most
part stranger names, and inhabitants, the Britons, Picts, Scots, Saxons, Iutes,
and English, whose fortunes we are in the next place to relate.

The Britons scattered and divided asunder by the interveening of the Saxons,
became after this, better known by the names of the Cornish, Welsh, and
Cumbri, or Britons of Cumberland, of whom severally.

THE CORNISH BRITONS. Cornvvallenses. Malmesbur. l. 2. c. 6. Britanni
Cornu-galliae ib. l. 2. c. 1. Cornvvalli recentiorum.

THey v. Malmesburiensis de Gest. Anglorum l. 2. c. 1. and l. 2. c. 6. Flores
Historiarum per Mat. Westmonasteriensem. Guil. Camdeni Britanniam de Cornubia,
and de Britannis Cornvvallens.
were named Cornwealer by the ancient Saxons, by the Latin authors from hence
Cornwalli, and their country Cornwallia, and by later writers Cornubia.
Malmeshuriensis would have them thus called from their situation to
Cornu-Galliae, or Cournovaille in France. The more judicious fetch their name
from the word Corn, which in the British language, as almost in the Latin,
signifies a horn, or wedge, in regard of such a resemblance of their country,
inhabiting a long and narrow promontory, and from the word Walsh, signifying
strange, or foreign with the Saxons, as they accounted all the Britons. When
this name begun we find not, as neither what was the form of their
government. The British authors make mention of Dukes of Cornwall before
Cadwallader, but of whose truth we much doubt. Upon the conquest of the country
where now is Somersetshire by the VVest-Saxon kings, they became severed from
the rest of the Britons, divided afterward from the Welsh by the Sea of
Severne. They contained the present Cornwall, and the whole, or part of
Devonshire, or the country of the Danmonij of Ptolemy. By great Egbert, the
first Monarch of the English, in the year 809, after Matthew of Westminster
they were subdued, and made a Province of the Saxon Empire, ever since
continuing English, although to this day in part retaining the British
language. By King Athelstan, succeeding about the year 924, at that time
extending Eastward as far as Excester, (which City then they inhabited
together with the English) they were after Malmesburiensis removed more
VVestward, confined within the river Tamar, the modern bounds of Cornwall from
Devonshire, and the rest of England.

THE BRITONS OF CVMBERLAND. Cumbri Malmesbur. l. 2. c. 6.

THE Bedae Eccles. Hist. Gentis Anglorum l. 4. c. 26. Malmesbur. de Gestis
Angl. l. 2. c. 6. and 7. Flores Hist. per Mar. Westmonasteriensem page 366.
Georgij Buchanani Rerum Scoticar. Hist. l. 6. Gregorio Rege. Guil. Camdeni
Britanmam de Cumbria.
word Cumberland signifies the country of the Kimbri, or Cymbry, by which
appellation the ancient Britons (as now are the Welshmen) were called in their
native language. By the taking in of Caer-Legion or Chester, and the
neighboring Regions by the Northumbrian, and Mercian Saxons, they were
excluded from the union and commerce of the other Britons. They contained then
the parts, where now lie Cumberland, Westmorland, and Fournesse Fells in
Lancashire, with part of Scotland beyond Solway Frith, secured by their
mountains and wastes, wherewith those countries are on all sides environed.
Afterward notwithstanding we find them subject to the Saxon kings of
Northumberland. About the year 685, and in the reign of king Allfrid, they
shook off the yoke hereof; for of those only can we interpret the Britons,
mentioned by Beda, assuming liberty after the decease of Ecgfrid his
predecessor, overthrown, and slain in a great battle by the Picts. We do
not read notwithstanding of the name of Cumbri, or Cumbria, until the
Monarchy of the West Saxons, and the great wars hereof with the Danes. In
the Scottish Histories about the year 875, we hear of one Constantine, king
of the Britons of Cumbria, invading the Scottish Dominions, and slain in fight
by Gregorius, king of that Nation, succeeded unto by his brother Hebert. More
distinctly in Malmesburiensis we find mention of Eugenius, king of the Cumbri,
made subject to great Atheistan, Monarch of the English. Under Dummailus their
last king, in the year 946 after Matthew of Westminster, they were at length
totally subdued by Edmund, Monarch of the Saxons, aided by Lewelin king of
Dimetia, or Southwales, and given by Edmund unto Malcolme king of the Scots, to
be held under the sief of the kings of England, with condition to defend the
Northern frontire of the English against the Danes; and foreign invaders.
After this time Cumberland, and Westmoreland, or the country hereof for above
the space of one hundred years were possessed by the Scottish Nation, whose
Praefects (as the Scottish writers term them) or immediate Princes, were the
eldest sons, or next Heirs of Scotland. By king William surnamed the
Conqueror, they were taken from the Scots, and with the rest of England
subjected to the Normans. King Stephen engaged in a dangerous war against Ma^de
the Empress, restored Cumberland to the Scots to be held with the old
conditions, recovered again not long after by king Henry the second, his
successor, disliking this liberality of Stephen, and so great a diminution of
his kingdom, and incorporated with the Crown of England, in which union the
country has ever since continued, the name, language, and account of the
Britons thorough their English and Scottish subjection, being long since here
worn out and extinguished.

THE WELSH BRITONS. Wallenses Malmesburiensis lib. 2. c. 9. North-Wallenses,
and Aquilonares Britanni eiusdem l. 2. c. 1 and 6. Walli recentiorum. Cambri
Humphredi Lhuyd, and Wallicorum scriptorum.

THese vid. Iosephi Antiquit. lib. 1. cap. 7. Zonarae Annalium Tom. 1.
Malmesburiensis de Gestis Anglotu^. l. 2. c. 1. and 6. Flor. Historiarum per
Mat. Westmonaster. Henr. Hunting. don. Hist. lib. 4. Fragm. Brit. Descriptionis
per Humphredum Lhuyd. The description of Wales. by S. Hugh Price Knight. The
History of Cambria by Henry Lhoyd, and David Powell. The English Annalls.
in their native language call themselves C^mro, Cymero, and Cymbri, as their
Latihe Authors Cambri, and their country Cambria, which they would have to be
derived from Camber, one of the sons of Brutus, their progenitour, unto whose
share this part of the Island should fall in the devision hereof with his
brethren, a fable begun by Geffrey or Monmouth, and yet maintained by all
their Historians, and Commentatours, men otherwise learned, and skillful in
antiquities, but over zealous to prefer the glory of this their Trojan
descent. The name, (as before we have showed) was common to the Britons of
Cumberland, and to the rest of the nation, the words (Britons, and Britain)
not being British originally, but imposed by the Greeks, and forreiners. The
Etymology hereof, we cannot conjecture unless from Gomar, the son of
Iapheth, first peopling these Western parts of Europe; and from whom after
Josephus, and Zonaras the Gauls were aunciently called Gomarenses, and
Gomares; of which nation the first Britons were a colonie. Their name of Welsh,
or Walsh was Dutch, and of a later imposition, signifying strangers with the
Saxons, in which account the English still held the Britons. They were a more
great and strong remainder of the vanquished Britons, under their King
Careticus before mentioned, driven over the Severne by the victorious Saxons,
and sheltering themselves amongst the Silures, and Ordovices, and the
Mountains of the West. The name notwithstanding of the Welsh we find not
until afterward, and the year 708, at what time we first read in Henry of
Huntington of one Gerent, King Rex Wallensis Huntingdon. l. 4.
of the Welshmen, overcome in so attaile by Ina the VVest-Saxon some 19 years
after the decease of Cadwallader, and end of the British kingdom. The more
ancient bounds hereof were upon the South the sea of Severne, by which they
were divided from the Cornish Britons; upon the West, the Irish Ocean; and upon
the North, and East, the rivers Dee, and Severne from the Mercian Saxons. By
the reign of Offa King of the Mercians, succeeding in the year 758, all the
plain Country beyond the Severne (where now is Herefordshire, with parts of
Glocestershire, Shropshire, and Worcestershire) being subdued, and taken in by
the Saxons of Mercia, they were wholly shut up within their Mountains, for
their better distinction enclosed by Offa, and severed from his English, with a
wide, and deep ditch continued from Basingwerk upon the Dee betwixt Chester and
Ruthland in Flintshire along the hills unto the mouth of the river Wye near
Bristoll, whose tract in many places is yet seen, and named Claudh Offa in
their language, or Offa's ditch, afterward the common bound of both nations.
Others notwithstanding, as a more known limit, make the river Wye to be the
bounds of both. Their government after Cadwallader was under diverse Lords,
whom their Histories call Kings. Amongst these their Chronicle makes mention of
Edwall, Roderique, and Conan Tindaethwy descended from Cadwallader, and
following in a direct line, the progenitors of the succeeding Princes.
Afterward Roderique surnamed the Great, grandchild by his mother unto Conan
Tindaethwy attained to a Monarchy of the whole Wales, which about the year
870, he divided into three parts, or provinces, which limited and distinguished
with their meeres he left unto his three sons with the authority, and name of
Kings; Guinedh, or Northwales, bounded with the Dee, the Ocean, and the river
Dovi, the part of Anarawd his eldest son, Deheubarth, or South Wales lying
beyond the river Dovi; and Powys extended upon the East toward England, the
portions of Codelh, and Mervin his two younger sons. These likewise
subdeviding their estates amongst their numerous issue, as did continually
their successors after them (for such was then the bad custom of the Welsh,)
the country again became shared amongst many petty Lords, each son having a
part of his fathers inheritance, whereof some notwithstanding (the eldest son
most commonly, or who otherwise overtopped the rest in power, or favor with
the people,) still bore the titles of their general divisions, known in their
histories by the names of Kings of North, and South Wales, and Lords of Powys
continuing those styles until toward their subjection to the English. Amongst
these likewise one was still accounted sovereign, or chief Lord, to whom the
rest were to pay tribute, and to do service, which honor by the order of
Roderique the great, and of Howell Dha their lawgiuer, was due unto the
succession of Anarawd before mentioned, and the Kings of Northwales, the first
borne, or chief of the house of Cadwallader. These their sovereign lords are
named kings in the Welsh history unto Owen, surnamed Guyneth, succeeding about
the year 1137, who first is called Prince, which title is continued until the
time of Edward the first, King of England, and to L^evelyn, their last prince,
taken up since by the heirs of the house of England. By Egbert Interea
Egbertus, cum clementia, and mansuetudine subiectorum amorem redemiset prima
virium documenta in Britannos, qui eam insulae partem inhabitant, quae
Cornu-Galliae dicitur, dedit, quibus subiugatis, Aquilonares Britannos, qui a
praedictis maris brachio dividuntur, tributarios fecit. Malmesbutiensis de
Gestis Anglorum lib. 2. cap. 1.
the great Saxon Monarch, the nation is first made subject to the tribute, and
homage of the English, ruled nevertheless after their own laws, and free
from foreign yoke until the Kings of England of the Norman race. By Bernard
de Neumarck, a Norman gentleman, assisted by the Aubryes and other of the
French and English nobility in the reign of William Rufus king of England,
Brechiniauc, now Brecknockshire after a long and hard war is wrested
herefrom, and annexed to the English Empire. By Robert Fitz-hamon in the same
reign Morganwc, now Glomorganshire. By Arnulph of Mountgomerie, and Girald of
Winsore his successor in the war, in the reign of King Henry the first, the
Country of Dyvet, now Pembrokeshire; at what time a colonie of the Flemmings,
whose country had been drowned by the Ocean, by the permission hereof were
planted in Ros, a part of Dyvet, continuing here ever since their succession,
and English language, and occasioning the name of little England beyond Wales.
By the Earls of Chester, Warren, and Mortimer with others about the same times
the parts of Flint, and Denbigh, together with Caeretica, and the land of
Gwent, now Cardigan, and Monmouthshire are likewise taken in, and subdued. The
valor, or fortune of King Edward the first put an end to this languishing
estate of the Welsh; after some years war vanquishing, and killing Lhewelyn
ap Gruffith, their last prince, and annexing the whole Wales to the English,
subiecting the people to his English laws. King Henry the eight of later
years descended from the Welsh by the fathers side, incorporated the country
with the kingdom of England, investing the Welsh with all the rights, and
privileges of his English subjects, in which rank, and union they now
remain. The princes hereof from more certain and clear times follow with
that truth which their Histories will afford. Roderique surnamed the Great,
Monarch of the Welsh, son to Meruyn Vrych a nobleman of Wales, and Esylht
daughter to Conan Tindaethwy, son to Roderique Molwynoc, son to Edwal, son to
Cadwallader, the last king of the Britons. Parting Wales into the divisions
before mentioned, he allotted Guynedh, or Northwales unto Anarawde his eldest
son; and unto Cadelh, and Mervyn Deheubarth, or Southwales, and Powys, with
condition that the two younger brethren, and their successors should be
leigemen, and acknowledge the soveraignety of Anarawd, and the kings of
Northwales, confirmed afterward by the laws of Howel Dha. He deceased in the
year 876, slain by the English.

Anarawd prince of Guynedh, or Northwales, sovereign, or chief King of the
Welsh, eldest son to Roderique the Great. The order of the kings of
Southwales, and Lords of Powys (for thus were they called,) and of the many
inferior Lords or Princes in each devision (for (as before) every son after
the custom of the present Germans had a share of his fathers possessions) I
have omitted in regard of their number.

Edwal Voel, prince of Guynedh, and chief King of Wales, son to Anarawd,
succeeding about the year 913. In the reign hereof Athelstan King of England
forced a tribute upon the Welsh of 20 pounds of gold, and 300 of silver, with
200 head of cattaile, remitted afterward by King Edgar for a tribute of wolves.

Howel Dha Prince of Deheubarth, or Southwales, and Powys, sovereign King of
Wales, succeeding in the year 940, descended from Cadelh, brother to Anarawd,
the sons of Edwal Voel, the right heirs, excluded. He made laws for the
Welsh, observed by the nation until their subjection to the English.

James, and Ievaf, sons to King Edwal Voel, joint princes of Guynedh, and
chief Kings of Wales, succeeding after the decease of Howel Dha, Owen with
other the sons of Howel, Lords of Southwales, and Powys, contending with them
for the soueraignety, being overthrown by them in battle, and their elder
brother Meyric omitted, as unfit for government. Unto these princes Edgar the
King of England forgave the tribute of money imposed by Athelstan, exchanged
for a certain number of wolves, constantly brought in by the Welsh (after my
Author) until they were all destroyed.

The relation I leave to the censure of the reader.

These afterward falling out, Ievaf is taken prisoner, and James remains
sole king, overcome not long after, and chased out by Howel, son to Ievaf.

Howel, Prince of Guynedh, and chief King of Wales, son to Ievaf, succeeding
about the year 973, his father freed by him, and set at liberty, but not
restored to the sovereignty. He was slain fighting against the English without
any male issue.

Cadwalhon, Prince of Guynedh, and sovereign King of Wales, son to Ievaf, and
brother to Howel, succeeding about the year 984. He was slain in battle
with Meiryc his brother by Meredith, son to Owen king of Southwales.

Meredith, Prince of Guynedh, and chief king of Wales (having slain
Cadwalhon, and Meyric) son to Owen king of Deheubarth, or South Wales. After
the decease of his father, he likewise got seized of Southwales. He afterward
lost Guynedh, or Northwales unto Edwal, son to Meyric, the eldest son of Edwal
Voel, the right heir, in his absence set up by the inhabitants.

Edwal, prince of Guynedh, and chief King of Wales, son to Meyric, eldest son
to Edwal Voel, succeeding in the year 992. He was slain in fight by the
Danes, leaving behind him a young son, named James. In the year 998 died also
Meredith aforesaid, King of Southwales, leaving one only daughter, named
Angharat, married to Llewelin ap Sitsylht. By means hereof for want of heirs,
or fit to goyerne, Conan ap Howel, and Aedan ap Blegored, contended for the
government, when coming to battle Conan is slain, and Aedan usurps the
kingdom.

Aedan ap Blegored, prince of Guynedh, and sovereign king of Wales, succeeding
in the year 1003. He was slain with his four sons in the year 1015 by
Llewelin ap Sitsylht, husband to Angharad.

Llewelin ap Sitsylht descended from king Anarawd, and Angharad his wife,
daughter to Meredith, king of Southwales, after the decease of Aedan the
usurper sovereign kings of Wales. He was slain in the year 1021 by Howel,
and Meredith, sons to Edwin, son to Eneon, brother to king Meredith, leaving a
son named Gruffith ap Llewelin. After the death of Llewelin ap Sitsylht, James
son to King Edwal, took upon him the government of Northwales, as right heir.

James the second, prince of Guynedh, and chief king of Wales, son to king
Edwal. He was overthrown, and slain in the year 1037 by Gruffith son to
Llewelin, and Angharad.

Gruffith prince of Guynedh, and chief king of Wales, son to Llewelin ap
Sitsylht, and Angharad. He also subdued Southwales, slain by treason.

Blethyn, and Rywalhon, sons to Angharad aforesaid, and Conwyn ap Gueristan her
second husband, princes of Guynedh, and chief kings of Wales after the decease
of king Gruffith. Rywalhon being slain in the year 1068 in a battle fought
betwixt these, and Meredith, and Idel sons to king Gruffith, Blethyn by this
means remains sole King of Northwales. He was slain in the year 1073 by
the treason of Rees ap Owen ap Edwyn.

Trahern ap Caradoc prince of Guynedh, or Northwales, and chief king of Wales,
cosen german to king Blethyn. He was slain in battle by Gruffith son to
Conan, son to king James the second.

Gruffith ap Conan, prince of Northwales, and chief king of Wales. In the
year 1079 after my Author, and the reigns of Gruffith ap Conan, and Rhees ap
Theodor king of Southwales William the Conqueror king of England took the
homages of the Welsh princes. Not long after under William Rufus by the good
leave hereof Morganwc Brechiniauc, and the Country where now is Cardiganshire
parts of Deheubarth, or Southwales, with some part of Northwales neighboring
unto Chester are subdued by Robert Fitzhamon, Bernard de Neumarck, and other
valiant Norman adventurers, and added to the English government. In regard
hereof Matthew Paris makes William Rufus the Conqueror of Wales. Gruffith ap
Conan in a full age deceased about the year 1137, the last whom the Welsh
history names king of Wales.

THE PRINCIPALITY OF WALES.
Owen Guyneth prince of Guynedh, and Wales, eldest son to king Gruffith ap
Conan succeeding about the year 1137. At this time Rhees ap Gruffith descended
from Howel Dha was chief Lord of Southwales, named King by the English, by the
Welsh the Lord Rhees.

David prince of Guynedh, and Wales, younger son to Owen surnamed Guyneth,
succeeding in the year 1169; his elder brother Iorwerth in regard of some
deformity excluded. He was deposed in the year 1194 by Llewelin the son of
Iorwerth.

Llewelin prince of Guynedh, and Wales, son to Iorwerth, eldest son to Owen
Guyneth. He took the oaths, and acknowledgements of the many inferior Welsh
princes, which duty for some years had been omitted through their civil
dissentions, and other defects.

David prince of Guynedh, and Wales, succeeding in the year 1240, son to
Lhewelin ap Iorwerth. He did homage at Gloucester for the principality of Wales
to Henry the third King of England. He deceased without issue.

Lhewelin prince of Guynedh, and Wales, son to Gruffith, son to prince Lhewelyn
ap Iorwerth, the last prince of Wales of the British offspring, and race of
Cadwallader. By this time through the daily encroachings of the English, in a
manner the part only of Guynedh, or Northwales, containing now Merionith, and
Caernarvonshire, with Anglesey were left unto the Welsh princes, better
defended by their inaccessable mountains, and bogs. Refusing, or rather
deferring the accustomed homage due from the Welsh, he was pursued with hot war
by king Edward the first, and forced to a composition, amongst other hard
conditions concluding after his decease a surrendry to the English of the
principality of Wales, and the parts he now enjoyed. Not long after (as it
seems) repenting himself of his act, and the more incensed through the
instigation of his brother David (excluded from all hope of succession by this
agreement) pretending the English tyranny, and injustice, he again fatally
took arms; the success whereof was his own death, happening shortly after,
slain in the prosecution of the war, nere the town of Buelth, (as the
Welshmen say) betrayed, the execution of David his brother by the hand of
justice, the final abolition of the Welsh government, and the conquest of the
whole country by the English. The Welsh line extinguished, the king of England
invested with this title and honor their eldest sons, or who were next to
succeed them in the English Monarchy. Their order, and names we have inserted
unto our times. Edward of Caernarvon, son to Edward the first, prince of Wales,
and afterward king of England by the name of Edward the second. Edward of
VVinsore, son of Edward the second, king of England by the name of Edward the
third. Edward surnamed the black prince, eldest son to Edward the third.
Richard of Bourdeaux, son to Edward the black prince, king of England by the
name of Richard the second. Henry of Monmouth, son to Henry the fourth, king of
England by the name of Henry the fifth. His son Henry the sixth is not
accounted amongst the princes of Wales, his father deceasing only some few
months after his birth. Edward son to Henry the sixth, slain by the faction of
York after the battaill at Tewkesbury. Edward son to Edward the fourth, king
of England by the name of Edward the fifth. Edward, son to Richard the third.
Arthur, eldest son to Henry the seventh. Henry younger son to Henry the
seventh, king of England by the name of Henry the eight. Edward, son to Henry
the eight, king of England by the name of Edward the sixth. Henry eldest son to
James king of great Britain of happy memory. Charles, son to King James, and
brother to prince Henry, now King of great Britain, whom God long preserve..

THE PICT'S. Picti Claudiani de. 4. Consulatu Honorij Panegyris, et Am.
Marcellini Hist. l 20. etc.

THe vid. Eumenij Panegeticum Constantino. Am. Marcellini Hist. lib. 20. 26,
and 27. Claudiani l. de Bello Getico. Eiusdem* Panegyrin de 4. Consulatu
Honorij Augusti. Eiusdem lib. 2. de laudibus Stiliconis. Herodiani lib. 3.
Hist. Severo Imperatore. Gildae Epistolam de Excidio, and Conquestu Britanniae.
Bedae Ecclesiasticae Hist. Gentis Anglorum. lib. 1. c. 1. and 5. etc. Isidori
Hispalensis Episcopi Originum l. 9 Pomponij Loeti To. Hist. Compendium
Imperatore Valentini^no primo. Malmesburiensem de Gestis Regum Anglorum. Henr.
Huntingd. Hist. lib. 8. Hectoris Boethij Histor. Scotorum. Georgij Buchanani
Rerum Scoticarum Hist. Camdeni Britanniam (de Pictis.
name hereof signifies painted in the Latin tongue, which was first given
unto them by the Romans, in regard of their paintings. That the Picts were
accustomed to paint themselves, the authorities of Claudian Quae Scoto dat
fraena truci, ferroque notatas Perlegit exangues, Picto moriente, figura^.
Claudia. de Bello Getico.
, and Scoti (intellige Pictos) nomen habent a picto corpore, eo quod aculeis
ferr^is cum atramento variarum figurarum stigmate annotentur. Isidori Hispal.
Episc. Orig. lib. 9.
Isidore make manifest. Pompoinus Laetus, Buchanan, and others, would have them
to have been a Colonie of the opposite, and neighboring Germans. But which
nation we read not in Tacitus or in any classique author ever to have been
painted. Beda of much better authority fetches their pedigree further of from
the Scythians, who should arrive in the Northern parts of the Island in the
year 78 after Christ, yet which he does not constantly affirm, but delivers
only as received by tradition. The error hereof, and of the like foreign
derivations, the general consent of ancient Geographers, and Historians does
plainly evince, placing here the Caledonii, and other names of the Britons,
but not mentioning the Picts until two hundred years afterward. The most
probable assertion is that they were no other then the native Britons,
inhabiting the wild parts of Caledonia, who after Neque vestis vsum (Britanni)
cognorunt, sed ventrem, atque cervicem ferro incingunt, ornamentum id esse, ac
diuitiarum argumentum existimantes, perinde vt aurum caeteri Barbari. Quin ipsa
notant corpora pictura varia, and omnifariam formis animalium. Quocirca ne
induuntus quid em, vide licet picturamcorporis ne adopeirunt. Herodian. lib. 3.
Severo Imperatore. v. etiam Caesaris Com. Bell. Gal. lib. 5. and Plinij Not.
Histor. lib. 33. c. 1. etc.
Herodian, using to paint their bodies with sundry shapes of birds and beasts,
and going naked to have their braverie seen, became at length thus named by
the Romans from such their strange habit, and for their better distinction
from the civil Britons of the Province wearing clothes, and attired after the
Roman manner. Some reasons inducing hereunto might be their like fashions, and
manner of living with the more ancient Britons, and the many British words yet
left in the towns Aber-neith, Aber-den. Aberdore. Aber-Lotneth. etc.
, and parts of Scotland, which they sometimes inhabited, arguing as the same
language, so the same nation of both. We add the great silence of the Romans,
who neighboring close unto them, and possessing the Southern part of the
Island long before their supposed arrival by Beda, yet make no mention of their
descent hither from foreign parts. We add likewise the testimony of Eumenius
in his Panegyrique unto the Emperor Constantine the Great, who makes the
Caledonij to be a part of the Picts, intimating hereby as the Picts to be
Britons (for such were the Caledonij,) so this not so much then to have been
the name of a people, as some agnomination, or by-name given to all the wild,
and barbarous Britons in regard of their disfiguring, or painting. They are
first mentioned by Eumenius in his Panegyrique aforsaid, living in the time of
Constantine the great. The part of Britain they then possessed, was the whole
Northern part hereof not yet conquered, or brought into a Province by the
Romans; for by this name all the barbarous Britons begun now to be called,
neither were the Irish Scots at this time arrived, and had settled here their
habitation. The Western part of Caledonia being overwhelmed by a deluge of the
Scots, (which happened about the reign of the Emperor Honorius) they withdrew
wholly into the Eastern part hereof bordering upon the German Ocean, bounding
upon the South with the Bodotria, now Edenborough Frith; (for thus far
Northwards extended the Roman, or civil Britons, as did afterward the Saxons
of Northumberland;) upon the West, with the Scots; and upon the East, and
North, with the German, and Northern Oceans. The kingdom of the Northumbrians
after their last Ethelred, and the year 794 becoming extinct, or miserably
languishing through a 33 years civil dissension, and the invasion of the
Danes, by the advantage hereof they enlarged their bounds Southwards as far
as the river Tweed gotten from the English. The contained a little before their
final overthrow by the Scots the Countries now of Tividale, Tweedale, Merch,
Lauden, Fife, Cuningham, Merne, Anguish, Straith-ern, and Mar with others, or
the whole Eastern part of the present Scotland from the Tweede Northwards. By
the Scots under their King Kenneth after a fierce, and bloody war about the
year 830, they were totally subdued, and their name, and memory quite rooted
out, their country having been since added to the account, and name of
Scotland. Their language most probably was the British. Beda makes it distinct
herefrom, and one of the four general of the Island: But whom the more
judicious interpret not of languages, but of Dialects. That the Dialect, and
many words hereof should in Beda his time be much different from those of the
Cornish, or Welsh Britons, their long disunion through the coming betwixt of
the Northumbrian Saxons, and the ancient subjection, and commerce of the other
with the Romans must necessarily enforce. Their government was under Kings.
Their order, and succession we find not. Their last was Druskenus slain with
the extirpation of the whole Nation by Kenneth, and the Scots.

THE SCOTS. Scoti Am. Marcellini Hist. lib. 20. and Claudian. de 4 Consulatu
Honorij Paneg. etc.

THE v. Am. Marcellini Hist. lib. 20, 26. and 27. Imperat. Constantio. 2. and
Valentimano primo. D. Hieronymum contra Pelagianos ad Ctesiphontem. Pauli
Orosij Hist. lib. 1. c. 1. Latini Pacati Drepani Panegyricum Theodosio Augusto.
Claudian l. de Bello Getico. Eiusdem de 4. Consulatu Honorij Panegyrin. Eiusdem
de laudibus Stiliconis lib. 2. Ep. Gildae de Excidio, and Conqu. Britanniae.
Bedae Eccl. Hist. Gentis Anglorum. l. 1. c. 1. 9. 11. 12. 13. 14. 34. etc.
Eginhartum de Vita, and Rebus Gestis Caroli Magni. Isidori Hispal. Episcopi
Originum l. 14. Giraldi Cambrensis Topograph. Hiberniae Distinct. 3. c. 7.
Flores. Histor. per Mat. Westmonast. p. 366 Hectoris Boethij Histor. Scotorum.
Georgij Buchanani Rerum Scoticarum Histor. Guil. Camdeni Britanniam (de Scotis.
The English Annalls.
Scots after Giraldus Cambrensis, were a Colony of the neighboring Irish.
Orosius living in the reign of the Emperor Honorius, calls the many people
in his time inhabiting Ireland by the general name of the Scots. The like does
Beda in the first book of his Ecclesiastical story of the English, and first
Chapter. Eginhartus in his life of the Emperor Charles the Great, names
Ireland, an Island of the Scots. Isidore more plainly makes Ireland, and
Scotland only to be two different names of one, and the same Island, distinct
from Britain. Gildas more to our purpose terms the Scots then inhabiting
Britain, and infesting the Natives with their daily forragings Irish
grassatores, or free-booters. That the Scots originally were Irish, besides
these authorities the present language, habit, and barbarous manners of the
High-landers, or Western Scots, agreeing with the present Irish, do plainly
demonstrate. The Scots in Ireland, Ptolemy and the ancient Geographers mention
not. The name doubtless was new, and affected, upon some accident (which we
know not) given unto, or taken up by the Irish toward the waine of the Roman
Empire, in that manner, as were about the same times those of the Picts,
Almans, French, and Sclaues, with others by the Britons, Germans, and
Sarmatians, leaving their former old names, and uniting into these common.
Concerning the Etymology hereof, learned Camden after much search professes
himself to be ignorant. Porphyrius is the first of ancient Authors, in whom
we find the Scots mentioned, living in the time of the Emperor Aurelian, and
as he is cited upon an other occasion by S. Hierome, in his Tract against the
Pelagians ad Ctesiphontem. In ancient and approved Histories we first read of
them with the Picts (with whom they are still joined) in the reigns of the
Emperors Constantius the second, Honorius, and the first, and third
Valentinians. Their mention after this is common unto this present. The time of
their first plantation in Britain is uncertain. In the 20, 26, and 27 books
of Ammianus Marcellinus, we hear of them ransacking, and spoiling the Roman
Province, but from what parts my Author sets not down, whether from
Caledonia, and the Northern parts of Britain, or rather from Ireland, which
is more probable. Claudian in his second book de laudibus Stiliconis relates
of them attempting upon the Continent hereof from Ireland, and stopped, and
driven home by Stilico where also he accompteth them amongst the neighboring
Nations infesting Britain; which makes it almost manifest, that in the
beginning of the reign of Honorius, under whom Stilico then served, they had
not yet arrived here, or set firm footing. Shortly afterward notwithstanding,
and before the intrusion of the Saxons, we find them in Beda with the Picts
possessing the Northern part of Britain, invading from hence the Province,
and (the Britons being unable to withstand them) twice overcome, and beaten off
by fresh Roman supplies sent from Honorius, and Valentinian the third. From
these proofs we strongly conjecture their first descent hither, and fixed
dwelling to have happened toward the latter end of the reign of the Emperor
Honorius. The part here they first took up was the Western moity of
Caledonia, formerly inhabited by the Picts, bounding upon the East with this
Nation, and upon the South with the Roman Province, from the which they were
divided by the Glota, now the Frith of Dunbriton, which they held without any
sensible addition, till after the time of Beda. After the year 794, and the
decease of King Ethelred before mentioned, through the advantage of a long
civil dissension amongst the Saxons of Northumberland, and of the Danish wars
which together happened, they got seized of the parts lying betwixt the Friths of
Solway, and Dunbriton, belonging aunciently to the Northumbrian kingdom of
Bernicia. They contained by that time the present Countries of Carict,
Galloway, Cantire, Argile, Braid-Albin, Lorn, and Rosse, with others, or the
whole Western part of the present Scotland, from Solway Frith coasting
Northwards along the Irish Ocean. King Kenneth the second about the year 830
(the Picts being subdued) enlarged the Dominion hereof, and the name, and
account of Scotland Eastward unto the German Ocean, extended by this means
over the whole Northern part of the Island, and severed from England by the
Frith of Solway, and the River Tweede, the more certain bounds ever after
betwixt the two kingdoms. Malcolme the first about the year 946 added
Cumberland, and Westmoreland, parts of England, to the Dominion of the Scottish
Kings by the gift of Edmund King of England, to be held under the fief of the
English Monarchs, recovered by Henry the second, and incorporated with the
English Crown. Their government was Monarchical, yet where more aunciently,
not always the next of blood, but the ripest in years, and the most fit to
rule of the kingly Race, succeeded. Kenneth the third, succeeding about the
year 976, by the consent of the States made the Kingdom first haereditary,
and to descend unto the next ofkin, confirmed by his son Malcolme the second,
and continued unto our times.

Their first King (after the Scottish Historians) was Fergusius, the son of
Ferchard, an Irish Scot, chosen by the Nation shortly after their arrival in
Britain, and about the year 330 before Christ's Incarnation, succeeded unto by
Ferithari^. Mainus. Dornadilla. Nothatus. Reutherus. Reutha. Thereus. Iosina,
Finnanus. Durstus. Evenus the first. Gillus. Evenus the second. Ederus. Evenus
the third. Metellanus. Caratacus. Corbredus. Dardannus. Corbredus the second.
Luctacus. Mogaldus. Conarus. Ethodius. Satrael. Donaldus the first. Ethodius
the second. Athirco. Nathalocus. Findochus. Donaldus the second. Donaldus the
third. Crathilinthus. Fincormachus. Romachus. Angusianus. Fethelmachus. and
Eugenius slain with the whole strength and flower of the Nation by the joint
arms of the Picts and Romans under Maximus, Lieftenant of the Province for the
Emperor Gratian, after whom (the remainder of the vanquished Scots being
banished their Country by an edict of the Romans) should follow a vacancie, or
Interregnum of 27 years. The untruth, and absurdity of this whole narration,
the consent of ancient, and approved Authors does sufficiently manifest,
placing here the Novantae, Caledonij, and other names of the Britons without
mentioning the Scots, until the reign of the Emperor Honorius. We add that
the Roman Historians (as neither the more ancient British, or English) relate
not any such conquest of the Scots, or Northern part of Britain under
Gratian, and Maximus, of which more great, and remarkable victory they would
not doubtless have been silent, if any such had been.

Their succession from more certain, and clear times follow. Fergusius, named
by the Scottish Historians Fergusius the second, (whom they suppose to be the
son of Erthus, son to Echadius, or Ethodius, brother to Eugenius, slain in
battle by Maximus, and the Romans) in the year 404, and reign of the
Emperor Honorius returning from exile, and through the aid and confederacy of
the Picts, and the absence of the Roman Legions, drawn out into the Continent
against the barbarous Nations by Honorius, with the rest of the banished Scots,
recovering their lost country, created King in the year aforesaid some 27
years after the decease of Eugenius. The more impartial and judicious make
this Prince to be the first king of the Scots of Britain. That the Scots were
possessed of a part of Britain in the reign of Honorius we have before
proved. The manner, we leave unto the credit of our Scottish Relaters. Beda
otherwise calls the King, or Captain of the Scots, under whom they first
inhabited this Island, by the name of Reuda. The time he sets not down.
Eugenius eldest son to Fergusius. The kingdom of the Scots contained at this
time the part of present Scotland extended along the Western Ocean from the
Frith of Dunbriton Northwards. He deceased in the year 449, slain in battle
against Hengist, and the Saxons. Dongaldus brother to Eugenius. Constantinus
brother to Dongaldus, and Eugenius. Congallus, son to Dongaldus. Goranus,
brother to Congallus. Eugenius the second, son to Congallus. Congallus the
second, brother to Eugenius the second. Kinnatellus, brother to Engenius, and
Congallus the second. Aidanus, son to Goranus in the time of S. Columbanus, and
of Austine the Monk, the Apostle of the English. He deceased in the year 604.
Kennethus the first. Eugenius the third, son to Aidanus. Ferchardus the first,
son to Eugenius the third, succeeding in the year 622. Donaldus, brother to
Ferchardus the first. Ferchardus the second, son to Ferchardus the first.
Maldvinus, son to Donaldus. Eugenius the fourth, son to Donaldus, and brother
to Maldvinus. Eugenius the fifth, son to Ferchardus the second. Amberkelethus,
son to Findanus, son to Eugenius the fourth. Eugenius the sixth, brother to
Amberkelethus. Mordacus, son to Amberkelethus. Etfinus, son to Eugenius the
sixth, succeeding in the year 730. Eugenius the seventh, son to Mordacus.
Fergusius the second, son to Etfinus Solvathius, son to Eugenius the seventh.
Achaius, son to Etfinus, he deceased in the year 809, Charles the great then
commanding over the French Empire. Under these two Princes after my Authors,
begun first the ancient league betwixt the French, and Scottish Nations.
Congallus the third, cosen German to Achaius. Dongallus, son to Solvathius.
Alpinus, son to Achaius. His mother was sister unto Hungus king of the Picts,
in whose right (the heirs of Hungus being deceased) he made claim to the
Pictish kingdom, the occasion of a long, and bloody war betwixt the two
nations, the issue whereof was the death of Alpinus, overcome in battaill, and
slain by the Picts, and the final overthrow, and extirpation of the Picts not
long after by king Kenneth, and the Scots. Scotland at this time contained
only the Western moity of the present (extending from Solway Frith
Northwards) together with the Redshanks, or Western Islands, having the Picts
upon the East; upon the South, the Britons of Cumberland; and upon the North,
and West, the Ocean from Ireland. Kennethus the second, son to Alpinus. He
utterly subdued, and drove out the Picts, and enlarged the Scottish Empire over
the whole North part of the Island, divided from the Britons, and English by
Solway Frith, and the river Tweede. He deceased in the year 854. Donaldus the
second, brother to Kennethus the second. Constantinus the second, son to
Kennethus the second. He was slain in fight against the Danes in the year
874. Ethus, brother to Constantine, and son to Kenneth. Gregorius, son to
Dongallus. Donaldus the third, son to Constantine the second. Milcolumbus the
first, son to Donaldus. He added to the Scottish dominions the Countries of
Westmoreland, and Cumberland (part sometimes of Northumberland) given unto him,
and his Successors by Edmund Monarch of the West Saxons, to be held under the
right, and homage of the English. Indulfus, slain against the Danes. Duffus,
son to Milcolumbus the first. Culenus, son to Indulfus. Kennethus the
third, brother to Duffus. By the consent of the states assembled in Parliament
he made the kingdom haereditary, or to descend unto the next ofkin to the
deceased, which until that time had uncertainly wandered amonst the princes of
the royal blood, the uncles most commonly being preferred before the nephews,
and the elder in years before those who were younger. He was slain by the
malice and treason of Fenella, a woman, in the year 994. Constantinus the
third, son to Culenus, chosen king by his faction against the law of Kenneth
the third, opposed by Milcolumbus, son to Kenneth. He was slain in fight by
Kenneth, base brother to Milcolumbus, Grimus, son, or nephew to King Duffus,
elected against Milcolumbus, and the law of Kenneth, overthrown in battaill,
and slain by Milcolumbus. Milcolumbus the second, son to Kenneth the third,
king by right of conquest, and the law of Kenneth. He confirmed by act of
Parliament the Law touching the succession, made by his father. After this
Prince the eldest sons of the Kings, or the next of their blood ordinarily
succeeded in the Scottish kingdom. He deceased without male issue, slain by
treason. Duncanus, son to Crinus, chief Thane of the Western Islands, and
Beatresse, eldest daughter to Milcolumbus the second. He was slain by the
treason of Macbethus. Macbethus, son to the Thane of Anguis, and Doaca, younger
daughter to King Milcolumbus the second, after seventeene years tyranny, and
usurpation overcome, and slain by Milcolumbus son to Duncanus. Milcolumbus the
third, son to Duncanus, succeeding in the year 1057. He married unto Margaret
eldest daughter to Edward surnamed the Outlaw, eldest son to Edmund Ironside
King of England, by which means the right of the house of the Saxons (Edgar
Atheling, the only son of Edward, deceasing unmarried, and without issue)
descended upon the Kings of Scotland, the posterity hereof, and Margaret,
continued herein unto our times, and the union of the two kingdoms in James
our late Sovereign of happy memory. He first (as is thought) brought into
Scotland the titles of Earls, and Barons, with others, borrowed from the
neighboring English, with whom under Edward the Confessor during the
usurpation of Macbeth he had for a long time remained. He was slain at the
taking of Anwick Castle in Northumberland after some years war maintained
against William the Conqueror, and the Normans, occasioned through his
protection, and aid of the banished English. Donaldus the fourth, son to
Duncanus, and younger brother to Milcolumbus the third, usurping the kingdom by
the aid of Magnus king of Norwey. He was driven out by Duncanus, natural son
to Milcolumbus the third. Duncanus the second, natural son to Milcolumbus the
third, slain by the treason of Macpendirus Earl of Merne corrupted by
Donaldus the fourth, living then exiled amongst the Western Islands. He thus
murdered, Donardus the fourth resumed the kingdom, vanquished* and taken
prisoner not long after by Edgar, the right heir, son to Milcolumbus the
third, and Margaret, aided by his uncle Edgar, and the English. Edgar son to
Milcolumbus the third, and Margaret, daughter to Edward, surnamed the Outlaw.
His sister Maude was married unto Henry the first, king of England, youngest
son to the Conqueror, uniting hereby the royal blood of the Saxons with that
of the Normans. He deceased without issue. Alexander the first, son to
Milcolumbus, and Margaret, and brother to Edgar. He also deceased sans issue.
David the first brother to Edgar, and Alexander, and son to Milcolumbus, and
Margaret, succeeding in the year 1124. He annexed to the Crown of Scotland
the Earledomes of Northumberland, and Huntingdon, acruing through his marriage
with Maude, daughter to Earl Waldeofus. He recovered likewise Cumberland and
Westmoreland, from the English, taken from his predecessors by William the
Conqueror; restored unto him by the liberality of king Stephen. Milcolumbus
the fourth, son to Henry prince of Scotland, son to king David. Unable to
withstand the ambition and greater power hereof, he quitted Northumberland,
Westmoreland and Cumberland unto Henry the second, king of England, retaining
only the Earldom of Huntingdon of all his English possessions, left for a
time unto his successors. He deceased without issue unmarried. William
brother to Malcolme the fourth. Taken prisoner at the battaill of Anwijck to
procure his liberty, and peace with the English he did homage, and swear
fealty unto king Henry the second for the Crown of Scotland. Alexander the
second, son to William. Alexander the third son to Alexander the second. He
deceased in the year 1285 without heirs of his body, or not long surviving.
The whole issue hereof, and of king Alexander the second, and William
extinguished, their contended for the soveraignety* John Balliol, Lord of
Galloway, son to John Balliol, and Dornagilla, daughter to Alan Lord of
Galloway, and Margaret eldest daughter to David Earl of Huntingdon, brother to
king William, and great uncle to Alexander the third; and Robert Bruce Lord of
Annandale, son to Robert Bruce, and Isabell, second daughter to David Earl of
Huntingdon and sister to Margaret, both parties challenging a chiefer right,
and interest before the other, Balliol, as descended from the elder sister; and
Bruce as nearer by one degree to Earl David. The Scots not able to determine
the controversy, or without arms, Edward the first king of England is chosen
vmpire. After 6 years vacancy the right is adjudged on the behalf of Balliol
by king Edward with condition of his acknowledgment, and homage to the English
Crown. John Balliol Lord of Galloway, king of Scotland by the arbitration of
king Edward the first. He did homage to king Edward at the town of Newcastle
upon Tine according to the agreement made betwixt them. Discontenting his
subjects through this his English subjection to regaine their lost loves, or
(after my Scottish Authors) provoked with some disgrace and injuries received
from Edward, he renounced not long after his homage and fealty sworn to the
English, warred upon by Edward, and after some overthrows, unable to withstand
so valiant and great a Monarcke, forced to resign into the hands hereof the
whole right, and interest he had, or might claim to the Crown of Scotland,
imprisoned afterward in the tower of London, and set at liberty by the
mediation of Pope Boniface the eight, and sent over to his inheritance, and
possessions in France, where in a private fortune he dyed. After this, king
Edward the first of England made a full conquest of the Scots, who^ he kept
under hard subjection during his whole reign, although not without sundry
defections, and rebellions of this fierce and stirring nation, moved by William
Walleys, Robert Bruce, and others, most commonly to their loss. He deceasing,
through their great victory at Banocks-bourne near Striueling obtained
against Edward the second, and the English, and the tumults, and disorders
happening in England during the reign of this weak, and unfortunate prince, the
Scots again recover their liberty, and Robet Bruce formerly crowned in the
reign of Edward the first, is confirmed king. Robert the first, son to Robert
Bruce lord of Anandale, competitour of the kingdom with John Balliol, king of
Scotland by right of war, his birth, and the voluntary cession of Balliol,
the restorer of the Scottish name, and liberty, after a victorious, and happy
reign deceasing in the year 1329. David the second king of Scotland, son to
Robert the first. In the minority hereof Edward Balliol son to John Balliol
invadeth, and by the help of the English obtayneth the Scottish Crown, to be
held by him under the homage, and protection of Edward the third king of
England, opposed by the faction of David. Balliol, and his Enhlish after long
misery, and war being thrust out, king David recovereth his almost lost
kindgome, taken prisoner shortly after at the battaill of Nevills cross near
Durham, invading England in favor of his ancient friends the French,
distressed through the many victories of Edward the third, and the English. He
deceased without issue in the year 1370, the second, and last king of
Scotland, of the house, and name of Bruce Robert the second, the first of the
family, and name of the Stewarts, descended from Walter, created Stewart of
Scotland by Malcolme the third (which name of office grew afterward a surname
to his house and offspring) king of Scotland in right from his mother, eldest
daughter to Robert the first, and sister to David the second. Since this time
the name, and house of Stewarts have still worn the regal Crown of the
Scottish dominions. John the second, called Robert after his inauguration (the
name of John (as ominous) cast off by a decree of the states, unlucky to the
Scottish, French, and English Monarchs) son to Robert the second. James the
first, son to John, or Robert the third, murdered in his bed at Perth by
Walter Earl of Athol. James the second, son to James the first, slain at
the siege of the Castle of Rosburg against the English. James the third, son to
James the second, slain in battaill against his seditious, and rebellious
subjects near the town of Sterling. James the fourth, son to James the third.
He married the Lady Margaret, eldest daughter to Henry the seventh king of
England. He was slain at the field of Floddon by Thomas Howard, Earl of
Surrey, and the English. James the fifth, son to James the fourth, and Margaret
daughter to king Henry the seventh. He deceased without male issue. Mary
daughter to James the fifth. James of happy memory, son to Henry Stewart Lord
Darly, and Mary Queen of Scotland. The famous, and victorious Queen Elizabeth
in the year 1602 deceasing unmarried, the last descended from the male issue
of Henry the seventh, and Elizabeth, he succeeded in the English dominions,
descended from Lady Margaret aforesaid, the right, and undoubted heir of the
three princely houses of the Saxon, Scottish, and Norman Kings, and the first
sole Monarke of Great Britain, Ireland, and the neighboring Islands. Charles
king of great Britain, France, and Ireland, son to James of happy memory, whom
God long preserve.

THE ENGLISH. Angli. Taciti lib. de Moribus Germanorum, Bedae, and recentiorum.
Suevi Angili Ptolem. Geog: l. 2. c. 11.

THey v Tacitum de Moribus Germanorum; Ptolem, Geogr. l. 2. c. 11. Bedae
Ecclesiasticae Histor. Gent. Anglorum. lib. 1. c. 15. Ethelvverdi Chron. lib.
1. Guilielmi Ca^deni Britanniam de Anglo-Saxonibus.
were a German people, mentioned by Tacitus, and Ptolemy, containing part of
the great, and populous nation of the Suevi. Ptolemy places them in this time
about the middle of that vast Interiores autem atque Mediterrancae gentes
maxim sunt Angili Sueui, qui magis Orient^les sunt, quam Longobardi, protensi
ad Septentrionem vsque ad medium Albis fluvij. Ptolem. Geog. lib. 2. c. 11.
continent, and the river Albis, with which river they were bounded upon the
North, having toward the West the people of the Longobards. They inhabited
then most probably according to his description the parts, where now lie the
Bishopric of Hall, and the Higher Saxony about Wittenberg. Their
interpretations seem absurd, who in regard of the affinity of the names would
have them seated about Engerne in Westphalen, or Angloen in Pomerania, places
far distant from the river Elb, or the heart of Germany. Afterward toward
the waine of the Roman Empire they flitted to the German Ocean more Westwards.
Beda before their invasion of this Island placed them there betwixt the Iutes,
lying upon the North of them, and the Saxons upon the South. Ethelwerd Porro
Anglia vetus sita est^nter Saxones, and Giotas, habens oppidum capitale, quod
sermon Saxoni^o nun^upatur Sl^svvic, secundum vero Danos Haithby. Ethelvverdi
Chapter lib. 1.
(an ancient Author living not long after Beda) more distinctly makes
Sleswiick then to be their chief city, situated in the Cimbrian Chersonese
betwixt the two nations now mentioned. The name of Angelen in the present
Dukedom of Schleswiick together with these authorities manifestly prove that
to have been their country in Dutchland immediately before their English
arrival.

THE IVTES. Gutae Ptol. Geogra. lib. 2. c. 11. Giotae Ethelvverdi Chr. lib. 1.
Iutae. Malmesburien. de Gestis Reg. Anglorum l. 1. c. 1. etc. Vitae Bedae
Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. c. 15.

THe Ptol. Geogr. lib 2. c. 11. Bedae Ecclesiasticae Hist. Gent. Anglorum. l.
1. cap. 15. Ethelvverdi Chron. lib 1.
Iutes doubtless were the Gutae of Ptolemy, inhabiting Meridionalia (Scandiae
tenent) Gutae, and Dauciones. Ptolem. Geog. lib. 2. c. 11.
the Southern part of Scandia, which he mistaketh to be an Island, and
attributes unto Germany. In the declining age of the Western Empire (the
exact time we find not) sailing over the Bay Codanus, or the Straights of the
Sundt, they flitted into the neighboring Cimbrian Chersonese, subdued, or made
viode (which is the more likely) upon the departure of the Cimbri, and other
Dutch people, drawing more Southwards* toward the Roman frontier, and uniting
into the common names of Saxons, French, or Almans. Beda places them in this
Chersonese upon the North of the English, or of Sleswiick their chief town.
Their memory is here yet preserved in the name of Iutlandt, the part of the
Chersonese, or of Denmark, lying upon the North of the Dukedom of Schleswiick.

THE SAXONS. Saxones Ptolemaei Geogr. lib. 2. c. 11. etc.

OF this v. infra in Germania.
nation we have spoken more fully in the relation of Germany. They were
likewise a Dutch people, mentioned by Ptolemy, inhabiting then the neck of the
Cimbrian Chersonese, now Holstein. Afterward passing the river Elbe, and
sundry other German names joining into this common, they spread Southwards as
far as the French. These conquering, and removing into Gaul, they enlarged
unto the right shore of the river Rhijn. By the reign of the Emperor Charles
the great they extended along the German Ocean from the river Eydore (deviding
them from the Danes) unto the Rhijn, from the fall of that river upwards as
high as Colen, parting them from the French.

These v. Am. Marcellini Hist. lib 26. 27. 28. and 30. Gildae Epist. deexcidio,
and Conq. Britanniae. Bedae Ecclesiast. Histor. Gentis Anglorum. Malmesb. de
Gestis Regum Anglorum. lib. 1. Huntingd. Hist. lib. 2. Flores Hist. per Mat.
Westmonast* etc.
three German nations since their affair with the Britons are only by Beda
thus particularly named, and distinguished. By Ammianus Marcellinus, Gildas,
and other Authors before his time the Dutch infesting Britain are all called
by one general name of the Saxons. After Beda, and the more ancient English
historians they are sometimes named the English; by others, the Saxons, and
Anglo Saxones.
English-Saxons. That they were the different parts of one general Dutch name,
or people it is by all agreed. In the year 449 according to Beda (if his
account be right,) Valentinian the third, and Theodosius the second then
governing the Roman Empire, after long pyracies upon the seacoasts hereof,
they first to any any purpose enter, and inhabit Britain, called in by
Vortigerne, and the Britons to their aid against the Scots, and Picts, and
under Hengist, and Horsa their Captains planted in the Island of Thanet in
Kent, given unto them by Vortigerne. The Scots, and Picts being vanquished, and
overthrown through their valor (near Stamford after Henry of Huntingdon,)
and the weakness of the Ilanders discovered, new supplies from Germany are
sent for by Hengist with his fair daughter Rowena, married shortly after to
the lustful prince Vortigerne, bewitched with her beauty, by whom for his
consent, and more firm friendship with the Saxons, Kent is allotted to
Hengist, about the year 455 by him erected into a kingdom, the first dominion
of the Saxons in Britain. This foreign friendship, and alliance, with the
daily intrusion of the Dutch growing suspected by the Britons, Vortigerne
deposed, and Vortimer his son by a former wife elected king, hot wars ensue
betwixt the two nations, continued with deadly hate, and fury for many hundred
years betwixt them; whose effect was the final expulsion of the Britons
beyond the Severne amongst the Welsh Mountains, (which happened by the reign
of their King Caereticus about the year 586,) and the conquest of the plain,
and Eastern country by the Saxons, with fresh companies continually invading
the Island upon occasion of those wars, or allured with the happy success of
those first adventurers, and beginning sundry small kingdoms in the parts,
where they arrived, or took up to inhabit (whereof some one notwithstanding
still bore a sway over the rest, whose King was accounted sovereign or
Monarch;) the kingdoms of Kent, the South Saxons, East Saxons, East Angles,
Northumberland, Mercia, and of the West Saxons, whose original, continuance,
and fortunes until their union into the kingdom of the West Saxons, and name
of England come next in place.

THE KINGDOM OF THE KENTISH SAXONS. Cantuarij Bedae Ecclesiasticae Hist. l. 2.
c. 5. Cantuarij Malmesburiensis de Gestis Regum Anglorum. lib. 1. c. 1.
Centenses Huntingdon, lib. 2.

THis v. Bedae Eccl. Histor. Gentis Anglorum. Malmesburiensis de Gestis Regum
Anglorum lib. 1. cap. 1. Henr. Huntingdon. Hist. lib. 2, 3, and 4. Flores Hist,
per Mat. Westmonast. Florentium Wigorniensem.
contained only Kent. It was begun by Hengist aforesaid, the first Saxon
Captain, that invaded Britain; unto whom the country was given by
Vortigerne, King of the Britons, in favor of Rowena, the beautiful daughter
of Hengist, married unto Vortigerne, about the year 455 from Christ's
incarnation, and in the seventh year after the arrival of Hengist. It
continued for the space of 375 years after Malmesburiensis (accompting from the
first entrance of Hengist,) ending in the year of Christ 824 in Baldred, the
last prince hereof, overcome, and driven out by Egbert, king of the
West Saxons; added afterward as a Province to the West Saxons dominion. The
Kings hereof were Hengist before mentioned, descended after my author (as were
all the rest of the Kings of the Heptarchie) from Woden, a great prince amongst
the German Saxons, and his wife Frea, in whose honor the third, and fifth days
of the week were named Flores Historper Mat. Westmonast. p. 174. iuxta
editionem Francofurtensem.
Wednesday, and Friday by the idolatrous English, continued since in the time
of the Gospel unto this present. His brother Otha, and son Ebusa, whom he had
sent for out of Germany, by the good liking of Vortigern (to whom they
pretended the defense of the country against the neighboring Scots, and Picts)
got seized of the Northern parts of Britain, lying on the further side of
Humber; held by them, and their successors with the title of Dukes under the
right, and fealty hereof, and of the kings of Kent, changed after into the
kingdom of Northumberland. In his time likewise Ella, and Cerdic, (two noble
Captains of the same Nation) invading the South, laid the foundations of the
kingdoms of Sussex, and the West Saxons. He deceased in the year 488, the
first king of Kent, and Monarch or chief king of the English Saxons. Eske, son
to Hengist. From this Prince the Kentish-Saxons were called Oiscingae Orrich,
cognomento Oisc, a quo reges Cantuariorum solent Oiscingae nominari. Bedae
Eccles. Hist. Anglorum l, 2. c. 5.
after Beda. Octa, son to Eske. Ermerick, after Malmesburiensis, son to Octa,
or Otha. Ethelbert, son to Ermeric, succeeding in the year 561. He recovered
the Monarchy unto the Kentish men, after Hengist lost unto the South and
West Saxons; the sixth sovereign, or chief king of the English. In his reign
the Saxons first received the Christian faith, converted by Austine, sent from
Gregory, Bishop of Rome. He deceased in the year 616. Edbald, son to
Ethelbert. Ercombert, younger son to Edbald, King of Kent, during the nonage of
Ethelred, and Ethelbert, sons to Ermenred, eldest son to Edbald. Egbert, son to
Ercombert. He inhumanely murdered Ethelred and Ethelbert, sons to Ermenred
aforesaid; jealous of their better right to the kingdom of Kent. Lothaire,
younger son to Ercombert, and brother to Egbert, usurping the kingdom in the
minority of Edric, son to Egbert. He was slain in fight after 11 years reign
by Edric in the year 685. Edric son to Egbert, slain against his rebellious
subjects after two years tumultuous, and unquiet reign. After his decease the
Kingdom, torn with civil dissentions, became a prey to Ceadwalla, which (but
without success) he sought to unite to his West Saxon kingdom, miserably
wasted through his rage and cruelty. Withred, brother to Edric, and son to
Egbert, succeeding after seven years vacancy in the year 693, by the good
leave of Ina king of the West Saxons, successor to Ceadwalla, whose peace he
had purchased with a sum of money. Edbert, son to Withred. Ethelbert the
second, son to Withred, and brother to Edbert. Alric, brother to Edbert, and
Ethelbert, ouer-throwne and slain by Offa, the great king of the Mercians, the
last king of Kent descended from Hengist. After this Prince, the Province
miserably distressed through the wars, and invasions of the Mercians, became
usurped by such of the Natives who had power to effect the same, the posterity
of Hengist being extinguished or excluded. Ethelbert the third, surnamed Pren,
after Alric usurping the government. He was taken prisoner, and deprived by
Kenulf king of the Mercians, set at liberty not long after, and deceasing in a
private fortune. Cuthred succeeding in the year 797, set up by Kenulfe, king
of the Mercians after Etheldred. Baldred usurping the kingdom after Cuthred in
the year 824, over-throwne in battle, and chased out by great Egbert, after
whom Kent was annexed to the kingdom of the West Saxons. The Kentish Dutch, or
Saxons, were after Beda a colony of the Iutes.

THE KINGDOM OF THE SOVTH-SAXONS. Australes Saxones. Bed. Eccles. Histor.
Anglorum l. 2. c. 5. and Hunting. Hist. l. 3. etc.

IT v. Bedae Eccl. Hist. Anglor. Flores Hist. per Mat. Westmon. Huntingdon.
Hist. 1. 2. 3. and 4.
contained the Regni of Ptolomy, or the present countries of Surrey and
Sussex; bounding upon the South with the British Ocean; upon the East with the
kingdom of Kent; upon the North with the river Thames from the East Saxons;
and upon the West with the kingdom of the West Saxons; named thus from the
situation thereof, lying in the most Southern part of the Island. It was begun
by Ella, a Saxon captain, arriving here with new Dutch supplies in the time of
Hengist king of Kent, and first Monarch of the English. Concerning the exact
time of Ellaes descent hither, our English authors do much vary for want of
more ancient to direct them. All notwithstanding, or the most part agree, that
this happened in the time of Hengist. After about 200 years continuance, and
long oppression by the more mighty kings of the West Saxons, this state took
end, subdued by king Ina, and incorporated into the union of the West Saxon
kingdom. This, as neither the Kentish, although the first kingdoms erected by
the Saxons, yet came not to any growth through the bad neighborhood of the
West Saxons, Mercians, and other more potent Dutch intruders, coming betwixt
them, and the Britons. The kings were Ella aforesaid, arriving here about the
year 477 (after Flores Hist. per Mat. Westmonast. Zenone Imperatore.
Mat. of Westminister,) sent for by Hengist; and some years afterward having
vanquished the Britons in sundry fights, and sacked the strong city of
Anderida, their chief fortress, about the year 488 taking upon him the name,
and authority of king of those parts. After Hengist he attained to the
sovereignty, or chief command of the rest of the Saxons the second Monarch
of the English. Cissa, son to Ella, king of the South Saxons, the founder of
the town of Chichester in Sussex. He lost the Monarchy, or chief rule to
Cerdic, king of the West Saxons. He deceasing about An. D. 590, defuncto Cissa
rege, Australium Saxonum regnum devolutum est ad Ceaulinum regem Occidentalium
Saxonum. ib.
the year 590, the kingdom fell (by what right we find not) upon Cheulin,
king of the West Saxons. After this time we read not of any more kings of the
South Saxons, until Adelwold, Edelwach, or Ethelwolf (for by all these names
he is called,) the first Christian King of the South Saxons. He was invaded,
and slain in battle in the year 687 after Mat. of Westminster by Ceadwal,
king of the West Saxons, the last who is named king of the South Saxons.
Adelwold being slain, Berthun, and Authun, two Dukes of the country, but
without the title of kings took upon them the government, by whom for the time
Ceadwal is repulsed, and driven home. Not long after the kingdom of the
South Saxons, unable any longer to with-stand the power of the West Saxons, is
finally subdued by Ina, who succeeded unto Ceadwal, added to the West Saxon
kingdom.

THE KINGDOM OF THE EAST SAXONS Orientales Saxones, Bedae and Malmesburiensis
de Gest. regum Anglor. l. 1. c. 6. etc.

IT Bedae Eccles. Hist. Anglor. Malmesbu^. de Gestis Regum Angl. l. 1. c. 6.
Hen. Hunting. Hist. l. 2. 3. 4. and 5. Flores Hist. per Mat. Westmon.
Florentium Vigorniensem.
contained the country of the Trinobantes of Caesar, and Ptolemy, or the
present of Middlesex, and Essex, with part of Hartfordshire after
Malmesburiensis; or the Diocese of London, having upon the East the Germane
Ocean, upon the South the river Thames, dividing it from the kingdoms of Kent,
and of the South Saxons; upon the West the Kingdom of Mercia, and upon the
North the kingdom of the East Angles. It was begun about the year 527, and
reign of Eisc king of Kent, by Erchenwyn, descended after Huntingdoniensis
from Woden, the common progenitour of all the Saxon Princes. It continued about
the space of 300 years, and ended in the year 827, and Suthred the last king
thereof, warred upon, and chased out by Egbert king of the West Saxons, by whom
it was united to the Dominion of the West Saxons. The Princes hereof were
Erchenwin Flores Hist per Mat. Westmonast. An. 527. and Henr. Huntingd. hist.
l. 2.
now mentioned, the first king in the year 527, and reign of Eisc, the second
king of Kent. Sledda, Sledda primus rex Orientalium Saxonum. Malmesb. l. 1. c. 6
son to Erchenwin. He had to wife Ricula, daughter to Ermeric king of Kent.
Sebert, son to Sledda, and Ricula; the first Christian king of the East Saxons,
converted thorough the pious endeavors of Ethelbert king of Kent, and Monarch
of the English, succeeding in the year 596. By the godly zeal, and aemulation
of those two Christian Princes were first founded the ancient, and renowned
Churches of S. Paul's in London, and S. Peter's of Westminster. Selred, Seward,
and Sigebert Pagan, and idolatrous Princes, sons to Sebert, joint kings of the
East Saxons; overthrown, and slain in fight by Kingils, and Quinchelin, kings
of the West Saxons about the year 623. Segebert the second, son to Seward, son
to king Sebert. Segebert the third, son to Segebald, brother to Sebert, and son
to Sledda, and Ricula his Kentish Queen. He restored the forsaken Catholic
Religion in the kingdom of the East Saxons, by the special instigation of
Oswye, king of Northumberland; assisted in this blessed work by holy Cedda,
brother to S. Ceadda, or Chad, Bishop of the Meircans. Swithelme, brother to
Segebert the third, baptized by S. Cedda, Apostle and Bishop of the
East Saxons. Sighere, and Sebba, whereof the first was son, the other was
brother unto Segebert the second, joinct kings of the East Saxons after
Swithelme. Sighere deceasing, Sebba is sole king; after thirty years holy and
just reign, quitting his kingdom, and turning religious in the Monastery of
S. Paul's in London. His tomb is yet shown in the walls of the North I Will of the
Chancell of that Church. Sigheard, son to holy Sebba, succeeding in the year
694. Seofrid, brother to Sigheard, and son to Sebba. Offa, son to Sigheard. He
enriched with buildings, and large endowments the Church of S. Peter in
Westminster. Abandoning the vain pleasures of this temporary world, he
departed unto Rome with Kenred King of the Mercians, where he took upon him
the habit of Religion. Selred the second. Suthred, son to Selred the second,
the last king of the East Saxons, about the year 828 driven out by Egbert, the
potent king of the West Saxons; uniting the countries hereof with his kingdom
of the West Saxons. None of the princes hereof attained to the Monarchy, or
chief command of the English-Saxons.

THE KINGDOM OF THE EAST ANGLES. Orientales Angli Bedae Eccles. Histor. lib.
3. cap. 16, and Malmesburien. lib. 1. c. 5. etc.

IT took the name v. Bedae Eccl. Histor. Anglorum. Malmesb. de Gestis Regum
Anglorum lib. 1. c. 9. Huntingd. Hist. lib. 2. 3. and 4. Flores Historiarum per
Mat. West. monast. Florentium Wigorniensem.
from its more Eastern situation, and the people of the English; from whom
after Beda, with the Mercians, and Northumbrians, the Dutch inhabitants hereof
were descended. It contained the greatest part of the country of the Iceni of
Tacitus, after Malmesburiensis Cambridgeshire, Norfolk, and Suffolk, or the
two Dioceses of Elie, and Norwijch. It had upon the South, the kingdom of the
East Saxons; upon the East, the German Ocean; upon the North, the sea Metaris
of Ptolomy, or the Washes; and upon the West, the kingdom of the Mercians,
begun by Vffa, a Saxon Captain about the year 575, and ending with the
Martyrdom of St Edmund about the year 886; possessed afterward for many
years by the Danes; and lastly by Edward the first of the name, king of the
West Saxons, or English (the Danes expulsed) about the year 914 incorporated
with the English kingdom, and Monarchy. The princes follow. Vffa, the first
king of the East Angles about the year 575. From this prince after Hunting
doniensis the East Angles for a long time were named Vffingae Huntingd. Hist.
l. 2.
the Vffingae. Titulus king of the East Angles, son to Vffa. Redwald, son to
Titulus, succeeding in the year 593. After the decease of Ethelbert, the first
Christian king of Kent, he got the Soveraignety, or chief rule of the
English-Saxons, the seventh Monarch of the English. With this prince
Malmesbur. lib. 1. c. 5.
Malmesburiensis begins the order of the kings of the East Angles.
Erpenwald, son to Redwald, the first Christian king of the East Angles,
converted through the godly zeal, and friendly exhortation of Edwin (restored
to the kingdom of Northumberland by his father Redwald,) succeeding in the
year 624. He was slain by a conspiracy of his wicked, and idolatrous
subjects, exasperated against him by means of his Christian, and Catholic
profession. Sigebert, son to the wife of Redwald by a former husband (neither
of whose names we find (descended of the blood royal of the East Angles,
during the reign of Redwald (jealous of his ambition to the Crown,) and of
Erpenwald his successor, living exiled in foreign countries; after the
decease of Erpenwald returning from banishment, and succeeding in the kingdom
of the East Angles about the year 636. He restored the Christian Religion
amongst the East Angles, wherein he had been taught and baptized during his
exile in France. For the more firm rooting of Christianity amongst his
East Angles, he founded after Beda a school for the trayning up of youth,
appointing teachers to instruct them in religion, and good literature. The
learned of Cambridge derive from hence the beginning of their ancient, and
famous University; Beda (from whose authority more especially they ground
their assertion) mentions Mox ea (Sigbertus) quae in Gallia been disposita
vidit, imitari cupiens, scholam instituit, in qua pueti erudirentur, iuvanti
Episcopo Foelici, quem de Cantijs acceperat, ijsque; pedagogos, ac magisiros
iuxta morem Cantuariorum praebenti. Bedae Ecclesi. Hist. Anglorum lib. 3. cap.
18.
a school, but not the place, where this should be erected, as neither do any
other ancient, and approved authors. Leaving the kingdom to Egrick, he
turned Religious in the Monastery of Cumbrebury; forced out of his Cel not long
after by his distressed subjects against Penda, the Pagan king of the Mercians,
by whom he was slain, or rather martyred in battaill. Egrick, kinsman to
Sigebert; after four years reign with Sigebert slain in fight by Penda, and
the Mercians. Anna, son to Any after Malmesburiensis, brother to Redwald, and
son to Titulus, succeeding in the year 642. He likewise felt the rage of
Penda, and the Mercians, slain by them in a great battaill about the year
654. His son Erkenwald with five daughters (such was the zeal of that devout
age) Ethelrid, Sexburg, Withgith, Ethilburg, and Edelburg, put on the habit of
Religion, obtaining after their decease the repute, and name of Saints.
Ethelherd, brother to king Anna. He was slain in the quarrel of Penda against
the Saxons, or English of Northumberland. Edelwald, brother to Ethelherd.
Aldulf, son to Ethelherd Elswolf, son to king Ethelherd, and brother to
Aldulfe. Beorn son to Ethelherd, and brother to Aldulfe, and Elswolfe.
Ethelred, kinsman to Beorn, and the preceding kings. Ethelbert, son to
Ethelred. He was treacherously murdered by Offa, the great king of the
Mercians; invited to his Court upon pretense of marriage with his daughter
Elfrid. After Echelbert the East Angles for a long time became a prey to the
Mercians, West Saxons, and Kentish Saxons, without kings, or mentioned in
Authors. By great Egbert with the rest of the Heptarchie they became subject
to the English name, and Monarchy under a substituted king of their own, not
named by Huntingdoniensis my Author; as neither are any other of their princes
until Edmund descended from Anna, succeeding about the year 780. Saint
Edmund, the last Saxon king of the East Angles, substituted, or governing under
the West Saxons; invaded by Hungar, and Hubba, two Pagan Danish Captains, and
after sundry torments, with great constancy sustained for his faith, and
profession, tied to a stake, and shot to death with their arrows; canonized
for a Saint, and Martyr, whose rich, and much honored shrine gave occasion of
the name of Saint Edmundsbury in Suffolk. Saint Edmund thus martyred, after 9
years vacancy, and spoil by the Danes, Guthrum, or Godrun, a Danish Captain,
succeeds in the kingdom hereof, and of the East Saxons; to whom Eohric of
the same nation succeeds. By Edward the first, Monarch of the English Saxons,
the Danes are lastly driven out, and the country is immediately united to the
rest of the English Empire.

THE KINGDOM OF MERCIA. Mercij Bedae, and Malmesburiensis. lib. 1. cap. 4. etc.

IT was so v. Bedae Eccl. Histor. Anglor. Malmesburiensis de Gestis Regum
Anglorum. lib. 1. c. 4. Henr. Hunting. Hist. l. 2. 3. 4. and 5. Flores Hist.
per Mat. Westmonaster. Florentium Wigorniensem.
named after our best antiquaries from the word Mearc, signifying with the
Dutch, or English, a bounder, called thus since confining in a manner withal
the rest of the Saxon kingdoms; lying in the heart, and middle part of the
Island. Better Etymologies we know not. It contained in its greatest extent the
Countries of the Dobuni, Catyc^chlani, Coritani, and Cornavij of Ptolemy, with
part of the Iceni, and Silures; or after Malmes buriensis the modern countries
of Lincoln, Nottingham, Rutland, Leicester, Huntingdon, Bedford, Northampton,
Buckingham, Oxford, Gloucester, Warwijck, Stafford, Darby, Worcester, Hereford,
Chester, and Shropshire, with part of Hartfordshire, the largest of all the
seven kingdoms; bounded upon the East, with the East Saxons, and East Angles,
with part of the German Ocean betwixt the Metaris, or the Washes of
Lincolneshire, and the mouth of Humber; upon the South, with the river Thames
from the West Saxons; upon the West, with Offa's-Ditch from the Welsh, with
part of the Irish Ocean betwixt the Dee, and Mersey; and upon the North, with
the river Mersey, and Humber from the kingdom of Northumberland. It
comprehended the North, and South Mercia, the river of Trent parting these two
devisions after Mat. of Westminster. It was begun by Crida Flores Hist. per
Mat. Westmonast. 585.
, or Creodda, a Saxon Captain in the year 585, after my author descended
from prince VVoden, enlarged by the victories of Wibba, Penda, and Offa. By
great Egbert it was subjected to the vassalage of the West Saxon Monarchs,
about the year 886 ending in Burdred, a substitute of the West Saxons, tired
with long wars, and molestations of the Danes, and departing unto Rome; after
whom (the Danes, who had now usurped it being expulsed) it was united to the
West Saxon kingdom. The Kings were Crida, or Creodda aforesaid about the year
585, the first king of the Mercians. Wibba, son to Crida. Ceorl, son to
Kinemund, brother to VVibba. Penda, Penda primus rex Merciorum secundum
Malmesburiensem de Gestis Regum Anglorum lib. 1. c. 4.
son to VVibba, succeeding in the year 626. He slew in battaill Edwin, and
Oswald kings of Northumberland, and Sigebert, Egfrid, and Anna kings of the
East Angles, and drove out of his kingdom Kenwald of the West Saxons; noted
for his bloody, fierce, and violent reign, many victories, and much cruelty
against the neighboring Christian English. Himself was lastly slain at a
great, and memorable overthrow given by Oswy king of the Northumbrians. After
this, the country for a time was made subject to Oswy, and the Northumbrian
Saxons. Peada, son to Penda, by Oswy king of Northumberland upon the marriage
of Alkfled, his natural daughter, set over the part of Mercia, lying South of
the river Trent, with condition that he should become Christian, the first
Christian king of the Mercians. The part of Mercia upon the North of Trent Oswy
joined to the immediate government of the Northumbrians. He was slain after
Beda by the treason of his wife Alkfled, after others by his mother Kinswith,
wife to Penda. After Peada, the Mercians shook off the yoke of the
Northumbrians, and Wulfhere is advanced to the kingdom. Wulfhere, son to
Penda, and brother to Peada, (Oswy, and the Northumbrians thrust out,) king of
the Mercians. By his great valor, and happy exploites after Oswy he obtained
the Soveraignety, or chief rule of the Saxons, continued in his successors
until Kenelme, and the Monarchy of Egbert, and the West Saxons; the eleventh
Monarch of the English* He founded the Church, and Monastery of Medesham, or
Peter borough (begun by his brother Peada,) converted to Christianity by holy
Chad, the Apostle, or first Bishop of Lichfield, and the Mercians. He deceased
in the year 674. Amongst other issue he had Wereburg, a professed Nun in the
Monastery of Elye, appointed afterward by king Ethelred visitour of all the
Monasteries in the kingdom of Mercia, which charge she underwent with great
zeal, and opinion of sanctity; whose dead corpse, or relics removed
afterward to the City of Chester occasioned there the Church of Saint
VVereburg, since the Cathedral of that Diocese, founded by Leofrike Earl of
Chester in her honor. Ethelred, brother to Peada, and VVulshere, and son to
Penda, king of Mercia, and the twelft Monarke of the English. He founded the
Monastery of Bardney in Lincolneshire, where relinquishing the kingdom,
himself became Monk, and afterward Abbat. Kenred, son to Wulfhere (Ethelred
resigneing) king of Mercia, and Monarch of the English. Having reigned four
years he likewise gave over the kingdom, and with Offa king of the
East Saxons went to Rome, where, Constantine the first being Pope, they
together put on the Coule, and habit of religion. Chelred, son to Ethelred,
king of Mercia, and Monarch of the English. He had wars with Ina, king of
West Saxons (grown great through his late victories over the Kentish, and
South Saxons, and aspiring to the Monarchy,) managed with aequall fortunes.
Ethelbald, of the blood royal of the kings of Mercia (descended from Crida,)
king of the Mercians, and Monarch of the English in the time of St Winifrid, or
Boniface, the Apostle of the Germans, and Archbishop of Mentz, reprehended by
him for his unmarried, yet most lascivious, and unchaste life. He was slain by
his mutinous subjects, stirred up by Bernred, aiming hereby at the kingdom.
Offa descended from Wibba, after some vacancy, and the death of the Tyrant
Bernred (whom he slew in battaill), king of Mercia, and Monarch of the English,
renowned for his great victories archieved against the bordering Welsh, and
Saxons. He drew Offaes Ditch before described, the bounder betwixt him, and the
Welsh, and subjected his English to atribute of the sea of Rome called Romscot,
and Peterpence. He likewise founded the great, and rich Monastery of St Alban
in honor of that first British Martyr, a Citizen of the neighboring
Verulamium, put to death here by the Emperor Dioclesian, and now canonized at
his cost. He deceased in the year 796. Egfri^, son to great Offa, king of
Mercia, and Monarch of the English, deceasing within the year. Kenwolf
(descended from Wibba) king of Mercia, and Monarch, or chief king of the
English, deceasing in the year 819. After this prince, the Mercians lost the
sovernignety, or chief rule of the English, to Egbert, and the West Saxons,
happening through the feeble, and unripe years of Kenelme, his next successor,
the quarrels, and devisions hereof for the Crown, and the power of Egbert,
grown mighty through the access of the East, and South Saxons, and Kentish
kingdom. Kenelme, son to Kenwolf, at the age of seven years, succeeding in
the kingdom of Mercia, murdered by his sister Quendrid, ambitious of the
government. Ceolwulf, king of Mercia, Uncle to Kenelme, and brother to Kenwolf;
after one years troublesome reign, driven out by his seditious subjects, and
thorough the treason and faction of Bernulf. Bernulf, King of the Mercians,
usurping the kingdom against Ceolwulfe. He contended with great Egbert for
the chief rule, or sovereignty of the English, by whom he was overcome in
fight, and was lastly slain against the East Angles. Ludecan King of Mercia,
intruding the Bernulf, overcome and slain by Egbert, and the East Angles.
Withlafe King of Mercia, usurping after Ludecan, subdued afterward, and made
tributary, and substituted by Egbert. Berthulf king of Mercia, after Withlafe
substituted by the West Saxons. He was driven out by the bloody, and
all-conquering Danes Burdred, appointed by Ethelwolf the West Saxon or English
Monarch. After two and twenty years reign, wearied out with continual
wars, and fresh invasions of the Danes, and leaving England unto fortune,
about the year 886, he took sanctuary in Rome, where in a private state he
dyed, the last Prince of the long languishing Mercian kingdom; after whom, and
some few years revelling Malmesbur. l. 1. c. 4.
of the Danes; the countries hereof by Alfred (the Danes brought under) were
united to the English, or VVest-Saxon Monarchy.

THE KINGDOM OF NORTHVMBERLAND. Nord-Humbri Bedae Eccl. hist. l. 3. c. 7.
Northanimbri Malmesbur. l. 1 c. 3. Nordanhumbri Mat. Weston.

IT was v. Bedae Eccles. Histor. Anglorum. Malmesbur. de Gestis Regum Anglor.
l. 1. c. 3. Hen. Hunting. hist. l. 2. 3. 4. and 5. Flores hist. per Mat.
Westmon, Florentium Wigorn.
thus called from the more famous river, or creek of Humber, upon whose North
it lay. It contained the Brigantes of Ptolemy, with other parts of North
Britain, extended from hence unto the Bodotria, and Glota of the same Author,
now the Friths of Edinburgh, and Dunbriton; on after Malmes buriensis the
present countries of Yorkshire, Lancashire, Durham, Westmoreland, Cumberland,
and Northumberland. We add Tweedale, Merch, Lauden, Carict, and Galloway,
with other parts of modern Scotland unto the Glota, and Bodotria, (for thus
far after Malmesburiensis the Empire of the English (whose North this was)
shortly upon their invasion, and conquest extended.) It had upon the South, the
rivers of Mersey, and Humber from the kingdom of the Mercians; upon the East,
the German Ocean; upon the West, the Irish sea; and upon the North the two
Friths before mentioned, parting it from the Scots and Picts. It was divided
into two Deirorum and Berniciorum Provinciae parts gentis Nordhumbrorum. Bedae
Eccles hist. gentis Anglor. l. 3. c. 1.
Provinces, more aunciently commanded a part by their kings; of Deira
Malmesbur. l. 1. c. 3.
Deira, which was the part intercepted betwixt Humber, and the river of Tees;
and Bernicia ib.
Bernicia, lying betwixt the Tees, and Frith of Edinburgh. The kingdom was
occasioned by Otha, and Ebusa, the brother and son of Hengist, shortly after
the coming of the first Saxons, the better to strengthen their party, sent for
out of Germany by Hengist, and by the good leave of Vortigern king of the
Britons arriving, and planting in those Northern parts, pretending their guard
against the injurious, and ill neighboring Picts, and Scots; whose successors
(the truce, and amity betwixt the two Nations quickly broken) in continuance of
time subduing the Country thus limited, and governing the same with the title
of Dukes under the right and sovereign command of the kings of Kent, about
the 60, and 72 years after the death of Hengist changed their style into the
name of kings of Bernicia, and Deira, (for thus the parts hereof (as before)
then were called,) uniting again not long after into one only kingdom, and
common name of Northumberland, called thus in regard of the Northern situation
thereof unto that famous river. The Northumbrians after Ethelred, and the year
794, being much distressed through their civil dissentions, and the invasions
of the Danes, by the advantage hereof the Scots, and Picts got seized of the
parts of Bernicia, situated upon the North of the river Tweede, and Solway
Frith, the ordinary bounder afterward of the English, and Scottish kingdoms.
The Britons before this (inhabiting the parts where now lie Cumberland, and
Westmoreland, with Fournesse Fels in Lancashire (subject aunciently to the
Saxon kings of Northumberland,) about the year 685 revoulting v. Bedae Eccles.
Hist. gentis Anglorum l. 4. c. 26.
from under the government hereof begun the kingdom of the Cumbri, or
Cumberland, continuing after the Heptarchy of the English expired. In this
manner the kingdom of Northumberland stinted toward the North with the Frith
of Solway, and the river Tweede, about the year 827, and some 33 years after
the decease of Ethelred before mentioned, ouer-charged with foreign, and
domestique wars, submitted to the protection of great Egbert, and his
West Saxons, by whom it was lastly united to the West Saxon, or English
Monarchy. The princes hereof were Ida, the first king of Northumberland after
Mat. of Flores histor. per. Mat. Westmonast. an. 548 and 560.
Westminster, elected by the victorious Dutch, or English of these Northerly
parts in the year 548, and about the 60 year after the death of Hengist. By
Floretinus v. Florentium* Wigorniensem an. 547. and 559.
Monk of Worcester, he is styled only king of Bernicia. Ida deceasing, the
Northumbrians in the year 560 after Mat. of Westminster, first became divided
into the two kingdoms of Deira, usurped with this title by Ella, son to Duke
Iffus; and Bernicia, the portion remaining unto Adda, son and successor unto
Ida, succeeded unto in Bernicia, during the long reign of Ella, by Clappa
Theodulphus, Freothulfus, Theodoricus, and Ethelricus, all sons to Ida, and
brethren to Adda. Adda, Clappa, Theodulphus, Freothulfus, Theodoricus, and
Ethelricus, kings of Bernicia, and sons to Ida, successively reigning one after
another; and Ella king of Deira, son to Duke Iffus. After the decease of Ella,
king Ethelricus (Edwin thrust out, son to Ella) obtains the sovereignty of
the whole Northumberland. Ethelricus, son to Ida, (Edwin son to Ella excluded)
king of Northumberland, or of both Provinces of Deira, and Bernicia. Ethelfrid,
king of Northumberland, son to Ethelricus. He confirmed, and much enlarged the
kingdom of the Northumbrians through his conquests, and victories against the
Scots, and weak remainders of the Britons. He was slain in battle by
Redwald, king of the East Angles, and Monarch of the English, in the quarrel
of Edwyn king of Deira, expulsed by Ethelricus. Edwyn king of Deira, son to
Ella, after Ethelfrid succeeding in both Provinces of Deira, and Bernicia, the
first Christian king of the Northumbrians, converted by the means of his
Queen Ethelburga, daughter to Ethelbert, the first Christian king of Kent, and
through the preaching of Paulinus, the Apostle of those Northern parts, and
first Archbishop of York. He began at York the Church of S. Peter, appoiting
it to be the Cathedral of that Metropolitan sea. After Redwald, he got the
sovereignty, or chief rule amongst the Saxons, the eight Monarch of the
English. Having a long time reigned victoriously, he was lastly about the year
633 slain in battle by the joint arms of Penda king of the Mercians, and of
Cadwallo king of the Britons. Osric, king of Deira, son to Alfrid, brother to
Ella; and Eanfrid king of Bernicia, son to Ethelfrid, after the decease of
Edwin returning out of Scotland (where they had kept during the reign hereof,)
and succeeding in the two kingdoms of Northumberland, noted by Beda and
Malmesburiensis for their apostasy from the faith of Christ (wherein with
Oswald, who next succeeded, they had been baptized during their exile amongst
the Scots,) and the just revenge of God for this their impiety; after some one
years short reign overcome, and slain by Cadwallo king of the Britons.
Oswald, son to Ethelfrid, and brother to Eanfrid, having vanquished Cadwallo,
and his Britons in a memorable, and bloody fight, succeeding in both Provinces
of Deira and Bernicia. He attained likewise to the chief rule of the Saxons,
the ninth Monarch of the English. He restored in the parts of Northumberland
the much decayed Christian Religion by the preachings and especial industry of
Aidan a Scottish man, and the first Bishop of Lindisfarne, to whom in regard of
his ignorance of the Saxon tongue, he served as an interpretour. He was slain
by Penda, the cruel king of the Mercians, in a battle fought at Maserfield,
now from hence named Oswaldstree, in Shropshire. Oswy, king of Bernicia,
natural son to Ethelfrid; and Oswyn king of Deira, son to Osric, succeeding
about the year 643 in the two kingdoms of Northumberland. Emulation, and wars
arising betwixt the two Princes, and good Oswyn by the treason of Earl Hunwald
being delivered into the hands of Oswy, by whom he is wickedly murdered, Oswy
attaineth to the Dominion of all Northumberland, and by the strength and
advantage hereof, to the chief rule and sovereignty of the English, the tenth
and last Monarch of the English, of the house of Northumberland. He slew in
fight the merciless and raging Penda, and subdued the Mercians to his will,
rebelling notwithstanding shortly after, and reassuming liberty under Vulfhere,
son to Penda. He deceased about the year 670. After this Prince the two
Provinces of Deira and Bernicia, went still united under one only king of
Northumberland. Egfrid king of Northumberland, son to Oswy. He lost the
Monarchy or chief rule of the English to Vulf here, and the Mercians. He was
slain against the Picts, entrapped amongst their mountains. Encouraged by
this overthrow Bedae Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 6.
the remainder of the Britons, inhabiting Cumberland, and the Western coasts
along the Irish Ocean, cast off the yoke of the Northumbrians, and became a
free estate. Alkfryd, king of Northumberla^d, natural son to Oswy. Osred king
of Northumberland, son to Alkfrid. He was slain in fight by Kenred, and Osric,
aiming hereby at the Crown, and through the advantage of his licentious life,
and many vices. Kenred, king of Northumberland, the murderer of Osred,
descended from Ida, the first king of Bernicia, by his Concubine. Osric king of
Northumberland, associate with Kenred in the treason against Osred. Ceolwulph
king of Northumberland, brother to Ke^red. He voluntarily resigned the
kingdom, and took the habit of religion in the Island of Lindisferne, now Holy
Land. Unto this prince Venerable Bede dedicateth his Ecclesiastical history
of the English Nation. Egbert king of Northumberla^d, son to Eata, brother to
Ceolwulf. He also left the kingdom, and turned religious. Oswulph, son to
Egbert, after a short reign slain by treason. Edilwald descended from king
Ida, by his Concubine, slain by Alured. Alured, descended from Ida, and the
same Concubine, driven out by his seditious subjects. Ethelred, son to
Edilwald, expulsed by the faction of Edelbald, and Herebert two noblemen of the
Country. Alswald, brother to king Alured, murdered by his ever wicked, and
rebellious subjects. Osred, son to Alured, forced out by the same fury.
Ethelred, son to Edilwald, restored to the kingdom after Alswald, and Osred,
in the year 794, slain by his still bad, and mutinous subjects, long
practiced in treason, and the murder of their princes, the last king of
Northumberland after Malmesburiensis. Ethelred thus murdered, the Country for
the space of thirty and three years was much turmoyled with civil
dissentions, and continual intrusions of petty tyrants, contending for, and
usurping the soveraignety, of small power through this disorder, and short
continuance, and not deserving the name of kings. In the year 827, not able
any longer to hold out, or to resist so great a Monarch, the Northumbrians were
subdued, or rather voluntarily yielded unto Egbert, the most potent king of the
West Saxons. After this subjection, they were ruled by Vice-Royes, or
substitute kings under the West Saxons, of which rank were Osbrict, and Ella,
mentioned by Henry of Huntingdon. Hist. lib. 5.
Huntington, in the reign of Ethelwolf, son and successor to great Egbert.
These two being slain by the Danes, they were made subject to that nation,
whose kings after Huntingdoniensis (if they be worth the naming) were Haldene,
Gudfert, Nigellus, Sidrik, Reginald, and Anlaf, commanding here in a confused,
and disorderly manner, sometimes one ruling alone, sometimes two, or many
together. By Athelstan these Danish Northumbrians were driven out, or subdued
to the English Monarchy, not long after by king Edred after sundry rebellions
incorporated into the kingdom, and account, and name of the English.

THE KINGDOM OF THE WEST SAXONS. Occidentales Saxones and Gevissi Bedae Eccl.
Hist. lib. 3. cap. 7. West-Saxones Malmes. lib. 1. c. 2.

IT v. Bedae Eccl. Hist. Gentis Anglor. Malmesb. de Gest. Regum Anglo. lib. 1.
c. 2. and l^b. 2. c. 1. Hen. Huntingd. Hist. lib. 2. 3. and 4. Flores Hist. per
Mat. Westmonast. Florentium Wigorniensem.
contained more aunciently the Belgae, Attrebatij, and Durotriges of Ptolemy,
now Barkeshire, Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Hantshire, and Dorset-shire, with the
I Will of Wight, having upon the South, the British Ocean; upon the East, the
South Saxons; upon the North, the Mercians, and the river Thames; and upon the
West, the sea of Severne, and the Cornish Britons. Malmesburiensis adds
Devonshire, and Cornwall, or the parts belonging sometimes to the Danmonij, or
Cornish Britons, subdued, and annexed by Great Egbert, a little before the
period of the Heptarchie, and the abolition of the kingdom, and distinction of
the West Saxons. The state was begun after those of Kent, and Sussex, but
before the rest of the Heptarchie, by Cerdic, a Saxon Captain, about the year
495, landing with fresh German succors amongst the Iceni, where now is
Cerdic-shore, near Yarmouth, and (descending from thence toward the West,
and having vanquished and slain Natanleod, a British Commander) fixing, and
establishing in the Western parts the kingdom named thus from its situation;
enlarged by the after conquests hereof, and of his victorious Successors upon
the distressed neighboring Britons. Into this kingdom, as into a more fresh,
and lively stock, all the rest of the kingdoms of the Saxons became at length
engrafted, mastered by the arms of great Egbert, and through their own
intestine broils, and in the year 819 by the decree of Egbert at an assembly
of the states at Winchester joined into one entire state, or common name of
England, continued through many successions of princes unto our times. The
order of the kings of the West Saxons follows until the Heptarchy
determined, and the union, and name of England. Cerdic before mentioned, the
first king of the West Saxons about the year 502, and 43 years after the
first arrival of Hengist. After Ella of the South Saxons, he attained to the
chief rule, or soueraignety amongst the Saxon princes; the third Monarch of
the English continued in his successors for two descents. Kenrik king of the
West Saxons, and Monarch, or chief king of the English, son to Cerdic Cheulin
king of the West Saxons, chief king, or Monarch of the English, son to Kenrik.
After sundry conquests, and great victories against the Britons, and Kentish
Saxons, he was lastly overthrown, and driven out by a joint war of the
Welsh, and his seditious subjects discontented with his insolent government,
drawn on through the treason, and ambition of his nephew Cealic. Cealic king
of the West Saxons, son to Cuthwolf, brother to Cheulin, and son to Kenric. He
lost the Monarchy, or chief rule of the English unto Ethelbert, king of the
Kentish men. Chelwolf king of the West Saxons, son to Cuth, brother to
Cheulin. Kingils, son to Chel, brother to Chelwolfe, king of the West Saxons,
succeeding in the year 612. He first of the VVest-Saxon princes embraced the
Christian Religion, won to the faith by the preaching of Berinus an Italian,
the first Bishop of Dorchester in Oxfordshire, and through the holy zeal, and
endeavors of Oswald king of Northumberland. He took for his companion in the
government his son Quincheline, who deceased before him. Kenwald king of the
West Saxons, son to Kengils, he founded the rich abbey of Malmesburie, and the
great Church of Winchester. He deceasing without issue, his wife Segburg, a
manly woman, for a time managed the affairs of the kingdom, succeeded unto
by Eskwin. Eskwin king of the West Saxons, descended from Cerdic. Kenwin, king
of the West Saxons, brother to Kenwald, and son to Kingils. He much enlarged
the kingdom of the West Saxons upon the Bordering Britons, or Welsh.
Ceadwalla, king of the West Saxons, descended from Kenric. He slew in fight
Edilwalch, the last king of the South Saxons. After much cruelty, and outrage
committed against the neighboring South, and Kentish-Saxons, to expiate his
sins, following the manner of those superstitious times, he departed on holy
pilgrimage to Rome, baptized there by Sergius Bishop of that sea, where shortly
after he dyed. Ina, king of the West Saxons, descended from Cheulin. He annexed
to his dominions the Country of the South Saxons, and founded the College of
Wels, and the great Monastery of Glastenbury. Ambitious of the honor of his
predecessor, he went to Rome, and put on the habit of religion, deceasing in
a private fortune, having first subjected his kingdom to the payment of
Peter Pence to that sea. Ethelard, king of the West Saxons, descended from
Cheulin. Cuthred, king of the West Saxons, brother to Ethelard. About this time
after Beda the dead corpse of the deceased begun first to be enterred within
towns, and cities, formerly after the manner of the Turks at this day, buried
in the fields. Sigebert of unknown parentage, king of the West Saxons, driven
out by his seditious subjects pretending his tyranny, and many vices. Kenwulf,
king of the West Saxons, descended from Cerdic. He was slain by Kineard,
brother to Sigebert. Brithric descended from Cerdic, king of the West Saxons
succeeding in the year 784. In the time hereof, and year 787, the Danes first
arrive, and discover the Western coasts of the Island, followed with greater
forces in the reign of Egbert, and the succeeding English Monarchs. He was
poisoned by his Queen Ethelburga, daughter to Offa the great, king of the
Mercians. In regard of this treason, the wives of the succeeding West Saxon
Monarchs were by law afterward excluded from all state, place, and title of
princes. Egbert, king of the West Saxons, descended from Cheulin, and
succeeding in the year 800. He subdued the Cornish Britons, and the Kentish,
and East Saxons, with those of Mercia, East-England, and Northumberland. Of
these Kent, and the East Saxons, with the Cornish Britons he immediately
incorporated with his kingdom of the West Saxons. The rest (which were
Northumberland, with the East Angles, and Mercians) he commanded by his
substitutes, or Vice-royes. All notwithstanding he united into one entire
Monarchy, which he named of England (from the Angli, or English, of whom
himself was descended, or in regard of the greater extent of that people,
containing after Beda the Mercians, Northumbrians, and Mercians, or some two
thirds of the whole Dutch Nation) whereof he was Crowned king in the year 819,
some 370 years after the arrival of Hengist. In this sort (the Heptarchy
extinguished) the whole Southern part of the Island took the name of England,
(Wales, and the Britons of Cumberland excepted) whose fortunes until the
return hereof into the union of Britain under Lames out late Sovereign of
happy memory remain in the next place to be related.

THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND. Anglia.

THis v. Malmesb. de Gestis Regum Anglor. lib. 2. Hen. Huntingd Hist lib. 5.
and 6. Rogeri de Houeden Annalium partem priorem. Flores Hist. per Mat.
Westmonast. Florentium Wigorniniensem. Guil. Camdeni Britanniam (de
Anglo-Saxonibus.) The English Annalls.
was begun by Egbert aforesaid. The manner, and year we have even now showed.
It was bounded more aunciently with the German Ocean upon the East; upon the
South, with the English channel from France; upon the West, with the Welsh,
and Britons of Cumberland, with part of the Western, or Irish Ocean from
Ireland; and upon the North, with the river Tweede from the Picts, or Scotland.
King William, surnamed the Conqueror, added Cumberland, and VVestmoreland,
parts of the ancient kingdom of the Cumbri, wrested from the Scots. His son
Rufus, and the succeeding princes of the Norman blood added Wales. By the
reign of king Edward the first (Wales then being totally subdued) the
account, and name of England enlarged over all the part of the Island, lying
upon the South of the river Tweede, and Solway Frith; the present extent of the
kingdom. It has suffered sundry changes since this its first name, and
erection; being twice conquered by foreign power, and made subject to three
different successions of Monarchs. 1 Of the race of the West Saxons. 2. Of
the Danes. 3: and of the Normans.

THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND UNDER THE WEST SAXONS.
THe Kings of England follow, of the house of the West Saxons, and until the
Danish subjection. Egbert, king of the West Saxons, (the Heptarchy destroyed)
crowned king of England at a Parliament of the states held at Winchester in the
year 819. In the reign of this prince, the Danes begin their fierce invasions
of the English, continued with variable success during the whole time of
Englands Monarchs of the race of the West Saxons, and until the year 1016,
and conquest of the whole by Canutus. He deceased in the year 836. Ethelwolf,
and Athelstan, sons to Egbert, succeeding to their father in the kingdom of
England, and the Danish wars. Of these, Athelstan had for his share the
countries of Kent, and of the South and East Saxons, and Ethelwolf the rest of
England, with the praerogatiue, and title of Monarch, or chief king of the
whole. At the same time likewise Burdred commanded Mercia, but substituted,
and under the right of Ethelwolf, and the English Monarchs. Ethelbald, and
Ethelbert kings of England, sons to Ethelwolf. Hereof Ethelbert inherited Kent,
with the East, and South Saxons, the portion of his uncle Athelstan. The rest
with the right of chief king, or Monarch of the English fell to the lot of
Ethelbald, the elder brother. This last took to his incestious bed his
stepmother Judith, daughter to Charles surnamed the Bauld, king of West-France,
and widow to his father Ethelwolf, married after his death (which happened
shortly after) to Bauldwin, the first Earl of Flanders. He deceasing, his
brother Ethelbert remained sole king of the English. Ethelbert, son to
Ethelwolf after the decease of Ethelbald sole Monarch of England. Ethelred the
first, king of England, brother to Ethelbald, and Ethelbert. During the
troublesome reign hereof through the advantage of the wars of the Danes, the
East Angles shake off the yoke of the English Monarchs, creating holy Edmund
their king; martyred by Hungar, and Hubba two Danish Captains, and succeeded
unto by princes of this merciles, and Pagan Nation. After stout resistance, and
many battails fought, he was at last slain against the Danes. Alfrid, king of
England, fourth son to Ethelwolf, and brother to the three preceding Kings.
Great was the valor amongst other virtues of this unparalleled, and matchles
princes, if not altogether vanquishing, yet repressing the fury of the raging
and unconquerable Danes, threatening now an utter destruction of the English
nation; brought to a low ebb through their long, and restles invasions,
frequent victories, depopulations, and tyranny. He founded, or rather renewed
v. Asser Meneven.
the most ancient, and renowned University of Oxford, and first parted the
land into shires, tithings, and hundreds, deceasing in the years 901. Edward,
surnamed the Elder, king of England, son to Alfred. He made subject the
East Angles, and all other* parts possessed by the now languishing, and droping
Danes, excepting Northumberland, held yet by princes of that nation. Athelstan
king of England, son to Edward. He twice vanquished in fight Constantine king
of the Scots assisted with the Irish, subdued the Britons of Cumberland, with
the remainder of the Danes inhabiting Northumberland, made the Welsh tributary,
and confined the Cornish within the River Tamar, their present bounds; the
greatest, and most victorious of the English Monarchs before his time,
deceasing in the year 940. Edmund the first, king of England, son to Edward,
and brother to Athelstan. The Danes of Northumberland revolting, he again
brought under, and annexed that province to his immediate government. He also
quite overthrew the kingdom of the Britons of Cumberland, killing the two sons
of Dummailus their last king, whose country he gave unto Malcolme the first,
king of Scotland, with condition of homage to the English Crown, and of his
defense of those Northern parts against the Danish intruders. Edred, King of
England, son to Edward, and brother to Athelstan. He the third time tamed, and
brought under the ever restles, and rebellious Danes of Northumberland. Edwy,
King of England, son to Edmund the first. Against this prince, nothing gracious
with his subjects, Edgar his brother, and next successor usurped the dominion
of the still unquiet Northumbrians, and Mercians. Edgar King of England,
surnamed the peaceable in regard of his quiet reign not molested with
foreign or domestique wars, nor ordinary in those tumultuous, and stirring
times, son to Edmund, and brother to Edwy. He remitted the tax of money
imposed by Athelstan upon the Welshmen for a tribute of wolves. Edward the
second, king of England, son to Edgar; surnamed the Martyr from the manner of
his death, murdered by the treachery of his stepmother Elfrida, coveting the
kingdom for her son Ethelred. Ethelred the second, king of England, son to
Edgar, and Elfrida, and half brother to Edward. In his time the Danes, who had
lain still during the late reign of his victorious praedecessours, subdued,
or beaten home through the high valor of Alfred, Athelstan, and other
succeeding English Monarchs, renew their wonted outrages, on all sides with
fury irresistable, pillaging, and spoiling the country, encouraged by the
quarrels, factions, and bad affection of his disloyal subjects, withdrawing,
or forslowing their aides, or betraying his armies; after much calamity, and
affliction compounded withal by Ethelred, and not long after upon Saint Brice
his festival, and in the year 1002 massacred in one day by the command
hereof, and a joint conspiracy of the English; drawing on a more sharp
revenge, and dreadful war of the nation under Sueno, and Canutus their
potent, and much incensed kings; not ending but with the English Monarchy of
the West Saxons, and the final conquest hereof by Canutus. After a long, but
miserable reign, he deceased in the year 1016. Edmund the second, from his
hardy valor surnamed the Iron-side, son to Ethelred the second, succeeding
his father in the kingdom of England; and in his unfortunate war with the
Danes. Having fought sundry stout battles, and one single combat with
Canutus in the I Will of Alney by Gloucester, coming to an agreement with the
Dane, he parted with him the kingdom of England, contenting himself with the
more Southern moity hereof; deceasing after a seven months reign (a short
time for so many brave acts which in that space he achieved) in the year
1016, about 567 years after the first arrival of the Dutch under Hengist, and
some 197 years, since the name and beginning of the kingdom by Egbert. Edmund
Iron-side thus removed out of the way, the whole kingdom of the English, tired
out with long miseries of war, yielded to Canutus, and the Danes, whose estate,
and succession follows during their rule, and government over the English.

THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND UNDER THE DANES. Dani Iornandis de Rebus Geticis. etc.
Daci vitiose Henrici Huntingd. Hist. lib. 4.

COncerning v. Pomp. Melae lib. 3. Iornandem de Rebus Geticis. Eginhartum de
vita, and Gestis Caroli Magni. Aimonij de Rebus Gestis Francorum. li. 4. c. 9.
92. 96. etc. Malmesb. de Gestis Anglorum lib. 2. Henr. Hunting. Hist. lib. 5.
and 6. Rogeri de Hoveden Annalium partem priorem. Flores Hist. per Mat.
Westmonaster. Guil. Camdeni Britanniam (de Danis.) The English. Annals.
this Nation we have more fully related in the discourse of Germany. They were
a Dutch people (for thus their Dutch dialect, or language does manifest.) Their
name we conjecture from the bay Codanus and Island Codanonia, of Mela, now the
Sundt, and Island of Zelandt, where, and in the adjacent countries the Nation
since their first mention has always continued. When they begun we find not.
Iornandes is the first of ancient authors by whom they are named, living in
the time of the Emperor Justinian the first. Their Country then he makes to
be the neighboring Scanzia,, or Scandia, most probably now Hallandt, Schonen,
and Bleking, or the part in that Continent of the present Denmark. We add the
Islands of Zeland, and Funen, with others, lying in the straights of the Sundt.
Afterward (the exact time we know not) they spread into the bordering Cimbrain
Chersonese in the maine land of Germany, taking up the left rooms of the
Iutes, and English, departing into the Island of Britain under Hengist. By the
reign of Charles the Great king of the Frenchmen, under their king Godfrey,
we find them in Aymonius extended Southwards in the Chersonesse as far as the
river Eydore, dividing them from the Saxons beyond the Elb, the present bounds
now of Denmark from the land of Holstein, and the German Empire. In the year
787, and reign of Brithric king of the West Saxons, agreeing with the 20 year
of Charles the Great, we first hear of them in England, with three ships
landing in the South-West parts hereof, not so much attempting a conquest, as
making a discovery of the country. In the next reign of Great Egbert, they
first to any purpose invaded the Island, arriving at several times in the Island
of Lindisferne in the North, in Wales, and in the I Will of Shepeye in Kent, not
without much difficulty driven out by Egbert. He deceasing, they fell on with
greater power and rage in the reigns of his sons Ethelwolf, and Athelstan, and
of the succeeding English Monarchs sons to Ethelwolf, laying waste, and
beating down all before them, and subduing the Provinces of the Mercians,
East Angles, and Northumbrians, where (the English Governors or Princes being
either slain, or beaten out) they erected petty tyrannies of their own
Nation; omitting no kind of barbarous cruelty upon the miserable and
distressed inhabitants. By the wisdom, patience, and great valor of learned
Alfred, this violent torrent is somewhat assuaged, and the edge of their fury
abated. By Edward surnamed the Elder, the East Angles are recovered, and united
again to the English Empire. By Athelstan Northumberland, or the rest of
England, the Danes being either wholly expulsed by him, or made subject to his
government, mixing amongst, and joining in alliance with the English. By Edmund
the first, and Edred, the Danes rebelling in Northumberland, are again
vanquished, and reduced into the English obedience, after whom we here read no
more of them during the more peaceable reigns of Edwy, Edgar, and Edward
surnamed the Martyr, and until Ethelred the second. In the unfortunate reign
of this Prince they begin afresh their intermitted pyracies, and war; which
after the treacherous massacre of the Nation by Etheldred, they maintained with
a more eager pursuit, and bloody revenge, managed in person by Swain, and
Canutus their powerful kings. In the year 1016, (both sides wearied with
their continual fights, and mutual butcheries) they come to a composition
with the English, and the kingdom is divided betwixt the reconciled kings,
Canutus son to Swain, and Edmund Ironside son to Etheldred. The death of the
Iron-side happening in the same year, put shortly an end to this division, and a
beginning to the Monarchy of the Danes; after whom the English (loath as
before) any more to hazard) submitted voluntarily to Canutus, and the Danish
government. The time from the first arrival of the Danes in the reign of
Brithricus, king of the West Saxons, unto the conquest of England by Canutus
was 229 years. The male issue of Canutus failing in his son Hardi-canute, the
English in the person of Edward surnamed the Confessor, resume the
sovereignty, the Danes thrust out. The kings of England follow of the Danish
descent, and offspring. Canutus surnamed the Great, king of England, Denmark,
Norweye, and Sweden, son to Swain. He took to wife Emme, sister to Richard
the third, Duke of Normandy, widow to king Ethelred, and mother to Edward the
Confessor. Peace, and his kingdom established, he unburdened the land of
the multitudes of his Danish soldiers; contented with a large salary, and at
the request of Emme sent back into their Country. Having governed with much
piety, justice, and moderation for the space of 19 years, he deceased in the
year 1035, buried at Winchester. Harold king of England, natural son to
Canutus, intruding in the absence of his brother Hardi-canute, to whom England
with Denmark had been allotted by the will of Canutus. He deceased without
issue in the year 1040. Hardi-canute king of England, son to Canutus, and
Emma. He deceased likewise sans issue in the year 1042, the last prince of the
Danish blood. The house of Canutus being thus extinguished; the Crown of
England (all Danish, and foreign blood by a present Decree of the States
excluded) returns again upon the English, and Edward, for his Saint-like
life surnamed the Coufessour, son to Ethelred, and Emma, is sent for out of
France (where with Richard and William, Dukes of Normandy, he had soiourned
during the Danish usurpation) and by a general consent succeeds in the
kingdom; to whom besides his nearenesse in regard of his English descent, the
right of the Danes did seem in a manner to appertain, being half brother to
the late deceased king.

THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND recovered by the English, or West Saxons.
EDward v. Malmesb. de Gestis Reg. Anglor. lib. 2. Henr. Huntin. Hist. l. 6.
Flores Hist-per Mat. Westmon. Rogeri de Hoveden Annal. partem priore^. The
English Annals.
surnamed the Confessor, king of England, son to king Ethelred the second, and
Emma, Daughter to Richard the second, Duke of Normandy; succeeding in the year
1042; Edward surnamed the outlaw (eldest son to Edmund Ironside) the right
heir, remaining then in Hungary, passed over by the practice of Queen Emma,
very gracious in the subjects eyes, or for that living in too foreign and
remote parts. He deceased in the year 1066, married, but having never used the
company of his wife, reputed in those blind times amongst his many true, and
noble virtues, deserving his account, and name of Saint, the last in the line
masculine of the house of* the West Saxons. Edward deceased, and Edgar
Ethelinge the true heir, son to Edward surnamed the outlaw, neglected as too
young, and a forreiner, borne in Hungary; Harold, son to Goodwin, Earl of
Kent, and Duke of the West Saxons, without either choice, or dislike of the
irresolute English, intrudeth into the Government, well approved for his great
valor, and other Princely virtues befitting a king. Harold, king of England,
son to Goodwin Duke of the West Saxons, and Earl of Kent, succeeding in the
year 1066; opposed by Harold Haardread king of Denmark, challenging the
Crown in the right of his Danish succession; and by William surnamed the
Bastard, Duke of Normandy, pretending the donation of Edward the Confessor.
The Dane vanquished and slain at Stamfordbridge in Yorkshire, with his torn,
and wearied troops adventuring shortly after his person, and the fortunes of
the English against the Norman at the great battle near Hasting in Sussex,
he there most unfortunately within the first year of his reign, lost both his
kingdom, and life, the last English, or Saxon king, succeeded unto by William
the Conqueror, and the Normans, whose turn now falls in the last place.

THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND under the Normans. Nordmanni Eginharti in vita Caroli
Magni. Nortmanni Aymonij de gestis Francorum l. 5 c. 20. etc. Normanni Wilhelmi
Gemiticensis de Ducum Normannoru^ Gest. l. 1. c 4. etc and recentiorum

THe v. Eginhartum in vita Caroli Magni. Annals cujusdam Anonymi domestici.
Ludov. Pij Francorum Regis, imperanti eodem Carolo; Aymonij de gestis Francorum
l. 5. c. 20. and. 31. Wilhelmi Gemiticensis de Ducum Normannorum gestis.
Vpodygma Neustriae per Tho. de Walsingham. Eius. hist. Malmesb. de gestis Angl.
l. 3. Henr. Hunt. hist. l. 6. 7. and 8. Guil. Neubrigensem. Rogeri de Ho^eden
Annal. part^m poster. Flo^es hist. per Mat. Westmon. Guilielmi Camd. Britan.
(de Normannis.) The English Annals.
word Normans, or Nortmans, signified Normanni autem dicuntur, quod lingua
eo^um Boreas North vocatur, homo vero Man. inde Northmanni, sid est homines
Boreales nuncu^ntur. Wilhelmi Gemiticensis de Ducum Norm^nnorum gestis l. 1. c.
4.
Northern men with the Dutch, of which Nation, and language they were. The
name was common to the Danes, Norvegians, and Swethlanders; or to whatsoever
German people, inhabiting toward the Pole Artique, and the North; taken up, or
given unto them from such their more Northerly situation. An ancient Frencb
Historian, living in the reign of the Emperor Lewis the Godly, (about which
time we find them first mentioned) more distinctly boundeth Normannia, or the
Country of the first, or Dutch Normans, with the river Eydore; including
within this account Denmark, and other more Northerly Regions and excluding
Saxony, and the parts of Germany, lying upon the South of that river. They were
otherwise called the Nord-luidi in Helmoldus, and the aforesaid Author. The
derivation we know not, unless from the words Nord, or North, and Lieu, which
last with the French, signifies a place, or country. The names were begun upon
occasion of the pyracies, and wars of certain mixtures of all those
Northern together, or of the Swethlanders, and Norvegians a part, following
the tracts of the Danes, and invading, and preying upon the French and English,
toward the declining estate of those nations, and called by these general
appellations, either because their proper names were not yet so well known
abroad, or because then consisting of many. We first read of the express name
of the Normans in the reign of Charles the Great by Eginhartus in his life of
that Emperor, infesting then the seacoasts of France, and Germany. Their
mention after this is frequent, more especially in the French Histories, with
great cruelty, and fury irresistable afflicting the kingdom of France in the
reign of Charles the Bauld under their Captain Hastinge; and under Godfrey,
an other of their Leaders in the reign of Charles the Gros. In the year 912,
they first fix fast footing in this rich Continent under Rollo, another of
their Captains, to whom king Charles, surnamed the Simple, upon composition for
his peace herewith, gave the country of Neustria, together with his daughter
Gista in marriage, with condition to hold the same under the fief, and homage
of the French kings, and to become Christian. After this time, that part of
France from the firm residence hereof has ever since been called Normandy,
as the inhabitants hereof Normans; victoriously held for a long time by the
heirs of Rollo with the title of Dukes of Normandy; succeeded unto by
William, surnamed Long-espee, or with the Long-sword, son to this first Rollo;
Richard the first, son to William surnamed Long-espee; Richard the second son
to Richard the first; Richard the third, son to Richard the second; Robert
brother to Richard the third; and William surnamed the Bastard, the seventh
Duke, natural son to Robert. Under this last prince these French Normans
(France now growing too narrow for their ambition) first attempt upon, and
invade England. Their color for this war was the pretended right of their Duke
William to the Crown hereof, bequeathed unto him by Edward the Confessor in
the time of the Danes during his exile in France, confirmed afterward by
Edward being king, and now since his decease withheld by Harold. Their hopes
in so great an enterprise was the unsettled state of England, now under an
usurper (Edgar Etheling the right heir excluded,) and the favor of the Bishop
of Rome (Alexander the second, then succeeding in the Papacy) siding to their
cause, of whose countenance in authorizing unjust claims Pepin, and the late
kings of France had made profitable use. In the year 1066 the Armies of the
English, and Normans assisted with many thousands of French adventurers in
Sussex near Hastings fatally encounter. Harold, not by valor, but through the
sins, and many vices of the Nation, is vanquished, and slain with the loss of
above 67000 of his valiant, and faithful soldiers, and the remainder of the
miserable English (none then further adventuring, factious, irresolute; without
head, and terrified with Papal cursings) without any more resistance become
subject to the Conquerours, and William the Norman obtayneth the Crown, with
great happiness maintained hitherto in his Norman posterity. The kingdom of the
English (the growth hereof having been long hindered by the Danish wars,)
before this last Norman conquest exceeded not the ancient limits of the Saxons
Heptarchie, bounding upon the West with Wales, and the Countries of
Westmoreland, and Cumberland, enjoyed by the Scots, and Welsh princes under the
homage of the kings of England. By king William the first, following his
victories, Cumberland, and Westmoreland (as before) are taken in, and
incorporated into the account, and name hereof. By William Rufus, and the
succeeding Monarchs Wales. In foreign parts by Henry the second, Ireland is
conquered, and Aniou, Touraine, Maine, Aquitaine, and Guienne, with Normandy
their ancient inheritance (containing almost one half part of France) are
annexed to the house, and right of the Norman-English. By Edward the third, and
the fifth, and sixth Henry's the potent kingdoms of France. The French having
long since withdrawn their allegiance, divided asunder by spacius seas,
language, and affection, the rest remain subject; parts, or states appending
of the English kingdom. In James the first of happy memory both kingdoms of
England, and Scotland, or the whole Britain, are united under one Monarch,
together with Ireland, a Country depending upon England; or the dominion of
all the British Islands. The Kings of England follow of the Norman blood, and
until this last, and blessed union. William duke of Normandy, from this
victories surnamed the Conqueror, the first king of England of the house of
the Normans, natural son to Robert Duke of Normandy by Arlet, a Burgers
daughter of Falaise in that Country, (Battle-field won) by conquest, and a
pretended right from the gift of Edward the Confessor his cosen German by the
mothers side, succeeding in the year 1066. The subdued English, stubborn,
malecontented, unquiet, and ill brooking foreign government, he oppressed with
servitude, and hard Laws, dispossessing the nobility of their goods, places,
and revenues, which he assigned to his French, and Normans, the root of the
present more ancient English gentry. He deceased in the year 1087. william
the second surnamed Rufus from his more ruddy color, a younger son to the
Conqueror, king of England by the will of his father, his elder brother Robert
succeeding in the Dukedom of Normandy. He deceased in the year 1100, slain
unawares in New-Forrest in Hamshire, as he was following his game, unmarried,
and without issue. Henry the first, surnamed Beauclercke, or the good Scholar
(for such he was by means of his education,) borne at Selby in Yorkshire,
youngest son to the Conqueror; king of England, through the advantage of his
brother Roberts absence, warring then ab^ad in the Holy Land, and by the favor
of the people in regard of his English birth, and his sugared promises (which in
part he performed) to remit those heavy laws, and taxations, wherewith they
had been burdened during the reigns of his father, and brother. To better
his title, and the more to insinuate into the English affections, he took to
wife Maude, daughter to Malcolme the third, king of Scotland, and St Margaret
daughter to Edward, surnamed the Outlaw, eldest son to Edmund Iron-side,
hereby uniting together the Norman, and English blood in his issue, and
posterity. Wars arising betwixt the two brethren, he with his English subdued
the Normans, upon the same day after forty years, wherein his father with the
Normans had conquered the English, annexing Normandy to his English Crown, his
borther Robert being surprised in battle, and detayned prisoner during life.
He deceased in the year 1135, the first English-Norman king. Stephen Earl of
Mortaigne, younger son to Stephen Earl of Blois and Champaigne by Adcla,
daughter to the Conqueror; king of England by the power of his faction, the
advantage of his sex, and the pretended will of king Henry upon his deathbed,
opposed by Maude the only legitimate daughter, and surviuing issue of Henry,
formerly wife to Henry the fourth, Emperor of the Romans. After long trouble,
and wars betwixt the two sides a peace at length is concluded, and Stephen is
continued in the possession of the Crown to return after his decease upon
Henry Fitz-Empresse son to Mande, and to the heirs of the first Henry. Henry
the second, son to Geffrey Plantaginet Earl of Aniou in France, and Maude the
Empress, daughter to Henry the first, and Maude daughter to Malcolme king of
Scotland, and St Margaret descended from king Edmund surnamed the Iron-side. In
this prince the surname of Plantaginet was first derived upon the house of
England, continued unto Edward son to George Duke of Clarence, the last
Plantaginet, or of the male issue hereof (the rest extinguished during the
civil wars betwixt the houses of York, and Lancaster) put to death by king
Henry the seventh. He married unto Eleanor, daughter, and sole heir to
William Duke of Aquitaine, and Guienne, and by arms, and voluntary submission
made first subject the factious, and divided Irish; king of England, Duke of
Normandy, Aquitaine, and Guienne, and Earl of Aniou. The dominion and title of
Ireland he had given unto his youngest son John. Maude, his eldest daughter, was
married unto Henry surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony, and Bavaria, from whom
are descended the present Dukes of Brunswyck, and Lunenburg in Germany, bearing
the same arms with the more ancient kings of England. Richard the first, king
of England, Duke of Normandy, Aquitaine, and Guienne, and Earl of Aniou, son
to Henry the second. He accompanied Philip, surnamed Augusts, king of France,
with other Latin princes toward the East for the recoverie of the Holy Land,
renowned for his victories against Saladine, Sultan of Egypt, and the
Infidels. Not the least in that journey, amongst his other conquest, was that
of the Cyprio^s, whom occasioned by some hostile, and churlish carriages of
Cursar their king against his distressed, and weather-beaten Fleet, he in few
days subdued; exchanging that Island with Guy of Lusignan for the kingdom, or
title of Jerusalem, remaining in the house of Guy for many descents until the
usurpation thereof by the Venetians. He deceased without issue. John king of
England, Duke of Normandy, Aquitaine, and Guienne, Earl of Aniou, and Lord of
Ireland, (which last title he first added) youngest son to Henry the second,
opposed by Arthur, Duke of Britain, son to Geffrey his elder brother, and
Constance inheretresse of that house. He lost Normandy, Aniou, Touraine, and
Maine, with Poictou, part of the Dukedom of Aquitaine, to Philip the second,
surnamed Augustus, French king, pretending their forfeiture (holding of the
French kings in fee) upon the decease of Arthur, whom he surmised to have been
murdered by John; forsaken in those troubles by his disloyal Nobility,
refusing their aids, and betrayed by the natives of those countries, better
effected to the French. Engaged at once in three dangerous wars against the
Pope, and Clergy, the French king, and his rebellious subjects, to make his
peace with the Pope, his more potent adversary, and the chief author of those
evils, (Innocentius the third then succeeding in the Papacy) he enthralled his
Crown to the tribute, and vassallage of the sea of Rome. Henry the third, son
to John, succeeding in the left dominions of his father, and in his wars
against the French, and his traitorous English Barons. Edward the first, son to
Henry the third. He subdued the Scots, and annexed the Welsh to his English
kingdom. Edward the second, son to Edward the first. He married unto Isabel,
daughter to Philip the fourth, French king, deposed by a joint conspiracy of
his disloyal Queen, and subjects, pretending his bad government, and vices.
Edward the third, son to Edward the second, and Isabel of France. The male
issue of Philip the fourth extinguished in Charles surnamed the Fair, in right
from his mother daughter to Philip, the next heir general; he made claim to
the rich kingdom of France, assuming the title hereof, and quartering his
English armoryes with the French Lillies; continued still in his successors.
Having vanquished the French in two memorable battles at Crecy, and
Poictiers, and taken John their king prisoner, he in the end nothwithstanding
(fortune changing) lost to that enemy all Aquitaine, and Guienne, the remainder
of the English possessions in that Continent (Calais excepted,) yielded up by
the treacherous inhabitants, ill affecting the English government, and coveting
a reunion with France. He deceased in the year. 1378. Richard the second, king
of England, and France, and Lord of Ireland, son to Edward prince of Wales,
eldest son to Edward the third; deposed by Henry the fourth without issue.
Henry the fourth, king of England, and France, and Lord of Ireland, son to John
of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, fourth son to Edward the third, the first prince
of the Lancastrian family, whose usurpation, and unjust title gave occasion
afterward to those long, and miserable wars betwixt his house, and York.
Henry the fifth, king of England, and France, and Lord of Ireland, eldest son to
Henry the fourth. The field of Azincourt won, and the unfortunate French under
a lunatike, and weak king being divided into two great factions of Burgundy,
and Orleans; by the aid of Burgundy having married Catharine, the French
kings daughter, he is made Regent of France during the malady, and
indisposition hereof, and declared his next successor to the Crown, Charles
the Dolphin his son disinherited. Henry the sixth, king of England, and France,
and Lord of Ireland, son to Henry the fifth, and Catherine of France, Crowned
French king at Paris in the year 1431. In the reign hereof Richard Duke of
York laid claim to the Crown of England in the right of the house of
Clarence, elder brother to John of Gaunt, father to king Henry the fourth,
aided by Richard Nevile Earl of Warwick, and other potent nobility; the effect
whereof was a bloody civil war, continued with variable fortune for the
space of 25 years betwixt the two houses of Lancaster, and York, the
slaughter of the greatest part of the blood royal of both factions, the
deposing, and murder of this holy, and just prince, the irrecoverable loss of
France by these tumults, and the establishing of the kingdom in Edward the
fourth, and his succession the house of York. Edward the fourth, son to
Richard Plantaginet, Duke of York, (which Richard was son to Richard Earl of
Cambridge, son to Edmund Duke of York, fifth son to king Edward the third) by
Anna his wife, daughter to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, son to Edmund
Mortimer, and Philippa, daughter, and sole heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence,
third son to king Edward, king of England, and France, and Lord of Ireland by
conquest, and the right of his house. Edward the fifth, king of England, and
France, and Lord of Ireland, son to Edward the fourth, deposed, and afterward
murdered by his unnatural uncle Richard the third, deceasing without issue.
Richard the third, son to Richard Duke of York, and younger brother to Edward
the fourth. He was slain at Bosworth field against Henry the seventh, the
last king of the name of Plantagenet, Henry the seventh, king of England, and
France, and Lord of Ireland, son to Edmund Earl of Richmund, and Margaret his
wife, daughter to John Duke of Somerset, son to John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster by Catherine Swinford; the next and almost only surviuing person of
the house of Lancaster, butchered in the late wars. The better to assure the
kingdom to his posterity, and to prevent all future quarrels, he took to
wife Elizabeth eldest daughter to king Edward the fourth, uniting in his issue
the undoubted rights of both factions of Lancaster, and York. Henry the eight,
son to Henry the seventh. He made Ireland a kingdom, and first assumed the
title of Defendour of the faith. Edward the sixth, king of England, France, and
Ireland, son to Henry the eight. Mary Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
daughter to Henry the eight, and sister to Edward. Elizabeth of famous memory,
Queen of England, France, and Ireland, sister to Edward, and Mary. James of
happy memory the sixth of that name king of Scotland, in the year 1602 (the
whole issue of king Henry the eight being extinguished in Elizabeth) succeeding
in the kingdom of England, and the dominions thereunto belonging, son to Henry
Stuart Lord Darly, and Mary Queen of the Scots, daughter to James the fifth,
son to James the fourth, and Margaret eldest daughter to king Henry the
seventh; the first sole Monarch of Great Britain, and of the neighboring
Islands. Charles king of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, whom God long
preserve, son to James of happy memory.

In this sort the Island of Great Britain having suffered so many alterations
is at length now become divided into two only kingdoms, governed by one
Monarch, but not any wise depending, or subordinate to another; the kingdom of
England, lying upon the South of the river Tweede, and Solwey Frith; and the
kingdom of Scotland lying beyond.

The kingdom of England (our present subject) has been formerly divided into
52 Shires or Counties, Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Barkeshire, Hantshire, Wiltshire,
Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Devonshire, Cornwall, Glocestershire, Oxfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Hartfordshire, Middlesex, Essex, Suffolk,
Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, Northamptonshire, Rutlandshire,
Leicestershire, Lincolneshire, Nottinghamshire, Darbyshire, Cheshire,
Staffordshire, Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Shropshire, Herefordshire,
Monmouthshire, Glamorganshire, Brecknockshire, Radnorshire, Caermardenshire,
Penbrokeshire, Cardiganshire, Merioneihshire, Caernarvonshire, Anglesey,
Denbighshire, Flintshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire, the Bishopric of Durham,
Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Northumberland.

Of these Kent retayneth yet the ancient name. Essex, and Sussex have bin thus
called from the East, and South Saxons. Midlesex from the situation of the
English, or Dutch inhabitants, planted betwixt the West, South, East, and
Mercian Saxons Devonshire or Denshire from the Danmonij, the ancient British
inhabitants. Westmoreland from the more Western position, and quality of the
country, being hilly, and full of fruitles wastes, named Mores by the Northern
English. Northumberland, from the English kingdom of Northumberland, whereof
it was a part. Rutlandshire, most probably from the ruddie color of the soil.
Barkeshire, from the wood Berroc after Asser Menevensis. Glamorganshire, from
the word Mor, signifying the sea with the Britons, or Welsh, upon which it
lies. Wiltshire, and Somersetshire from Wilton, and Somerton, decayed towns,
sometimes the chief of the Shires. Anglesey from the English, since the
possession hereof by the Nation. Suth-rey, or Surrey signifies with the
English the Southern kingdom, a part of the kingdom of the South Saxons.
Suffolk, and Norfolk the more Southern, and Northern people, compared thus
together, the parts sometimes of the kingdom of the East Angles. The occasion
of the names of Cornwall, and Cumberland we even now related. Merioneth was the
ancient name, given by the Welsh. The reason hereof we find not. The rest
have been named from the chief towns of each devision. Their descriptions
follow. L. D.

THE THIRD BOOK.
Containing the Chorographicall description of England.

KENT. Cantium.

BOunded upon the South, and East with the English channel, and the German
Ocean; upon the North with the river Thames from Essex, and upon the West with
Surrey, and Sussex. The country is hilly, shaded with hedge-rowes; and woods;
populous, and fruitful, planted with a frugall, and industrious inhabitant.
The air is thick, and in many places agueish, and unwholesome for this cause, or
in regard of some bad vapors from a wet, cold, and unhealthful ground. Places
of better note are Canterbury upon the river Stour (Darvernum of Ptolemy,
Cantuaria. lon. 24. gr. 51. min. lat. gr. 51. m. 16. Camd.
Durovernum of Antoninus, and Durovernia of Beda) the chief town, and an
Archbishops sea, the Primate of the kingdom, founded by Ethelbert, the first
Christian king of Kent, in the person of S. Austine, the Apostle of the
English. Upon the Ocean Reculver (a country village) Regulbium of the Notitia,
the Station of the 1 Cohort, named of the Vetasii. Sandwich, a Cinque Port. In
the neighboring fields stood the town Rhutupiae of Ptolemy, and Rhitupae of
Antoninus (the tract of whose streets are yet discovered by a more thin growth
of corn in those places, named S. Augustines cross by the vulgar people) a
famous port of the Romans, and the Mansion of their 2d Legion, surnamed
Augusta, drawn hither in the waine of that Empire from Isca Silurum, now Caer
Leon in South Wales, to defend the coast against the pyracies, and incursions
of the Saxons. North hereof lies the I Will of Tenet (Thanatos of Ptolemy) made
by the river Stour, Thanatos.
here dividing, and falling into the Ocean with two branches, or channels. The
foreland, a promontory of the Island, is named Cantium by Ptolemy, in some
editions corruptly Nucantium, and Acantium. Dover under the cliffs, Dubris.
lon. 26. gr. 10, m. lat. gr. 51. Hues.
and where they divide (Dubris of Antoninus, and Dubrae of the the Notitia, the
Station of a foot company of the Tungricani) a noted passage into France, and
one of the Cinque ports, defended with a spacious and strong castle, mounted
upon a high, and praecipitous rock, commanding the subject Ocean. The
Constable hereof is Warden of the Cinque ports. The straight of the sea betwixt
this, and the Continent (named by the French Le Pas de Calais, Fretum Caletanum.
by the Latins Fretum Caletanum) contains about 30 miles in breadth. At the
castle of Deal, a low shore in the way toward Sandwich, Caesar is thought to
have landed, when he first invaded Britain. Along the cliffs Folkeston. Hide,
a cinque port, although now remote from the sea by the intervenings of beeche,
and sands. Lime (a small village near unto Hide) Lemannae of Antoninus, and
the Notitia, then a noted seaport, and the station of a foot company of the
Turnacenses. It stands now within the land. Upon the West hereof is Rumney
marsh, extended along the Ocean for some 14 miles in length, and 7 in breadth,
low, fenny, trenched with ditches, far, rich, but very unhealthful, and ill
inhabited. The country has been gotten from the sea (from whose violence it
is yet defended by banks) and seems more aunciently to have made the noted
road, or harbor, named Portus Lemannis by Antoninus. Rumney a cinque port,
Sylva Anderida.
and the chief town of the Marsh. It is now on all sides enclosed with the
land. In the Weald, or woodlands Newenden upon the river Rother, Anderida, of
the Notitia, the station of a foot company of the Abulci, took, and sacked by
Ella, the first king of the South Saxons. From hence the Wealds of Kent, and
Sussex are named Andreds-wald, and Andreds-flege in the more ancient English
Historians. Below is the I Will of Oxney, made by the divided streams of the
Rother. Tenterden. Cranbroke, towns of clothing in the same weald. Upon the
river Medwey Tunbridge. Roffa.
Maidston, (Vagniacis of Antoninus) a populous, and large town. Rochester,
(Durobrovis of Antoninus, and Rotschester, and Castellum Cantuariorum of Beda)
a Bishopssea, founded not long after Canterbury in the person of S. Iustus.
Here the Medwey affords a deep, and safe road for the kings Navy Royal.
Further down lies the I Will of Shepey (Toliatis of Ptolemy) encompassed with
the Ocean, and the divided channels of the Medwey, named the East, and West
Swale, whose chief town is Queen borough, defended with a strong castle,
commanding the entrance of the river, founded, and thus named by Edward the
third in honor of his Queen Philippa. Upon the East of the Medwey
Sittingburne. Feversham. Lenham, (Durolevum of Antoninus.) Nearer London,
Dartford upon the river Darent. Upon the Thames Gravesend, a noted road for
ships, and passage to London. Greenwich, honored with one of the Kings Royal
Houses, the happy birthplace of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory. Cantii,
Vitae.
The ancient Inhabitants were the Cantij of Ptolemy, afterward the Vitae of
Beda, by Hengist erected to a kingdom, the first Christian of the English,
converted by S. Austine. It contains 5 Lathes, or great divisions, S.
Austine, Sheepway, Scray, Aileford, and Sutton, 64 Hundreds, and 398 parishes.

SUSSEX. Sussexia.

BOunded upon the South with the English Channel; upon the East, and West with
Kent, and Hantshire; and upon the North with Surrey. The more Southern parts
swell with chaulkie downs, yet the shore is plain, and open, but rockie, full
of shelues, and yielding few good harbors. Those toward the North are
ouer-spred with forests, and woods (S. Leonards forest, Word, Ashdown, with
others) part of Andreads-wald, and continuate with those of Kent, much
diminished of late years hy means of glass, and iron-workes. Chiefer towns
are along the Seacoast Rhie at the mouth of the river Rother, an haven town
of good note, and an appendant of the Cinque ports. New Winchelsey
(distinguished thus from the old (Vindelis of Antoninus) now covered with
Ocean) upon a steep hill over-looking the sea, a member of the Cinque ports.
The haven is warped up, and the town by that means decayed. Hasting the first
of the Cinque ports. Upon the North hereof stands Battle, occasioned by the
Abbey thus named, founded by the Conqueror in the place where he subdued
Harold, and the English. The Monastery suppressed, the town remains. Jews
the best town of those parts, fatal to king Henry the third, overcome here,
and taken prisoner by his disloyal Barons. Brighthelmsted upon the Ocean Not
far of is Ederington (a small village) Portus Adurni of the Notitia, the
station of a foot company of the Exploratores. Stening. Arundell a fair
castle, and town, whereof the Earls of Arundell are entitled; of the most
honorable house, and name of the Fitz-Alans, Cicestria, lon. 26. gr. 10. m.
lat. g. 51. Hues.
now of the Hawards. Chichester, almost encompassed with the river Lavant, the
chief town of the country, (builded by Cissa the second king of the
South Saxons) and a Bishops sea, brought hither in the reign of the Conqueror
by Bishop Stigand from Celsey, a neighboring peninsula upon the South, whose
town the more ancient seat of the Bishops, Regni.
is now worn into the sea. More Northwards Midherst. Australes Saxones.
Petworth. The more ancient inhabitants were part of the Regni of Ptolemy,
afterward of the South Saxons. It contains 6 greater divisions, which they
call Rapes, (Hasting, Pevensey, Jews, Bramber, Arundell, and Chichester) 57
Hundreds, 18 Market towns, and 312 parishes.

SVTH-REY. Surria.

BOunded upon the South and East with Sussex, and Kent; upon the North with the
river of Thames from Middlesex; and upon the West with Barkshire, and
Hantshire. The air is sweet, and pleasant, the soil fruitful upon the
skirts, in the midst more barren. Places of more note are Farneham; Guildford.
lon. 20. gr. 2. m. lat. 51 g 22. m. Speed.
and Guildford upon the river Weye. Croydon, graced with the palace of the
Archbishops of Canterbury. Nonesuch, a magnificent, and royal palace of the
kings. Upon the Thames Otlands at the fall of the river Weye. Richmond, royal
houses of the kings. Nere Otlands at Coway stakes the Thames is forded, thought
to be the place, where Caesar passed the river against Cassivellan king of the
Britons. Kingston, the chief town. Here usually were crowned the ancient
Monarchs of the English Saxons. At Woodcote (a forest, or wood not far from
hence) are seen yet the ruins of some ancient city, conjectured to be
Naeomagus of Ptolemy; and Noviomagus of Antoninus. Lambeth, the seat or
residence of the Archbishops of Canterbury, quart of London. Southwark, quart
of the same city. The ancient inhabitants were part of the Regni of Ptolemy,
afterward of the South Saxons, It conteyneth 13 Hundreds, 8 Market towns, and
140 parishes.

BARKE-SHIRE. Bercheria.

BOunded upon the East with Surreye, upon the North with the river of Thames
from Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire; upon the West with Wiltshire; and upon
the South with Hantshire. The Eastern part is woody, and less fertile. Those
toward the South rise with grassie downs, apt pasturage for sheep. Under the
hills more Northwards lies the veil of White-horse, a deep, and fat soil,
yielding plenty of corn. Chiefer places are upon the Thames, Windsore, a
royal castle, and house of the kings, with a town adjoining, the place of
creation of the most honorable knights of the Gartar; upon a steep hill
enjoying a large, and pleasant prospect over the river, and subject country.
Reading. long. 19. g. 35, m. lat. 51. g. 40. m. Speed.
Maidenhead. Reading, near unto the confluence of the Thames and Kennet.
Wallengford (Calleva of Ptolemy, and Antoninus, the city of the Attrebatij.)
Abingdon. In the great, and vast forest of Windsore Okingham. Upon the river
of Kennet, Hungerford. Newbery. Close by is Speene, (now a mean village)
Spinae of Antoninus. Amongst the downs Lamborne. In the vale Wantage.
Faringdon. The ancient inhabitants were the Attrebatij of Ptolemy, Attrebatij.
Occidentales Saxones.
afterward part of the West Saxons. It contains 20 Hundreds, 12 Market
towns, and 140 parishes.

HANT-SHIRE. Com. Southantonensis.

BOunded upon the East with Surrey, and Sussex; upon the South with the English
Channel; upon the North with Barkeshire; and upon the West with Wiltshire, and
Dorsetshire. The air is fresh, and most healthful, the soil rich in
pasturage, and corn; in the borders shaded with forests, and woods, in the
midst more champian, and open. Chiefer towns are Portesmouth, a noted road
for ships, and a strong town of war in Portsey, an Island close by the
Continent; whereunto it is joined by a bridge. The bay, or harbor hereof is
named (...) by Ptolemy, or the Great haven. Southanton (Clausentum of
Antoninus) a well traded port upon a coing of land betwixt the rivers Test, and
Alre, ouer-looking a fair, and spacious bay, named by Ptolemy Trisantonis
Ostium, or the Mouth of the river Anton, naming the town, as this does the
country. West of the bay, and for many miles along the Ocean toward
Dorsetshire lies New-Forrest, woody, solitary, and better stored with dear,
and wild beast, then men, made thus with the pulling down of 36 Churches, and
towns, by king William the Conqueror through his hatred to the English, or
greater love to his sports, or to give a more free entrance to his Normans, if
any insurrection, or tumult should happen amongst the discontented natives;
fatal to his issue, (not without just revenge) by the violent, and untimely
deaths of William Rufus, and of Henry, son to the Curthose, his eldest son. The
sea betwixt this, and the I Will of Wight affords a safe road for ships,
commanded by Hurst, and Calshot castles, built to defend this empty shore by
king Henry the eight upon the points of two narrow, and long promontories
within the Ocean. Christs-Church upon the sea, and meetings of the river
Stoure, and Aven. Ringwood upon the Aven (Regnum of Antoninus, naming the Regni
of Ptolemy.) Cerdici Vadum.
Higher upon the Aven, and borders of Wiltshire Chardford, named thus from
Cerdic the first king of the West Saxons, and his great victory obtained there
against Natanleod, and the Britons. Rumsey upon the river Test. Wintonia. lon.
g. 22. lat. g. 51. Camd.
Andover. Winchester (Venta of Ptolemy, and Antoninus) seated in a pleasant
bottom amongst hills, a Bishops sea, and the chief town, the royal seat
sometimes of the West Saxon Monarchs. Basingstoke. Hard by stands Basing, a
magnificent, and spacious house, the seat of the Marqueses of Winchester. Not
far off is Silchester, the carkafe of a Roman town, named Vindonum by
Antoninus. The walls remain yet almost entire, and contain some two Italian
miles in compass. The more ancient inhabitants were the Belgae of Ptolemy,
Regni, and Belgae
with part of the Regni of the same author, inhabiting the Seacoast,
afterward the West Saxons. Here are accounted 40 Hundreds, 18 Market towns,
and 253 parishes.

VVILT-SHIRE. Wiltonia.

BOunded on the East with Barkeshire, and Hantshire; upon the North with
Glocestershire; and upon the West, and South with Somersetshire, and
Dorsetshire The country is champian, and open; in the middle, and toward the
South took up with grassie plains; to the North more hilly, and sprinkled
with woods; most healthy, pleasant, and stored with all profitable, and useful
varieties. Towns of more note are Marleborough (Cunetio of Antoninus) upon the
Kennet nere unto the head of the river. Ramesbury, (a mean village upon the
same river, nerer Hungerford) sometimes a Bishops sea for Wilsthire, erected
by Edward surnamed the Elder, Monarch of the English Saxons, united afterward
with Sherborne by Bishop Herman in the reign of Edward the Confessor, and
lastly removed to Sarisbury in the time of the Conqueror. Crekelade upon the
Thames, or Isis. By Breden Forest Malmesbury, a walled town mounted upon a
hill Castle-like, and encompassed with the river Avon (Maildulphi urbs of Beda,
named thus from S. Maidulphus an Irish Scottish Monk, and Anchoret.)
Chippen-ham upon the same river. Calne, memorable for a famous Synod of the
English, and a disputation held under Archbishop Dunstan in the reign of
Edward surnamed the Martyr betwixt the Monks, and married Priests, whose cause
in the credit, and opinion of the Vulgar fell with the chamber, wherein they
were assembled, and thorough the preservation of Saint Dunstan (thought to be
miraculous) who only sat firm, and unhurt, the patron, and defendour of the
Monks. Bradford. The Devices, or Vices. In the Plains Ambresburie upon the
Aven. Close by is the monument of Stone-henge, set up after Mat. of Westminster
by Aurelius Ambrosius king of the Britons in memory of the British nobles,
under Vortigerne slain there by Hengist, Sarum. and Sarisburia. long. 18. g.
31. m. lat. 51. g. 10. m. Speed
and the Saxons. Sarisburie, encompassed with the plains, in a pleasant
bottom at the meetings of the rivers Aven, and Nadder, running thorough, and
watering the many streets thereof, a Bishops See. The town is not ancient,
begun since the reign of king Richard the first, raised out of the ashes of
old Sarisbury (Sorbiodunum of Antoninus,) the dead ruins of a Roman fort, or
town of some half a mile in compass, seated a mile of upon the hills,
forsaken by the Bishop and inhabitants for want of water, and other defects,
removing hither. Wilton, naming the country, at the meetings of the rivers
Willey, and Nadder, a mean village, yet governed by a Maiour, graced chiefly
with a fair house of the Earls of Penbroke. Werminster, (Verlucio of
Antoninus.) The whole is divided into 29 Hundreds, 19 Market towns, Belgae.
and 304 Parishes. The ancients inhabitants were part of the Belgae of
Ptolemy, afterward of the West Saxons.

SOMERSETSHIRE. Com. Somersettensis.

BOunded upon the East, with Wiltshire, and the river Avon from Glocestershire;
upon the North, with the sea of Severne from Wales; upon the West, with
Devonshire; and upon the South, with Dorsetshire. The soil is fat, deep, and
in some places marishie, and subject to inundations; to the East upon the edge
of Wiltshire woody, overspread with the great forest of Selwood. Within arise
Mendip hills, rich in mines of lead. Bathonia. long. 20. gr. 56 m, la. 51. g.
21. m. Camd.
Chiefer towns are Bath (Aquae Calidae of Ptolemy, and Aquae Solis of
Antoninus,) named thus from the hot medicinable waters thereof, a walled town,
and the chief of the Country, seated in a bottom upon the river Avon.
Amongst the hills environing the town is Bannesdowne (Mons Badonicus of
Gildas, and the ancient English Historians,) famous for a great victory of
king Arthur, and the Britons obtained against the Saxons. The trenches are yet
seen (although obscurely) where the English lay encamped. Wells under Mendip
hills, Glastonia.
a Bishops See with Bath. Glastenburie amongst rivers; and waters in the Island
Avallon, or Avallonia of Malmesburiensis; occasioned by the great, and rich
Monastery thus named, the place of burial of sundry of the West Saxon
Monarchs, founded by king Ina in the place where was thought to have stood the
Cell of Joseph of Arimathea, the first supposed Apostle of the Britons. Here in
the reign of king Henry the second was found the grave, and inscription of
Arthur king of the Britons, discovered by the songs of the Welsh Bards. The
country on all sides is fenny, and Marishy, distinguished into the names of
Gedney Moore, Sedege Moore, Audre Moore, Heth Moore, Queens Moore, and
Brent-Marsh, strong fastnesses of king Alfred, and his English, distressed by
the wars of the all conquering Danes. Ilchester (Iscalis of Ptolemy) upon the
river Evil. Crookehorne upon the river Parret. Bridge-water upon the Parret.
The arm of the sea below this, and the confluence of the Parret with another
river from the fens of Glastenbury is named Vzella of Ptolemy. Taunton upon the
river Tone. Upon the Ocean VVatchet. Dunster. The whole contains 42 Hundreds,
33 Market-townes, and 385 Parishes. The ancient inhabitants were part of the
Belgae of Plolemy, afterward of the West Saxons.

DORSET-SHIRE. Com. Dorcestriae.

BOunded upon the North, with Somersetshire, and Wilsthire; upon the East,
with Hantshire; upon the South, with the English Channel; and upon the West,
with Devonshire. The soil is fruitful, especially Moreland, or the valley of
white-hart. Towns of better note are Shaftsbury upon the edge of Wiltshire.
Upon the Stour Blandford. Winburne (Vindogladia of Antoninus.) Upon Moreland
Shirburne, sometimes a Bishops See, removed to Sarisbury in the reign of the
Conqueror. Dorcestria lon. 18. g. lat. 50. 48. m. Speed.
Upon the From Dorchester (Dunium of Ptolemy, and Durnovaria of Antoninus) the
chief town. Along the Seacoast Poole within a spacious Bay upon a point of
land, almost encompassed with the sea. Beyond the bay lies the I Will of
Purbecke, a Peninsula environed on three sides with the Ocean. Weimouth. 23. g
50. m. Long. 51. g. lat. Hues.
Weymouth, and Melcomb, divided with the little river of Wey, a noted Port.
Upon the South hereof stands Portland, sometimes an Island, now joined to the
Continent, defended with a castle, founded by king Henry the eight, commanding
the entrance of the haven of Weymouth. Burtport. Lime. It contains 34.
Hundreds, 18 Market-townes, and 248 Parishes. Durotriges.
The ancient Inhabitants were the Durotriges of Ptolemy, afterward part of
the West Saxons.

DEVON-SHIRE. Devonia.

BOunded upon the East, with Dorsetshire, and Somersetshire; upon the South,
and North, with the English Channel, and the Sea of Severne; and upon the
West, with the river Tamar from Cornwall. The country is hilly, rich in mines
of Tin, especially toward Cornwall, and the West; and well stored with
convenient Ports, and harbors for shipping. The soil is lean; yet made
fruitful thorough the great industry of the inhabitants, Exonia. long. g. 19.
m. 11. lat. gr. 50. m. 40. Came. long. gr. 22. m. 10. lat. gr. 51. Hues.
enriched by their intermixing of lime, or sands fetched from the sea-caost.
Towns of more note are Axminster upon the Ax. Honniton upon the Otterey. Upon
the Ex Tiverton. Excester (Isca of Ptolemy, and Isca Dunmonioru^ of Antoninus)
the chief town, and a bishops See, removed hither from Kirton in the reign of
Edward the Confessor. Columbton upon the river Columb. Upon the Creedy beyond
the Ex Kirton, an ancient Bishops See, founded by Edward surnamed the Elder,
and removed afterward to Excester. Totnes upon the Dert. Tavestok upon the
Tavy. In Dertmore (a mountainous, and fruitles waste upon the East hereof)
plenty of Tin is gotten. Here also lately have Loadstones been found. Upon the
Seacoast, and the English channel Plimmouth a famous Port at the fall,
Plimmouth* (...) gr. 10. m lon. 50. g. 50. m. lat. Hues.
and meetings of the rivers Plim, and Tamar. The haven is large, and deep,
affording a safe road for ships in both rivers, defended with the strong Island
of St Michael, and other fortifications upon the land. Dertmouth, a well
frequented Port at the mouth of the river Dert. Beyond is Torbay a spacious
inlet of the sea, and a commodious harbor. At the mouth of the Ax toward
Dorsetshire Seton (Moridunum of Antoninus,) memorable only for the antiquity.
Toward the Sea of Severne Bediford upon the river Touridge. West hereof lies
Hertland point, (Promontorium Herculis of Ptolemy). Berstaple upon the Taw,
navigable here for great vessels, a well traded, and rich empory. The Shire
contains 33 Hundreds, 37 Market-townes, and 394 Parishes. The ancient
inhabitants were the Danmonii of Ptolemy, Danmonij.
named otherwise the Cornish after the invasion of the English. These being
driven out by great Athelstan, and confined within the river of Tamar, the
West Saxons succeed in their void places.

CORNWALL. Cornubia.

BOunded upon the East, with the river Tamar from Devonshire; and upon all
other sides encompassed with the Ocean. The country is hilly like unto
Devonshire, but more barren, enriched chiefly by never decaying mines of Tin,
and with fishings, and commodities arising from the sea. The valleys
notwithstanding afford plenty of grass, and corn, fatted with sea-sand, and a
sea-weede, which they call Orewood. Amongst the minerals Gold, and Silver
likewise are found, as also Diamonds of a large seize, angled, and polished by
nature, but yielding to the Oriental in color, and hardness. The Inhabitants
(as of Devonshire) are strong, and well-limmed, tall, good wrastlers, skillful
mariners, and brave warriors both by sea, and land, stout, undaunted,
resolute, thorough a more vegetiue quality of the Western wind, Fanum Stepham.
whereunto they are exposed, or by some hidden nature of the heavens, or
ground. Places of more note are Tamerton (Tamara of Ptolemy) upon the right
shore of the Tamar, named from hence. More remote from the river Stratton.
Launston upon the brow of a hill, the chief town. Saint Germans upon the river
Liver (a mean village) sometimes a Bishops See for the Cornish, removed hither
from Bodman. Lestuthiel (Vzella of Ptolemy) upon the Fawey, much decayed of
late years thorough the choking of the river by sand, Bodman. long. 15. g.
13. m. lat. 50. g. 35 m. Speed.
and rubbish falling from the Tin-workes; a common danger of all the navigable
streams of the country. Bodman, an ancient Bishops See, founded by Edward,
surnamed the Elder, Monarch of the English, removed afterward to S. Germans
during the wars, and troubles of the Danes, and lastly united with Kirton in
the reign of Canutus. Tregenie. Truro. Penrin upon certain Creekes of the
great Bay of Falmouth. St Buriens. Nere hereunto is the Promontory, named the
Lands-end The Lands-end.
(Bolaeum; and Antivestaeum of Ptolemy,) the most Western point of the
kingdom. Upon the shore a long the South sea, East, and West Loo at the mouth
of the river thus called. Foy. 15. g. long. 51. g. la. Merca.
Foy a noted Port at the mouth of the river Fawey. West hereof amongst others
of obscurer sort is Falmouth a deep, and spacious Bay before mentioned
(Cenionis Ostium of Ptolemy,) reaching for a great space within the land, and
deviding into sundry Creekes, and safe Roades for ships; defended at the
entrance with two Castles, or Forts, St Maudits upon the East, and Pendinas
upon the West, built by King Henry the eight. Within the Bay stood the town
Voluba of Ptolemy, now either extinct, or unknown, and called by some other
name. Further West is the Lizard The Lizard.
point (the Promontorie of the Danmonij, and Ocrinum of Ptolemy,) the furthest
point of the Island toward the South. Pensans within Mounts-bay, named thus
from St Michaels-Mount, a strong fort upon a craggie, and high rock at every
Full-sea environed with waters, defending the Rode. Upon the North-sea Padstow
near unto the mouth of the river Alan. It contains 9 Hundreds, 22
Market-townes, and 161 Parishes. The Inhabitants are part of the Danmonij of
Ptolemy, named otherwise the Cornish by the English; a remainder (as are the
Welsh) of the ancient Britons, and retayning their language.

These ten Shires seem more aunciently to have contained the Roman Province
named Britannia Prima by Rufus Festus, Britannia prima.
and the Author of the Notitia; divided amongst 6 British people the 1.
Cantij. 2. Regni, 3. Attrebatij. 4. Belgae. 5. Durotriges, 6. and the Danmonij
of Ptolemy. Under the Saxons they comprehended 3 kingdoms of their Heptarchie.
1 of Kent. 2. Regn. Cant. 2. Australium Saxonum 3. Saxonum Occidentalium.
and of the South. 3. and West Saxons. At this day they make the first Quart,
or Devision before observed; extended in length from East to West about 250
Italian miles, and in breadth about 60 of the same miles; bounded upon the
South, and East with the English Channel, and part of the German Ocean; upon
the West, with the Vergivian Ocean; and upon the North, with the sea of
Severne, and the rivers Avon by Bristow, and the Thames from the rest of
England.

GLOUCESTERSHIRE. Com. Glocestrensis.

IT lies upon both sides of the river of Severne; bounded upon the South, with
Wiltshire, and Sometsetshire; upon the West, with Herefordshire, and the river
of Wye from Monmouthshire; upon the North, with Worcestershire; and upon the
East, with Warwickshire, and Oxfordshire. The country is fruitful, and
pleasant; beyond the Severne woody, overspread with the great Forest of Deane;
toward the East, where is Cotteswold, hilly, and open, yielding good pasturage
for sheep, in the vale betwixt the hills, and the river fat, deep, and most
plentiful in corn, and fruits. Towns of better note are Bristow, a Bishops
sea, and a famous port, and rich empory, for state and beauty accounted the
third city of the kingdom, seated upon a rising ground upon both sides of the
river Avon, at the confluence hereof with the little river From. It stands in
both divisions of Glocestershire, and Somersetshire, whereof the greatest part
is in Glocestershire, but is accounted of neither, being a County within it
self. Upon the Severne Barkley, honored with a castle, whereof the Lord
Barkleyes are entitled. Further up Gloucester (Clevum of Antoninus) a Bishops
sea, Glocestria 19 lon. 53. Lat. Market. lat. 52. g. 14. m. long. 18. g. 5 m.
Speed.
and the chief town. Teuxbury upon the Avon (a different river from the Avon
by Bristow) near the confluence hereof, and the Severne. In the woodlands
beyond the Severne Newent. Michel-deane, naming the Forest of Deane, extending
from hence for many miles Southwards betwixt the Severne, and Wye, unto the
confluence of both; vast, and thick of woods, but much wasted of late years by
reason of iron-workes. In the forest upon the right shore of the Severne
Avington (a mean village) Abone of Antoninus. In Cotteswold Cirencester upon
the river Churne (Corinnium of Ptolemy, and Corinium of Antoninus, the chief
city of the Dobuni. Winchelcomb. It contains 30 Hundreds, and 280 parishes.
The ancient inhabitants were upon the hither side of the Severne the Dobuni of
Ptolemy, Dubuni, and Silures. Mercij Saxones.
and Bodunni of Dion; beyond part of the warlike Silures, afterward the
Mercian Saxons.

OXFORD SHIRE. Com. Oxoniensi^.

BOunded upon the West with Glocestershire; upon the North with Warwickshire,
and Northamptonshire, upon the South with the Thames from Barkeshire; and upon
the East with Buckinghamshire. The air is sweet and healthful, and the soil
fruitful; toward the East, and Buckinghamshire hilly, and covered with woods;
deep, and rich in the vale betwixt this, and Cherwell; to the West, and North
champian, and most pleasant. Towns of more note are Burford upon the
VVindrush. Whitney upon the same river. Chipping-norton. Not far off upon the
hills above Long-Compton are seen Rolle-rich stones, set up in manner of a
circle (as it is thought, by Rollo, the first Duke of Normandy; his trophy of
some victory obtained against the English before his plantation in France.
Woodstock amongst woods, and grassie plains, honored with a royal house of
the kings, the birth place of Edward surnamed the Black Prince, the terror,
and scourge of France. Banbury upon the Cherwel. Oxford, Oxonia 22. g. long 51.
g. 50 m. Lat. Camd 24. g. long. 52. lat. Hues.
the Sun, eye, and soul of the kingdom, and with her sister Cambridge the
fountain of wisdom, and divine, and humane learning, from whence Religion,
civility, and all good arts do flow, a Bishops sea, and the chief town,
seated at the confluence of the Cherwell, and Isis upon the coing of a plain,
descending every way to the rivers, encompassed with waters, meadows, and
woody hills, and only open to the clear, and health-breathing North; enriched
with sumptous, and stately buildings as private, so much more public of the
University, and Colleges, with fair, large, and open streets; a sweet, and
apt dwelling of the Muses. Beyond the Cherwell Biciter. Tame upon the river
thus named. Dorcestria.
Dorchester (Dorcinia of Beda) at the confluence, or marriage bed of the Tame,
and Isis, and beginning of the name of Thames; sometimes a Bishops sea, begun
by king Kingils in the person of Birinus, the Apostle of the West Saxons,
removed afterward, and divided betwixt Winchester, and Lincoln. In the
Chilterne Henly upon the Thames, in a bottom betwixt woody hills. Here are
contained 10 Market Towns, 14 Hundreds, and 280 Parishes. The ancient
inhabitants were the Dobuni Dobuni.
of Ptolemy, afterward the Mercian Saxons.

BVCKINGHAMSHIRE. Com. Buckinghamiensis.

BOunded upon the North with Northamptonshire; upon the West with Oxfordshire;
upon the South with the river Thames from Barkeshire; and upon the East with
Bedfordshire, Hartfordshire, and the river Cole from Middlesex; extended much
in length, but narrow, and not so wide. It is distinguished into the Chilterne,
or Hill-country, shaded with thick beechie woods, and lying toward the East
and South, and along the course of the Thames; and the Vale to the North, and
West under the hills, a fat, and deep soil, rich in corn, and pasturage.
Chiefer towns in the Vale are Alesbury. Buckinghamia. 20. g. long. 53. lat.
Market. long. 19. g. 33. m. lat. 52. g. 18. m. Speed.
Upon the river Ouse Buckingham, the Shire town. Stony-Stratford. Upon the
further side of the river is Passham, a country village, thought to be
Lactodurum of Antoninus. Newport Painell. Oulney. Upon the hills Wickham*
Beaconsfeld. Upon the Thames Marlow. Colebroke upon the river Cole (Pontes of
Antoninus) The ancient Inhabitants were the Cattyeuchlani Catyeuchlani.
of Ptolemy, the Catuellani of Dion, afterward the Mercian Saxons. Here are
reckoned 11 Market Towns, and 185 parishes.

BEDFORDSHIRE. Com. Bedfordiensis.

BOunded upon the West with Buckinghamshire; upon the North with
Northamptonshire, and Huntingdonshire; and upon the East and South with
Cambridgeshire, and Hartfordshire. The country is little; more woody in the
middle; toward the North more fruitful. Towns of better note are Bedford
upon the river Ouse, the chief town. Bigleswade. Upon the edge of the
Chilterne Dunstable (Magiovintum of Antoninus.) Bedfordia 21. g lon. 53. lat.
Market. long. 20. g. 16. m. lat. 52. g. 30. m. Speed.
The Shire is divided into 9 hundreds, containing 10 Market Towns, and 116
parishes. The ancient inhabitants were the Cattyeuchlani of Ptolemy,
afterward the Mercian Saxons.

HARTFORD-SHIRE. Com. Hartfordiensis.

BOunded upon the North, with Cambridgeshire; upon the West; with
Buckinghamshire, and Bedfordshire; upon the East, with the river Stort from
Essex; and upon the South, with Middlesex. The country is fruitful, and no
less pleasant. Places of more note are Roiston under the downs, and upon the
edge of Cambridgeshire. Bishop-Stortford upon the river Stort. Hartfordia. 21.
g. long. 52. lat. Merc. long. 20. g. 29. m. lat. 52. g. 5. m. Speed.
Upon, and along the course of the Lea Hartford, the Shire town (Herudford of
Beda, the place of a Synod of the English, and British Bishops in the time of
Saint Austine, the Apostle of the Saxons.) Ware a great, and noted road.
Hoddesdon. Theobalds, a royal house of the Kings. Fanum S. Albani.
More VVest-ward St Albans, occasioned by the Monastery thus named, founded by
Offa king of the Mercians to the memory of St. Alban, the first Martyr of the
Britons, here put to death during the tenth persecution in the reign of the
Emperor Dioclesian. Close by, where is Verulam, stood sometimes the town
Verulamium of Tacitus, and Vrolamium of Ptolemy, a Municipium of the Romans,
and after Gildas the country of St Alban the Martyr. Near unto Redburn upon
VVatlingstreet, or the Roman military way, betwixt this, and Dunstable is
thought to have stood Durocobrivis of Antoninus; as on the other side upon
Brockley hill near Ellestree in the same road toward London, Sulloniacae of
the same Author. Barkhamsted. It contains 8 Hundreds, 18 Market-townes, and
120 Parishes. The ancient inhabitants were the Cattyeuchlani of Ptolemy,
afterward part of the Mercian, and East Saxons.

MIDLE-SEX. Midle-Sexia.

BOunded upon the North, with Hartfordshire; upon the West, with the river Cole
from Buckinghamshire; upon the South, with the Thames from Surrey, and Kent;
and upon the East, with the Lea from Essex. The air is healthie, and pleasant,
the country fruitful, graced with sundry fair villages, and towns, and
houses of the gentry, and nobility. Places of better note are Vxbridge upon
the Cole. Along the Thames Stanes at the fall, or entrance of the Cole.
Hampton Court, Londinum 23. g. 25. m. longit. 51. g. 34. m. lat. Camd. 25. g.
50. m. long. 51. gr. 40. m. lat. Hues.
a great, and magnificent house of the Kings. Brentford. London (Londinium of
Ptolemy, Antoninus, and Tacitus, and Lundonium surnamed Augusta of Ammianus
Marcellinus, a famous Mart-towne of the Britons, misplaced by Ptolemy amongst
the Cantij,) now the royal chamber of the kings, a Bishops See, and the chief
city of the kingdom, with Westminster, Redcliff, and Limehouse, wherewith it
is continuate, extended upon the river for about 4 miles in length, and some
mile, and a half in breadth; sumptuous in buildings, mighty, populous,
esteemed at 600 thousand of Inhabitants; flourishing in trades, and gainefull
manufactures; strong in merchants, and shipping; the magazin of all the riches,
and commodities, which the whole earth, and world affords. At Westminster
Westmonasterium.
in the magnificent Church of St Peter the Kings of England are usually
Crowned, as likewise enterred; begun by Sebert the first Christian king of the
East Saxons, but raised to the state we see by Edward the Confessor, and the
succeeding English Monarchs. Blackewall, a Road for greater vessels, almost
continuate with Limehouse. The ancient inhabitants were the Trinobantes of
Caesar, Trinobantes. Orientales Saxones.
and Trinoantes of Ptolemy, afterward the East Saxons. Here are contained
only 73 Parishes, besides 121 accounted within the City, Liberties, and
Suburbs.

ESSEX. Essexia.

BOunded upon the West, with the river Stort from Hartfordshire, and the Lea
from Midle-sex; upon the South, with the Thames from Kent; upon the East, with
the German Ocean; and upon the North, with the Stoure from Suffolk. The
Country is large, woody, fruitful, and rich; but low, flat, and in many
places (more especially upon the Thames, and Seacoasts) marishy, agueish, and
very unhealthful. Towns of more note are Waltham upon the Lea, naming the
great forest thus called. Nearer London upon the same river Leiton (a
straggling village,) thought to be Durolitum of Antoninus. Barking at the
confluence of the Thames, and the river Roding. Rumford. Brentwood,
conjecturally Caesaromagus of Antoninus. Ralegh. Not far of at the mouth of
the Thames lies the Island Convey (Convennos of Ptolemy;) low, and subject to
inundations. Chelmesford not improbably Canonium of Antoninus. Cogshall upon
the river Froshwell, Pant, or Blacke-water; for by all these it is named.
Further down upon the same river Maldon, Camulodunum, Cynobellini regia. Dion.
lib. 60. De Colonia veteranorum sub Claudio Imperatore a P. Ostorio Scapula
Camalodunum deducta v. Cor. Tacit. Annal. lib. 12.
(Camudolun of Ptolemy, and Camalodunum of Tacitus, and others, the royal
seat of Cynobellinus, king of the Trinobantes, afterward a Roman Colony,
planted by Ostorius Scapula in the reign of the Emperor Claudius.) Below upon
the Blacke-water in Dengey Hundred (a flat, and unhealthful soil) stood
sometimes Ithancester of Beda, the place where St Cedda baptized the relapsed
East Saxons in the reign of Sigebert their king, thought to be Othona of the
Notitia, the station of a foot company of the Fortenses. The town has long
since been worn into the river. The shore hereabouts yields plenty of most
excellent oisters. Colcestria. 23. g. lon. 53. latit. Merc. lat. 52. g. 14. m.
Speed. Harwich. 23. gr. longit. latit. 53. Merc. 27. g. 30. m. lon. 52. lat.
Hues.
Colchester (Colonia of Antoninus) upon the river Colne, the chief town.
Harwich a noted port at the mouth of the Stoure. Walden. Close by is
Audley-end, a great, and sumptuous house of the Earls of Suffolk. In the
bordering fields, as in Cambridge-shire, and Norfolk, grows store of
Saffron. It contains 20 Hundreds, 21 Market-townes, and 415 Parishes. The
ancient inhabitants were the Trinobantes of Caesar, afterward the East Saxons.

SVFFOLKE. Suffolcia.

BOunded upon the West, with Cambridgeshire; upon the South; with the Stoure
from Essex; upon the East, with the German Ocean; and upon the North, with the
Lesser Ouse; and the Wavency from Norfolk. The soil is most fat, and rich,
unless toward the East; the country large, populous, and well furnished with
harbors, and safe roades for ships. Places of more note are Sudbury upon the
Stour. Hadley upon the Breton. Toward the head of the river Bretenham
(Combretonium of Antoninus.) Wulpet. Ipswich upon the river Orwell the chief
town, Ipswich. lon. 22. g. 9. m. lat. 52. g. 25. m. Speed.
a populous, rich, and noted empory. Woodbridge upon the Deben. Framlingham, a
beautiful, and strong castle. Upon the Seacoast Aldburg. Dunwich (Domuc of
Beda,) sometimes a Bishops See, the first of the East Angles, founded by king
Sigebert in the person of Faelix the Apostle hereof, extinguished by the Danish
wars. The town now is ruinous, and much decayed, for the greatest part worn
into the sea. Southwold at the mouth of the river Blithe, Iland-like at every
Full-sea environed with the Ocean. Beyond is Easton-nesse (Extensio of
Ptolemy,) the furthest point Eastward of the kingdom. More West, Opidum S.
Edmundi.
St Edmundsburie (Villa Faustini of Antoninus,) named thus from St Edmund, the
last king of the East Angles, martyred by the Danes, and here enshrined.
New Market, in both counties of Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire, amongst green,
and spacious plains. The shire contains three greater devisions, which they
name the Geldable, St Edmonds Liberty, and the Liberty of St Audry, distributed
amongst 22 Hundreds, 28 Market-townes, and 575 Parishes. The ancient
inhabitants were part of the Iceni of Tacitus, Iceni. Angli orientales.
the Simeni corruptly of Ptolemy, afterward the East Angles.

NORFOLK. Norfolcia.

BOunded upon the South with the Lesser Ouse, and the Wavency from Suffolk;
upon the East, and North, with the Ocean, the Washes, and the river Nen from
Lincolneshire; and upon the West, with the Greater Ouse from Cambridgeshire.
The Country is large; for the most part champian, rich, and exceedingly
populous; inhabited by an industrious, and witty people, but very litigious,
our best breed of common Lawyers. The soil is different; about the towns
commonly good, well watered, and with some wood; upwards to the heathes dry,
and naked; Marshland, and Flegge abundantly fruitful; but Flegge for corn,
and Marshland for pasture. Towns of better note are Thetford at the confluence
of the rivers, Thet, and the lesser Ouse (Sitomagus of Antoninus,) sometimes a
Bishops See, removed hither from North-Elmham in the reign of the Conqueror,
and afterward to Norwich about the year 1086. Norwicus^. 24. g. 55 m. lo. 52.
g. (...). m. latit. Camd.
Windham. Norwich, the chief town, upon the river Yare, a Bishops See, and a
great and flourishing emporie. Not far off is Caster, the dead ruins of
Venta of Ptolemy, and Antoninus, the chief city sometimes of the Iceni.
Yarmouth. 27. g. 30. m. lon, 53. lat. Hues.
Yarmouth a noted Port at the confluence of the rivers Yare, and Thyrn, and the
fall of both into the Ocean. Here, or at Burgh Castle in the neighboring parts
of Suffolk stood Garionnonum of the Notitia, the station of a troop of horse,
named the Stablesiani by my Author. Walsingham, famous of late years by
continual pilgrimages to a much honored image of our Lady. Upon the Seacoast
Brancaster (a country-village) Brannodurum of the Notitia, the station of a
troop of Dalmatian horse. Lin, a rich, and noted port at the fall of the river
Ouse into the Washes. Here are numbered 27 Market-townes, 31 Hundreds, and 660
Parishes. The ancient inhabitants were the Iceni of Tacitus, afterward the
East Angles.

CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE. Com. Cantabrigiensis.

BOunded upon the South with Hartfordshire, and Essex; upon the East, with
Suffolk, and Norfolk; upon the North, with the Welland from Lincolneshire; and
upon the West, with Huntingdonshire, and Bedfordshire. The Southern part is
Champian, and a fat, and rich corn soil. The North is low, deep, and
marishy, trenched with rivers, and diches, a strong fastness of outlawes, and
rebels in the time of the Conqueror, and the Barons wars. Towns here are
Wisbich amongst fens, and waters. Elye (naming the Island, encompassed with the
divided streams of the rivers Nen, Cantabrigia. 23. g. 25. m. lon. 52. g. 11.
m. lat. Camd.
and Ouse) a Bishops See. Cambridge (Camboritum of Antoninus,) the other
Seminary, and well spring of learning, and religion, seated in a flat upon the
river Came, or Grant. The ancient inhabitants were the Iceni of Tacitus,
afterward the East Angles. Girvij pars Merciorum.
Those of the I Will of Elye were otherwise called the Giruij by Beda, a name
common hereunto, and to the inhabitants of the bordering fens of
Huntingdonshire, Northamptonshire, and Lincolneshire, joining, and continuate
together for the space of 68 miles unto Wainflet Northwards. Here are contained
17 Hundreds, 8 Market-townes, and 163 Parishes.

HVNTINGDON-SHIRE. Com* Huntingdoniensis.

BOunded upon the East, with Cambridgeshire; upon the South, with Bedfordshire;
and upon the West, and North, with Northamptonshire, and the river Nen. The
soil is fruitful; toward the East marishie; in some places hilly,
Huntingdonia. 21. g. lon. 53. la. Market.
and shaded with woods. Towns here are Kinbalton. Upon the Ouse St Neot.
Huntingdon, the chief town. On the other side of the river Goodmanchester, or
Gormancester, a populous, and great village (Duroli pons of Antoninus.) Further
down upon the same river St Ives. It contains 4 Hundreds, 6 Market-townes,
and 78 Parishes. The ancient inhabitants were the Iceni, afterward the
Mercian-Saxons. Mercij Saxones.


NORTHAMPTONSHIRE. Com. Northamtoniae.

BOunded upon the East, with Huntingdonshire, and Bedfordshire; upon the South,
with Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire; upon the West, with Warwickshire; and
upon the North, with the Welland, and the Lesser Avon from Lincolneshire,
Rutlandshire, and Leicestershire. The Country is hilly, and uneven, champian,
and populous (unless where the avarice of the great ones have made wastes, and
enclosures,) pleasant, and most fruitful. Towns of more note are Brackley,
at, or near unto the head of the river Ouse. Torcester (Tripontium of
Antoninus.) Daintry amongst hills, fountains, and springs, the heads of the
rivers Leame, Cherwell, and Nen; with different courses by the Severne, Thames,
and the Washes disburdened into the Irish, and German Oceans. Upon the Nen
betwixt this, and Torcester, where is Wedon on the Street, stood Bennavenna of
Antoninus. Northampton, Northamptonia 22 g* 29. m long. 52 g 13. m. lat. Camd.
the chief Town upon the Nen. Not far off is Holdenby, a royal house of the
kings. Upon the same river of Nen, Wellingborough. Higham-Ferrers. Thrapston.
Oundle. Further down stands Fotheringhay castle, an honor of the kings.
VValmesford, a noted thorough-fare upon the same river. Peterborough
Petriburgum.
upon the Nen, and edge of the fens, a Bishops See. At Caster a small village
upon the Nen, betwixt this, and Walmesford, stood Durobrivae of Antoninus.
Kettering. The ancient inhabitants were part of the Coritani Coritani.
of Ptolemy, afterward the Mercian Saxons. Here are reckoned 20 Hundreds, 10
Market Towns, and 326 parishes.

RVTLANDSHIRE. Rutlandia.

DIvided with the river Welland from Northamptonshire; and enclosed upon the
other sides with Lincolneshire, and Leicestershire. The country is little,
hilly, fruitful, and most pleasant. Towns of more note are Vppingham. Okeham
in the Vale of Catmose, the chief town. Bridge-casterton upon the river Guash
(a small village) thought to be Gausennae of Antoninus. It contains 48
parishes. The ancient inhabitants were the Coritani, afterward the Mercian
Saxons.

LEICHESTERSHIRE. Com. Leicestriae.

BOunded upon the South with Northamptonshire; upon the West with
VVatlingstreet from Warwickshire; upon the North with Darby shire, and
Nottinghamshire; and upon the East with Rutlandshire, and Lincolneshire. The
country is champian, and open; the soil most fruitful for grass, and corn,
but in most places wanting wood, a common defect of the neighboring, and
inland shires. Towns here are Lutterworth upon the Swift, a small stream
falling into the Avon. Beyond, where is the High Cross upon Watlingstreet,
stood Vennones of Antoninus. Harborough toward the head of the river Welland.
Melton-Moubray. Not far off lies Erdborough or Borough (Verometum of
Antoninus) The tract of the fort, or town is yet plainly seen upon the top of
a steep hill, with a large, and pleasant prospect ouerlooking the subject
country. Upon the river Soar Leicester Lecestria. lon. 19. g. 22. m. lat. 53.
g. 4. m. Speexsd
(Rhage of Prolemy, and Ratis, or Ratae of Antoninus) the chief town,
sometimes a Bishops See, taken out of Lichfeld by Ethelred, king of the
Mercians, son to Penda, and united afterward with Dorcester. Mont-sorell.
Loughborough upon the Soar, and under the hilly, and great Forest of
Charnwood. More west Bosworth, fatal to Richard the third, overthrown, and
slain at a memorable battle in the bordering plains by king Henry the
seventh. Ashbye de la Zouch. It contains 6 hundreds, 12 Market towns, and
some 200 parishes. The ancient inhabitants were the Coritani of Ptolemy,
afterward the Mercian Saxons.

LINCOLNE-SHIRE. Com. Lincolniensis.

BOunded upon the South with Rutlandshire, and with the VVelland from
Northamptonshire, and Cambridgeshire, and the VVashes (the Sea Metaris of
Ptolemy) from Norfolk; upon the East with the German Ocean; upon the North
with Humber (Abus of Ptolemy) from Yorkshire; and upon the West with the
river Dun from the same Shire, with the Trent from Nottinghamshire, and with
Leicestershire. The country is large; extended above 60 miles in length, and
about 30 in breadth, and severed into 3 greater names, or divisions. 1 of
Holland upon the Washes, and Ocean unto Wainflet. 2 Kesteven, lying upon the
west of Holland, and betwixt the rivers Welland, and VVitham, with Fosdike, 3
and Lindseye Lindissi Bedae.
betwixt the VVitham, Trent, and Humber: flat, brackish, and marishy in
Holland, and along the Seacoast; and in all other parts champian, and
pleasant, distinguished into sundry long ridges of hills, beginning at Humber,
and continuing Southwards, most fruitful in their bottomes, and thick with
towns, and upon their tops plain, grassie, open, and rich in corn, and
pasturage for sheep. Places of more note are in Kesteven Stanford, Stanfordia.
a walled town consisting of 7 Churches, or parishes upon the river VVelland,
and the edge of Northamptonshire. Hither in the reign of Edward the third, a
great part of the University of Oxford made a famous secession, occasioned
thorough the quarrels of the Boreales, and Australes, brought back not long
after by the command and authority of the King. Since the Graduates there
still take an oath at the time of their admission to degrees not to profess in
Stanford publicly, as in an University. Upon the Witham Paunton (a country
village) Ad pontem of Antoninus. Grantham upon the same river. Upon the west
hereof Belvoir Castle, belonging to the Earls of Rutland, and naming the
subject valley. Beyond upon the heath Ancaster (Crococalana of Antoninus.)
Sleford. In Holland Crowland upon the Welland, and amongst deep, and
impassable waters, and marshes; accessable only toward the North, and East,
by narrow, and long causyes. Spalding amongst dreanes, and waters. Boston a
fair town, and a noted Port, seated on both sides of the river Witham. The
tower of the beautiful, and large Church hereof contains 44 fathomes in
height, or 264 foot; a conspicuous, and noted Sea-marke. The Churches
generally of those low, and moorish parts exceed all others in luster, and
fairenes; the more admired at by strangers, their meaner private buildings
considered, and want of stone, and materials. In Lindsey (Lindissi of Beda)
Lincoln Lincolnia. 22. g. 52. m. longit. 53. gr. m. 12. la. Camd.
(Lindum of Ptolemy, and Antoninus,) a Bishops See, and the chief town,
unevenly seated in the bottom, and upon the brow, and top of a steep hill,
under which runs the river Witham. The Minster, or hilly part (whereunto the
country is every way ascending) enjoys the most large, and fair prospect of
the kingdom, with a seemingly near distance seen from all parts of the
shire, and the more eminent places of neighboring, and remote countries. In
the Minster, a great, sumptuous, and magnificent Church, and the chief grace,
and ornament of the city, is shown amongst others; the monument, and epitaph
of William Smith, sometimes Bishop hereof, and Lord President of Wales for King
Henry the 7th, with Sr Richard Sutton Knights; the honorable founders of
Brasen-nose College in Oxford. Here the Roman Military way by Ancaster
devideth, whereof one part crosses the Trent at Litleborough, the other below
at Burton near unto the fall of the river into Humber. From Torksey, and the
Trent a channel has been brought hither to the Witham by king Henry the
first, called now Fosdike by the inhabitants, with those rivers, and Humber
making Lindsey an Island. Gainsborough upon the Trent. Further down Burton, a
noted passage over the Trent. Beyond lies Axholme, or the I Will of Axey,
encompassed with the rivers Trent, Idell, and Dun, and containing about 10
miles in length, and some 5 in breadth. Glamford-bridge upon the Ankam, a
foeculent, and moorish river, affording plenty of most delicate, and strange
sorts of foul. Caster under the cliffe (which is a long ridge of hills,
extended Southwards from the fall of the Ankam into Humber,) named thus, and
occasioned by a castle (whose ruins are yet seen,) by the leave of king
Vortigerne founded by Hengist after his conquest, and victory of the Picts,
and Scots. Barton* a noted passage over Humber into Yorkshire. At Humber
betwixt this, and the mouth of Ankam ends a Roman Military Road, named the
Long Meare by the bordering inhabitants, continued hither over solitary
plains from Holland, and the Fens. The place, where it is terminated, seems
more aunciently to have been the ordinary passage over Humber. An argument
hereof might be the names of South, and North Feribyes, neighboring towns
upon the opposite sides of the river Louth. Upon the river Bane Horn-castle.
Tatershall, In the Marsh Alford. Grimesby, a decayed haven town at the mouth
of Humber. The ancient inhabitants were the Coritani of Ptolemy, afterward
the Mercian-Saxons. Here are contained 31 Hundreds, or Weapontakes, 30 Market
towns, and 630 Parishes.

NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE. Com. Nottin. gamiae.

LYing upon both sides of the Trent, and bounded upon the South, with
Leicestershire; upon the North, with Yorkshire; upon the East, with
Lincolneshire; and upon the West, with Darbyeshire. The parts upon the hither
side of the Trent are fat, and rich of corn, and pasturage, as likewise are
the South, and North Clayes beyond the river. The middle, and West are in a
manner wholly taken up with the vast forest of Shirewood, extended from
Nottingham for the space of 22 miles Northwards; sandy, barren, solitary, and
thin of towns, and inhabitants. Places of more note are Nottingham the chief
town upon the rivers Trent, Notinghamia. 22. g. 14. m. lon. 53. g. la. Camd.
and Lin, and the brow of a rocky hill; defended with a fair, and strong
castle, mounted upon a steep, and precipitious rock. Newark upon the Trent.
Litleborough (a small village, and a passage over the river) Agelocis of
Antoninus. In the Clay Retford upon the river Idell. In the Sand, and Forest
Blithe. Workensop, graced with a fair house, the seat sometimes of the Earls
of Shrewesbury, belonging now to the Earl of Penbroke. Maunsfeld. The ancient
inhabitants were the Coritani of Ptolemy, afterward the Mercian-Saxons. It
contains 8 Market towns, 8 Hundreds, and 168 Parishes.

DARBY-SHIRE. Com. Darbiensis.

BOunded upon the South, with Leicestershire; upon the East, with
Nottinghamshire; upon the North, with Yorkshire; and upon the West, with
Cheshire. The South, and East are populous, fruitful, and somewhat woody.
Beyond the Darwent Westwards arise the high Mountains of the Peake, could,
rocky, and barren, yet good pasturage for sheep, and plentiful in minerals,
especially of lead. Towns of better note are Chesterfield in Scardale. Darbia.
19. gr. lon. 54. la. Mer lon. 19. gr. 2. m. 53. gr. 25. m. lat. Speed.
Darby upon the river Darwen, the chief town. In the Peake Workesworke.
Ashborne upon the river Dove. Buxton, where are hot medicinable springs. The
ancient inhabitants were the Coritani of Ptolemy, afterward the
Mercian-Saxons. Here are accounted 8 Market towns, 6 Hundreds, and 106
Parishes.

CHESHIRE. Co. Chestrensis.

BOunded upon the West, with the Irish Ocean; upon the North, with the river
Mersee from Lancashire; upon the East, with Darbyshire, and Staffordshire; and
upon the South, with the Dee, Shropshire, and Wales. The country is rich in
pasturage, and cattaill, well wooded, populous, and full of stout and ancient
gentry. Towns here are Congleton upon the river Dan, Cestria. 20. gr. 23. m.
lon. 53. g. 11. m. lat. Came. 21. g. 30. m. lo. 53. g. 50. m. lat. Hues.
(Condate of Antoninus.) Maclesfeld. Knottesford. Stockport, or Stockfort upon
the Mersee. Nantwich upon the Wever. Northwich upon the same river. Betwixt
these upon the Croc Middlewich. In the three last plenty of Sault is boiled
from Sault-springs. Chester (Deunana of Ptolemy, and Deva of Antoninus, the
Mansion sometimes of the twentieth Roman Legion, surnamed Victrix,) a Bishops
See, and the chief town, upon the river Dee. Toward the Northwest lies
Wirall, a long Chersonese, or Promontorie, sandy, and less fruitful,
environed with the Ocean, and the wide channels of the Dee, and Mersee. The
ancient inhabitants were the Cornavii Cornavij.
of Ptolemy, afterward the Mercian Saxons. It contains 13 Market towns, 7
Hundreds, and 68 Parishes.

STAFFORDSHIRE. Com. Staffordiensis.

BOunded upon the North, and East, with Darbyshire, and Warwickshire; upon the
South, with Worcestershire; and upon the West, with Cheshire, and Shropshire.
Moreland, or the North is lean, hilly, and mountainous, the beginning of the
English Apennine. Toward the South, and in the middle about the Trent the
soil is more fertile, shaded with woods (the chief whereof are Canc, and
Neede-wood,) and well stored with mineralls of Coal, Iron, and fine
Alablaster. Towns here are upon the Trent New Castle. Stone, the place of
Martyrdom of Vulfaldus, and Rufinus, put to death for their Christian
profession by their unnatural father, Wulferus king of the Mercians,
occasioning the town. Burton. Lichfield Lichfeldia. 21. g. 20. m. lo. 52. g.
42. m. lat. Came.
(Liccidfeld of Beda) upon both sides of a lake, or meare, the head of a small
river issuing into the Trent; a Bishops See, the first of the Mercians, fixed
here by St Ceadda, or Chad in the year 669, and reign of king VVulferus.
Close by stood Etocetum of Antonmus. The carkase, or dead ruins hereof are
called the Wall, a small hamlet upon the Roman military road. Stafford
Staffordia.
naming the country, upon the river Sow. Not far of where is Penkridge (a
country village upon on the river Penck above the confluence hereof, and the
Sow) stood Pennocrucium of Antoninus. Eccleshall. VVolverhamton. VVashall.
Tamworth upon the river Tame, in both shires of Staffordshire, and
Warwickshire. Vtcester upon the Dove. The shire contains 13 Market towns, 5
Hundreds, and 130 Parishes. The ancient inhabitants were the Cornavii of
Ptolemy, afterward the Angli Mediterranei Angli Mediterranei, part Merciorun.
of Beda, part of the Mercian Saxons.

WARWICKESHIRE. Com. Warwicensis.

BOunded upon the South, with Glocestershire, and Oxfordshire; upon the East,
with Northamptonshire, and Leicestershire; upon the North, with Staffordshire;
and upon the West, with Worcestershire. It is distinguished into the
VVoodland, the part upon the North of the Avon; and the Feldon, lying upon the
South of the river, a champiah, deep, and fat soil. The sheep of this
country (especially of the Feldon) are great devourers, eating up villages,
and frame-houses, and consuming, or driving out their inhabitants, a common
misery of the kingdom. Towns in the VVood-land are Sutton-Colfeild near
Staffordshire. Bremicham, inhabited with Black-smiths, forging sundry kinds of
iron-vtensils. Coleshull. Non-Eaton. Mancester (a small village upon the river
Anchor) Manduessedum of Antoninus. Coventria. 25. g. 52. m. lon. 52. g. 25. m.
Lat. Camd.
Coventry upon a small rivulet, named Shirburn, the chief town, and with
Lichfield a Bishops See. To the South-west upon a lake amongst woods stands
the large, fair, and strong castle of Kenelworth. Henly upon the Alne.
Aulcester at the meeting of the rivers Alne, and Arrow. Upon the Avon Rugby.
Warwicus.
Warwick, naming the country (Praesidium of Antoninus, and the Notitia, the
station then of a troop of Dalmatian horse.) Stratford upon the same river. In
the Feldon Southam. Kineton. Shipston upon the Stour. Here are contained 15
Market-townes, 9 Hundreds, and 158 Parishes. The ancient inhabitants were the
Cornavii of Ptolemy, afterward the Mercian Saxons.

WORCESTERSHIRE. Com. Wigorniensis.

BOunded upon the South, with Glocestershire; upon the East, with Warwickshire;
upon the North, with Staffordshire; and upon the West, with Shropshire, and
with Malverne hills from Herefordshire. The air is healthful; the soil
fruitful (amongst other profits yielding store of Pirry, a raw, and windy
beverage;) in the middle, and to the North more close, and woody; toward the
South, and the river Avon descending in a fat, and open valley. Towns here are
Kidderminster upon the Stour. Which upon the Salwarp, enriched with
Sault-springs, whereof plenty of fine sault is boiled. Upon the right shore of
the Severne Beaudley, adjoining to the Forest of Wyre. Upon the left shore,
Wigornia. 21. g. 52. m. lo. 52. g. 12. m. larit. Camd.
and on this side of the river Worcester (Brannogenium of Ptolemy, misplaced by
my Author amongst the Ordovices) a Bishops See, and the chief town. In the
vale, and upon the Avon Eveshom. The ancient inhabitants were on this side of
the Severne the Cornavii of Ptolemy; Cornavij, and Silures.
beyond, part of the Silures, and Ordovices of the same author, Wiccij, pars
Merciorum.
afterward the VViccii of Beda, part of the Mercian Saxons. It contains 10
Market-townes, 7 Hundreds, and 152 Parishes.

SHROP-SHIRE. Com. Salopiensis.

Divided with the Severne, and bounded upon the East, with Worcestershire, and
Staffordshire; upon the North, with Cheshire; upon the West, with
Denbighshire, and Mongomery-shire in Wales; and upon the South, with
Hereford-shire. The country is large, pleasant, fruitful, and very populous.
Towns of better note are VVhitechurch. Oswestre, named thus, and occasioned
from Oswald, the second most Christian king of Northumberland, slain here in a
blooddy battle by Penda, king of the Mercians, reputed a Saint, and Martyr by
the people of that devouter age, honoring the place with their frequent
pilgrimages. Draiton upon the Terne. Salopia. 20. gr. 37. m. lo. 52. gr. 53. m.
lat. Came.
Newport. Shrewsbury upon a hill almost encompassed with the Severne, a rich
empory, and the chief town. Below, Wroxcester (a mean village at the meeting
of the Severne, and the Terne) Viroconium of Ptolemy, and Vriconium of
Antoninus, a city of the Cornavij. Over Wreken hill toward New-port Oken-yate
(aother country village) Vxacama of Antoninus. Bridgemorfe, or Bridgenorth upon
a rock, under which runs the Severne, and adjoining to the forest of
Morfe. Wenlock. Bishops-castle, near unto the head of the river Clune. Ludlow
at the confluence of the rivers Temd, and Corue, the seat of the Council of
the Marches. Above, at the meeting of the Temd, and Clune rises the hill,
named Caer Caradoc by the Welsh, fortified with a wall of stone, and for the
time defended by Caractacus king of the Britons against P. Ostorius Scapula,
Lieftenant of the Roman province for the Emperor Claudius, mentioned by
Tacitus in the 12 book of his Annals. Some relics of that rude defense are
yet appearing. The ancient inhabitants were parts of the Cornavij and Orduices
of Ptolemy, Cornavij, and Ordovices.
the Ordovices of Tacitus; afterward the Mercian Saxons. Here are contained
14 Market Towns, 15 hundreds, and 170 parishes.

HEREFORD-SHIRE. Com. Herefordiae.

BOunded upon the North with Shropshire; upon the East with Worcestershire, and
Glocestershire; upon the South with Monmouthshire; and upon the West with
Brecknockeshire, and Radnorshire. The air is pure, and healthy; the country
pleasant, watered with sundry sweet, and fresh rivers, (the chiefest whereof
are the Wye, Lug, and Munow) descending from the Welsh Mountains; the soil
most fruitful; the people stout, free, and given to hospitality. Towns are
Lemster upon the river Lug, commended for wools, the best of the kingdom.
Brameyard in a bottom upon the river From. Ledbury under Malverne hills upon
the Ledden. Herefordia. 20 g. 24. m. lon. 52. g. 6 m. lat. Camd.
Hereford in a plain upon the Wye, a Bishops See, and the chief town; raised
(as it is thought) out of the ashes, and named thus from Ariconium of
Antoninus, whose ruins are yet seen, where are Kenchester walls, distant about
three miles Westward from the city. The Cathedral Church is dedicated to S.
Ethelbert, a king of the East Angles, murdered at Sutton upon the Lug (the
Court then of Offa king of the Mercians) thorough the ambition, and treason of
Quendreda, Queen to Offa; honored afterward as a Saint, and Martyr. Rosse
upon the same river. The Old Town (a small village upon the Munow) Blestium of
Antoninus. The ancient inhabitants were the Silyres of Ptolemy, or the Silures
Silures.
of Antoninus. It contains 8 market towns, 11 hundreds, and 176 parishes.

These 23 Shires, Flavia Caesariensis.
inclusiuely from Glocestershire, seem to have contained more aunciently the
Roman Province, named Flavia Caesariensis by Rufus Festus, and the Notitia,
with part of Britannia secunda of the same Authors; divided amongst 6 more
great, and potent. British people, the Dobuni, Cattieuchlani, Trinobantes,
Iceni, Coritani, and Cornavij of Ptolemy and others, with part of the Silures,
and Ordovices. During the Saxons Heptarchy they comprehended the three
kingdoms. Regn Orientalium Saxonum. 2 Orientalium Anglorum. 3 Mercior*
1 of the East Saxons. 2 the East. Angles. 3 and the Mercians. They make now
the 2 Quart, or division formerly mentioned, extended about 160 English miles
in length betwixt East, and West, and in breadth betwixt North and South some
130 of the same miles, and bounded upon the East with the German Ocean; and
from the rest of England upon the South with the river Thames, and the Avon by
Bristoll; upon the North with Humber, and the river Mersee; and upon the West
with Offaes Ditch, and part of the Wye from Wales.

MONMOVTH-SHIRE. Com. Monumethensis, and Regio Ventana.

BOunded upon the North with the river Munow from Herefordshire; upon the East
with the Wye from Glocestershire; upon the South with the Sea of Severne; and
upon the West with the Remney from Glamorganshire. The parts toward the East,
and Wye, are graffie, and full of woods; those toward the West stony, and
somewhat mountainous; the Seacoasts where the Vske falls into the Severne,
low, moorish, Munmouth. lon 17. g. 36. m. lat. 52. g. 8. m. Speed.
and subject to inundations. Places of more note are Munmouth at the confluence
of the Wye, and Munow, the chief town; honored with the birth of Henry the
fifth, the glorious Conqueror of France. Chepstow. 18 long. 53. lat. Market.
Chepstow upon the Wye near unto the fall thereof into the Severne. Westwards
from hence is seen Caer Went, the carkase of an old Roman city, named Venta of
the Silures by Antoninus. Aber-gevenny, or Aber-genny (Gobannium of Antoninus)
at the meetings of the Gevenye, and the Vske. Vske (named thus from the river,)
Burrium of Antoninus. Caer-Leon upon the same river of Vske, (Isca Silurum of
Antoninus, the Mansion of the second Roman Legion, surnamed Augusta.) Newport
upon the same river nearer to the Severne. The inhabitants are part of the
Silyres of Ptolemy, Silures.
the Silures of Tacitus. It is divided into 6 Hundreds, wherein are contained 6
Market towns, and 127 parishes. It is not accounted amongst the Welsh shires.

GLAMORGAN-SHIRE. Glamorgan Comitatus.

BOunded upon the East with the river Remneye from Monmouthshire; upon the
South with the Sea of Severne; upon the West with the Loghor from
Caermarthenshire; and upon the North with Brecknockeshire. The North, and more
inland parts are mountainous, and hilly; the Seacoasts more plain, fruitful,
populous, and well replenished with towns. Caerdif. lon. 16. g. 52. m. lat.
51. g. 49. m. Speed.
These of better note are Landaff upon the river Taff, a Bishops See. Caerdif
upon the same river, the chief town. Cowbridge. Not far from hence upon the
seacoast is Boverton (Bovium of Antoninus.) Neath upon the river so called,
Cowbridge. lon. 17. lat. 52. Merca.
(Nidum of Antoninus.) Swansey, or Aber-taw, at the mouth of the river Taw in
Gower, the part of this country betwixt the rivers Neath, and Loghor. Further
to the West stands Loghar upon the river thus named, (Leucarum of Antoninus.)
The inhabitants are the Silures of Tacitus. Here are contained 6 Market towns,
10 Hundreds, and 118 parishes,

BRECKNOCK-SHIRE. Brechinia.

BOunded upon the East, with Herefordshire; upon the South, with Monmouthshire,
and Glamorganshire; upon the West, with Caermarthen-shire; and upon the North,
with the river of Wye from Radnorshire. The country is mountainous; in the
valleys not unfruitful. Places of more note are Brecknocke upon the river
Vske, Brecknock. 17. lo. 53. la. Merc. lon. 16. gr. 32. m. lat. 52. g. 21. m.
Speed.
the chief town. Upon the Wye Buelth (Bulleum of Antoninus,) naming the
bordering mountainous region. Hay upon the same river. The inhabitants are part
of the Silures of Tacitus. The Shire contains 6 Hundreds, 3 Market towns,
and 61 parishes.

RADNOR-SHIRE. Com. Radnoriae.

BOunded upon the North with Mongomerieshire; upon the East, with
Hereford-shire; upon the South, with the river Wye from Brecknock-shire; and
upon the West, with Cardiganshire. The parts toward Cardiganshire, and the
West are altogether taken up with rocky, asperous, and desert mountains,
strong refuges of Outlawes and of Vortigerne king of the Britons, pursued by
the all conquering English, and the fear, and hate of his own subjects. Those
to the South, and East are less unfruitful, and better inhabited. Towns here
are New-Radnor, Radnor. lo. 17. g. 1. m. lat. 52. g. 45. m. Speed.
the chief town, distinguished thus from the Old, not improbably Magni of
Antoninus, and Magi of the Notitia, the station of a foot company of the
Pacenses. Prestaine upon the river Lug. Knighton. The inhabitants are part of
the Silures. It contains 6 Hundreds, 4. Market-townes, and only 52 Parishes.

CARMARDEN-SHIRE. Com. Maridunensis.

BOunded upon the North, with the river Tyvi from Cardiganshire; upon the East,
with Brecknockshire, and the river Loghor from Glamorganshire; upon the South,
with the Sea of Severne; and upon the West, with Penbrokeshire. The country is
hilly; the soil not unfruitful. Towns here are Caermarden upon the river
Tovy, Maridunum. 16. g. lo. 53. gr. lat. Merc. lo. 18. g. 30. m. lat. 52. grad.
15. m. Speed.
the chief town (Maridunum of Ptolemy.) Higher upon the top of a hill, under
which runs the Tovy, stands Dineuour-castle, the seat sometimes of the
princes of South Wales. New Castle upon the Tyui, and the edge of Cardiganshire
(coniecturally Louentinum of Ptolemy.) Kidwelly upon the Ocean. The inhabitants
are part of the Demetae Demetae.
of Ptolemy. The whole contains 6 Market-towne, 6 Hundreds, and 87 Parishes.

PENBROKE-SHIRE. Com. Penbrochiae.

BOunded upon the East, with Caermardenshire; upon the North, with the river
Tyvi from Cardiganshire, and upon the other sides encompassed with the Ocean.
The country is less hilly; the soil fruitful; cut, and divided in the
middle with the rivers Cledhydhy, and Cledhewen, and Milford haven, whereinto
these are disburdened, distinguished into sundry creekes, bays, and roades for
ships, the most safe, and and spacious harbor of the kingdom. Upon the West
of the bay lies a Promontorie, or Chersonese, named Ros by the Britons, and
otherwise from the speech little England beyond Wales, inhabited by a colony of
the Dutch, or Flemmings, planted here by king Henry the first, an industrious,
stout, and valiant people, exercised in continual arms against the
neighboring Welsh, and always most faithful, and loyal to the English,
retayning yet their language. Towns here are Tenby seated upon a rock
ouerlooking the Ocean, a walled town, and a neat, and well traded empory.
Penbroke upon a creek of Milford haven, the chief town. Harford-west upon the
Cledhewen, or the more Western Gledawh in Ros, or little England beyond Wales.
Beyond, upon a bleeke, and open Promontorie (the Promontorie of the Octopitae
of Ptolemie) St David's (more aunciently called Menew by the Welsh, Meneva, and
Fanum S. Davidis. 20. g. lon. 52. la. Hues.
) a Bishops See, brought hither from Caer Leon in the reign of king Arthur by
St David, since naming the place. Fishgard, or Abergwain of the Welsh in the
Baronny of Keimes, and at the mouth of the river Gwain. New-port upon the
Neuern. Kilgarran upon the Tyvi, and the edge of Cardiganshire. The inhabitants
are part of the Demetae of Ptolemy. It contains 5 Market-townes, 7 Hundreds,
and 145 Parishes.

CARDIGAN-SHIRE. Ceretica.

BOunded upon the East, with Radnorshire; upon the South, with the river Tyvi
from Penbrokeshire; upon the West, with the Irish Ocean; and upon the North,
with Mongomery-shire, and Merionith-shire. The country is plain toward the
Ocean, and the river Tyvi; toward the East, and North hilly, and mountainous.
In the borders betwixt this and Montgomerieshire rises the great hill
Plinlimon, whence issue out the rivers Wye, and Severne. Towns here are upon
the Tyvi Tregaron. Llan-Beder. Cardigan, or Aber-tyvi of the Welsh, near unto
the fall of the river Tyvi, Cardigan. 15. g. lon. 53. g. lat. Mero. lon. 15. g.
10. la. 52. gr. 33. m. Speed.
the chief town. Aber-y-stwith at the mouth of the rivers Y-stwith, and
Ridol, descending from the mountain Plinlimon. The inhabitants are the Demetae
of Ptolemy. It contains 4 Market-townes, 5 Hundreds, and 64 Parishes.

MONT-GOMERY-SHIRE. Mountgomery Com.

BOunded upon the South, with Radnorshire, and the mountain Plinlimon from
Cardiganshire; upon the East, with Shropshire; upon the North, with
Denbighshire; and upon the West, with Merionith-shire. The country is
mountainous; the soil fruitful in the bottomes. In the West hereof out of the
great mountain Plimlimon arises the Severne. Towns of more note are
Machleneth, not improbably Maglona of the Notitia, the station of a foot
company of the Solenses. Llan-Vethlin, probably Mediolanium of Ptolemy, and
Antoninus. Upon the Severne Llanidlos near unto the head of the river.
Tre-newith, or the New-towne. Trellin, or the Welsh-poole. Betwixt this, and
Llan-vethlin is Mathraval, sometimes the seat of the Princes of Powis. Upon
the hither side of the river, Montgomerye lon. 17. g. la. 53 g. Speed.
Montgomery, the chief town, founded by Bauldwin Warden of the Marches in the
reign of the Conqueror, and afterward named thus from Roger of Montgomerie
Earl of Shrewesburie in the same reign, whose it was. The inhabitants are
part of the Orduices of Ptolemy, Ordovices.
and Ordovices of Tacitus. The Shire retayneth yet amongst the Welsh the
account, and name of Powys, divided into 7 Hundreds, containing 6 Market
towns, and 47 Parishes.

MERIONITH-SHIRE. Mervinia.

BOunded upon the West; with the Irish Ocean; upon the South, with the river
Dovy from Cardiganshire; upon the East, with Montgomery-shire; and upon the
North, with Caernarvon-shire. The country is wholly ouergrowne with thick,
asperous, and high mountains, affording good pasturage for sheep, and beeues,
but little corn; steep, rocky, and unapt for tillage. The towns are few, and
those very mean. Harlech. 16. gr. lo. 54. la. Merc. lo. 15 gr. 47. m. lat.
53. g. 29. m. Speed.
Places of more note are Harlech a strong castle, mounted upon a steep rock,
nere to the Ocean, the place of Assizes, and the chief Market of the
Mountainers. Dolegethel in a valley upon the river Avon. Bala at what place the
Dee issues out of Lhin-tegid, or Pimblemeare. The inhabitants are part of the
Ordovices of Tacitus. It contains 6 Hundreds, divided amongst 37 Parishes.

CAERNARVON-SHIRE. Arvonia.

BOunded upon the South, with Merionith-shire; upon the East, with the Conwey
from Denbigh-shire, and upon the North, and West, with the Ocean, and the Menai
(an arm of the Irish seas) from Anglesey. The Seacoasts are more plain,
populous, and fruitful for corn; more especially the great Promontorie, named
Langanum by Ptolemy, and now Lhein by the Welsh. The inland swells with
precipitious, high, and inaccessable mountains (the greatest whereof is
Snowdon in the middle, and ouertopping the rest,) good pasturages, and strong
shelters sometimes of the Welsh, ouermatched with the greater power of the
English. Chiefer towns are Pullhelie upon the Ocean, and the Promontorie now
mentioned Newin upon the further side of the Promontorie. Caer-narvon. 15. g.
lo. 54. g la. Merc. lo. 15. gr. 50. m. lat. 53. g. 50. m. Speed.
Caernarvon the best town, seated upon the Menai, and founded by king Edward
the first. Close by, where is Caer Seont, stood Segoncium of Antoninus. Bangor
upon the same branch of the Ocean, a Bishops See. Aber-Conwey at the mouth of
the river Conwey, built by Edward the first. Further up, where is Caer-hean a
small village upon the Conwey, stood Conouium of Antoninus. The inhabitants are
the Ordovices of Tacitus. The Shire contains 5 Market-townes, and 68 Parishes.

ANGLESEY.
IT is an island (Mona of Tacitus, Mona Taciti Annal. lib. 14.
the seat of the British Druides) encompassed upon three sides with the
Irish-Ocean; and by the Menai divided from Caernaruonshire, and the Continent
of England. The country seems dry, and stony, yet the soil is most
fruitful, the mother of Wales in Giraldus Cambrensis, extended some 20 miles
in length betwixt East, and West, and about 17 in breadth. Towns of more note
are Beau-marish in a flat upon the Menai, Beau-marish. lon. 15. g. 45. m. lat.
54. g. Speed.
the chief town, founded by king Edward the first. Newburg. More Westward
upon the Ocean is Aber-fraw, the royal seat sometimes of the kings of
Guynedh, or North Wales; and Holy Head, or Caer Guby of the Welsh, the
religious recesse of St Guby, or Kibius, a scholar of St Hilary Bishop of
Poictou, a noted Promontorie, and passage into Ireland. The inhabitants are
part of the Ordovices of Tacitus. It contains only 2 Market towns, 6
Hundreds, and 74 parishes.

DENBIGHSHIRE. Denbigh. Co.

BOunded upon the West, with the river Conwey from Caernarvonshire; upon the
South, with Merionithshire, and Mont-gomery-shire; upon the East, with
Shropshire, and the river Dee from Cheshire; and upon the North, with
Flint-shire, and the Irish Ocean. The West is cold, hungry, mountainous, and
ill inhabited, as likewise are Chirke, and Yale toward the East, and South. In
the middle for 17 miles in length, and about 5 in breadth, where lies Strat
Cluid, or the valley of the river Cluid, the country is pleasant, sweet,
healthy, and most fruitful. The like affected is Bromfeld upon the Dee toward
Cheshire, amongst other profits rich in mines of lead. Denbigh. 17. g. lo. 54.
g. la. Mer. lo. 16. g. 45. m. lat. 53. g. 49. m. Speed.
Places of better note are Denbigh the chief town. In Strat-Cluid Ruthin upon
the river Cluid. In Bromfeld Wrexham. Holt Castle upon the river Dee, and the
edge of Cheshire. The inhabitants are the Ordovices of Tacitus. The whole
contains 3 Market towns, 12 Hundreds, and 57 parishes.

FLINT-SHIRE. Flintensis. Co.

BOunded upon the South, and West, with Denbighshire; upon the East, with
Cheshire, and upon the North, with the mouth of the river Dee. The country is
somewhat ^illy, but no where mountainous; fruitful, more especially toward
the Ocean, or Dee. Places of more note are St Asaph, or Llan-Elwy of the
Welsh, at the confluence of the river Elwy, and the Cluid, a Bishops See,
named thus from St Asaph, the second Bishop. Not far off, where is Bod-vary
in the confines of this, and Denbighshire, stood Varis of Antoninus. Ruthlan
upon the Cluid. Flint. 17. g. lon. 55. g. lat. Merc. lon. 17. g. la. 53. g. 55.
m. Speed.
Basingwerk at the mouth of the Dee. Here begun the Ditch of Offa before
mentioned. Close by is Haly-well, or the famous well of St VVinnifrid. Flint
upon the Dee, naming the Countye. In the English Mailor (a part of the Shire
severed from the rest by the coming betwixt of Cheshire, and Denbigh-shire)
are seen yet some ruins of Bonium of Antoninus, turned afterward to a
Monastery, and named Bancornaburg by Beda, and Banchor by Malmesburiensis, the
first of the Britons; flourishing before the English invasion, and containing 7
greater divisions, whereof each had at the least 300 persons, living without
revenue with the labor of their hands. Some fragments hereof now remaining are
named Port Hoghan, and Port Cleis by the Welsh, lying upon both sides of the
Dee, and some mile asunder. The inhabitants are part of the Ordovices of
Tacitus. It contains 5 Hundreds, and only 1 market town, and 28 parishes.

These 13 Shires with Herefordshire, and the parts of Shropshire,
Worcestershire, and Glocestershire within the Severne, more aunciently seem to
have contained the Roman Provence, named Britannia secunda Britannia Secunda.
by Rufus Festus, and the Author of the Notitia; divided amongst three stout
and renowned British people, the Silures, Demetae, and Ordovices, unconquerable
through their valor, or the advantage of their mountains, and kept in awe by
two Roman Legions, continually attending their motions, the Second Legion,
surnamed Augusta, residing at Isca Silurum, now Caer Leon in Monmouthshire, and
the Twentieth Legion, surnamed Victrix, at Deva, or Chester. The Romans being
withdrawn into the Continent, and the Monarchy of the Britons lastly
extinguished in Cadwallader, about the year 870 under Roderique the Great,
they broke into 3 greater names, or divisions, which the Welshmen call
kingdoms. 1 Venedotia.
of Guynedh, bounded with the Ocean, the Dee, and the Dovy, and comprehending
now Anglesey, Merionithshire, and Caernarvonshire, Powisia.
with parts of Denbighshire, and Flintshire. 2 Powysland, divided into Powys
Vadoc, and Powys Wenwynwin, and containing Shropshire within the Severne,
Montgomery-shire, and Radnor-shire, with the rest of Merionithshire, Demetia.
Flintshire, and Denbighshire. 3 and of Deheubarth, bounded with the Ocean, the
sea of Severne, and the rivers of Dovy, and Wye from Guynedh, and Powys, and
containing Glamorganshire, Monmouthshire, Caermardenshire, Penbrokeshire,
Brecknockshire, and Cardiganshire, after long wars subdued by William Rufus,
and the succeeding English Monarchs, and these distinctions abolished,
incorporated into the union, and name of England. They now take up all the
Western part of the kingdom, and make the third Quart, or Division, Walli^.
which we call Wales; distinguished into South Wales, containing the 7 first
Shires, whereof Caermardenshire, Penbrokeshire, and Cardiganshire are otherwise
named, and accounted West-Wales; and North Wales containing the six last
shires, bounded with the Irish Ocean, and with the sea of Severne, the Dee,
Wye, and Offaes-Ditch from the rest of England, and extended about 100 miles in
length betwixt North, and South, and some 60 in breadth.

LANCASHIRE. Lancastrensis Com.

BOunded upon the South with the river of Mersee from Cheshires; upon the West
with the Irish Ocean; upon the North with the river Duden from Cumberland; and
upon the East with VVinander-meere from VVestmoreland, and with Mountains from
Yorkshire. The country is large, populous, and well woodded, the air healthy,
but sharp, and moists the soil fruitful (where are not hills, and mosses,)
much helped by marle, and the great industry of the inhabitants, yet more
commendable for pasturage, and a large and kindly breed of beeves, and oxen.
Towns here are VVarrington upon the Mersee. Further down Letherpoole, or
Lirpole a noted passage into Ireland. Ormeskirk, neighboring whereunto is
Latham, a large, and magnificent house of the Earls of Darbye. VViggin.
Bolton. Upon the river Irwell Bury. Manchester (Mancunium of Antoninus.
Rochdale under Blackstone-edge, and the mountains of Yorkshire. Blakeborne
upon the river Darwen. Upon the Ribble Whaley under Pendle-hill, the highest
of the English Apennine. Preston. Betwixt these upon the same river is
Ribble-chester, Rhigodunum, Lancastria. 20. g. 48. m. lon. 54 g. 5. min. lat.
Camd,
or Ribodunum of Ptolemy, a city of the Brigantes. Lancaster upon the river
Lune, the shire town (Longovicus of the Notitia, the station of a foot
company named from the place the Longovicarij.) Higher upon the same river
Ouer-Burrow (a mean village) thought to be Bremetonacum of Antoninus.
Vlverston in Fournesse, a rocky, and mountainous country betwixt the Sands by
Lancaster, and Cumberland. Briganres.
The more ancient inhabitants were the Brigantes of Ptolemy, Deiri, pars
afterward the Deiri of Beda, Nordan-Humbrorum,
part of the Northumbrian Saxons, or English. Fournesse, or the division beyond
the Sands seems otherwise to have been a part of the kingdom of Cumberland,
inhabited by a remainder of the Britons after the English conquests, and
invasion. The shire contains 15 market towns, and only 6 Hundreds, and 36
parishes, but those spacious, and very populous.

YORKE-SHIRE. Eboracensis Com.

BOunded upon the West with Mountains from Lancashire, and VVest-moreland
(parts of the English Apennine;) upon the South with Cheshire, Darbyshire,
Nottinghamshire, and Humber from Lincolneshire; upon the East with the German
Ocean, and upon the North with the river Tees from the Bishopric of Durham.
The country is large, populous, and well watered with great and fair rivers,
(the Dun, Calder, Are, VVharfe, Nid, Ouse, Swale, and Derwent) descending from
the hills, and by the wider channel of the Ouse emptied into Humber. The soil
is diverse. It contains three greater divisions, in extent, and number of
inhabitants scarce inferior to the best Shires. 1 the VVest-Riding. 2 the
East Riding. 3 the North Riding.

THE WEST RIDING OF YORKE-SHIRE.
BOunded upon the West, with the English Apennine, and Lancashire; upon the
South, with Cheshire, Darbyshire, and Nottinghamshire; and upon the East, and
North, with the rivers Ouse, and Derwent from the East, and North-Ridings. The
Western parts are hilly, and more barren; but which defects are more then
recompensed by the great industry of a stout, and painful inhabitant,
exercising clothing, and other gainefull trades, and manufactures. The soil
toward the East is abundantly fruitful, especially Marshland (encompassed
with the Dun, Are, Ouse, and Trent,) a deep, and fat country, but moorish, and
subject to inundations, defended by banks from the ouer-flowings of the Ouse,
and the waters of Dich marsh in Winter. Chiefer towns are upon the Dun
Sheafield in Hallom-shire (as are sundry neighboring villages) inhabited by
Cutlers, Smiths, and Hard-ware-men. Rotheram. Dancaster (Danum of the Notitia,
the station of a troop of horse of the Crispiniani.) Halifax. Wakefeld upon
the Calder: rich towns of clothing. Betwixt these upon the top of a steep
hill near unto the town of Almondburie, and the Calder the ruins are yet
shown of Camulodunum of Ptolemy, and Antoninus, a town of the Brigantes.
Skipton amongst hills near unto the Are, the best town of Craven, a stony, and
mountainous region in the English Apennine, bordering upon Lancashire. Leedes
upon the Are^ Below, where is Castleford at the confluence of the Are, and
Calder, stood Legeolium of Antoninus. Pontfreit defended with a beautiful, and
strong castle, a royal honor of the kings. Sherborn. Beyond is Towton,
Englands Pharsalia, fatted with the blood of above 35000 of her natives, slain
at one battle of both factions of York, and Lancaster. Upon the VVherf
Wetherby in the Roman military road. Above is Inckley, Olicana of Ptolemy.
Tadcaster (Calcaria of Antoninus) upon the same river. Knasborrow a town, and
castle, mounted upon a steep rock, under which runs the river Nid. Rippon
at the confluence of the Ure, and Skell. Near hereunto, where is Ald-borough,
stood Isurium of Ptolemy, E^^racum. 22, g. 25. m. lon. 54. gr. 10. mi. latit,
Camd. lon. 23. g. 30 m la 54. g. 30. m. Hues.
and Antoninus, a city of the Brigantes. York (Eboracum of the same Authors,
a Municipium of the Romans, the Mansion of their sixth Legion, surnamed Victrix,
and the seat of their Emperors during the time of their abode in the Island,
attending the wars of the Picts, and Caledonians, famous for the death, and
funeral exequies of the Emperors Severus, and Constantius, and the happy
inauguration of Constantine the Great, son to Constantius, here beginning his
reign over the Roman, and Christian world) now a Metropolitan sea, and the
second city of the kingdom, the seat of the President, and Council of the
North; standing in a plain upon both sides of the Ouse, populous, and well
traded with Merchands thorough the commodity of the river, round, spacious
within the walls, and thick builded. In the large, and beautiful Cathedral
Church of S. Peter, begun (although not with that state, having been sundry
times rebuilt) by Edwin, and St Oswald, the first Christian kings of
Northumberland, is seen amongst other more costly monuments the tomb, and
epitaphe of Brian Higden, sometimes Deane hereof, whom with all due
thankefulnes I remember, under God the founder of those means, whereby I have
been enabled to those, and other studies. West of the city lie Ackham hills,
the place where the Exequies of the Emperor Severus were celebrated, raised
upon that occasion. Selbye further down upon the Ouse amongst woods, and
marshes, the Birth place of Henry the first, son to the Conqueror, the
first English Norman king.

THE EAST RIDING.
BOunded upon the South, and East, with Humber, and the German Ocean; and with
the river Derwent from the West, and North-Ridings. The parts along the
Derwent, and toward the Ocean are low, and fat soiles; chiefly Holdernes, a
long Chersonese (the Promontorie Ocellum of Ptolemy,) enclosed with the sea,
Humber, and the river of Hull. Betwixt these rises Yorkes-would, high, and
grassie downs, good arable, and pasturage for sheep. Towns of more note are
Howden upon the Ouse near unto the fall thereof into Humber. Upon the Derwent
Auldby (Derventio of the Notitia, the station of a foot company named from
hence the Derventionenses.) Under the Woulds Pocklington. Wighton (Delgovitia
of Antoninus.) Close by upon the hills stands God-manham (Gotmundin-gaham of
Beda) a place, or temple of idolatrous worship under the Pagan Saxons, burnt
down, and destroyed by Coifi, chief Priest of the Idols, converted to
Christianity by Paulinus, the first Archbishop of York. Behind the Woulds
upon the river of Hull Beverley, the Cell, or religious recesse of Saint John,
sometimes Archbishop of York, deceasing in the year 721, canonized a Saint,
Hull. 25. g 20. m. lon. 53. g. 40. m. lat. Hues.
and here enshrined; occasioning the town. Kingston upon Hull, seated in a
flat at the fall of the river into Humber; a walled town, and the chief port
of these parts, defended with rampires, bulwarks, and sundry block-houses, or
castles. In Holdernes Headon upon Humber. Patrington (Praetorium of Antoninus.)
Beyond lies the Spurn head, the furthest point of the Promontorie Ocellum of
Ptolemy, of late years, and in our memory broken off, and divided from the
Continent, and made an Island. Bridlington upon the German Ocean. Hard by is
Flamborough head; Flamborough head. Long. 25. g. 20. m. lat. 54. g. Hues.
a large, and noted Promontory. The sea lying under the Lee hereof to the South
seems to have been the Bay, or Road, named of the Gabrantovici by Ptolemy.

THE NORTH RIDING.
BOunded upon the South, with the rivers Derwent, and Ouse from the North, and
East-Ridings; upon the East, with the German Ocean; upon the North, with the
river Tees from the Bishopric of Durham; and upon the West, with hills from
Westmoreland; rocky, and mountainous in the extreme parts toward
Westmoreland, and the sea; in the middle plain, and more fruitful, containing
four chief names, or devisions, Blackamore, Cliueland, North-Allerton-shire,
and Rich-mondshire. Places of better note are in Blackamore Scarborough,
Scarborough. 24. g^. 50. m. lo. 54. g* 30. m. lat. Hues.
a seaport, defended with a strong castle, on all sides (unless to the West)
environed with high, and precipitious cliffs. The subject Ocean yields plenty
of fishing, neglected by the less industrious, and provident English, and
occupied by the Dutch, with leave notwithstanding by ancient custom to be
obtained from the castle. Whitbye. The seacoasts hereabouts, as elsewhere,
afford good geate found in the clefts of the rocks. More within the land
Pickering. Kirkby-Moreside. Malton upon the river Derwent. In Cliueland
Gisburgh, enjoying a most sweet, and pleasant situation. The country amongst
other profits is plentiful in Allom, discovered of late years. Not far off
is Ounsbery-Topping, a noted sea-marke. Yarum upon the Tees. Upon the river
Wisk, and under the hills North-Allerton, naming the Shire, or Devision. In
Richmond-shire Catarick (Caturactonium of Ptolemy, and Cataracton of Antoninus)
in the Roman military road upon the river Swale. Higher upon the same river
Richmond, the chief town of the Devision. Betwixt the Swale, and the Tees
Bows, (Lavatrae of the Notitia, the station of a foot company of the
Exploratores, or Sentinells.) Here begins Stanemore, a high, and mountainous
region, stony, vast, desert, almost fruitles, unless for cattaill, exposed to
continual winds, and storms, and affording a slutchie, troublesome, and ill
way for travelers. The like, or worse affected are all the Western parts
hereof, bordering upon Westmoreland, and Lancashire. In the middle of Stanemore
stands the Rerecrosse, or Reicrosse, the bounder betwixt the two kingdoms of
England, and Scotland, (at what time that Westmoreland, and Cumberland were
Scottish) set up by the Conqueror.

The whole is divided into 28 Hundreds, containing 46 Market towns, and 563
parishes. The ancient inhabitants were the Brigantes of Tacitus, afterward
the Deiri of Beda, part of the Northumbrian Saxons.

THE BISHOPRIC OF DVRHAM. Dunelmensis Episcopatus.

BOunded upon the South, with the river Tees from Yorkshire; upon the East,
with the German Ocean; upon the North, with the Tine, and the Derwent from
Northumberland; and upon the West, with Mores from Westmoreland. The seacoasts
are good ground, and well replenished with towns; the parts toward
Westmoreland rocky, wast, solitary, and ill inhabited. Places of note are
Barnards-Castle upon the Tees. Darlington. Upon the Wire Aukland, graced with a
palace of the Bishops. Below, Binchester (a small hamlet) Binovium of Ptolemy,
Dunelmum. 22. g. long. 54. g. 55. mi. lat. Camd.
and Antoninus. Further dowue, Durham upon a hill, or rising ground almost
encompassed with the river, a Bishops see, and the chief town. Gateshead upon
the Tine, quart of New Castle. Upon the Ocean Hartle poole, a noted emporie,
and road for ships. It contains 6 Market towns, and 118 parishes. The
ancient inhabitants were the Brigantes of Tacitus, afterward the Bernicij of
Beda, part of the Northumbrian Saxons.

WEST-MORE-LAND. Westmoreland, and Westmaria.

BOunded upon the East, with the Bishopric of Durham, and Yorkshire; upon the
South, with Lancashire; and upon the West, and North, with Cumberland. The
country is mountainous, seated upon the height of the English Apennine. The
more fruitful parts are those about Kendall, or the Southern, encluded
betwixt the Lune, and Winandermeere, a deep, and spacious lake, extended for
some 10 miles in length betwixt this country, and Fournesse Fels in
Lancashire. Places of better, and more memorable note are Ambleside upon
Winandermeere, the carkase of an ancient Roman town, not improbably
Amboglanna of the Notitia, the station of the first Cohort, named Aelia of the
Daci. Candalia. long. 17. g. 30. m. lat. 55. g. 15. m.
Kendall upon the river Can, the chief town, and a rich, populous, and well
traded empory. Kirkby Lons-dale upon the river Lune. Burgh under Stanemere
near unto the head of the Eden, (Verterae of Antoninus, and Veterae of the
Notitia, the station of a foot company, named the Directores by my Author.)
Upon the river Eden Apelby, (Aballaba of the Notitia, the station of a foot
company of Moors.) Further down Whellep-castle, probably Calatum of Ptolemy,
and Gallatum of Antoninus. Brougham upon the same river (Brocavum of Antoninus,
and Braboniacum of the Notitia.) Here are contained 4 Market towns, and 26
parishes. The inhabitants are part of the Brigantes of Tacitus, named
afterward the Cumbri.

CVMBERLAND. Cumbria.

BOunded upon the South, with the river Dudden from Fournesse Fells in
Lancashire; upon the West, with the Irish Ocean; upon the North, with Solway
Frith, and the Eske from Galloway, and Annandale in Scotland; and upon the
East, with Northumberland, and Westmoreland. Copeland, or the more Southern
parts swell with thick, asperous, and rough Mountains, rich in mineralls of
Copper, and Lead, from whence likewise much silver is extracted, and
distinguished in their bottomes with sundry fair lakes. The part toward the
North is plain, or rising with grassie downs, amongst other profits affording
good pasturage for sheep. Places of more note are in Copeland, and upon the
Ocean Ravenglas at the fall of the river Eske. The seacoasts hereabout yield
good pearl. Beyond the Promontory St Bees (the solitary recesse sometimes of
St Bega, or St Bees an Irish Virgin, and Anchoret,) Moresby (a country village)
conjecturally Morbium of the Notitia, the station of a troop of great horse,
amongst other forts, and garrisons (many of whose tracts are yet seen)
defending the shore hereof against the Irish-Scots, the usual place of their
descent, and invasions in the reign of the Emperor Honorius, and before their
fixed plantation amongst the Picts, or Caledomians beyond the Glota, or Frith
of Dun briton. At the mouth of Solway Bulnesse (a small village) Blatobulgium
of Antoninus, the first stage of his British Itineraries. Here begun the Picts
wall (Vallum of Antoninus,) continued thorough this Country, and Northumberland
by Carlisle, Naworth-Castle, Halt^wesell, Hexham, and New Castle, and ending at
Walls-end, a village upon the Tine short of Tinmouth (whose tract is
euery-where most conspicuous, and the wall in some places almost entire,)
strengthened with sundry forts and bulwarks, (named now Castle-steeds by the
neighboring inhabitants,) manned sometimes with Roman garrisons, their best
defense against the barbarous Caledonians, and the more certain bounder
Northwards of the British Province, and their Empire; first raised of Earth, or
Turfe by the Emperor Adrian, repaired by Severus, and lastly more firmly
built of stone by the weak, and distressed Britons a little before their
English, or Dutch invasion. More within the land Burgh upon the Sands, fatal
to the English by the untimely death of the most valiant, and victorious
Prince, king Edward the first. Carleolum. 21. g. 31. m. lon. 54. g. 57. m. lat.
Camd.
Carlisle upon the Eden (Lugwallum of Antoninus, and Lugobalia of Beda) a
Bishops See, and the chief town. Beyond, the river Esk is received into the
Solway, the most known limit of the two kingdoms. By the natives otherwise
the Sarke, a rivulet beyond the Eske, is reputed the English border. The part
of the country betwixt this, and the Leven (a river upon this side of the Eske)
is named the Batable ground in the language of the inhabitants, as controversed
betwixt the two nations, of late years possessed by the Grahams, a numerous
and potent family of out-lawes, since belonging to the Earls of Cumberland by
the gift of King James of happy memory. Brampton upon the river Irthing, and
the Scottish borders, (Bremetenracum of the Notitia, the Station of a troop of
heavy-armed horse.) Higher upon the Eden Linstock castle, (Olenacum of the
Notitia the station of a wing of Horse, named the first Herculea.) Warwic, not
improbably Virosidum of the same Author, the station of the sixth Cohort of the
Nervians. Penreth upon the same river. Close by is old Penreth the ruins of
some ancient city, (conjecturally Petrianae of the Notitia, the station of a
wing of Horse, from hence named Petriana by my Author.) More Westwards Ierbye,
(Arbeia of the Notitia, the Station of a foot company of the Barcarij
Tigrienses.) Cockermouth, at the confluence of the river Cockar, and Derwent.
Keswick upon a deep and spacious lake amongst mountains under Skiddaw (a
biforced hill, ouer-topping the rest,) enriched with Copper, and Lead-workes.
The inhabitants are the Brigantes of Ptolemy, and Tacitus, after the English
invasion named otherwise the Kimbri, or Cumbri (a general appellation of the
Britons,) distinguished thus from the Dutch, or Saxons of Northumberland, to
whose Empire they at length became subject. In the reign of king Alkfrid with
VVestmoreland, and Fournesse in Lancashire (parts likewise of the ancient
Cumbri) rebelling against the English, they are made a free estate, known by
the name of the kingdom of Cumberland, subdued long after by Edmund, Monarch
of the English-Saxons, and given to Malcol^e, and the Scots; recovered by
William the Conqueror, and Henry the Second, and united to the English
Crown. Here are numbered 9 market towns, and 58 parishes.

NORTHVMBERLAND. Northumbria.

BOunded upon the East with the German Ocean; upon the South with the rivers
Tine, and Derwent from the Bishopric of Durham; upon the West with Mores from
Cumberland; and upon the North with the mountain Cheviot, and the river Tweed
from Scotland. The country is hilly, and full of wastes; the soil barren in
most places, commended chiefly for horses, and plenty of Sea-coale. The more
fertile parts, and better inhabited are the Seacoasts. The people are hardy,
fierce, valiant, and excellent riders; the gentry gallant; the commons poor.
More remarkable places are upon the Tine Hexham, (Axelodunum of the Notitia,
the Station of the 1 Cohort of Spaniards, and Haugustald of Beda, a Bishops see
under the Saxons.) Corebridge, (Curia of Ptolemy, a city of the Otadeni.)
Prudhow castle (probably Procolitia of the Notitia, the station of the 1 Cohort
of the Batavi.) Novum castr^ ad Tinam. 22. g. 30. m. long. 54. gr. 57. m. lat.
Camd. 23. gr. 10. m. lon. 55. g. 20. m. lat. Hues.
Newcastle (not improbably Gabrosentum of the Notitia, the station of the 2
Cohort of the Thracians,) the chief town, a rich empory, and a noted Port,
whose best trade is upon Coal, distributed from hence over all the Seacoasts
of the kingdom, and into foreign, and remote countries; seated upon the
Picts wall, and the side of a steep hill, under which runs the Tine.
Walls-end, (Vindomara of Antoninus, and Vindobala of the Notitia, the station
of the 1 Cohort of the Frixagori.) Here at the Tine ends the Picts wall.
Tinmouth-Castle, (Tunnocellum of the Notitia, the station of the 1 Cohort named
Aelia Classica.) At the Sheales upon both sides of the Tine, betwixt this and
New Castle, plenty of salt is boiled with coal; made of Sea-waters. Along the
Picts wall without the Tine Thirlewall betwixt the South-Tine, and the head of
the river Irthing. Here the Scots, and Picts are said to have broke thorough
into the Province in the reign of the Emperor Valentinian the third, after
the departure of the Roman Legions; occasioning the aides, and invasion of the
Saxons. Beyond, near to Caer Vorran, a part of the wall stands almost
entire, containing 15 foot in height, and some 9 in breadth. Short of
Busye-gap Chester on the Wall, (Magnae of the Notitia, the station of the 2
Cohort of the Dalmatians.) Seauenshale, (Hunnum of the Notitia, the station of
a Wing of Horse, named Saviniana by my Author.) Walwick, conjecturally
(Gallana of Antoninus.) Beyond, the North-Tine crosses the Wall, arising from
mountains in the Scottish borders, and naming the large village of Tindale.
Stilicester, (not improbably Cilurnum of the Notitia, the station of the 2 wing
of the Asturians. Pont-Eland upon theriver Pont (Pons-Aelii of the Notitia, the
station of the 1 Cohort of the Cornavij.) Borwick (Borcovicus of the Notitia,
the Station of the 1 Cohort of the Tungri.) Winchester in the Wall, (Vindolana
of the Notitia, the station of the 4 Cohort of the Lergi. Bamborrow Castle,
short of the Holy Island, Bebba of Beda. Morpit upon the Wents-beck. Anwick upon
the ^iver Alne. Upon the Tweede, and Borders of Scotland, Werke-castle. Norham.
Berwick upon the lest bank, Berwicus, 21. g. 43. m. l. 55. g. 48. m. l. Camd.
and mouth of the river, a strong town of war, opposed sometimes against the
Scots, the farthest bounds of the English Empire. Upon the Till (a river
falling into the Tweed above Norham) Ford Castle. To the West beyond the river
rises Floddon hill, made famous by the death of James the fourth, king of
Scotland, slain in a memorable battle by Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey,
general of the English, in the reign of Henry the Eight. Otadeni, pars
Maeatarum. Bernicij, pars Nordan-Humbrorum.
The ancient inhabitants were the Otadeni of Ptolemie, part of the Meatae of
Xiphilinus; afterward the Bernicij of Beda, part of the Northumbrian English.

The V. Rog. Hoveden part. priorem.
Earldom of Northumberland after the expulsion of the Danes, extended betwixt
the rivers Tweed, and Humber, containing the whole ancient kingdom of
Northumberland. In the reign of king Edgar, it was parted into two Earledomes,
or goverments (for such then were the Earledomes;) the Earldom of
Northumberland beyond the river Tine; and on this side: reunited not long
after, and again divided in the Earls Morcar, and Osulfus about the reign of
the Conqueror. The part, or Earldom on this side of the Tine, taking
afterward the name of Yorkshire from the chief city, the Earldom, and name
of Northumberland, was left only to the part beyond the Tine, continued here
unto our times, the beginning, and occasion of the present.

These six shires seem more anciently to have contained the consulary Roman
Province, named Maxima Caesariensis by Rufus Festus, Maxima Caesariensis, and
Valentia.
and the Notitia, with part of the Province Valentia of Ammianus Marcellinus,
and the same Authors; inhabited by the great, and populous nation of the
Brigantes of Ptolemie, with the Otadeni, or Maeatae. Under the Saxons they
comprehended the Deiri of Beda, with part of the Bernicij, divided asunder with
the river Tees; Reg. Nordanhumbrorum.
or the greatest part of the kingdom of Northumberland. They make now the
fourth, or last division of the kingdom, bounded upon the East, and West with
the German, and Irish Ocean; upon the North with the rivers Tweed, and Eske, or
the Sark, with Solway Frith from Scotland; and upon the South with Humber, and
the Mersee from the rest of England.

OF THE STATE OF EVROPE. The IIII Book.
COntaining the Relation and Description of Scotland, and of Ireland, with
other the Islands of Great Britain.

SCOTLAND.
THE bounds hereof are the Ocean upon the East, West, and North; and upon the
South the Mountain Cheviot, the Frith of Solway, and the rivers Eske, or
Sarke, and Tweed from England.

It lies betwixt the 55, and 60 degrees of Northern Latitude, subject to the
11, and 12, with part of the 10, and 13 Climates. The longest day at Solway
Frith contains about 17 hours, and 15 minutes. At Straithy head (the most
Northerly point) it contains 18 hours, and 3 quarters. The length after this
computation is 310 Italian miles. The greatest breadth is accounted at 190
English miles.

The soil is different, the West, and North, craggy, and mountainous; the
East, and South less hilly, and more fruitful: full of rivers, and fair
lakes, and cut into by sundry long, and spacious Creekes of the Ocean,
plentiful in fish, and affording good harbors for shipping. The Hills abound
with Mineralls, sea-coale, marble, copper, Iron, and lead, with some silver.
Nothing is wanting for the necessary use of the inhabitants; frugall, plain,
and temperate in their diet, not accoustomed to that luxury, and excess,
usual to more rich, and fertile countries.

The ancient inhabitants were the Britons; divided by Ptolemie into many lesser
names; by Dion, and Xiphilinus into two only general, of the Caledonij, and
Maeatae; and lastly called the Picts toward the waine of the Roman Empire from
their paintings, and for their better distinction from the civil, and clothed
Britons, distinguished by Amm: Marcellinus into the (...)

The Laws, whereby the whole is governed, are the Parliamental Municipal, or
Common, and when these are wanting, the Civil or Roman; yet where conscience,
and equity do overrule both: besides the Session, or Supreme Court, residing
at Edenburg, whereunto appeal may be made from the rest etc., here administered
in 25 Prefectureshipps, or Iuridicall Resorts. 1. the Countries or Sheriffdomes
of Edenburg, Linlithquo, Selkirck, Roxburgh, Peblis, Lanark, Renfrew, Dunfreis,
Wighton, Air, Bute, Argile, and Tarbar, Dunbriton, Perth, Clackmannan, Kinros,
Fife, Kincardin, Forfair, Aberdone, Bamff, Elgin, Forres, Narn, Innernesse,
Cromarty, and Orkney, and Schetland. 2. the Seneschaussees, or Stewarties of
Mentieth, Strath-ern, Kircudbricht, and Annandale. 3. the Bailywicks of Kile,
Carick, and Cunningham. 4. and the Constableship of Haddington: whose Judges in
both causes Civil, and Criminal are the Sheriffs, Stewards, or Bailiffs of
each jurisdiction (or their Delegates,) offices for the most part hereditary to
noble families.

The Country contains 34 parts, or divisions. Merch. Lauden. Tweedale.
Teifidale. Liddesdale etc. Annandale. Niddesdale. Galloway. Carick. Kyle.
Cuningham. Arran. Cluidesdale etc. Lennox. Stirling. Fife. Strath-ern.
Me^teith. Argile. Cantire. and Lorne, lying upon the South of the river Taye.
and Braid-albin, Loquabria. Perth. Athol. Anguis. Mern. Mar. Buquhan. Murray.
Rosse. Sutherland. Catnesse. and Strath-Navern, lying upon the South of that
river, the middle of the kingdom.

MERCH. Marchia.

LYing upon the German Ocean betwixt Northumberland in England, and Lauden.
More noted places are Hume-Castle, naming the family of the Humes. Kelso.
Coldingham (Coldana of Beda, and not improbably Colania of Ptolemy.)
Fast-Castle, belonging to the Humes, upon the Promontory, S. Ebbes.

LAVDEN.
EXtended along the same Ocean betwixt Merch, and the Frith of Edenburg;
fruitful in corn, and inhabited by an industrious, and civil people. Chiefer
towns are Hadington in a plain upon a small rivulet, named the Tine. Below,
upon the Ocean, and near unto the mouth of that river, stood sometimes the
strong Castle of Dunbar, in the year 1567 destroyed by the command of the
States; jealous of the surprisall thereof by rebels. Musselborough, upon the
river Eske, memorable for a great overthrow of the Scots, given by the English
under Edward, Duke of Somerset, protector of the Realm of England in the
minority of king Edward the Sixth. Leith, a noted port upon the Frith of
Edenborough (Bodotria of Tacitus, and Boderia of Ptolemy,) the seat of war
of the French in the reign of Queen Mary (wife unto Francis the Dolphin,)
Edenburgum. lon. 18. g. lat. 58. g. Merc.
besieged, and thrust out by the ioinct arms of Queen Elizabeth of famous
memory, and the Scottish nobility. Edinburgh, the chief city of the
kingdom, extended betwixt West, and East, upon a hill, or rising ground of some
mile in length, and some half a mile in breadth; populous, fair, and through
the neighborhood of the Frith, and Leith, rich, and well traded, defended with
walls, and a magnificent, and strong castle, mounted upon a steep, and
precipitious rock toward the West end of the Town. Some suppose here to have
been Alata Castra of Ptolemy: but v. supra. Limnuchum.
erroneously. Linlithquo, or Lithquo, upon a Lake near unto the head of the
Frith, supposed to be Lindum of Ptolemie, a city of the Damnij of the same
Author.

TWEEDALE. Twedia.

COntinued along the Tweede toward Merch, and Berwijck; commended for sheep,
and woolls. More chief places are Drimlar Castle; and Peblis; and Selkirck,
Sherifdomes, or Praefectureships for the valley: all standing upon the Tweede.

TIVIDALE. Teviotia.

SEated among rocky hills betwixt Tweedale, and Northumberland, and along the
course of the river Teviot. Places of more note are Iedburg near unto the
confluence of the Ied, Rosbuegum. lon. 18. g. 4. m. lat. 56. g. 54. m. Merc.
and Teviot: and Roxburg, a decayed castle at the meetings of the Teviot, and
Tweede, the Sherifdome of the country, fatal to the Scots by the untimely
death of king James the second, slain in the siege hereof by the English.
These four seem to contain the Gadeni of Ptolemie.

ESKE-DALE, Escia. Lidalia. Evia.
LIDDES-DALE, AND EVSE-DALE.
NAmed thus from, and extended upon the rivers Eske, and the Lidden, and Euse;
by the Eske disburdened in the Solway near to Caerlile. The chief place is
the Hermitage, a strong castle in Liddesdale.

ANNANDALE. Annandia.

COntinued upon both sides of the river Annan, falling into the Frith of Solway
against Burgh upon the Sands in Cumberland. More noted places are the Castle
Maban, strongly seated within the Lake Maban: and the town Annand, standing
upon the river, thus named, nere unto the fall thereof into the Frith.

NIDISDALE. Nithia.

LYing to the West of Annandale upon the river Nid (Nobius of Ptolemy,)
received into the Solway below the river Annan. Places of better note are upon
the Nid Sanghuer Castle, Dunfreis. lon. 16. g. 24. m. l, 56. g. 16. m* Merc.
whereof are entitled the Lords Sanqhuer of the house, or name of the
Creichtons. Morton, naming the Earls Morton of the name of Duglas. Dunfreis
nere to the fall of the river, a rich, and well traded Emporie, the chief
town of these parts. At the mouth of the river Caerlaverock castle
(Carbantorigum of Ptolemie,) the house now of the Lord Maxwels. Upon a lake
more remote from the river, Glencarne, whereof are styled the Earls of
Glencarne of the house of the Cuninghams. These from Eskedale seem more
anciently to have contained the Elgov^e, or Selgovae of Ptolemy, imparting
their name to bordering Frith of Solway.

GALLOWAY. Gallovidia.

RIsing with grassie hills betwixt Nidisdale upon the East, and Carict upon the
North; and enclosed upon the other sides with the Irish Ocean; the most
Western part this way of the kingdom. Places of more note are upon the river
Dee (Dea of Ptolemy) Kircoubright, a commodious haven, Wigton. lon. 15. g. lat.
56. g. 10. m. Merc.
and Seneschaussee. Wigton, a Sherifdome, and a commodious Port, betwixt the
rivers Blaidnoo, and Crea. Whit-herne (Leucopibia of Ptolemy) a Bishops sea,
the seat sometimes of S. Ninian, the Apostle of the Northern Picts. Beyond
lies the Mul of Galloway, a Promontory, and Chersonese, joined to the
continent by a very narrow neck of land (the Promontory of the Novantes of
Ptolemy,) the furthest point of Galloway toward the West, and Ireland.

CARICT.
SEated upon the Irish Ocean, betwixt Galloway, and Kile, rich in pasturages,
corn, and commodities, arising from the sea. Places of more note are Bargeny
(Berigonium of Antoninus;) and Cassil Castle, the seat of the Earls thus
named, of the house, of the Kennedyes.

KYLE. Coila.

Upon the Irish Ocean, or Frith of Dunbriton, betwixt Carict, and Cuningham;
populous, Era. lon. 15. g. lat. 56. g. 49. m. Merc.
and well inhabited. The chief town is Air, a Sherifdome, and a noted port,
and Empory, at the fall of the river, thus called, into the Ocean, or Frith of
Dunbriton.

CVNINGHAM. Cunigamia.

Upon the Frith, or Irish Ocean, betwixt Kyle, and Dunbriton. More noted places
are upon the Seacoast Irwin, a small Port at the mouth of the Irwin, Irwin.
a river parting this Country, and Kyle. Ardrossan Castle. Largis. Nearer
Dunbriton, Eglington Castle; naming the Earls of Eglington. The parts
inclusiuely from Galloway were the Novantes of Ptolemie.

CLVYDS-DALE. Vallis Glottiana.

LYing upon both sides of the river Cluyd, from the head thereof in
Crawford-Moore toward the Frith of Dunbriton. (...) Duglas Castle in
Duglas-dale, (a valley upon the river Douglas) naming the ancient, Lanarcum.
and noble family of the Duglasses. Lanric, a Sherifdome, at the confluence of
the Duglas, and Cluyd. Hamilton Castle upon the Cluyd, naming the house, and
Marquesses of Hamilton. Bothwell, whereof the Earls Bothwell were entitled,
Glascua. lon. 15. g. 44. m. lat. 57. g. 3. m. Market.
upon the Cluyd. Farther down upon the same river Glascow, an Archbishops
sea, an University, and the chief town. Betwixt this, and Cuningham lies the
Barony of Renfrew, named thus from the town, a Sherifdome, hereditary to the
Lord Sempils.

LENNOX. Leuinia.

LYing upon the North of the river Cluyd; whereby it is divided from the Barony
of Renfrew, and by the river Kelwin parted from Cluydes-dale, or the Sherifdome
of Glascow; named thus from the river Levin (Lelanonius of Ptolemy) issuing
forth of Lough Lomo^^ (a spacious Lake of whose Islands strange wonders are
spoken,) spreading here under the mountain Grampius for some 24 miles in
length, and some 8 in breadth, and falling into the Cluyd at Dunbriton.
Britanno dunum. l. 15. g. 24. m. lat. 57. g. 10. m. Merc.
More noted places, are Kilmoronock upon the East side of the Lake; a fair
house of the Earls of Cassel. Dunbriton a town, and Castle, a Sherifdome, and
the strongest hold of the kingdom; seated in a grassie plain at the fall of
the Levin into the Cluyd, upon two steep and precipitious rocks, flancked
upon the West with the two rivers, and upon the East with a myrie flat, drowned
at every Full-sea.

THE SHERIFDOME OF STERLING. Sterlinensis ager.

DIvided with mountains from Lennox, and with the river Aven from Lauden;
having upon the East the Bodotria, or Frith of Edenborough: a plentiful, and
rich soil, and much graced with the seats, and houses of the Scottish
Nobility. Sterlinum. lon. 16. g. 10. m. lat. 57. g. 20. m. Merc.
The chief town is Striuelin, or Sterlin, upon the Forth, defended with a
fair, and strong castle. The more ancient inhabitants hereof, and from
Cluydesdale seem to be the Damnij, of Ptolemy. Through this country passed the
trench, or wall of Julius Agricola, and Lollius Vrbicus, before mentioned,
continued for about the space of 30 miles (for such is only the narrow distance
here betwixt the two seas) from Abercorne, upon the Frith of Edinburgh, unto
Dunbriton, or Kirck-patrick: the farthest limit Northwards of the Roman
Empire; with the two Friths, the bounder betwixt them, and the Picts, or
Caledonians, as afterward betwixt the Saxons, or English, and the Picts, and
Scots. The tract hereof in many places is yet appearing, and is called
Grahams-dike by the Natives. The part of the Island betwixt this, and the wall
of Severus (containing the countries of Scotland already described, with
Northumberland in England) was named Valentia in Rufus Festus, and the Author
of the Notitia, being one of the five general Provinces, whereinto the Romans
divided their British conquests, uncertainly held by them until the
expiration of their Empire; inhabited by the M^^tae of Xiphilinus, afterward
by the Bernicij, part of the Northumbrian English.

MENTEITH Taichia.

BOrdering upon Sterling, and Menteith, divided herefrom by the Forth, and
named thus from the river Teith, or Taich, falling into the Forth. The chief
town is Dunblan, Dunblan. lon. 16. g. 12. m. 157. g. 25. m. Merc.
a Bishops sea, upon the Taich.

STRATH-ERN
LYing to the North of Menteith, and continued along the course of the river
Ern, arising in the Lake Em, under Drum-albin (part of the hill Grampius,) and
falling into the Taye below S. Iohns-Towne. Places of more note are Drumin.
Tulibardin. Duplin: castles situate upon the Erne. Toward Fife and the East
hereof, and Menteith, lie the Prefectures, or Sherifdomes of Clackmannan,
Clackmannan. lon. 16. g. 36. m. lat. 57. g. 23. m. Merc.
and Kinross.

FIFE.
COntained betwixt the Frith of Edenborough, and the mouth of the Taio;
plentiful in corn, pasturage, sea-cole, and in commodities, and profits,
arising from the Ocean, populous, and full of towns along the Seacoast.
Places of more note are Aberneth near Straith-ern, and at the fall of the
river Ern into the Taye, the chief seat sometimes, and residence of the kings
of the Picts. Fanum D. Andreae. lon. 17. g. 28. m. l. 57. g. 46. m. Market.
S. Andrews upon the Ocean, nere unto the fall of the Ethan, an University,
and an Archbishops sea, the Primate of Scotland. More within the land Cuper
upon the Eden, or Ethan, a iuridicall resort, the seat of the Sheriff.
Falkland, a pleasant secesse of the Scottish kings, retiring thither for the
pleasure, and commodity of hunting.

THE SHERIF-DOME OF PERTH
COntinued upon the river Taye. Towns of better note are Dunkelden, a bishops
sea. Perth. lon. 16. g. 8. m. lat. 58. g. Merc.
Perth, or S. Iohns-Towne, in the middle of the kingdom, a walled Town,
fair, and peopled with industrious inhabitants; both seated upon the Taye.
Beyond in Goury, a Champion, and fruitful country on the further side of the
river, is Scone, sometimes a famous Monastery; the place of inauguration of the
Scottish kings. Arrol, further down upon the Taye, the seat of the Earls of
Arrol.

ATHOL. Atholia.

LYing upon the North of the Taye; rough, woodie, and Mountainous, part
sometimes of the wood Caledonia of Cacitus; with other bordering countries,
strong fastnesses of the Picts and Northern Britons against the Romans; and of
later years of the Scots in their hard wars with the English in the reigns
of Edward the first, and Edward the third.

ANGVIS. Angusia.

EXtended along the German Ocean betwixt the mouth of the Taye, and the river
Eske; plentiful in wheat, corn, and pasturages. Places of more note are
Forfar, Taodunum.
nearer Gowry; the seat of the Sheriffs. Dundee, a rich and noted port at the
mouth of the Taye. Brechin. lon. 17. g. 38. m. lat. 58 g. 12. m. Market.
Brechin upon the Eske, a Bishops sea. Mont-rose at the mouth of the Eske,
naming the Earls of Mont-rose.

MERNE. Mernia.

COntinued along the same Ocean betwixt Anguis, and the river Eske upon the
South; and Mar, and the Dee upon the North: plain, and abundantly fruitful.
The chief place is Dunnotyr Castle, mounted upon a steep, and inaccessable
rock, overlooking the subject Ocean; the seat of the Sherifs.

MAR. Marria.

LYing with a narrow point upon the same Ocean betwixt the falls of the rivers
Dee, and Done; or Merne, and Buquhan: within the land spreading more wide, and
extending some 60 miles Westward. The Seacoast, and along the rivers are more
plain, fruitful, and better inhabited. The parts toward the West swell with
mountains, and hills; branches of the Grampius. Aberdon. lon. 18. g. 12. m.
lat. 58. g. 40. m. Merc. Badenacha.
The chief towns are old Aberdon at the mouth of the Dee; and new Aberdon, an
University, and a Bishops sea at the mouth of the Done; distant about a mile a
sunder. Toward the West betwixt this country, and Loquabria rises the high
country of Badgenoth, containing part of the Grampius.

BVQVHAN. Bucharia.

Upon the same Ocean; from Mar, and the river Done upon the South, extended
toward Murray Northwards: well stored with grass, sheep, and pasturage.
Betwixt this, and Murray, or the river Speye, lie the small countries, and
prefectures of Bamff, a Sherifdome, Boen, Ainz, and Straithbogye, or the valley
of the river Bogie.

MVRRAY. Morania.

EXtended upon the same Ocean from the river Speye unto the Lake, and river of
Nesse, parting it from Rosse. Here begins the mountain Grampius of Tacit.,
continued from hence with a perpetual ridge of high hills South-West over
Badgenoth, Athol, and Braid-albin unto the Lake Lomu^d, and Lennox: spreading
into other neighboring Countries. Places of more note are Rothes Castle upon
the Spey, Forres lon. 16. g. 40. m. lat. 59. g. 3. m. Merc.
naming the Earls of Rothes. Elgin Forres. and Narne; Sherifdomes, or
Prefectureshipss for the division. The Lake, and river of Nesse freezeth not in
the hardest time of winter through a warm quality of the water, infused from
mineralls in the neighboring mou^tains, out of which they issue; extended some
24 miles Westwards, and with Logh-Loth, from the which it is divided by a small
neck of Mountains, and Logh Aber (whereinto this is disburdened) falling into
the Western Ocean, parting Rosse, Loqhuabria, and other the more Northerly
regions from the rest of the Continent of Scotland.

ROSSE. Rossia.

EXtended betwixt both Seas, the German, and Western Ocean; and having upon
the South Lough-Nesse from Buquhan, and Loqhuabria; and upon the North
Catnesse, and Straith-Navern: rough, mountainous, and wooddie to the West; in
the valleys, and toward the East more fruitful. In the midst, and toward the
Lake Nesse arise the high mountains of Ardmanoch covered all the year long
with snow. Upon the North-West is Assinshire; indented with sundry creekes of
the Western Ocean. Chief places are in Ardmanoch, the Castle Louet. At the
mouth of the Nesse, Chanonry, the seat of the Bishops of Rosse. Cromerty a
Sherifdome, or place of Judicature.

SVDERLAND. Suderlandia.

SEated upon the German Ocean, betwixt Catnesse upon the North, and Rosse upon
the South; and having Strath-Navern upon the West: mountainous, yielding
tolerable pasturage, but little corn. The chief place is Dun-Robin Castle;
the seat sometimes of the Earls of Suderland. The mountains afford plenty of
fine marble, but of no use in those cold, and Northren regions.

CATNESSE. Cathanesia.

HAving upon the South, Suderland; upon the North, and East, the Ocean; and
upon the West, Straith-Navern. The inhabitants live most upon their profit of
cattle, and fish, got in the Ocean. The most noted places are Girnego castle,
the seat of the Earls, and Durnock, and Wik, the seats of the Bishops of
Catnesse. More to the North lie the Promontories Berubium, and Viruedrum of
Ptolemy, now Dunsbey, or Duncans-bay, and Hoia, or Vrdshead; with Howburne-head
in Strath-Naverne, the extreme points of the Island of Great Britain toward
the Pole Articke, and the North. Camden places these two last in
Strath-Navern. Buchanan, otherwise in this country.

STRAITH-NAVERNE. Navernia.

NAmed thus from the river Naverne (Nabeus of Ptolemy,) and bounded upon the
South with Rosse; upon the East with Suderland, and Catnesse; and upon the
West, and North, with the Ocean; cold, hilly, and less fruitful; with Catnes,
the extreme parts of Great Britain toward the North. Here lies the
Promontory, named Tarvedrum, and Orcas by Ptolemy; now Howburne Head.

LOQHVABRIA. Abria.

COntinued upon the same Ocean, betwixt Rosse upon the North, and Logh-Aber
upon the South; fruitful in corn, and pasturages, and pleasantly shaded with
woods. The most noted place is Innerloth, upon the lake Loath.

LORNE. Lorna.

EXtended a long the same Western Ocean betwixt Logh Aber upon the North (by
which it is parted from Loqhuabria,) and Knapdale, and Cantire upon the North;
fruitful in corn, and divided by the great Lake named Leauve by the natives.
The chief place is Tarbar in Logh Kinkeran, a Sherifdome, or juridicall resort
for this country, and the more Southern part of the Western Scottish Islands.

BRAID-ALBIN. Albania.

SEated to the East of Lorn, amongst rockie, and high mountains, parts of the
hill Grampius of Tacitus; inhabited by the High-land-men, or Irish Scots.

ARGILE. Argathelia.

LYing to the West of Lennox, and the lake Lomond, and bounding upon the South
with the Sea, or Frith of Dunbriton; wild, rockie, and mountainous, with
Cantire, Braid-Albin, and the neighboring countries of the Highlanders, the
more ancient, and first residence of the Scots, desbourding hither from Ireland.

CANTIRE.
IT is a narrow Promontory, or Chersonese of some 30 miles in length (the
Promontory of the Epidij of Ptolemie;) divided from Argile by Logh Fin (a long,
and spacious arm of the sea of Dunbriton,) and joined to Knapdale, and the
Continent, by a small neck of land, not exceeding a mile in breadth. The Mul
of Cantire, the farthest point of the Chersonesse, is distant only 13 miles
from Ireland, the next part of Scotland, and Great Britain to that Island.

These last, inclusiuely from Menteith, were the famous V. s^pra.
Caledonij of Tacitus, parted by Ptolemy into 13 lesser names, or divisions,
the Epidij, Cerones, Creones, Carnonacae, Carini, Cornabij, Logi, Mertae,
Cantae; Texali, Vennicontes, Vacomagi, and Caledonij, particularly thus called;
the only part of Britain, stopping, and giving bounds to the great conquests,
and victories of the Romans, twice invaded, by Julius Agricola in the reign of
Domitian, and by the Emperor Severus, but without any good effect, and not
without much loss to the Roman side; secured by their mountains, lakes,
marshes, and woods. The Roman Empire declining, they were all called by the
names of Picts. Afterward they became divided betwixt the Picts, driven unto
the Eastern shore; and the Scots, a colony (as before) of the Irish, thrusting
into the parts toward Ireland, and the West; the victorious conquerours not
long after of the Picts. At this day they are distinguished into the
Law-land-men, or the English, and more civil Scots, inhabiting the plainer
countries along the German Ocean, and upon this side of the two Friths, and the
Highland-men, or Irish Scots, retaining yet the Irish language, and manners,
and possessing the heights of the hill Grampius, Braid-albin, Argile, and other
mountainous regions upon the Western, and Irish Seas.

THE ISLANDS OF GREAT BRETAINE.
THe Islands belonging to this Continent are all called in Ptolemy by the name
of the British Islands. Insulae Britannicae. Ptol. lib. 2. c. 2. and 3. and l.
8, c. 3.
Before the time of Pliny, as in his 4 book, and 16 chapter, they made with
Albion, or the Greater Britain, the general name of the Britains;
distinguished from the ancient, and accounted an other world after Solinus.
Britanniae Plin. N. Hist. lib. 4. c. 16.
The most famous, and greatest of these, and after England of the Islands of
Europe, and the West, is Ireland.

IRELAND. Ierna. Arist. de Mundo c. 3. Iris Diodor. Siculi. Iuverna. Mel. l. 3.
Ierne. Cla. Paneg. de. 4. Consul. Hon. Aug. Ibernia, Ptol. Geog. lib. 2. c. 2.
Hibernia Corn-Tacit. in Vita Iul. Agric. and recentiorum.

THE bounds hereof are upon the East Ibernic^s oceanus Ptol. Geog. lib. 2. c. 2.
the Irish Ocean, or S. George his Channel from England, and Scotland; upon
the North the Hyperboreus. ib.
Northern Ocean; upon the West Occiduus. ib.
the Westernesea; and upon the South the Vergivius. ib.
Vergivian.

It lies betwixt about the 51, and 56 degrees of Northern Latitude, or betwixt
the 19, or middle Parallel of the 8 Clime, where the longest day has 16 hours,
and a half, and the 24 Parallel, or end of the 10 clime, where the same has 17
hours, and 3 quarters.

The length of the Island after this computation is 320 Italian miles, or
measured English. Camden otherwise accounts the length only at 300 English.
The breadth he reckneth at 120 of the same miles.

The air is temperate, and healthie, but moist, and raw, rather plentifully
bringing up, and nourishing, then ripening fruits.

The soil is fertile, but better pasturage, and for grass, then for fruits,
and corn, through a wet quality of the ground, or by the sloth of the
natives, and for their want of manuring; encombred with bogs, lakes, marshes,
and with thick, slutchie, and vndreaned woods.

The first inhabitants were the Irish (for more ancient we find not,)
distinguished by Ptolemie into sundry lesser V. Ptol. Geo. lib. 2. c. 2.
people, and names: the Rhobognij, Darnij, Voluntij, Vennicnij, and Erdini; now
containing Vlster: the Auteri, Gangani, and Nagnatae; inhabiting Connaught: the
Velibori, Vterni, Vodiae, and Coriondi; now Munster: and the Menapij, Cauci,
Blanij, and Brigantes; now Leinster: whose cities were Rhigia, Rheba,
Macolicum, Dunum, Laberus, and Ivernis, etc. whose interpretatio^s we let
pass, as very uncertain; free for a long time, and not conquered by foreign
power, neglected by the Romans, and the succeeding Saxons, or English, engaged
in more necessary wars, or more honorable, and gainefull conquests. Toward
the waine of the Romans V. supra.
Empire they are named the Scots (the occasion, or reason hereof we find not,)
subduing the neighboring Picts, and Caledonians, and giving the name of
Scotland to the Northern part of the British Continent. Leaving there this new
affected name, they lastly resume, and return here unto their first, and more
wonted name of Irish.

Their government anciently was under many petty kings, or tyrants.

In the reign of king Henry the second, occasioned through the quarrels
hereof, they are first made subject to the English; whose princes were styled
Lords of Ireland. King Henry the eight by the good likeing of the natives first
assumed the title of King, continued ever since in his successors.

More lately they were distinguished into the Irish, and the English Pales, or
the Wild, and Civil Irish; whereof these obeyed the English laws; the other
were let loose to their barbarous customs, and living. The happy success of
the last wars against Tir-oen, and the wisdom, and zeal of King James of
happy memory put an end to this division; the country being now every where
planted with civil inhabitants, and the whole reduced to an English Province.

The laws, whereby the people are governed, are their Acts of Parliament, and
the Municipall, or Common Laws of England; executed by the Lord Deputy, or
Viceroy for the king, Presidents, Judges, Sheriffs, and other English names of
Magistrates.

Their Religion, which only is allowed, is the Reformed, or Protestant, yet
where the pretended Catholic, or Roman does more prevail amongst the vulgar,
through their discontent, or an inbred and rooted superstition.

Their Clergy are Archbishops, Bishops, and Inferior ranks; whose Primate
is Armagh; and first Apostle S. Patricius, Magdeburg. Cent. 5. c. 11. and Baron
Ann. Ecc. An. Chr. 431. ex Sigebert. Chron. and Probo. in vita. S. Patric.
or Patrick, in the year 432, and the reign of the Emperor Valentinian the
third; a Scot, or Irishman after my author, nephew to S. Martin Bishop of
Tours, and Disciple to S. German.

The Religious of this nation (Monks of an ancient institution) have been no
less deserving, then their neighbors of Great Britain; chaste, and holy
Seminaries of piety, and religion during the Primitive times of the English,
French, and Dutch Churches; but who passing under the general name of the
Scots (for both then were thus called) are oftentimes mistaken by their readers
for the Scots of the Continent.

The country is divided into 5 greater names, or Provinces, petty kingdoms
sometimes of the Irish: Vlster. Leinster. Meth. Conaght. and Mounster.

VLSTER.
BOunded upon the East, North, and West with the Ocean; and upon the South with
Leinster, Meth, and Conaght. The country is large; the soil good; deep
pasturages, but otherwise until the English last plantation less fruitful
through the sloathfulnesse of the wild natives: overgrowne with vast, and
thick woods, bogs, lakes, and marshes. Chief towns are Knocfergus in
Antrim, within a spacious bay (Vinderius of Ptolemie;) a garrison town, and a
commodious Port, near to Cantire, and Scotland. Upon the same Eastern shore,
and in Louth Carlingford. Dundalk. Tredah, at the mouth of the river Boine;
Tredah. lon. 12. g. 34. m. lat. 54 g. 54. m. Merc.
a fair, and populous town, the next to Leinster. Within, Armagh, near to
the river Kalin; an Archbishops sea, the Primate of the kingdom. The Province
contains ten shires, or counties: Louth, Cavon, Fermanagh, encompassing the
great Lake Erne, Monaghan, Armagh, Down, Antrim, Colran, Tir-oen, and Tir
conell, or Donegall. The ancient inhabitants were the Darnij, Voluntij,
Robognij, and Erdini of Ptolemy.

LEINSTER.
EXtended along the Irish Ocean from Tredah, Vlster, and the river Boine unto
the Neure, and Mounster upon the South; and bounded toward the West with Meth,
and the river Sha^on from Canaght. The soil is fruitful, better manured, and
less encombred with woods; the inhabitants more civil, descended for a great
part from the English, and conforming to their habit, and custom of living.
Chief towns are Dublin (Eblana of Ptolemie) upon the Ocean, Dublin. l. 12. g.
40. m. l. 54. g. 27. m. Merc.
at the fall of the river Liff (Libnius of Ptolemy,) an Archbishops sea, and
the seat of the Lord Deputy, or Viceroy of the kingdom, rich, strong,
populous, and beautified with fair buildings. Without stands a College,
consecrated to the Muses, and the name of the holy Trinity; a small
University, founded by Queen Elizabeth of happy memory. Weisford (Menapia of
Ptolemie) at the mouth of the Slane (the river Modona of the same author,)
Weissford. l. 12. g. 44. m. lat. 53. g. Merc.
the first place in Ireland subdued by the English, and peopled with their
Colonies. Within the land Kildare, a Bishops sea. Kilkenny upon the river
Neure; the best town of all the inland parts. The whole contains 7
divisions, or shires: Dublin, Weisford, Kildare, Kings-Countie, Queens
county, or the Lease, Caterlogh, and Kilkenny. The ancient inhabitants were
the Menapij, Cauci, Blanij, and Brigantes of Ptolemy.

METH.
SEated in the middle of the Island betwixt Leinster, Conaught, and Vlster. It
contains East-Meth, West-Meth, and the county of Longford. Towns here are
Trim in East-Meth upon the river Boyne; Trim.
and Molingar in West-Meth. The ancient inhabitants were part of the Blanij of
Ptolemy.

CONAGHT.
BOunded upon the West with the Irish Ocean; upon the North with Vlster; and
upon the East, and South with Meth, Leinster, and Mounster, by the great river
Shanon (Senus of Ptolemie,) arising out of the mountains of Letrim, and after
a long course having made sundry great lakes by the way, falling into the
Western Ocean some 60 miles below Limerick. In the North hereof rise Curlew
Mountains, fatal to the English by their slaughter, and overthrow during the
late Irish wars. It contains 6 shires or Counties: Letrim, Roscoman, Slego,
Maio, Galway, and Twomund. The chief town, Galway. lon. 9. g. 17. m. lat. 54.
g. 6. m. Market.
and the third city of the kingdom is Galway, a Bishops sea, a fair, rich,
and well frequented Port, near unto the fall of the great lake, or river
Corbes into the Western Ocean. The ancient inhabitants were the Gangani,
Auteri, and Nagnatae of Ptolemie.

MOVNSTER.
BOunded upon the South-East, and West with the Ocean; and upon the North with
Leinster and the river Shanon from Conaght: divided amongst 6 Counties,
Limerick, Tipperarie, Corck, Waterford, Desmond, and Kerry. Chief towns are
Limerick, in an Island, encompassed with the river Shanon; a Bishops sea, and a
well traded Empory. Waterford, a rich Port, and the second city of the
kingdom; upon the river Suire. Corck a Bishops sea. Kinsale, a walled town,
and a commodious Port at the mouth of the river Bany. The ancient inhabitants
were the Velibori, Vodiae, Vterni, and Coriondi of Ptolemie.

Other more noted Islands of Great Britain are, 1 those of Orcades Taciti etc.
Orkney. 2 those of Thule. ib. and Thyle, cuius media l. 63. g. Ptol. Geog.
lib. 2. c. 3.
Schetland lying in 63 degrees of Latitude. 3 the Western Ebudae. Ptol. ib.
lib. 2. c. 2.
Islands; belonging to the Crown of Scotland. 5 Subject to the English Crown
Monaeda Ptol. ib.
Man. 6 Those of Cassiterides. Plin. N. Hist. lib. 4. c. 22. etc.
Silly. 7 Wight Vectis Tac. etc.
. and Holy Lindisfarnensis. Bed. Ec. Hist. Ang.
Island. etc.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
Containing the present bounds, situation, and quality of Spain. The
Inhabitants. Their manners, languages, and religion. The institution, power,
and courts of their Inquisition. The number, and order of their Bishops. The
Religious del Resgate, and de la Merced. The military orders of the Cross. The
manner of their civil government. The King. His style of Catholic. His
dominions, and revenues. A short censure of the present Spanish greatness. The
parts, or countries of Spain.

THE bounds hereof are upon the North-east the Pyrenaean Mountains, Ergo latus
Hispaniae ortiu^ Pyrene includit, me^idionale efficit nostrum ma^e a Pyrena
vsque ad Columnas, proximum huic oceanus vsque ad Sacru^ Promontorium, tertium
latus est occiduum, fere paralelum Pyrenae a Sacro Promontorio vsque ad
Promontorium apud Ar^abros, quod vocatur Nerium, quartum latus inde ducitur
vsque ad boreales Pyrenes fines. Strab. Geogra. lib. 3.
deviding it from France, and from the rest of the Continent of Europe,
surrounded upon the other sides with the deep, and spacious Ocean; upon the
North, with the sea Cantabrique; with the Atlantique upon the West; and upon
the South with the Straights of Gibraltar, and the sea Mediterranean. Mariana
lib. 1. de Rebus Hispaniae. cap. 2.
accompteth the circumference of the whole to be 2816 Italian miles; measuring
along the course of the Pyrenaean Mountains from Cabo de Creux upon the
Mediterranean unto the town of Fuentarabia 320 miles; to Cabo Finisterre along
the shore of the sea Cantabrique 536 miles; from that Promontorie unto the
town of Gibraltar 895 miles; and from thence returning again to Cabo de Creux
(bending still with the creekes, and windings of the sea) 1065 miles. The
greatest length hereof he reckneth at 800 miles, and the breadth at 560 of the
same miles.

It is seated in the Southern half part of the Temperate Zone, lying betwxt
the. 4. 24/60, and 19 degrees of Longitude (for such are the distances of the
Promontories Finisterre, and de Creux from the first Meridian drawn by the
Azores Islands, whose two Meridians make about a full hours difference of the
Suns first rising,) and betwixt about the 36, and 44 degrees of Northern
latitude, or from the 30 minute South of the 11, or middle parallel of the 4
clime unto about the 30 mi (...) wary and descreet withal, not carried with
that rash, and headlong fury, esteemed by others valor, ouercomming rather
with temporizing, deep reach, and policy, then by maine force and violence. If
we would have him in a word described, he almost is, whatsoever almost is not
the Frenchman.

The Languages spoken hereby are. 1. the Castillian, or vulgar Spanish, common
to the whole Nation. 2. that of Portugals, as are the people, mixed of the
Castillian and French. 3. that of the Catalonians, and inhabitants of the
kingdom of Valentia, which is not much unlike unto the French spoken in
Languedoc. 4. the Basquish, proper to the Biscians and people of Guipuscoa, a
language purely barbarous, not refined with the mixture of more elegant
tongues, and thought to be the ancient Spanish spoken here before the Conquest
of the Romans. Here likewise was in use the ancient Moorish, retained by the
Moriscos, but of late years banished from hence with the people.

The ancient religion hereof was that common to all the Gentiles, worshipping
many false and absurd gods.

The v. Joan. Chrysostom. in praefat. in Epistol. ad Hebraeos, and in Mat. Hom.
76. Theodoret. in Epistola^ ad Timoth. 2. c. 4. Pauli Orosij Histor. lib. 7. c.
19. B. ^sidori Hispalensis Chron. Gothorum, Wandalorum, and Svevo. and de
Sanct. c. 82. Joan. Marianae de Rebus. Hisp. lib. 4. cap. 2. lib. 5. c. 1. 2.
3. 5. 9. and 14. and lib. 7. c, 10. and 13. Baron. An. Eccl. Anno Christi. 61.
etc.
first that preached here the holy Gospel was the Apostle S. Paul according to
S. Chrysostom, Theodoret, and sundry other of the ancient fathers. That he
had an intent to make a journey into Spain, we plainly gather from the the 15
chap. to the Romans. That he went, or was hindered in his purpose (detayned
prisoner at Rome by Nero) nothing is certain. After Isidore, and the general
voice of the Spaniards (but without more ancient authority) S. James, the son
of Zebedee, otherwise is said to have been the first; the supposed founder of
Nuestra Senora del Pilar, a Church yet extant at Saragoca, accompanied with
Saint Peter, the Apostle of Ebora: S. Cecilius of Eliberis: S. Euphrasius, of
Illiturgis: S. Secundus of Abula, with others whose names I omit, for that they
agree not about their number. Concerning St James, the tradition goes, that
after his Martyrdom at Jerusalem, slain by Herod, his dead body should from
thence be convayed hither to Iria Flavia in Galitia; thence to Compostella,
where it should be enterred, but in what place that it was not known until
the year 796, when it should be first found out by Theodomyrus, bishop of
Iria; although (says my Author) the reasons are not set down, why a grave
then discovered should contain the corpse of that blessed Apostle. Such
notwithstanding was the credulous devotion of those times, that presently a
Church was erected hereunto by Alfonsus, surnamed the Chaste, then king of Leon,
famous afterward through the Christian world for the continual pilgrimages
thither made from all parts, and enriched with liberal endowments and
privileges. It was some 50 years afterward, and since the year 846, and
their great victory at Clavigio under king Ramir the first, obtained against
the Moors, and (as then firmly was believed) by the visible presence, and
aid hereof, that the Castillians (for the Portugalls and Aragonians with the
English, and Genowayes acknowledge St George for their Patron) have been still
accustomed in their fights, and encounters to call upon S. Iago, as their
guardian, and protector, their sign and word of Battaill. To return to our
purpose from these, and such like beginnings Christianity here daily grew, and
more and more prospered in the first age of the Primitive Church, increasing
through affliction, and by the holy blood of slain Martyrs. In the happy
reign of Constantine the Great, Gentilisme put down, Religion was first
authorized here, as in the other Provinces of the Roman Empire, by public
command, and a small truce was granted to the Church, Heresy, Gentilisme, and
Persecution freshly reviuing again in the reigns of the next Emperors
Constantius and Iulianus. These tempestuous times ouerpast, by the favor of
God the Sun of the Gospel again gloriously breaks out, and in a calm and
clear sky, here freely shines during the reigns of the after succeeding most
Christian and Catholic Emperors of the West. In the reign of the Emperor
Honorius swarm in hither the barbarous Nations, by whom Religion suffers a
second Eclipse. Of these the Alans were Gentiles, but whose outrage lasted not
long, shortly after their first coming ouer-throwne, and rooted out by the
Goths. The Vandals, also Gentiles at the time of their first entrance, by
their after commerce and acquaintance with the Goths under their king
Gensericus turned Arrian Christians, departing not long after into Afrique. The
Suevians at the first likewise were Gentiles. Under their third king Receiarius
about the year 448, they received the Christian, and Catholic faith, which
shortly after being subdued, and restored again by the Goths, sweyed with the
greatness of that Nation, under their king Remismundus they changed for their
Arrian heresy. In the reign of Theodomyrus after an apostasy of above one
hundred years, they returned again unto the Catholic belief, wherein they
continued until the extirpation of their kingdom, and name by the Goths in
Andeca their last king. The Goths were Arrians from their first entrance into
the Roman Provinces, corrupted by Valens, Emperor of the East. In continuance
of time becoming Lord of the whole Spain, the rest of the barbarous nations,
and the Romans subdued, they subjected all this continent under that foul
heresy. Under their King Ricaredus about the year 588, rejecting the Arrian,
they first embraced the Orthodox tenent, and the whole Spain is again become
Catholic, in the which the same persisted until the expiration of the name
and Monarchy hereof in Rodericus. In the year 714, and reign of this Prince,
happened that fatal invasion of the Moors, whereby this country almost in a
moment of time became overwhelmed with the new Mahumetane superstition, and
religion confined within the Mountains of Biscay, and Asturia. After long and
fierce wars for above the space of 700 years, the kingdom of Granado, their
last retraite, being taken in by Ferdinand the fifth, and Isabel kings of
Castile, and Aragon, the Infidels are again beaten home into Afrique, and the
Province is totally recovered unto the Christian belief; if by this time it
may rightly be esteemed Christian, corrupted by long Popish impostures: which
although since in part reformed in most other parts of Christendom, has here
in its full impurity been maintained unto this day.

The Religion then here only allowed, is that of the Romish Church without all
visible show of other mixtures.

An especial cause hereof (besides the unnatural stiffnes of the Nation not
easily changing) has been the Inquisition with extremest diligence, and
watchfulness, still crushing Religion in the shell; and Protestants books,
and all freer discourse and commerce utterly prohibited, taking away all means
of attayning to the light hereof.

This De l' Histoire d' Espaigne par Loys de Mayerne livre 22.
was first begun in the year 1478 in the reigns of Ferdinand the fifth, and
Elizabeth, kings of Castile and Aragon, by the especial procurement of D.
Pedro Gonsales de Mendoza, Cardinal and Archbishop of Sevilla, occasioned by
the Apostasy of the newly then baptized Jews, and Moors, beginning to return
to their ancient Superstition, against whom then chiefly (the name of Lutheran
and Protestant not being extant) it was intended. It was first exercised in the
Kingdoms of Castile, and Granado; afterward received into Navarre, and
Arragon; and lastly into Portugal. The power and authority hereof is to
enquire after, and to censure Infidelity, haeresie, witchcraft, and sins
against nature. The Inquisitours are all of the Saecular Clergy, besides
Portugal distributed into 12 Courts, or Tribunals: the Courts of Inquisition at
Vallidolid, and Logronnio for Navarre, and so much of the kingdom of Castile,
as lies on this side the Mountains of Segovia and Avila: at Toledo, and
Cuenca for New Castile: at L'erena for Estremadura: at Murcia for that
Country: at Sivilla, and Cordova for Andaluzia: at Granado for the kingdom
thereof: at Valentia for that Province: at Saragoca for Aragonia; and at
Barcelona for Catalonia. The residence hereof for Portugal I find not. By
these merciless Tyrannies, thus dispersed over the body of these Realms, the
people here are so bridled in, that nothing can be spoken, scarcely known,
much less attempted, or done, prejudicial to the present Romish Church, and
Religion. Insomuch that here the Priests may lie by authority, coin, and forge
miracles without contradiction, say and do whatsoever they please, without any
one daring to oppose, even against their palpable impostures, and most
shameless impudency.

These, as in all other Countries subject to the Sea of Rome, are
distinguished into Archbishops, Bishops, Secular Priests, and sundry sorts of
Regulars.

The Bishops (besides those of Leon, and Oviedo, who by ancient exemptions
acknowledge no superior, but the Pope) are ranked under their Archbishops, or
Metropolitanes, as follow. Under Toledo, the Bishops of Cordova, Cuenca,
Siguenca, Iaen, Murcia, and Vxama. Under St Iago, Orense, Mondonedo, Badaios,
Tui, Placenza, Lugo, Salamanca, Avila, Zamora, Astorga, Coria, and Cuidad
Rodrigo. Under Sivilla, Malaga, Cadiz, and of the Canary Islands. Under Granado,
Guadix, and Almeria. Under Burgos, Pampelona, and Calahora. Under Valentia,
Orihuela, Segorve, and Xativa. Under Saragoca, Huesca, Iacca Balbastro,
Taradona, and Albarracino; and under Taragona, Barcelona, Tortosa, Vique,
Vrgel, Girona, Lerida, and Elna in the land of Russillon. In Portugal are 3
Archbishops Sees, of Braga, Lisbona, and Evora. Whereunto are subordinate the
Bishops of Coimbre, Lamego, Viseo, Porto, Miranda, Portalegre, Guarda, Elvis,
Leira, and Silvis. Of these Toledo, Taragona, and Braga do all contend for the
Primacy, the matter yet remaining undetermined. Howbeit Toledo now carries the
account, the most honorable, and richest hereof, whose revenues are esteemed
at 300000 ducats by the year, the perpetual Chancelour of Spain. Amongst
the inferior Clergy the most memorable, proper almost to this Country, are
the Orders del Resgate, and de la Merced, the former flourishing most in
Aragonia, where it begun, the other much the greater in the kingdom of
Castile, but scattered nevertheless over France, and other parts bordering
upon the Sea Mediterranean. The profession, and exercise hereof is with alms,
gathered amongst the people, to redeem such Christian Captives, as what by
chance of war, and by the daily pyracyes, and incursions of the Turks, and
Moors do in Barbary, and other Mahumetane countries live enthralled to the
Infidells; for this cause sending yearly their Agents to Algier, and Fez,
where managing this affair with no less diligence then faithfulness, they
first ransom the religious, then the king of Spain Lay subjects, and of those
first the younger sort, then those of other nations, as far as their alms
will extend. They leave also here certain of their brethren to inform them of
the state, quality, and necessity of the Captives to make the better way for
their liberty the year following. The king with a liberal hand greatly
furthereth this business, giving ordinarily as much more as the Friars have
collected. Neither are the people wanting herein, few here dying, who leaves
not some legacy for these charitable uses.

Besides these numberles Clergy, here are another sort of Regulars, which,
although for the most part they are of the Laity, depend notwithstanding, and
had their beginning from Religion. They are the Knights of the Cross
instituted in the holy wars against the Saracens, whose office it was by
arms to defend the Christian faith, and the professors thereof againgst the
force and outrages of the Infidells; besides the Malteses, who here yet hold
good possessions, divided into six orders peculiar to this Province; those of
Calatrava, S. James and Alcantara in the kingdom of Castille; of Avis, and of
Christ in Portugals; and of Montesa in Aragon.

The order v. Joan. Marianae de Rebus Hispaniae lib. 11. c. 6. and de l'
Histoire d' Espaigne par Loys da Mayerne livre 10.
of Calatrava was first occasioned in the year 1157 by certain Monks of the
order of Cisteaux, undertaking the defense of that city, then newly surprised
upon the Infidel, and in regard of the danger forsaken by the Knight Templars,
to whose charge is was committed. In process of time it grew to that state,
that besides 8 fair Monasteries, it now enjoys no less then 61 towns, and
castles in both kingdoms of Castille and Aragon. The Knights do wear for a
mark of their order a white coat with a red cross upon it, and are subject
to the Monkish discipline of Cisteaux. They have made many flittings of their
chief residence; from Calatrava to Ciruelos; to Buxeda; to Corcolos; to
Salvitierra; and from thence to the castle of Covo, where it now rests. They
have been seen to serve in the field against the Moors with 300 great horse
which is the whole number of men of arms their Commaunderies were bound to set
forth to the wars.

The famous v. Joan. Marianae de Rebus Hispaniae lib. 11. c. 13. and de l'
Histoire d' Epaigne par Loys de Mayerne livre 10. and 13.
order of St James was begun, and occasioned not long after that of Calatrava,
by the superstitious aemulation of the Monks of St Eloy, and certain
Gentlemen of Castille; who by building hospitalls in diverse passages of Spain
for the entertainment of Christian pilgrims, travailing from toward France to
S. Iago, and performing other charitable offices toward those devoted people,
deserved so well of Pope Alexander the third, that he erected them into an
order; by this means becoming partly Ecclesiastical, and partly Saecular,
all of them appointed to live after the rule of St Augustine, and the Saecular
permitted to marry, so that they would not break the bonds of wedlock, which
they must vow inviolably to keep. Their first residence was at their Covent by
the Hospital of St Mark, lying without the city of Leon. Afterwades falling
out with Ferdinand king hereof, and removing into the kingdom of Castille,
they had there given them by king Alfonsus the town, and castle of Vcles, now
the chief seat of their order. Repossessing notwithstanding after the death
of the said Ferdinand the Covent by St Mark, the order by this means became
divided into two several factions, or parts; the towns and commanderies in
the kingdom of Leon acknowledging S. Mark, and those other of the kingdoms
of Castille, and Portugal Vcles: all notwithstanding subject to one master,
resident at Vcles, until king Dionysius ranked the possessions, belonging
hereunto in his kingdom of Portugal, under a master of their own. The lands
and possessions hereof (besides those of Portugal) are two Colleges in the
University of Salamanca, a Covent at Sivilla, 4 Hermitages in the mountains, 5
hospitalls of special revenue, and some 90 commanderie towns, and castles.
The Knights wear a red cross upon a white coat, fashioned like a sword, and
are accounted at this day above 600 Gentlemen, besides about 200 Friars
resident in their Vicarages, Covents, and other benefices, and are by much the
richest order in Spain.

The order v. Joan. Marianae de Rebus Hispaniae. lib. 12. c. 3. and de l'
Histoire d' Espaigne par Loys de Mayerne livre 11.
of Alcantara was erected in the year 1217, by Alfonsus king of Leon, who
would that that town with whatsoever else the order of Calatrava possessed in
his kingdom should be divided from thence, and made a distinct order;
observing notwithstanding the discipline of Cisteaux, and acknowledging the
cheifage, and superiority of the other. The Knights, for a distinction from
them of Calatrava, are marked with a green cross.

The v. de l' Histoire d' Espaigne par Loys de Mayerne livre 10.
order of Avis so called from a town of that name in Portugal was founded by
Sanctius the first king hereof. The Knights do wear the green cross of
Alcantara. The order in riches, and revenues is much inferior to those before
named.

The v. Joan. Marianae de Rebus Hispaniae. lib. 15. c. 16, and de l' Histoire
d' Espaigne par Loys de Mayerne. livre. 13.
order of Christ was raised out of the ruins of the exauthorized order of the
Templars, all whose lands, and possessions in Portugal were by king Dionysius
assigned hereunto. It is the richest order in Portugal, to whose right belong
the Islands of the sea Atlantique, with the countries in Asia, Africa, and
Brasil lately discovered, and now held by this nation. The mark hereof is a
red cross stroked in the midst with a white line. The first residence of the
Knights was at Castromarin, seated at the mouth of the river Guadiana, now at
Tovar betwixt the Guadiana, and the Taio.

The order Ibidem.
of Montesa was instituted about the same time with the order of Christ in
Portugal, and by the same occasion; unto which James the first, king of
Aragon, gave all the revenues of the condemned order of the Templars, lying
within his country of Valentia, with the town and castle of Montesa, from
whence it took the name, the chief seat of the order. The Master and Knights
hereof at the time of their first erection were made subject to them of
Calatrava, and their Monkish discipline of Cisteaux. By leave from Pope
Benedict the 13 they afterward changed the mark hereof for a red cross to be
worn before their breasts, now the badge of the order.

All these in times past had their several masters, who were still of
especial nobility, usual of the blood royal, and many times the younger, or
base sons of their Kings. They also had (as yet they retain) their
vice-masters, or great Commendadors, whereof the order of St James had two
(besides the part of the order in Portugal,) offices at this day of great
note, and most commonly borne by the most eminent personages of the kingdom,
the great Commendador of Castille, for the devision of Eucles, and the great
Commendador of Leon for that of St Mark. These had likewise their Clavigeros,
besides infinite petty Commendadors. The Knights were always Gentlemen by
birth. Ferdinand the fifth, king of Castille, and Aragon, after the wars with
the Moors, and Granado ended, jealous of the numbers and of the tumults, and
disorders, which these privileged gallants, wanting foreign employment, might
afterward fall into, to the great danger, and prejudice of his kingdoms,
united the Master-ships hereof with the Crown, followed afterward by the
Kings of Portugal in their dominions. Since this first injury by a common
fate of all religious states they have for a long time languished, and now
scarce are in being, their laws and privileges broken, and Gentlemen,
Courtiers, and favorites of great men usurping the titles and revenues.

The Masterships of the kingdoms of Castille, and Portugal (Montesa in Aragon
not reckoned) yield yearly to the king according to Linschotte^s account above
126759 pound sterling, besides the rents of St George in Guinea, belonging to
the order of Christ, worth 100000 ducats by the year. This has been the
Ecclesiastical state.

Concerning the civil, the whole is subject to one sole Monarch, divided
notwithstanding into three distinct kingdoms, different in laws, and
customs, and not united but in their Prince: the kingdom of Castille, and
Leon, whereunto Navarra, and Granado are annexed, and are parts; and of Aragon;
and of Portugal. Of these the kingdom of Aragon enjoys a more free estate
then the rest, the royal authority being so pressed down by the privileges
of the people, and the power of their v. Joan. Marianae de Rebus Hispainae.
lib. 8. c. 1. and de l' Histoire d' Espaigne par Loys de Mayerne livre. 9. 13.
22. and 23.
Iustitia that scarcely it may be accounted Monarchical. In Castille, as in
the chiefest and most devoted unto him, the king is always resident, and here
most commonly at Vallidolid, or Madrid. The other two he commands by his
Vice-royes; whereof Aragon contains three (for as much as consisting of so
many different Provinces and governments,) the Vice-roye of Aragonia, resident
at Saragoca, who ought still to be a native; the Vice-roye of the Country of
Valentia, residing in the city of Valentia; and of Catalonia at Barcelona.
Navarra likewise, although it be now incorporate with Castille, has
notwithstanding its particular Viceroye, administering justice according to the
laws of Castille, and the customs, and the privileges of the country. The
laws, all is governed by, are the municipall, or common laws of each
kingdom, and when these are wanting, the civil, or Roman law, professed, and
executed by Civillians, brought up in their Universities, and following the
proceeding and course of the Civil. A no small commendation of the Nation has
been their strict execution hereof, which they administer with due severitie,
and without partiality, a chief cause of their general more prosperous and
flourishing estate. The King is haereditary, and where women for defect of male
issue do succeed.

He v. Joan. Marianae de Rebus Hispaniae lib 7. c. 4. and de l' Histoire d'
Espaigne par Loys de Mayerne live. 25.
is styled the most Catholic King, a title first given to Ricaredus, the
first Orthodoxe King of the Goths, in a Provincial council held at Toledo,
continued afterward in Alfonsus the first king of Leon, for his devout and
religious carriages, but not becoming haereditary until Ferdinand the fifth,
king of Castille and Aragon; who honored herewith by Pope July the second, for
maintayning his quarrel against the excommunicated king of France, Jews the
twelfth, transmitted the same to succession unto this day.

His dominions may not unfitly be distinguished according to the 4 great
devisions of the inhabited world, into those of Europe, Afric, Asia, and
America. In the first besides Spain, and the Islands, thereunto belonging, he
holds the kingdoms of Naples, and Sicily, the dukedom of Millaine in Italy,
and the Island of Sardinia, besides the many Provinces of the Low Countries, not
yet revolted, now in the possession of Isabella, aunt to Philip the fourth now
reigning, after her decease without heirs to return again unto the Crown of
Spain. In Africa he maintained against the Infidells the towns of Oran, and
Melilla, the great haven Muzalquiuer, the Penion or rock of Veliz, the towns
of Seuta, Tangier, and Mazagone in the Continent of Barbary; the fortresses of
Arguin, and St George de la Mina in Aethiopia; beyond the cape of good hope the
forts of Sena, and Sofala, with the Island Mozambique; together with the Azores
or Flemmish Islands; those of Madera, Cape Verde, Saint Thomas, and del Principe
lying along the West shore hereof on this side of the Promontorie of Buona
Esperanza. In Asia he commands in a manner all the Sea-co^sts from the
Persian gulf to the famous Promontory, aunciently called Aurea Chersonesus,
where now Malaca stands; in which space he possesses the havens and
fortresses of Diu, Chavl, Goa, Canora, Cochin, Damain, Bazain, Tavaan, Colan,
the haven, and castle of Columbo in the Island of Zeilan, and the town of
Malaca in the aforesaid Chersonese, the furthest bounds of his East-Indian
Empire. Concerning America with the Phillippinae, and infinite other Islands
thereunto belonging, his Catholickenes challenges the whole, given unto him by
a Bull of his Countryman, Pope Alexander the Sixth. Moreover the Knights of S.
John of Jerusalem do hold of him the Island of Malta, given unto them after
their retreat from Rhodes by the Emperor Charles the fifth. He also lays
claim to the Island of Corsica, possessed by the Genowayes, the kingdoms of
Tunis, and Jerusalem, usurped by the Turks, the Dukedom of Burgundy
withheld by the French, with the united Provinces of the Netherlands, lately
withdrawn from his obedience by the confederate states.

His revenues The fourth book of John Hugh van Linsch^ten in his discourse of
voyages into the East, and West Indies.
from hence are great, as well in regard of the riches, and large extent
hereof, as of the many taxes and impositions, which especially his Spanish
subjects of Castile, as well those of the Clergy, as of the Laity are subject
unto; which first brought in upon occasion of the holy wars against the
Infidels, upon the like pretense against the Heretics, as they term the
reformed, have been hitherto still kept up, and maintained. The particulars
hereof collected by Linschotten out of the Exchequers of his several
kingdoms, and as they were farmed out in the year 1578 before the union of
Portugal (not otherwise to make any certain estimate hereof, which must needs
be uncertain) were as follow. His demaine in Castile with the Alcavala, and
Tertiae of that kingdom) which Alcavala is the tenth penny of all Lands,
merchandise, and goods sold by any Castilian, (for further then that kingdom
it extends not,) the Tertiae being the third part of all spiritual
promotions, and revenues) yield yearly about the sum of 1274 Quintos. The
custom of Merchandise, passing out of Biscay, and Guipuscoa into Castile,
paying after the rate of one in ten at the Custome-houses of Victoria, Horduna,
and Valmas Ceda, amounts to 70 Quintos. The custom for wares, passing
through the Country of Leon by Sanabria, and Villa-Franca, one Quinto. The same
for Merchandise out of Asturia by Oviedo, 375000 Maravedies. The rent of the
Prevosts office of Bilbao 490000 Maravedies. The toull of the Inland passages
of Valentia, Aragonia, and Navarre, where is paid the tenth penny of all
Merchandise brought thither out of Castile, 49 Quintos, and 35000 Maravedies.
The like toull of certain inland ports of Castile, frontiring upon Portugal,
for wares passing to and fro, betwixt those two kingdoms, 34 Quintos, and
155000 Maravedies. The woolls yearly transported out of Spain into foreign
Countries, paying for every sack, weighing above ten Aroben, two dukats for a
subject, and 4 for a stranger, 53 Quintos, and 586000 Maravedies. The farm of
the Almoxarischap of Sivilla for the tenth penny of the Merchandise of the
Dutchmen, English, and other people of Europe, there discharged, 154 Quintos,
and 309000 Maravedies. The farm of the Almoxarischap of Sivilla for the
Spanish Indies, (which is for the 20. penny of all Merchandise laden here, and
bound thither, paying an other 20 penny at their arrival there,) 67 Quintos.
The rent of the mint of Spain, (every dukat which is there coined for any of
the Kings subjects paying a ryall of plate) 22 Quintos. The Salinas, or
Salt-workes, belonging to the Crown, are taxed at 93 Quintos. The Farms of
the Master-ships of S. James, Calatrava, and Alcantara, besides their
pasturages, yield 98 Quintos. The rent of the pasturages of these Masterships
37 Quintos. The rent of the Quicksilver mine at Almaden 73 Quintos. The rent
of the silver mine of Guadalcana in Estremadura was wont to be worth 187
Quintos by the year but is now much decayed. The rent called de la Moneda
Forera (which is a certain rent of every hertsteed, each paying yearly 7
Maravedies,) yields 6 Quintos, and 656000 Maravedies. The farm of Cards
(every pair here sold, paying unto the King half a ryall of plate) 20
Quintos. The rashes or clothes of Florence, (whereof every piece pays 6
dukats,) 10 Quintos. The Popes pardons (of which he makes good merchandise in
America) 200 Quintos. The first fruits (paid by the Clergy at their first
entrances into their benefices for confirmation of their places, given unto him
toward the maintenance of the wars against Heretics and Infidels) 65
Quintos. The Excusado, a yearly contribution so called, because consented unto
by the Letters Patents of his Holiness, (given by the Clergy upon the same
pretext of holy war) 11 Quintos. The Exercitio (granted by all the Provinces
toward the keeping of slaves, and making, and maintaining of gallyes,) 7
Quintos, and 750000 Maravedies. The extraordinary contribution of Spain is
yearly worth 104 Quintos, and 305000 Maravedies, gathered through the country
amongst the common sort of people, taxed according to their several abilities.
The ordinary revenues of the kingdom of Aragon, a freer state then the rest,
and less subject to impositions, reach only to 75 Quintos. The revenues of
Sicily to 375 Quintos. Of Naples to 450 Quintos. Of the Dukedom of Milaine to
300 Quintos. Of the West Indies to 300 Quintos. The Low-Countryes, with
Burgundy, were wont to yield 700 Quintos; but besides the late revolt of some
third part, they are now alienated from the Crown hereof, assigned to the
Arch-dutchesse Isabella. The Islands of Sardinia, Mallorca, and Menorca afford
the Prince no profit at all, their whole revenues being employed for their
defense against the Turkish Pirates, to whose injuries they are still exposed,
and sometimes more then is received. The ordinary revenues of Portugal amount
to a million of Dukats. The Masterships of the cross of that kingdom yield
100000 Dukats. The Islands of the Sea Atlantique, the Acores, Madera,
Cape-Verde, S. Thomas, and del Principe, (for the Canaries belong to the Crown
of Castile,) 200000 dukats. The Mine of S. George in Guinea, appertaining to
the order of Christ, and now usurped by the king, 100000 dukats. Brasil 150000
dukats. The custom of the spices, and merchandise brought to Lisbona from the
East Indies (for the other revenues are spent upon the defense of the Country,)
600000 dukats. His whole revenues out of all his three kingdoms, of Castile,
Portugal, and Aragon, and of the conquests thereof we find in Linschotten,
(reckoning every dukat at 5s 6d, a million of Maravedies to a Quinto, and each
Quinto at 735l, 5s ob. sterling,) accounted in gross 3479917 l. 5s 9d, the
revenues of the Crown of Spain, and 605000l. the revenues of the Crown of
Portugal. Linschotten ib.
at 4084917l, and 5s 9d English.

From such his large possessions and means, some much extolling the greatness
of this Prince, have compared him with the great Turk, and other the mightiest
Monarchs of the world, yet not rightly considering the many weaknesses, and
imperfections his great body of estate is subject unto, making him not only
inferior hereunto, but perhaps in solid strength to some lesser neighboring
Potentates. 1 The disunion and remoteness of his Provinces, severed by
infinite spaces of sea, and land, and their vnreadines hereupon in case of
danger to relieve, and succor one another. 2 His slow praeparation for any
war upon the same reason; his forces being long a gathering together from
parts so far distant, and subject still to be cut off by the way, or
smothered in the many strangling harbors hereof, by a more quick, and ready
enemy. 3 His want of men for the execution of any great design; his Indians,
and other barbarous subjects being altogether unfit for service, and Spain for
the causes before set down not so well peopled, as that, with the rest of his
dominions in Europe, it can afford any great matter. 4 The uncertainty, and
danger of a great part of his revenues, exposed to the hazard, and lets of
seas, winds, pyracyes, and open enemies. 5 His extraordinary charge and
expense in the wages, and stipends of almost infinite Viceroyes, governors,
officers, and soldiers he is forced to maintain in the many Provinces of his
scattered Empire. 6 The discontentednes of the greatest part of the people and
nations, subject unto him; the Aragonians being much offended with him for
their privileges broken, and ancient liberties infringed; the Portugalls never
well brooking the Castillian government, forced hereunto by conquest, and
accustomed to Princes of their own; and his estates in Italy, and of the
Levant kept from open revolt by the strength of Citadels, and Spanish
garrisons. My censure only shall be the greatness of these his empty,
scattered, and ill affected dominions rather to be a trouble, and burden, then
to add any great advantage, and strength unto him; not easily any long time to
be held together without his command of the Sea, or if not guided by a
provident, and wise Council, after the manner of the nation very wary, and
circumspect in all their actions, and seldom committing ouersights, endued
with an extraordinary judgment, constancy, and valor above many of their
neighbors, as to foresee, and prevent, so to master, and remedy any
mischiefs, and disorders, which may happen.

The Country at this day contains 18 greater parts, or devisions. 1. Of
Portugal betwixt the Taio, and Guadiana. 2. Portugal betwixt the Taio, and
Duero. 3. Portugal betwixt the Duero, and Minio. 4. Castillia la Nueva. 5.
Castillia la Veia. 6. Galitia. 7. Asturia. 8. Biscaia. 9. Guipuscoa. 10.
Navarra. 11. Estremadura. 12. Andaluzia. 13. Granado. 14. and Murcia, parts of
the kingdom of Castille. and of 15. Aragonia. 16. Valentia. 17. Catalonia. 18.
and the land of Russillon, the parts of the kingdom of Aragon: whose
descriptio^s follow in the third place, after that I have first set down the
ancient estate, with the many alterations, and successions, happening in the
province from the first memory of histories unto our times, occasioning the
present state, names, and devisions.

THE SIXTH BOOK.
Containing the Descriptions of the more noted Mountains, the Rivers of
Spain. Their ancient, and modern names. The more ancient limits, and names
of Spain. The first inhabitants. The intrusion of the Celtae, Tyrians,
Phocenses, Zacynthij, and Rhodians. The first conquest hereof by the
Carthaginians. Their continuance, and the extent here of their empire. The
dominion hereof, and conquest of the Romans. The Description, and Estate of
Spain during the government of the Romans, collected out of Ptolemy, and the
ancient Geographers. The History, invasion, and conquests of the Vandals,
Silingi, Alans, Suevians, and Goths. The succession, dominion, and history of
the Moors. The beginning, increase, and union of the kingdoms, of Leon,
Castille, Navarra, Aragon, and Portugal, with the Earldom of Barcelona. The
present devision, names, and estate of Spain, occasioned thorough these
mutations.

THE MOVNTAINES OF SPAIN.
THE Land-markes whereof we will make use in the ensuing discourse are the
Mountains, and Rivers hereof.

The Mountains v. Joan. Marianae de Rebus Hisp. l. 1. c. 3.
may be distinguished in 6 greater ridges continuate, and knit together, and
whereof the rest are parts.

A first is the noted ridge of the Pyrenes Pyrene Ptol. lib. 2. Geogra. c. 6.
Pyrene, and Montes Pyrenaei Strab. Geograph. lib. 3. (Mon^) Pyrenaeus Pli. Not.
Hist. lib. 3. c. 1.
, common hereunto, and France, inhabited by both Nations, and the bounds of
both. They begin at the Promontory Oeaso Ptomontorium Pyrenes. Ptol. Geog. li.
2. c. 6.
Oiarco, and Sea Cantabrique, and are continued from thence South-East betwixt
the two kingdoms unto Veneris Templum Ptol. Geogra. lib. 2. c. 6.
Cabo de Creux, and the Sea Mediterranean. Part hereof toward the
Mediterranean, and land of Russillon is called the Mountain Mons Canus Joan.
Epis. Gerundensis Paralipom. Hispaniae. lib. 1,
Canigo. Other names, and distinctions we find not.

From these about Ronceval branch a second row of hills, coasting Westwards
along the shore of the Sea Cantabrique, and overspreading the countries of
Guipuscoa, Biscay, and Asturia, until in Galitia, which they devide in the
midst, at the Nerium Promontorium Strab. Geogra. lib. 3. and Ptol. Geog. lib
2. c. 6
Cape Finisterre they end with the ancient world. Pliny seems to call these
Iuga Asturum Plin. Not Hist. lib. 3. c. 1.
Iuga Asturum. Not unfitly we may name them the Mountains Cantabrian from
their neighborhood unto that Sea. Guipuscoa, Biscay, Asturia, with part of
Galitia, or the parts of Spain, lying North hereof betwixt them, and the
Ocean, are called by the natives the Countries beyond the Mountains. A more
eminent top hereof is the Mountain Mons D. Adriani Vasaei Brugensis Chron.
St Adrian, situated in the high road to Baione, and France, cut through in
the midst for the more easy passage of travelers; from whose top Vasaeus
Brugensis reports that he saw both the Cantabrian, and Mediterranean Seas.

Out of those craggie hills toward the head of the river Ebro proceeds a
third ridge, which running directly South by the cities Burgos, Taradona, and
Daroca, at length end at the Mediterranean, a little West of the fall of the
river Ebro. The whole was aunciently by Ptolemy, Idubeda Stra. Geog. lib. 3.
and Ptol. l. 2. c. 6.
and Strabo named mons Idubeda. It is now called by diverse names; near unto
the town of Burgos Saltus Aucensis. Idem Vindius Mons Ptol. l. 2. c. 6.
secundum Birtium.
, Monte D'oca; at the head of the river Duero Sierra de Cocollo; near to
Taradona Monte Edulius Mons Ptol. l. 2. c. 6. eode^ interpret.
Moncaio; to Daroca Sierra Balbaniera; and at the sea Monte Moncia.

From Idubeda a little beneath Monte Moncaio arises a fourth bank of
mountains, which, first directing their course South-west by the towns
Molina, and Cuenca, afterward at Segura, and Alcaroz do part into two
branches; the one extending to the town of Muxacra, Murcia, and the Levant;
the other passing through the kingdom of Granado along the coast of the
Levant, until ending at the town, and straights of Gibraltar. This whole
ridge is named Orospeda Strab. Geog. li. 3. O^^ospeda. Ptol. lib. 2. c 6.
Orospeda by Strabo. Ptolemy calls part hereof Illipula Mons Pt. Geo. l. 2.
c. 4.
Montem Illipulam, now the tract of the Alpuxarras. It now has diverse names.
Near unto the town of Molina it is called Monte de Molina; to Cuenca Monte de
Cuenca; to Alcaraz Sierra de Alcaraz; to Segura Monte de Segura; to Granado
Sierra Nevada; to Velez Malaga the Alpuxarras; and to Ronda Sierra de Ronda.
The extreme point hereof aunciently named Calpe Strab. Geog l. 3. and Pl. in
proaemio. li. 5. Not. Hist.
Calpe, now the mountain of Gibraltar, was one of the Proxima autem faucibus
vtrinque impositi montes coercent, Abila Africae, Europae Calpe, laborum
Herculis metae. Quam ob causam indigenae columnas eius Dei vocant, creduntque
perfossos exclusa ante a admisisse maria, and rerum naturae muta^sse faciem*
Plin. ibidem.
two famous pillars of Hercules, the end and bounds of his labors; answered on
the other side of the straights in Afrique by another like copped mountain,
called Abila, which was the other pillar. The narrow Seas betwixt those two
hills were named from hence Fretum Herculeum, Fretum Herculium.
now the straights of Gibraltar.

Out of Orospeda about the town of Alcaraz brancheth the a fifth mountain,
named by Ptolemy Mons Marianus Ptol. Geog. lib. 2. c. 4.
Mons Marianus, now Sierra Morena, which, running along the right shore of the
river Guadalquiver, still accompanies the same unto the Atlantique Ocean. The
part hereof from Alcaraz unto Cordova was particularly named by Caesar Saltus
Castulonensis Caesar. Comment. Bell. Civ. c. 14.
Saltus Castulonensis from the city Castulo, now Navas de Tolosa.

Near unto the Mountain Moncaio, and the beginning of Orospeda, in the
midst of a spacious plain arises by degrees a sixth ridge of Mountains,
which keeping the river Taio continually upon the left side, from the which it
is never far distant, first distinguishes New Castille from the Old, then,
deviding Portugal into two equal parts, at the town of Sintra some 28 miles
from Lisbona makes the Promontory aunciently called Lunae Lunae Montis
Promontorium Ptol. Geog. lib. 2. c. 5.
Montis Promontorium by Ptolemy, now Capo de St Gian. This long ridge is not
now known by any one name, new or ancient, but only by the names of such
towns it passes by; near to the town of Avila being called Monte de Avila;
to Segovia Monte de Segovia; to Placenza Vera de Placenza. The part hereof in
the kingdom of Castille was called by Plinyu Iuga Carpetania; Iuga Carpetana
Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 3. c. 1.
the part in Portugal Lunae mons Ptol. Geog. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Lunae Mons by Ptolemy.

THE RIVERS.
THe rivers for the most part issue out of those Mountainous tracts. The
greater are the Ebro, Guadalquivir, Guadiana, Taio, Duero, and Minio.

The Iberus Strab. Geog. lib. 3. etc.
Ebro arises with two heads out of the Cantabrian Mountains, near to the
beginning of Monte D'oca, at the town, which is named from hence Fuentibre.
Passing from hence through the kingdoms of Navarra, and Aragon by the towns
Tudela, Saragoca, and Tortosa, a little below this city deviding its streams,
after the course of 460 miles it falls into the Mediterranean. Chiefer
rivers, which are hereinto receyved, are first out of the mountains of the
Pyrenes Aragon flu.
Arga rio, occasioning the name of that kingdom, now confining the countries
Aragonia, and Navarra. Gallego rio. Cinga Caes. Com. Bell. Ci^. lib. 1. c. 17.
etc.
Senga; and Sicoris Caes. ibidem etc.
Segre. On the other side of the Ebro out of the mountain Idubeda Salo
Martialis Epigram.
Xalon rio.

Guadalquivir Baetis Strab. Geog. lib. 3. etc.
signifies in the language of the Moors a great water. It springs out of
Sierra de Alcaraz, part of Orospeda, not far from the town of Cacorla.
Flowing through Andaluzia by the cities Cordova, and Sivilla, a little from St
Lucar de Barameda it is disburdened into the Ocean. Chiefer streams, which
empty hereinto, are Guadalimar rio out of Sierra de Alcaraz; and Xenil Singilis
Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 3. c. 1.
out of the mountains of Granado.

Guadiana Anas Strab. lib. 3. etc.
signifies in the same Moorish language the water Anas, the ancient name. It
arises amongst the mountainous heaps of Orospeda in Campo de Montiel, near
unto an obscure town, named Cagnamares. Afterward betwixt the towns
Medelino, and Villaria it is hidden under ground for the space of ten miles.
Deviding first Estemadura, then that country, and Portugal; betwixt Ayamonte,
and Castromarin it is swallowed by the Ocean. There are not any rivers of
account, which are received into the channel hereof, although the course be
very long; which happens thorough an extraordinary drines of the neighboring
Countries.

The Tagus Strab. lib. 3. etc.
Taio streameth out of Orospeda about 6 miles from a little town called
Tragacet, not far from Cuenca. Through New Castille, and Portugal, and by
the cities Toledo, and Lisbona at Cascais it falls into the Ocean. Of the
famous gold hereof is made the vid. Resendij Lusitaniae Antiquitat. lib. 2. (de
Tago.
Scepter of the kings of Portugal. Chiefer rivers flowing hereinto are Henares,
and Guadaraema, both of them issuing out of the Mountains of Castille.

Duero Durius Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 4. c. 22. etc. Dorias Pto. Geog. l. 2. c. 5.
arises out of the Sierra de Cocollo, part of Idubeda, not far from the
town of Soria, and the ruins of the ancient Numantia. It first directs its
streams toward the South, but, meeting with the Mountains of Castille it
diverteth to the West; whence carrying along all the rivers of Castillia la
Veia, and Leon, and passing through Portugal, a little below the town of Porto
it is disburdened into the Atlantique. This is thought to contain a greater
quantity of waters then the Taio does; although straightened within a more narrow
channel (flowing for the most part amongst hills, and mountains) it seems
lesser. It is neither by reason of the swift current so navigable as the other.
Chiefer rivers emptied hereinto are Pisorica.
the Pisverga, and Terms.

The Minius Plin. Not, Hist. lib. 4. c. 22. et Ptol. Geog. lib. 4. c. 6.
Boenis, et Minius Strab. Geo. l. 3.
river Minio springs out of the Alps of Galitia at Castelverde some 6 miles
upon the North of Lugo. Meeting with the river Avia at the town of Valentia,
then deviding Galitia, and Portugal, it is emptied into the Western Ocean not
far from Baiona.

Other rivers, having immediate intercourse with the Ocean, are first in
Catalonia Rubicatus Pt. Geog. l. 2. c. 6.
Lobregat, and Thulcis.
Francolino: in the country of Valentia Guadilivar Turium flu. Plin. Not.
Hist. lib. 3. c. 3. Durias Strab. Geog. l 3. Turia Claudiani. Floribus, et
roseis formosus Turia ripis.
, and Sucro Ptol. Geog. lib. 2. c. 6. etc.
Xucar: in the kingdom of Granado Guadalquivireio, and Guadalantin: in
Andaluzia Guadalethe: in Portugal betwixt Guadiana, and the Taio Calipodis flu.
Pto. l. 2. c. 5.
Palma: betwixt the Taio, and Duero Monda^ Ptol. Geog. li. 2. c. 5.
Mondego: betwixt the Duero, and Minio, the river Limius Ptol. lib. 2. c. 6.
Limia Plin. Not. Hist. l. 4. c. 22. Lethe, et Limaea Stra. Geog. lib. 3.
Limia, the famous Vltimi colunt Artabri ad Promontorium, quod vocatur Nerium,
in quod Occidua, et Septentrionalis linea desinunt. Habitant circum Celtici,
cognati eorum Celticorum qui sunt ad Anam. Ferunt enim inter hos, et Turdulos
cum fecissent exped itionem eo, Limaeo (quem diximus) flumine transito, ortam
seditionem: ad quam cum accessisset ducis obitus, mansisse ibi dispersos, inde
que Oblivion^ flu^io nomen factam. Strab. l. 3. Geo.
Lethe of the ancient Poets. There are not any rivers of note received into
the Ca^tabria^ Sea, stopped by the intervening of the long mountainous ridge,
before mentioned, drawn from Ronceval of the Pyrenes unto Cabo Finisterre, and
coasting along that shore. Those which be, of short courses, and falling from
that bank of Mountains, are the river Mearo, now deviding Galitia, and
Asturia: in Biscaia Ibaisabellum, upon which stands the rich town of Bilbao:
and in Guipuscoa Gurvinea rio, the river of the port of St Sebastian. Here is
also the Vidosa springing out of the Pyrenean Mountains, and at Fuentarabia
bounding this kingdom, and France. The most part of those of the South, lying
betwixt the Guadiana, and Ebro have the Punique word Guadi prefixed; an
argument of the long, and settled abode of the Moors in those parts. None of
these rivers are very deep, and navigable, usually spreading too wide, and
through the natural drought of the Country, scanted of waters; besides uneven,
and uncertain.

Marinaeus Siculus reckneth the whole number to be 150 of Marinaei Siculi de
Rebus Hispan. lib. 1.
al sorts.

DIVERSE NAMES OF SPAIN.
THE more ancient Greek Authors have named this Country Iberia Herodoti lib.
1. etc. v. and Plin. Not. hist. l. 3. c. 1. and 3. and lib. 37. c. 2. Ptol.
Geog. l. 2. c. 4. and Strabonis Geog. l. 3.
Iberia, either from the noted river Iberus, (which is most probable,) or from
the Iberi, a people of Asia, neighboring to the Caspian Sea, related by Pliny
with the Persians sometimes to have come into those parts. By others also we
find it sometimes called Celtiberia. v. Appiani Alexandrini lib. de bellis
Hispanicis, and Strab. l. 3.
Celtiberia from the more warlike and famous nation of the Celtiberi; likewise
Hesperia, Hesperia Horatii carm. l. 1. Od. 36.
from the Evening star, and its more Western situation. The latter Greeks,
and generally all the Latins call it Hispania Strab. Geog. l. 3 Ptol. l. 2. c.
4. etc. Spania Ammonij de Gestis Francorum l. 2. c. 20.
Hispania, or Spain, (a name which to this day it retains,) if we may believe
Justin, from v. Justin. hist. lib. 44.
Hispanus, once king hereof, not to trouble you with more difficult, and
further fetched Etymologies, and alike uncertain.

ANCIENT BOVNDS.
THE Bounds hereof have still been the same; environed upon three sides with
the Ocean, and on the part toward the Continent of Europe, walled from the
Province of Gaul, or France, with the long ridge of the Pyrenean mountains,
extended betwixt the Mediterranean, and Cantabrique Seas.

SPAIN UNDER THE FIRST NATIVES.
THE v. Macrobii Saturn. l. 1. c. 20 Herodoti l. 1. Plutarchi vit. in Scipio.
Africano. Iustini hist. l. 44.
first rule, and dominion hereof was under the native Spaniards, (for we read
not any former name of inhabitants) after the manner of all barbarous Nations,
shared amongst many lesser, and obscure Princes. Amongst these we find
mention in Macrobius of one Thereon, king of the hither Spain: in Herodotus of
Arganthonius; and in Justin of Gargoris, and Habis, kings of Tartessus: of
Mandonius, and Indibilis in Plutarch in the life of the great African: of
Luceyus, Prince of the Celtiberians, in the same Author. Concerning other
memories hereof in regard of their exceeding antiquity, and the rudenes of
those first times little is related; or whereunto safe credit may be given.

The first intrusion of foreign Nations.
OF stranger nations the first intruding here amongst, were the v. Strab. Geog.
l. 3. and 4. Pli. Not. Hist. l. 3. c. 1. Marianae de Rebus Hisp. l. 1. c. 14.
and 15.
Celtae, Tyrians, Phocenses, Zacynthij, and Rhodij; the occasion of whose
descent hither we have before pointed at. The first arrival of the Tyrians,
Strabo sets down to have happened before the age of Homer: Mariana (I know
not from what more ancient authority,) about the foundation of the City of
Carthage, brought hither by Sichaeus, husband to Queen Dido. The coming of
the other is more uncertain. From the Celtae, the warlike Celtiberi, Calaeci,
and Celtici, were descended. By the Phocenses, a colony of the Massillians, the
city Emporiae, and Dianium were founded. By the Zacynthij, the famous Saguntum.
By the Rhodians (as is thought) the city Rhodope. By the Tyrians, Gades. Strabo
relates in his third book the most part in his time of the towns of
Turdetania, and of the neighboring Seacoasts, to have been colonies of this
People.

The conquest-hereof by the Carthaginians.
THE v. Polyb. hist. Romans l. 2. 3. 10. and 11. T. Livij Romans Hist. l. 21. 22.
23. 24. 25. 26. 27. and 28. Iustini hist. l. 44. Appianum Alexandrinum de Bell.
Punic. and Hispan.
first, who upon an ambitious desire of attayning greater dominion, and Empire
invaded this Province, were the Carthaginians. Repulsed from Sicily and other
Islands of the Levant about the year of Rome 132, and bending their forces
toward the West, they first took in here the Island of Ebusa, belonging to
this Continent. About the year 236, invited by the Tyrians, inhabiting Gades,
to their aid against the neighboring Spaniards, turning their faithless arms
here against they dispossessed them of that famous city and Island. By their
captains Himilco, and Hanno in the year 307, by force and subtilty they got
seized of the Islands of the Baleares. Under Hamilcar, father to the great
Hannibal, about the year of Rome 516, first to any purpose attempting upon the
Continent, they conquered Betica, together with the Bastetani, and Contestani
upon the same shore of the Levant. By Hasdrubal, succeeding hereunto in the
government, they enlarged their conquests, (the city of the Saguntines
excepted,) as far as the Ebro. By Hannibal, successor unto Hasdrubal,
(Saguntum taken, and the Carpetani, Ilergetes, Ausetani, and other barbarous
people subdued,) they extended the same unto the Pyrenaean Mountains,
stretching upon the other side Westwards unto the straights of Hercules;
Lusitania, and the more Northern parts excluded, remaining yet free, and not
conquered by foreign power till afterward. By the fortune of the second
Punique war in the 14 year thereof, they quite abandoned and lost this
Province, driven out by the valiant P. Scipio, from his greater victories,
afterward surnamed the African, some 416 years after their first taking of
Ebusa, and about 32 years since their invasion and conquest of the Continent
by Hamilcar, leaving the same, and their other hopes herein to the more
fortunate and better succeeding Romans.

By the Romans.
THE v. T. Livij Hist. Romans l. 21 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. and 28. etc Polybij
hist. l. 3. 10. and 11. Strab. Geog. l. 3. Plutarch. in vita P. Scipionis
Africani. L. Flori Hist. Romans l. 2. c. 6. 17. and 18. and lib. 4. c. 12. Rufi
Festi Breviarium. Eutropii hist. Romans l. 3. 4. 6. and 7. M. Aurelj Cassiodori
chronicon, Imperatore Octaviano Augusto. Appian. Alexandrini de bell. Hispan.
and Pun. lib.
occasion of the first attempts of this Nation hereupon, was their like
ambition of greater dominion, together with their jealousy of the Carthaginian
greatness, whose conquests here, and daily encroachings they much feared; the
joint cause hereof, and of the second Punique war. Under Cn: and Pub: Scipio
brethren, pretending the aid hereof, and the revenge of their confederates the
Saguntines, injuriously warred upon, and sacked by Hannibal, in the year of
Rome 534, and about the beginning of that war they first set footing herein;
after many victories, both of them diasterously here slain by the arms of the
Carthaginians, and treason of the Celtiberians. Unto these with much better
fortune succeeded in the Proconsulship, and war hereof in the year of Rome
543 Publius Scipio the African, son to the other Pub: Scipio before named,
whose valor, or chance it was utterly to expel here-hence the Carthaginians,
and to make way for the Roman greatness; by the issue of this war partly made
subject to the Empire hereof, and partly won unto their friendship, and
confederacy. Occasioned by the sundry after wars, tumults, and rebellions of
the fierce and warlike people of the Celtiberi, Numantini, Lusitani, Celtici,
Calaeci, Astures, Cantabri and others, severally tamed, and brought under by
their Captains, and Leiftenants Cato Censorinus, Gracchus, the Metelli,
Lucullus, Decimus Brutus, Fabius, Scipio Numantinus, Pompey, and Augustus
Caesar, (for together to the ruin of the whole they never consented in any
war) after above 200 years resistance they at length conquered the whole,
not fully quieted, and reduced into the order of a Province until Augustus;
the first people of the Continent (the Italians excepted) in part subdued
hereunto, and almost the last totally and fully conquered, and brought under
their laws, and government. The whole time the Romans commanded here,
accompting from Scipio African unto Eurycus King of the Visi-Gothes, by whom
they were quite expulsed, was about 700 years; governed by their Proconsuls,
Praetors, Rectors, Vicarii, and other names of Magistrates, according as the
times, and policy of the Empire changed.

THE DESCRIPTION OF SPAIN UNDER THE ROMANS.
THE v. T. Livij Hist. Romans l. 55. Strab. Geog. l. 3. Guidonis Pancirolli in
Notitiam Imperij Occidentis Com. c. 67. Lodovici Nonij Hispaniam.
first devision, which we find hereof during those first times, was into the
hither, and the further Spain, the river Ebro bounding those two parts;
afterward this bound set further Westwards, and the hither Spain contained
betwixt it, and the Pyrenaean mountains, and the further Spain lying beyond.
Augustus Caesar subdividing the further Spain, first distinguished the whole
into 3 parts, or Provinces, the hither Spain, otherwise more commonly called
Tarraconensis, from the city Tarraco; and Baetica; and Lusitania, the parts of
the further Spain, a devision afterward observed through the Empire until
the reign of the Emperor Constantine the great; the exacter bounds whereof
with their people and cities, as they were in those times, I have inserted out
of Ptolemy, as follows, with reference to Strabo, Pliny, and other ancient
Geographers.

BAETICA.
SO called v. C. Ptol. Geog. li. 2. c. 4. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 3. c. 1. Strab.
Geog. l. 3. Pom. Melae. l. 2. c. 6. Itinerarium Antonini Augusti. Lodovici
Nonij Hispaniam. P. Montani, and Birtij Interpretat in C. Ptol. Geog. lib. 2.
c. 4.
from the river Betis, now Guadalquivir, passing through the same. The bounds
hereof were the Sea extended from the more Eastern branch of the river Anas
unto the town of Murgis, near the Promontory Charidemum: the river Anas,
deviding it from Lusitania, and a line drawn from the Anas over land unto the
said Town of Murgis, parting it from Tarraconesis. Mariana begins this line
from the river Anas, or Guadiana, where now stands the town of Almagro,
continuing the same over Navas de Tolosa unto the forenamed town of Murgis,
and the sea Mediterranean. It contains at this day the countries of Granado,
and Andaluzia, with part of Estremadura, and Portugal.

The people hereof were the Bastuli Paeni (the Bastuli of Strabo,) now the
Seacoasts of Andaluzia, and Granado from the straights of Gibraltar unto the
Promontory de Gates. Their cities were Menralia, now Begorra de Melana.
Traducta. Barbesola, (Barbesula of Pliny, and Mela.) Carteia, (Carteia of
Pliny, Strabo, and Mela, and Calpe Carteia of Antoninus, situated betwixt
Malaca, and Gades) now Algeriza. Suea, now Chipiona. Malaca, (Malaca of Strabo,
Mela, and Antoninus, and Suel Malaca of Pliny) now Malaga. Menoba (Maenoba of
Strabo, and Menoba of Pliny, and Antoninus in the way betwixt Malaca, and
Castulo.) Sex (Sexi Firmum, surnamed Iulium of Pliny, and Sexitanum of
Antoninus in the way betwixt Castulo and Malaca) now Velez Malaga. Selambina
(Selambina of Pliny) now Selabrenna. Extentio. Abdara (Abdera of Pliny, founded
by the Carthaginians, Abdera, built by the Phenicians after Strabo) now
Almeria. Portus Magnus. and Baria, now Barria.

The Turduli, (Turduli of Strabo, Turduli, part of Baeturia, after Pliny) now
the rest of Granado, with part of Andaluzia within the land toward
Tarraconensis: whose cities were Setia (Sitia of Pliny.) Illurgis (Illiturgi,
surnamed Forum Iulium, of Pliny, Illiturgis of Antoninus, in the way betwixt
Castulo, and Corduba,) now Anduxar, a village town distant about half a
Spanish league from Iaen. Vogia. Calpurniana, now Carpio. Caecilla. Baniana.
Corduba (Corduba of Strabo, Mela, and Antoninus, and Corduba, a Roman Colony,
sunamed Patritia by Pliny,) now Cordova. Iulia (Iulia of Pliny, and Strabo,)
now Belia. Obulcum (Obulco of Strabo, and Obulco, surnamed Pontificense, of
Pliny,) now Porcunna. Arcilacis, now Alcala-horra. Detunda. Murgis (Murgis, the
end of Baetica, after Pliny, and Murgis of Antoninus, in the way betwixt
Castulo and Malaca,) now Muxacra. Salduba (Salduba of Pliny, and Mela) now
Vbeda. Tucci (Tucis of Strabo, Tucci, surnamed Augusta Gemella, of Pliny, and
Tucci of Antoninus, in the way betwixt the mouth of the river Anas, and
Emerita.) Sala. Balda. Ebora (Ebura, surnamed Cerealis, of Pliny.) Onoba (Onoba
of Strabo, Onoba Martialum of Pliny, and Onoba of Antoninus in the way betwixt
Emerita, and the mouth of the river Anas.) Illipula magna (Illipula, surnamed
Laus, of Pliny, Illipula, upon the river Baetis, of Strabo.) Selia. Vescis.
Escua, (Escua of Pliny.) Artigis, (Artigi, surnamed Iulienses of Pliny, Artigi
of Antoninus in the way betwixt Corduba and Emerita,) now Alhama. Calicula.
Lacibis, (Lacibi of Pliny.) Sacilis, (Sacili of Pliny) now Alcorrucen. Laccippo
(Laccippo of Pliny.) Illiberis (Iliberi surnamed Iulienses of Pliny,) standing
sometimes upon the hill Elvire near unto the city of Granado. Mnesthei Portus
(Mnesthei Portus of Strabo) now El Puerto de S. Maria. Belon (Bello of Mela,
Belon of Pliny, Belo of Strabo, and Belo of Antoninus, in the way betwixt
Malaca and Gades) now Tarif.

The Turditani (the Turditani of Strabo) containing now in a manner the rest of
Andaluzia, with the part of Estremadura, lying toward Portugal: whose towns
were Canaca. Seria, (Seria of Pliny.) Osca (Osca of Pliny.) Caeriana. Vrium.
Illipula, (Ilipula minor of Pliny.) Setida. Ptucci. Sala. Nebrissa, (Nebrissa
of Strabo, and Nebrissa, surnamed Venerea inter Baetis aestuaria, of Pliny) now
Le-brixa. Vgia. Asta (Asta Regia of Pliny, and Strabo, and Asta of Antoninus,
in the way betwixt Gades and Corduba,) now Xeres de la Frontera. Corticata.
Lelia. Italica (Italica of Strabo, Ilipa surnamed Italica of Pliny, and Italica
of Antoninus, 6. m. from Hispalis) now Sevilla la Veia. Maxilua. Vcia. Carissa,
(Carisa, surnamed Aurelia, of Pliny) now Carina. Calduba. Caesula. Saguntia
(Saguntia of Pliny) now Giconca. Asindu^ (Asido Caesariana of Pliny) now Medina
Sidonia. Nertobriga, now Valera Ar-monta. Contributa (Contributa of Pliny, and
Contributa of Antoninus in the way betwixt the mouth of the Anas, and Emerita.)
Rhegina. Cursus. Mirobriga (Mirobrica of Pliny.) Spoletinum. Laepa magna.
Hispalis (Hispalis of Strabo, and Mela, and Hispalis Colonia, surnamed
Romulensis, of Pliny) now Sevilla. Obucola, (Obulcula of Pliny, and Obucula of
Antoninus, in the way betwixt Hispalis, and Emerita.) Oleastrum, (Oleatrum of
Strabo, and Oleastro of Pliny) now Oleatro. Vrbona. Baesippo, (Besippo of Mela,
and Baesippo of Antoninus in the way betwixt Malaca, and Gades.) Fornacis.
Arsa, (Arsa of Pliny.) Asyla. Astygis (Astygi colonia, surnamed Augusta Firma
of Pliny, Astygi of Mela, and Astygi of Antoninus, seated betwixt Hispalis, and
Cordova,) now Eceia. and Charmonia (Carmon of Strabo, and Carmon of Antoninus,
seated betwixt Hispalis and Emerita.

The Celtici of Pliny, now the part of Estremadura, confining upon Portugal:
whose towns were, Aruci (Arucci of Pliny.) Arunda (Arunda of Pliny.) Curgia;
Acinipo (Acinippo of Pliny.) and Vama.

Pliny adds amongst the Bastuli Paent the towns Ossonoba, surnamed Lusturia,
Interfluentes. Luxia. Vrium. and Mellaria (Mellaria of Strabo, and Mela, and
Mellaria of Antoninus in the way betwixt Malaca and Gades.) Amongst the
Bastitani Segeda, surnamed Augurina. Virgao, surnamed Alba (Vergi in the bay
Vergitanus after Mela) now Vera. Singilia, now Antiqueria. Hegua. Arialdunum.
Aglaminor. Baebro. Castra Vinaria. Episibrium. Hipponova. Illurco. Succubo. and
Nuditanum. In the resort of Corduba, Ossigi, surnamed Laconicum. Ipasturgi,
surnamed Triumphale. Ripepora Faederatorum. Corbulo. and Decuma. In the resort
of Hispalis, Osset, surnamed Iutia Constantia. Celtica. Axatiara. Vergentum.
and Colobona. In the resort of Astigi, Attubi, surnamed Claritas Iulia. Vrso,
surnamed Genua Vrbanorum, (Vrso of Strabo) now Ossuna. Munda (Munda of Strabo)
now Munda. Ostippo (Ostippo of Antoninus, in the way betwixt Gades, and
Corduba.) Callet. Castra Gemina. Merucra. Sacrana. Oningis. Vertobrige.
Concordia Iulia. Laconimurgi. Constantia Iulia. Turobrica. Lastigi. Alpesa.
Saepona. and Serippo. And in the resort of Gades, Vlia. Vrgia, surnamed Castrum
Iulium. Besaro; with others, whose present names, and places we find not.
Strabo adds Apetua. Astenas. and Luciferi Fanum, now S. Lucar de Barrameda.
The whole number of towns after Pliny amounted to 175 of all sorts: amongst
which were four iuridicall resorts, Gades, Corduba, Astygi, and Hispalis; 8
Roman colonies; 8 Roman Municipia; 29 enjoying the rights of the ancient
Latins; 6 free towns; and 120 Stipendiaries. The part lying betwixt the river
Anas, and Baetis he more particularly names Baeturia, distinguished into
Baeturia Celtica (surnamed thus from the Celtici,) which was the part adjoining
to Lusitania; and Baeturia Turdulorum, ^ying near to Tarraconensis, surnamed
thus from the people of the Turduli.

LVSITANIA.
THus vid. C. Ptol. Geog. li. 2. c. 5. Strab. Geog. li. 3. Plin. Nature. Hist l.
4. c. 21. and 22. Pom. Melae l. 2. c. 6. Itinerarium Antoninini Augusti.
Lodovici Nonij Hispaniam. P. Montani, et Bertii interpret. in C. Ptol. l. 2. c.
5.
named from the chief inhabitants the Lusitani. The bounds hereof were the
river Anas, common hereunto, and Baetica; the Ocean, intercepted betwixt the
Anas, and Duero; the Duero, deviding it from the Callaici Bracarenses; and a
line from the Duero unto the Anas, parting it from Tarraconensis. Mariana
draws this line from the confluence of the Duero, and Pisuerga, by Puente de
Arcibispo (a noted bridge over the Taio) unto that part of the Anas, where
sometimes dwelt the Oretani, and called now Comarcha de Almagro. It
comprehends now the part of the kingdom of Portugal betwixt the Guadiana;
and Duero; with parts of Estremadura, and the two Castiles.

The people were the Turditani ( Turduli veteres, qui aliter Barduli, et
Tapori, Pli. ib.
Turduli Veteres, called otherwise the Barduli, and Tapori, after Pliny,)
continuate with those of Baetica, lying on both sides the Promontory Sacrum
from the Anas unto the river Tagus, and containing now the kingdom of Algarue,
with part of the true Portugal unto that river: whose cities were Balsa (Balsa
of Pliny, and Balsa of Antoninus, seated in the way from Estris unto Pax
Iulia,) now Tavilla. Ossonoba (Ossonoba of Pliny, and Ossonoba of Antoninus,)
now Gibraleon, or Faro. Salacia (Salacia of Pliny, and Salacia of Antoninus, in
the way betwixt Olisipon and Emerita) now Setunel. Caetobrix. Pax Iulia (Pax of
Pliny, and Pax Iulia of Antoninus) now Beia, or Badaios; and Iulia Myrtilis
(Myrtylis of Pliny.)

The Celtici (Celtici of Strabo) continuate likewise with those of Baetica, and
comprehending now part of the true Portugal betwixt the rivers Palma, and Taio:
whose cities were Lancobriga (Langobriga of Antoninus.) Piana. Braetoleum.
Mirobrica (Mirobrigenses of Pliny, Mirobriga of Antoninus, in the way betwixt
Emerita, and Caesaraugusta) Arcobriga, now Alcacor. Meribriga (Merobrica of
Pliny.) Catraleucos. Turres Albae; and Arundae (Arunditani of Pliny.

The Lusitani, particularly so called; containing now Portugal betwixt the
river Taio, and Duero, with part of Estremadura, and New Castile: whose cities
were Oliosipon (Olisipon of Antoninus, Olysippo, surnamed Faelicitas Iulia of
Pliny,) now Lisbona. Lavara; now Avero. Aritium (Aritium Praetorium of
Antoninus, in the way betwixt Oliosipon and Emerita.) Selium (Sellium of
Antoninus, in the way betwixt Oliosipon, and Bracara Augusta.) Elcoboris.
Araducta. Verurium. Velladis. Aminium. Chretina. Arabriga. Scabaliscus
(Scalabis, surnamed Praesidium Iulium of Pliny, and Scalabis of Antoninus, in
the way betwixt Oliosipon, and Bracara Augusta.) now Trugillo, or Santaren.
Tacubis. Concordia (Concordienses of Pliny.) Talabriga (Talabrica of Antoninus,
in the way from Oliosipon to Bracara Augusta.) Rusticana, now Cuidad Rodrigo.
Menteculia. Carium (Caurenses of Pliny) now Coria. Turmogum. Burdua. Colarnum
(Colarni of Pliny.) Salaecus. Amaea (Ammienses of Pliny.) Norba Casarea (Norba
Caesariana of Pliny) now Alcantara. Licinniana. Augusta Emerita (Augusta
Emerita of Pliny, and Strabo, Emerita of Antoninus, Emerita the chiefest city
in Lusitania after Mela,) now Merida. Evandria, Evandriata of Antoninus, in the
way from Oliosipon to Emerita; now Caceres. Geraea. Caecilia Gemelliana, Castra
Caecilia of Antoninus, in the way from Emerita to Caesaraugusta; now S. Maria
de Guadalupe. and Capasa.

The Vettones, Vettones of Strabo; now part of Leon, and Castillia la Veia:
whose cities were Lancia opidana, Lancienses of Pliny. Cottaeobriga.
Salmantica, Salmantica of Antoninus, in the way betwixt Emerita, and
Caesaraugusta; now Salamanca. Augustobriga, Augustobrigenses of Pliny, and
Augustobriga of Antoninus, in the way from Emerita to Caesaraugusta. Ocellum,
Ocelenses of Pliny, and Ocellum Duri of Antoninus, in the way from Emerita to
Caesaraugusta. Capara, Caperenses of Pliny. Manliana. Laconimurgi. Deobriga.
Obila. and Lama.

Pliny adds the Pesuri; and of towns Conimbrica (Conimbrica of Antoninus, in
the way from Oliosipon to Bracara,) now Condexa, near Coimbre. Minium.
Colippo. Eburo. Castra Iulia. Ebora, surnamed Liberalitas Iulia (Ebora of
Antoninus in the way from Oliosipon to Emerita,) now Ebora; with others, whose
places are lost. The whole number of towns he puts down to be 45, amongst
which were one Roman Municipium (Olysippo;) 5 Roman Colonies (Emerita Augusta,
Pax Iulia, Norba Caesarea, Metallinensis, and Scalabis;) three free towns of
the ancient Latins, (Ebora, Myrtilis, and Salacia;) and 36 Stipendiaries,
divided amongst 3 iuridicall resorts of Emerita, Pax Iulia, and Scalabis.

TARRACONENSIS.
NAmed thus v. Ptol. Geog. lib. 2. c. 6. Strab. Geog. l. 3. Plin. Not. hist. l.
3. c. 3 Pomp. Mel. l. 2. Solini. c, 26. Itinerarium Antonini Augusti. Lodovici
Nonij Hispaniam. P. Montani, and Birtij interpret. in Ptol. Geog. l. 2. c. 6.
from Tarraco, now Taragona, sometimes the chief city. The bounds hereof were
the lines before described, dividing it from Baetica, together with the
Pyrenaean mountains from France. It contained all the rest of Spain; at this
day the Countries of Galitia, Asturia, Biscaia, Olava, Guipuscoa, Murcia, the
greatest parts of the two Castiles, la Veia, and la Nueva, Portugal betwixt the
rivers Duero, and Minio, Navarra, and the kingdom of Aragon.

The people were the Callaici Braecarij, surnamed thus from the city Braecara
(Callaici, Callaeci, and Gallaeci of Strabo, and Bracari of Pliny,)
comprehending now the part of the kingdom of Portugal, lying betwixt the
rivers Minio, and Duero: whose Cities were Braecaria Augusta (Braecara of
Antoninus, Bracae juridicus conventus, quem appellant 24 civitates. Plin. ib.
Bracae of Pliny, a iuridicall resort) now Braga. Calodunum (Calodunum of
Antoninus, in the way from Bracara to Austrica.) Pinetus (Pinetum of Antoninus,
in the way betwixt Bracara, and Asturica.) Complutica (Complutica of Antoninus,
in the same way from Bracara to Asturica.) Tuntobriga. Aradu^a. Aquae ^^cae
Turodorum. Velobriga Nemetanorum. Caeliobriga Caelerinorum, now Berganca. Forum
Bibalorum. Forum Limicorum. Tude Gruiorum, Gravij, Plin. Not. hist. lib. 4. c.
20.
Castellum Tide of Pliny, now Tui. Merva Luancorum. Aquae Cuacernorum.
Cambaetum Lubaenorum; and Forum Narbasorum.

The Callaici Lucenses, so surnamed from the city Lucus, now Lugo; containing
Galitia, with part of Asturia de Oviedo, and divided from the Callaici
Braecarij by the river Minio: whose cities were Flavium Brigantium (Brigantium
of Antoninus, seated in the way by the Seacoasts from Bracara to Asturica;)
now Corunna. Burum. Olina, now Molina Vaeca. Libunca. Pintia, now Cheroga.
Caronium. Turuptiana. Glandomirum, (Glandomirum of Antoninus, in the same way
by the Seacoasts from Bracara to Asturica) now Mondonedo. Ocelum. Turriga.
Iria Flavia in Caporis, now Padron Claudiomerium. Novium. Lucus Augusti (
Lucus, iuridicus conventus, quem 16. populi appellant. Plin. ib,
Lucus of Pliny, a iuridicall resort suited by 16 people, and Lucus Augusti of
Antoninus, in the way by the Seacoasts betwixt Bracara and Asturica) now Lugo.
Aquae Calidae in Cilinis (Aquicaldenses of Pliny, and Aquae Celeniae of
Antoninus, in the way by the Seacoasts from Bracara to Asturica) now Orense.
Dactonium in Lemavis. Flavialambris in Baedyis. Talamina. and Aquae Quintianae
in Seuris.

The Astures, East of the Callaici Lucenses (Astures of Strabo, and Astures of
Pliny, comprehending 12 people, and divided into the 2 general names of the
Augustani, and Transmontani, whereof part were the Giguri, Pesici, Lancienses,
and Zoelae) containing now the rest of Asturia de Oviedo, with the Country of
Leon. Their cities were Lucus Asturum, now Oviedo. Laberis. Interamnium
(Interamnium Flavium of Antoninus, in the way betwixt Bracara and Asturica.)
Argenteola (Argentiolum of Antoninus, in the way betwixt Bracara, and
Asturica.) Langiati. Maliaca. Gigia. Bergidum Flavium. Germanica Legio Septima
(Legio Septima Gemina of Antoninus) now Leon. Brigaetium Brigaecinorum. Bedunia
Bedunensium. Intercatia Orniacorum (Intercatia of Polibius in Strabo, and
Intercatia of Antoninus, in the way by the Cantabrians from Asturica to
Caesaraugusta.) Pelontium Lungonum Nardinium Selinorum. Petavonium
Supereriatiorum (Petavonium of Antoninus, in the way from Bracara to Asturica.)
Asturica Augusta (Asturica of Antoninus, Asturica, a magnificent city after
Pliny) now Astorga Nemetobriga Tiburorum (Nemetobriga of Antoninus, in the way
from Bracara to Asturica;) and Formm Egurrorum (Forum of Antoninus in the way
from Bracara to Asturica.)

The Paesici, (Paesici of Pliny, part of the Astures) now Asturia Santillana:
whose city was Flavionavia, now S. Anderos.

The Cantabri, East of the Astures (Regio Cantabrorum of Pliny, and Cantabri of
Strabo:) whose cities were Coucana. Otaviolca. Argenomescum. Vadinia, now
Victoria. Camarica. Iuliobriga (Iuliobrica of Pliny,) now Logronno; and Moraeca.

The Murbogi, adjoining to the Cantabri: whose cities were Braum, now Burgos.
Sisaraca. Deobrigula, Deobricula of Antoninus, in the way from Asturica to
Tarraco. Ambisna; and Setisacum.

The Autrigones, East of the Murbogi, and Cantabri: whose cities were
Flaviobriga, Flaviobriga colonia of Pliny, where now Bilbao. Vxamabarca.
Segisamonculum, Segisamon of Antoninus, in the way from Asturica to Tarraco;
now Segura. Viruesca, Virouesca of Antoninus in the same way Antecuia.
Deobriga, Deobriga of Antoninus, in the same way betwixt Asturica, and Tarraco.
Vindelia; and Salionca.

The Varduli upon the sea Cantabrique, the Varduli of the resort of Clunia,
containing 14 people after Pliny, and the Bardyali, and Bardietae, of Strabo:
whose cities were Menosca; now Vramea. Gaballa. Gebalaeca. Tulonium, Tullonium
of Antoninus, in the way from Asturica to Burdegala. Alba, Alba of Antoninus,
in the same way. Segontia Paramica, Segontia of Antoninus, in the way from
Emerita to Caesaraugusta. Tritium Tuboricum, Tritium of Antoninus, in the way
from Asturica to Burdegala; and Thabuca.

The Caristi, upon the same shore of the sea Cantabrique: wherein were the
towns Suestasium. Tullica; and Velia.

These 5 last were all parts of the general name of the Cantabri, and together
comprehended now the countries of Biscaia, Guipuscoa, and Olava, with part of
Castillia la Veia.

The Vascones, Vascones of Strabo, and Pliny; now Navarra, with part of
Guipuscoa: whose cities were Easo; now Fuentarabia, or near thereunto.
Pompelon, Pompelonenses of Pliny, Pompelon Pompelon in Vasconibus, quasi
diceres Pompeii vrbs. Strab. Geog. lib. 3.
of Strabo, Pompelon of Antoninus, in the way from Asturica to Burdegala; now
Pampelona. Iturissa. Dituris. Andelus. Nemanturista. Curnovium. Iacca; now
Iaca. Gracuris; now Agreda. Calagorina, Calaguris of Strabo, Calaguritani,
surnamed Fibularenses, of Pliny, and Calagurris of Antoninus, in the way
betwixt Narbo in Gaul and Legio 7 Gemina; now Calahorra. Bascontum. Ergaula.
Tarraga, Tarragenses of Pliny. Muscaria. Setia; and Alavona.

The Vaccaei Vaccaei of Strabo, in the inland, adjoining to the Callaici
Braecarij, and containing now the greatest part of Castillia la Veia: whose
cities were Bergiacis. Intercatia, Intercatia of Antoninus, in the way from
Asturica by Cantabria to Caesarugusta. Viminacium, Viminacium of Antoninus, in
the way from Asturica to Burdegala. Porta Augusta. Antraca. Lacobriga,
Lacobricenses of Pliny, and Lacobriga of Antoninus, in the way from Asturica to
Tarraco. Avia. Sepontia. Paramica. Gella, Albocella. Rauda. Segisama Iulia,
Segisameiensienses of Pliny, Segisama of Polybius in Strabo, and Segisamon of
Antoninus, in the way from Asturica to Tarraco; now Tordesillas. Palantia,
Pallentini of Pliny, Pallantia amongst the Arevacae of Strabo, Pallantia of
Mela, and Palantia of Antoninus, in the way from Asturica to Tarraco; now
Palentia Eldana, now Puennas. Gougium; now Cabecon. Cauca, Cauca of Antoninus,
in the way from Emerita to Caesaraugusta. Octodurum. Pintia, Pintia of
Antoninus, in the way from Asturica by the Cantabrians unto Caesaraugusta; now
Vallidolid. Sentica, Sentice of Antoninus in the way from Emerita to
Caesaraugusta; now Camora. and Sarabris.

The Carpetani, South of the Vaccaei and Arevacae, Carpetani of Strabo, and
Carpetani of Pliny; containing now the greatest part of Castillia la Nueva;
whose cities were Ilurbida. Etelesta. Ilaccuris. Varada. Thermada. Tituacia.
Mantua; now Madrid. Toletum, Toletani of Pliny, and Toletum of Antoninus, in
the way from Emerita unto Caesaraugusta; now Toledo. Complutum, Complutenses of
Pliny, and Complutum of Antoninus, in the way from Emerita unto Caesaraugusta;
now Alcala de Henares. Cara^ca; now Guadalajara. Libora; now Talavera. Ispinum.
Met^rcosa. Barnacis. Alternia. Paterniana; now Pastrana. Rigusa. and Laminium,
Laminitani of Pliny, and Laminium of Antoninus, in the way by Lusitania from
Emerita unto Caesaraugusta.

The Oretani, South of the Carpetani, and Celtiberi, Oretani of Strabo,
Oretani, quiet Germani cognominantur. Plin. ib.
and Oretani, surnamed Germani, of Pliny; comprehending now part of Castillia
la Nueva, and Andaluzia: whose cities were Salaria, Salaria of Pliny. Sisapona,
Sisapon of Strabo, and Sisapon of Antoninus, in the way by Lusitania from
Emerita unto Caesaraugusta. Oretum Germanorum, Orid of Strabo; where now is the
chapel called Nuestra Sennora'd Oreto near the town of Calatrava.
Aemiliana. Mirobriga, Mirobriga of Antoninus in the way by Lusitania betwixt
Emerita and Caesaraugusta. Salica. Libicosa. Castulon, Castulonenses of Pliny,
Castaon of Strabo, Castulo of Antoninus; now Caslona la Veia. Lupparia.
Mentisa, Mentesani of Pliny. Cervaria. Biatia. Lacuris, Lacuris of Antoninus in
the way by Lusitania from Emerita to Caesaraugusta. and Tiva.

The Pelendones, adjoining to the Murbogi, Pelendones, part of the Celtiberi of
Pliny; now part of Castillia la Veia: whose cities were Vis^ntium; now, Viseo.
Augustobriga, Augustobriga of Antoninus in the way by the Ca^abrians from
Asturica to Caesaraugusta, now Aldea el Maro and Savia.

The Ar^vacae adjoining to the Pelendones, and Berones, Arrebaci of Pli. and
b^nevaci, part of the Celtiberi after Strab now part of Castillia la Veia:
whose cities were Conflue^ta. Clunia Clunia, Celtiberiae finis Plin. ib.
Clunia the end of Celtiberia after Pliny, and Clunia of Anton. in the way from
Asturica by the Cantabrians to Caesaraugusta; now Corunna del Conde. Terms,
Terms of Plin. now Cuidad Real. Vxama, Vxama of Pliny, and Vxama of Antoninus,
in the way from Asturica by the Cantabrians unto Caesaraugusta; now Osma.
Setortia Lacta; now Sepulveda. Veluca. Tucris; now Tudela Numantia, Numantia of
Strabo, and Mela, Numantini of Pliny, and Numantia of Antoninus in the way from
Asturica by the Cantabrians unto Caesaraugusta; now Garay, a village town
near Soria. Segubia, Segovia of Pliny, and Segovia of Autoninus, in the way
from Emerita to Caesaraugusta; now Segovia. and Noudaugusta, Nova Augusta of
Pliny.

The Celtiberi, East of the Carpetani, Celtiberi of Pliny and Strabo, and
Celtiberia of Solinus; containing now part of Aragonia, Valentia, and Castillia
la Nueva: whose cities were Belsinum; now Borgia. Turiaso, Turiasionenses of
Pliny, and Turiaso of Antoninus in the way from Asturica by the Cantabrians
unto Caesaraugusta; now Tarrazona. Nertobriga, Nertobriga of Antoninus, in the
way from Emerita unto Caesaraugusta; now Alurha. Bilbis, Bilbilis of Strabo,
and Bilbilis of Antoninus, in the way from Emerita to Caesaraugusta, standing
sometimes upon the hill, now called Baubola, some half a Spanish league from
Calataiud. Arcobriga, Arcobriga of Antoninus, in the way from Emerita to
Caesaraugusta; now Arcoz. Cesada. Mediolum, now Medina Caeli. Attacum.
Ergavica; now Alcamiz. Segobriga, Segobriga of Strabo, and Segobricenses, caput
Celtiberiae. Pli. ib.
Segobricenses, the chief city of Celtiberia, after Pliny; now Segorve.
Condobora; now Seguenca. Bursada. Lacta. Valeria. Istonium. Alaba. Libana. and
Vrcesa; now Velez.

These 3 were all parts of the general name of the Celtiberi.

The Lobetani, adjoining to the Celtiberi, whose city was Lobetum.

The Illergetes, Regio Illergetum of Pliny, adjoining to the Vascones, and
containing now part of Aragonia; whose cities were Bergusia. Celsa. Bergidum.
Erga; now Vrgel. Succos^. Osca, Osca of Strabo, Oscenses regionis Ves^^taniae.
Plin. ib.
Oscenses, in the country Vescitania, after Pliny, and Osca of Antoninus in
the way from Asturica to Tarraco; now Huescar. Burtina, Bortina of Antoninus in
the way from Asturica to Tarraco; now Balbastro. Gallica Flava, Gallicum of
Antoninus in the way from Asturica to Tarraco; now Fraga. Orgia; now Al^arez;
and Ilerda, Ilerda of Strabo, and Ilerda of Antoninus, in the way from Asturica
to Tarraco; now Lerida.

The Cerretani, more East; Cerretani of Strabo, inhabiting the vallyes of the
Pyrenaean mountains; now the rest of Aragonia; whose city was Iulia Lybica.

The Bastitani, Bastitani of Strabo, containing now part of the countries of
Valencia, and Murcia: whose cities were Pucialia. Salaria; now Siruela.
Turbula. Saltiga. Bigerra; now Beiar. Abule. Asso. Bergula. Carca. Illunum.
Arcilacis, now Archifana. Segifa. Orcelis; now Orihuela. Vergilia. and Acci,
Colonia Accitania of Pliny, and Acci of Antoninus in the way from Narbo in
Gaul unto Castulo.

The Contestani, Contestania of Pliny; containing part of the same countries of
Murcia and Valentia: whose cities were Carthago nova, Carthago, Carthago
Panorum opus Plin. ib.
founded by the Carthaginians after Pliny, Carthago nova, built by Hasdrubal,
Successor to Barca, father unto Hannibal, after Strabo; Carthago, built by
Hasdrubal captain of the Carthaginians after Mela; Carthago founded by the
Carthaginians, and afterward made a Roman colony, after Solinus; and Carthago
Spattaria of Antoninus; now Carthagena. Alonae, Alon of Mela; now Alicante.
Menralia; now Murcia. Valentia, Valentia Colonia of Pliny, Valentia of Mela,
and Valentia of Antoninus in the way from Narbo in Gaul unto Castulo; now
Valentia. Setabis, Setabis of Strabo, and Setabitani of Pliny; now Xativa
Setabicula. Illicias, Illici, a free colonie after Pliny, Illice, giving the
name to the bay called Ilicitanus, after Mela, and Illicis of Antoninus, in the
way from Narbo in Gaul unto Castulo and Iaspis.

The Edetani, Regio Edetania of Pliny, East of the Contestani, Bastitani, and
Celtiberi; now part of Valentia, and Aragonia: whose cities were Caesaraugusta,
Caesaraugusta of the Celtiberi of Strabo, Caesaraugusta Caesaraugusta, Colonia
immunis, vbi antea Salduba. Plin. ib.
a free colonie, formerly named Salduba, after Pliny, Caesaraugusta a famous
Caesaraugusta clarissima vrbs in mediterraneis. Pompon. Mel. ib.
inland city after Mela, and Caesaraugusta of Antoninus; now Saragoca.
Bernama. Ebora. Belia. Arsi; now Haril^. Damania. Leonica. Osicerda. Etobesa.
Lassira. Edeta. Saguntum, Saguntum founded by the Zacynthia^s after Strabo,
Saguntu^ Saguntus civium Romanorum oppidum. Plin. ib.
a town of Roman citizens after Pliny, Saguntus famous Saguntus fide, et
aerumnis clata. Pomp. Mel. ib.
for miseries, and the faith thereof unto the Romans, after Mela, and Saguntus
of Antoninus, in the way from Narbo in Gaul unto Castulo; now Morviedre. and
Dianium, Dianium, a town of the Massilians after Strabo; Dianium, oppidum
Stipendiarium, of Pliny; Dianium of Solinus; now Denia.

The Ilercaones, East of the Edetani, Regio Ilergaonum of Pliny; now part of
the countries of Valentia, and Catalonia: whose towns were Carthago vetus; now
Villa-Franca. Bisgargis, Bisgargitani of Pliny. Theava. Adeba. Tiari^lia.
Sigarra: and Dertosa, Dertusani of Pliny, Dertossa colonia, Dertossa colonia in
Iberitraiectu. Strab. ibdem.
the passage over the river Iberus after Strabo, and Dertosa of Antoninus in
the way from Narbo to Castulo; now Tortosa.

The Authetani, West of the Cerretani, A^setani at the foot of the Pyrenaean
mountains of Pliny: whose towns were Aquae Calidae. Baecula. Ausa; now Vich.
and Gerunda, Gerunda of Antoninus, in the way from Narbo in Gaul unto Legio 7
Gemina, and the Gerundenses of Pliny; now Girona.

The Castellani, adjoining to the Authetani: whose cities were Sependium. Basi.
Egosa. and Boseda.

The Iaccetani, West of the Castellani, Iaccetani of Strabo, and Lacetani, at
the foot of the Pyrenaean Mountains, of Pliny: whose cities were Lyssa.
Vdura, Ascerris. Setelsis. Telobis. Ceressus. Bacasis. Iespus. Cinna. and
Anabis.

The Indigeti, Indigetes of Pliny: whose cities were Emporiae, Emporium,
founded by the Massilians, of Strabo, Emporiae descended from the Phocenses,
and divided into two towns, inhabited a part, the one by the Spaniards, the
other by the Greeks after Pliny; now Ampurras. Rhoda, Rhodope of Strabo,
founded by them of Emporium, after others by the Rhodians; now Roses. Deciana.
and Iuncaria, Iuncaria of Antoninus, in the way from Narbo in Gaul unto Legio
7 Gemina, now Iunquera.

The Laetani, Laeetani of Strabo, and Laletani of Pliny: whose towns were
Barcinon (Barcino colonia, surnamed Faventia of Pliny, Barchino of Mela,
Barcino of Antoninus, in the way from Narbo in Gaul, unto Legio 7 Gemina) now
Barcilona. Diluron (Illuro of Pliny, and Mela) now Badallona. Blanda, Blandae
of Pliny, and Blanda of Mela, now Blanes* and Rubricata.

The Cosetani (Regio Cossetania of Pliny:) whose cities were Tarracon (Tarracon
Tarracon vrbs, Metropolis Hispaniae inter Iberum. Strab: ib:
the chief city of Spain within the Iberus, of Strabo, Tarraco colonia,
Scipionum opus: Plin: ib:
Tarraco colonia, a town of the Scipioes, after Pliny, Tarraco the richest of
the maritine towns upon that Sea, after Mela, Tarraco, builded by the
Scipioes, of Solinus,) now Taragona and Subur (Subur of Mela) now Siges.

These 6 people are all now contained within the large country of Catalonia.

Pliny adds the Vettone^, doubtless the Vettones of Ptolemy in Lusitania,
but misplaced. Icositani. Itani; and Mentesani. The countries Mavitania, and
Dietania: and of towns amongst the Autrigones, Lucentum, and Baetulo, Betullo
of Mela and amongst the Arevacae, Saguntia.

Strabo adds the Lartolaeitani. Lusones. Sidetani; inhabiting toward the
mountain Orospeda to the South of the Celtiberi. Artabri at the Promontory
Nerium. and the Celtici, neighboring to the Artabri, and descended from those
other of that name, inhabiting the shore of the river Anas. Of towns he
adds A^ontia, seated upon the river Durius amongst the Vaccaei: amongst the
Oretani Cetulum: Cherronesus: and Cartalias: amongst the Ilergetes Iliosca upon
the Ocean: amongst the Vascones Idanusa: and amongst the Verones, Serguntia,
and Varia upon the Iberus, hitherto navigable: Segida amongst the Arevaci; and
Noega amongst the Astures.

Pliny accompteth the whole number of towns in this division to have been 294
in his time: amongst which 12 were Roman Colonies; 13 Municipia; 17 free of the
right of the ancient Latins; one confederate town. and 136 Stipendiaries,
divided amongst 7 iuridical resorts; of Carthago nova, Tarraco, Caesaraugusta,
Clunia, Asturica, Lucus, and Bracara.

The Emperor v: Rufi Festi Breviarium. Notitiam Provinciarum Imperii
Occidentis. Guidonis Pancirolli in Notitiam Provinciarum Imper^ Occidentis Com:
c: 67. Lodovici Nonii Hispaniam:
Constantine the Great afterward, subdividing the greater Province of
Tarraconensis, and adding the Islands of the Baleares, and the country of
Tingitana in Afric, unto the account hereof, distinguished the whole into 7
parts or Provinces, remaining until the end, and dissolution of the Western
Roman Empire; of Baetica, Lusitania, Gallaecia, Carthaginensis, Tarraconensis,
Tingitana, and of the Islands. Of these Baetica and Lusitania were bounded as
before. The name of Gallaecia was enlarged Eastwards, as far as the
Pelendones, and Celtiberi; besides the Callaici beforementioned, containing
the Astures, Murbogi, and Vacc^i, at this day Galitia, Asturia, Leon, Portugal
betwixt the rivers Minio, and Duero, with the greatest part of Castilia la
Veia. Carthaginensis, so named from the city Carthago nova, contained the
Oretani, Carpetani, Pelendones, Arevacae, Celtiberi, Bastitani, Contestani, and
Edetani, now Castillia la Nueva, Murcia, and Valentia, with parts of Andaluzia,
Castillia la Veia, and Aragonia. The rest of the continent Tarraconensis
comprehended. The Province of the Islands contained those of the Baleares, and
Ebusa, now Mallorca, Menorca, Ivyca, and Formentera. Hispaniae Tingitania the
Island of Gades, with the opposite shore of Afric, lying on the farther side
of the straights of Hercules; named thus from the town there of Tingis, now
Tangier. Of these the three first Provinces were consulary, or governed by
Proconsuls; the four other were Presidiall, commanded by the Roman name of
Praesides. Sextus Rufus names only six Provinces, Tarraconensis,
Carthaginensis, Gallaecia, Baetica, Lusitania and Tingitania, omitting that of
the Islands: whereof, differing from the Author of the Notitia, only Baetica,
and Lusitania he makes consulary, the rest Presidiall.

This was the estate of Spain during the government of the Romans, confounded,
and quite altered by the coming of the barbarous people; by the justice and
decree of God, who will have nothing here eternal but himself, and to check
the pride of that mighty Nation, with irresistable fury swarming in hither in
the reigns of the Emperors Honorius, and Valentinian the third.

The Invasion and Dominion of the Barbarous nations.
THey were the Vandals, Silingi, Alans, Suevians, and Goths, whose original,
first entrance, reign, continuance, and successions we are next to relate.

The Vandals. Vindili Plin. Not. hist. l. 4. c. 12. Vandalij Cor. Taciti de
Moribus Germanorum. Wandali Pauli Oros^i l. 7. c. 27 Vandali Cassiodori Chron.
Imperatore Arcadio.

THese are v. Taciti de Moribus Germanorum. lib. Plin. Not. hist. l. 4. c. 12.
P. Oros^ii l. 7. c. 27. and 28. M. Aurelii Cassiodori Chron. Imper. Arcadio,
and Honorio; Honorio and Theodosio; and Theodosio, and Valentiniano. Procopii
de Bello Vandal. libros. Isid. Hispalensis Chronicon Wandalorum. Joan. Marianae
de Rebus Hispaniae l. 4. c. 21. and lib. 5. c. 1.
named by Pliny the Vindili, being one of the five general nations, whereinto
he divides the Germans, and whereof he makes the Burgundiones a part. By
Tacitus they are called the Vandalij, by Cassiodorus the Vandali, by Orosius,
Isidore, and Paulus Diaconus the Wandali. They were a noted German people,
inhabiting beyond the river Elb upon the coast of the sea Baltique in the parts
where now lie the great Dukedomes of Pomeren, and Mecklenburg; wherein the name
in some Latin Authors is yet continued. In the eleventh year of the Emperor
Honorius, and Arcadius, and year of Rome 1172, Arcadius and Probus then being
Consuls, with the Alans, and Suevians they first entered Gaul, drawn in by the
traitorous practices of Stilico, Guardian of the Western Empire in the
minority of Honorius; by the advantage of the troubles, which might be hereby
occasioned, the fear and discontentednes of the people, their dislike of the
present government, and desire of innovation, which he thought might happen,
hoping to get the Empire for his son Eucherius, borne of the sister of
Honorius. Some three years afterward in the first year of Honorius, and
Theodosius, accompanied with the same nations, and quitting Gaul, they first
broke into this province of Spain, let in by the Honoriaci Orosij li. 7. c. 28.
Honoriaci (another sort of Barbarians, named thus from the Emperor Honorius,
under whose pay they had served,) keeping then the straights, and passages of
the Pyrenaean Mountains for the Tyrant Constantinus, rebelling against
Honorius. The part, wherein they first planted, was Gallaecia, Wandali, cum
Alanis, and Suevis pa^iter Hispanias ingrediuntur. Hi^pace inter se inita sort
ad habitand^m sibi provinciarum dividunt regiones. Galliciam VVandali, and
Svevi occupant. Alani Lusitaniam, and Carthaginense provincias. Wandali autem
cognomine Silingi Baeticam fortiuntur. Isidori Chronic. Wandalorum.
which they inhabited together with the Suevians. Afterward they removed into
Baetica unto the Silingi. In the fourth year of the Emperors Theodosius, and
Valentinian, and about 18 years after their first Spanish invasion, abandoning
Spain, they ferried over into Afrique, invited thither by Bonifacius,
governor of that province, rebelling against Valentinian; which not long after
(Bonifacius repenting himself of his folly, and in battle overthrown by
them) old Carthage taken, and the Romans quite expulsed, they utterly brought
into subjection, continuing their name there, and dominion for above the space
of one hundred years, and until the reign of the Emperor Justinian the
first, Emperor of the Greeks. In the reign of this prince by his leiftenant,
the valiant Belisarius, they were totally subdued, and their kingdom, and name
in Gilimer, their last king, quite extinguished. Their religion at their first
coming into those Western parts was Gentilisme. By their after acquaintance
with the Goths they turned Arrian Christians, which heresy they kept until
their extirpation. Their kings, whereof we read, were Gunderichus, under whom
they first invaded Gaul and Spain. Gensericus, brother to Gunderichus, under
whom with 80 thousand fighting men they first passed into, and conquered
Afrique, and afterward took, and sacked Rome. Honorichus, son to Genserichus.
Gundabundus, son to Genzo, brother to Honorichus. Trasamuadus, brother to
Gundabundus. Hilderichus, son to Honorichus. He was deposed by Gilimer.
Gilimer, son to Genzo, descended of Genserichus. He was overcome, and taken
prisoner by Belisarius, in whom ended the kingdom, and nation hereof in
Afrique.

The whole time from their first invasion of Spain until their overthrowe,
and extirpation in Afrique Isidore reckons to have been 133 years, and 7
months.

THE SILINGI. Wandali Silingi Isidori Chronic. Gothorum. Wandali cognomine
Silingi Isidori Chron. Wandalorum.

THese were v. Claud. Ptolomaei Geogr. lib. 2. c. 11. Isidori Hispalensis
Chronicon Wandalorum. eiusdem Chronicon Gothorum. Ioannis Marianae de Rebus
Hispaniae lib. 5. c. 1.
also a Northern people, but of what parts we find not. Not improbably they
might be the Subalingij, a German Nation, mentioned by Ptolemy. Isidore (by
whom only amongst ancient Authors we find them expressly named) makes
them to have been a part of the Vandals. Mariana puts them to be a
different people, but joined in the same troop with the other, and under one,
and the same king passing into Gaul, and Spain, and seating themselves in
that part of Baetica, vvhereabout was Sivilla. The Vandals departing into
Afrique they remained behind, from whose longer continuance, (for as much, as
they were accounted amongst that nation) that part of Baetica became named
Vandalia, now corruptly Andaluzia. By Rechila, By Walia king of the Goths
after Isidore in his Annalls of the Goths.
the second king of the Suevians, they were finally subdued, and their country
with the whole Baetica added to the dominion of that people, after which
time we hear no more of them.

THE ALANS. Alani Ammian. Marcellini. l. 22. etc. forsan Alauni Scythae
Sarmatarum Europ^orum pars. Clau. Pto. Geog. l. 3. c. 5.

THese v. Suetonu Tranquilli de Caesaribus l. 8. (de Domitiano.) Iulii
Capitolini Maximinos duos. Aelii Spartiani Ad^^anum. Ammiani Marcellini. l. 22.
and 31. P. Orosii H.st. l. 7. c. 27. et 28. Zosimi Hist. l. 5. Impetatore
Arcadio, et Honorio: et Honorio, et Theodosio. M. Aurelii Cassiodori Chronicon
Imper. Arcadio, et Honorio. Isidori Hispalensis Chr. Gothorum. eiusdem Chron.
Wandalorum. Ioannis Marianae de Rebus Hisp. l. 5. c. 1.
Ammianus Marcellinus places in Scythia, inhabiting about the Fen Moeotis;
neighboring to the Roxolani, Iaziges, and other Barbarous nations, and
extending for a great space of land betwixt that marish, and the rivers
Tanais, and Ganges, and divided into sundry lesser people, called all by this
general name. Their first mention in histories we find to have been in the
reign of the Emperor Vespasian, then warring upon the Parthians; whereof
read Suetonius in Domitian. Their after memory is frequent, but confused. With
the Vandals, and Suevians, before mentioned, they first entered Gaul, and
Spain. The parts, which they took up to inhabit in, were the Provinces of
Lustainia, and Carthaginensis, the Celtiberi, and Carpetani excepted, which
people remained yet under the Roman subjection. Aspiring to the dominion of the
whole Spain, and cooping with, and overthrown in a mighty battle by the
Goths, they shortly after their first entrance lost here both their kingdom,
and name; their king Atace, with great number of them being slain, and the
residue, who escaped the slaughter, flying into Calaecia amongst the Suevians,
where being confounded with that nation we hear no further mention of them.
Their reign here was but short during one only prince before mentioned. Their
religion was Gentilisme.

THE SVEVIANS. Suevi Corn. Tacit. l. de Moribus Germanorum.

THey v. Tacit. lib. de Mor^ibus Germanorum. Eutropij Hist. l. 8. Imper. M.
Antonio Vero. P. Orosij Hist. l. 7. cap. 28. Isidori Hispalensis Chronicon
Suevorum. Joan. Marianae de rebus Hispaniae l. 5. c. 1. 2. 3. et 4. et lib.
were a Dutch people, famous in all ancient Geographers, and Historians,
inhabiting the more Eastern moity of Germany beyond the river Elb, and divided
into sundry potent nations, whereof these were a Colony, or part. For from this
great, and general name sundry other mighty people, and states, the Lombards,
English, High Dutch, or Almans, Sweath-landers, and Danes, at this day of great
power, and command in Europe, were descended. In the reign of the Emperors
Arcadius, and Honorius, with the Vandals, and Alans they first invaded Gaul,
and Spain. The part of Spain, wherein they first inhabited, was Calaecia.
Under Rechila, their second king, subduing the Silingi, they added Baetica to
their dominions. In the reign of Recciarius, their third king, they became
likewise possessed of Lusitania. Puffed up with so great posperity, falling
out with Theodoricus the most powerful king of the Goths, overcome hereby
in a great battle, and their king Recciarius slain, they for a time became
subject to that nation, their kingdom, and state being overthrown, and shared
betwixt the Goths, and their confederates the Romans. After a short
Interregnum by the liberality of this Theodoricus they had again their
kingdom restored, but now straightned only within Calaecia. King Remismundus
not long after added part of Lusitania, where now is Coimbre, and Lisbona,
recovered from the Romans, unto whom after that calamity, and overthrowe under
Recciarius that province fell. In the year 586 after 174 After 126. years,
according to Isidore in his A^nalls of the Suevians.
years continuance, and in the reign of the traitorous usurper Andeca this
kingdom, and state took end; overthrown by Leutigildus, king of the Goths,
their king being shorn monk, and Calaecia made a Province of the Gothish
monarchy, their name, and mention becoming after this extinct, and no more
heard of in Spain. Their religion at the time of their first coming hither
was Gentilisme. Under their king Recciarius they first embraced the Christian,
and Catholic faith, but which in a free estate they enjoyed not long,
enthralled to Theodoricus, and the Arrian Goths. After that their kingdom was
restored by the Goths, swayed with the power, and greatness of that nation,
under their king Remismundus they changed their Catholic faith for the
Arrian heresy, wherein for about the space of one hundred years they
afterward persisted. Under their king Theodomyrus by the especial industry of
Martin Abbot of Dumia they reassumed the Catholic religion, which they
constantly kept until their state, and kingdom ended. Their kings (for as
many of them as were set down in authors, for the greatest part are not
remembered) were Hermenericus, under whom they first passed into Gaul, and
Spain, and planted in Calaecia. Rechila, under whom they conquered the
Silingi. Recciarius, their first Christian, and Catholic king, subdued, and
slain by Theodoricus king of the Goths. Franta, and Masdras after the
restitution of the kingdom by the Goths, chosen by their factions; the nation
being divided. Masdras sole king of the Suevians; Franta deceasing. Frumarius,
and Remismundus, son to Masdras, after the decease hereof, slain in the third
year of his reign. Remismundus sole king of the Suevians, Frumarius
deceasing. Under this king the nation first revolted to the Arrian heresy.
After this prince for the space of one hundred years by the negligence of
ancient times their kings are not remembered, and until Theodomyrus.
Theodomyrus, the restorer of the Catholic religion. Myro, or Ariamyrus, son
to Theodomyrus. Eboricus, son to Myro, deposed, and shorn Monk by Andeca.
Andeca, upon occasion, and pretense of whose treason Leutigildus, king of the
Goths, warring hereupon, utterly subdued the nation, the last king of the
Suevians, after the milder custom of those times toward their vanquished
enemies forced to religious orders, and shut up in a monastery by Leutigildus.

THE GOTHS. Gothi Iulij Capirolini de duobus Maximinis etc.

THese v. Corn. Tac. lib de Moribus Germanorum. Aelij Spartiani Antoninum
Carcallum Iulij Capitolini Maximinos duos. P. Orosij Hist. l. 7. c. 28.
Trebellij Pollionis Diuum Claudium. Ammiani Marcellini. l. 31. Imp. Valente,
and Gratiano. Zosimi Hist l. 1. Imp. Valeriano. et Gallieno. l. 3. Imp. Iul.
et. l. 4. etc. Se^ti Aurelij victoris Epitomen Imper Valente, and Valentiniano.
Iornandem de rebus Geticis. eundem de Regn. and Temp. Successione. M. Aurelij
Cass^odori Chronicon Imp. Decio; Valeriano, and Gallieno. Valente, and
Valentiniano; Arcadio, and Honorio and Honorio, and Theodosio. Isidori
Hispalensis Chron. Gothor^. Marianam de Rebus Hispaniae.
Aelius Spartianus in the life of Antoninus Bassianus Caracalla, and Iornandes
de Rebus Geticis seem to confound, and make one nation with the Getae.
Iornandes would have their ancient, and first abode to have been in Scanzia,
or Scandia, thought then to be an Island, and by Ptolemy accounted unto
Germany, since known to join with the Firm Land. The modern names of East,
and West Gothia in the kingdom of Swethen, and the style of the kings hereof
(amongst other titles now naming themselves kings of the Goths) yield some
likelihood of the truth of this assertion. No less probably they might be the
Gothini of Tacitus, a people of the Suevians, inhabiting in the South-East part
of Germany. A reason to persuade hereunto might be the neerenes of that nation
unto the Ister, or Danubius; upon the banks of which river we first hear of
the name of the Goths in histories: Again the neighborhood of the Gothini
unto the Quadi, and Sarmatae, whom in the reign of the Emperor Galienus we
read in Iornandes de Regn: and Tempo: Successione accompanying the Goths in
their inroades, and excursions into Pannonia. That originally they were Germans
their distinctions of Ostro-gothes, and Wisi-gothes, signifying in their
language (as now with the Dutch) the Eastern, and Western Goths, and names
of Alaric, Theodoric, Reccared, with others (the same, or alike terminated with
the ancient French) do almost make certain. The name, and succession hereof
Iornandes, by nation a Goth, continues from the times before the Trojan
wars, and beyond the report of other profane histories. But whose relation,
grounded only upon unknown, and barbarous authors, we reject as fabulous.
Their first certain, and express mention in approved authors we find to
have been in the reign of the Emperor Antoninus Caracalla, overcome hereby
in certain tumultuary fights in his way toward Persia, and the East. Their
mention after this is familiar, and common: In the reign of the Emperor
Maximinus, upon occasion of his parentage, whose mothers was of this nation. Of
Decius, then ransacking Thrace, and overthrowing in battaill, and killing this
Emperor: Of Galienus, wasting Greece, Pannonia, Pontus, and Asia: Of Claudius
the second, after their 15 years spoil of Illyri^um, and Macedonia, slain,
and overthrown by him with great slaughter: Of Iulianus, accompanying, and
ayding him in his unfortunate war against the Persians: Of Valens, with the
Taifali, and other Barbarians driven then by the Huns from beyond the further
shore of the river Ister into the Roman Provinces, afterward in fight
overcome, and slain by them. Of Theodosius the first, overthrown by him in
sundry battails: Of Honorius, and Arcadius, under their kings Alaricus, and
Radagaisus invading Italy, and at Pollentia putting Stilico, the leiftenant of
Honorius unto flight: Of Honorius, and Theodosius the second, then taking Rome:
Of the same Emperors, under their king Athaulphus upon a composition made with
Honorius seating in Gaul, and Spain. After this time we read of a continual
succession of them in the French, and Spanish histories, and until their
final overthrow, and extirpation. Their country since their express name was
Dacia, or the further shore of the river Ister, quarting upon the other side
Pannonia, Maesia, or Thrace, the common Rendez-vous of the many successions of
barbarous nations. Driven over that river by the more fierce and barbarous
Huns, they had Thrace permitted unto them to inhabit in by the Emperor
Valens, with condition to serve under the pay of the Romans, and to become
Christians; the cause of their Arrian infection, wherewith so long time after
they troubled the Christian Commonwealth, unto which Haeresie that Emperor
was addicted. A little before their coming into Italy, and the West, they
enlarged their bounds as far as Pannonia. In the reigns of Arcadius, and
Honorius, denied their accustomed pay of the Romans by the treason of Stilico
Protector, and Lieftenant to Honorius, under their kings Rhadagaisus, and
Alaricus, they drew into Italy in two Armies; the former whereof at Fesulae was
slain, and his Army discomfited by Stilico, the other by the treachery hereof
permitted to live, and by injuries provoked to the taking of the city of Rome,
and to the ruinating of the Western Empire. After this their invasion, we
find the nation distinguished, and more famously known by the names of
Ostrogothes, and Wisigothes. Of both which severally.

THE OSTRO-GOTHES. Ostrogothi Claudiani Poetae in Eutropium l. 2. etc.
Ostrogothae Iornandis de Rebus Geticis. forsan Austrogothi Trebellij Pollionis
de Divo Claudio.

THE v. Claudiani in Eutropium l. 2. Trebellii Pollionis Divum Claudium.
Eutropii Romans hist. l. 12. sive Pauli Diaconi hist. Romans l. 2. Eutropio
attributum. Iornandem de Rebus Geticis. eundem de Reg. and Temp. successione.
M. Aurelij Cassiodori Chronicon Imperat. Zenone, and Anastasio. Procopium de
Bello Gothico. Sigonii de Regno Italiae lib. 1. et eiusd. Hist Occidentalis
Imperii l. 16.
Ostrogothes, and Wisigothes signified in their language the Eastern, and
Western Goths; and argument of their Dutch descent. Mariana (yet whom I find
not backed by the authority of ancient authors) would have them to have been
thus named from their more Eastern, and Western situations in Scandia before
their coming to the Ister, and Roman confines. Paulus Diaconus in his
additions to Eutropius with better authority from such their positions in
Dacia, or beyond the Ister in the reign of the Emperor Valens; at what time
under their Captains Athalaricus, and Fridigernus, first dividing into two
plantations, or companies, those which with Fridigernus inhabited the more
Western Countries were from hence in their native language, named the
Wesegothi, or the Western Goths, the other under Athalaricus planted in the
East, the Ostrogothi. Trebellius Pollio notwithstanding long before those times
names the Austro-gothi in the reign of the Emperor Claudius the second. But
whether by these were understood the Eastern, or Ostrogothes, or rather, as
the Latin word more properly does signify, the Southern Goths we can not
determine. Ammianus Marcellinus in his 31 book, and reign of the Emperor
Valens, and Gratianus makes often mention of Fritigernus, and the Goths, but
in whom we find no where the distinctions of Ostro-gothes, and Wisigothes. In
Ablavius in Iornandes we hear of the Wesegothae, and Ostrogothae, under their
king Ostrogotha, inhabiting then in S^ythia upon the shore of the sea Euxinus.
But whose narration we have before accounted as fabulous. That the Goths had
these distinctions given them before their descent into the Western Roman
Provinces it is manifest out of the 2d book in Eutropium of the Poet Claudian,
living in the time of the Emperor Honorius, where he mentions the
Ostro-gothi, when as yet only these were in the East. The just time and place
in the East where these names begun is uncertain. They grew more famous after
the plantation of the nation in the Provinces of the Western Roman Empire; the
Italian Goths being distinguished in the histories of those times by the name
of Ostrogothes, and those of Spain, or Gaul by the name of Wisigothes. The
Ostrogothes then (to speak more certainly) were a remainder of the Goths in
the East, after the departure of Alaricus, and Rhadagaisus toward Italy,
Gaul, and the West. In the reign of the Emperor Valentinian the third, these
accompanied Atilas, and the Huns, invading the Western Roman Provinces,
partakers of their overthrow in the plains of Chaalon, given by the valiant
Aetius, the Wisigothes, French, and other barbarous confederates. Shortly after
this in the reign of Marcianus they returned again to their wonted pay, and
service of the Romans, by the leave of this Emperor seating themselves in
Pannonia. In the reign of the Emperor Zeno, threatening war against the
Grecians, by the policy, and persuasion hereof they turned upon the Heruli,
then possessing Italy, the Western Empire being at that time trodden underfoot
by barbarous nations, whom after sundry battles, having slain their king
Odoacer they finally vanquished, inhabiting, and taking up their left rooms,
and extending their conquests there over Italy, Rome, Illyricum, Dalmatia,
Sicily, and the neighboring Isles, together with the part of Gaul Narbonensis,
contained betwixt the Alps, and the river Rhosne, (now called Provence)
usurped upon the Wisigothes. By Amalasiunta, daughter to Theodoricus, then
Governor of the kingdom for her young son Athanaricus, fearing a tempest of
war from the Grecians, (to make their better peace with the potent French
Nation) their part of Gaul Narbonensis was surrendered to Theodebert, the
French king of Mets, or Austrusia. By Justinian the first, Roman Emperor of
the East, after a long and bloody war, lasting the reigns of six of their
kings, and managed on the Emperors side by the famous captains Belisarius,
and Narses, they were at length subdued, and their name, and memory here, as in
all other parts of the world utterly extinguished; making room for the
Longobards through the anger, and discontent of Narses, shortly after called
into Italy, and succeeding in their void places. Their Religion was
Arrianisme, corrupted by the Emperor Valens. Their kings (whereof we find
more distinct mention) were Athalaricus before mentioned, living in the reign
of the Emperor Valens; under whom, after Paulus Diaconus, the name of the
Ostro-gothes first began. Theodomirus in the reign of the Emperor Leo, at
what time these yet were in the East, and before their last descent into Italy.
Theodoricus in the reigns of the two Emperors Zeno, and Anastasius, under
whom they conquered the Heruli, and Italy. Athanaricus, son to Amalasiunta,
daughter to Theodoricus. During the wars with the Emperor Justinian the
first Theodatus son to Amalafreda, sister to Theodoricus. Vitigis.
Vldebaldus. Ardaricus. Totilas. Teya, their last king. Their whole reign in
Italy after Sigonius lasted 70 years.

THE VVISI-GOTHES, Wisigothi Isidori Chronic. Gothorum. etc. Vesegothi Pauli
Diaconi, seu Eut^opij Hist. Rom l. 12. Wesegothae Iornandis de Rebus Geticis.

ABlavius v Iotnandem de Rebus Geticis. Eutropij, seu P. Diaconi Hist. Romans l.
12. Isidori H. spalensis Chronic. Gothorum. P. Orosij Hist. l. 7. c. 28, et 29.
M. ^urelij Casiod. Chronic^n Imper Honoric, et Theodosio. Roderici Toletani de
Rebus Hisp. l 2, et 3. Joan. Maria. de Rebus Hispan*
in Iornandes (as has been related) fabulously makes mention of the
Wesegothae in the time of Ostrogotha, king of the Ostrogothae, residing then in
Scythia near unto the Sea Euxinus, and lying upon the West of the Ostrogothes.
Paulus Diaconus in his additions to Eutropius otherwise begins their name
from the reign of the Emperor Valens, and their king Fridigernus; concerning
whom see the Ostrogothes. Isidore continues their History only from their
king Athanaricus, who preceded Alaricus in the kingdom. Under their king
Alaricus in the reign of Honorius, Emperor of the West, they first descended
into Italy, taking, and sacking the city of Rome. Under Athaulfus, who
succeeded to Alaricus, marrying unto Galla Placidia, sister to Honorius,
entering into league, and confederacy with the Romans, and leaving Italy, they
had Gaul Narbonensis given unto them to inhabit in, with the part of Spain
Tarraconensis, where now is Catalonia, with condition to keep them for the
Roman Empire, and to serve under the pay hereof. Under Walia, subduing the
Alans in Spain, for a reward of their service (for the countries recovered by
them, were by their league herewith to return unto the Romans) they had given
unto them the part of Aquitania, which is extended betwixt the river Garonne,
and the Pyrenaean mountains, added unto their other possessions in Gaul.
Under Theodoric, the victorious conqueror of Rec^iarius, and the Suevians,
with the good leave of the Romans they joined Bae^ica to their Spanish
dominions, won from that nation. Under Eurycus breaking their faith, and league
with the Romans, they recovered from them whatsoever these held in Spain.
Under the same king they also took from the Romans the countries of the
Rutheni, Cadurci, and Auverni with other parts in Gaul, enlarging their
conquests in that province unto the river of Loire; all which notwithstanding,
with their whole possessions there, they shortly after lost to the French, and
Ostrogothes in the next reigns of Alaric the second, and Amalaric, the part of
Narbonensis only excepted, where now is Languedoc. By Leutigildis they subdued
the Suevians, and took in the country of Calaecia, attayning by this means
to a perfect Monarchy of the whole Spain, which with the part of Gaul
Narbonensis, before spoken of, together with Hispania Tingitana in Afrique they
kept entire under their subjection until their overthrow, and extirpation
under their last king Rodericus. In the year 714, and the reign of this
prince the nation hereof, and state took end, overwhelmed by a deluge of the
Moors, after their continuance here for about the space of 300 years. Their
religion until toward the period of their state was Arrianisme, corrupted by
Gothi antea per legatos supplices poposcerunt, vt illis Episcopi, a quibus
Christianae fidei regulam discerent, mitt^rentur. Valens Imperat. exitiabili
pravitare detentus, doctores Arriani dogmatis his misit. Gothi primae fidei
rudimenta, quod acceperunt, tenuere. P. Orosij Hist. l. 7. c. 19.
Valens, Emperor of the East. Under their king Reccaredus in the year 586,
and the third Council of Toledo they received the Orthodox, and Catholic
faith. Their government was Monarchical. Their manner hereof was elective.
Their kings were Fridigernus, in the reign of the Emperor Valens, the first
king of the Wisigothes after Paulus Diaconus. Athanaricus in the time of the
Emperors Gratian, and Valentinian the second. With this prince Isidore
begins the Catalogue of the West-gothish Monarchs. Hitherto the Wisigothes
kept in the East. Alaricus in the reign of the Emperor Honorius, under whom
they first descended into the West, and sacked Rome. Athaulphus, kinsman to
Alaricus, under whom in the year 415 they first planted in Gaul, and Spain.
Sigericus. Walia, by whom (the Alans in Spain being subdued) Aquitania in
Gaul was added to the dominion hereof. Theodoredus, slain against Atilas, and
the Huns in that memorable battaill, fought in the plains of Chaalon in Gaul.
Turismundus, son to Theodoredus. Theodoricus, brother to Turismundus, by whom
Baetica in Spain was added. Euricus by whom the rest of Spain (Calaecia
excepted) together with the Rutheni, Cadurci, Auverni, and other parts of Gaul
unto the river of the Loire. Alaricus the second, son to Euricus, under whom
these lost all their conquests in Gaul (part only of Narbonensis excepted,)
won from them by Clovys the great, the first Christian king of the French.
Gesaleicus. Amalaricus, son to Alaricus the second. In the minority hereof
Theodoricus king of the Ostrogothes, protector then of the kingdom, by the
advantage hereof got seized of the part of Narbonensis, lying next unto his
dominions of Italy, now called Provence; surrendered afterward by his daughter
Amalasiunta unto Theodebert, French king of Mentz. Theudis an Ostro-goth,
formerly governor of the kingdom for Theodoricus king of the Ostro-gothes in
the minority of Amalaricus, elected king of the Wisi-gothes. Theudeselus,
descended from the Ostro-gothes, and nephew to king Totilas. Agila.
Athanagildus. In the reign hereof the Spanish Suevians under their king
Theodomirus received again their left Catholic religion. Liuva. Leutigildus,
brother to Liuva, under whom, Andeca, and the Suevians being subdued, the whole
Spain was united into the Gothish Monarchy. Reccaredus, son to Leutigildus. In
the reign hereof these changed their Arrian heresy for the Catholic faith,
which ever after with great zeal, and constancy they maintained. Liuva the
second, son to Reccaredus. Witericus. Gundemarus. Sigebutus. Reccaredus the
second, son to Sigebutus. Suinthila. Sigenandus. Chintila. Tulga. Flavius
Chindasvinthus. Reccesvinthus, son to Chindasvinthus. Wamba. Flavius Ervigius.
Egica. Witiza, son to Egica. Rodericus, the last king of the Wisigothes, slain
with the whole flower, and strength of the nation in the year 714 in that
great battaill at Xeres de la Frontera by Tarif, and the Infidels; after whom
Christianity, and the nation hereof being extinguished, succeeded the faithles
Moors, whose turn is next to come upon the stage.

THE DOMINION AND SVCCESSION OF THE MOORS. Maurusij Stra. Geogra. lib. 2.
Maurusii, et Mauri eiusdem Geogr. lib. 17. Mauri Luc. Flori Hist. Romans l. 4. c.
2. etc. Sarraceni Am. Marcellin^. his. l. 14. Imper. Gallo, et Constantio, et
l. 25. Imp. Ioviano. Chron. Cassinensis lib. 1. c. 23. Aimonij de Gestis
Francorum. l. 4. c. 22. et 52. etc. Agareni, and Sarraceni Aimonij li. 4. c.
22. Agareni Chronic. Cassinensis lib. 1. c. 28.

THese v. Cl. Ptolo. Geog. l. 4. c. 1 and 2. Pet. Bertii in Ptol. Geog. l 4. c.
1. and 2. Interp. Ioannem Marianam de Rebus Hispaniae. hist. d' Espaigne par
Loys de Mayerne.
(as the Latin word does signify) more properly were the inhabitants of
Mauritania in Afrique, extended after Ptolemy from the Western Ocean along the
Straights of Hercules, and the Seas Ibericum, and Sardo^m, parts of the
Mediterranean, unto the river Ampsaga upon the East, the bounds thereof, and of
the lesser, or proper Afrique; divided by the river Malva into the Provinces
Tingitana, and Casariensis, containing together at this day after Birtius the
kingdoms of Morocco, Fez, and Tremisen. Since the supersititon of the
Mahumetanes this general name has been derived over almost the whole
Seacoast of Afrique, lying quart of Europe, and reaching from the Sea
Atlantique, and Straights of Gibraltar unto the Red Sea, and Egypt; subject
now, as was the whole known South, and East, unto the great Miramamoline, or
Caliph of the Saracens, resident at Damascus in Asia, the Empire hereof at that
time being whole, and vndevided. The occasion of their first coming, and
invasion hereof (next unto the sins of the nation) was the treason of Iulianus,
Governor now of Tingitana for Rodericus; discontented with the promotion
hereof unto the kingdom, being of the faction of the sons of Witiza, and then
newly enraged with the ravishment of his daughter Cava by the lustful king
Rodericus. Vlit was then Miramamoline. His governor for Afrique was Muza,
posted unto by Iulianus, and with fair hopes invited to the conquest of the
Goths, and Spain. The Miramamoline made acquainted, Tarif is sent from Muza.
In the year 714 at the river Guadalethe near unto the town of Xeres dela
Frontera the powers of Spain, and Afrique fatally join, aided by the traitor
Iulianus, and the faction of the sons of Witiza. Rodericus with great slaughter
of his people is overthrown, and slain, the name of the Goths extinguished,
and the whole Spain within three years space conquered, and overrun: the
hilly parts of Asturia, and Biscaia with those of the Pyrenes almost only
excepted, at whose mountains, the Rendez-vous of the distressed, and flying
Christians, the great good fortune of the Moors suddenly stops, and
recoyles; their Empire here in a manner no sooner beginning, then declining,
sundry honorable Christian kingdoms, and estates here arising, as did
afterward in other parts of Spain by the means, and thorough the emulation
hereof (those of Leon, Castille, Navarre, Aragon, Portugal, and Barcelona,) by
the favor of God, the valor of the Nation, the charitable aid of
neighboring Christians, and thorough the discord, and disunion of the Infidels
gathering continual ground hereupon, and at length utterly expelling, and
driving them out. After continual loppings of the divided, and long
languishing estate hereof, and their continuance, and abode here for the space
of 778 years, in the year 1492 their command, and government in Spain took
end; the kingdom of Granado, (all other parts, which they held, having long
before been recovered) under Mahomet Boabdelin, their last king, being taken
in by Ferdinand the fifth, and Elizabeth kings of Castille, and Aragon, and such
as would not ^e^ege their superstition, forced over into Afrique. Of late
years, presently upon the first wars ended with the Netherlanders, certain
remainders of this offspring to the number of many thousand families,
inhabiting within the countries of Granado, and Valentia, though Christians (at
least in show,) and subject unto the kings of Spain, were by the jealousy of
Philip the third then reigning, utterly expulsed, and their whole race, and
name here by this means quite rooted out. The dominion hereof in Spain was
first under the great Miramamolines of the Saracens, before mentioned, residing
in Asia, and commanding here by their Lieftenants. In the year 759,
revoulting from under the government of the Miramamolines, in the person of
Abderabmen, descended from their Prophet Mahomet, they erected here a free
Monarchy, loose from all foreign subjection, in which state, and in the
posterity hereof they continued for the space of 247 years. Occasioned
thorough the slough, and pusillanimity of Hissemus the second, the last Monarch
of the race of Abderrahmen, about the year 1006 deposed by Mahomad Almohadius,
and thorough the civil wars, and dissentions, which ensued afterward for
the soveraignety, they broke into the many petty kingdoms of Cordova, Sevilla,
Toledo, and Saragoca, with others, the governors of each chief city then
taking upon them the name, and authority of Kings. Iuzephus Telephinus,
Miramamoline of Morocco of the house of the Almoravides, and the ambition of
the king of Cordova, aiming by the aid hereof at the conquest of the rest,
about the year 1091 put an end to this first devision; subduing those petty
kings, and reducing in a manner the whole, which was yet left unconquered by the
Christians, under his sole government, reuniting them with the African Moors.
The family of the Almoravides being overthrown, and destroyed by Abdelmon, and
the Almohades (a new sect of the African Moors) in the year 1150 they again
changed their lords, and superstition, and became subject hereunto. Mahomad,
surnamed the Green, Miramamoline of Morocco of the sect of the Almohades,
overcome by the Christians in a great battaill at the mountains of Sierra
Morena, dispairing afterward here of any good success, (the estate of the
Spanish Moors then being very small, and irrecoverablely declining) departing
into Afrique, and leaving Spain to fortune, in the years 1214, and 1228 they
again divided into the lesser kingdoms of Cordova, Sevilla, Valentia, and
Murcia; for the rest of Spain was before this time wholly cleared of them.
Those four lesser kingdoms, with the kingdom of the Islands, not long after
being destroyed, and taken in by Ferdinand the third, king of Castille, and
James the first, king of Aragon, there remained unto them only the city of
Granado, with the country about it, (part formerly of the kingdom of Cordova,)
unto which king Alhamar (Cordova being surprised by Ferdinand) removing his
royal seat, in the year 1239 began the famous kingdom of Granado; thorough
the advantage, and strength of the mountainous situation thereof, and the
contempt, neglect, and discord of the Christians continuing for the space of
253 years afterward, until in the year 1492 after ten years war it was
likewise conquered, and recovered by Ferdinand the fifth, king of Castille, and
Arragon. The Caliphs, or Miramamolines of the Saracens commanding here,
together with their Lieftenants follow. Vlit of the house of Humeia, descended
from Zeineb, one of the daughters of their Prophet Mahomet, Monarch of the
whole Nation of the Saracens, and superstition of the Mahumetans, under whom
Spain was first conquered by the Moors about the year of the Incarnation of
Jesus Christ 714, and the 97 of the impostour Mahomet, whose Deputies here were
successively Muza, and Abdalasisius, son to Muza. Their Empire here during the
reign of this Miramamoline, extended over the whole Spain, the parts of
Biscaia, Asturia, and Guipuscoa excepted. Zuleiman, brother to Vlit, whose
Lieftenant here was Alahor. Homar, and Izit, joint Miramamolines, sons to Vlit.
Izit, sole Miramamoline, Homar being deceased, whose Lieftenants were Zama,
slain in battle before Toulouse in France, Aza, Ambiza, Odra, and Iahea.
Iscamus, brother to Izit, whose Spanish governors were Oddifa, Himenus,
Autuma, Alhuytanus, Mahomad, Abderrahmen, Abdelmelic, and Aucupa. It was the
Abderrahmen, here mentioned, Lieftenant of the Province for the Miramamoline
Iscamus, whom we read in the French histories ransacking, and spoiling France
in the regency of Charles Martel with a numberles multitude of these Moors; in
the year 734 slain by Martell, and the French, in a great and memorable
battle fought near unto the city of Tours with no fewer then 375000 of the
Army, and crew attending him. Hitherto likewise we find the Infidels to have
been possessed of the part of Gaul Narbonensis, now called Languedoc, being a
part of their Gothish conquests, recovered for the most part from them with the
cities of Avignon, and Narbonne by the valiant Martell, during the reign of
this Miramamoline. Alulit, son to Izit, whose Lieftenants were Abulcatar, and
Toba. Ibrahemus, brother to Izit. He was slain by Maroanus. Maroanus, the last
Miramamoline of the Saracens of the house of Humeia, the murderer of
Ibrahemus, whose quarrels gave first encouragement, and occasion to the
usurpation of the house of Alaveci. He was slain by Abdalla. His Lieftenants
here were Toba, and Iuzephus. Abdalla of the house of Alaveci, descended from
Fatima the eldest daughter of their Prophet Mahomet, and sister of Zeineb
beforementioned, Miramamoline of the Saracens, having slain Maroanus, and the
house of Humeia put down, and deposed. His Spanish Governor was Iuzephus,
slain by Abderahmen. In the reign of this Prince, Abderahmen, descended from
the deposed, and slaughtered house of Humeia, shunning the cruelty hereof, and
flying into Spain for succor, in the year 759 usurped the dominion of the
Spanish Moors, well affected to the house of Humeia, free for a long time
after from the subjection of the great Miramamolines. After Abderrahmen (the
Miramamolines excluded) succeeded in the kingdom of the Spanish Moors,
Hissemus the first, son to Abderrahmen. Alhaca the first, son to Hissemus the
first. Abderrahmen the second, son to Hissemus the first, overthrown in a
memorable battle fought at Clavigio in the year 846 by Ramir the first, king
of Leon. Mahomad, son to Abderrhamen the second. Almund^r, son to Mahomad.
Abdalla, brother to Almundar, and son to Mahomad. Abderrahmen the third, son to
Mahomad, son to Abdalla* Alhaca the second, son to Abderrahmen the third.
Hissemus the second, son to Alhaca the second, about the year 1006 deposed by
Mahomad Almohadius, encouraged through his sloth, neglecting the affairs of
the kingdom, and governing altogether by deputies; after sundry successions of
tyrants restored; and by the like inconstancy in the year 1010 again thrust
out, and forced to a private fortune by his factious subjects. Occasioned
thorough these disorders, the Spanish Moors, hitherto in a manner still
entire, and under one, became divided into sundry petty kingdoms of Cordova,
Sivilla, and Toledo, with others; overthrown not long after by Iuzephus
Telephinus, Miramamoline of Morocco, and united with the Moors of Afrique. The
dominion of the Moors at this time extended Northwards unto the river of
Duero; the bounds thereof, and of the Christians inhabiting Castille. Iuzephus
Telephinus, the second Miramamoline of Morocco in Afrique of the house of the
Almoravides, (succeeding there unto the family of Alaveci, supplanted and
destroyed by them) drawn in by the ambition of the king of Cordova, and about
the year 1091 ouer-throwing those petty kingdoms, and joining them to his
dominions of Africa; the kingdom of Toledo excepted, taken in before this time
by Alfonsus the sixth king of Castile, and Leon. Hali, Miramamoline of Morocco,
son to Iuzephus Telephinus. Albo-halis, Miramamoline of Morocco, son to Hali,
thought by some to have been the learned Avicenna, whose works are now
extant, compiled at his commandment by certain of the best Arabian Doctors
of those times, and thus named from him. In the reign hereof Almohadi, a
religious Moore, Doctor of the Mahumetane Law, to gain a faction for
Abdelmon, (whom, although descended of base parentage, Aben-Thumert, an
Astrologian, had by his art foretold should be Miramamoline, or king) began to
broach certain new, and unheard of doctrines about their Religion, and the
interpretation of their Alcoran amongst the African Moors, superstitiously
still addicted to novelties, and easily changing; the effect whereof was the
siding of the greatest part of this inconstant Nation unto his opinions, named
from hence the Almohades, and by the advantage hereof the setting up of
Abdelmon, and the disthroning of Albo-halis, and the house of the Almoravides,
overcome in battle, and slain by Abdelmon. Abdelmon, Miramamoline of
Morocco, of the new sect of the Almohades, succeeding in the year 1150.
Aben-Iacob, Miramamoline of Morocco, son to Abdelmon. Aben-Iuzeph, Miramamoline
of Morocco, brother to Aben-Iacob. Mahomad, surnamed the Green, Miramamoline
of Morocco, brother to Aben-Iacob, and Aben-Iuzeph. In the reign hereof
(thorough his great ouer-throw at the battle of Sierra Morena dishartned for
attempting any more upon this Province, and departing into Afrique) the nation
(as has been related) broke again into many petty kingdoms of small
strength, and of less continuance; Zeit Aben-Zeit, brother to this Mahomad, in
the year 1214 usurping in Valentia, and the neighboring country; Mahomad,
nephew hereunto at the same time in Cordova; and Abullalis in Siuillia; and
afterward in the year 1228 Aben-hutus in Murcia. The kingdom of Valentia,
not long after being subdued by James the first king of Aragon, as were about
the same time those of Sivillia, and Murcia, with the city of Cordoua by
Ferdinand the third, king of Castille; in the year 1239 Mahomet Aben-Alhamar,
king of Cordoua, removing his royal seat to the city of Granado, began the
kingdom thus named, being formerly part of the kingdom of Cordoua, the only
country now held by the Infidells, the rest being conquered, whose princes
follow. Mahomet Aben-Alhamar, before mentioned, the founder of the kingdom of
Granado in the year 1239. Mahomet Myr Almus, king of Granado, son to Mahomet
Aben-Alhamar. Mahomet Aben-Alhamar Aben-Azar, son to Mahomet Myr Almus. He was
deposed by Mahomet Azar Aben Levin. Mahomet Azar Aben-Levin, brother to Mahomet
Aben-Alhamar Aben-Azar, and son to Mahomet Myr Almus, deposed by Ismael, son to
Farrachen, gouernonr of Malaga. Ismael, son to Farrachen aforesaid. Mahomet,
son to Ismael. He was murdered by his subjects. Joseph Aben Amet, brother to
Mahomet, and son to Ismael, slain by Mahomet Lagus. Mahomet Lagus, uncle to
Joseph Aben-Amet, and brother to king Ismael, deposed by Mahomet Aben-Alhamar.
Mahomet Aben-Alhamar, king of Granado. He was again thrust out by Mahomet
Lagus, and afterward inhumanely put to death by Peter king of Castille, unto
whom he had fled for succor. Mahomet Lagus, king of Granado, restored.
Mahomet, surnamed Guadix, son to Mahomet Lagus. Joseph, son to Mahomet Guadix.
Mahomet Aben-Balva, younger son to Joseph. Joseph, elder brother to Mahomet
Aben-Balva, and son to Joseph. Mahomet Aben-Azar, son to Joseph, driven out by
Mahomet, surnamed the Little. Mahomet, surnamed the Little, overthrown, and
taken prisoner by Mahomet Aben-Azar. Mahomet Aben-Azar, restored the second
time. He was again deposed by Joseph Aben-Almao. Joseph Aben-Almao. Mahomet
Aben-Azar, restored, and deposed the third time by Mahomet Aben-Ozmen. Mahomet
Aben-Ozmen, deposed by Ismael. Ismael. Muley Albohacen, son to Ismael, driven
out by his son Mahomet Boabdelin. During the reign hereof begun the wars of
the Christians under Ferdinand the fifth, and Isabel kings of Castille, and
Aragon, thorough the civil wars, and dissension hereof continuing for the
space of ten years with happy success, and ending with the utter expulsion of
the Infidels. Mahomet Boabdelin, son to Muley Albohacen, opposed during the
Christian wars by his father, afterward (he growing old, and forsaken by his
faction) by his uncle Muley Boabdelin son to Ismael, each one being
acknowledged kings by their parties; in the year 1492, Granado surrendered,
(Malaga, Guadix, Baca, Almcria, with other places, belonging to his uncle,
being before recovered) after ten years war, with the whole Mahumetane
superstition driven over into Afrique by Ferdinand the fifth, and Elizabeth
kings of Castille, and Aragon. During the usurpation of the Moors out of the
ruins (for the most part) of the vanquished Goths arose (as before) certain
honorable Christian kingdoms, and estates (of Leon, Castille, Navarra,
Aragon, Portugal, and Barcelona,) in continuance of time (the Infidels beaten
home) over-spreading this whole continent, whose original, increase, union,
and whole fortunes we are now to relate.

THE BEGINNING, PROGRESS, AND FORTVNES OF THE KINGDOM OF LEON.
THis Kingdom v. Joan. Mari. de Rebus Hisp. hist. d'Espaigne par Loys de
Mayerne.
was begun in Asturia in the person of Pelagius, descended from the ancient
Gothish Monarchs, in the year 716 by the distressed remnants of the
vanquished, and flying Christians, sheltering themselves in the mountains
hereof, about two years after their great overthrow given by the Moors at the
battaill near Xeres de la Frontera. It was first called the kingdom of
Asturia. After that the city of Leon was taken by Pelagius, it took the name
thereof. Some would have, after that the town of Oviedo was builded by king
Froila, that for certain descents it did bear the name of that city; wherein
I strive not much, the name of Leon at length prevayling. The parts of Spain,
which at the beginning it contained, were the mountainous parts of Asturia, now
only retayning the name hereof, together with part of Galitia. By the reign
of Ordonius the second, the kingdom became enlarged over all Galitia, Asturia,
and Leon, with the greatest part of Castillia la Veia, being divided from
Navarra by Monte D'oca; and from the Moors by the Mountains of Segovia, and
Avila. Castille revolting in the reign of king Froila the second, it became
stinted Southwards with the river Pisuerga, (the common bounds hereof, and of
that country;) comprehending only Galitia, Asturia, and Leon, the ancient
extent of the kingdom of Leon until its reunion with Castille. Upon the
decease of Veremundus the third without issue, slain in battaill by Ferdinand
the first, king of Castille, it became seized upon by that prince in right of
his wife Sanctia, sister to Veremundus; added to his dominions, and family. In
the house of this Ferdinand it became twice again severed from Castille; in
Alfonsus son hereof; and in Ferdinand the second for some descents. In
Ferdinand the third, son to Alfonsus the ninth, and Berengaria sister to Henry
the first king of Castille, the two kingdoms were lastly united; incorporated
into one entire state, known by the name of the kingdom of Castille, and
Leon. The kingdom was hereditary, and where women for defect of heirs male
might succeed. The princes until their last reunion with Castille were
Pelagius, descended of the Gothish Monarchs, the first founder (as before we
have related) of the kingdom, created king in Asturia in the year 716.
Favila, son to Pelagius. He died without issue. Alfonsus the first, surnamed
the Catholic, son in law to Pelagius. Froila the first, son to Alfonsus
the first, slain by the treason of his brother Aurelius. Aurelius, brother to
Froila the first. He deceased without heirs. Silo, and his wife Adosinda,
sister to Aurelius. Alfonsus the second, surnamed the Chaste, son to Froila the
first, deposed by Mauregate thorough the power, and aid of Abderahmen the
first, king of the Spanish Moors. Veremundus the first, surnamed Deacon, son
to Bimaranus, son, or brother to Froila the first. He admitted for companion in
the kingdom Alfonsus the second, deprived by Mauregate, living then exiled in
Biscaia. Alfonsus the second, sole king of Leon, Veremundus deceasing. Ramir
the first, son to Veremundus the first. He overthrew the Moors in a great
battaill at Clavigio under their king Abderahmen the second, in the year 846.
Ordonius the first, son to Ramir the first. Alfonsus the third, son to Ordonius
the first. Garsias the first, son to Alfonsus the third. His younger brother
Ordonius was prince of Galitia; the kingdom then being for a time divided. He
dyed without issue. Ordonius, prince of Galitia, brother to Garcias the first;
after the decease hereof the second of the name king of Leon. In this princes
time the kingdom of Leon contained all Asturia, Leon, Galitia, and the
greatest part of Castillia la Veia, bounded upon the East, and South by Monte
D'oca, and the Mountains of Segovia, and Avila from Navarra, and the Moors;
and upon the North, and West extending unto the Ocean. He cruelly murdered all
the Earls of Castille; the occasion of the revolt not long after of that
country. Froila the second, brother to Ordonius the second. Formerly
exasperated with the murder of their Earls by Ordonius the second, and now
encouraged by the slough, and many vices of this prince in the year 898, and
reign hereof the Castillians first revolted from under the government of the
kings of Leon, and became a free estate. Alfonsus the fourth, surnamed the
Monk, son to Ordonius the second; injuriously prevented by king Froila the
second. Lazy, and unfit to govern, he voluntarily resigned the kingdom to
Ramir, his younger brother, and turned Religious. Ramir the second, son to
Ordonius the second, and brother to Alfonsus the fourth. Ordonius the third,
son to Ramir the second. Sanctius, surnamed the Gross, brother to Ordonius the
second Ramir the third, son to Sanctius the Gross. Veremundus the second, son
to Ordonius the third. Alfonsus the fifth, son to Veremundus the second.
Veremundus the third, son to Alfonsus the fifth; slain in battaill by Ferdinand
the first king of Castille. Ferdinand the first king of Castille, younger son to
Sanctius, surnamed the Great, king of Navarra, after the decease of Veremundus
the third without issue succeeding in the kingdom of Leon in right of his wife
Sanctia, sister to Veremundus. He deceased in the year 1065. Alfonsus the
sixth, younger son to Ferdinand the first. His elder brother Sanctius inherited
the kingdom of Castille, the two kingdoms being now again divided. Driven
out by his brother Sanctius, king of Castille, he lived for a time exiled
amongst the Moors of Toledo. After the decease of his brother without heirs,
he enjoyed both kingdoms of Castille, and Leon, whereunto he added that of
Toledo; since incorporated with the kingdom of Castille, and in regard thereof
now called Castillia la Nueva, injuriously taken from his late hosts the
Moors thereof, with whom not long before during his exile he had been
friendly entertained. In the reign, and by the favor, and advancement hereof
in the person of Henry of Lorraine, a Frenchman, began the Earldom of
Portugal; made afterward a kingdom by Alfonsus son to Henry. He deceased in
the year 1109 Vrraca, daughter to Alfonsus the sixth, succeeding in both
kingdoms. Alfonsus the seventh, son to Vrraca, the mother resigning. He was
likewise king of both. Ferdinand the second younger son to Alfonsus the
seventh. His elder brother Sanctius the second had for his share the kingdom
of Castille. Alfonsus the ninth, king of Leon, son to Ferdinand the second. He
married unto Berengaria, sister to Henry the first, king of Castille. Ferdinand
the third, son to Alfonsus the ninth, king of Leon, and Berengaria, sister to
Henry the first, king of Castille; in whom those two kingdoms of Castille, and
Leon were lastly united, never afterward disjoined.

THE KINGDOM OF CASTILLE.
THe estate, v. Joan. Mari. de Rebus* Hisp. hist. d'Espaigne par Loys de
Mayerne.
and name was first occasioned, and begun amongst the Vaccaei by certain
honorable gentlemen of the kingdom of Leon, living under the command, and
authority of the princes hereof, and by the name, and title of Earls defending
then, and enlarging those the Marches of that kingdom against the neighboring
Infidel Moors; from the great number of Castles, and fortresses their
erected, as usually happens in all frontire places, called afterward by the
name of Castille. What were the names of those first Earls, at what time, and
by whom they were instituted; in what parts they severally commanded (for many
lived together;) or in what manner: whether as free princes under the fief and
homage of the kings of Leon, or rather only as their deputies, or prefects, we
find not. By the time of Ordonius the second this name, and account was
extended over the whole country of the Vaccaei, containing now the greatest
part of old Castille, divided then from the Moors by the Mountains of
Segovia, and Avila. In the reign of Froila the second, incensed with the late
murder of the Earls hereof by Ordoninus the second, the country first shoke
off the yoke of Leon, and became a free government; commanded first by
Judges, afterward by Earls. By Sanctius the Great, king of Navarra, in the
person of his younger son Ferdinand the first it was erected into a kingdom.
King Ferdinand the first added unto the account, and name of Castille part of
the country of Navarra, lying beyond Monte D'oca. He also united in the right
of the princes hereof the kingdom of Leon; afterward for some time again
divided therefrom. Alfonsus the sixth added the kingdom of Toledo, now
Castillia la Nueva. John the first the countries of Biscaia, and Guipuscoa.
Ferdinand the third Andaluzia, and Murcia. Ferdinand the fifth of late years,
and in the memory of our ancestors Navarra, and Granado; to omit sundry other
petty enlargements. By so many additions the kingdom of Castile together with
Leon, (incorporated with it) extends at this day over thirteen great
Provinces of Galitia, Asturia, Biscaia, Olava, Guipuscoa, Leon, Castillia la
Veia, Castillia la Nueva, Murcia, Andaluzia, Extremadura, Granado, and Navarra,
containing now some two third parts of the Continent of Spain, the largest,
and the most noble of the three kingdoms hereof. The first Earls under the
subjection of the kings of Leon, whereof we find any mention, (for the
greatest part of them are not remembered) were Roderique living in the time of
Alfonsus the second, surnamed the Chaste. James surnamed Porcellus, son to
Roderique, in the reign of Alfonsus the third. Nunnius Ferdinandus, with the
rest of the Earls, slain by King Ordonius the second. After the murder of
the first Earls, and the revolt of the country from under the government of
Leon, succeeded Nunnius Rasura, and Lainus Calvus chosen by the people, and
commanding by the name of Judges; the former whereof governed in civil
affairs, the other in matters military. Consalvus Nunnius, son to Nunnius
Rasura, succeeding in the same title, and authority of Judge. He married unto
Semena, daughter to Nunnius Ferdinandus, murdered by Ordonius the second,
transmitting by that means unto his house the right of the ancient Earls of
Castile. Ferdinandus Consalvus, son to Consalvus Nunnius, and Semena. He
reassumed the title of Earl of Castille, continued in his successions unto
Sanctius the Great, King of Navarra. Upon composition made with Sanctius
surnamed the Gross, in the year 965 he freed the estate hereof from all right
and acknowledgement of the Kings of Leon. Garcias Ferdinandus, Earl of
Castille, son to Ferdinandus Consalvus. Sanctius, son to Garcias
Ferdinandus. Garcias, son to Sanctius, slain by treason, young, and without
issue. Sanctius, surnamed the Great, king of Navarra, and Earl of Aragon, and
in right of his wife Elvira, elder sister to Garcias, Earl of Castile, the
last Earl. He made Castile a kingdom, given by him with this title unto
Ferdinand, his second son. Ferdinand, younger son to Sanctius the Great, king of
Navarra, the first king of Castile. The bounds hereof in the time of this
Prince were the river Pisverga from the kingdom of Leon; Monte D'Oca from
Navarra; and the mountains of Segovia, and Avila from the kingdom of Toledo,
and the Moors. He further extended those limits beyond Monte D'Oca over part
of Navarra, won from his elder brother Garcias, king of Navarra, and since
incorporated into the name of Castile. He also annexed to his house the
kingdom of Leon; Veremundus the third, king hereof, being slain by him in
battle sans issue, brother to his wife Sanctia. Sanctius the first, king of
Castile, eldest son to Ferdinand the first. His younger brother Alfonsus
succeeded in the kingdom of Leon, driven out by Sanctius amongst the Moors of
Toledo. He deceased without issue, slain before Zamora. Alfonsus the sixth,
king of Leon, brother to Sanctius the first, king of Castile; after the decease
hereof returning from banishment out of the country of the Moors, and
inheriting both kingdoms. He added hereunto the city, and kingdom of Toledo,
afterward named Castilia la Nueva; unkindly taken from his late hoasts the
Moors, and Hyaia their last king. Vrraca, daughter to Alfonsus the sixth,
succeeding in both kingdoms. Alfonsus the seventh, son to Vrraca; (she
resigning) succeeding likewise in both. Sanctius the second, king of Castile,
eldest son to Alfonsus the seventh. His younger brother Ferdinand the second
inherited Leon; the two kingdoms being the third time divided. Alfonsus the
eight, son to Sanctius the second, whose wife was Eleanor, daughter to Henry
the second, king of England. He took from Ramir the second, king of Navarra,
the towns of Logrogno, Nagera, and Calahora, and almost whatsoever else the
Navarrois held on that side of the river Ebro, which he added unto Castile, in
which name, and account they at this day continue. Henry the first, king of
Castile, son to Alfonsus the eight. He dyed without issue. Ferdinand the third,
son to Alfonsus the ninth, king of Leon, and of Berengaria, younger sister to
Henry the first deceased, in right from his mother king of Castile; Blanch,
elder sister to Berengaria, then wife to Jews, son to Philip the French King,
refused. His father deceasing, he succeeded likewise in the Kingdom of Leon.
After this last union, the two Kingdoms were never again severed,
incorporated into one entire state, known now by the name of Castille, and
Leon. He recovered from the Moors the countries of Andaluzia, and Murcia;
containing then the petty Kingdoms of Murcia, and Sivillia, with part of the
Kingdom of Cordova. In the reign hereof, and year 1239, began the famous
kingdom of Granado by Mahomet Aben-Alhamar, King of Cordova, upon the
surprisall of that city by Ferdinand, removing hither his royal seat.
Alfonsus the tenth, King of Castile, and Leon, son to Ferdinand the third. He
was that famous Astronomer, whose works are now extant with us; the framer of
the Tables of Alfonsus, named from him. The German Electours divided, he was
chosen by his faction Emperor of the Romans against Richard Earl of Cornwall,
brother to Henry the third, King of England, detained notwithstanding at home
during his whole reign with civil wars against his unnatural son Sanctius,
much more happy in the love of the Muses, then of his subjects. Sanctius the
third, king of Castile, and Leon, the rebellious son of Alfonsus the tenth.
Ferdinand the fourth, son to Sanctius the third. Alfonsus the eleauenth, son to
Ferdinand the fourth. Peter the first, son to Alfonsus the eleauenth. He was
driven out for his cruelty, and was restored again by Edward, named the Black
Prince, son to Edward the third, king of England. Destitute of the English
succors not long after he lost both his kingdom, and life; overcome, and
slain by his brother Henry. Henry the second, brother to Peter the first, and
natural son to Alfonsus the eleaventh. John the first, king of Castille, and
Leon, son to Henry the second; opposed by John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster,
pretending the right of Constance his wife, daughter to Peter the first. In
this prince by his marriage of D. Maria Diaz de Haro, daughter, and
inheretresse to Don Lopez Diaz de Haro, last prince of Biscaia, and Guipuscoa,
these seigneuries were annexed to the crown of Castille. Coming to
composition with John duke of Lancaster, he married his son Henry unto
Catherine daughter to the other, by agreement created upon the marriage prince
of Asturia, which title (occasioned from the English whose eldest sons are
named princes of Wales) has ever since bin continued in the heirs of
Castille, or Spain. Henry the third, son to John the first. He married unto
Catherine, daughter to John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. John the second, son
to Henry the third. Henry the fourth, son to John the second. He deceased
without heirs of his body. Elizabeth, queen of Castille, and Leon, sister to
Henry the fourth. She married unto Ferdinand the fifth, king of Aragon, and
Sicily. In the reign hereof the countries of Granado, and Navarra (the
French, and Moors being expulsed) became annexed to the house hereof, and
incorporated with Castille, and the whole Spain (the kingdom of Portugal
excepted) united under one Monarch. Naples likewise was then conquered from the
French, and the house of Ferdinand the bastard, and the rich newfound world
first discovered, and added to the dominion hereof. Philip the first, Archduke
of Austria, and Duke of Bungundie, son to the Emperor Maximilian the first,
and Mary Duchess of Burgundy; king of Castille, and Leon in right of his
wife Ioane, eldest daughter to Ferdinand the fifth, and Elizabeth kings of
Castille, and Aragon. Philip deceasing, and Ioane of Aragon his Queen in
regard of her frenzy, and indisposition being unfit to govern, Ferdinand the
fifth in the minority of Charles the fifth reassumed again the kingdom of
Castille. Charles the fifth, son to Philip the first, and Ioane of Aragon, after
the decease of his grandfathers (Maximilian the first, Emperor, and king
Ferdinand the fifth) elected Emperor of the Romans, and succeeding in the
kingdoms of Castille, and Leon, Aragon, Naples, Sicily, Jerusalem, and of the
Indyes, the Dukedomes of Austria, and Burgundy, and the dominions of the
low countries. He added unto these in Italy the great Dukedom of Milan after
the decease of Francis Sforcia without heirs, according to the composition
made betwixt them; and in the Netherlands the Provinces of Vtreicht, Over-Ysel,
Zutphen, and Gelderland. Wearyed with long sickness, and the burden of so great
an Empire, he voluntarily surrendered all his estates unto his younger brother
Ferdinand, and his son Philip the second; cloistering himself up in the
monastery of St Iustus in Estremadura, where in a private fortune he dyed.
Philip the second, son unto the Emperor Charles the fifth, lord of all the
kingdoms, and possessions belonging to the house of Burgundy, and Spain. The
German Empire, and the dominions of Austria were left unto his uncle Ferdinand.
Sebastian, king of Portugal, being slain in Afrique by the Moors at the
battle of Alcacar, and his uncle, Cardinal Henry, not long after surviuing,
by the great captain Don Ferdin^d Alvares de Toledo in the year 1580 he
conquered that kingdom, the first Monarch of Spain since king Rodericus, and
the Goths. To give a check unto this sudden, and overgreat prosperity, the
Low Countries in his time revolted; eight of whose richest provinces, Holland,
Zealand, Vtreicht, Over-Ysel, Gelderland, Zutphen, West-Freisland, and
Groninghen have now by arms freed themselves from the Spanish yoke, and
subjection. Philip the Third, son to Philip the second, succeeding in the
dominions, and conquests of Spain. The Netherlands were assigned by his father
unto his sister Isabella, married unto Albert, Archduke of Austria. Philip the
fourth, son to Philip the third, now king of Castille, and Spain, and of the
many provinces subject to the great Empire hereof.

THE KINGDOM OF NAVARRA.
THe v. Ioannem Marianam de rebus Hisp. hist. d'Espaigne par Loys de Mayerne.
Histor. de Navarre par Andre Fauyn.
Kingdom hereof was first begun amongst the Pyrenean Mountains, in the parts,
whereabout now stands the town of Suprarbe, by the Vascones the natural
inhabitants, or rather by certain remnants of the shipwrack'd, and flying
Christians, in that great inundation of the Moors retreating amongst the safer
rocks, and shelters hereof. The exact time when it begun is not set down.
Only thus much is agreed upon, that Garcias Ximinius, the first king, dyed in
the year 758, some 42 years after the first erection of the kingdom of the
Asturians, or Leon. It was first entitled the kingdom of Suprarbe; then the
chief town of those mountainous parts. Afterward it took the name of
Navarra, most probably under Innicus Garcias; at what time first descending
from the mountains, where the former kings had kept themselves immured, they
took in Pampelona, and the plain country from the Moors. By the reign of
Sanctius the Great, (the Earledomes of Castille, and Aragon being annexed) the
kings hereof were seized of the whole Biscaia, Olava, Navarra, and old
Castille, with part of Aragonia. By this prince Castille, and Aragonia were
again divided from Navarra, given by him with the title of kings to his sons
Ferdinand, and Ramir. By the after encroachments of Ferdinand the first, and
Alfonsus the eight, kings of Castille, the towns of Nagera, Calahora, and
Logrogno, with other parts of Navarra betwixt the river Ebro, and Monte D'oca,
were lopped off herefrom, and joined to the name, and account of Castille.
Biscaia, and Olava were likewise afterward rent off. But when, and by what
means we find not. Overmatched by their more potent neighbors, the kings of
Castille, and Aragon, and by their interveening betwixt them, and the Moors
being barred from enlarging any further their dominions in this continent,
crossing over the Pyrenaean mountains into France, by their marriages, and
alliances with the houses of that kingdom the princes hereof in their several
times became possessed of the Earledomes of Champaigne, and Brie, Foix, and
Begorre, the sovereign Lordship of Bearn, the Dukedom of Eureux, Albret, and
Vendosme, and lastly of the most mighty kingdom of France; the which now,
being shut out of Spain by the arms of the Castillians, and Navarra won from
them by king Ferdinand the fifth, the heirs of the house at this day only
enjoye. The kingdom was hereditary, and whereof women, and their issue were
capable. The princes hereof were Garcias Ximinius, the first king of Suprarbe,
deceasing in the year 758. Garcias Innicus, son to Garcias Ximinius. Fortunius
Garcias, son to Garcias Innicus. Sancius Garcias, son to Fortunius Garcias.
Ximinius Garcias, son to sancius Garcias. He died without heirs, the last king
of Suprarbe, of the house of the first Garcias Ximinius. An Interregnum for 4
years. Innicus Garcias, surnamed Arista, Earl of Begorre, elected in the
year 840. He conquered Pampelona, and the champian country from the Moors,
in whose time most probably the kingdom took the name of Navarra. Garcias
Innicus, son to Innicus Garcias Arista, king of Navarra. He voluntarily
resigned the kingdom, and turned Religious. Fortunius, son to Garcias Innicus,
and Vrraca sister to Fortunius Ximinius, the last Earl of Aragon. Fortunius
Ximinius Earl of Aragon deceasing without heirs, in right from his mother
Vrraca, he got seized of that Earldom, continued in the house of Navarra
until Sanctius the Great. He dyed unmarried. Sanctius the second, surnamed
Abarca, brother to Fortunius. Garcias Sanctius, son to Sanctius Abarca.
Sanctius Garcias, and Ramirus, joint kings of Navarra, sons to Garcias
Sanctius. Sanctius Garcias, sole king of Navarra; Ramir deceasing unmarried.
Garcias, surnamed the Trembler, son to Sanctius Garcias. Sanctius, surnamed the
Great, king of Navarra, son to Garcias the Trembler. He married unto Nunnia, or
Elvira, sister to Garcias, the last Earl of Castille; by which right (Garcias
dying sans issue) he became possessed of Castille in the year 1028. Deviding
his dominions he gave Castille unto his younger son Ferdinand, and to Ramir,
his natural son, Aragonia; unto both with the title of kings. Garcias de
Nagera, eldest son to Sanctius the Great, succeeding in the rest of the
dominions of the house of Navarra. After this prince, tainted with unnatural
wickedness against his mother, wrongfully accused by him of adultery, the
kingdom of Navarra continually languished, and never prospered; daily
encroached upon by the neighboring kings of Castille, and Aragon, and lastly
in John d' Albret wrested from the posterity hereof, and added as a province to
Castille. Sanctius Garcias, son to Garcias de Nagera, slain by the treason of
his brother Raimund without surviuing issue. Raimund bro^her unto Sanctius
Garcias. He enjoyed not long the kingdom, expu^sed presently after his
usurpation. Sanctius Ramir king of Aragon, and Navarra, son to Ramir the first,
king of Aragon, brother to Garcias de Nagera. Peter the first, king of Aragon,
and Navarra, son to Sanctius Ramir. Alfonsus the first, king of Aragon, and
Navarra, brother to Peter the first. He deceasing sans issue, and Aragon
descending to his brother Ramir, surnamed the Monk, Navarra returned upon
Ramir Lord of Moucon, descended from Garcias de Nagera, from whose house the
kingdom had been for a time wrongfully detayned. Ramir Lord of Moucon, king
of Navarra, son to Ramir Lord of Calahora, younger son to Garcias de Nagera.
In this Princes reign Alfonsus the eight, king of Castille, pretending title
to the Crown hereof, and warring hereupon, took from Navarra the towns of
Logrogno, Nagera, and Calahora, uniting them with Castille. Sanctius, surnamed
the Wise, son to Ramir the second, Lord of Moucon. Sanctius the eight, son to
Sanctius the Wise, succeeding in the year 1194. Until this prince for the
space of above 500 years the kingdom of Navarra had been still continued in
the line masculine. After his decease sans issue it first fell to the right of
women, transported over the mountains into France; where, transmitted from one
French family unto another, it has rested unto our times, and the union
thereof with that kingdom. Theobald the fifth, Count Palatine of Champaigne,
and Brie, and king of Navarra, son to Count Theobald the fourth, and Blanch,
sister to Sanctius the eight, and daughter to Sanctius the seventh; king of
Navarra, succeeding in the year 1234. Theobald the sixth Earl of Champaigne,
and Brie, and king of Navarra, son to Theobald the fifth. Henry the first,
Earl of Champaigne, and Brie, and king of Navarra, brother to Theobald the
sixth. Philip le Bell, king of France, in right of his wife Ioane, daughter to
Henry the first in the year 1284 succeeding in Champaigne, and Brie, and the
kingdom of Navarra. Jews, surnamed Hutin, king of France, and Navarra, and
Earl of Champaigne, and Brie, son to Philip le Bell, and Ioane aforesaid.
Philip le Long, king of France and Navarra, brother to Jews Hutin. Charles le
Bell, king of France, and Navarra, brother to Jews Hutin, and Philip le Long.
He deceasing without issue male, and the kingdom of France according to the
pretended Salique law descending upon Philip de Valois, the next of the line
masculine, Navarra returned upon Ioane de France, daughter unto Jews Hutin.
The Earledomes of Champaigne, and Brie were incorporated with the Crown of
France. Philip Earl of Eureux, in the right of his wife Ioane of France,
daughter to Jews Hutin, succeeding in the kingdom of Navarra. Charles the
second, Earl of Eureux, and king of Navarra, son to Philip, and Ioane
aforesaid. Charles the third, Earl of Eureux, and king of Navarra, son to
Charles the second. John of Aragon, younger son to Alfonsus the fifth king of
Aragon, in right of his wife Blanch, daughter to Charles the third, succeeding
in the kingdom of Navarra. After the decease of his brother he succeeded
likewise in Aragon. Gaston the fourth, Earl of Foix, and Begorre, and
Sovereign Lord of Bearn, king of Navarra in right of his wife Leonora,
daughter to John of Aragon, and Blanch aforesaid. By means of this marriage
the Earldom of Begorre, and Lordship of Bearn became annexed to the house of
Navarra, as they do yet continue. Francis Earl of Foix, and Begorre, Lord of
Bearn, and king of Navarra, son to Gaston prince of Viane, son to Gaston the
fourth and Leonora. He dyed young sans issue. John duke of Albret, in the right
of his wife Catherine, sister to Francis, succeeding in the kingdom of
Navarra, the Earldom of Begorre, and sovereign Lordship of Bearn. He lost
Navarra unto Ferdinand the fifth, and Elizabeth, kings of Castille, and Aragon,
since incorporated with the kingdom of Castille, retayning only the countries
of Begorre, and Bearne, and the title of Navarra, left unto his successors.
Henry d' Albret, titulary king of Navarra, son to John duke of Albret, and
Catherine. Anthony de Bourbon duke of Vendosme, and prince of the blood, in
right of his wife Ioane d' Albret, daughter to Henry d' Albret, Earl of
Begorre, Lord of Bearn, and titulary king of Navarra. Henry the third, king of
Navarra, son to Anthony de Bourbon, and Ioane d' Albret. After the murder of
Henry the third, the last French king of the house of Valois, ^e succeeded in
the kingdom of France by the name of Henry the fourth (being the next of the
line masculine, and descended from S. Jews,) after infinite troubles mastered,
and ouerpast, and a fast peace established in that kingdom, slain of late
years in Paris by that bloody Assassine Ravaillart. Jews the thirteenth, son
to Henry the fourth, succeeding now in the kingdom of France, and in the
right, and title of Navarra.

THE KINGDOM OF ARAGON.
THE estate v. Ioannem Marianam de Rebus Hispan. His. d'Espaign^ par Loys de
Mayernes. Indices Rerum ab Aragoniis Regibus gestarum per Hieronymum Su^itam,
was begun shortly after that of Suprarbe, or Navarra, in the reign of Garcias
Innicus, the second king of Suprarbe, by one Aznarius, son to Eudo the Great,
Duke of Aquitaine in France; who having taken from the Moors certain towns
about the rivers Aragon, and Subordanus, by the good leave of that Prince,
entitled himself from the river, Earl of Aragon, subject then (as were his
successors for some time after) unto the kings of Suprarbe, and commanding
here in nature of Marqueses. In Fortunius (son to Garcias Innicus, king of
Navarra, and Vrraca, sister to Fortunius Ximinius, the last Earl hereof, who
deceased without issue) the Earldom was annexed to the house, and kingdom of
Navarra. King Sanctius the Great again divided Aragon from Navarra; giving it
with the title of king to his bastard son Ramir. The extent of the country
was but little, at what time under Ramir the first it was first made a
kingdom. By the time of king Ramir the second, Saragoca Huescar, and other
towns being won from the Moors, it became enlarged over the whole country,
called now Aragonia. By the marriage of Petronilla, daughter to Ramir the
second, unto Raimund Berengarius the fifth Earl of Barcelona, in the year 1137
the country of Catalonia was added By Raimund, son to Raimund Berengarius the
fifth, the Earldom of Russillon. By James the first the kingdoms of Valentia,
and of the Islands of Mallorca, and Menorca, conquered from the Moors; the
present extent of the kingdom of Aragon. In foreign parts Peter the third
annexed to the house of Aragon the kingdom of Sicilye. James the second the
Island of Sardinia. Alfonsus the fifth Naples, all which the kings of Spain in
right hereof do at this day enjoy. The Princes were Aznarius, the first Earl
of Aragon in the reign of Garcias Innicus, the second king of Suprarbe. The
country then only contained certain small towns about the river Aragon,
occasioning the name, enlarging afterward, as did the conquests hereof.
Aznarius the second, son to Aznarius the first. Galindus, son to Aznarius the
second. Semenus Aznarius son to Galindus, slain in the battle of Ronceval
against the Emperor Charles the Great. Semenus Garcias, uncle to Semenus
Aznarius. Fortunius Semenus, or Ximinius. He deceased without issue. Fortunius
king of Navarra, Earl of Aragon in right from his mother Vrraca, sister to
Fortunius Semenus. Sanctius Abarca, king of Navarra, brother to Fortunius king
of Navarra, succeeding in the Earldom of Aragon by the same right. Garcias
Sanctius king of Navarra, son to Sanctius Abarca. Sanctius Garcias, and Ramir,
joint kings of Navarra, son to Garcias Sanctius. Garcias the Trembler, king of
Navarra, son to Sanctius Garcias. Sanctius the Great, king of Navarra, and
Earl of Castille, son to Garcias the Trembler. He again divided Aragon from
Navarra, erecting it into a petty Kingdom in the person of Ramir his base son.
Ramir the first, natural son to Sanctius the Great, King of Navarra; the first
King of Aragon, advanced hereunto by his father at the earnest suite of his
stepmother Elvira, the defense of whose life, and honor, he had voluntarily
undertaken, unjustly accused of adultery by her unnatural son Garcias de
Nagera, an honorable, and just beginning of afterward so renowned, and famous
a Kingdom. Sanctius the seventh, son to Ramir the first. He was elected King
of Navarra after Sanctius, son to Garcias de Nagera. Peter the first, son to
Sanctius the seventh, king of Aragon, and Navarra. Alfonsus the first, King of
Aragon, and Navarra, brother to Peter the first, and son to Sanctius the
seventh. Ramir the second, surnamed the Monk, King of Aragon, brother to
Peter the first, and Alfonsus the first, and to son to Sanctius the sevaenth.
Navarra by the will of Alfonsus the first, returned upon the right heir
thereof, Ramir Earl of Moucon, descended from Garcias de Nagera. The Kingdom
of Aragon at this time contained only the present country of Aragonia Raimund
the first, Earl of Barcelona; in the right of his wife Petronilla, daughter to
Ramir the second, succeeding in the Kingdom of Aragon. In those two Princes
the houses, and estates of Aragon, and Barcelona were united into one family,
and Kingdom. Raimond the second, King of Aragon, son to Raimund the first, and
Petronilla. He changed his name to Alfonsus. Gerard the last Earl of
Russillon deceasing without issue, he added that Earldom to the dominion
hereof. Peter the second, son to Raimund the second, or Alfonsus. Drawn on (it
is uncertain by what superstitious zeal, or necessity of state) in the year
1214, he made the Kingdom of Aragon tributary to Pope Innocent the third, and
the Sea of Rome. Repenting (as it seems) afterward of this error, he took
part with the Albigenses in France, slain in their quarrel by Simon, Earl of
Montfort, and his crossed followers. James the first, son to Peter the second.
He took from the Moors their two Kingdoms of Valentia, and of the Islands of
Malorca, and Menorca, remaining since parts of the Kingdom of Aragon. He
deceased in the year 1314. Peter the third, son to James the first, King of
all the dominions of Aragon, the Islands of Malorca, and Menorca excepted, given
with the title of King to James his younger brother, by his father James the
first: reunited notwithstanding not long after to the Kingdom of Aragon. He
married Constantia, daughter to Manfredus King of both the Sicilies; by whose
right the choice of the Ilanders, and the legacy of Corradinus, the last Duke
of Schwaben, beheaded at Naples by Charles duke of Aniou, (the French being
massacred at that fatal Sicilian Vespers) he became king of Sicily,
transmitting the kingdom to his posterity. Alfonsus the third, K. of Aragon,
younger son to Peter the third. His elder brother James succeeded in the
kingdom of Sicily* He deceased in the year 1291. James the second, king of
Sicily, eldest son to Peter the third, after the decease of his brother
Alfonsus the third, succeeding in the kingdom of Aragon. He added to the
house, and dominion hereof the Island of Sardinia by right of conquest and the
gift of Boniface Bishop of Rome about the year 1323, which Island has ever
since been held by those princes. He lost on the other side the kingdom of
Sicily, usurped by his younger brother Frederique, whose heirs held the same
until that it was reunited in Martin the first. Alfonsus the fourth, King of
Aragon, son to James the second. Peter the fourth K. of Aragon, son to
Alfonsus the fourth. He reunited with Aragon the kingdom of the Islands of
Mallorca, and Menorca, taken from the house of James, younger brother to Peter
the third. John the first, son the Peter the fourth. He deceased without
issue-male. Martin the first, brother to John the first, and son to Peter the
fourth. In this prince Sicily returned again to the right, and possession of
the kings of Aragon, bequeathed unto him by his son Martin king of that Island.
He dyed without surviuing issue-male, in whom ended the race masculine of the
kings of Aragon, descended from Raimund Earl of Barcelona. Ferdinand the
first, son to John king of Castille, and to Leonora, daughter to Peter the
fourth; after Martin the first (other competitours rejected,) succeeding in the
kingdoms of Aragon, and Sicily. Alfonsus the fifth, king of Aragon, and Sicily,
son to Ferdinand the first. By arms, and the pretended gift of Ioane, the last
queen of Naples of the house of Aniou, he got seized of the kingdom of
Naples, ever since continued in his house. Having no lawful issue, he gave
Naples to his natural son Ferdinand Duke of Calabria, from whom descended the
succeeding Kings of Naples until King Ferdinand the fifth. John the second,
King of Aragon, Navarre, and Sicily, brother to Alfonsus the fifth. Ferdinand,
surnamed the Catholic, King of Aragon, and Sicily, son to John the second,
and Ioane, daughter to Henriques Constable of Castille. He married unto
Elizabeth, Queen of Castille, conquered the kingdoms of Navarra, Granado, and
Naples, discovered the golden Indies, and by the marriage of his eldest
daughter Ioane unto Philip, Duke of Burgundy, and Austria, united to his house
the Low Countries, and dominions of Austria, the founder of the succeeding
Spanish greatness, whose succession, and offspring read in the princes of
Castille, and Leon. His sister Eleanor, daughter to John the second by Blanch
of Navarra, his first wife, inherited by that right the kingdom of Navarra.

THE KINGS OF THE ISLANDS OF THE HOUSE OF ARAGON.
THe kingdom was begun by the Moors. It contained (as before) the Islands of
Mallorca, and Menorca. James the first, King of Aragon, who had conquered it
from the Moors, gave it with this title to James his second son, with the
countries of Ceretania, or Cardona, and Russillon in the Continent. The Kings
until their reunion with Aragon were James the first, before mentioned, son
to James the first King of Aragon. Jealous of the envy, and greatness of his
brother Peter the third King of Aragon, he submitted himself, and his
succession to the perpetual fief, and vassallage of that Crown. James the
second, son to James the first, King of the Islands. Ferdinand, brother to James
the second. James the third, son to Ferdinand. Denying his accustomed homage,
he was overcome, and slain, and his estates seized upon by Peter the fourth,
King of Aragon; remaining ever since parts of the kingdom of Aragon.

THE KINGS OF SICILY OF THE HOUSE OF ARAGON.
THis contained that noble Island. In the person of Peter the third, King of
Aragon, thorough the expulsion of the French, and the right of his wife
Constantia, it became first possessed by the family of Aragon. The princes of
this house until their reunion with the Kings of Aragon were Peter the third,
King of Aragon, before mentioned. James, eldest son to Peter the third.
Succeeding unto his brother Alfonsus the third in the kingdom of Aragon, his
younger brother Frederique usurped the dominion of Sicily, continued in his
posterity. Frederique, brother to James, and son to Peter the third King of
Aragon, and Sicily. Peter, son to Frederique. Frederique the second. Peter the
third. Jews, son to Peter the third. Frederique, Duke of Athens, brother to
Jews. Martin, son to Martin, King of Aragon, in right of his wife Blanch,
daughter to Frederique the third. Deceasing without heirs he bequeathed the
Island, and kingdom of Sicily unto his father Martin, King of Aragon; remaining
ever after united in the princes of that kingdom.

THE KINGS OF NAPLES OF THE HOUSE OF ARAGON.
THis kingdom was first annexed to the house of Aragon by King Alfonsus the
fifth by right of conquest, and a pretended gift from Ioane the second, the last
princess of the house of Aniou, or France. Having no lawful issue he left it
to his base son, Ferdinand, Duke of Calabria. The princes follow. Alfonsus the
fifth, king of Aragon; the first of this house King of Naples thorough the
right, and means now mentioned. Ferdinand the first, duke of Calabria,
natural son to Alfonsus the fifth King of Aragon, and Naples. Alfonsus the
second, son to Ferdinand the first. Ferdinand the second, son to Alfonsus the
second; the father resigning. He was driven out by Charles the eight, French
king; restored not long after by the aid of Ferdinand the fifth, surnamed the
Catholic, king of Castille and Aragon. Frederique, brother to Alfonsus the
second, and son to Ferdinand the first; thrust out by the joint arms of Jews
the twelfth, and Ferdinand the fifth, Kings of France, and Spain. Jews the
twelfth, French king, and Ferdinand the fifth, king of Spain; joint Kings of
Naples after the expulsion of the house of Ferdinand the first. These two
mighty neighbors not long agreeing, and the French by the valor, and wisdom
of the great Captain Consalvo being beaten out, Ferdinand becomes master of
the whole country, ever since continued in his successors, the kings of
Spain; belonging to the right of Aragon.

THE EARLDOM OF BARCELONA.
Jews, v. Ioannem Marianam de rebus His. Hist. d'Espaigne par Loys de Mayerne.
surnamed the Godly, son to the Emperor Charles the Great during the reign
hereof, and in the year 801 having surprised the city of Barcelona from the
Moors, first occasioned this name, and estate; the French governors after the
custom of those times being then styled Earls hereof, and in time becoming
proprietary, and deriving the honor to succession. The Earldom at what time
that it was united with the kingdom of Aragon extended over the whole country
of Catalonia. The first Earl was Bernard, a Frenchman, Earl, or Governor of
Barcelona for the Emperors Charles the Great, and Lewis the Godly. After him
succeeded in the Earldom Wifredus the first, Governor for the Emperor Lewis
the Godly. These two Earls were only such magistrates thus named, commanding
for the French during life, or for a set number of years. Wifredus the second,
son to Wifredus the first. In this Earl the estate became first proprietary,
and hereditary by the liberality, and gift of the Emperor Charles, surnamed
the Fat, to be held under the fief of the Roman Emperors, not long after
freed from foreign jurisdiction; the house of that Emperor expiring, and the
power of the factious, and divided French declining. Miron Earl of Barcelona,
son to Wifredus the second. Godefridus, or Wifredus, son to Miron. Borellus,
son to, Wifredus, brother to Miron. Raimund the first, son to Borellus.
Berengarius Borellus, son to Raimund the first. Raimund the second, son to
Borellus. Raimund the third, son to Raimund the second. Raimund the fourth, son
to Raimund the third. Raimund the fifth, son to Raimund the fourth. He married
unto Petronilla, daughter to Ramir the second, King of Aragon, by which means
these two estates became united, continued in the Kings of Aragon.

THE KINGDOM OF PORTVGALL,
THe v. Joan. Mari. de Regib. Hisp. His. d'Espaigne par Loys de Mayerne.
Duardum Nonium de Regum Portugalliae vera Genealogia. Hieronimum Conestagium de
Portugalliae cum Regno Castellae coniunctione.
name hereof some have derived from the town of Porto, standing upon the river
of Duero, and the Galli, or Frenchmen, the founders of the nation of the
Portugalls. Others from the port, or haven-towne named Cale, now Caia, lying at
the mouth of that river, sometimes a rich, and flourishing emporie, whereof the
first princes should be entitled. The estate was begun long after the rest by
the Frenchmen in the year 1090, and in the person of Henry a Lorrainer, or
after others a Burgundian, borne in the city of Besancon, and descended from
the ancient Earls of the Free county; who coming hither to the holy wars,
and having married Therasia, base daughter to Alfonsus the sixth, king of
Castille, and Leon, had given unto him by way of dowry the town, and country
thus called, to be held with the title of Earl under the right, and tribute
of the Kings of Castille. The Earldom at the time, that it was first
instituted, was extended only over the part hereof, which is contained now
betwixt the rivers of Duero, and Minio; part then of the dominions of King
Alfonsus the sixth, and by this means separated. Earl Henry, the first prince,
added to the account, and name hereof the part contained betwixt the Duero, and
the town of Coimbre, won from the Moors. Alfonsus the first, his victorious
son, the first king, the towns of Lisbona, Leira, Santaren, and Sintra, and in
a manner the rest of the kingdom (Algarve excepted,) taken from the same enemy
Sanctius the first the town of Silvis. Alfonsus the second Alcacar. Alfonsus
the third the rest of Algarve, by conquest from the Infidel, and by his
marriage with Beatrix, base daughter to Alfonsus the tenth, K. of Castille; the
whole extent of the kingdom of Portugal. Afterward Spain being cleared from
the Moors, the princes hereof wanting other honorable, and just wars, and
means of further enlarging their dominions, discovering toward the South, and
East, made themselves Lords (the Canary Islands excepted, belonging to the
Crown of Castille) of the whole seacoasts of Afrique, Brasil, and Asia,
extended betwixt the Straights of Gibraltar, and Magellan, and the Promontories
of Good Hope, and Malaca, planted with their colonies, and people. Henry
Cardinal, and Archbishop of Evora, the last king, deceasing without heirs,
the country was subdued by Philip the second, K. of Castille, and united with
the rest of Spain, pretending right hereunto from his mother Isabel, daughter
to K. Emanuel. The Princes follow. Henry, son to Guy Earl of Vernol, son to
Reginald Earl of Burgundy, created first Earl of Portugal in the year 1090
by Alfonsus the first K. of Castille, and Leon. He added the towns of Lamego,
Viseo, and Coimbre beyond the river of Duero. Alfonsus the first, son to Henry,
and Therasia. Having vanquished the Moors in a great battaill fought at
Ourique in the year 1139, he took upon him the title of king, confirmed
afterward unto him for a certain tribute by Pope Alexander the fourth, and
continued in his successors. He subdued the great city of Lisbona, with the
rest of the country unto Algarve. Having reigned about 72 years, he deceased
in the year 1184. Sanctius the first, king of Portugal, son to Alfonsus the
first. Alfonsus the second, son to Sanctius the first. Sanctius the second, son
to Alfonsus the second. He deceased without heirs. Alfonsus the third, brother
to Sanctius the second. Casting of his former wife Maude Countess of Boloigne,
notwithstanding that he had issue by her, and marrying unto Beatrix, base
daughter to Alfonsus the tenth, king of Castille, and Leon; he had given unto
him by way of dowry the kingdom of Algarve to be held under the fief of
Castille, which right was remitted afterward by Alfonsus of Castille in favor
of his Nephew Dionysius. He won from the Moors the town of Faro, and all
other places they held in Algarve; extending by this means the account of
Portugal Southwards unto the Ocean. Since this Prince the kings of Portugal
always have bin styled kings of the Algarves. Dionysius, king of Portugal, and
of the Algarves, son to Alfonsus the third, and Beatrix. He founded the
University of Coimbre, Reg Algalbiorum.
and instituted the military order of Christ. Alfonsus the fourth, son to
Dionysius. Peter, son to Alfonsus the fourth. At this time reigned three Peter's
in Spain, all noted for their tyranny and cruelty, who were this Prince, Peter
King of Castille, and Peter the fourth King of Aragon. Ferdinand, son to Peter.
He died without heirs male. John the first, natural son to Peter by Therasia
Gallega his concubine, after the decease of Ferdinand elected King of the
Portugals in the year 1383. Edward, son to John the first, and Philippa,
daughter to John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. Alfonsus the fifth, son to Edward.
Warring upon the Moors in Afrique, he took from them the towns of Tangier,
Arzilla, and Alcacar. John the second, son to Alfonsus the fifth. Under this
Prince to the great honor of the Nation, begun first the happy discoueries of
the Portugals in the Atlantique, and Aethiopique Oceans; the Western shore of
Afrique coasted; a supposed inhabitable Torride Zone found inhabited; populous
nations to dwell in the Southern Hemispheare, not believed by the Ancients;
and the unknown Continent of the World, and Afrique to end to the South in a
promontory, or wedge of land, showing a passage to the Indies, and the East,
for this cause named by the Portugals, the Cape of Good Hope. He deceased in
the year 1495. Emmanuel king of Portugal, and the Algarves, son to Ferdinand
Duke of Viseo, son to king Edward. In the Golden days of this Prince the
discoueries of the nation to the South, and East are fully accomplished, the
Seacoasts of Afrique, Brasil, and Asia perfectly viewed; forts, and colonies
of the Portugalls planted in convenient places; the way to the East Indies by
the back of Afrique traced out; the riches of the East brought by Sea into
Europe; the great navies, and armies of the Egyptian Sultans, and of other
barbarous Princes discomfited, and overthrown; and no small part of Aethiopia,
India, and Persia subdued, or made tributary. John the third, son to Emanuel.
Sebastian, son to John Prince of Portugal, son to John the third. With more
then youthful folly adventuring his person against the Moors in Afrique,
young, unmarried, and without any known successor that might continue the
house, he was there unfortunately slain at the battle of Alcacar in the
year 1578. Henry the second, Cardinal, and Bishop of Evo^a, son to king
Emanuel. In this Prince, being a Priest, and unmarried, and leaving no heirs,
ended the line masculine of the kings of Portugal. He deceased in the year
1580. Philip, son to the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Isabel, daughter to
king Emmanuel, the first Monarch of Spain since the Goths, his Competitour
Don Antonio, natural son to Jews (son to king Emmanuel) driven out. Philip
the third, son to Philip the second. Philip the fourth, son to Philip the third.

By this means after so many chaunges, and successions, Spain (as has been
declared) is become at this day divided into three distinct kingdoms, united
under one Monarch, but otherwise differing in Laws, and in the manner of their
government. 1 of Castille, and Leon, whereof Navarra, and Granado are parts. 2
of Aragon. 3 and of Portugal: containing together 18 lesser divisions, or
Provinces. 1 of Portugal betwixt the rivers Minio, and Duero. 2 betwixt the
Duero, and Taio. 3 and betwixt the Taio, and Guadiana. 4 Castillia la Veia. 5
Castillia la Nueva. 6 Asturia. 7 Biscaia. 8 Galitia. 9 Guipuscoa. 10 Navarra.
11 Estremadura. 12 Andaluzia. 13 Granado. 14 Murcia. 15 Aragonia. 16 Valentia.
17 Catalonia. 18 and the Land of Russillon. The occasions of the names of
Portugal, and Castille, we have before related. Galitia, and Asturia, were
called thus from the Calaeci, and Astures, their ancient inhabitants.
Guipuscoa, and Biscaia corruptly from the Vascones; intruding hereinto.
Granado, Murcia, and Valentia from their chief cities, thus named. Aragonia
from the river Arga, or Aragon, where the state begun. Navarra from the more
even and plainer situation thereof. Andaluzia from the Vandals, or Silingi;
there sometimes inhabiting. Russillon, from the ancient Castle, so named.
Estremadura from the river Duero, beyond the which it lay, the bounds sometimes
of the Christians, and Moors, the name in continuance of time being removed
further from the river Southward unto the Guadiana; as it happened upon the like
occasion unto those of Northumberland in England, and Austria, or Oosterriech
in Germany. The name of Catalonia some have drawn from the Catti, and Alani,
there inhabiting together. Others from the Catalauni, an ancient French people.
Both uncertainly. Their descriptions follow.

THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Containing the Chorographicall description of Spain.

PORTVGAL. Portugallia. Lusitania.

BOunded upon the South, and West, with the Atlantique Ocean, intercepted
betwixt the rivers Guadiana, and Duero; upon the North, with the rivers Minio,
and Avia, dividing it from Galicia; and upon the East, with a line, from the
town of Ribadania, standing upon the Avia, drawn by the river Duero, and the
town of Miranda unto the Guadiana, a little below Badaios, then with the river
Guadiana continued from thence unto the Ocean, dividing it from Andaluzia,
Estremadura, and the two Castilles. It contains 400 miles in length; in
breadth where it is widest 100 miles; where it is narrowest fourscore miles.
The country is healthy, and pleasant, but not so fruitful, yielding little
corn, shipped hither for the greatest part from neighboring countries;
enriched chiefly by means of the trade of the nation in Afrique, Brasil, and
the Indies, and rather by foreign, then homebred commodities. It is divided
into the parts, named from their situations betwixt the Taio, and Guadiana;
betwixt the Taio, and the Duero; and betwixt the Duero, and Minio.

PORTVGAL BETWIXT THE TAIO, AND GVADIANA. Transtagana.

THis is the most wild, and desert part of the kingdom, dry, lean, asperous,
peopled with few towns, neither those very populous. The South part hereof is
named Algarve, divided from the rest of the country by a line, Algarbia.
drawn from the Guadiana betwixt the little rivulets Vataon, and Careiras
Westwards unto the little town of Odeseiza upon the Moors, and with that title
given to Alfonsus the third by Alfonsus the tenth king of Castille, continued
since in his Successors, styled now Kings of Portugal, and Algarve. Chief
towns here are Elvis. Portelegre: Bishops Sees. Beia, supposed to be Pax Iulia
of Pliny, and Ptolemy, then a Roman colonie, and one of the 3 juridicall
resorts of Lusitania. Setubal.
The town is mean, and ill inhabited. Setunel, (Salacia of Ptolemy) now a
noted port, situated at the mouth of the river Palma. Ebora.
Evora, (Ebora of Pliny, and Antoninus, surnamed Faelicitas Iulia, and free of
the rights of the ancient Latins) now an Archbishops See, and University,
founded of late years by Cardinal Henry, afterward king of Portugal; seated
in the midst of a spacious, and pleasant plain, surrounded with woody
mountains, the chief town of the country. Olivenca beyond the river
Guadiana, in the parts belonging sometimes unto Baetica. In the kingdom of
Algarve Tavila (Balsa of Ptolemy, and Pliny.) Faro, supposed to be Ossonoba of
Ptolemy, and Antoninus. Lagos: all three noted parts upon the Ocean. More
within the land Sylvis, a Bishops See. Near to Lagos lies the noted
Promontory de Santo Vincente; Caput. S. Vincentij. Ion. 17. g. latit. 37. grad.
Hues.
named thus from the relics of that holy Martyr, brought hither from Valentia
by certain persecuted Christians, flying the cruelty of Abderrahmen, the first
king of the Spanish Moors, removed afterward to Lisbona by king Ferdinand.
Strabo, and Ptolemy call it Promontorium Sacrum; adjudged then to be the
furthest point of the world toward the West. The ancient inhabitants of this
part of the kingdom were the Celtici, and Turdetani of Ptolemy, and Strabo;
continuate with those other of the same names, inhabiting Baetica. Strabo
names the wedge of land, where lies the Promontory, Cuneum; called thus from
the form thereof.

PORTVGAL BETWIXT THE TAIO AND DVERO. Cistagana.

Containing the part of the country, Olisipon. long. 5. g. 10. m. l. 39. g.
38. m. Clav.
lying betwixt those two rivers. Chiefer towns are Lisbona (Oliosipon of
Ptolemy, Olisipon of Antoninus, Olyssippo of Solinus, and Olysipo of Pliny, a
municipium of the Romans, surnamed Faelicitas Iulia, afterward made a kingdom
of the Moors, then upon the surprisall thereof by Alfonsus the first, the
royal seat of the Kings of Portugal,) now an Archbishops seat, the residence
of the Vice-royes,, and a populous, and flourishing Empory, the staple of all
the Merchandise, coming from the conquests of the Portugals, situated upon
five rising hills upon the right shore of the river Taio, and about five miles
from the Ocean. The town is rather to be accounted rich, then beautiful; the
streets, and houses for the most part standing disorderly by means of the
hilly, and uneven site thereof, and the carelessness of the Moors, never
curious in private buildings. It contains some 32 Parish churches, 350
streets, 11000 dwelling houses, 20000 households, 160000 inhabitants, besides
Churchmen, strangers, and them, that follow the Court, and with the subvrbs
about 7 miles in compass; extended along the river rather in length, then
widenes, and within the ancient walls not being very spacious, being much
enlarged since the discovery and trade of the Indies. Botero (I know not how
rightly) gives hereunto a fourth place amongst the more great, and renowned
Constantinople, Paris, Muscovia, and Lisbona, the 4 chief cities of Europe
after Botero.
cities of Europe. Scalabis.
Santaren (Scabaliscus of Ptolemy, and Scalabis of Antoninus, and Pliny,
surnamed Praesidium Iulium, then a Roman colony, and a juridicall resort for a
third part of Lusitania,) seated in a fruitful soil upon the Taio; named thus
from St* Irene, a Number of Tomar, there supposed to have been martyred, and here
enshrined. Cascais at the mouth of the Taio upon a Promontory, or wedge of
land, named from hence Cabo de Cascais, by Solinus Promontorium Vlyssipponense.
On the further shore of the river lies the Promontory Barbarium of Ptolemy,
and Strabo, now Cabo de Spichel. Sintra upon the maine Atlantique at the end of
the long mountainous ridge, called Mons Lunae by Ptolemy. Hither for the
pleasure of the adjoining shady woods, and cool breathing Ocean the kings of
Portugal used to retire in Summer, and recreate themselves with hunting,
Conimbrica^. l. 5. gr. 45. m. latit. 40. grad. 30. m. Clav.
and other exercise. Coimbre, pleasantly seated amongst vineyards, and woods of
olives upon a scalpe, or rock on both sides of the river Mondego, a Bishops
See, and a noted University. The students hereof enjoy their distinct
privileges from the town, and were esteemed betwixt three, v. Hier.
Conestagij de Portugalliae cum Regni Castellae coniunctione Hist. l. 8.
or four thousand at what time, that Philip the second by Ferdinand Duke of
Alva subdued the Portugals. Near here unto at Condexa la Veia stood sometimes
the town Conimbrica of Pliny. Lamego. Viseo. Guarda: Bishops Sees. Tomar. Here
the Kings of Portugal were accustomed to be crowned. The ancient inhabitants
hereof were the Lusitani, contained first only betwixt the Duero, and Taio;
afterward upon the division of Spain by the Romans into the three Provinces
before mentioned, extended beyong the Taio over part of the Turditani, and
Celtici unto the river Anas, and Promontory Sacrum.

PORTVGAL BETWIXT THE DVERO, AND MINIO. Interamnica.

Contained within those two rivers; the most fruitful, and best inhabited part
of Portugal, but the poorest in regard of the great distance thereof from
Lisbona, and its more Northerly situation, lying out of the way betwixt that
city, and the rich conquest of the Portugals. Bracara. lo. 6. g. lat. 43. g.
Clav.
Chiefer towns are Braga (Breacaria Augusta of Ptolemy, Bracara of Antoninus,
and Bracae of Pliny, then a juridicall resort suited by 24 towneships, and
giving the surname to the Callaici Braecarij.) By Antoninus in his Catalogue of
famous cities it is reckoned amongst the four chiefest in Spain. By the
Suevians afterward it was made the royal seat of their Kings. It is now an
Archbishops See, and the best town of the division; containing about two
thousand inhabitants, subject to the Bishop in both jurisdictions civil, and
ecclesiastical. Portus.
Porto. Miranda: Bishops Sees upon the Duero. Braganca, from whence the Dukes
of Braganca are entitled. The ancient inhabitants hereof were the Callaici
Braecarij of Ptolemy. In foreign parts the Kings of Spain now hold in right
of the crown hereof upon the coast of Barbary, the towns of Seuta, Tangier,
and Mazagone: in the Ocean on the hither side of the Cape of Good hope the
Islands of the Acores, Madera, Cape Verde, Saint Thomas, and del Principe: the
fortresses of Arguin, and S. George de la Mina in the land of Guinea: in
America Brasil, extended for 1500 miles along the Seacoasts toward the
Straights of Magellan, divided into 18 governments, or praefectureships: beyond
the cape of Buona Esperanza the Island Mozambique, and forts of Sena, and
Sofala: and in Asia Diu, Chaul, Goa, Cochin, Damain, Bazain, and Malaca.

CASTILLE AND LEON. Regnum Castellae, and Legionis.

BOunded upon the West, with the river Guadiana, and the line before described,
drawn betwixt that river, and the Avia, dividing it from Portugal, with part
of the Atlantique Ocean, extended betwixt the mouth of the river Minio, and
Cabo Finisterre; upon the North, with the Cantabrique Sea unto Fuentarabia, and
the Pyrenaean Mountains; upon the South, with the Sraights of Gibraltar, and
Sea Mediterranean; and upon the East, first with the Pyrenaean Mountains from
Fuentarabia until toward the head of the river Arga, or Aragon, parting it
from France, then with a winding line, drawn from the Ebro, and by the towns
of Taradona, Hariza, Daroca, Xativa, and Orihuela continued unto the mouth of
the river Segura, dividing it from the kingdom of Aragon. It contains the
countries of Galitia, Asturia, Biscaia, Olava, Guipuscoa, Navarra, Castillia la
Nueva, Castillia la Veia, Estremadura, Andaluzia, Granado, and Murcia, or some
two third parts of the whole Spain.

GALITIA. Calecia.

HAving upon the South, the rivers Minio, and Avia, the bounds thereof, and
Portugal; upon the North, and West, the Seas Cantabrian, and Atlantique; and
upon the East, the river Mearo, deviding it from Asturia. The country is very
mountainous, overspread with the branches of the Cantabrian Alps, dry,
barren, and ill inhabited. Chiefer towns are S. Iago, an Archbishops See,
named thus from the supposed relics of S. James the Apostle, Compostella. l.
7. g. 15. m la. 44. g. 15. m. Clav.
the son of Zebedee, the Patron of the Castillians, visited here by continual
pilgrimages from all the parts of Christendom, Lucus Augusti.
subject to the Papacy. Lugo, (Lucus Augusti of Ptolemy, and Antoninus, and
Lucus of Pliny, then a juridicall resort, suited by 16 people, or townships,
and surnaming the Callaici Lucenses.) It is now a Bishops See. The ancient
inhabitants of the country hereabouts were the Capori of Ptolemy, part of the
general name of the Callaici Lucenses. Aquae Calidae.
Orense, (Aquae Calidae of Ptolemy, and Aquae Celeniae of Antoninus, named thus
from the hot medicinable bathes thereof) now a Bishops See, seated upon the
Minio. The particular inhabitants hereof were the Cilini of Ptolemy, part of
the Callaici Lucenses. Tide.
Tui, (Tude of Ptolemy, and Castellum Tide of Pliny,) now a Bishops See upon
the same river of Minio; frontiring upon Portugal. The particular inhabitants
were the Gruij of Ptolemy, the Gravij of Pliny, part of the Callaici Braecarij.
Corunna (Flavium Brigantium of Ptolemy, Corunna. lon. 16. g. 50. m. lat. 43. g.
20. m. Hues.
and Brigantium of Antoninus,) now a noted port upon the Sea Cantabrian. The
town is exceeding strong, the chief Bulwark, and defense of Galitia, and
these Northern parts; divided into the High, and the Base towns, severally
fortified. The Haven is very spacious, able to contain the greatest navy of
ships. Nearer to Asturia upon the same Seacoast lies the great promontory,
named by Ptolemy Lupatia Cory, and Trileucum, now Cabo Ortegal. Pontevedre.
Baiona: seacoast towns upon the Western Ocean, betwixt Cabo Finisterre, and
the river Minio. The ancient inhabitants hereof (Tui excepted) were the
Callaici Lucenses of Ptolemy; Caput Finis terrae. lon. 16. g. lat. 43. g. 10.
m. Hues.
parts whereof were the Capori, Cilini, Lemavi, Bedyi, and Seuri, mentioned in
the same Author.

ASTVRIA. Asturia.

BOunded upon the North with the Sea Cantabrian, extended betwixt the river
Mearo, and Castro de Ordiales; upon the West with Galitia; upon the South with
the country of Leon; and upon the East with Biscaia. It is wholly possessed with
wild, and desert mountains, the shelter of the distressed Christians after
their disaster, and overthrow given by the Moors at the battle of Xeres
under Roderigo, the last king of the Goths. It is divided into Asturia de
Oviedo, and Asturia Santillana.

ASTVRIA de OVIEDO. Asturia Ovetensis.

IT is the more Western moity; extended along the Ocean from the river Mearo,
and confines of Galitia unto the town of Llanes. Chiefer towns are Oviedo
(after Birtius Lucus Asturum of Ptolemy,) Ovetum.
a Bishops Sea, founded, or rather reaedified by King Froila the first, in the
year 757, remaining afterward for certain descents the chief residence of
the Kings of Leon. Villa-viciosa, the only port of note in these parts.

ASTVRIA SANTILLANA.
COntinued Eastward along the Sea Cantabrian from LLanes, and Asturia d' Oviedo
unto Castro d' Ordiales, and the country of Biscaia. Chiefer towns are
Santillana, from whence it has been thus surnamed. St Anderos (after Birtius
Flavionavia of Ptolemy, S. Anderos. lon. 22. g 10. m. lat. 43. gr. Hues.
) the city of the Paesici, now a rich, and noted port, seated upon the maine
Ocean. The particular inhabitants of Asturia Santillana were the Paesici of
Ptolemy, and Pliny, part of the Astures. The general inhabitants of both the
Asturiaes were the Astures Transmontani of Pliny, renowned with the first birth
of the kingdom of Castille, and Leon; the rest of Spain then in a manner
being subdued by the Moors, begun by Pelagius, and some remainders of the
vanquished Goths in the year 716. The heirs of Castille, amongst other
titles are called Princes of Asturia, a custom borrowed from the Kings of
England, whose eldest sons are borne Princes of Wales, brought hither by
means of the marriage of Catharine, daughter of John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, unto Henry, son to John the first; upon this occasion entitled thus
by his father, continued since in his successors.

BISCAIA. Biscaia.

BOunded upon the North with the Sea Cantabrian, extended betwixt Castro d'
Ordiales, and the town of Montrico; upon the West with Asturia; upon the South
with Castillia la Veia; and upon the East with Guipuscoa. The country is like
unto Asturia, wholly ouer-spread with the rough, and craggy Cantabrian Alps;
yet better peopled, and something more fruitful, yielding plenty of Oranges,
Chestnuts, and the like fruits, but little store of corn, as neither by reason
of the coldness thereof any wines at all, in regard whereof the inhabitants
drink sider; enriched chiefly with minerals, especially of iron. Chief towns
are Bilbao, Bilbao. lon. 23. gr. 30. m. lat, 43. g Hues.
a wealthy, and populous Empory, well known unto the English, Dutch, and
French merchants; seated in a plain, toward the Land surrounded with
mountains, some two Spanish miles from the maine Ocean upon a river, or creek
of the Sea, from the great depth thereof called by the Inhabitants in their
barbarous language Ibaisabellum; founded, or rather reedified out of the ruins
of the ancient Flaviobriga of Ptolemy, by Diego de Haro, prince of Biscaia in
the year 1300. Laredo, Portus Lauretanus. lon 22. g. 50 m. lat. 43. g. Hues.
a Seacoast town upon a spacious bay, West of Bilbao. Here, and at Bilbao,
great numbers of ships are made both for war, and burden, the neighboring
woody mountains affording plenty of materials for this use. The common
inhabitants hereof are more simple, and rude, then the rest of the Spanish
nation, acknowledging Christ, and a God, but not being able to give an account
of their faith. They think their country much profaned, if any Bishop do but
set footing in it; as happened to the Bishop of Pampelona in the reign of King
Ferdinand the fifth, when unawares following the Court toward Bilbao, much
superstition was used by them to hallow the steps, wherein his horse had trod.
Unmarried Priests they allow not without their concubines, thinking it
otherwise impossible for these to abstain from their wives. They use a
barbarous language, proper unto them, and the Guipuscoans, thought to be the
ancient Spanish, spoken by the nation before the conquest of the Romans. They
were a part of the stout, and valiant Cantabri, renowned in ancient authors,
whose stubborn, and undaunted resolution they still retain, courageous,
fierce, impatient of servitude, and not easily to be constrained. Since the
expiration of the Western Roman Empire by the intrusion amongst them of the
neighboring Vascones, most probably they have took the name of Biscains.

GVIPVSCOA. Guipuscoa.

Containing the rest of these Northern Seacoasts; continued from the town of
Montrico unto the mouth of the river Vidosa, and beginning of France. It has
upon the West, Biscaia; upon the East, the Pyrenaean Mountains, and Guienne in
France; and upon the South, Navarra. It differs little in quality from
Biscaia, alike mountainous, rocky, and barren, rich only in the never decaying
mines of iron, and steel, then which no country yields either better, or
more plenty. From hence, as out of Vulcans shop, forged out of these materials,
great store of all sorts of instruments both for war, and common use are
carried into the countries adjoining, the public armory of Spain. Chiefer
towns here are Tolosa at the confluence of the rivers Oria, and Duarzo.
Placenza upon the river Denia, inhabited almost altogether by blacke-smiths.
Placentia. Fanum. S. Sebastiani.
S. Sebastian, a much frequented, and noted port at the mouth of the river
Gurvinea. Fuentarabia at the foot of the Pyrenaean mountains, and mouth of
the river Vidosa, the furthest town in Spain. On the other side of the river
begins the province of Guienne in France. The ancient inhabitants hereof
were part of the general name of the Cantabri, with part of the Vascones.
Their Language is the Basquish.

OLAVA. Olaba.

THe country is little, situated upon the top of the Cantabrian Alps betwixt
Guipuscoa, Biscaia, Castillia la Veia, and Navarra. The chief town is
Victoria, Victoria.
first built, or rather reedified out of the ruins of the ancient Vellica of
Ptolemy in the year 1180 by Sanctius king of Navarra. The ancient inhabitants
were part of the Cantabri.

NAVARRA. Navarra.

BOunded upon the North, with the Cantabrian Mountains, and countries of
Olava, and Guipuscoa; upon the East, with France, and the Mountains Pyrenaean;
upon the South, with the river Aragon, or Arga, parting it from Aragonia; and
upon the West first with the Ebro, then an obscure river falling thereinto a
little below Calahora, dividing it from Castillia la Veia. The country is plain
for the greatest part (yet on all sides environed with mighty mountains,) well
watered with rivers, and fruitful, but not very populous, containing after the
account of Mariana some 40000 households, or families. Chiefer towns are Tudela
upon the Ebro, a little University, instituted by king Ferdinand the fifth.
Stella. Pompelon. lon. 24. g. 30. m. lat. 43. g. Clav. etc.
Estella. Pampelona, (Pompelon of Ptolemy, Strabo, and Antoninus, named thus,
and first founded by Pompey the great immediately after the wars ended with
Sertorius,) a Bishops See, and the residence of the Vice-royes, situated in a
plain upon the river Arga. Suprarbe amongst the Pyrenaean mountains. Here
begun first the kingdom of Navarra, before the plain country subdued, named
hereof. The ancient inhabitants of Navarra were part of the Vascones of
Ptolemy, Strabo, and Pliny, after the Western Roman Empire subdued in the
reign of Dagobert, King of the French, desbourding beyond the Pyrenaean
Mountains into the province of Aquitania in Gaul, as probably about the same
time here amongst the Cantabri, occasioning the names of Biscaia, and Guipuscoa
in Spain, and of Gascoigne in France.

CASTILLIA LA VEIA. Castella vetus.

THis country including Leon, whose distinct limits we find not, comprehends
all that large tract of land, extending from Biscaia, and Asturia, lying upon
the North thereof, unto the mountains of Segovia, and Avila upon the South,
dividing it from Castillia la Nueva; having otherwise upon the East Navarra
with the kingdom of Aragon; and upon the West, the kingdom of Portugal,
according to the lines, and bounds before set down. It is more plain,
fruitful, and better inhabited then are the neighboring countries, bordering
upon the Cantabrian Sea; serving notwithstanding better for pasturage, then for
corn, wine, oil, and fruits. It is refreshed with many fair rivers, amongst
the which is the Duero, the receptacle of the rest. Towns of better note are
Astorga, Asturica.
(Asturica Augusta of Ptolemy, and Asturica of Antoninus, and Pliny, surnaming
the Astures Augustani, then the chief of that division) now a Bishops See,
frontiring upon Galitia. Legio. lon. 21. g. 10. m. lat. 42. g. 15. m. Hues.
Leon at the foot of the Asturian mountains, built out of the ruins of
Sublancia, lying sometimes amongst the neighboring hills, where now is
Sublanco, in regard of the strong situation thereof destroyed by the command
of the Emperor Nerva, fearing a commotion of those mountainers. Ptolemy, who
lived about that time, named it Legio Germanica Septima, Antoninus with some
difference Legio Septima Gemina; either because that it was first founded by
that Legion, or because that it was their fixed residence, and station. Won
from the Moors by Pelagius, the first King of the Asturians, it became
afterward the royal seat of those princes, entitled from hence Kings of Leon
until the union hereof with Castille. It is now a Bishops See, exempt from all
superior jurisdiction in matters Ecclesiastical, saving of the Popes. The
town otherwise is mean, and ill inhabited, beautified chiefly with a fair
Cathedral Church, where the ancient Kings of Leon lie enterred. The ancient
inhabitants of this part were the Astures Augustani of Pliny. Salmantica. lo.
8. g. 50. m. lat. 40. grad. 15. mi. Clav.
Salamanca (Salmantica of Ptolemy, and Antoninus) a Bishops See, and a
flourishing University, chiefly for the civil laws; seated upon the river
Tormes. The ancient inhabitants of the country hereabouts were the Vettones of
Strabo, and Ptolemy. Cauria* Civitas Roderici.
Coria (Carium of Ptolemy) a Bishops See. Cuidad Rodrigo, (Rusticana of
Ptolemy) a Bishops See upon the river Gada. The ancient inhabitants were part
of the Lusitani of Ptolemy. Zamora. lon. 8. g. latit. 49. g. 5. m. Clav.
Zamora (Sentica of Ptolemy, and Sentice of Antoninus,) a Bishops See; seated
upon the right shore of the Duero. The town is strong, and fairly built:
Tordesillas, (Segisama of Polybius in Strabo, Palantia.
Segisama Iulia of Ptolemy, and Segisamon of Antoninus.) Palentia (Palantia of
Ptolemy, and Antoninus, and Pallantia of Strabo, and Mela, the name not much
changed,) seated upon the river Carrion; aunciently an University, removed
thence to Salamanca by king Ferdinand the third. Vallisoletum, and Vallis
Oletana. lon. 10. g. 10. m. lat. 42. g. Clav.
Vallidolid, (Pintia of Ptolemy,) situated upon the river Pisuerga, a late
University, (founded by Philip the second) and the chief of the three
Cancellariaes of Castille, and Leon, whither the greatest part of that kingdom
resort for matters of justice* By means hereof, and of the Kings Court,
residing for the most here, and at Madrid, the town is become very populous;
fair, large, and of great state, nothing yielding to the best cities in
Spain; Lisbona, and Sevilla excepted. The ancient inhabitants of this part of
Castille were the Vaccaei of Ptolemy, but extended much further. Strabo
reckons Pallantia amongst the Arevacae, Burgos. lon. 12. g. lat. 42. g. 48.
m. Clav.
but erroneously. Burgos amongst shady mountains near to Monte D'oca, and the
head of the river Relanzon, founded by Nunnius Belchis, a Dutchman, son in
law to James Porcellus, one of the first Earls of Castille, out of certain
lesser towns, and villages, lying hereabouts, amongst the which, as is
supposed, was Braum of Ptolemy. It continued after this for a long time the
royal seat of the kings of Castille. It is now an Archbishops See, retayning
the chief place amongst the cities of the kingdom of Castille, and Leon in
the Parliaments, or general assemblies of the states. The rest, which have
voices in the diets hereof, are Toledo, Leon, Granado, Sivilla, Cordova,
Murcia, Soria, Avila, Segovia, Vallidolid, Salamanca, Zamora, Taurus, Cuenca,
Guadalaiara, Madrid, and Iaen; all the other towns excluded. Without Burgos
flourishes the rich Nunnery de las Huelgas, a monastery of especial revenue,
whereinto none can be admitted, but such as are noblely descended. In the
mountains some 20 miles herefrom, where is the Chapel, called Nuestra Senora
d'oca, sometimes stood the town Auca, giving the name of Saltus Aucensis to the
part of Idubeda, now called Monte D'oca. Abula.
Avila, a Bishops See, under the hills, named from hence the Mountains of Avila
Segovia, Segobia. lon 9. g. 30. m. lat. 38. grad. Clav.
(Segovia of Pliny, and Antoninus, and Segubia of Ptolemy) a Bishops See, and a
rich town of clothing, lying under the same mountainous ridge. Here yet
stands almost whole an ancient Aquaeduct of the Romans, the most entire, and
fairest monument in Spain. Cronna del Conde, (Clunia of Ptolemy, Pliny, and
Antoninus, one of the 7 resorts of the province Tarraconensis.) Vxama, (Vxama
of Pliny, and Antoninus) a Bishops See. Soria, near unto the head of the
Duero. At Garay, a village town, near hereunto, stood sometimes that famous
Numantia, renowned for a 14 years wars against the Romans, subdued by Scipio
African the younger. The ancient inhabitants of the country from Segovia were
the Arevacae of Ptolemy, the Arrebaci of Pliny, the Arevaci of Strabo, part of
the Celtiberi. Logronnium.
Beyond Monte D'oca Naiara. Logronnio upon the Ebro, (Iuliobriga of Ptolemy,
and Iuliobrica of Pliny, a city of the Cantabri.) Calagurris.
Cala^ora upon the same river, a Bishops See (Calagorina of Ptok my, Calaguris
of Strabo, and Calagurris of Antoninus, a town of the Vascones, and the
country of the Oratour-Quintilian.)

CASTILLIA LA NVEVA. Castella Nov.

BOunded upon the North, with the Mountains of Segovia, and Avila, dividing it
from Castillia la Veia; environed on the other sides with Extremadura,
Andaluzia, Granado, and part of the kingdom of Aragon. The country is
Champian, and plain for the most part, yielding sufficient plenty of corn,
fruits, and other necessary provision Chiefer towns are Talavera, seated upon
the Taio, and belonging to the Archbishop of Toledo, Toletum. lon^. 10. g.
lat. 40. gr. Clav.
(Libora of Ptolemy.) Toledo (Toletum of Pliny, and Antoninus, then the chief
city of the Carpetani,) mounted upon a steep and uneven rock upon the right
shore of the river Taio, with whose circling streams it is almost round
encompassed. By the Goths it was made the chamber, and royal seat of their
Kings. Under the Moors it became a petty kingdom, the strongest hold the
Infidels had in those parts; after 5 years siege in the year 1085 recovered
from them by Alfonsus the sixth, King of Castille and Leon. It is now the chief
city of the country, an University, and an Archbishops S^e of especial
revenue, the Bishop whereof is the Primate of Spain, and the Chancelour of the
kingdom. The town by means of its situation is very strong, rather great,
then fair, the private buildings being mean, the streets narrow, close,
hilly, Madritum.
and uneven, very troublesome to walk, and go upon. Madrid, (Mantua of
Ptolemy) upon the river Guadarrama in the heart, and center of Spain.) The
town by means of the Court is become of late years one of the most fair,
and populous places of the kingdom. Some 8 miles from hence stands the
magnificent, and stately monastery of S. Laurence, founded by King Philip the
second. Alcala de Henares, Complutum. lon. 10. g 30. m lat. 41. g. 40. m. Clav.
(Complutum of Ptolemy, and Antoninus) upon the river Henares. Here now
flourishes a famous University, especially for the study of Divinity, founded
in the reign of King Ferdinand the fifth by Francisco Ximenes, Cardinal, and
Archbishop of Toledo. Guadalaiara upon the same river (Caracca of Ptolemy,
naming the Charracitani, a people mentioned by Plutarch in the life of
Sertorius.) The country hitherto were the Carpetani of Strabo, and Ptolemy.
Calatrava upon the river Guadiana. Here begun, and was first named the famous
military order of Calatrava. Nere hereunto, where is the Chapel of Nuestra
Senora d'Oreto, stood sometimes Oretum Germanorum of Ptolemy, occasioning the
name of the Oretani of the same author. Segura. Alcaraz, giving the names to
the mou^tainous tracts of Sierra de Alcaraz, and Monte de Segura, parts of the
Orospeda of Strabo. Not far from Alcaraz upon an inaccessible mountain,
surrounded with deep vallyes, stands Castona la Veia (Castulon of Ptolemy,
Castul^.
Castulo of Antoninus, and Castaon of Strabo, then a chief City of the
Oretani, and the country sometimes of Himilce, the wife of the great Hannibal,)
at this day a poor, and ignoble village. The part of Sierra Morena, from
hence, or Alcaraz extending toward Cordova, was named hereof by Caesar Saltus
Castulonensis. Cuenca, Conch^.
a Bishops See, and seat of the Inquisition, situated upon the top of a
steep, and abrupt hill amongst the mountains of Orospeda, near to the heads
of the river Xucar, and Huecar, and not far from that of the Taio; first built
by the Moors, whom it a long time served, as an invincible fortress against
the neighboring Christians, secured by the asperous site thereof, and the
strait, craggy, and uneasy ways unto it, wanting only water, which is
altogether conveyed hither by conduit pipes from the neighboring mountains,
won from them in the year 1177 by Sanctius the second, king of Castille. The
part here of the Orospeda is named from hence Monte de Cuenca. Melina. From
hence the adjoining mountainous tract of the Orospeda is now called Monte de
Molina. Sigontia. long. 13. g. 30. m. lat. 40. g. 50. m. Clav.
Siguenca, a Bishops See, beautified with a fair Cathedral Church, (Condabora
of Ptolemy, a city of the Celtiberi.)

ESTREMADVRA.
Having the mountains of Castille upon the North; upon the South Sierra
Morena, and Andaluzia; upon the East Castillia la Nueva; and upon the West the
kingdom of Portugal. The air here is extraordinarily clear, and for that
cause in Summer very hot, and scorching. The country is plain, and good
pasture ground, especially that grassie bridge under the which the river
Guadiana is hidden; yet in regard of the heat very dry, and scarce of waters,
as of inhabitants, having few cities and towns for so large an extent, and
those little, and ill inhabited. Chiefer here amongst are Placenza, Placentia.
a Bishops See, enjoying a sweet, and pleasant situation near unto the
mountains of Castille. In a solitary place, not far from this city, stands
the Monastery of S. Iustus, whither the mighty Prince Charles the fifth, tired
with sickness, and the burden of a troublesome Empire, some few years before
his death quitting the world, voluntarily retired; spending there the rest of
his days in prayers and divine meditation. Alcantara upon the right shore of
the Taio (Norba Caesarea of Ptolemy, and Norba Caesariana of Pliny, then a
colony of the Romans.) It was afterward the seat of the Knights of the order
of Alcantara, from thence thus named. Merida, Emerita.
(Emerita of Mela, and Antoninus, and Augusta Emerita of Ptolemy, and Pliny, a
Roman colony, and iuridicall resort, and the chief city of Lusitania) seated
upon the river Guadiana, and named thus from the Emeriti milites, or Legionary
Soldiers of the Romans, who had served out their time in the wars, whereof
it was a Colony.) Ausonius prefers it in his time before the rest of the
cities of Spain. The town now is very ruinous, mean, and empty of people,
showing nothing worthy of its ancient greatness, saving only a goodly bridge
over the Taio, built, as appears by the inscription, by the Romans. Badaios,
a Bishops See, frontiring upon Portugal. Medelino. Neete hereunto the river of
Guadiana hides it self under ground for the space often miles; breaking out
again near unto the town of Villaria. Guadalupe upon the pleasant banks of
the river thus called, shaded here on both sides with thick, and tall groves
of poplar trees. Here is visited with great, and thronging devotion the much
honored Image of our Lady of Guadalupe, of the like grand esteem with this
Nation, as is that of Madona de Loretto with the Italians, affirmed to be the
same which Gregory the great carried about with him in a solemn procession he
made in Rome, in the time of a fierce, and general pestilence then raging in
Christendom, ceasing hereupon; given afterward by him to S. Leander, Bishop
of Sivilla, religiously there kept until the Moorish invasion, then carried
from thence, secretly hidden, and about the year 1336, miraculously discovered
by a neate-heard, and a Chapel erected thereunto, the occasion of the Town.
Birtius notwithstanding, and Montanus place here the town named Caecilia
Gemelliana by Ptolemy, and Castra Caecilia by Antoninus. The ancient
inhabitants of Estremadura were the Celtici, and part of the Turditani, and
Lusitani, lying in both provinces of Baetica, and Lusitania.

ANDALVZIA. Vandalitia.

BOunded upon the North, with the mountains of Sierra Morena, and with
Estremadura, and Castillia la Nueva; upon the West, with Algarve in Portugal;
upon the East, with Granado; and upon the South, with the Straights of
Gibraltar, and seas Mediterranean, and Atlantique, extended betwixt the mouth
of the rivers Guadiana, and Guadalantin. The country is most fruitful, and
pleasant, flourishing as well the mountains, as plains, with a continuate
greenes of vines, olives, and other plants, and fruit trees. Only water here
is scant, the common want of Spain. The air likewise in regard of the more
Southern situation thereof is very immoderate, and scorching in Summer,
notwithstanding refreshed in the night with constant cool gales of wind,
breathing from the neighboring Ocean. Chiefer towns are Sevilla, (Hispalis of
Strabo, Hispalis. long. 7. g. 15. m. latit. 37. g. Clav.
Ptolemy, and Pliny, then a flourishing colony of the Romans, and one of their
four juridicall resorts for Baetica) seated upon the great river Guadalquivir.
Under the Moors it was made the first seat of their Spanish Empire, by
Alahor, lieftenant for the Miramamoline Zuleiman, removed to Cordova. The
dominion of the Spanish Moors afterward divided, it became the head of a
petty kingdom of that nation, containing the greatest part of this Province,
with Algarve in Portugal, recovered from the Infidels by Ferdinand the third
king of Castille, and Leon. It is now an Archbishops See, and the only staple
for the commodityes of the West Indyes, belonging to the Crown of Castille,
rich, populous, beautified with fair and stately buildings, both public, and
private, great, accounted the second city of Spain, the next unto Lisbona,
containing about 6 miles in compass, and after Botero his account some-80000
inhabitants. The river unto it is deep, and navigable. The country about it is
plain, pleasant, and most fruitful. About a league upon the East hereof is
Sevilla la Veia (Italica of Strabo, Ptolemy, and Antoninus, and Ilipa, surnamed
Italica of Pliny, the country of the mighty Emperors Trajan, and Adrian,) now
a base, and obscure village. Along the course of the Guadalquivir Palacios*
Nebrissa.
Cabecas. Le-brixa, (Nebrissa of Strabo, Luceferi Fanum.
and Ptolemy, and Nebrissa surnamed Venerea of Pliny.) S. Lucar de Barrameda,
Luciferi Farum of Ptolemy,) a noted port in the way to Sivilla, lying at the
mouth of the river Guadalquivir. Puerto de S. Maria, (Mnesthei portus of
Ptolemy,) a commodious haven town at the mouth of the river Guadalete. Xeres
de la Frontera in the maine land (Asta of Ptolemy, and Antoninus, and Asta
Regia of Strabo, and Pliny.) In the fruitful country hereof grow the
plentiful Xeres sack, named thus from the town. It breeds likewise the
most fierce, and swift gennets. Nere hereunto upon the river Guadalete was
fought that fatal battle betwixt the Moors, and Roderigo the last King of
the Goths. Medina Sidonia (Asindum of Ptolemy, and Asido Caesariana of Pliny.)
Hereof the Dukes of Medina Sidonia are entitled. Conil, a seacoast town
beyond the Island of Cadiz, belonging to the Dukes of Medina Sidonia. Tarif,
upon the same seacoast, so named from Tarif, general of the Moors in their
first Spanish invasion, by whom it was founded. Here Lodovicus Nonius
conjectureth sometimes to have stood the famous Tartessus of Herodotus, Strabo,
and other ancient authors, rich in gold, and silver, and visited by
continual fleetes of the Tyrian Merchants, as by the Phocenses in the reign
of Arganthonius a little before their expugnation by Cyrus; the same doubtless
with that Tharsis mentioned in the Scriptures, from whence Salamon did fetch
part of his gold for the adorning of his new-built temple at Jerusalem. Some
in Strabo place this, where then was Carteia, whose position now is alike
uncertain. Others in the same author betwixt the two channels, or branches of
the river Baetis, called then, as was the town Tartessus, and as was the
neighboring country from hence Tartessis. The mention hereof is famous; but
the town through age ruinated, or the name thereof quite changed in the time
of Strabo, and other ancient Geographers. Algeriza upon the same seacoast.
Cibraltar a strong town of war at the entrance of the Straights, lying under
the mountain, named Calpe by Strabo, after Pliny one of the pillars of
Hercules, and the bounds of his labors, the furthest point of Spain, and
Europe toward the South. The narrow channel of the Sea betwixt this, and
Afrique was called by the ancients Fretum Herculeum, Gaditanum, and
Tartessiacum, from the famous pillars, Island, and city before mentioned; now
from hence Estrecho de Gibraltar. They are in length 15 miles, and in breadth,
where they are the straitest, Corduba. Ion. 9. g. 40. m. lat. 37. gr. 50. m.
Clav.
about 7 miles. Cordova further up within the land, at the foot of Sierra
Morena, and upon the right shore of the river Guadalquivir (Corduba of Strabo,
Ptolemy, and Mela, a famous colony of the Romans, the first they planted in
this province, surnamed Patritia by Pliny, a juridicall resort, and the chief
city of Baetica, reckoned by Ausonius amongst the 4 chiefest of Spain, the
country of Lucan, and of the two Senecaes.) Under the Moors it remained for a
long time the chief seat of their Spanish dominions; after Alahor the
residence of the Leiftenants of the Miramamolines, as afterward of their
Kings. The Empire hereof being divided, it was made the head of a particular
kingdom, named from hence, containing then part of Andaluzia, with the country
of Granado; taken from the Infidels by Ferdinand the third, King of Castille.
It is now a Bishops See, and one of the two seats of the Inquisition for this
province. The town is large, and spacious, beautified with a magnificent
Castle standing at the West end thereof, the palace sometimes of the Moorish
Kings. The buildings otherwise for the most part are mean. The situation is
very pleasant, and happy, over-looking toward the South a fruitful, and even
plain, toward the North overtopped with the steep, and hollow mountains of
Sierra Morena, reaching almost to the subvrbs, greened over with olives, vines,
and other plants. Iaen, a Bishops See. At Anduxar, a village distant some half
a Spanish league from hence, stood sometimes the town Illurgis of Ptolemy, and
Illiturgis of Antoninus, and Illiturgi surnamed Forum Iulium of Pliny. Ecceia.
Ecceia upon the river Chenil (Astygis of Ptolemy, Astygi of Mela, and
Antoninus, and Astygi, surnamed Augusta Firma, of Pliny, a Roman colony, and
one of the four juridicall resorts of Baetica.) Ossuna.
Ossuna (Vrso of Strabo, and Pliny,) whereof the dukes of Ossuna are thus
entitled, a late University, founded in the year 1549 by John Telter de
Girona, Earl of Vrenna. The fruitful, and pleasant country hereabouts
abounds in olive trees. Marchena upon a hill, overlooking a champian, and
most fruitful country, especially for olives, the ordinary residence of the
Dukes of Arcos. The ancient inhabitants of Andaluzia were the Turditani of
Ptolemy, and the Turditani, and Turduli of Strabo, divided by the river Baetis,
and lying upon the seacoast on this side of the river Anas, at that time the
most civil, and learned people of all the Spaniards, using Grammar, and having
their written monuments of v. Strab. Geo. lib. 3.
antiquity, poems, and laws in verse for the space after their account of six
thousand years; the Elysian fields of Homer, the extraordinary riches,
pleasure, and fertility of the country occasioning the fiction. Here also
dwelt part of the Turduli of Ptolemy, and Bastuli of Strabo, and Ptolemy.

GRANADO.
HAving upon the West, the river Guadalantin, the bounds thereof and Andaluzia;
upon the North, Castillia la Nueva; upon the East, Murcia; and upon the South,
the Mediterranean Sea, reaching from the river Guadalantin unto the town of
Vera. It contains in length, accompting from Ronda to Huescar, 200 miles, and
in breadth, from Cabili unto Almugnecar upon the Mediterranean, 100 miles. The
circuit of the whole after Marinaeus Siculus is 700 miles. The North part is
plain; the South ouer-spread with the steep, and inaccessible mountains of
the Alpuxarras, and other names of the Orospeda, swelling along the seacoasts
hereof. The soil is generally very fat as well the hills, as the plain
country, yielding plenty of corn, wine, and other sorts of delicate fruits.
Granatum, and Granata. long. 11. g. lat. 37. gr. 50. m. Clav.
Granado is the chief city, seated in the heart of the country upon two
greater hills (besides others which are lesser) betwixt which runs the little
river Darrien, arising out of the mountains 17 miles upon the East hereof;
divided into four parts or quarters, Al-hambre, El-Alvesin, El-Granado, and
Antiquerula (the two former being situated upon the hills, the other two in the
valley below,) containing together, at the time that the town was won by King
Ferdinand the fifth, some 200000 inhabitants, now not so many. In El-Granado is
the Cathedral Church, of a round figure, having sometimes been a Mahumetane
temple, where in a sumptuous Chapel, built since by the Christians, Ferdinand
the fifth and Isabella Kings of Spain lie enterred. In Al-hambre stand two
magnificent palaces, the one more lately erected by the Christian princes, the
other the seat of the ancient Kings of the Moors, severally encompassed with
a wall, and enjoying a most pleasant prospect; toward the West and South
ouer-looking a flourishing green plain, garnished with meadows, corn
fields, vineyards, and woods of olives, and to the South the cloudy tops of
Sierra Nevada, distant some 9 miles from thence, being part of Orospeda. The
private buildings are for the most part of brick, after the custom of the
Moors rather many, then costly, the streets then standing thick, and close
together, now (many houses being pulled down, and partly for want of
inhabitants,) made more wide, and enjoying a more free air. Here by means of
the plenty of Mulbery trees great store of silk is made, and wouen. Upon the
hill Elvire near hereunto stood sometimes the town Illiberis of Ptolemy.
Other towns of better note are Loxa, upon the river Darrien, enjoying a most
fruitful, and pleasant situation. Guadix, a Bishops See. Alhama (Artigis of
Ptolemy, Artigi surnamed Iulienses of Pliny, and Artigi of Antoninus,) seated
in a fruitful soil amongst steep, and picked rocks, wherewith it is
environed; a town now much frequented by the Spanish nobility by means of the
hot medicinable bathes thereof. Antiquera, (Singilia of Pliny.) Arunda.
Ronda. The neighboring part of the mountain Orospeda is now called from
hence Sierra de Ronda. Nearer unto the sea Mediterranean Munda, Munda.
(Munda of Strabo, and Pliny.) Here the great battaill was fought betwixt
Julius Caesar, and Cn: and Sextus Pompeij, the sons of Pompey the great.
Malaca. lon. 23. g. 30. m. lat. 38. g Hues.
Cartima. Malaga (Malaca of Strabo, Ptolemy, Mela, and Antoninus,) seated upon
the Mediterranean at the mouth of the river Guadalquivireio, a Bishops See, a
strong town of war, and a noted port, well known unto the English, and
Dutch Merchants, trading there for sacks, rasins, almonds, and the like
fruits. Velez Malaga, (Sex of Ptolemy, Sexitanum of Antoninus, and
Sexi-Firmum, surnamed Iulium of Pliny.) From the huge neighboring tops of the
Aspuxarras the far remote shores of Afrique, with the Straights of Gibraltar,
and towns of Seuta, and Tangier may plainly be discerned; covered until of
late years with an incredible multitude of villages of the Moriscos, banished
into Afrique by the edict of king Philip the third, with the rest of that
of-spr^ng. Almeria upon the Mediterranean, (Abdara of Ptolemy, and Abdera of
Mela, after Strabo founded by the Tyrians, or after Pliny by the
Carthaginians.) It is now a Bishops See. Muxacra upon the same shore of the
Mediterranean beyond Cabo de Gatas; thought to be Murgis of Ptolemy, Pliny;
and Antoninus, the furthest town of Baetica. Vera, upon the same seacoast,
the furthest town toward France, and the East of the country of Granado;
thought to be Virgao of Pliny, naming the neighboring bay, or crook of the
Mediterranean Sinum Virgitanum in Mela. Porcunna within the land (Obulcum of
Ptolemy, and Obulco of Strabo, and Pliny.) The ancient inhabitants hereof were
parts of the Bastuli, and Turduli of Strabo, and Ptolemie.

MVRCIA.
BOunded upon the West, with the kingdom of Granado; upon the North, with
Castillia la Nueva; upon the East, with Valentia; and upon the South, with the
Mediterranean, intercepted betwixt the town of Vera, and the river Segura. The
country is for the greatest part dry, barren, and ill inhabited. Towns of
better note are Murcia the chief town, naming the country (Menralia of
Ptolemy,) seated in a fresh, and pleasant plain, planted with pomegranates,
and other excellent fruit trees, Carthago Nova. lo. 28. g. 20. m. lat. 38. gr.
20. m. Hues.
a Bishops See, and seat of the Inquisition. Carthagena, (Carthago of Ptolemy,
and Pliny, founded by Hasdrubal Carthaginian, Successor in the government of
Spain unto Hamilcar, father of the great Hannibal, taken during the second
Punique war by Publius Scipio the African) and afterward made a Roman
Colony, and one of the 7 iuridicall resorts of Tarraconensis, and by the
Emperor Constantine the great, the principal city of the Province, named from
hence in Rufus Festus Carthaginesis.) Twice sacked, and rased to the ground by
the barbarous Vandals, and Goths, in a long time lay buried in its ruins;
reedified, and strongly fortified of late years by King Philip the second,
fearing a surprisall thereof by the Turkish Pirates invited by the opportunity
of the fair, and spacious haven thereof. The town is yet but mean,
containing 600 households, or families. The ancient inhabitants hereof were
part of the Contestani of Ptolemy.

The foreign Conquests, which the Kings of Spain enjoy now in right of the
Crown of Castille, are the towns of Oran, and Melilla, with the haven
Musalquivir, and rock of Velez in the Continent of Barbary, the Canary Islands,
and the New-found-world of America; Brasil excepted.

ARAGON.
BOunded upon the South with the Sea Mediterranean, extended from the mouth of
the river Segura unto the castle of Salsas, and frontire of Languedoc; upon the
East with the Pyrenaean mountains from the sea Mediterranean until toward
the head of the river Agra, or Aragon, from France; upon the North with that
river from Navarra, then with a winding line, continued from the Ebro by the
towns of Taradona, Hariza, Daroca, Xativa, and Orihuela unto the
Mediterranean, and mouth of the river Segura, dividing it from the rest of the
kingdom of Castille. It contains the three Provinces of Valentia, Aragonia,
and Catalonia, with the Land of Russillon.

VALENTIA. Valentiae Regnum.

HAving the Sea Mediterranean upon the East, intercepted betwixt the rivers
Segura, and Cinia; the Segura, and Country of Murcia upon the South; Catalonia,
and the river Cinia upon the North; and upon the West Aragonia. The country
seems a continuate garden; the fields in regard of the mild temperature of
the Heavens, garnished all the year long with sweet smelling flowers, and
miraculously euery-where abounding with Pomegranates, Limons, and other
delicious fruite-trees. Otherwise for corn it yields not that plenty, which
might suffice the inhabitants. The sheep here bear the finest fleece
thorough the whole Spain, being, as some relate, of the breed of Cottes-would
in England, transported into this Continent in the reign of Ferdinand the
fifth. The inhabitants by reason of their too great pleasure, and delicacy are
accounted less warlike, then the rest of the Spanish nation. Of these were
reckoned of late years no fewer then 22000 families of the Moriscos, for the
most part inhabiting the country, and like unto those of the Alpuxarras,
retaining the language, as in a manner, the behavior, and manner of living of
the ancient Moors; with the rest of that race in Spain banished into Afrique
by King Philip the third. Chiefer towns here are Orihuela (Orcelis of
Ptolemy,) a Bishops See upon the river Segura, and confines of Murcia.
Alicantt. long. 28. g. 40. m. lat. 39. g. Hues.
Alicante, (Illicias of Ptolemy, Illici of Pliny, Illice of Mela, and Ilicis of
Antoninus, a free Colony of the Romans, and giving the name to the bay, called
by Mela Sinus Illicitanus, now the bay of Alicante) a noted port upon the
Mediterranean. Dianium.
Denia (Dianium of Ptolemy, Strabo, Pliny, and Solinus, a stipendiary town of
the Romans; first founded by the Massillians,) seated upon a hill upon the
brinke of the Mediterranean, over which it enjoys a fair, and large
prospect. Hereof was entitled the Marquess of Denia, of the house of Roias,
and Sandoval, since created Duke of Lerma. Betwixt this town, and Alicante
lies the great Promontory Ferraria, (named Artemus, Dianium, and Hemeroscopium
by the ancients.) Gandia, giving the title, and name to the Dukes thus styled
of the house of Borgia; Valentia. long. 14. g. lat. 39. g. 30. m. Clav.
a petty University, lately instituted by the Dukes. Valentia, (Valentia of
Ptolemy, Pliny, Mela, and Antoninus) then a Colony of the Romans, founded by
Iunius Brutus, by the Moors afterward made the head city of the kingdom thus
named) now an Archbishops See, and the chief city of the Province; situated
upon the right shore of the river Guadalivar, some 3 miles from the
Mediterranean. The town is rich, fair, well traded, and exceedingly pleasant.
Here were borne under contrary stars the learned Lodovicus Vives, and that
monster of Popes, Setabis.
and men, Alexander the sixth, Bishop of Rome* Xativa (Setabis of Strabo, and
Ptolemy) a Bishops See; situated upon the river Xucar. Xelva, or Chelva,
supposed by Florianus to be Incibilis of Livy, where Hanno was overcome by
Scipio African the great. Sogorve (Segobriga of Ptolemy, and Strabo, the chief
city of the Celtiberi,) now a Bishops See. Saguntum. lo. 14. g. 36. m. lat. 39.
g. 40. m. Clav.
Morvedre upon a river thus named (Saguntum of Strabo, Ptolemy, and Pliny, and
Saguntus of Mela, and Antoninus, founded by the Zacynthians, confederate with
the Romans, destroyed by Hannibal a little before the second Punique war, and
reedified afterward by the Romans, and made one of their Colonies.) The
ancient inhabitants of the country of Valentia were parts of the Bastita^,
Contestani, Edetani, and Celtiberi of Ptolemy, and other more ancient Authors.

ARAGONIA. Aragonia.

LYing with an equal division upon both sides of the river Ebro; having upon
the South Valentia, and Aragonia; upon the West, the two Castilles; upon the
North, the river of Aragon, and Navarra; and upon the East the Pyrenaean
mountains, and France. The country is nothing so pleasant, and fruitful, as
are the parts immediately before described, ouerrun with the branches of
Idubeda, and of the Pyrenaean Mountains, and commonly dry, and scanted of
waters, where it is not refreshed with rivers, and for this cause ill
inhabited; especially toward the Mountains Pyrenaean, where in regard of this
want in some places neither town, nor house are to be seen for many days
journeye. Chiefer towns are Albarracino, a Bishops See. Daroca under Sierra
Balbaniera. Calataiuta.
Calataiut upon the river Xalon, named thus from Aiub, a Saracen prince, the
founder thereof, Some half a mile from hence, and upon the Xalon, with whose
streams it is almost round encompassed, arises the hill Baubola, the seat
sometimes of the city Bilbis of Ptolemy, and Bilbilis of Strabo, and Antoninus,
a municipium of the Romans, and the country of the Municipes Augusta mihi,
quos Bilbilis acri
Poet Martial. Above this hill the little river Cagedo falls into the Xalon,
mentioned likewise by the Epigramatist. Taradona, (Turiaso of Ptolemy, and
Antoninus,) a Bishops See, Monte creat, rapidis qui Salo cingit aquis. etc.
situated near to Monte Moncaio, and the borders of Castille. Saragoca
(Caesaraugusta of Ptolemy, Strabo, Pliny, and Antoninus, then a Colonie, and
Municipium of the Romans, and one of their seven juridicall resorts of
Tarraconensis, vid. Val. Martialis lib. 10. Epigram. 103. ^ogedus flu.
Caesar-augusta. lon. 14. g. 15. m. lat 41. g. 45. m. Clav.
named thus from the Emperor Augustus Caesar, by whom it was first made a
colony, formerly being called Salduba from certain neighboring Salt-wiches,
yet extant in the Mountains.) Under the Moors it became the head of a
particular kingdom thus named, recovered in the year 1118 by the Christians,
and afterward made the chief residence of the kings of Aragon. It is now an
Archbishops See, an University, and the seat of the Inquisition, and
Vice-roye of the province, situated in a goodly champian upon the right shore
of the river Ebro. The city is fair, and large, having wide, open, and hansome
streets, and containing 17 parishes, besides 14 monasteries, and sundry
chapels dedicated to the blessed Virgin; amongst the which is that called
Nuestra Senora del Pilar, believed by this credulous people to have been
erected by James, surnamed the Lesser, the Apostle of Spain, and patron of the
Castillians. Beyond the Ebro Cuera upon the river Gallego. Fraga upon the river
Senga, (Gallica Flava of Ptolemy, and Gallicum of Antoninus.) Balbastro upon
the Senga (Burtina of Ptolemy, and Bortina of Antoninus,) now a Bishops See.
Moncon. Huesca, (Osca of Strabo, Ptolemy, and Antoninus, the place, where
Sertorius in Plutarch detayned as hostages for their fathers fidelity the
children of the Spanish nobility under the pretense of trayning them up in
learning; afterward upon their revolt cruelly murdered by him.) It is now a
Bishops See, and a petty University. Venasque amongst the Pyrenaean mountains.
Iacca, amongst the same mountains, a Bishops See, the first seat, or
residence of the Kings of Aragon. From hence were named the Iaccetani of
Ptolemy, and Strabo, and Lacetani of Pliny. The ancient inhabitants of Aragonia
were the Iaccetani, Cerretani, and Lacetani, now mentioned, with parts of the
Celtiberi, Illergetes, and Edetani.

CATALONIA. Catalonia.

BOunded upon the West, with Valentia, and the river Cinia; upon the North,
with Aragonia; upon the East, with the Earldom of Russillon, and the
Pyrenaean Mountains from France; and upon the South, with the Sea
Mediterranean betwixt the river Cinia, and Cabo de Creux. The country is
hilly, and full of woods, yielding small store of corn, wine, and fruits;
enriched more thorough its maritine situation, then by homebred commodities.
Dertusa.
Chiefer towns are Tortosa, a Bishops See, seated upon the river Ebro,
(Dertosa of Ptolemy, and Antoninus, and Dertossa of Strabo, Tarraco. lo. 18. g.
30. m. lat. 38. g. 20. m. Clav.
a Roman colonie.) Taragona upon the Mediterranean, some mile upon the East of
the river Francolino, (Tarracon of Strabo, and Ptolemy, and Tarraco of Pliny,
Mela, and Solinus, a colony of the Romans, founded by the two brethren, Cn: and
Publius Scipio, during the second Punique war, and afterward made their
chief town, and giving the name unto the Province Tarraconensis.) It is now
an Archbishops See, containing two miles in compass, and about 700 families,
or households. Lerida, (Ilerda of Strabo, Ptolemy, Lucan, and Antoninus) upon
the river Segre, a Bishops See, and University. Vich, a Bishops See, (Ausa of
Ptolemy, naming the Authetani of the same Author, and the Ausetani of Pliny.)
Vrgel, (Erga of Ptolemy) seated under the Pyrenaean Mountains. Barcino. long.
17. g. 15. m. lat. 41 grad. 36. m. Clav.
Barcelona (Barcinon of Ptolemy, Barchino of Mela, and Barcino of Pliny, and
Antoninus, a Roman colonie, surnamed Faventia by Pliny,) situated upon the sea
Mediterranean betwixt the rivers Besons, and Lobregat. Won from the Moors by
Jews the Godly, son to the Emperor Charles the great, it became the chief
city of the famous Earldom thus named; whereunto in continuance of time
accrewed the whole Catalonia, held first under the subjection, and sovereignty
of the Frenchmen, afterward commanded by free princes, and lastly by Raimund
the fifth, marrying unto Petronilla, inheritresse of Aragon, united with that
kingdom. It is now a rich, and noted port, a Bishops See, and the seat of the
Viceroy, and Inquisition for this province; the place where ordinarily
embarque the Spanish soldiers bound for the Levant Isles, and Italy, as for the
Netherlands by the way hereof, and of the Alps, and Germany. The town is
large, beautified with stately buildings both private, and public, the
streets fair, and open, the walls whole, and entire, with wide, and deep
ditches. The country about it is pleasant, but not so fruitful. Here great
store of ships are made both for war, and burden. Near hereunto, upon the
right shore of the river Lobregat, arises the pleasant mountain, called
Mon-serrato, stuck full of Anchorets Cells, and honored with a much frequented
chapel, and image of the blessed Virgin, Blanda.
whose ravishing description read in L. Nonius. Blanes, (Blanda of Ptolemy,
and Mela, and Blandae of Pliny,) upon the Mediterranean at the mouth of the
river Tardera. Ampurias, (Emporium of Strabo, Emporiae.
and Emporiae of Ptolemy, and Pliny, founded by the Massilians, and afterward
made a Roman colony,) seated upon the Mediterranean.) The town is now poor,
and base, affording only a safe harbor, Gerunda.
and road for ships. Girona (Girunda of Ptolemy, and Antoninus,) a Bishops
See, situated at the meetings of the little rivers, Ter, and Onhar. The town is
little, but hansomly built, and well traded. Upon the same Seacoast under the
Pyrenaean mountains is Rosas, Rosae.
(Rhoda of Ptolemy, and Rhodope of Strabo, founded by the Emporitanes, or
Rhodians,) now a mean, and obscure village. Further up lies Cabo de Creux
(Veneris Templum of Ptolemy,) Veneris Templum.
a promontory of the Mediterranean, the furthest point Eastwards of Catalonia.
The people more aunciently inhabiting Catalonia were the Authetani, or
Ausetani, Indigeti, Laeetani, and Cosetani, with part of the Ilercaones, and
Iaccetani of Ptolemy, and other ancient authors.

THE LAND OF RVSSILLON. Terra Russinonis.

INcluded betwixt two branches of the Pyrenaean Mountains, beginning at the
mountain Cano, and the one extended to Colibre, and toward Cabo de Creux, and
the other unto Salsas; having upon the North, the maine ridge of the Mountains
Pyrenaean; upon the West, Catalonia; upon the East, Languedoc in France; and
upon the South, the sea Mediterranean from Cabo de Creux unto the castle of
Salsas. Places here of note are Colibre, Illibetis. Ptol. Geog. lib. 2. c. 10.
(Illiberis of Ptolemy) commendable only for its antiquity; now an ignoble
village, affording notwithstanding a safe, and commodious harbor for ships.
Helna a Bishops See upon the river Techo. Salsulae.
Salsas, (Salsulae of Strabo,) a strong castle, frontiring upon Languedoc, and
France, the fortress, and bulwark of Spain upon this side. The piece after
the new, and best manner of fortification consists of many several wards,
distinguished a part with wide, and deep ditches, having bridges over them,
and made defensible, as together, so one against another. Perpignian the only
town here of importance, seated in a pleasant plain upon the river Thelis; a
rich, and flourishing Emporie, and a strong hold against the French, to whose
injury in time of war it is still exposed, built in the year 1068 by
Guinard Earl of Russillon. Some half a Spanish league from hence, Ruscino
Latinorum. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 5. Ruscino Strab. lib. 4. Ruscinum
Pto. lib. Geo. 2. c. 10
where is the Castle of Russillon, sometimes stood Ruscino Latinorum of Pliny,
giving the name to the country.

The Kings of Spain hold in right of the Crown of Aragon the Islands Mallorca,
and Menorca, Sardinia, and Sicily, and in the continent the kingdom of Naples
in Italy.

THE ISLANDS OF SPAIN.
They partly lie within the Straights of Gibraltar in the sea Mediterranean,
and partly without in the maine Ocean.

IN THE MEDITERRANEAN.
THose in the Mediterranean are Mallorca, Menorca, Formentera, and Yvica,
besides some lesser.

MALLORCA. Maiorica.

Lying against the country of Valentia, and containing in circuit about 300
miles, and in breadth, and length, which differ not much, some 100 miles. The
inhabitants are reckoned at some 30000 of all sorts. The land toward the sea
is mountainous; within more plain, and fruitful, yielding sufficient store of
corn, wine, oil, and fruits. Maiorica.
Mallorca is the only town of note, so named from the Island, a little
University; the country of Raimundus Lullius.

MENORCA. Minorica.

IT is less in quantity then the other; from whence it has had the
distinction, and name. It differs not much from it in quality, saving that it
is better stored with beeues, and cattaile. The chief town is Menorca,
Minorica.
called as is the Island, (Mago of Ptolemy.) Here is likewise Cittadella (Iama
of the same author.) Mago. Iama. Ptol. Geo. lib. 2. c. 6.


These two Islands were the famous Baleares Gymnasiae of Strabo, and the
ancients, Baleares Strab. Geog. lib. 3. Bolearides Gymnasiae. Ptol. lib. 2. c.
6.
whose inhabitants were renowned for their skill, and use of slings, their
proper arms, trained up hereunto from their childhood, the first inventors of
them, occasioning the name hereof, whereof we find much mention in the wars
of the Carthaginians, and Romans. They obeyed for the most part the same Lords
with the Continent. Under the Moors they became a particular kingdom; as they
continued for a time under the Christians of the house of Aragon. They belong
now to the Crown of Aragon.

YVICA, AND FORMENTERA.
DIvided asunder by a narrow creek of sea, and situated betwixt the Baleares,
and the Promontory Ferraria of the country of Valentia; the former containing
one hundred miles in circuit, the other about seaventy, Ebusus. Strab. lib. 3.
and Ptol. li. 2. c. 6.
In Yvica, called Ebusus by Ptolemy, and Strabo, great store of salt is made.
It yields no venomous creatures. The chief Town is of the same name with
the Island. Formentera is named Ophiusa in the same authors from the great
number of Serpents, Ophiusa ibid.
and venomous beasts, wherewith it is infested. These two together are called
the Pityusae by Strabo, Pityusae ibid.
from the multitude of Pine trees there growing. About them lie Moncolibre,
Dragonera, and other lesser Islands; for the most part uninhabited, and not
worth relation.

VVITHOVT THE STRAIGHTS. CADIZ. Gades.

THe Island is situated near unto the mouth of the river Guadalquivir; distant
about 700 paces from the maine Land of Andaluzia, joined thereunto with a
bridge, called Puente de Suaco. The Land is fruitful; enriched besides with
fishing, and making of Salt, and by means of the West-Indian traffic, the
bay thereof serving as a road for the fleetes, and ships passing betwixt
Sivilla, and that Continent. Gadira. Ptol. l. 2. c. 4. Gades Caesaris Com.
Bell. Civ. l. 2. c. 7. and 8. Strabo l. 3. Plin. Not. hist. l. 3. c. 1.
Cadiz is the only town (Gades of Pliny, and Strabo, and Gadira of Ptolemy,
founded by the Tyrians, becoming afterward a famous municipium of the Romans,
and one of their four iuridicall resorts for the Province of Baetica, divided
in the time of Strabo into the old, and new towns, the latter of them having
been then lately built by Cornelius Balbus,) seated in the Western part of
the Island. It is now a Bishops See, and a rich and noted port. Here some of the
ancients have put the Pillars of Hercules; whose opinion is rejected by Strabo
in his third book, who would rather have them to have been placed at the
mouth of the Straights, either with Pliny, where were the hills Calpe, and
Abila, or otherwise in two little Islands, neighboring to those two hills, the
Columns then being worn away through antiquity, and the places retaining only
the account, and names hereof. Other Islands, appertaining to the Continent of
Spain, and situated without the Straights in the maine Ocean, are Londobries.
Ptol. Geog. l. 2* c. 5.
Berlinga against Portugal, betwixt the falls of the rivers Taio, and Mondego:
those of Baiona, lying against that Town, and Galitia: and Zaziga, with others
before the town of Corunna, Cassiterides* Strab. l. 3.
conjectured by L. Nonius to be the Cassiterides of Strabo.

THE EIGHT BOOK.
Containing the present bounds, situation, and quality of the country of
France. The Inhabitants. The victory, and great renown of the ancient
Gauls, and Frenchmen. A description of the modern French manners. Their
Languages, and Religion. Their Bishops. The revenues of the Clergy. The manner
of the civil government. The Courts of Parliament, Bailliages, and
Seneschausses. The King. His manner of Succession. The Salique Law. The title of
most Christian King. His dominion, and revenues. The countries, or greater
divisions of France.

FRANCE.
NAmed thus from the victorious, and renowned nation of the Frenchmen.

It is bounded upon the South, with the Sea Mediterranean; upon the West, and
South-west, with the Western, or Aquitanique Ocean, and the Pyrenaean
Mountains from Spain; upon the North, with the English channel; and upon the
East, and North-East, first with Alps from Italy, then with a line drawn from
thence on the hither side of the Rhijn unto the town of Calis, dividing it from
the Low Countries, and Germany.

The greatest length hereof is 660 Italian miles, or 330 French. The breadth
570; the circumference, or compass 2040 of the same miles.

It is situated betwixt the 20, and 38 degrees of longitude, and the 41, and 52
degrees of Northern latitude; or betwixt the 13, or middle parallel of the 5
clime, where the longest day has 15 hours, and the 19, or middle parallel of
the 8 clime, where the same contains 16 hours, and an half.

The Air in regard thereof is very temperate, and pleasing, not so hot, and
scorching, as Spain, before described, nor so cold, and raw, as are the more
Northern parts.

The country is no less pleasant, then fruitful, stored with all varieties
whether for necessity, or ornament, sporting, and prodigal nature can afford;
plain for the most part, and numerously inhabited, not encombred with so many
desert, and fruitles wastes of woods, marshes, and mountains, ordinary to
neighboring regions; not vndeservedly accounted the Garden, and Paradise of
Europe.

The chiefer commodities sent out from hence are corn, and wines, with the
former whereof the wants that way of Spain are abundantly supplied, with the
other those of England, and more Northern countries. It yields such plenty
of salt, as which might seem sufficient to store all Europe, a no small part of
the riches of the kingdom. It likewise brings forth great abundance of
olives, figs, and other sorts of most delicious fruits, proper to hotter
countries, in the Southern parts, where lie Provence, and Languedoc.

The more ancient inhabitants were the Gauls, renowned in times past for
their many great, and famous victories, atcheived thorough the world. From
these the warlike nations of the Celtiberi, Lusitani, and Astures in Spain
were descended. v. T. Livij Hist. Romans li. 5. and 38. Iustini Hist. lib. 20.
and 24. Plutarchum in vita Furij Camilli. Pli. Not. Hist. lib. 3. c. 1. etc.
Cornelium Tacitum de moribus Germanorum (de Boiis.) Beati Rhenani Rerum
Germanicarum. li. 1. and 2. (de Boioarijs.
These under their captain Segovesus victoriously raunged over all Germany,
from whom have sprung the Bohemians, and Bavarians, with other people of that
continent; from whence most probably continuing their conquests, as far as
Scythia, they there founded the Celtoscythae. These under Bellovesus, brother
to Segovesus, about the same time, passing over the Alps, conquered the next
part of Italy unto them, called afterward from hence Gaul Cisalpina. After
this by Brennus they took, and sacked Rome. Afterward by Belgius, and another
Brennus with irresistable might they ra^sacked Illyricum, Pannony, Greece, and
Thrace, from whence under Lomnorius, and Lutorius, ferrying over the
Hellespont, they subdued the whole Asia, lying on this side of the Mountain
Taurus; which together with the neighboring country of Syria they a long time
held under their tribute, seating about the river Halys, and occasioning there
the name of the Gallo-Greekes, or Galatae.

v. infra.
The first, who conquered this victorious nation, and made them subject to
foreign laws (to let pass their private differences with Ariovistus, and the
Germans) were the Romans, as in part by former captains, so totally by C:
Julius Caesar immediately before his civil wars with Pompey. In the reign of
the Emperor Gratian came first hither the Britons from the island of great
Bretaigne, placed in Gaul Armorique by the Tyrant Maximus, rebelling against
Gratian, from whom that part has since been named Bretaigne. Not long after
in the reign of the Emperor Honorius the Burgundians were received in,
intruding amonst the Hedui, and Sequani: then the Visigots, to whom Gaul
Narbonensis was allotted. Shortly after in the reign of the third Valentian
the Franci, or Frenchmen break in, who, the Romans beaten out, and the other
barbarians subdued, in a short time make themselves masters of the whole
province, giving the name of France thereunto. Since the French conquest, and
monarchy the Vascones, a Spanish people, after Pasquier in the time of king
Dagobert the first, or as in Chesne in the reign of Guntran, king of Orleans,
breaking forth of the Pyrenaean mountains, here seized upon that part of
Aquitania, which since from thence has bin called Gascoigne. Afterward in the
reign of Charles the Simple the Normans by force, and composition got
possession of the country called Neustria, named since from these Normandy.
The whole inhabitants by means of their long subjection to the French Crown
are at this day all incorporated into the general name, and account of
Frenchmen.

The French always have been a most warlike, and victorious nation. Sosimus
in Iulianus during their abode in Germany gives them the commendation of the
most hardy, and valiant people of all the Barbarians of that country. Since
their coming into Gaul, and under the race of Meroue we read of many great
affairs of theirs in Italy, Spain, and Germany. Charles the great advanced
their victorious arms over all Europe, establishing the Western Empire in his
family, and the name of the French for many descents. Since the race of Capet
they have planted their victorious ensigns in all the quarters of Europe, and
in sundry parts of Asia, and Africa, as well in those glorious wars against the
Infidells, managed for the greatest part with soldiers of this nation, as in
their many wars nerer home against the jealous neighboring Christians. They
have given Emperors to Bauldwin Earl of Flanders Emperor of Constantinopl.
etc.
Constantinople, and Kings William the Conqueror D of Normandye K of England.
etc.
to England, Henry of Lortaine first Earl of Portugal etc.
Portugal, Charles Duke of Aniou King of Naples, and Scicily. etc.
Naples, Sicily, Charles Martel K. of Hungary son to Charles the Lame K. of
Naples, descended from Charles D. of Aniou etc.
Hungary, Guy of Lusignan king of Jerusalem, afterward of Ciprus by the gift
of Richard the first K. of England.
Ciprus, and Godfrey of Buillon D. of Lorraine, and king of Jerusalem etc.
Jerusalem.

They are now not so much dreaded for arms, as in their more first, and
barbarous times; their ancient fiercenes being much abated thorough long
luxury, and ease, (vices incident to all flourishing states) and the pleasure,
and nicenes of such an effeminate country, and clime.

The modern Frenchman are usually of a middle stature, by complexion hot, and
moist, of body delicate, tender, and very apt for the breeding, and nourishing
of diseases Naturally he is very merry v. Ant. Mag. Geog. (in Gal. lia. etc.
, and pleasant, rather witty, then wise, open, and full of words, of a free
speech, not grave, or affected in his carriage, fickle, unconstant, stirring,
ready upon the least occasion to take up arms, and with as much easines to lay
them down again, and in time of peace to entertain suites in law, faction,
sedition, and domestique quarrels. In wars he is rather furious, then
valiant, hot at the first encounter, but soon cooling, impatient of delay, and
rather snatching, then fairly expecting victory, fighting with little slight,
and skill, and with less foresight, and judgment, more happy, and overcomming
oftener in his sudden, and unthought of, then in set battails, and his
premeditated attempts. To describe him more fully, read the deep, grave,
stayed, and secret Spaniard, and take his contrary.

The Character is of others; neither of their virtues, but blemishes. Great
vices argue in other kinds noe less perfections. The Roman Majesty, and
Empire (as before) restored by them, Religion propagated, and established, and
the Western world subdued by their valor, give otherwise large testimony of
their more then ordinary and transcendent worthiness.

The several languages here spoken are 1 the British, now altogether in use in
the dioceses of St Pol, Treguier, and Kemper, or Bretaigne Bretonant, and
differing little from the Cornish in England. 2 the Basquish, or the language of
the Biscains, spoken betwixt Baione, and Spain, or in the parts, neighboring
unto Guipuscoa. 3 and the French, common to the whole nation, composed (says
Pasquier) of the Latin, and the ancient languages of the Gauls, and
Frenchmen, and distinguished into many different dialects.

The more ancient v. C. Iul. Caes. com. Belli Gall. lib. 6. c. 8, and 9. etc.
religion hereof was in a manner the same with other Heathens. Their gods were
Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, Mercury, and Minerva, to whom they attributed the like
powers, and virtues, which did other Gentiles. Amongst these they chiefly
adored Mercury, most probably for an especial reverence they bore to learning,
whereof they acknowledged him to be the patron. They also, after my French
Author, much honored the Demi-god Hercules, whom they pictured like an old
bald-pate, or gray-bearded Charon, leading after him an infinite sort of people
by a golden chain, fastened to his tongue, and their ears; their Priests given
them thereby to understand, how that the great conquests, which he attained
unto, were rather by fair, and gentle language, then by strong hand, and
violence, and that cautelous, and provident old age, then rash, and
inconsiderate youth, is more fit for the managing of warlike affairs. In their
sacrifices to their Idols they used oftentimes to slay, and offer up men, as
for the public, so for their private weals, when they were desperately
sick, or otherwise in danger of their lives, thinking that they could by no
other means redeem their distressed souls from the anger of their gods,
unless by offering up the souls, and lives of other men. They most commonly
served themselves in these unnatural cruelties with thieves, murderers, and
notorious malefactors, deeming such oblations most acceptable to their gods.
Their Priests, or Ministers of these sacrifices were the Druides, a sect much
honored by them, distinguished from the common sort, and exempted from wars,
taxes, contributions, and all public charges, and governed by a chief, or
head of their own. They were also their judges in civil causes, having power
to excommunicate such stubborn persons, as would not stand unto their censure.
They were also to instruct the younger sort, as in matters of religion, so in
Philosophy, and humane learning, which they did without acquainting them with
the use of characters, or of writing, and reading, fearing that books would
make them too much to trust hereunto, and to neglect the more profitable
exercise of their memory. Amongst other points (now the deeper mysteries of
their science they kept secret amongst themselves) they taught their scholars
the immortality of the soul, and that after the departure thereof from one
body it presently went into another, to make them thereby to be more courageous
in battaill, and the less to fear death; wherein the Gauls became so well
persuaded, that dying, they would usually have buried with them what things
they loved best unto their very bonds, and papers of accounts, as if they meant
to demand, and pay their debts in that other world. The learning hereof was
first invented in great Bretaigne, whether such as would more thoroughly be
instructed, used to repair. Beside the Druides, they had likewise their Bardi,
and Eubagi, whereof these were likewise in their kind Philosophers, the Bardi
only professing a rude kind of Poetry, or the making, and singing of Ballads
in the praise of their victorious ancestors; but neither whereof had any
interest in the office of the Priesthood.

The first, by whom here the holy Gospel was preached, was Eusebius. Eccl. Hist.
l. 3. c. 4.
after Eusebius St Crescens, disciple to St Paul, mentioned in his 2 Epistle
unto Timothy, and 2 Chapter. The City, or place, where he should teach, he
sets not down. Baronius Baron. Annal. Eccl. Anno Christi 118.
out of the Roman Martyrologye names Vienna. The Church of v. P. Ber. Co.
Rerum Germ. lib. 3.
Mentz otherwise challenge him to be their founder, a city in ancient Gallia,
or Gaul, but excluded the present France. The Magdeburgenses from some
Histories of the Saints add Nathaniel, the Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 2.
supposed Apostle of the Bituriges, and Treveri, and Lazarus, whom Christ
raised from the dead, and Saturninus, the Apost. of the Massilians and
Toulouse. Baronius Baron. Ann. Eccles. Ann. Christi 95.
out of the Roman Martyrologie St Denis Bishop of Paris, St Eutropius of
Saints, St Lucian of Beauvois, St Taurinus of Eureux, and St Nicasius of Roan,
appointed by St Clement, Bishop of Rome, successor to St Peter. That a Church
here flourished during those first times amidst streams of blood, tortures,
and persecution, besides other testimonies, might witness the doleful letter
of the distressed Christians of Vienna, and Lion sent unto the Churches of
Asia, and Phrygia about the year 179, and reign of the Emperor M. Aurelius
Antoninus Philosophus, mentioned by Eusebius in his Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c.
1.
5 book, and 1 chapter. In the reign of the Emperor Constantine the Great,
Gentilisme abolished, Religion was here, as thorough the whole Roman Empire,
publicly professed, and authorized; exauthorized shortly after by Constantius,
and Iulianus, and re-established again by Iovianus, and the succeeding
Catholic Roman Emperors of the West. Toward the expiration of the
Western Roman Empire swarm in hither the barbarous Northern nations in the
reign of the Emperors Honorius, and Valentinian the third, by whom Religion
is again eclypsed. Of these the Burgundians, v. P. Or^s. lib. 7. cap. 19.
a more civil people then the rest; were Christians, and Catholics before
their coming hither. The Goths were Arrians, v. supra.
in which heresy they persisted until the reign of Reccaredus, Monarch of
Spain, and the third Council of Toledo in the year 588, at what time they
first became Catholics. The Frenchmen at their first entrance were Gentiles.
Under Clovys, or Clodoveus their fifth king from Pharamond, after their great
victory obtained against the Almans at Zulp, or Tolbiacum, they The French
Aunals.
first embraced the Christian Faith, wherein with great constancy, and zeal,
they have perseuered unto our times, thorough their many, and great Conquests,
and victories, enlarging afterward, as their Empire, so the bounds of
Christianity over the whole Gaul, or France, and the better part of Germany,
with other neighboring countries of Europe; corrupted not long afterward by
Popish impostures, and made subject to the common errors, and misfortunes of
the Western Churches. The first here, who openly durst make head against the
abuses, and tyranny of the Sea of Rome, were the Waldenses, named thus Ibidem.
from one Peter Waldus, a citizen of Lion, their chief, and called otherwise
the Poor men of Lion in regard of their poverty, and exile, which happened about
the year 1160, and reign of Lewis the seventh, French King. The Waldenses
ouerborne, and scattered by the power, and greatness of the Papacy, and hidvered
under the ashes for a time, after certain years broke out again under an
other name of the Albigenses, called thus from the town of Alby in Languedoc,
where they first made open profession, spreading their opinions over the most
Ibidem.
part of Languedoc, and the Southern French Provinces, and maintaining their
cause by force of arms for about the space of 50 years during the reigns of
Philip Augustus, and of Lewis the eight, and S. Lewis, or Lewis the ninth,
favored, and maintained amongst other of the French nobility of the Earls by
Toulouse, Foix, Cominges, and Beziers, and assisted by Peter the second, King
of Aragon, slain in their quarrel at the battle of Muret; after long
oppression, misery, and war lastly worn out in the reign of St Lewis, or
forced to retire amongst Mountains, and more difficult places of access,
where in Daulphinye, Savoy, but more notably in Provence we find a continual
succession of them, certain remainders whereof were those miserable people of
Merindol, and Chabrieres, cruelly slain and massacred in the reign of King
Francis the first. Some pretended positions of theirs are set down by b Sieur
du Haillan in Philip Augustus, and Marian. de Rebus Hispan. l. 12. c. 1.
Mariana in his 12 book, and 1 chapter, for the most part monstrous, false,
and most suppositious, after the Popish manner maliciously fained to disgrace
their cause, and the Orthodoxe Religion. What more impartially, and truly they
were, see the confession of the Waldenses Confession. Wald. per Balt. Lydium.
in Balth Lydius, and Ioachimus Ioach. Came. de frat. Orth. Ecclesijs. etc.
Camerarius. Those Reformed covered afterward under the more odious names of
the Lutherans, Calvinists, and Hugonots, and consenting with them in doctrine,
and opinion, no less persecution afflicts then before during the whole reigns
of Francis the first before mentioned, and Henry the second. In the reign of
the next succeeding Prince, Francis the second, the number of the Protestants
daily increasing, begin first those bloody civil wars for Religion. After
the troublesome, and unfortunate raigns of three brethren kings Francis the
second, Charles the ninth, and Henry the third, infinite battles, and
conflicts fought, the takings, and sackings of towns and cities on both sides,
the slaughters, and killings of Princes, and heads of both factions, many
treaties, and peaces made, and the same still broken, by the happy procurement
of the late King Henry the fourth, a lasting, and firm peace is at length
granted hereunto; which since his decease his Queen Mary de Medices, Regent of
France, and not without some quarrels, and bickerings in the mean time, his
son Lewis the thirteenth more lately have confirmed.

Their are then two different names of religions now openly professed, and
allowed in this kingdom, that of the Papists, adhering to the sea of Rome, and
the Reformed, or Calvinisme. Of the Popish sect is still the king (for so their
stronger side constrayneth him,) most of his Nobility, Councelours, and
Officers of estate, with the greatest part of the common people. The doctrine
of the Protestants differs not from that of the Church of England. Their
order, and discipline is such, which the condition of their state (poor, and
afflicted, rather tolerated, then allowed, and without Bishops, and Tithes, and
almost Churches, detayned by the Papists) has necessarily enforced them unto.
The Ecclesiastical dignities are all still held by the Popish Clergy. Of
these are reckoned 15 Arch-bishopricks, 109 Bishoprics, 540 Monasteries, or
Abbeyes, 27400 Pastoral Cures after the number of their Parishes, (accompting
but one parish for every city) besides chapels, and infinite other religious
places.

Their Bishops, and Archbishops follow. Under Lions the Primate of the
kingdom, the Bishops of Austun, Langres, Chaalon upon the Soasne; and Mascon:
under Rheims, Chalon upon the Marne, Laon, Soissons, Cambray, Tournay, Arras,
Boulogne, Amiens, Noion, Senlis, and Beauvois: under Roan, Sais, Aurenches,
Constances, Bayeux, Lyseux, and Eureux: under Sens, Paris, Chartres, Orleans,
Auxerre, Meaux, Nevers, and Troy: under Tours, Man's, Angiers, Renes, Nantes,
Cournovaille, Vannes, Leon, Triguier, Dol, St Malo, and S. Brieu: under
Bourdeaux, Saints, Poictiers, Lusson, Mailesais, Perigueux, Sarlat, Condom,
and Again: under Bourges, Mende, Castres, le Puy en Velay, Rodes, Vabres, and
Cahors: under Toulouse, Montaubon, Rieux, Mirepoix, Vaur, Lombez, S. Papoul,
and Apamies: under Narbonne, Carcassone, Besiers, Agde, Lodesve, Nismes,
Montpelier, Vzez, Eaule, Aleth, and S. Pont de Tonieres: under Aux, Cominges,
or S, Bernard, Coserans, Lactoure, Tarbe, Air, Basatz, D'ax, Baione, Lescar,
and Oleron: under Aix, Ries, Apt, Gap, Cisteron, and Feriuls: under Ambrun,
Digne, Senez, Clandeve, la Grace, S. Paul de Vences, and Nice: under Vienne,
Geneve, Grenoble, Maurienne, Die, Valence, and Viviers: under Arles,
Marseilles, Tolon, Aurange, and S. Paul: and under Avignon, Carpentras,
Cavaillon, and Tarascon. Here are likewise the Bishops of Metz, Toul, and
Verdun, but subordinate to the Archbishop, and Electour of Triers in Germany.

The yearly v. La^ description, and government des Respubliques du Monde par
Gabriel Chappuy^ (en France.
revenues hereof, and of other Ecclesiastical livings, before the civil wars,
as an inventory taken thereof in the year 1543, related by Chappuys, amounted
to 12 millions, and 300 thousand pounds, besides other casual, yet ordinary
commings in; or as by another estimate of Monsieur Allemant, President of
Acco^pts at Paris, to 712 parts of the whole revenues of France. They are yet
little diminished, the Clergy possessing in a manner whatsoever they formerly
enjoyed.

Concerning the civil statc, the whole, as governed by one king, so is
incorporated into one only kingdom.

The Laws, whereby it is governed, are partly the French, or Municipall, and
partly where these are defective, the civil, or Roman, and partly customs,
which in some parts almost only are in use, yet which the king may alter at
his pleasure, if he see them to be prejudicial to the state.

The Professors hereof are only Civilians, brought up in their Universities,
of which there are many in this kingdom especially for this profession in
regard of the multiplicity of suites thorough the quarelsome nature of the
people.

For the more due administration of justice the realm is divided into many
shires, or Balliages, and Seneschausees, as they term them, besides almost
infinite subordinate courts; where by their Baillifs, and Seneschaux, and their
assistants (which two Magistrates Les Recherches de la Fran. par Estienne
Pasquiet.
after Pasquier are all one, and differ but in name) all matters are adjudged
both civil, and criminal, but with reference to the high Courts of
Parliament, whereunto they are subject, and whither appeals may be made
according to every ones resort.

These Bailliages, v. Les Antiquitez, and Recherches de France par Andre du
Chesne.
and Seneschaussees, are thus ranked under their several Parliaments. In
Bretaigne, the Bailliages of Renes, and Nantes under the Parliament of Renes.
In Normandy, of Roan, Caux, Gisors, Eureux, Alencon, Caen, and Constances under
the Parliament of Roan. Under the Parliament of Paris, in Picardy the
Bailliages of Amiens, Laon, Boulogne, and Abbeville: in Champaigne, of Rheims,
Troy, Sens, Vitry, Chaumont, and Auxerre: in Brie, of Chasteau-Thierry,
Provins, and Meaux: in France Special, of Senlis, and Melun, with the
Vicounte, or Prevoste of Paris: in Beausse, the Seneschaussee of Angiers, with
the Bailliages of Orleans, Chartres, Man's, Montfort l' Amaulry, Tours, and
Blois: in Berry, the Bailliage of Bourges: in Rochelois, of Rochelle: in
Poictou, the Seneschaussee of Poictiers: in Bourbonois, of Moulins: in
Lionnois, of Lions: in Limaigne, or le Basse Auvergne, of Rions: and in
Engoulmois, of Engoulesme. Under the Parliament of Bourdeaux, in Limousin, the
Seneschausees of Limoges, and Brive: in Perigort, of Perigueux: in Guienne, of
Saints, Bourdeaux, Basats, and Lapourd: in Agennois, and Condomois, parts of
Gascoigne, at Again, and Condom. Under the Parliament of Toulouse for the rest
of Gascoigne, the Seneschaussees of Lactoure, and Tarbe: in high Auvergne, the
Seneschaussee of Orillac: in Quercy, of Cahors: in Rovergne, of Rhodes: in
Languedoc, of Toulouse, Carcassone, and Beaucaire. In Provence under the
Parliament of Aix, the Seneschaussees of Aix, and Cisteron. In Daulphinie under
the Parliament of Grenoble the Seneschaussees of Grenoble, Vienne, and Valence:
and in la Bourgoigne under the Parliament of Diion, the Bailliages of Diion,
Austun, Chalon upon Soasne, Semur, and la Montagne. Of these 8 Parliaments the
chief is that of Paris, whether appeal may be made from the other seven. The
Bailliages likewise, and Seneschaussees have under them many subordinate places
of Justice; called by the French les Seiges Royaux, les Chastellenies, and les
Bailliages Subalternes, resortable hereunto, as those are to the Parliaments.
Here are also some peculiar, and exempted places, suiting no superior courts,
such as are the little Principality of Dombes, with the countries of Avignon,
and Aurenge; which two howsoever, that they are seated within the maine land of
Provence, acknowledge notwithstanding only their own laws, and Lords, the
Pope, and Princes of Aurenge.

The King is hereditary, but where no women by a pretended Salique law, as
neither their issue thorough their right, do inherit.

This law, (as the tradition goes) v. L. Histoire de France par Bernard de
Girard, Seigneur du Haillan (en le Roy Pharamond. and les Recherches de France
par Estienne Pasquier.
was first made by Pharamond, and was so named of the Salij, a French people
(called thus from the Ysel, one of the three maine channels of the Rhijn, where
they inhabited before their coming into Gaul.) The words thereof are (as my
author En la terre Salique aucune, portion de l' haeredite ne vienne a la
femme. L. Histoire de France par Barnard de Girard Seigneur du Ha^llan (en le
Roy Pharamond.
recites them) that no women shall have any portion in the Salique la^d,
which, although not restrained to any sort of inheritance, and meant only of
the country of the Salij, lying without the limits of modern France, they
understand notwithstanding of the present France, and interpret only of the
kingdom; forced heevnto, for that custom, and examples are manifest of women
inheretrices in their Dukedomes, and private possessions. But that this has
been a mere imposture of the French, Sieur du Haillan, a native Frenchman, is
plain; in his History of France, and in the life of Pharamond, freely
acknowledging that the words cannot be understood of the kingdom; that
Pharamond never made such a law; and that their perpetual male succession they
have not so much by law, as by custom, begun in the first, and barbarous race
of their Kings, reverenced as a law by the second, and by the third race for
the better authority thereof falsely called by the name of Salique, and
attributed unto Pharamond. He adds that neither Aimonius, Gregory of Tours,
nor any of the more ancient, and more approved French Historians, ever make
any mention of this law, which so remarkable a thing, if it had been, they
would not have omitted. It is manifest then this law to have bin fained,
either, as in du Haillan, by Philip le Long to put a bar unto the title of
his Neice, Ioane of France, daughter to Lewis Hutin, them making claim unto
the kingdom (for before that time, as in Pasquier, the kingdom never fell in
Quenoville, or unto the right of women,) or otherwise by Philip de Valois to
exclude the title of Edward the third, king of England, his competitour for the
kingdom, descended from Isabel, daughter to Philip the fourth, father to Lewis
Hutin, and Philip le Long, and if ever since it has been observed, that this
has bin rather to avoid the exceptions of the English, then that they have
any just reason, or authority for it.

The Prince is styled by the name of the most Christian King, a title (says du
Haillan) continued in the succession hereof ever since the Regency of Charles
Martel, father to king Pepin, and grandfather to Charles the great, to whom it
was given for his valiant, and stout defense of the Christian Religion against
the Infidels.

His Dominions are now nothing so large, as in times past. In the race of
Merovee he lorded over all Gaul, and the better part of Germany. Charles the
Great, and his son Lewis the Godly were Sole commanders of all Gaul, of
Germany unto the rivers Eydore, Elb, and Saltza, of Pannony, of a great part of
Italy, and of Barcelona, or Catalonia in Spain. Since the usurpation of Capet
he for a long time held subject in the Lowcountries the great Earldom of
Flanders, with that other of Artois, held always by the Princes thereof under
the fief, and soveraignety of this Crown; by the late league of Cambray in the
reigns of Henry the second, French King, and Philip the second, King of
Spain, quitted from all right, and acknowledgment hereof. At this day he only
retayneth modern France, limited as above, together with the bare title of
Navarre, the country ever since Ferdinand the fifth, being witheld from him by
the Spaniard.

The greater causes (...). in fr^.
of the declining hereof have been: 1 that improvident devision of the French
Empire by the sons of the Emperor Lewis the Godly, whereby not only Gaul, or
France within the Rhijn became parted into diverse lesser seigneuryes, but
Italy, and Germany quite rent herefrom, their kingdoms with the honor, and
title of Roman Emperor being translated to foreign, and stranger families. 2
The monstrous, alienations of many the chiefer provinces hereof, granted by
former Kings with a bare reservation of homage unto themselves, by which means
the great Dukedomes of Aquitaine, and Guienne, Bretaigne, Normandy, and
Burgundy, the Earledomes of Champaigne, and Provence, with others, containing
above one half part of the whole France, became for a long time free, and
loose from the immediate command, and jurisdiction hereof; which by marriages,
and otherwise, coming into the hands of strangers, or of some not so well
affected to this Crown, have much disabled him for any great performance, and
oftentimes turning their arms here-against have much endangered the ruin of
the whole kingdom, a no small adva^tage of the English, and cause of the many
victories which they achieved in times past against this Nation. 3 The
infinite factio^s, whereunto this unconstant, and stirring people have been
still subject, and from the which they have been almost never clear; whereof
their wiser neighbors have still known to make good use. 4 The jealousies of
neighboring princes, especially since the great attempts, and conquests upon
Milan, and Naples by Charles the eight, and Lewis the twelth; bending their
leagues, and setting up, and enabling the Spaniard against him.

But as his power, and ancient greatness have been hereby much abated, so yet
neither have they been so empared, but that for solid, and true strength he
remains now nothing inferior to any Christian prince of Europe. Indeed he is
not Lord of such huge, and spacious dominions, as some others are. Yet if we
consider the general fertility, and riches of his countries, their compaction,
and vnitednes, not broken into diverse kingdoms, or parted by Sees, or the
intervening of foreign states, his store of strong, and well fortified cites,
and towns in every province, the infinite number of his French subjects in
regard of the extraordinary populousnes of the country (the substance of war,
and the wall of kingdoms) estimated at 15 millions of inhabitants, and that
harmony, and good agreement, which should be amongst a people of the same law,
nation, country, and language, we shall find him to have sundry advantages
above many of his neighbors, firm, strong, great, and not easily to be
endangered by the mainest combination of his adversaries.

An especial strength, and advantage of the present above the former kings,
has been the incorporation of the many alienated great Dukedomes, and Estates
before mentioned, thorough the great wisdom of his Predecessors still as
they were gotten in by war, or marriage, being inseparably united to the
crown hereof.

What his revenues might be from so rich a kingdom, we will not define.
Monsieur Froumenteau in his book entitled les Secrets des Finances, accompteth
them for 31 years space during the late reigns of Henry the second, and of
the three brethren kings at 15623655 17/31 Escus or French Crowns, one year
with an other: but whereof a great part being then made by the confiscation of
Protestants goods, alienations of their demaines, and by the like casualties,
incident to troubled States, cannot be accounted ordinary.

The country contains now 24 greater divisions, or Provinces, of Bretaigne,
Normandy, Picardy, Champaigne, Brie, France Special, Beausse, Poictou,
Engoulmois, Berry, Bourbonois, Forest, and Beauiolois, Lionois, Auvergne,
Limousin, Perigort, Guienne, Gaiscoigne, Quercy, Rovergne, Languedoc, Provence,
Daulphine, and Bourgogne; divided amongst 8 iuridicall resorts, or Parliaments,
of Paris, Roven, Renes, Bourdeaux, Toulouse, Aix, Dijon, and Grenoble. whose
descriptions follow, having first set down the ancient estate hereof, with
the sundry changes, and successions, people, nations, and gouerments, happening
unto our times; occasioning the present names, state, and divisions.

THE NINTH BOOK.
Containing the description of the more famous Mountains, and Rivers of
France. Their ancient, and modern names. The ancient name, and Etymology of
Gaul. The distinction hereof into Gaul on this side, and beyond the Alps.
The beginning, and occasion of the name of Gaul on this side the Alps. The
bounds, situation, and ancient estate of Gaul on this side the Alps before
the subjection thereof to the Romans, and reunion with Italy. The ancient
limits, and extent of Gaul beyond the Alps. The first inhabitants of Gaul
beyond the Alps. The intrusion of the neighboring Germans, and of the Greeks
Phocenses. The foundation of the ancient, and noble city of Marseilles. The
conquest of Gaul beyond the Alps by the Romans. The description, and face
hereof during the Roman government out of Ptolemy, Pliny, Antoninus, and
others. The history, invasion, and conquests of the Britons, VVisigothes,
Burgundians, Almans, and Frenchmen. The conquest of the whole by the French.
The large extent aunciently of the French dominions. The reestablishment of the
Roman Empire of the West in Charles the Great, and the French nation. The name
of France. The distinction hereof into the parts, and names of Oosten-reich,
and VVest-reich. The division of the grand Monarchy of the French by the sons,
and posterity of the Emperor Lewis the Godly. The French kingdoms of Germany,
and Italy. Their rent from the nation, and name of the French. The kingdoms of
Burgundy, Lorraine, and VVest-France. The Dukedomes of Lorraine, Iuliers,
Cleue, Brabant, Luxemburg, Limburg, and Gelderlandt, the Palatinate of the
Rhijn, the Bishoprics of Liege, and Vtreicht, the Lantgraueship of Elsatz, the
Earledomes of Namur, Hainault, Holland, and Zealandt, parts sometimes of the
ancient French kingdom of Lorraine. The uniting of Brabant, Luxemburg,
Lim^urg, Gelderlandt, Namur, Hainault, Holland, Zealandt, Vtreicht unto the
Netherlands, and family of Burgundy; and of the rest to the Empire of the
Germans. The Dukedomes of Savoy, and of Burgundy on this side the Soasne, and
beyond the Iour, the Earledomes of Lions, and Mascon, the free counrye of
Burgundy, the kingdom of Arles, the Earldom of Provence, Daulphiny, and the
Commonwealth, and League of the Switzers, parts of the ancient French
kingdom of Burgundy. The uniting of the Dukedom of Burgundy on this side of
the Soasne, and of Daulphiny, Lionois, and Provence to the kingdom of
West-France, and of the rest to the German Empire. The Earledomes of Flanders,
and Artois, parts sometimes of the kingdom of VVest-France. Their division
herefrom, and union with the Netherlands, and house of Burgundy. The kingdom
of France. The present limits, and extent of France, occasioned thorough so
many rents, and divisions. The Etymology, or reason of the present names of the
countries of France.

THE MOVNTAINES OF GAVLE, OR FRANCE.
THe Land-markes, whereof we will make use in the discourse following, are the
Mountains, and Rivers hereof.

The Mountains, v. C. lul. Caes. Comment. belli Gallici. lib. 1. c. 3. and
lib. 7. cap. 4. Ptol. Geog. l. 2. cap. 7. 8. and 9. Histoire de Lion par Claude
de Rubys. Pauli Merulae Cosm. p. 2. l. 3. c. 4.
whereof there is made any mention by ancient authors, were the Gebenna,
Iura, and Vogesus.

The Gebenna, (named thus by Caesar) was the same with the Mountains Cemmeni
of Ptolemy. Caesar makes them to part the Auverni from the Helvij, or (as
Merula interprets) the country of Auvergne from Vivaretz. They are put by
Rubys to be the mountains of Givaudan, and Auvergne.

Iura was that long mountainous ridge Iurassus Clau. Ptolomaei.
, which divides now the Free County of Burgundy from Savoy, and Switzerland,
or (as in Caesar) the Sequani from the Helvetij. It lies wholly out of France
in the parts of Gaul, belonging unto Germany and the Empire; beginning at the
confines of the country of Basil not far from the Rhiin over against the town
of Waldshut, and continuing from thence South-west by the Northern shores of
the lakes Bieler se, Nuwenburger se, and Lemane, and ending a little short of
the river Rhosne. It is now called by diverse names; toward the beginning, and
near unto the ancient castle of Habspurg, Botsberg; betwi^t the river Soasne,
and Forspurg, Schaffmat; betwixt Olten, and the Leiftenantship of Humberg,
Nider-Hauwestein; afterward Ober-Hawestein; further West Wasser-fal; then
Iurten by the inhabitants of Savoy; after this, and to the end le Mont. S.
Claude.

Vogesus was that, which now incircling Lorraine, divides it upon the East,
and South from Elsats, and the Free County of Burgundy. It lies likewise
wholly without the limits of modern France in the parts, appertayning to the
Empire, and is now (says Merula) amongst other names called le Mont de
Faucilles.

THE RIVERS.
THe more great, and noted rivers hereof, having enter course with the Ocean,
and which are the maine channels, and receptacles of the other, are the Rhosne,
Garonne, Loyre, Seyne, Scheldt, and the Meuse.

The Rhosne springs Rhodanus Caesar Comm. belli Gallic. lib. 1. c. 3. etc.
out of the Mountain, called by the Dutch Die Furcken, being part of the Alps
Lepontiae, the head thereof being distant about two Dutch miles from the spring
of the nearer branch of the Rhiin. With a swift, and headlong stream hastening
thorough Wallislandt, and the Lake Lemane; after having visited the cities of
Sion, Geneve, Lions, Vienne, Avignon, and Arles, it falls with six channels
into the Mediterranean sea. The more noted rivers emptied hereinto are the
Soasne Araris Caesar. Com. bell. Gall. ^^b. 1. c. 4. etc.
, arising out of the Mountain Vauge not far from the springs of the Meuse,
and Moselle, and by the towns of Chal^n, and Mascon with an imperceptible, and
still course, flowing hereinto at Lions: the Isere Isara Ptol. lib. c. 10.
: and Druentia Pt. ^^b. 2. c. 10.
Durance, sourcing out of the Alps.

The Garonne Gatumna Cae. ^om bell. Gall. ^^b. 1. c. 1. etc.
, has its head in the Pyrenaean Mountains, near unto a town named Catalup.
After having passed by the great cities of Toulouse, and Bourdeaux; betwixt
Xaintogne, and the country of Medoc in Guienne it is disburdened into the
Aquitanique Ocean. The part hereof, intercepted betwixt the Ocean, and the
town of Libourne, or its meeting with the Dordonne, is called the Gironne.
Greater rivers, falling hereinto, are the Dordonne, springing out of the
Mountain d'Or in Auvergne: Loath: Tarn: and Gers.

The Loire arises Ligeris Caes. Com. bell. Gal. ^^b. 7. cap. 5. etc.
in the hilly country of Velay; the place, where it springs, being called le
Font de Leyre, that is, the head of the Loire. After a long, and pleasant
course by the cities of Orleans, Bloise, Amboise, Tours, and Nantes, below this
town it is receyved into the Western Ocean. Chiefer rivers, emptying herein,
are the Allier, springing in Auvergne near unto the town of Clermont: Cher:
Vienne: and the Maine.

The Seine Sequana Caes. Com. bell. Gal. ^^b. 1. c. 1. etc.
has its head in the Dukedom of Burgundy. Taking its course by the cities of
Paris, and Roan, at New Haven in Normandy it falls into the British Ocean.
Chiefer rivers, received hereinto, are the Oyse out of Picardie, taken in at
Poissy: and the Marne Matrona, Caes. Com. bell. Gal. ^^b. 1. c. 1.
, at Pont-Charenton, nere to Paris, streaming from the Vauge, nere Langres.

The Tabuda Ptol. ^. 2. cap. 9. Scal^is Caesar. Com. ^el. Gal. l. 6. cap. 2.
and Plin. ^at. Hist. li. 4. c. 7.
Scheldt arises in Vermandois. By the cities Cambray, Valencienes, Tournay,
Gaunt, and Antwerp it is disburdened into the German Ocean by two channels;
that upon the right hand dividing Zealandt, and carried into the sea betwixt
the Island Walcheren, and Schouwen; and the other by the name of the Honte,
parting Zealandt from the continent of Flanders, and flowing into the Ocean
betwixt Walcheren, and the town of Sluys. More noted rivers, emptying hereinto,
are the Sabis Caes. Co. ^el. Gal. l. 5. c. 8.
Sambre: and the Hayne, watring; and dividing Hainault, and occasioning the
name of that country.

The Mosa. Caesar. Com. bell. Gal. ^^b. 5. c. 8.
Meuse, or Maes springs out of the Mountain Vauge in the confines of
Lorraine, and of the Free Country of Burgundy near unto the Monastery la
Voyage in Lorraine. By the more noted towns, and cities of Namur, Luick,
Maestricht, Venlo, Grave, Buchoven, Dort, Rotterdam, Vlardring, and Brill;
betwixt this town, and Graue-sand in the maine land of Hollandt, after having
received in the Wael, and Leck, (two principal branches of the Rhijn) it is
disburdened into the German Ocean. The part hereof from Buchoven unto below
Worcum is called De Nieuwe Maes, or the New Maes for a distinction from the old
channel; derived aunciently from Buchoven by the sluices, now called Meedickse
Maes, and D'oude Maes, and by the towns of Huesden, and S. Gertrudenberg,
afterward thorough the drowned lands, near unto Dort, then betwixt the two
Islands of Vorn, after this betwixt the Island Corendick, and the towns
Bleynckuliet in the more Northern Vorn, lastly thorough the maine of this
Island at a town not far from Brill, named Geeruliet, carried into the Ocean.
The new Channel, or Maes from Worcum by Dort, and Rotterdam unto Vlardring is
promiscuously called by the names of the Niewe Maes; and of the Merwe from a
castle so named, whose ruins are yet seen in the drowned land near Dort.
Beyond Vlardring it again assumeth its former name of the Maes, which it
continues unto the Ocean.

THE ANCIENT NAME OF FRANCE.
THE more ancient name Gallia Caesar: Com: etc. Celtogalatia Ptol. Geog. l. 2
c. 7.
of this country was Gallia, or Gaul, being so called from the milkie
whiteness of the people; compared to the Greeks, and Romans, the first
imposers.

For the better clearing hereof we are to distinguish of a twofold Gallia;
Cisalpina, or Gaul on this side of the Alps, and Transalpina, or Gaul beyond
the Alps: for so were those parts named by the Romans in regard of such their
situations toward Italy, the seat of their Empire.

GAVLE CIS-ALPINA.
Gaul Cisalpina v. Livii Hist. l. ^. Plutarch. in vit. Furii Camilli, and
Claud. Marcelli. C. Plin: Not. hist. lib. 3. c. 15. and l. 4. c. 17. Eutrop.
lib. 3. hist. Romans Carolum Sigonium in Fastos and Triumphos Consulares. Iacobi
Dalechampii Annotationes in lib. 3. c. 15. and in lib. 4. c. 17. C. Plinii Not.
hist.
was otherwise called Quod placidiot esset, and Romano vestitu vteretur. Iacobi
Dalechampij Annot. in l. 4. c. 17* Plin. Not. Hist. and Dionis l. 46.
Gallia Togata from the Roman habit, and greater civility of the people,
conquered by the Romans before the other, and brought unto their manners, and
custom of living. This was a part of Italy, as it is at this day accounted,
more aunciently possessed by the Thuscans Gallos traditur fama dulcedine
frugu^, maximeque vini nova cum voluptate captos. Alps trans^jsse, agrosque ab
Hetruscis antea cultos possedisse. T. Live. hist. l. 5.
, and first changing into this new name upon the coming of the Gauls from
beyond the Alps, desbourding hither under Bellovesus, Nephew to Ambigatus,
King of the Celtae, in the reign of Tarquinius Priscus, King of Rome, and
those ancient inhabitants driven out, subduing the Country, and planting
therein. The bounds hereof were the Alps of France, and Germany, dividing it
from those Continents, the Tirrhene, and Adriatique Seas, and the rivers Arno,
and Rubicon hic fluvius, quondam Ital^ae finis. C. Plin. Not hist. l. 3. c. 15.
Rubicon fluvius labitur inter Ariminum, and Casennam, fluitque in Adriaticum
mare* Circa originem Rucon, vel Rugon vocant, cum longius provectus est mare
versus* Pisciatello. Iacobi Dalechampii in Pli. Not. hist. lib. 3. c. 15.
Annotationes.
Rubicon, falling thereinto, and dividing it from the rest of Italy. It
contained the parts where now lie the great Dukedom of Milan, those other of
Mantua, Ferrara, Parma, and Vrbin, the States of Genoa, and Lucca, Marca
Trevisana, and the country of Venice, Romagna, Piemonte, and the dominions of
the great Duke of Tuscanye, lying West of the river Arno. They were the Gauls
of this division, famous in ancient times for their taking, and sacking of the
city of Rome, and their great Conquests, and victories in Greece, and Asia
before mentioned. After long, and fierce wars with the Romans, the country,
and people became at length totally subdued by that nation; which their final
subjection happened a little before the Second Punique war, and about the year
of Rome 531, M. Claudius Marcellus, and Cn. Cornelius Scipio being then
Consuls. For it was in the Consulships hereof (as in the 3d Book of Eutropius)
that their last war herewith was ended; commenced against the Insubrians.
Concerning the after estate hereof, since it was no part of the more ancient,
and proper Gaul, see Italy.

GAVLE TRANSALPINA.
Gaul Transalpina Strab. Geog. l. 4. Claud. Ptolem. l. 2. c. 7. et^.
was divided from Gaul Cisalpina with the Alps, being bounded on the other
sides with the Pyrenaean mountains from Spain, the river Rhijn from Germany,
with the Sea Mediterranean, and the Aquitanique, and the British Oceans. It
comprehended at this day the Wallons, and Low Countries, as far as the
Rhijn, the Dukedomes of Lorraine, Gulick, Sweyburg, and Savoy, the free County
of Burgundy, Elsace, Luick, the district of Triers, Stiff van Colen, the
Diocese of Mentz, parts of the Lower Palatinate, and Dukedom of Cleve, the
most part of the Cantons, and Confederacy of the Switzers, together with the
great, and renowned kingdom of France, the subject of this present discourse.
This was the true, and proper Gallia, whose sundry fortunes, and estates,
successions, and alterations follow.

GAVLE UNDER THE FIRST NATIVES.
THE first v. T. Livii Hist Romans l. 5. Caij Iul. Caes. comment. bell. Gallici.
Strab. Geog. l. 4. Luc. Flori hist. Rom l. 3. c. 2. Herodoti Clio.
dominion hereof was under the Gauls, occasioning the name of the Country,
whose antiquity, and first coming hither lie without the reach of History, or
times memory; a people much renowned for arms, the victorious Conquerours of
neighboring, and remote nations, themselves for a long time remaining
unconquerable. Their government during their first, and rude times was under
kings, divided amongst many. Amongst these we read of Ambigatus, king of the
Bituriges, or Celtae; Teutomalius of the Salyi; Bituitus of the Auverni, with
others not worth the mentioning. In the time of Caesar they consisted for the
most part of Commonwealths, the name and authority of kings abrogated. The
first of foreign Nations flowing hereinto were the Germans, intruding upon the
parts, neighboring to the Rhijn, from whom the many people of the warlike
Belgae were descended. The certain time of their coming is not set down. In
the reign of Tarquin the Proud, king of the Romans, and in the 45 Olympiade,
arrive here the Phocenses, a Grecian people inhabiting Phocaea, a City of
Ionia in Asia the less, subdued, and driven out of their Country by Harpagus,
general of the army of Cyrus, Monarke of the Persians; the founders here of
the noble city of Massilia, the mother of the many after flourishing colonies
of Emporiae, Nicaea, Forum-Iulium, Taurentium, and Olbia upon the seacoast
hereof, and of Spain.

GAVLE CONQVERED BY THE ROMANS.
THe Romans v. T. Li^. Epitom. l. 61* Lu. Flor. Hist Romans lib. 3. c. 2. Strab
Geog. li. 4. Caij Iu. Caes. Com. Bell. Gal. Pomp. Mel* l. 3. Plut. in vua Iu.
Caesaris. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 4. c. 17 Am. Marcellini^ lib. 15. Cassiod Chro.
Imperato^bus Honor. et Theodosio. Sigonium in Fastos, and Triumphos Romanorum.
Iacobi Dalechampij Annotat. in li. 4. c. 17. N. Hist. Plinij.
were the first, who for the desire of rule, and the greater enlargement of
their Empire, invaded this country. About the year of Rome 628. M. Fulvius
Flaccus, and M. Plautius being then Consuls, pretending the injury of their
co^federates, the Massillians, fell out here their first war with the Salyi;
subdued by this Fulvius, and by the succeeding Consul C. Sextius, together with
their neighbors the Vocontij, and Ligures. Upon occasion of this war, and of
the protection, and aid of Teutomalius, King of the Salyi, in the years of
Rome 631, and 632 happened their next wars with the Allobroges, assisted by the
Auverni, managed successively by two of their Consuls Cn: Domitius.
Ahenobardus, and Q. Fabius Maximus; the issue whereof was the captivity of
Bituitus, king of the Auverni with great slaughter of the Barbarians, and the
subjection of the whole Southern part hereof, extended from the sea
Mediterranean unto the Mountains Cemmeni, called afterward Gaul Narbonensis,
first reduced into the order of a Province (as thinks Sigonius) by this
Fabius in the year 633 of Romes foundation, and some 5 years after that the
wars with this Nation beyond the Alps first begun. Some 70 years afterward
C. Julius Caesar, governor of the province, in ten years space by a long, and
bloody war conquered the rest hereof, lying North of the Mountains Cemmeni,
and known by the name Comata Plin. Not. Hist. l. 4. c. 17. Comata, quorum
populi Belgae, Aquitani et Celtae. Pomp. Mel. li. 3. Comata sic appellata, quod
incolae studiosius comam alerent. Jacob. Dalechampij in l. 4. c. 17. Plin.
Annotationes.
of Gallia Comata; all which he reduced under the form of a Province, governed
by their Proconsuls, and other names of Magistrates until the expiration of
the Roman Empire. In the reigns, and Consulships of the Emperors Honorius,
and Theodosius the second, and about the year of Rome 1164, and of Christ 412,
by the gift of Honorius, the Goths under their king Ataulphus first entered
into, and took possession of Gaul Narbonensis; followed immediately after by
the Burgundians, and Frenchmen; with whose swarms the whole in a short space
became ouerspread, the Roman authority, and Empire, as the name of Gaul,
becoming hereby quite extinguished.

THE DESCRIPTION OF GAVLE UNDER THE FIRST ROMAN EMPEROVRS.
THe first v. C. Iul. Caesar. Com. Bell. Gall. lib. 1. c. 1. Strab. Geog. l. 4.
Plin. Not. Hist. l. 3. c. 5. and l. 4. c. 17.
division hereof during the Roman government, and those first times, we find
in Caesar to have been into the parts of Aquitania, contained betwixt the
Pyrenaean Mountains, and the river Garonne; Celtica extended betwixt the
Garonne, and the Seine, and Marne; and of Belgica, reaching from those two
rivers of the Marne, and Seine unto the Rhijn, and the Ocean. He excludes
Narbonensis from the account, and name of Gaul; doubtless in regard of the
civility of the inhabitants, by their long commerce, and acquaintance with the
Romans then grown altogether Italianate, and differing from the other in
fashion, and manner of living. Augustus Caesar notwithstanding, afterward
correcting this division, added Gaul Narbonensis hereunto; making hereby 4
parts, or provinces of the whole Gaul, Narbonensis, Aquitania enlarged unto
the Loire, Celtica, or Ante Augustum Aquitania inter Garumnam fluvium contenta,
item in tres parts devisa Gallia, Belgicam, Celticam, and Aquitaniam. Augustus
Caesar in 4. parts Galliam devisit, ita vt Celtas Narbonensi Provinciae
tribueret, Aquitanos eosdem cum lulio faceret, ijsque auctis, december alias
gentes intra Garumnam, and Ligerim inhabitants, reliquum in duas parts
tribueret, vnamque Lugduno ad^ungeret vsque ad superiora Rheni, alteram Belgis.
Strab. Geog. lib. 4.
Lugdunensis, and Belgica; a division long afterward observed until the
reign of the Emperor Constantine the Great, whose exacter bounds with their
many people, and cities follow out of Ptolemy, with reference to Caesar,
Strabo, and other best authors of those times.

AQVITANIA.
SO called v. Clau. Pt. Geog. l. 2. c. 7. Strab. l. 4. Pl. Not. Hist. lib. 4.
c. 19. Pomp. M^l. l. 3. Caes. Comm. Bell. Gall. l. 7. c. 2. 3. 4. 28. and 32.
Interpretationes Montani, and Petri Birtij in Ptol. Geog. lib. 2. c. 7.
from the city Aquae Augustae, now D' Acqs in Guienne. The bounds hereof were
the Western Ocean from the Promontory Oeso of the Mountains Pyrenaean unto
the mouth of the river Loire; the Loire from its head during the whole course
thereof unto its fall into the Ocean, dividing it from Lugdunensis; a line from
the head of the Loire unto the head of the river Illiberis in the Pyrenaean
Mountains, severing it from Gaul Narbonensis; and the ridge of the Pyrenaean
Mountains, taken betwixt that line, and the Promontory Oeso, parting the same
from Spain. It comprehends now the countries of Gascoigne, Guienne, Velay,
Gevaudan, Rovergne, Quercy, Perigort, Limousin, Auvergne, Berry, Engoulmois,
Xaintoigne, Nivernois, Bourbonnois, and Poictou, with the Dutchye of Raiz in
Bretaigne, besides some parts of other countries, accounted in Lugdunensis. The
sundry people, and cities hereof with their interpretations follow.

The Pictones, adjoining to the Loire, and the Ocean (the Pictones of Caesar,
Strabo, and Pliny,) containing now Poictou, and the Duchy of Raiz. Whose towns
were Augustoritum, now Poictiers. Limonum. and Sicor Portus, now Lucon. The
Santones (the Santones of Caesar, and Strabo, and Santones Liberi of Pliny,)
now Xaintoigne. Whose city was Mediolanium, (Mediolanum of Strabo) now
Xainctes.

The Bituriges, Vipisci (Bituriges Vbisci of Pliny, and Bituriges Iosci of
Strabo) now Bourdelois. Whose cities were Burdegala, (Burdegala of Strabo) now
Bourdeaux. Noviomagus. and Santonum Portus.

The Tarbeli (the Tarbelli of Strabo, and Tarbeli Quartuorsignani of Pliny,)
now le pais de Lapourd. Whose city was Aquae Augustae (the Aquitani Aquitani,
vnde nomen Provinciae. Plin. N. Hist. lib. 4. c. 19.
, from whence the name of the Province, after Pliny) now D'Acqs.

The Limvici, neighboring to the Pictones (the Lemovices of Caesar, Strabo,
and Pliny,) now Limousin. Whose city was Ratiastum, now Limoges.

The Cadurci (the Cadurci of Caesar, Strabo, and Pliny,) now Quercy. Whose city
was Ducona, now Cahors.

The Petrocorij (the Petrocorij of Strabo, and Petrogori of Pliny,) now
Perigort: Whose city was Vessuna, now Perigueux.

The Bituriges Cubi (the Bituriges Cubi of Strabo, and Bituriges Liberi,
surnamed the Cubi of Pliny,) now Berry. Whose city was Varicum (Avaricum of
Caesar) now Bourges.

The Nitiobriges (Nitiobriges of Caesar, and Strabo,) now Agennois, and
Condomois. Whose city was Aginum, now Again.

The Vassarij (the Vassei of Pliny) now Bazadois. Whose city was Cossium, now
Bazats.

The Tabali (Gabales of Caesar, Strabo, and Pliny,) now Gevaudan. Whose city
was Anderidum, now Lodesve.

The Datij. Whose city was Tasta, now Dau.

The Auscii (the Auscij of Strabo, and Ausci of Pliny, and Mela.) Whose city
was Augusta, now Auchs.

Part of the A^verni (the Arverni of Caesar, and Strabo, and Arverni Liberi of
Pliny, placed by Strabo in the Province Lugdunensis;) now Nivernois. Whose city
was Augustonemetum, now Nevers.

The Velauni (the Vellaunij of Strabo,) now Velay. Whose city was Ruessium, now
Rieux, or S. Flour.

The Rhutani (the Rutheni of Caesar, and Pliny, and Ruteni of Strabo,) now
Rovergne. Whose city was Segodunum, now Rhodes.

The Cuceneni, neighboring to the Pyrenaean Mountains. Whose city was
Lugdunum Colonia, now Oleron.

The more noted Promontories of the Seacoasts hereof after the same author
were Oeasum, now Olarso. Curianum Promontorium, now Cap de Butz. Santonum
Promontorium, and Pictonium Promontorium. The Havens were Santonum Portus. and
Sicor Portus, now Lucon. The rivers were Aturius, now Adour. Garumna, now
Garonne. Canentellus, now Charente, Ligeris, now the Loire. and Sigmanus.

CELTICA, OR LVGDVNENSIS. Beginning after Caesar and Mela at the Garumna; but
according unto Strabo, Pliny, and Ptolomy at the Loire.

SO called v. Claud. Ptol. Geog. l. 2. c. 8. Strab. l. 4. Plin. N. His. l. 4.
c. 1 8. Pomp. Mel. l. 3. Iul. Caes. Comm. Bell. Gal. l. 1. c. 12. l. 3. c. 3.
and 5. lib. 5. c. 21. l. 6. c. 2. 3. 7. and 8* and lib. 7. c. 3. 5. 18. 19. 20.
22. 26. 27. 28. 29. 36. etc. Interpret. Montani, and P. Birtij in Claud. Ptol.
lib. 2, c. 8.
from the famous people of the Celtae, and Lions, the chief city thereof. The
bounds were the Loire from its first head unto the Ocean, common thereunto, and
to Aquitania; the Ocean betwixt the falls of the Loire, and the Seine, the
Seine during its whole course, and a line, continued right therewith from the
spring, or head of the same unto the meetings of the rivers Doux, and the
Soasne, together dividing it from Gaul Belgique; and another line drawn from
the confluence of the rivers Doux, and Soasne, unto the head of the Loire, and
the Mountains Cemmeni, parting it from Gaul Narbonensis. It contains now
all Bretaigne (the country of Raiz excepted,) Normandy unto the Seine, France
Special, Chartrain, Perch, Maine, Aniou, Touraine, the Duchy of Vendosme, the
county of Dunois, the countries Blesien, and Tonneres, Orleannois, Lorris,
Soulogne, Brie, part of Champaigne, Forest, Lionnois, and the Dukedom of
Burgundy. The people, and towns hereof were thus ordered.

The Veneti, (the Veneti of Caesar, Strabo, and Pliny;) the part now of
Bretaigne about the town of Vannes. Whose city was Dariorigum; now Vannes.

The Osismij upon the seacoast (Osisimi of Caesar, and Osismij of Strabo,
Pliny, and Mela,) the part now of Bretaigne about the town of S. Pol. Whose
city was Vorganium, not improbably S. Pol.

The Samnitae, neighboring to the Loire.

The Aulercij Diabolitae (the Diablintes of Caesar, and Diablindi of Pliny.)
Whose city was Naeodunum.

The Arubij. Whose city was Vagorit^m.

The Namnitae (the Nannetes of Caesar, and Pliny;) the part of Bretaigne about
Nantes. Whose city was Condivincum, now Nantes.

The Rhedones (the Rhedones of Caesar, and Pliny;) the part now of Bretaigne
about the town of Rhenes. Whose city was Condate, now Rhenes,

The Biducenses upon the seacoast.

The Lexubij (the Lexovij of Caesar, and Pliny;) the part now of Normandy about
the town of Lyseux. Whose city was Naeomagus; probably Lyseux.

The Caletae upon the seacoast (the Caletes of Caesar, and Galleti of Pliny,
more rightly placed by Caesar amongst the Belgae;) now Caux in Normandy. Whose
city was Iuliobona; now Honfleu. These with the Curiosolites, Rhedones,
Ambibarri, Osissimi, Lemovices, and Vnelli, with other bordering states upon
the Ocean, Caesar in the 7 book of his Commentaries, and 32 chap. surnameth
the Aremoricae; called thus from their situation upon the Seacoast.

The Veneli, upon the seacoast (the Vnelli of Caesar, and Pliny.

The Veneliocassij (the Vellocassi of Caesar, and Vellocasses of Pliny;) the
part now of Normandy about Roan. Whose city was Rothomagus; now Roan.

The Auliorci.

The Abrigcatui (the Abrigcatui of Pliny;) the part now of Normandy about
Auranches. Whose city was Ingena; now Auranches.

The Cenomanni (the Cenomanni of Pliny;) now Maine. Whose city was Vindinum;
now Man's, Maine, or Vendosme.

The Aulercij Eburaici (the Aulerci, surnamed the Eburovices of Pliny.) Whose
city was Mediolanium.

The Most probably extended further in regard of the strength, and power of the
people. v. Caesar Co-Bel. Gal.
Senones (the Senones of Caesar, Strabo, and Pliny;) now Brie. Whose city was
Agedicum (Agendicum of Caesar;) now Provence.

The Carnutae (the Carnutes of Caesar, and Strabo, and Carnuti Faederati of
Pliny;) now le pais Chartrain, and Orleannois. Whose cities were Autricum; now
Chartres. and Cenabum (Genabum of Caesar, and Strabo;) now Oreleans.

The Andicani (the Andes of Caesar, and Andegavi of Pliny;) now Aniou. Whose
city was Iuliomagus; now Angiers.

The Parisii (the Parisii of Caesar, Parrisii of Strabo, and Parrhisii of
Pliny;) now the country of Paris. Whose city was Lucotecia (Lutetia of Strabo,
Lutetia of Caesar, seated in an Island of the Seine;) now Paris.

The Turupij (the Turones of Caesar;) now Touraine. Whose city was
Caesarodunum;) now Tours.

The Tricassij (the Trecasses of Pliny;) the part of Champaigne about Trois.
Whose city was Augustomana; now Trois.

The Segusiani, neighboring to the Arverni (the Segutiani of Caesar, Segusiani
of Strabo, and Secusiani Liberi of Pliny;) now Forest. Whose cities were Forum
Segusianorum; now Furs: and Rhodumna.

The Meldae (the Meldae of Strabo, and Meldi Liberi of Pliny;) the part of
Brie, about the town of Meaux. Whose city was Iatinum; now Meaux.

The Vadicassij (the Vadicasses of Pliny.) Whose city was Naeomagus; now
Nemours.

The Aedui (the Hedui of Caesar, the Hedui Faederati of Pliny, the Hedui, the
most famous people of the Celtae, after Mela, the Hedui of Strabo, honored
with the title of the Romans, the first of the Gauls, embracing their
friendship, and confederacy;) now the Dukedom of Burgundy, and Lionnois. Whose
cities were Augustodunum (Augustodunum, the richest city of the Hedui, after
Mela;) now Austun. Caballinum (Cavillonium of Caesar, and Cabullinum of
Strabo;) now Chalon upon Soasne. Lugdunum (Lugdunum of Pliny, a Roman colony,
situated in the country of the Secusiani, and Lugdunum of Strabo, the chief
town of the Segusiani, inhabited by the Romans, and after Narbo the most
populous city of the Gauls, a Mart town, and the place of mintage for the
Roman coins, used in this Province;) now Lion, and Carilocus.

The more noted Ports, or Havens of Gaul Celtica after the same Author were
Crociatonum; a Port of the Veneti. Brivates Portus, now Croisic in Bretaigne
upon the Loire. Vidiana; not improbably Blavet. and Staliocanus; now probably
the Haven of Breast. The rivers which he only mentions, were Titius, and
Argenis; now Trieu, and Arguennon; falling into the British Ocean at S. Brieu.
Here was likewise the Promontory Gobaeum; now le Four in Bretaigne.

BELGICA.
v. Claud, Ptol. Geog. l. 2. c. 9. Strab. l. 4. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 3. c: 5.
and l. 4. c. 17. Pomp. Mel. l. 3. Caes. Comment Belli Gallici lib: 1: c: 1: 2:
3: 4: 5. 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14. 15: 19. lib: 2: c: 2: 7: 8. 10: 11:
lib: 5: c: 1: lib: 6: c: 2. and 12: and lib: 7: c: 32. Corn. Taciti Annal: lib:
1: and Hist: lib: 1: 4: and 5. Interpretat* Montani, et P: Birtii in Claudu
Ptol. Geog: l: 2: c: 9.
BOunded with the Loire, and the line beforementioned, drawn from the Loire
unto the meetings of the rivers Doux, and Soasne, dividing it from Celtica; the
Ocean betwixt the more Eastern branch of the Rhiin unto the mouth of the
Seine; the river Rhijn from its first source in the Mountain Adulas (now der
Vogel of the Alps) unto its fall into the German Ocean, parting it from
Germany; and a line drawn from the Mountain Adulas, and the spring of the
Rhijn unto the confluence of the rivers Doux, and the Soasne, seuering it from
Gaul Narbonensis. The country at this day lies for the greatest part out of
France. It contains now Picardy, with parts of Normandy, Champaigne, and
France Special; and in the Low Countries, and the parts belonging to the
Empire, the Earledomes of Artois, Hainault, and Flanders, Brabant, Holland unto
the middle branche of the Rhiin (derived by Vtreicht, and Leyden), the parts of
Gelderland, and of the district of Vtreicht unto the said branch of the Rhiin,
Zealandt, Limburg, Luxemburg, Namur, Luick, Iuliers, Stiff van Triers,
Lorraine, and Bar, West-reich, Elsatz, the Free County of Burgundy, the
Dioceses of Colen, and Mentz, parts of the Dukedom of Cleue, and of the Lower
Palatinate, together with the parts of the Cantons, and Confederacy of
Switzers, included within the Rhiin. The inhabitants, and their cities follow.

The Atrebatii (the Atrebates of Strabo, and Pliny, and Attrebates of Caesar;)
now Artois. Whose city was Rigiacum^ now Arras.

The Bellovaci (the Bellovaci of Caesar, Strabo, and Pliny;) now Beauvoisin.
Whose city was Caesaromagus; now Beauvois.

The Ambiani (the Ambiani of Caesar, and Pliny;) the part of Picardy about the
town of Amiens. Whose city was Samarobriga (Samarobrina of Caesar;) now Amiens.

The Rhomandues (the Veromandui of Caesar, and Pliny;) now Vermandois in
Picardy. Whose city was Augusta Rhomanduorum; now St Quintin.

The Vessones (the Suessones of Caesar, the Suessiones of Strabo, and the
Suessiones Liberi of Pliny;) now Soissonois. Whose city was Augusta Vessonum;
now Soissons.

The Subanecti (the Vlbanectes Liberi of Pliny;) now the country about Senlis
in the Dukedom of Valois. Whose city was Rhotomagus.

The Rhemi (the Rhemi of Caesar, and Strabo, and Remi Foederati of Pliny;) the
part now of Champaigne about Rheims. Whose city was Durocottum (Duricorta of
Strabo;) now Rheims.

The Nervij (the Nervij of Caesar, and Strabo, and the Nervij Liberi of Pliny;)
now Hainault, and the country about Tournay. Whose city was Baganum, now
Tournay.

The Morini (the Morini of Caesar;) now Flanders, and the part of Artois about
Terwin. Whose city was Tarvanna; now Terwin.

The Tongri beyond the river Tabuda (the Tungri of Pliny;) now part of Brabant.
Whose city was Atuacutum; now Antuerpen.

The Menapij beyond the Mace (the Menapij of Caesar, Strabo, and Pliny;) now
part of Iuliers. Whose city was Castellum.

The Treveri (the Treveri of Caesar, Strabo, and Mela, and the Treveri Liberi
of Pliny;) now Luxemburg, and the District of Triers. Whose city was Augusta
Treverorum (Augusta of Mela, and Colonia Treverorum of Tacitus; now Triers.

The Mediomatrices, the Mediomatrices of Strabo, and Tacitus, and Mediomatrici
of Pliny; the part of Lorraine about the town of Mets. Whose city was
Divodurum, Divodurum of Tacitus; now Mets.

The Leuci, the Leuci of Strabo, and Leuci Liberi of Pliny; part also of
Lorraine. Whose city was Tullum; now Toul. and Nasium; now Nancy.

Germania Inferior, or the Lower Germany, extending along the course of the
river Rhijn from the confluence of that river with the Obrincus, or Moselle
unto the Ocean (Germania Inferior of Tacitus;) containing now Hollandt,
Zealandt, Vtreicht, Stiff van Colen, and Cleve. Whose cities were Batavodurum
in the Island of the Batavians (Batavodurum of Tacitus;) now Duer-steden. Vetera
Civitas (Vetera Castra, and Vetera of Tacitus;) now Batemborch. Legio trigesima
Vlpia, now Berck. Agrippinensis (Colonia Agrippinensis of Pliny, and Tacitus;)
now Colen. Legio Prima Traiana; now Cobolentz. Mocontiacum (Mocontiacum of
Tacitus;) now Mentz. and Bonna (Bonna of Tacitus;) now Bon.

Germania Superior, or the Higher Germany (Germania Superior of Tacitus,)
continued along the Rhijn from the river Obrincus, or the Moselle unto the
Mountain Iura, and the Helvetians; and divided into the many people of the
Nemeti (the Nemeti Rhenum accolens, Germaniae. gens. Plin.
Nemeti of Pliny, and Nemetes of Caesar,) now part of the Lower Palatinate.
Whose cities were Naeomagus, not improbably Spier. and Rufiniana, now
Oppenheim. The Vangiones (the Vangiones of Caesar, and Pliny,) now part
likewise of the Lower Palatinate, and Elsats. Whose cities were Borbetomagus,
now Worms. and Argentoratum, now Strasburg. The Triboci (the Triboces of
Caesar, and Tribochi of Strabo, and Pliny,) part of Elsats. Whose cities were
Breucomagus. and Elcebus, now Schlestat. And the Rauraci (the Rauraci of
Caesar, and Raurici of Pliny,) now the country of Basil, and part of Elsatz.
Whose cities were Augusta Rauracorum, now Basil; and Argentuaria, now Colmar.

The Longones, (the Lingones of Caesar, Strabo, and Tacitus, and the Lingones
Faederati of Pliny;) le pais Langroin. Whose city was Audomatunum, civitas
Lingonum of Tacitus; now Langres.

The Sequani, (the Sequani of Caesar, Strabo, and Pliny;) the Free County of
Burgundy. Whose cities were Didattium, now Talcnberg. Visontium, Vesontio of
Caesar; now Besancon. Equestris, Colonia Equestris of Pliny; now Neuf-chastel.
and Avanticum, Aventicum of Tacitus; now Avenche.

The Helvetij, the Helvetij of Caesar, and Tacitus; now Switzerlandt. Whose
cities were Ganodurum, now Constents. and Forum Tiberij; now Rhysers stul
Zurich.

The more noted Mountains of Belgica after the same author were the Iurassus,
Iurassus of Strabo, and Iura of Caesar, and Pliny; now the Iour: And Adulas
Mons; now der Vogel; a part of the Alps. The Promontories, or Havens were
Promontorium Itium, Portus Iccius of Caesar; now Calais, or S. Omar. and
Gessoriacum Navale amongst the Morini; now Boulogne. The rivers were Phrudis;
now the Some. Tabuda, Scaldis of Caesar, and Pliny; now the Scheldt. Obrincus,
Mosella of Ausonius; now the Moselle. The Mosa, Mosa of Caesar; now the Mace.
and the Rhijn. The greater channels of the Rhijn, whereby that famous river was
disburdened into the Ocean, were Ostium Occidentalius, the Wahalis of Caesar;
now the Wael. Ostium Medium, falling then into the Ocean at Lugdunum of the
Batavi, since diverted another way by the Lecke. and Ostium Orientalius, Fossae
Drusinae Fossae Drusinae C. Suetonij Tranquilli in Claudio. Fossa DrusianaTac.
Annal. l. 2.
of Suetonius; now the Ysel.

NARBONENSIS.
Narbonensis Provincia, Bracata ante dicta, a reliqua Gallia latere
Septentrionali, Montibus Gebenna, et Iura cincta, ag^orum cultu, virorum,
morumque dignatione, amplitudine opum nulli Provinciarum postferenda, breviter
Italia verius, quam Provincia. Pli. N. Hist. l. 3. c. 5. Bracata ^ Brachis
nominata, nempe tunica, quae sago imponebatur, qua in Curia deposita, latum
Ciavum Gallos sumpsisse Suetonius in Caio Caesare tradit. Provincia Romana
privatim quoque haec dicta est, quod prius a Romany superata, et in Provinciam
reducta leges Romanas* moresque accepissit. Jacob. Delechampij Annot: in Plin.
Not. Hist: lib: 4: c: 17. Vlterior Provincia. C. lul. Caes. Com. Bell. Gal. l.
1. c. 4.
v. Clau. Pt. G. l. 2. c. 10. Strab. l. 4. Pl N Hist. l. 3. c. 5. Po. Me. l. 2.
Iul: Caes. Co: l. 1. c. 3. 4* 5. and 15. l. 3. c. 3. and 9. and l. 7. c. 4. and
Com: Bell. Civ. l. 2. c. 1. etl* 3. c. 13. Interp: Montani, et P: Bertij in
Ptol. l. 2, c. 10.
CAlled thus from the chief city thereof, Narbona. The bounds were upon the
North, those before described, common hereunto, and to Aquitania, Belgica, and
Lugdunensis; and upon the other sides the Alps, extended betwixt the Mountain
Adulas unto the sea Mediterranean, and the mouth of the river Varo, parting it
from Italy; the Pyrenaean Mountains from toward the head of the river
Illiberis unto Veneris Templum, now Cabo de Creux, dividing it from Spain; and
the Sea Mediterranean, intercepted betwixt Veneris Templum, and the mouth of
the river Varo. It contained the countries of Languedoc, Provence, Savoy, and
Daulphinie, with the Land of Russeillon, now belonging to the Crown of
Spain. The people, and cities were these.

The Volcae, Tectosages, and Arecomij (the Volcae of Pliny, the Volgi, and
Volcae of Caesar, the Volgae, surnamed the Arecomici of Strabo, neighboring to
the Rhosne, and inhabiting the greatest part of the country, lying upon the
West thereof; the Tectosages, part of the Volcae, after Pliny, and the
Tectosages of the Volcae, reaching unto the Pyrenaean Mountains, after Strabo;
the Arecomici of Caesar, Pliny, Mela, and Strabo,) containing now together the
Province of Languedoc, and the Earldom of Russeillon. Whose cities were
Illiberis (Iliberis, of Pliny, Ilybirris, with a river of the same name, after
Strabo, Eliberri of Mela;) now Colibre. Ruscinum (Ruscino Latinorum of Pliny,
Ruscino a town, with a river of the same name, issuing forth of the Pyrenaean
Mountains, after Strabo, and Colonia Ruscino of Mela;) where now stands the
Castle of Russeillon, near unto the town of Perpignian. Tolosa Colonia (Tolosa
of Caesar, Tolosa of the Tectosages of Pliny, Tolosa of Strabo, and Tolossa of
the Tectosages, of Mela, one of the most wealthy cities of Gaul Narbonensis;)
now Toulouse. Cessero (Cessero of Pliny;) now Castres. Carcaso, Carcasu of
Pliny; now Carcasone. Betirae, Biltera of Strabo, a well fortified city upon
the river Obris, Blitera of the Septumani after Pliny, one of the most rich
cities of Gaul Narbonensis, and Bliterae, a colonie of the Septumani after
Mela; now Beziers.

Narbon Colonia (Narbo of Caesar, and Strabo, Narbo Martius, a colony of the
Decumani, after Pliny, Narbo Martius, a colony of the Atacini, and Decumani,
and the chief of the cities of Gaul Narbonensis after Mela;) now Narbonne.
Nemausum Colonia (Nemausus, the chief city of the Arecomici, after Strabo,
Nemausum of the Arecomici, a town free of the Latins, and the chief of 24
other towns, after Pliny, Nemausus of the Arecomici, one of the wealthiest
cities of Gaul Narbonensis (Mela;) now Nismes. and Vindomagus.

The Elycoci (the Helvij of Caesar.) Whose city was Albaugusta, now Viviers.

The Allobroges (the Allobroges of Caesar, Strabo, Pliny, and Mela,) Savoy, and
part of Daulphinie Whose city was Vienna (Vienna upon the Rhosne, the chief
town of the Allobroges, after Strabo, Vienna, a colony amongst the Allobroges,
after Pliny, Vienna of the Allobroges, one of the most rich cities of Gaul
Narbonensis, after Mela;) now Vienne.

The Segalauni (the Segovell auni of Pliny) part of Daulphinie. Whose city was
Valentia Colonia (Valentia of Pliny, in the country of the Cavares;) now
Valence.

The Tricasteni (the Tricastini of Pliny.) Whose city was Naeomagus; now Nion.

The Cavari (the Cavares of Strabo, and Mela, and Regio Cavarum of Pliny,) part
now of Daulphinie, and Provence. Whose cities were Accusianorum Colonia; now
Grenoble. Aveniorum Colonia (Avenio of Strabo, Avenio of the Cavares, free of
the rights of the ancient Latins, after Pliny, Avenio of the Cavares, of the
most wealthy cities of Gaul Narbonensis, after Mela;) now Avignon. Arausiorum
Colonia (Arusio of Strabo, Arausio, a colony of the Secu^dani, after Pliny,
Arausio of the Secundani, of the most wealthy cities of Gaul Narbonensis,
after Mela;) now Aurange* and Cabelliorum Colonia (Cabalio of Strabo, and
Cabellio of Pliny;) now Cavaillon.

The Salices (the Salyi of Pliny, and Montana Salyum regio of Strabo;) now part
of Provence. Whose cities were Taruscum (Tarascon of Strabo;) now Tarascon.
Glanum (Glanum of Pliny, and Glanon of Mela;) now Clandeve. Arelatum Colonia
Arelate, a noted Emporie upon the Rhosne, after Strabo, Arelate, a colonie of
the Sextani, after Pliny, Arelate of the Sextani, one of the most wealthy
cities of Gaul Narbonensis, after Mela;) now Arles. and Aquae Sextiae Colonia
(Aquae Sextiae of the Salyi, after Pliny, Aquae Calidae, or Sextiae, founded by
that Sextius, which subdued the Salyes, and named thus from him, and the hot
bathes their springing, after Strabo;) now Aix.

The Memini (Memini of Pliny,) part of Provence. Whose city was Forum Neronis,
(Foroneroniensis of Pliny.)

The Vocontij, (the Vocontij of Caesar, Strabo, Pliny, and Mela) part of
Provence. Whose towns was Civitas Vasiorum (Vasia of Pliny, and Mela;) now
Vaison.

The Sentij, part of Provence. Whose city was Dinia (Dinia of Pliny;) now Digne.

The seacoast towns of Narbonensis were Agathopolis (Agatha, founded by the
Massilians, after Strabo, Agatha, a town of the Massilians, after Pliny,
Agatha of Mela;) now Agde. Anatilorum civitas, Colonia (Anatilia of Pliny;) now
Martegue. Massilia in the Comonni (Massilia of Caesar, and Mela, Massilia, a
confederate city, inhabited by a colony of the Greeks Phocaeenses, after
Pliny, Massilia, built by the Phocaeenses, a well governed commonwealth, and
commanded by the Nobility, after Strabo;) now Marseilles. Tauroentium; now
Toulon.

Olbia (Olbia of Strabo, and Mela;) now Eres. Forum Iulium Colonia (Forum
Iulium of Strabo, Forum Iulium, a colony of the Octavani, after Pliny, Forum
Iulium, a colony of the Octavij, after Mela;) now Feriuls. and in the Deciatij
(Deciates of Deceates Flori l. 2. c. 3. Hist. Romans
Florus, and Regio Deciatium of Pliny,) Antipolis (Antipolis of Strabo, and
Pliny;) now Antibe.

The Rivers were Illeris; now Techo in the land of Russeillon. Iliberis; now
Aude in Languedoc. Atagis. Orobius; now Orb. Araurius, now Erhaud. Fossae
Marianae, a dreane, or channel of the Rhosne; now Aigues Mortes. Rhodanus; now
the Rhosne. Canus. Argentius in the Comonni; now Argentine. Varus; now Varo,
the common bounds of Gaul, and Italy: disburdened into the French seas. Arar
(Araris of Caesar;) now the Soasne. Isara, now the Isere. Druentia, now
Durance; emptyed into the Rhosne. and Dubis, Alduabis of Caesar; now le Doux in
the Free countye of Burgundy, falling into the Soasne.

Here were likewise the Lake Lemanus (Lemanus of Caesar;) the Lake now of
Geneve. and the Promontory Citharistos in the Comonni; now Cercilli, or Cabo de
S, Sigo.

The Islands hereof were Agatha. Blascon, most probably Languillade. the
Staechades, being five in number, and lying near unto the mouth of the river
Varo* and Lerona, now S. Margarita.

Unto these of Ptolemy v. Pli. N Hist. l. 4. c. 19. etc. Strab. Geog. li. 4.
Pomp. Mel. lib. 2. Iul. Caes. Com. Bell. Gal. l. 3. c. 9. l. 4. c. 7. and lib.
7. c. 5. 6. and 32.
are added by Pliny in Aquitania the Begerri; now the country of Begorre. The
Convenae; now Cominges. The Elusates (the Flussates of Caesar;) now Foix. The
Conserrani, now the country about the town of Coserans. The Ambilatri.
Anugnates. Sediboniates. Cocosates. Venami. Onobrisates. Belendi. Monesi.
Osquidates Montani. Sibyllates. Camponi. Bercorates. Bipedimni. Sassumini.
Vellates. Tornates. Sottiates, (Sontiates of Caesar.) Osquidates Campestres.
Succasses. Latusates; now the country about Lactoure. Basabocates. Sennates.
C^mbolectri. and Agesinates. In Lugdunensis, the Boij (the Boij of Caesar;) now
Bourbonois. The Cariosuelites (the Curiosolites of Caesar) now Cournovaille.
The Vidugasses. and the Itesui. In Narbonensis the Vulgientes; now the country
of Apt. The Tricorij, Tricorij of Strabo. Avatici. Tricolli. Camatullici.
Suelteri. Veruccini. Oxubii, (Ligures Oxybii of Strabo.) Ligauni. Suetri.
Quariates. Adunicates. Alabecerii. Apollinares. Ceninenses. Cambolecti,
surnamed the Atlantici. Livii. Piscenae. Ruteni. Sanagenses. Tascodunitani.
Cononienses. Vmbranici. Sardones. Desuviates. Consuarani. Avantici. Campi
Lapidei, (Campus Lapideus betwixt Massilia, and the mouth of the river Rhosne,
after Strabo, Littus Littus Lapideum, in quo Herculem contra Albionem, and
Bergiona, Neptuni filios dimicantem, cum tela defecissent, ab invocato Jove
adiutum imbre lapidum ferunt. Credas pluisse adeo multi passim, and late
iacent. Pomp. Mel. lib. 2.
, Lapideum after Mela;) now la Craux in Provence. and the Ebroduntii; now le
pais Ambrunois in Daulphinie. In Belgica the Toxandri. Pagus Gessoriacus; now
Boulognois. The Vbii, (the Vbii of Caesar, the Vbii, brought hither from the
farther shore of the Rhiin in Germany by Agrippa, after Strabo;) now the
Diocese of Colen. The Oromansaci. Hassi. Castologi. Britanni. Sueconi. Rinuci.
Frisiahones. Betasi. and Gagerni. Of towns Apta Iulia; now Apt. Carpentoracte;
now Carpentras. Alba Helvorum. Augusta Tricastinorum; now S. Antoni de
Tricastin. Aeria; now le Puy en Velaye. Bormannico. Marcina. Athenopolis of the
Massilians. and Lucus Augusti.

Strabo v. Strab. Geog. l. 4. lulii Caesaris Comment. Belli Gallici lib. 1. c.
6. l. 3. c. 1. l. 4. c. 7. l. 5. c. 8. l. 6. c. 14. and l. 7. c. 22. and 26.
adds in Belgica, the Sicambri (the Sicambri of Caesar;) now Cleuelandt. The
Eburones (the Eburones of Caesar;) now part of Iuliers. and the Nantuates,
seated at the head of the Rhiin (the Nantuates of Caesar;) now part of the
Grisons. In Narbonensis, the Massilienses. Iconij. Pe^yli. and Ligures. with
the towns Vrgenum. Contium. Gernum. and Vndalus, at the meetings of the rivers
Sulga, and Rhodanus.

In Aquitania amongst the Arverni, the towns Nemossus upon the Loire. and
Gergovia (Gergovia of Caesar;) now Gergoie, a village by Clermont in Auvergne.
In Lugdunensis Bibracta, a city of the Hedui (Bibracte of Caesar; now Beaulne
in the Dukedom of Burgundy.

Mela v. Pomp. Mel. l. 2.
adds the Atacini, named thus from the river Atax, upon which they inhabited.
and the town Citharistes.

Caesar v. C. Iul. Caesaris comment. Bell. Ga. l. 3. c. 1. l. 2. c. 2. and l. 7.
c. 5. 29. 32. and 36.
adds the Ambarri, a part of the Aremoricae. The Mandubij; now part of the
Dukedom of Burgundy. The Seduni, part of the Upper Wallislandt. The Veragri;
now the Lower Wallislandt. The Catuaci. and the Condrusones. with the towns of
Vellaunodunum of the Senones. Matiscona of the Aedui; now Mascon. Alesij of the
Mandubij; now Alize, a village, near unto Semur in the country of Auxois. and
Octodurus of the Veragri now Martinach in Wallislandt.

THE DESCRIPTIOM AND ESTATE of Gaul after the Emperor Constantine the Great,
toward the expiration of the Western Roman Empire.
THis was the face of Gaul during the first rank of the Roman Emperors. v.
Antonini Aug. Itiner. and Catal. Provinciarum, and civit. Galliae. Rufi Festi
Breviarium. Notitiam Provinciarum. Comment. Guidonis Pancirolli in No^t.
Provinciarum Imperii Occi dentis. Ammiani Marcellini hist. l. 15. P. Merulae
Cos. p. 2. c. 3. and P. Birtijcom. l. 1.
Constantine the Great for the better government hereof, subdivided those
greater into 17 lesser divisions, or Provinces: which for a more full survey
hereof, and because of some difference of names with the former, I have
inserted out of the Catalogue of the Provinces, and cities of Gaul, ascribed
to Antoninus Augustus, with relation to Rufus Festus, Ammianus Marcellinus, and
to the Author of the Notitia. These with their cities, and Interpretations
follow.

PROVINCIA LVGDVNENSIS Lugdunensis prima Ammian. Marcelli^^ hist. l. 15. et
Notit. Provinciarum.
prima.
Containing now Lionois, with part of the Dukedom of Burgundy. The cities
hereof were Civitas Lugdunensis, the Metropolis, and civitas Eduorum
Augustodunum. Antonini Aug. Itin.
civitas Lingonum, Castrum Gaballionense Cavellio. Anton. Aug. Itin.
, and Castrum Matisconense; now Lions, Authun, Langres, Chalon upon Soasne, and
Mascon.

Provincia Lugdunensis Lugdunensis Secunda Notit Prove. et Am. Marcel. hist. l.
15. Provinciae Lugdunenses duae. Rufi Festi Breviarium.
secunda.
COntaining now the Dukedom of Normandy. The cities were civitas
Rotomagensium, the Metropolis; and civ* Baiocassium, civ: Abrincuntum, civ:
Salarium (id est) Saiorum, civ: Lexoviorum, and civ: Constantia; now Roan,
Baieux, Auranches, Sais, Lyseux, and Constances.

Provincia Lugdunensis Lugdunensis Tert^a. Notit. Provinc.
tertia.
COmprehending now Touraine, Maine, Aniou, and Bretaigne. The cities were civ:
Turonum, the Metropolis; and civ: Cenomannorum, civ. Redonum, civ. Andicavorum,
civ: Namnetum, civ: Corisopitum, civ: Cianctium, id est Venetum, civ:
Osismorum, and civ. Diablintum; now Tours, Man's, Renes, Angiers, Nantes,
Kemper-Corentin, Vannes, and Leon, with the town of Carifes.

Provincia Lugdunensis Provincia Lugdunensis Senonia. Not. Provinc.
quarta.
COntaining now Beausse, Brie, Auxerrois, with parts of Champaigne, and of
France Special. The cities hereof were civitas Senonum, the Metropolis; and
civ. Pro (Carnutum.
Carnorum* civ. Antisiodorum, civ. Tricassium, civ. A^relianorum, civ.
Parisiorum, and civ. Meldu^rum: now Sens, Chartres, Auxerre, Trois, Orleans,
Paris, and Meaux.

Provincia Bellica Belgica Prima. Notit. Provinc. et Am. Marcel. hist. l. 15.
prima.
COntaining Lorraine with the district of Triers. The cities hereof were
civitas Treverorum, the Metropolis; and civ. Mediomatricum, id est Metis, civ.
Leucorum, id est Tullo, and civ. Veredonensium; now Trier, Mets, Toul, and
Verdun.

Provincia Bellica Belgica secunda. Am. Marcel. hist. l. 15. et Notit: Provinc.
Belgicae duae. Bufi Festi Breviar.
secunda.
COntaining now Artois, Picardy, parts of Champaigne, and France Special, with
the countries of Cambray, and Tournay. The cities hereof were civ. Remorum,
the Metropolis; and civ. Suessianum Pro (S^essonum*
, civ. Catalaunorum, civ. Pro (Veromanduorum.
Veromannorum, civ. Pro (Atrebatum.
Atravatum, civ. Camaracensium, civ. Turnacensium, civ. Silvanectum, civ.
Bellovacorum, civ. Ambianensis, civ. Morinum, id est Ponticum, and civ.
Bononensium; now Rheims, Soissons, Chaalon upon Marne, S. Quintin, Arras,
Cambray, Tournay, Senlis, Beauvois, Amiens, Terwin, and Boulogne.

Provincia Germania Germania prima Am: Mar^cel. Hist: l: 15: et Notit. Provinc.
prima.
Containing now Sungow, Elsats, West-reich, the Bishopric of Ment^, and the
part of the Palatinate on the side of the Rhijn. The cities were civitas*
Magontiacensis Magontiacus. Am: Marc: l: 15: Histor.
, the Metropolis, now Mentz; and civ. Argentoratus Am: Mar^: ibid.
Argentoracensium, civ: Nemetum (id est Spira,) and civ: Vangionensis (id est
Wormensis;) now Strasburg, Spire, and Worms.

Provincia Germania Germania secunda. Notit: Provin: et Am: Marc: ib: Germaniae
duae Rufi Festi Breviar.
secunda.
Containing now the district of Colen, Iuliers, Cleve, Luick, Brabant, Namur,
Hainault, Limburg, Luxemburg, Gelderland, Vtreicht, Flanders, Holland, and
Zealand. The cities hereof were civ: Agrippina Am. Marc. ib.
Agrippinensis, the Metropolis, and civ: Tungri Am: Marc: ib:
Tungrorum; now Colen, and Tongeren.

Provincia Maxima Sequanorum Maxima Sequanorum Rufi Festi, and Not.
Provinciarum.

Containing now the Free country of Burgundy, and Switzerland. The cities
hereof were civ: Bisontij Am. Marc. ibidem.
Vesontiensis, the Metropolis, now Besancon; and civ: Equestrium Equestris
Anton. Augusti Itinerar.
, now Lausanne, civ: Eluntiorum, now Avanches, civ: Basiliensium (id est
Basilea,) now Basil, civ: Noidenolex Aventicus, Castrum Vindonise, Castrum
Argentua^ia Antonini Augusti Itinerar.
Argentariense, now Colmar, and Castrum Rauracense, (id est) Abucina.

Provincia Alpium Alps Graiae, et Paeminae Am: Marc. lib. 15, et Notit.
Provin. Alps Graiae Ruf. Festi.
Graiarum, and Paeninarunt.
Containing now Wallislandt, and part of Savoy. The cities hereof were civ:
Centronum (id est) Tarantasia, the Metropolis, now Tarantaise; and civ:
Valensium (id est) octodurus; now S. Mauris, or Ma^tinach.

Provincia Viennensis Am: Mar. li. 15. Rufi Festi, et Notit. Provinc.
Vienniensis.
Containing now Daulphinic, Province and Vivaretz, with part of Savoy. The
cities were civ: Vienniensium Vienna. Am. Marc* lib. 15.
, the Metropolis, now Vienne; and civ: Gennave^sium Geneva Caesaris Com. Bell.
Gall.
, civ: Gratianopolis.
Gratianopolitana, civ: Albensium, civ. Vivario, civ: Decensium, civ: Valentia
Am. Marcel. lib. 15.
Valentinorum, civ: Avenicorum, civ. Arelatensium Arelate Am. Marcel. l. 15.
, civ: Carpentoratensis, civ: Massiliensium, civ: Tricastini Am. Marc. l. 15.
Ricartinorum, civ: Vasionensium, civ: Arausinorum, and civ: Cabellicorum, now
Geneve, Grenoble, Alby, Viviers, Die, Valence, Avignon, Arles, Carpentras,
Marscilles, S. Antony de Tricastin, Vaison, Aurange, and Cavaillon.

Provincia Alps Mariti^ae Am. Marc. lib. 15. et Notit. Provinc.
Alpium Maritimarum.
Containing now parts of Daulphinie, and Provence. The cities hereof were
civitas Ebroduno, the Metropolis, now Ambrun; and civ: Diniensium, now Digne,
civ: Saniciensium, id est Sanicisio, now Senas, civ: Clannetena, now Glandeves,
civ: Venciensium, id est Ventio; now S. Paul. de Vences, civ: Rigomagensium,
civ: Solliniensium, and civ: Cemetenensium.

Provincia Narbonensis Narbonensis Prima. Notit. Provinciarum.
prima.
Containing now Languedoc. The cities hereof were civitas Narbonensium Narbona
Am: Marcellini. l. 5.
, the Metropolis, now Narbonne; and civitas Tolosa Am. Mar. ib.
Tolosatum, id est Tolosa, civ: Beterrensium, civ: Agatensium, civ:
Nemausensium, civ: Megalonensium, civ: Lutuensium, id est Lutava castrum, and
civ: Vcetiensis; now Toulouse, Beziers, Agde, Nismes, Magalone, Lodesve, and
Vsets.

Provincia Narbonensis Narbonensis Se cunda. Notit. Provinc.
Secunda
Containing now part of Provence. The cities hereof were civitas Aquensium, the
Metropolis, now Aix; and civ: Aptensium, civ: Retensium, id est Reias, civ:
Foro-Iuliensium, civ: Appencensium, civ: Segesterorum, and civ: Antipolis Am.
Marcellini: l. 15.
Antipolitana; now Apt, Ries, Feriuls, Gap, Cisteron, and Antibe.

Provincia Aquitania Aquitania prima Notit. Provinciarum.
prima.
Containing now Berry, Auvergne, Rovergne, Quercy, Limousin, with Gevaudan, and
Velay in Languedoc. The cities hereof were civitas Bituricum, now Bourges, the
Metropolis; and civ: Arvernorum, civ: Rotenorum Rutheni Caesaris. v. supra.
, civ: Albigensium, civ: Gadurci Caesaris.
Cadorcorum, civ: Lemavicum, civ: Gabalum, and civ: Vellaunorum; now Clermont
en Auvergne, Rodes, Alby, Cahors, Limoges, Mende, and le Puy en Velay.

Provincia Aquitania Aquitania secunda Notit. Provinciarum. Aquitaniae duae
Rufi Festi.
secunda
Containing now Poictou, Xantoigne, Engoulmois, and Perigort, with Bourdelois,
and Agennois in Gascoigne, and Guienne. The cities hereof were civ: Burdegala
Am. Marcellilib. 15.
Burdegalensium, the Metropolis, now Bourdeaux; and civ: Aginum Ptol.
Agennensium, civ: Etolisnensium, civ: Santonum, civ: Pictavi Am. Marcellini
lib: 15. Pictones Caesaris.
Pictavorum, and civ: Petrogoriorum; now Again, Engoulesme, Saints, Poictiers,
and Perigueux.

Provincia Novem-populonia Novem-populana Rufi Festi. Nouem populi Am. Marc: et
Notit: Provinciarum.

Containing the rest of Guienne, and Gascoigne, with the Principality of Bearn.
The cities hereof were civ: Ausci Amm: Marcellini l: 15.
Ausciorum, the Metropolis, now Auchs; and civ: Aquae Augustae Ptolomaei.
Aquensium, civ: Latusates Plinij.
Lastoracium, civ: Convenarum, civ: Conserrani Plinij.
Consantanorum, civ: Boatum, quod est Bot, civ: Beranensium, id est Benainas,
civ: Aturensium, civ: Vasatae. Amm: Marcellini l. 15.
Vasatica, civ: Tursaubica Tralugorra, civ: Elleronensium, and civ:
Ellosaticum; now D'acqs, Lactoure, Cominges, Coserans, le pais de Buchs, and
Bearn, Air, Basats, Tarbe, Oleron, and Euse en Gascoigne.

Of these Viennensis, Lugdunensis prima, Germania prima, Germania Secunda,
Belgica prima, and Belgica secunda according to the Author of the Notitia were
Consulary Provinces. The rest were Praesidiall. Rufus Festus accompteth only 14
Provinces; differing from the Author of the Notitia in that he makes but two
Lugdunenses, and only one Narbonensis.

The INVASION, and DOMINION of the NORTHERN, and BARBAROVS Nations.
SVch was the estate of Gaul during the subjection hereof unto the Romans,
quite changed by the invasion, and conquests of the Northern, and Barbarous
Nations, and becoming divided into sundry new kingdoms, and names; that more
ancient of the Gauls extinguished. These were the Britons, Burgundians,
Visigothes, Almans, and Frenchmen: whose first entrance, reign, continuance,
and successon, and the Estates occasioned from them, follow in order.

THE BRITONS. Britanni, and Britones.

THese Galfr. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 12 etc. Hent. H^ntingdon. Hist. lib. 1.
and l' Histoire de Bretaigne par Bartrand. d' Argentre, Sieur de Gosnes.
not improbably were a remainder of the ancient Gauls, shut up within Gaul
Armorique thorough the conquests, and invasion of the French, and other
barbarous intruders, and named thus either from the Britanni, a people
mentioned Britanni Pli. Not. Hist. l. 4. c. 17.
by Pliny in the neighboring Gaul Belgique, or thorough an after mistake in
regard of their common language with the Britons of the Island, which after
Caesar, and Tacitus, vid. supra.
was the same of both nations. More certainly otherwise (not to contradict the
usual, and received opinion, although without the assertion of more ancient
Greek, and Latin Authors, who lived about those times (a belief grounded
only upon the authority of Gal. Monumeth. and other late English, and French
Historians) they were no other then a colony of the Britons Insulaires about
the year 385, and in the reigns of the Emperors Gratian, and Theodosius the
first, brought hither, and planted in Gaul Armorique by Maximus, Liefetenant
of the Island for the Romans, then rebelling and usurping the Western Empire
against Gratians to secure thereby his retreat into that Island, if by chance
of war, or otherwise he should be forced again to leave the continent. The
tyrant Maximus shortly after being vanquished, and slain by the Emperor
Theodosius, they became a free estate, loose from all foreign subjection,
neglected by the Romans, and the succeeding Frenchmen, busied with other
greater, and more weighty affairs; and reinforced not long after with other
great disbourdments of the same nation, avoiding the fury of the English, and
Saxons, wasting, and destroying their country. Their dominion here contained
the part, before mentioned, of Gaul Armorique, extended betwixt the Ocean, and
the rivers Loire, Maine, and Covesnon; since from hence called Bretaigne. In
the year of Christ 766, and the reign of the Emperor Charles the Great,
weakened by civil dissentions, they were first made subject to foreign, and
the French command; subdued by Astolphus, his Seneschall, or governor of the
Marches hereof. In the next reign of the Emperor Lewis the Godly they again
notwithstanding recovered their lost kingdom, and liberty: which, the French,
being still interessed, and detayned at home by civil broiles, they for a long
time after maintained until Duke Peter de Dreux, who overmatched by the power
of the French, and fearing their greatenes, made the country first subject to
the vassallage of Lewis the ninth, French king; followed by all his
successors. In the late memory of our ancestors Francis the first, French
King, and in the right of his wife Claude, Duke hereof, to present all future
claim, and disunion which might happen, by consent of the Estates incorporated
this great Dukedom with the Crown of France, never from thence to be severed,
which, the male issue hereof extinct in Henry the third, Lewis the thirteenth
of the house of Bourbon, and Navarre, now reigning (Isabella of Austria,
Princess of the Low Countries, the heir general, rejected) by the virtue
hereof at this day enjoys. Their religion was always Christian, and
Catholic, instructed in this faith under the Romans, before their coming
into this Province. Their government until their union with the crown of
France was Monarchical, first under kings, then under dukes. Their Princes
follow. Conan, an English Briton, placed here by Maximus in the year, and
reign aforesaid. Grallon after some son to Conan. Solomon the first, son to
Grallon. Auldran son to Solomon the first. Budic the first, son to Auldran.
Hoel the first, son to Budic the first. Hoel the second, son to Hoel the first.
Alain the first, son to Hoel the second. Hoel the third, son to Alain the
first. Solomon the second, son to Hoel the third. In this prince, Iudicael the
last K. of Basse Bretaigne, dying without heirs, (for since the last
disbourdments hither of the Britons until this time the estate hereof was
divided into two kingdoms,) the whole became united under one Prince. Alain
the second, grandchild to Solomon the second. He deceased without heirs, the
last king of Bretaigne of the house of Conan. Daniel Dremruz; Budic the second,
Maxence; John Reith; and David Wa, chiefes of their factions, the kingdom
being then rent into many petty tyrannies, the occasion of the after conquest
hereof by Charles the Great. After that the kingdom became again recovered
from the French, Neomene, formerly Lieftenant here, and Governor of the
Province for the Emperor Jews the godly, chosen about the year 841.
Heruspee, son to Neomene, slain by Solomon, his successor. Solomon the third,
the murderer of Heruspee, son to Rivaillon, brother to King Heruspee. He was
likewise slain by Pastenethen, and Gurvant, brothers to Heruspee; and sons to
Neomene in the year 874: the last king of Bretaigne. Alain, surnamed le Rebre,
son to Pastenethen, after long misery, and contention for the kingdom,
succeeding in the government hereof: the Normans, who had invaded the province,
being vanquished, and his competitours slain, and subdued.

THE DVKEDOME OF BRETAIGNE.
REfusing the more envious name of king, he took upon him only the title, and
style of Duke; since followed by all the succeeding Princes. Iuhael, and
Collodoch, sons to Alain le Rebre. An Inter-regnum for certain years by
means of the Norman, or Danish invasion, and tyranny, miserably wasting, and
subduing the Country. Alain, surnamed Barbetorte, son to Mathuede, Earl of
Porrhoet, and of the daughter of Alain le Rebre, the Normans being driven out.
Drogon, ^on to Alain Barbetorte, slain young by the treason of Fouques, Earl
of Aniou, in whom ended the house of Alain le Rebre. Conan, Earl of Renes,
descended from king Solomon the third; his Competitours Hoel, and Guer^ch,
natural sons to Alain Barbetorte, successively contending, being vanquished,
and slain. Geffrey, son to Conan the first. Alain the third, son to
Geffrey the first. Conan the second, son to Alain the third. He dyed sans
issue. Hoel the fourth, son to Alain, Earl of Cournovaille, in the right of
his wife Havoise, sister to Conan the second. Alain the fourth, surnamed
Fergent, son to Hoel the fourth. Conan the third, son to Alain the fourth.
Eudon, Earl of Ponthieure, in the right of his wife Berthe, daughter to Conan
the third. Conan the fourth, son to Eudon, and Berthe aforesaid. Geffrey the
second, third son to Henry the second, king of England, in the right of his
wife Constance, daughter to Conan the fourth. Arthur the first, son to Geffrey,
and Constance. He dyed young, and unmarried, after the French relation,
murdered by his unnatural Uncle, John King of England, jealous of his better
right to that kingdom. Peter de Dreux, in the right of his wife Alis, daughter
by a second marriage to Constance aforesaid. He first made the Dukedom subject
unto the sovereignty and homage of the French kings. John the first, son to
Peter de Dreux, and Alis John the second, son to John the first. Arthur the
second, son to John the second. John the third, son to Arthur the second. He
dyed without heirs. After the decease hereof the right was controversed
betwixt John, Earl of Montfort, younger son to Arthur the second, aided by
Edward the third, King of England; and Charles de Blois, husband to Joan la
Boiteuse, daughter to Guye, second son to Duke Arthur the 2d, assisted by
Philip de Valois, French king neither side yet prevailing. John the fourth,
surnamed the Valiant, son to John, Earl of Montfort aforesaid, sole Duke of
Bretaigne, after the decease of Charles de Blois, his competitour, thorough the
aid, and valor of the English overthrown, and slain at the battle of
Auray. John the fifth, son to John the fourth. Francis the first, son to John
the fifth. He deceased without heir male. Peter, brother to Francis the first.
He dyed sans heirs. Arthur the third, Earl of Richmond, and Constable of
France, second son to John the fourth. He also deceased without issue.
Francis the second, son to Richard, Earl of Clisson, third son to John the
fourth. He deceased in the year 1488. Charles the eight, French king in the
right of his wife Anne, heir of Bretaigne, daughter to Francis the second. He
dyed without issue. Jews the twelfth, French king, in the right of Anne of
Bretaigne aforesaid, daughter to Duke Francis the second, married unto him
after the decease of King Charles the Eight. He deceased without male issue.
Francis the first, French king, and the third of that name, Duke of Bretaigne,
in the right of his wife Claude, eldest daughter to king Jews the twelfth, and
Anne aforesaid. With consent of the estates of Bretaigne in the year 1532, he
inseparably united the Dukedom to the crown of France. Francis, Daulphin of
Vienne, eldest son to king Francis the first, and of Claude, crowned Duke of
Bretaigne in the year 1539. He dyed young before his father. Henry the second,
French king, son to King Francis the first, and Claude. Francis the second,
French king, son to Henry the second. Charles the ninth, French king, brother
to Francis the second, and son to Henry the second. Henry the third, French
king, brother to Francis the second, and Charles the ninth, and son to Henry
the second, the last French king of the house of Valois, and in whom ended the
line, and succession of the Dukes of Bretaigne. After his decease, the line
masculine of the house of Valois, and Bretaigne being extinguished, the right
hereof was questioned betwixt Henry the fourth, King of France, and Navarre,
and Philip the second, king of Spain, pretending the title of his daughter
Isabella, now Princess of the Low countries, descended of Elizabeth, daughter
to King Henry the second. By the aid of the English the Spaniards are beaten
out, and the province by virtue of the union, and incorporation made by King
Francis the first, has since remained still annexed to the crown of France.

THE BVRGVNDIANS. Purgundiones Plin. Oros. Cassiodor. etc.

THese were a v. Pli. N. Hist. l. 4. c. 12. Zosimi Hist. l. 1. Imperatore Prob.
Iornand. de Regn. and Temp. successione lib. Am: Marc. l. 18. Imperat.
Constantio, and Iul. and lib. 27. Imp: Valentiniano, and Valente. Cassiodori
Chron. Imper. Valentiniano primo. and Honorio, and Theod. Pauli Orosij Hist. l
7* c. ^7. Histoire de Lion par Claude de Rubys livre, 2. c. 2. 3. 5. 7. 8.
German people, inhabiting beyond the river of Elb toward the coast of the sea
Baltique. Orosius deriveth their name from the Dutch word Burg, signifying in
that language (as still it does) a town, given unto them in regard of such
their more civil manner of plantation, inhabiting towns, and villages;
differing in this from the rest of the Nullos Germanorum populos vtbes habitari
satis notum est, ne pati quidem inter seiunctas seeds. etc. Corn. Tac. lib. d^
Moribus Germanorum.
Germans. Their first mention we find in Pliny; placed (as is before related,)
and accounted then part of the Vandali. In histories we hear not of them
until the Emperor Probus, then fought withal, and overthrown by him in a
great battaill. Their mention after this is clear, and frequent. In the reign
of the Emp. Valentinian the first we read of them to the number of 80 thousand
fighting men, first descending to the coast of the Rhijn: afterward in the
reign of the Emperors Honorius, and Theodosius, as a Christian, and a more
peaceable Barbarian, drawn into Gaul by Stilico, liefetenant to Honorius, and
permitted there to inhabit, with charge only to defend the Rhijn, and the
Roman frontires against the Frenchmen, and other barbarours nations, preparing
to invade the Empire. Their first, and more ancient dwelling amongst the
Vandali, was part of the country, where now lie the great Dukedomes of
Mecklenbourg, and Pomeren. After their descent unto the Rhijn they took up
part of the Lower Palatinate; bordering to that river, and upon the Almans. In
Gaul, after that they had withdrawn thither, they inhabited all, or the
greatest part of the Provinces of Maxima Sequanorum, the Alps Graiae, and
Paeninae, Lugdunensis prima, and Viennensis, co^tayning now the Dukedom, and
Earldom of Burgundy, Nivernois, Bourbonois, Beauviolois, Lionois, Daulphinye,
Savoy, Switzerlandt unto the river Russ, and the Grisons; confining upon Italy
by the Alps, and divided from the Almans by the Russ, and the Mountain Vauge.
Their religion before their entrance into Gaul was Catholic, and Christian.
Their government was always Monarchical; divided whilst they remained in
Germany amongst many Kings; in Gaul governed only by one. Their princes here
were Gondiochus. Gundebault. Sigismond. and Gundemar. In this last prince,
warred upon, and overthrown, and driven out by Childebert, and Clotaire,
French Kings of Paris, and Soissons, in the year 526, after their continuance
of 120 years, their kingdom here, and state took end; added afterward as a
Province to the French Monarchy. Concerning the after affair hereof see the
Frenchmen.

THE VISI-GOTHES.
See Spain.
THey were the same with the Visigots, sometimes possessing, and inhabiting
Spain; their dominions being extended over both Provinces. Under their king
Euricus, at which time they were at their height, they held subject unto them
in this province in a manner the whole Southern moity hereof; continued from
the river Loire unto the sea Mediterranean, the Alps, and the Pyrenaean
Mountains, and containing then Aquitania, with the greatest part of
Narbonensis, now the countries of Provence, Languedoc, Gascoigne, Guienne,
Rovergne, Quercy, Limousin, Perigort, Engoulmois, Poictou, Berry, and Auvergne
with others. Driven out of Aquitania by Clovys, the fifth king of the Frenchmen,
and shortly after Provence by Amalasiunta, protector of the kingdom of the
Ostrogothes, being resigned to Theodebert, French King of Mets, there dominion
here became stinted betwixt the river Rhosne, and the Pyrenaean Mountains in
the part of Narbonensis, from the language, dialect, or longer abode there of
the nation called afterward Languedoc; which they held until their conquest,
and extirpation by the Moors.

THE ALMANS.
See Germany.
COncerning this people it has been more fully related in the survey, and
discourse of Germany; toward the expiration of the Western Roman Empire
falling into, and inhabiting part of both provinces. They shared here in Gaul
the province of Germania prima, with part of Maxima Sequ^norum; comprehending
now West-reich, Elsats, Sungow, the part of the Palatinate, lying on this side
of the Rhijn, with the part of Switzerlandt, contained betwixt the Rhijn, and
the river Russ, being divided from the Burgundians by the Russ, and the
Mountain Vauge. By Clovis, the first Christian King of the Frenchmen, they
were totally subdued, and their possessions both here, and in Germany annexed
to the French dominion; known for a long time after by the name of Almaigne,
or Suevia.

THE FRENCHMEN. Franci Am. Marc. lib. 27. etc.

v. Sext. Aurelium Victorem de Caesaribus Imperat. Gallieno. Trebellii
Pollionis Gallienos, duos. Flavij Vopisci Divum Aurelianum, Zosimi Hist. l. 1.
Probo Imper. and lib. 3. Imp. Constable. Eutropij Hist. To l. 9. Imp. Diocl. Am.
Marc. l. 27. Valentiniano primo, and Valente Imp. M. Aur. Cassiodori Chronicon
Imperat. Theodosio secun^do, and Valentiniano tertio. Prosperi Aquitani
Chronicon. Aymonium de Gestis Franc. Gregorij Turon. Hist. Francorum. Hotomanni
Franc-Gall. lib. 5. Ioannis Isacij Pontani Oigenes Francicas. Gagwini Annals
Rer. Gallicatum: Histo^^e de France par Bern* de Girard Seigneur du Haillan.
THese were certain people of the Germans, mentioned by Ptolemy, and the
ancient Geographers, and inhabiting near unto the fall of the Rhiin, toward
the maine of the Roman Empire for their greater strength, and security joining
into this one nation, and leaving their many old names, and uniting into this
common. Concerning the Etymology of the name, authors agree not. Some would
have them thus called from their bold, and fierce natures, which name should
have been given unto them by one of the Valentinian Emperors: whose error is
hereby apparent for that we read of the French long before any such Roman
Emperor. Pontanus does otherwise derive the name from the word: Francesca, a
weapon, peculiar to the Nation; an Etymology also without ground, and alike
uncertain. The most probable with the leave of Pontanus is that of Hotomannus
from the word Franck, signifying Free with the ancient Dutch, as now with the
modern, (for such was the first language of this nation;) taken up by the
sundry German people, whereof these were composed, in ostentation of their
valor, in regard of their freedom, and liberty from the Roman servitude, and
injuries, with continual excursions invading the provinces hereof, themselves
remaining safe from the like retaliations, secured by their intricate, and
impassable woods, and marshes. Their first express mention we find to have
been in the reign of the Emperor Galienus, then ransacking Gaul, and
Spain, and serving the rebel Posthumous in his wars hereagainst. After this
they are frequently named in the reigns of the succeeding Emperors: in the
reign of Clodius the second, forraging Gaul, and at Moguntiacum to the number
of 700 slain by Aurelianus, afterward Emperor, then Tribune of the 6 Legion
Gallican: of Probus, overthrown in battaill by the army hereof, and with a
fleet of ships pillaging, and spoiling along the seacoasts of Sicily,
Afrique, and Greece: of Dioclesian, with the neighboring Saxons infesting the
seacoasts of Gaul Belgique, and Armorique: of Constantius, son to Constantine
the Great, with the Almans, and Saxons after their wonted manner pillaging, and
ransacking Gaul, and spoiling no less then 40 cities in the tract hereof
along the Rhijn: of Valentinian, and Valens, with the Saxons again breaking
into, and spoiling the same province: of Thedosius the second, and Valentinian
the third, slain in great numbers by the valiant Aelius, lieftenant hereunto,
and driven out of a part of Gaul, neighboring to the Rhijn, which they then
newly had seized upon. Their country during these their first affairs was
wholly in Germany, seated betwixt the Almans, and the Saxons, and extended along
the shore of the Rhijn from the meeting hereof with the Meine unto the fall of
that river into the German Ocean, quarting in Gaul upon the further side of
the Rhijn the province of Germania secunda. They comprehended the countries,
where are at this day Engern, Marck, Bergen, part of Cleve, Stiff van Vtreicht,
Gelderlandt, and Hessen, the Earldom of Zutphen, Over-Ysel, West-phalen,
North-Hollandt, together with the East, and West-Freislandts. The several
Dutch people, which they contained (uniting into this general name,) were the
Bructeri, reaching along the shore of the Rhijn betwixt the river of the Meine,
and Colen: the Sicambri, extended from thence unto the division of the Rhijn at
Schenken-scans: the Chamavi, seated near unto the fall, or mouth of the Rhijn:
the Salij, lying Franci Salij Am. Marc. Hist. l. 17. Constantio, et Iuliano
Imperat.
about the river Isala, now Ysel, called thus from hence, and occasioning the
name of the pretended Salique Law: the Minores Frisij, now North-Hollandt: the
Maiores Frisij, now West-Freislandt: the Tencteri, Franci Atthuarij Am. Marc.
Hist. l. 20. Constantio and Iuliano Imperat.
Ansuarii, and Cherusci. For thus we find them dictinctly called, placed, and
attributed to this common name in the table published by Peutinger, written in
the time of the later Roman Emperors. The first time of their sixth plantation
in Gaul (following the most credited authors) happened in the reign of the
Emperor Valentinian the third, under Clodi^, their second king from Pharamond,
conquering, and inhabiting the country of Germania secunda; whether that they
were but only in part expulsed from hence by Aetius, or returning again with
greater confidence, and fury after the death hereof, murdered by Valentian,
jealous of his virtues. Under Merove, succeeding unto Clodio, they added
hereunto the first Belgica. Under Childeric they added the second Belgica;
withdrawing by little, and little out of Germany, their ancient abode, and
leaving the Moorish wood-lands, which they there possessed, unto the Saxons,
violently pressing upon them from the North, busied here in the conquests, and
plantation of better countries. Under Clovys, their fifth king (the Visigothes
overcome, and the Almans subdued,) they took in the provinces of Aquitania,
and Germania prima, cleared Belgica of the Romans (under Siagrius then keeping
possession about Soissons,) and added in Germany to their kingdom, and name,
whatsoever was then held by the Almans, and Bavarians, containing the part
hereof, extended betwixt the river Meine, and the Alps. Under Childebert, and
Clotaire, sons to Clovys, and kings of Paris, and Soissons (the French dominion
being then divided,) they conquered the Burgundians. Under Theodoric, brother
hereunto, and king of Mets, or Austrasia, they subdued the Thuringians. Under
Theodebert, king of Austrasia, grandchild unto Clovys, and son to Theodoric
they took in Provence, or the part of Gaul Narbonensis, contained betwixt the
river of Rhosne, and the Alps; surrendered by Amalasiunta, and the Ostrogothes,
by whom it had been gotten, and detayned from the Visigothes. Under Charles
Martel, regent of the kingdom for the titulary princes, they utterly expulsed
the Visigothes, and Moors out of Languedoc; their last retreat in this
province. Under Charles the Great they took from the Moors in Spain the part
of Tarraconensis, where was afterward the great, and famous Earldom of
Barcelona, and conquered the kingdoms, and nations of the Britons, Saxons,
Avares, and Lombards, uniting under the Monarchy of the French the whole Gaul
Transalpine, Pannony, Germany unto the rivers Eydore, Elb, and the Saltza, the
best part of Italy, together with the title, and honor of Roman Emperor, for
a certain time afterward remaining hereditary to the royal families of this
nation; in whose reign, and in that next of his son, the Emperor Lewis the
Godly, the Empire, and dominion hereof was at the height, thorough their civil
discords, and that vnprovident division made by the sons of the Godly,
declining shortly after, and breaking into five lesser kingdoms, of Italy,
Germany, or East-France, Lorraine, Burgundy, and West-France, all which not
long after coming into the hands of stranger princes, ceased to be French,
resolving into sundry petty states, and governments; West-France excepted,
wherein the name, and account of the nation at this day rests confined, the
manner whereof with their continuance, successions, and whole fortunes unto our
times, or during French, we will show hereafter. We find at this time the
account, and name of France (for thus was called the greatest part of the
French dominions after their possession, and plantation by this nation) to have
extended over the whole Gaul, as also over Pannony, and the parts of Germany
subject hereunto; their ancient names worn out. It contains then two
divisions, or kingdoms, famous in the French, and Dutch histories, of
Oosten-reich, or Austrasia; or of West-reich, or Westrasia; for thus we read
them corruptly named in the Latin Authors of that ruder age. Oosten-reich
signified the Eastern kingdom, so called from such its situation, compared
with the other division. It was otherwise named East-France, in regard likewise
of its more Easterly situation. Also Dutch France from the Dutch language of
the people. It was likewise called the kingdom of Metz from the town of Metz,
then the royal seat of the kings hereof. It contained all Pannony, and
Germany subject to the French, and within the Rhijn the parts lying betwixt
that river, and the Meuse, and Scheldt, comprehending now Lorraine, Luick,
Elsats, the districts of Trier, Colen, and Mentz, the Dukedom of Gulick, parts
of Cleve, and of the Lower Palatinate, together with the many provinces of the
Low Countries, contained betwixt those rivers. At this day the French name,
and account being wholly extinguished in those parts, the name is only
preserved in the Dukedom of Oostenrich in High Germany, sometimes parcel
hereof. West-reich signified in the Dutch language the Western kingdom; for
thus was it situated, compared to the other. It was also called West, and Roman
France from such its situation, and language, mixed with the Latin; compounding
now the modern French. It contained in a manner now modern France. The kings
of the French, until the division of the kingdom, and Monarchy hereof by the
sons of Jews the Godly follow. Pharamond, from whom they first begin the
succession hereof. He reigned wholly in Germany, and is put to have bin the
author of the pretended Salique-law. Clodion, son to Pharamond. Under this
Prince they first planted in Gaul. Merove, Master of the horse to Clodion, left
protector of the kingdom for his young sons; over whom he usurped. The
disinherited sons of Clodion (which were Auberon, Regnault, and Ranchaire (for
so were they named) retiring into the countries of Ardenne, and about the
Moselle, begun there the estates so called; from whom descended afterward the
Princely houses of Lorraine, The Earledom^ of Ard^nne.
Brabant, Namur, and Hainault. Childeric, son to Merovy. Clovys, son to
Childeric. This Prince first established here the Christian religion, and
mightily enlarged the French dominions, the Romans, and neighboring Barbarians
overcome, and vanquished. Childebert, Clodomire, Clotaire, and Theodoric, sons
to Clovys, the kingdom being divided amongst them; whereof the two former were
styled kings of Paris, and Orleans; the other two of Soissons, and Mets.
Clotaire, sole king of the French, the other brethren dying without issue, or
their posterity failing. In the reigns of these four brethren kings, the
kingdom of Burgundy, and of the Thuringians, with Provence in Gaul
Narbonensis was annexed to the French dominions. Chilperic, Aribert, Gontran,
and Sigibert, sons to Clotaire, the kingdom being again divided; whereof the
two former shared Soissons, and Paris, the other two the kingdoms of Orleans,
and Austrasia. At this time lived together the two monsters of their sex,
Brunehaut, and Fredegonde, Queens to Sigebert, and Chilperic aforesaid, for
their unnatural cruelties, famous in the French histories, this being the
murderer of her own husband, and of her brother-in-law Sigibert, the other of
eleven kings, and Princes, royally descended, and amongst others of her sons,
and grandchildren Childebert, Theodebert, and Theodoric, Kings of Austrasia.
Clotaire the second, son to Chilperic, and Fredego^de, Monarch of the French;
his Uncles Aribert, and Gontran, deceasing without heirs, and the house of
Sigibert by the cruelty of Brunehaut, being extinguished. Dagobert, and
Aribert, sons to Clotaire the second, whereof this reigned in Aquitania, or in
the parts of France contained betwixt the Loire, and the Pyrenaean mountains;
the other in the rest of the French dominions. Dagobert, sole king of the
French; Chilperic the son of Aribert, dying without heirs. In the reign
hereof the Vascones, a Spanish people, inhabiting where is now the kingdom of
Navarre (descending from the Pyrenaean Mountains) first invaded the
neighboring part of Aquitania, since from hence called Gascoigne; shortly
after their first entrance conquered to the French by Aribert aforesaid. Clovys
the second, son to Dagobert. Clotaire the third, son to Clovys the second. He
dyed young without heirs. Theodoric, brother to Clotaire the third, deposed for
his sloth, and insufficiency to govern, and shut up in a Monastery.
Chilperic, brother to Theodoric, slain by his rebellious subjects, pretending
his cruelty, and tyranny. Theodoric, after the death of Chilperic assumed
again unto the kingdom. About this time the ancient virtue of the French
Monarchs of the race of Merove, begun to decline, cloystered up for the most
part within their palaces, and giving themselves wholly unto luxury, and ease,
committing in the mean time the affairs of state unto the Majors of their
palaces, who hereby having once seized upon the government, transmitting the
same to succession, ceased not until they had bereft them of all authority, and
name, usurping upon them at length the kingdom. Clovys the third, son to
Theodoric. he dyed young without heirs. Childebert, son to Theodoric, and
brother to Clovys the third. Dagobert the second, son to Childebert. Daniel a
Priest, named Chilperic after his being king, upon the decease of Dagobert the
second, chosen by the Nobility, opposed by Charles Martel, Maiour of the
Palace. Clotaire the fourth, set up by Charles Martel, enemy to Chilperic.
Chilperic sole king of the French after the decease of Clotaire the fourth.
Theodoric, son to Dagobert the second. Childeric, son to Thedoric, the last
king of the house of Merove; upon pretense of an hereditary sloth, negligence,
baseness, and disability of the Princes of this line, by the especial aid,
and authority of Zachary then Bishop of Rome, deposed by Pepin, then Mayor of
the Palace, and shorn Monk. Pepin, Major of the Palace, son to Charles
Martel, whose ancestors had for a long time borne that title, and governed the
State; Childeric being deposed, elected King in the year 750. Charles the
Great, son to Pepin. In this prince in regard of the extraordinary greatness of
the French Monarques, and of their well deservings to the Christian
commonwealth in general, and to the Papacy in particular, by the chief
practice, and means of Pope Leo the third in the year 800 after a vacancy of
330 years the name, and dignity of Roman Emperor of the West was restored,
and conferred upon this Nation. He enlarged the French dominions with the
kingdoms of the Britons, Lombards, Avares, and Saxons, the mightiest of all
the French Monarques, and since his time of all the Emperors of the West.
Lewis surnamed the Godly, son to Charles the Great; the last Monarque of the
French Nation. Lotharius, Lewis, and Charles, surnamed the Bauld, sons to the
Emperor Lewis the Godly, the dominions of the French being divided amongst
them. Of these Lotharius had Italy with the title of Roman Emperor, and in
Gaul, or France within the Rhijn, the parts of Austrasia, Burgundy, and
Provence. Lewis had Germany, or East-France, and Charles had West-France, both
with the title of Kings. Not long after the Emperor Lotharius turning
Religious, to the further rent hereof subdevided his part amongst his three
sons Lewis, Lotharius, and Charles (his two brothers Lewis, and Charles the
Bauld yet living,) assigning unto Lewis, Italy with the title of Roman
Emperor, to Lotharius, Austrasia, from the portion, or kingdom hereof
afterward named Lot-reich, or Lorraine, and to Charles, Burgundy, and Provence
with the name, and style of Kings. By this means the dominion of the Frenchmen
hitherto entier, and under one, or never long divided, became severed (as has
been before related) into five kingdoms, never again united, of Italy,
Germany, Lorraine, Burgundy, and West-France; whose continuance, and estate,
during the time that they were French follow, in order.

The KINGDOM of ITALY under the FRENCH.
v. Caroli Sigonij Histor. de Regno Italiae l. 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5.
THis was not accounted any part of France. It was begun by the Lombards,
succeeding to the Ostro-gothes, drawn in hither by the treason, and discontent
of Narses, general in the Gothish wars for the Emperor Justinian. By the
reign of Aistulphus (the Exarchy destroyed) it contained all Italy (Apulia,
and Calabria remaining then to the Greekish Emperors, and the lands of the
Popes only excepted.) The Lombards being subdued by Charles the Great about the
year 774 it was annexed to the French dominions. In the person of Pepin, son
to Charles the Great, it was made a particular French kingdom, carried from
one Caroline, or French family unto another with the title of Roman Emperor,
for the most part annexed thereunto, until the Emperor Charles the Fat, after
whom it ceased to be French; usurped by the Italians, and succeeding Germans.
The French kings here of the house of Charles the Great follow. Pepin king of
Italy, second son to the Emperor Charles the Great. He deceased before his
father. Bernard king of Italy, son to Pepin. Lewis surnamed the Godly, eldest
son to the Emperor Charles the Great; Emperor of the Romans, and king of
France, and Italy. Lotharius, eldest son to the Emperor Lewis the Godly;
Emperor of the Romans, and king of Italy. Lewis, Emperor of the Romans, and
king of Italy; eldest son to the Emperor Lotharius. Charles, surnamed the
Bauld, youngest son to the Emperor Lewis the Godly; Emperor of the Romans,
and King of West-France, and Italy. Carloman, King of Bavaria, and Italy;
eldest son to Lewis, surnamed the Ancient, King of Germany, second son to the
Emperor Lewis the Godly. Charles surnamed the Fat, Emperor of the Romans, and
King of Germany, and Italy; younger son to Lewis the Ancient, and brother to
Carloman. He deceased in the year 888 without issue the last King of Italy of
the French, and house of Charles the Great; succeeded unto by Berengarius Duke
of Friuli, Guy Duke of Spoleto, and other petty tyrants of the Italian Nation,
the posterity of Charles the Great commanding in France, and Germany being
then illegitimate, or in nonage, and the power of the French thorough their
factions, and the many divisions of that grand monarchy then much declined.

The whole time that the French commanded in this province accompting from the
overthrow, and conquest of Desiderius, and the Lombards by Charles the Great
unto the decease of the Emperor Charles the Fat lasted 114 years.

THE KINGDOM OF GERMANY OR EAST-FRANCE.
THis See Germany.
kingdom was begun, as before, in the person of Lewis, surnamed the Ancient,
second son to the Emperor Lewis the Godly, unto whose lot it fell in the
division of the French Monarchy betwixt him, and his brethren Lotharius, and
Charles the Bauld. It contained all Pannony, and the parts of Germany, subject
to the French Empire. After the decease of the Emperor Conrade the first
without heirs, this likewise left off to be French, commanded ever after by
princes of the Dutch Nation, and resolving into its old name of Germany again,
the name, and memory of France, and of the French extinguished. The Kings here
of the house of France, and Charles the Great, and until the Dutch, or Saxons
follow. Lewis before mentioned, the founder of the kingdom, second son to the
Emperor Lewis the Godly. Carloman, Lewis, and Charles surnamed the Fat, sons
to Lewis, the first King; reigning together, the kingdom being divided amongst
them. Charles the Fat, sole King of Germany; his two brethren Carloman, and
Lewis deceasing without heirs, or issue lawful. After the decease of the
Emperor Lewis the Stammeter, King of West-France, as the only left heir of
the Caroline line, or of age to govern, he became king of Italy, and Emperor
of the Romans; a title for the greater power, and mightiness of this kingdom,
still afterward continued in the princes hereof, as during the French race, so
of that of the Saxons, and since these became elective unto this day. Arnulph,
natural son to Carloman, brother to Charles the Fat. Lewis, son to Arnulph.
Conrade the first, son to Conrade, brother to Lewis. He deceased in the year
919, the last Emperor of the Romans, and King of Germany of the French, and of
the house of Charles the Great; succeeded unto by Henry, surnamed the Fouler,
Duke of Saxony, and by the Nation of the Dutch.

THE KINGDOM OF LOTREICH, OR LORRAINE.
Les Antiquitez de la Gaul Belgique par Richard de Wassenburg. l^ure 3. and la
Table des Roy^ de L^^r^ne p^^mesme authe^ur.
THis signified with the ancient French, the kingdom of Lotharius; being so
called from Lotharius the second, son to the Emperor Aymonius ^therwi
^^ttributet^ the original of (...) name to the Emperor Lothatius. vid.
Aymonij* de Gestis Francorum. l. 5. c. 19.
Lotharius, whose share it was of the French dominions, and in whom the
kingdom first began. It contained all Austrasia, lying in Gaul, or in France
within the Rhijn; being divided from East-France, or the kingdom of Germany by
the river Rhijn; from West-France by the Scheldt; and from the kingdom of
Burgundy by the Mountains of the Iour, and Vauge. Lotharius the second,
deceasing without heirs, or legitimate, and the whole house of the Emperor
Lotharius being extinguished, after long debate, and contention betwixt the
Kings of West-France, and Germany, and sundry divisions, revnions, and
alterations during the Caroline line, in the reigns of the Emperor Otho the
third, and of Lewis the last French King of the house of Charles the Great,
this kingdom, and name took end, the title of Kings of Lorraine being then
left off by those princes, and the part hereof contained betwixt the rivers
Meuse, and the Scheldt, belonging to the French Kings, being incorporated with
France, and the other part, lying betwixt the Meuse, and the Rhijn, being added
unto Germany; divided afterward into sundry lesser States, partly at this day
subject to the Empire, partly to the family of Austria, and Burgundy, and to
the States of the united provinces of the Netherlands: the Dukedom of
Lorraine, Cl^ve, Gulich, Zweibruck, Brabant, Gelderlandt, Luxemburg, and
Limburg, the Earledomes of Hollandt, Zealandt, Hainault, Namur, and Zutphen,
the Lantgravedome of Elsatz, the County Palatine of the Rhijn, the Marquisate
of the Sacred Empire, the Lordship of Malines, and the Bishoprics of Vtreicht,
Luick, Triers, Colen, Mentz, Metz, Toul, Verdun, Spier, Worms, and Strasburg,
whose original, and fortunes follow after we have first set down the names,
and order of the Kings of Lorraine. Lotharius the second, the first king, son
to the Emperor Lotharius. He dyed without lawful issue. Lewis surnamed the
Ancient, King of Germany, and Charles the Bauld, King of West-France, sons to
the Emperor Lewis the Godly; after the decease of Lotharius the second.
usurping this title, and name, and dividing the kingdom betwixt them, whereof
Lewis had the part lying betwixt the Meuse, and the Rhijn, and Charles the part
contained betwixt the Meuse, and the Scheld. Carloman, Lewis, and Charles the
Fat, sons to Lewis the Ancient, Kings of Germany, and of the part of Lorraine
betwixt the Meuse, and the Rhijn; and Lewis surnamed the Stammerer, son to
Charles the Bauld, Emperor of the Romans, and King of West-France, and of the
part of Lorraine on this side the Meuse. After the decease hereof, Lewis, and
Carloman, his two bastard sons, succeeding in the kingdom of West-France,
surrendered their part of Lorraine unto Carloman, Lewis, and Charles the Fat,
the sons of Lewis the Ancient, and Kings of Germany before mentioned. Charles,
surnamed the Fat, son to Lewis the Ancient, after the decease of his two
brothers Carloman, and Lewis, without heirs, Emperor of the Romans, and sole
King of Germany, and Lorraine. Arnulp, base son to Carloman, brother to Lewis
the Fat; Emperor of the Romans, and King of Germany, and of the whole
Lorraine. Zuentebald, natural son to the Emperor Arnulph; King of the whole
Lorraine. He deceased without heirs. Lewis, son to the Emperor Arnulph;
Emperor of the Romans, and King of Germany, and of the whole Lorraine.
Conrade, nephew to the Emperor Lewis, Emperor of the Romans, and King of
Germany, and of the whole Lorraine. He lost the kingdom of Lorraine unto
Charles, surnamed the Simple, King of West-France. Charles, surnamed the
Simple, son to the Emperor Lewis the Stammerer, King of West-France, and of
the whole Lorraine. Upon agreement made with the Emperor Henry the first, he
restored unto him the part hereof betwixt the Meuse, and the Rhiin. Charles the
Simple, King of West-France, and of Lorraine on this side the Meuse; and Henry
the first Emperor of the Romans, and King of Germany, and of Lorraine beyond
the Meuse. Rodulph of Burgundy, King of France, and of Lorraine on this side
the Meuse. Lewis the fourth, French King, and of Lorraine on this side the
Meuse. Otho the first, Emperor of the Romans, and King of Germany, and of
Lorraine betwixt the Meuse, and the Rhijn. Lotharius the third, French King,
and of Lorraine on this side the Meuse. Otho the second, Emperor of the
Romans, and King of Germany, and of Lorraine beyond the Meuse. Lewis the fifth,
French King, and of Lorraine on this side the Meuse; and Otho the third,
Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany, and of Lorraine beyond the Meuse.
Under those two princes the title, and kingdom of Lorraine ceased to be;
incorporated, and united with West-France, and Germany. The many States arising
out of the ruins hereof follow.

THE DVKEDOMEOE LORRAINE.
v. Les Antiquitez de Gaul Belgique par Richard de Wassenburg. li. 3, 4. etc.
and la Table des Ducs de Loraine par mesme autheur.
THis now only retayneth the ancient name of the kingdom of Lorraine. It was
begun in the year 993 in the person of Charles, Duke of Brabant, younger
brother to Lotharius the third, and uncle to Lewis the fifth, the last French
Kings of the house of Charles the Great, to whom it was given with this title
by the Emperor Otho the second. It contains then besides modern Lorraine,
the country of Brabant (united to the name hereof, and called Basse Lorraine,)
together with Luick, and Gulick. The manner, how these were rent herefrom, we
will show in the Catalogue of the Princes, whose succession, and order follow.
Charles, Duke of Brabant, Uncle to Lewis the fifth, King of France, Duke of
Lorraine by the gift of the Emperor Otho the second. He dyed in bonds, caught,
and imprisoned by Hugh Capet, the usurping King of France, jealous of his
better right to that Crown. Otho, son to Charles. He deceased without issue.
Godfreye the younger, surnamed with the Beard, eldest son to Godfrey, Earl of
Ardenne, Buillon, and Verdun, after the decease of Otho succeeding in the
Dukedom hereof by the gift of the Emperor Henry the second, the heirs
general Gerberge, and Hermengarde, sisters to Otho, excluded. Gozelo, brother
to Godfrey the younger. Godfrey the second, son to Gozelo. Godfrey the third,
son to Godfrey the second. He died without issue. Godfrey of Buillon, the
fourth of that name, son to Eustace, Earl of Buillon, and of Ydain, sister to
Godfrey the third. He became king of Jerusalem, and deceased in the Holy land
without heirs. He sold the temporalty of the city, and country of Luick unto
Speutus, then Bishop hereof; continuing ever since by this right severed from
the Dukedom, belonging to these Prelates. About the same time (as it is
thought) the town, and country of Gulick were likewise divided herefrom,
seized upon with the title of Earl by Eustace, brother to Godfrey. Bauldwin,
brother to Godfrey of Buillon, king of Jerusalem, and Duke of Lorraine. He
lost Brabant, or Basse Lorraine to Geffrey, surnamed with the Beard, Earl of
Lorraine, descended from Gerberge, daughter to Charles of France, the first
Duke of Lorraine. He also dyed without heirs. Theodoric, son to William, Baron
of Ianville; brother to Godfrey, and Bauldwin, kings of Jerusalem. Simon the
first, son to Theodoric. Matthew the first, son to Simon the first. Simon the
second, son to Matthew the first. Frederique the first, son to Simon the second.
Theobald the first, son to Frederique the first. Matthew the second, son to
Frederique the first, and brother to Theobald the first. Frederique the second,
son to Matthew the second. Theobald the second, son to Frederique the second.
Frederique the third, son to Theobald the second. Rodulph, son to Frederique
the third. John, son to Rodulph. Charles the second, son to John. Reiner
d'Aniou, Duke of Bar, and afterward king of Sicily; Duke of Lorraine in right
of his wife Isabel, daughter to Charles the second. John the second, son to
Reiner of Aniou, Duke of Bar, and of Isabel of Lorraine aforesaid. Nicholas d'
Aniou, son to John the second. He dyed without heirs. Reiner the second, son
to Frederique, Earl of Vaudemont, and of Yoland, daughter to Reiner d' Aniou*
and Isabel of Lorraine. After the decease of his grandfather Reiner d' Aniou,
he became also Duke of Bar. Antonye, son to Reiner the second. Francis, son to
Antony. Charles the third, son to Francis, Duke of Lorraine, and Bar, and Earl
of Vaudemont in the time of Wassenburg, and of Albizius my Authors.

THE BISHOPRIC OF LIEGE.
IT was thus named v. la Prologue aux Antiquitez de la Gaul Belgique par
Richard de Wassenburg.
from the city of Liege; the chief of the country, and seat of the Prince. It
was sometimes a part of the Dukedom of Lorraine; by Godfrey of Buillon, sold
to Speutus, Bishop of that See, and made a particular State. The order of the
Bishops, and Princes, we find not.

THE DVKEDOME OF IVLIERS.
IT * was so called from the chief city Iuliers. It was also a part of the
Dukedo^e of Lorraine, rent, and divided therefrom, and made a particular
Earldom by Eustace, brother to Godfrey of Buillon, king of Jerusalem, the
first Prince. In the year 1329, and in the person of William the fourth, it
was translated to a Marquisate by the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria. Shortly after
in the person of the same Prince it was made a Dukedom by the Emperor Charles
the fourth. By Mary only daughter to William the fifth, and wife to John the
third, Duke of Cleve, it was brought with the Dukedom of Bergen unto that
family, wherein ever since it has continued; belonging now to the Princes of
Brandenburg, and Nuburg, heirs of that house. The order of the first Princes
we find not. The rest for brevity sake we omit.

THE DVREDOME OF CLEVE.
v. P^tri Birtij comment. Rerum German. lib. 2. c. 19.
THis lies in both Provinces of Gaul, and Germany, divided by the Rhij^, and
named thus from the town of Cleve. When the state begun, or by whom, it is not
agreed, Their assertion is less absurd, who draw the beginning hereof from one
Aelius Gracilis, to whom the country should be given with the title of Earl by
Pepin the Fat, and Charles Martel, Majors of the Palace in France. By the
Emperor Sigismond in the Council of Constance, and in the person of Adolph
the eleaventh, it was made a Dukedom. The right hereof, and of Gulick, and
Bergen, with the Earldom of Marck, appertain now to the Princes of
Brandenburg, and Nuburg; the line masculine failing, and extinguished in
William the second, the last Duke. From Theodoric the tenth, and more clear
times, the Princes follow. Theodoric the tenth, living about the reign of the
Emperor Jews of Bavaria. Mary, daughter to Theodoric. She married unto Adolph
the ninth of that name, Earl of Marck, whereby these two Earledomes became
united in one family. Adolph the tenth, son to Mary, and Adolph the ninth. He
lived in the reign of the Emperor Charles the fourth. Adolph the eleaventh,
son to Adolph the tenth, created first Duke of Cleve by the Emperor Sigismond
at the Council of Constance in the year 1417. John the first, son to Adolph
the eleaventh. John the second, son to John the first. John the third, son to
John the second. He married unto Mary, daughter unto William the fifth, Duke of
Gulick, and Bergen, by means whereof those two estates became added to this
family. Amongst other issue he had Anne of Cleve, Queen to Henry the eight,
king of England. William the first, son to John the third. William the second,
son to William the first; the last Duke of Cleve, Gulick, and Bergen, and Earl
of Marck, continued in the line masculine, and descended from Adolph the tenth.
He deceased in the year 1609 without issue. After his decease the estates
hereof were controversed betwixt the Emperor Rodulph the second, pretending
the prerogative, and right of the Empire upon the failing of the male issue;
and Wolfang* Prince of Nuburg, and George-William, Duke of Prussen, descended
from the eldest daughters of Duke William the first, by the favor, and arms
of neighboring Princes (Gulick besieged, and taken) established in the
possession hereof. George-VVilliam Duke of Prussen, son to John Sigismond,
Marquess, and Electour of Brandenburg, and to Anne, daughter to Albert, Duke
of Prussen, and to Mary-Leonor, eldest daughter to William the first, Duke of
Cleve; and Wolfang; prince of Nuburg, son to Philip-Lewis, Count Palatine of
Nuburg, and to Anne-Magdelin, second daughter to Duke William the first, and
sister to Duke William the second, Dukes of Cleve, Gulick, and Bergen, and
Earls of Marck in the year 1616, and at this present.

THE PALATINATE OF THE RHIIN.
IT likewise lies on both sides of the Rhijn; so named from the
Counte-Palatines, v. lo. Trit hem^^ de origin. Francorum. Franc. Irenici Exeg.
Germamaniae. lib. 3. c. 54. and 55. Petri Bertij Comm. Rerum Germanicorum. l.
2. c* 10.
or Princes thus styled, aunciently seated in those parts, and in continuance
of time by gift, purchase, marriage, and arms becoming Lords hereof. How
these by little, and little became seized of the country, read Franc: Irenicus
in his 3 book, and 54, and 55. chapters. Who were these first Paltzgraues it
is not agreed upon. Trithemius names Count Palatines before the reign of the
Emperor Charles the Great. Others account their beginning from the time of
this Emperor. Irenicus more probably from the Emperors of the German race,
and house of Saxony. They were not more aunciently Princes, or hereditary, and
but only chief Judges amongst the Dutch, or Presidents in their courts of
judicature thus entitled; appointed by the Emperors, and continuing during
pleasure. The first of these (whereof there is any certain mention) was one
Henry, living in the reign of the Emperor Otho the third, appointed one of
the six first Electours of the Empire. After him the Count Palatines, and
Electours follow. Sigifrid, Count Palatine of the Rhijn, and Elector, son to
Adelheild by a former husband, wife unto Henry the first Electour. Ezeline, and
Conrade, sons to Sigifrid. Lutolphus, son to Ezelin. Conrade in the reign of
the Emperor Henry the fifth. Frederique, son to Frederique with the one eye,
Duke of Schwaben, and nephew to the Emperor Conrade the third. Henry, surnamed
the Lion, Duke of Saxony, and Bavaria. Henry, son to Henry, surnamed the Lion.
Engerus. Henry the fourth. Hitherto the order was confused. Otto the second,
Duke of Bavaria, upon his marriage with Gertrude, daughter unto Henry the
fourth, created Count Palatine of the Rhijn, and Electour by the Emperor
Frederique the second. He deceased in the year 1259. Lewis the second, Duke of
Bavaria, and Electour, and Count Palatine of the Rhijn. He dyed in the year
1294. After the decease hereof these two Estates of Bavaria, and the Palatinate
became again divided, as they have continued ever since; Lewis his younger
son, succeeding in the part of Bavaria (since called the Dukedom of Bavaria,
and contained betwixt the Danow, and the Alps,) and Rodulph, his eldest son,
in the Electourship, and the Palatinate of the Rhijn, together with Nortgow,
aunciently part of the Dukedom of Bavaria, and then first separated, and from
the possession of these princes, named since the upper Palatinate, or the
Palatinate of Bavaria. Rodulph, eldest son to Lewis the second, Electour, and
Count Palatine of the Rhijn. His younger brother Lewis succeeded in the
Dukedom of Bavaria; created afterward Roman Emperor, from whom the present
Dukes of Bavaria are descended. Adolph, surnamed the Simple, Electour, and
Coute Palatine of the Rhiin, eldest son to Rodulph. His younger brother Robert,
and Rodolph were also styled Electours, a chief cause of his surname of
Simple. Rupert son to Adolph the Simple, Electour, and Count Palatine of the
Rhijn, Rupert the second, son to Rupert the first. He was afterward created
Roman Emperor. Lewis the third, surnamed with the beard, son to the Emperor
Rupert. From Stephen of Bipont, his younger brother, descended the Dukes of
Zweibruck, or Bipont, as also the modern Electours; the house of Lewis the
third becoming afterward in Otto-Henry extinguished. Lewis the fourth, son to
Lewis the third. Philip, son to Lewis the fourth. Lewis the fifth, son to
Philip. He dyed without heirs. Frederique the first, son to Philip, and
brother to Lewis the fifth. He also dyed without heirs. Otto-Henry, son to
Rupert, brother to Lewis the fifth, and Frederique the first, the last Electour,
and Count Palatine of the Rhijn of the house of Lewis the third; deceasing
with heirs, after whom succeeded in Electourship the house of Stephen of
Bipont. Frederique the third, Duke of Zimmeren, son to John the second, son to
John the first, son to Frederique Earl of Spanheim, son to Stephen of
Bipont, son to the Emperor Rupert (the house of Lewis the third failing in
Otto-Henry) in the year 1559, succeeding in the Electourship, and Palatinate.
He was styled Frederique the third in regard of Frederique Fridericus Bavariae
Du^, Comes Palatinus, Elector etc. The inscription upon the mo^^ment at
He^delberg of Fr^derique the victorious, son to the Electour Jews the third.
, surnamed the Victorious, younger son to Lewis the third, who, although not
Electour, had notwithstanding usurped this title in the minority of Philip
Electour, of whom he was Guardian. Lewis the sixth, son to Frederique the third.
Frederique the fourth, son to Lewis the sixth, governed in his minority by John
Casimir, Count Palatine of the Rhiin, and Knight of the honorable order of the
Garter in England, son to Frederique the third, and brother to Lewis the sixth.
Frederique the fifth, son to Frederique the fourth, Electour, and Count Palatine
of the Rhiin, chosen King of Bohemia against the Emperor Ferdinand the second;
whose wife is the most illustrious princess Elizabeth, sister to his Majesty
Charles King of Great Britain.

THE LANGRAVE-SHIP OF ELSATS.
THis took v. Franc. Irenici Exeg. Ger. maniae lib. 2. c. 109* and Gerardi de
Roo. Hist. Austriacae l. 1. (de Comitibus Habspurgicis.)
the name from the river Ill, the chief of the country. The State was begun in
the reign of the Emperor Otho the third; the first Lantgraue after Irenicus
being one Theodoric. In the reign of the Emperor Frederique the second the
male succession of these Lantgraues failing, by means of daughters it became
divided betwixt Albert the second, Earl of Habspurg, Albert Earl of
Hohenburg, and Lewis Earl of Ottingen. The Earl of Hohenburg shortly after
upon the marriage of Anne, his daughter, unto Rodulph, afterward Emperor, son
to Albert the second, Earl of Habspurg, surrendered his part unto that family.
By this means the house of Habspurg, afterward of Austria, became seized of
two parts hereof (containing now the upper Elsats,) the Free Cities excepted.
The rest (comprehe^ding at this day the lower Elsats) the Earl of Ottingen
sold unto the Bishop of Strasburg, whose Successors now hold the same;
usurping the title of Lant-graues of Elsats. The certain order of the first
Lantgraues we find not.

These countries, with the towns, and Bishoprics of Trier, Colen, Mentz,
(Metz, Toul, Verdun, Spier, and Worms, are by their princes immediately held of
the Empire; thorough their long commerce with, and subjection to the Dutch for
the greatest part now speaking that language, and accounted proper parts of the
kingdom, or empire of the Germans.

THE DVREDOME OF BRABANT.
THe v. C. Iulij Cae. Com. Bell. Gal. l. 2. c. 8. Ponti Heuteri Ducum Brabantiae
Genealogiam, and Comm. Chronique des Ducs de Brabant pat Adrian Barlande. Les
Antiquitez de la Gaul Belgique par Richard de Wassenburg. livre 3. 4. etc.
name of the country is ancient, so named after some from the town
Bratispantium of Caesar; mentioned in the second book of his Commentaries. The
Dukedom was begun in the person of Charles of France, uncle to Lewis the fifth,
and brother to Lotharius the fourth, French Kings; by the gift hereof belonging
to his share of the kingdom of Lorraine. This first prince by the liberality
of the Emperor Otho the second becoming afterward Duke of Lorraine, united
this unto that Dukedom, and account, called then Basse Lorraine; in which
name, and union it continued both during the Caroline line, and that of Ardenne
unto Bauldwin, Duke of Lorraine, and King of Jerusalem, brother unto Godfrey
of Buillon. Under this prince (busied in wars abroad against the Infidels) by
the favor, and aid of the Emperor Henry the fifth (whose sister he had
married) in the year 1108, it was again divided from the Dukedom of
Lorraine, and made a distinct dukedom by Geffrey, surnamed with the beard,
Earl of Lovaine, before mentioned, descended from Gerberge, eldest daughter to
Charles of France, the first prince; in which division, and estate it has
still continued unto our times. By Margaret, daughter to John the third, wife
to Philip the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, it came to the family of Burgundy;
carried hereby to that other of Austria, wherein now it rests. Since the
division hereof from Lorraine, the Princes follow. Geffrey the first, surnamed
with the beard, Earl of Lovain, descended from Gerberge, and the house of
France; by whom the Dukedom was recovered from Lorraine, and the house of
Ardenne. Geffrey the second, son to Geffrey the first. Geffrey the third, son
to Geffrey the second. Henry the first, son to Geffrey the third Henry the
second, son to Henry the first. Henry the third, son to Henry the second. After
the decease hereof Aleide, his widow, in the minority of her children for eight
years space governed the Dukedom; the heir not being designed. John the
first, second son to Henry the third, elected by the Estates of the Country;
his eldest brother Henry in regard of his many defects, and infirmities
rejected, approved only by the city of Lovain, a cause of some war betwixt
the sides, with little ado in regard of their inequality soon after appeased.
John the second, son to John the first. John the third son to John the second.
Wenceslaus, Duke of Luxemburg, son to John King of Bohemia, and brother to the
Emperor Charles the fourth, in the right of his wife Ioane, eldest daughter to
John the third. They dyed without issue in the year 1406. Anthony the second,
son to Philip the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, and of Margaret, daughter to Lewis
Malan, Earl of Flanders, and Margaret, younger daughter to John the third; his
elder brother John, afterward Duke of Burgundy, yielding over his right, upon
condition that the house hereof failing, the Dukedom should return upon him,
and his heirs. He was slain, fighting againg the English, at the battle of
Agen-court in France. John the fourth, son to Anthony. He married unto
Iaqu^line, Countess of Holland, from whom he was divorced, dying young, and
without heirs in the year 1426. He founded the University of Lovain. Philip
the first, son to Anthony, and brother to John the fourth. He also dyed young,
unmarried, and without heirs; in whom ended the house of Anthony, son to
Philip the Hardy. Philip the second, surnamed the Good, Duke of Burgundy, son
to John Duke of Burgundy, grandchild to Philip the Hardy, nephew to Anthony,
and cosen German to John the fourth, and Philip the first (the house of Anthony
failing) succeeding in the Dukedom of Brabant by right of blood, and of the
former agreement, made with Antony. Charles, surnamed the Fighter, Duke of
Burgundy, and Brabant, son to Philip the second. Maximilian, Archduke of
Austria, and Duke of Burgundy, and Brabant, in the right of his wife, Mary of
Burgundy, daughter to Charles the Fighter. Philip, son to Maximilian, and Mary.
Charles afterward Roman Emperor, son to Philip. Philip the second, king of
Spain, son to the Emperor Charles the fifth. Isabella, daughter to Philip the
second, king of Spain, now Duchess of Burgundy, and Brabant, and Princess
of the Netherlands.

THE DVKEDOME OF LVXEMBVRG.
THis v. Les Antiquitez de Gaul Belgique par Richard de Wassenburg. li. 3. and
Ponti Heuteri* Lutzenburg. Geneal. and Comment.
was sometimes a part of the Principality of Ardenne, first divided therefrom
in the reign of the Emperor Otho the first, by Sigifrid, son to Ricuin,
Prince of Ardenne, unto whose share it fell in the division of that
Principality betwixt him, and his other brethren; entitled thus from the
castle, now the town of Luxemburg, belonging aunciently to the Monastery of S.
Maximinus of Trier, and exchaunged with him for other lands, the seat of the
Prince. By the Emperor Charles the fourth it was made a Dukedom in the person
of his brother Wenceslaus. By Elizabeth, the last Princess, wanting heirs, it
was sold to Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, in which family, and the
succeeding name, and house of Austria, it has ever since remained, possessed
now by Isabella of Austria, and accounted amongst the 17 Provinces of the
Netherlands. The order of the first Princes we find not. The latter follow.
Henry the first (from whom my Author begins,) Earl of Luxemburg, slain in
fight, near unto the castle Worancan; taking part with Reinold, Earl of
Gelderland, against John the first, Duke of Brabant, contending for the
Dukedom of Limburg. Henry the second, son to Henry the first in the year
1308, elected Roman Emperor. John, son to Henry the second. Having married
unto Elizabeth, daughter to Wenceslaus the third, he was elected king of
Bohemia; slain by the English, fighting for the French at the battle of
Cressy. Wenceslaus the first, younger son to John; created the first Duke of
Luxemburg by his brother, the Emperor Charles the fourth. He dyed sans issue.
Wenceslaus the second, eldest son to the Emperor Charles the fourth, Emperor
of the Romans, and king of Bohemia. He also deceased without issue. Sigismond,
younger son to the Emperor Charles the fourth, Emperor of the Romans, and king
of Bohemia. By the right of his wife Mary he became also king of Hungary.
Enriched with so many states, and kingdoms, he surrendered his right hereof
unto Elizabeth, daughter to his brother John, Marquess of Brandenburg.
Elizabeth, daughter unto John, Duke of Gorlitz, and Marquess of Brandenburg,
by the gift of her Uncles, the Emperors Wenceslaus, and Sigismond, Duchess
of Luxemburg; the last prince. Having no heirs she sold the inheritance hereof
unto Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, possessed ever since by that house.

THE DVKEDOME OF LIMBVRG.
IT was so called from the town of Limburg; first an Earldom, afterward
made a Dukedom by one of the Henry Emperors. By John the first Duke of
Brabant, pretending some title hereunto, it was conquered to the house of
Brabant from Reinold the first, Duke of Gelderlandt, husband to Ermengarde, the
only daughter of Herman, the last Duke; possessed now in this right by the
Princes of Burgundy, and Austria. The order, and succession of the Princes we
find not.

THE EARLDOM OF NAMVR.
NAmed thus from the chief town thereof, Namur. The time when it first begun,
is uncertain. By John, or after others by Theodore, or Theodoric, the last
Earl, it was sold to Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, whose posterity the
P^inces of the house of Burgundy, and Austria, now enjoy it by that right.

THE EARLDOM OF HAINAVLT.
IT took the name from the river Haine v. Antiquitez de Gaul Belgique par
Richard de Wassenburg. live. 2. La second Table des successors de Pharamond,
and Clodion le Chevelu par Richard de Wassenburg. Ponti. Heuteri Genealog
Commit. Flandriae. Hadriani Barlandi Commit. Hollandiae histor.
, watering, and dividing the country. The estate is very ancient, being
sometime a part of the great Earldom of Ardenne, from the which it was
divided, and made a distinct Earldom in the person of Alberic, surnamed the
Orphelin, one of the youngest sons of Brunulph, Count of Ardenne, dispossessed,
and slain by Dagobert, French King; who restored, and dividing that country
with his other brethren, had this part given him with the title of Earl, by
Sigebert king of Austrasia, to be held under the sovereignty of the French
kings. After long continuance, and often change by Iaqueline, the last
Princess (wanting heirs,) together with Holland, Zealand, and
VVest-Freislandt, united in that family, it was surrendered unto Philip the
Good, Duke of Burgundy, her next kinsman; in whose house the right, and
possession hereof now remains. The Princes follow. Alberic, before mentioned,
one of the younger sons of Brunulph, Earl of Ardenne; the first Earl of
Hainault. VVaultier the first, son to Alberic. VVaultier the second, son to
Waultier the first. VVaultier the third, son to Waultier the second. He dyed
without male issue. Albon the first, in right of his wife, eldest daughter to
Waultier the third. Albon the second, son to Albon the first, and of the
daughter of Waultier the third. Manassier, son to Albon the second. Regnier
the first, son to Manassier. Regnier the second, son to Regnier the first.
Regnier the third, son to Regnier the second. Bauldwin Earl of Flanders in
right of his wife Richilde, sole daughter to Regnier the third. Bauldwin the
second, son to Bauldwin, and Richilde aforesaid. He succeeded only in the
Earldom of Hainault. Bauldwin the third, son to Bauldwin the second. Bauldwin
the fourth, son to Bauldwin the third. Bauldwin the fifth, son to Bauldwin the
fourth. Bauldwin the sixth, son to Bauldwin the fifth. He married unto
Margeret, Countess of Flanders; by which means these two Earledomes were the
second time united under one prince. Bauldwin the seventh, son to Bauldwin
the sixth, and Margaret, Earl of Flanders, and Hainault. Joan, eldest daughter
to Bauldwin the seventh, Earl of Flanders, and Hainault. She dyed sans issue,
having been twice married to Ferdinand, son to Sancius, K. of Portugal, and to
Thomas, son to Thomas, Earl of Savoy. Margaret the second, younger sister to
Ioane aforesaid, and daughter to Bauldwin the seventh; Countess of Flanders,
and Hainault. She married unto William of Burbon, Lord of Dampier, brother to
Archembauld, Duke of Bourbon, and deceased in the year 1279. Before her
marriage she had by Buscart, her Tutour, or Guardian, Prior of the Monastery
of S. Peter in L'isle, a son named John d'Avesnes, by agreement, and consent of
his other brethren, succeeding in the Earldom hereof; Flanders descending
upon the legitimate issue, the heir of Margaret, and William of Bourbon, Lord
of Dampierre. John d' Avesnes, natural son to Margaret the second, and
Buscart, Earl of Hainault. He married unto Aleide, daughter to Florentius the
fourth, and sister to the Emperor William, Earls of Holland. John the second,
son to John d'Avesnes, and Aleide aforesaid. After the decease of John the
first, Earl of Holland, without children, in the year 1300 he succeeded in
the Earledomes of Holland, and Zealand, and in the Lordship of West-Freisland;
continued still afterward united in his successors. William the first, son to
John the second, Earl of Hainault, Holland, and Zealandt, and Lord of
West-Freislandt. William the second, son to William the first. He deceased
without issue; slain at Staveren by the rebellious Frisons. Margaret the
third, sister to William the second, and wife to the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria,
Countess of Hainault, Holland, and Zealand, and Lord of West-Freislandt.
Younger sister hereunto was Philippa, Queen to Edward the third, king of
England. Betwixt this princess, and her unnatural son William the third arose
great quarrels, and contention about the possession hereof, the oceasions of
the factions d'Houc, and Cabelliau a long time after afflicting Holland, the
first taking part with the mother, the other with the son; the controversy at
length being composed betwixt them, and the Empress, the mother, being
contented only with Hainault, deceasing in the year 1355, and buried at
Valenciens. William the third, younger son to the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria,
and of Margaret aforesaid, Earl of Hainault, Holland, and Zealandt, and Lord
of West-Freislandt. Tainted with this unnatural rebellion, and wickedness
against his mother, he fell into a frensy, wherein he languished for the space
of 30 years; deceasing without islue. Albert the first, son to the Emperor
Lewis of Bavaria, and Margaret, and younger brother to William the third, during
his sickness, and malady Governor of all the provinces of the Netherlands,
subject to the house of Bavaria. Stephen, the eldest son to the Emperor Lewis
of Bavaria, and Margaret succeeded in the Dukedom of Bavaria. William the
fourth, son to Albert the first. Iaqueline, daughter unto William the fourth.
After long, and much trouble, and sundry unfortunate, and ill succeeding
marriages, she resigned the Estates of Hainault, Holland, Zealand, and
West-Frelslandt unto Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, her next kinsman,
deceasing without issue. Philip, surnamed the Good, son to John Duke of
Burgundy, and of Margaret, daughter to Albert the first, sister to William the
fourth, and aunt to Iaqueline; by right of blood, and the resignation of
Iaqueline, Earl of Hollandt, Zealandt, and Hainault, and Lord of
West-Freislandt, by whom these four provinces were all brought unto the house
of Burgundy, afterward of Austria.

These Estates begun for the most part by the French, seated in their part of
Lorraine, and first held under their right, thorough the quarrels, factions,
and sundry imperfections, reigning in that nation, have since wholly withdrawn
themselves from all subjection hereof; acknowledging the soveraignety of the
Dutch, accounted part of their Empire, and reckoned in their tenth circle of
Burgundy. At this day notwithstanding (chiefly since their possession by the
house of Burgundy) thorough the no less sickness, and maladies of the
languishing German Empire, they have likewise freed themselves in a manner from
all acknowledgment hereof, neither suiting their Imperial Court, nor obeying
the orders of their Diets, neither yielding any aid, or service to the
Emperor; with the provinces of Flanders, and Artois subject only to their own
princes, the Dukes of Burgundy, and Austria.

THE EARLDOM of HOLLAND, and ZEALAND.
v. Hadriani Barlandi Comitum Hollandiae Hist. and Petri Bittij Commentar.
Rerum Germanicarum. l. 2. 23.
THey were thus named from their low, and maritime situations. Vexed with the
pyracyes of the Normans, about the year 857, for their better defense, they
were first given with this title, together with the neighboring country of
the Frisons, unto Theodoric, son to Sigebert, prince of Aquitania, by the
Emperor Charles the Bauld. By Arnulph their fourth prince, quitting the French
alleagiance, they were first made subject to the fief, and soveraignttie of the
Dutch Emperors. In John the second they became added to the house of Hainault.
In William the third, to the house of Bavaria. In Philip the Good, to the
family of Burgundy. In Philip the second, to the house of Austria, wherein now
the right remains. In the reign of Philip the second, king of Spain, and
the third of that name, Duke of Burgundy (occasioned thorough their difference
in Religion, and the rough government of his Spanish officers,) together with
the provinces of Vtreicht, Over-Ysel, Gelderland, VVest-Freislandt, and
Groningen they shoke off the yoke of their princes; after about 40 years
war treated withal, and acknowledged as free estates by his son Philip the
third. Their Princes follow. Theodoric, son to Sigebert, prince of Aquitania,
first Earl of Holland, and Zealand, and Lord of West-Freisland, in the reign,
and by the gift of the Emperor Charles the Bauld. Theodoric the second, son to
Theodoric the first. Theodoric the third, son to Theodoric the second. Arnulph,
son to Theodoric the third, slain against the Frisons; with whom (still
rebelling) this prince, and his successors had often, and continual war. He
made subject these provinces to the soveraignety of the German Emperors.
Theodoric the fourth, son to Arnulph. Theodoric the fifth, son to Theodoric the
fourth. He dyed sans issue. Florentius the first, son to Theodoric the fourth,
and brother to Theodoric the fifth. Theodoric the sixth, son to Florentius the
first. In the minority hereof (Rupert Earl of Flanders, second husband to his
mother Gertrude, and protector hereunto being overcome, and driven out) the
countries hereof are usurped, and seized upon by Godfrey, surnamed le Bossu,
Duke of Lorraine, slain by treason in the year 1075, accounted by some
amongst the Earls of Holland, and Zealand. Florentius the second, son to
Theodoric the sixth. Theodoric the seventh, son to Florentius the second.
Florentius the third, son to Theodoric the seventh. Theodoric the eight, son
to Florentius the third. He deceased without male issue. Ada, daughter to
Theodoric the eight; married unto Lewis, Earl of Lossen, driven out by
William, Earl of East-Friesland. She dyed without heirs. William the first,
Earl of East-Freisland, brother to Theodoric the eight, and uncle unto Ada,
Earl of Holland, and Zealand, and Lord of West-Freisland. Florentius the
fourth, son to William the first. It was Margaret daughter hereunto, and wife
to Herman, Earl of Henneberg, who is so famous in the Dutch histories for her
monstrous birth of 365 children, christened altogether by the names of John, and
Elizabeth, by Guy Suffragan of Vtreicht; deceasing upon the same day with their
mother in the year 1276, and buried at Losdun, near unto the Hage, whose
monument, and epitaphe are there yet to be seen. William the second, son to
Florentius the fourth. He was elected Roman Emperor; slain by the rebellious
Frisons. Florentius the fifth, son to William the second. He married unto
Beatres, daughter to Guy, Earl of Flanders, by whom he had in way of dowry the
whole right given unto him, which the Earls of Flanders challenged in the Island
of Walcheren, and Zealand, for a long time controversed betwixt the two houses.
Meyerus in his history of Flanders would have him to have been the first
Earl of Holland, who should take upon him the title, and name of Earl of
Zealand. John the first, son to Florentius the fifth. He married unto
Elizabeth, daughter to Edward the second, King of England, and deceased without
issue in the year 1300, the last Earl of Holland, and Zealand, and Lord of
West-Freisland of the house of Aquitaine. John the second, Earl of Hainault,
son to John d'Avesnes, and Al^ide, or Adelheide, daughter to Florentius the
fourth, and sister to the Emperor William; Earl of Holland, and Zealand, and
Lord of West-Freisland. William the third, son to John the second. William the
fourth, son to William the third, slain at Staveren against the Frisons in the
year 1345 sans issue. Margaret, eldest daughter to William the third, and
sister to William the fourth; the last princess of the house of Hainault, She
married unto the Emperor, Lewis of Bavaria. William the fifth, younger son to
Margaret of Hainault, and to the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria. He dyed
phrenetique without issue, noted for his rebellion, and disobedience toward
his mother. His elder brother, Stephen, succeeded in the Dukedom of Bavaria,
from whom have descended the present Dukes of Bavaria. Albert, son to the
Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, and of Margaret of Hainault, younger brother to
William the fifth. William the sixth, son to Albert. Iaqueline, daughter to
William the sixth. She dyed without issue, the last princess of the house of
Bavaria; Countess of Holland, Zealand, and Hainault, and Lord of
West-Freislandt. Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, son to John Duke of
Burgundy, and of Margaret, daughter to Albert, and sister to William the sixth.
Charles, surnamed the Fighter, Duke of Burgundy, son to Philip the Good;
slain by the Switzers, and Lorrainers, before Nancie. Marie, daughter to
Charles surnamed the Fighter, the last princess of the house, or name of
Burgundy; Countess of Holland, Zealand, and Hainault, and Lord of
West-Freislandt. She married unto Maximilian the first, Archduke of Austria,
and afterward Emperor of the Romans. Philip the second, son to Maximilian,
and Mary, and afterward the first of that name king of Spain, in right of his
wife Ioane, eldest daughter unto Ferdinand the fifth, and Elizabeth, Kings of
Castile, and Aragon. Charles son to Philip, and Ioane aforesaid, heir of the
houses of Burgundy, Austria, and Spain* and the fifth of that name Emperor of
the Romans. Philip the third of that name Duke of Burgundy, and the second of
the name King of Spain, son to the Emperor Charles the fifth; under whose
government the provinces of Holland, Zealand, and West-Freisland first revolted.

The Bishopric, or Lordship of Vtreicht.
vid. Hadriani Barland. Vltraiectensium Episcoporum Catalogum, and Res Gestas.
NAmed thus from the city Vtreicht. The estate was first occasioned by one
Willebrod, an Englishman, the Apostle of those parts; upon his conversion of
the country from Paganism instituted first Bishop hereof about the year 611,
and during the Regency of Pepin the Fat, Majour of the Palace in France. The
Successors of this Willebrod in continuance of time by the liberality of the
French Kings, and of the German Emperors, have attained unto, as well the
temporal, as the spiritual jurisdiction of the country, together with
Over-Ysel beyond the Rhiin, belonging likewise unto the sea, which under the
fief hereof they still held subject unto them until the Emperor Charles the
fifth, who (taking occasion upon their many losses, and damages, sustained from
the Gelders, with whom the Bishop then had war,) pretending their disability
to resist that enemy, by the consent of Henry, Count Palatine, then Bishop,
seized upon the whole temporal domaine hereof, leaving only the spiritual to
the Prelates; which also since the usurpation of the Countries by the States of
the United Provinces has likewise been taken from them, remaining afterward
only titulary. In the reign of Philip the second, king of Spain, these
Countries were likewise freed from the yoke of Spain, or house of Austria;
containing now two distinct States, or Provinces, of Vtreicht, and Ouer-ysell.
The order, and succession of the Bishops for breuity sake we let pass.

The Dukedom of GELDERLAND.
IT v. Ponti Heuteri Comitum, and Ducum Geldriae, and Zutphaniae Geneal. and
Comment.
was so called from the castle, afterward the town of Gelders, founded here
by two brothers VVickard, and Luppola, created by the inhabitants first
guardians, or protectours of the country, in the reign of the Emperor Charles
the Bauld; continuing this title to succession. In the person of Otto, Earl of
Nassau, having married Aleide, daughter to Wickard, the last guardian, it was
made an Earldom by the Emperor Henry the third. In Reinold the first it was
made a Dukedom by the Emperor Jews of Bavaria. After the decease of Charles
of Egmond, the last Duke, by composition betwixt him, and the Emperor Charles
the fifth, and the pretense of a former donation made by Duke Arnold unto
Charles the Fighter, Duke of Burgundy, this Province with the Earldom of
Zutphen (united for a long time in the house of the Dukes of Gelderland)
descended upon the Emperor Charles the fifth; added by him to his other
Provinces of the Netherlands. Under Philip the second, King of Spain, for the
greatest part this shoke off the Spanish yoke; with Zutphen governed now in
manner of a Free estate, confederate with the rest of the united Provinces. The
princes follow. Otto, earl of Nassau, beforementioned, in right of his wife
Aleide, daughter to VVickard, the last guardian, created first Earl of
Gelderland in the year 1079 by the Emperor Henry the third. He had for second
wife Sophia, daughter to Wickman, the last Earl of Zutphen; by which means
that Country, and Earldom, became annexed to the house of Gelderland. Gerard
the first, son to Otto, and Aleide, Earl of Gelderland. Gerlac, his younger
brother, and son to Otto, and Sophia, inherited the Earldom of Zutphen. After
the decease of Gerlac without heirs, he succeeded likewise in the Earldom of
Zutphen, continued ever since in the same Princes with Gelderland. Henry the
first, son to Gerard the first, Earl of Gelderland, and Zutphen. Gerard the
second, son to Henry the first. He dyed sans issue. Otho the second, brother to
Gerard the second. Gerard the third, son to Otho the second. Otho the third,
son to Gerard the third. Reinold the first, son to Otho the third, created
first Duke of Gelderlandt in the year 1339 by the Emperor Jews of Bavaria.
Reinold the second, Duke of Gelderlandt, and Earl of Zutphen, son to Reinold
the first. Reinold the third, son to Reinold the second. He deceased sans
issue. Edward, brother to Reinold the third. He also dyed without issue. Mary,
sister to Edward, and Reinold the third. She married unto William the first,
Duke of Iuliers. William, son to William the first, Duke of Iuliers, and Mary
aforesaid. He dyed without issue. Reinold the fourth, brother to William, and
son to William, Duke of Iuliers, and Mary. He likewise deceased without issue.
Mary C. of Gelderland, daughter to Ioane, sister to William, and Reinold the
fourth, and daughter to William, Duke of Iuliers, and Mary. Arnold, son to
Mary, and to John, Lord of Egmond. Worthily incensed against his unnatural son
Adolph, by whom he had been a long time most inhumanely detayned in prison,
he partly sold, and bequeathed these estates unto Charles surnamed the
Fighter, Duke of Burgundy, to be occupied, and enjoyed by that house after his
decease. Charles, surnamed the Fighter, Duke of Burgundy, after the decease of
Arnold, succeeding in the Dukedom of Gelderland, and Earldom of Zutphen
(Adolph, son to Arnold, having been disinherited by his father) by virtue of
the sale, and legacy beforementioned. Adolph of Egmond, the unnatural son of
Duke Arnold, after the decease of Charles the Fighter (slain before Nancye)
restored by Mary, Duchess of Burgundy, daughter to Charles the Fighter.
Charles of Egmond, Duke of Gelderland, and Earl of Zutphen, son to Duke
Adolph. Wearyed with long wars against the Princes of the Netherlands of the
house of Burgundy, and Austria, pretending the legacy, and sale of Duke Arnold,
upon agreement, and composition made with the Emperor Charles the Fifth, he
yielded over these estates unto him, to be enjoyed after his decease, in case
that he left no issue. He dyed without issue. Charles the fifth, Emperor of the
Romans, and king of Spain by virtue of the agreement beforementioned, made
betwixt him, and Duke Charles of Egmond, succeeding in the Dukedom of
Gelderland, and Earldom of Zutphen, Philip the second, King of Spain, son to
the Emperor Charles the fifth. In the reign of this Prince these two Provinces
revolted with the rest from under the Spanish government; with those of Holland,
Zealandt, Vtreicht, Over-ysell, West-Friselandt, and Groningen, making now the
most potent, and renowned confederate, and united States of the Netherlands.

The KINGDOM of BVRGVNDY.
THis v. L' Histoire de Lion par Claude de Rubys. live. 3. c. ^0. and 21.
Kingdom was begun in the person of Charles, son to the Emperor Lotharius,
and brother to the Emperor Lewis the second, and to Lotharius, King of
Austrasia, or Lorraine; whose share it was of the French dominions in the
division of the part of the Emperor Lotharius, made betwixt him, and his other
brethren. It contained the greatest part of the ancient Kingdom of the
Burgundians, occasioning the name; together with Provence. It comprehends now
besides Provence, the Dukedom, and Free County of Burgundy, Savoy, Daulphinye,
Lionois, and the Confederacy of the Switzers. It lay divided from Germany by
the Rhijn; from Italy by the Alps; from the Kingdom of Lorraine by the
Mountain Vauge; and from the kingdom of West-France by the river Rhosne, and
by the modern Western limits of the Dukedom of Burgundy. These three
brethren Lewis, Lotharius, and Charles, sons to the Emperor Lotharius, not
long after deceasing without male issue, or issue legitimate, and the house of
the Emperor Lotharius being by that means extinguished, the kingdom became
usurped, and seized upon by the Emp: Charles the Bauld, and united by him, as a
province, to his kingdom of West-France. The Kings of Burgundy until this
union follow. Charles, younger son to the Emp. Lotharius, the first French K.
of Burgundy. He dyed without issue. Lewis the 2d, Emp. of the Romans, and
Lotharius the second, K. of Austrasia, brothers unto Charles the first K. after
the decease of their brother succeeding in the kingdom of Burgundy, and
dividing it betwixt the^; the Mountain Iour bounding, and severing their
portions. They also both dyed without heirs, or lawful; in whom ended the
house of the Emperor Lotharius, eldest son to the Emperor Lewis the Godly.
Charles surnamed the Bauld, Emperor of the Romans, and ^ing of West-France;
uncle to Charles, Lewis, and Lotharius the second, and brother to the Emperor
Lotharius. Under this prince this first French kingdom of Burgundy took end,
being added, as a province, to West-France* parted by him into three divisions,
or governments, of Burgundy on this side of the river of Soasne. Of Burgundy
beyond the Soasne* and of Burgundy beyond the Iour; containing together, and
occasioning not long after the Dukedom of Burgundy on this side of the Soasne,
with the Earledomes of Lion, and Mascon; the Dukedomes of Burgundy beyond the
Iour; and the kingdom of Arles, or Burgundy, whose beginnings, and after
fortunes follow.

The Dukedom of Burgundy on this side the Soasne.
THis v. L' Histoire de Lion par Claude de Rubys. lib 3. c. 24. and 26. Les
Annals de Bourgogne par Guillaume Paradin. and Histor. Belgicam Emanuelis
Meterani.
was part of the devision of Burgundy on this side the Soasne, subdevided by
the Emperor Charles the Bauld into 5 lesser Cantons, the Counties of Dijon,
Austun, Chalon, Mascon, and Lion, governed a part by their Earls, not then
hereditary, and but such Magistrates of the Kings of West-France, so named. The
estate was begun in the person of Theodoric, Count of Authun, unto whom Eudo
King of France having given the Counties of Dijon, and Chalon, united all three
into one entier Dukedom; from the first possession of this prince entitled
then of Austun, shortly after by Richard his son (who succeeded him) named of
Burgundy. The heirs of this princely house have in continuance of time got
seized of the many provinces of the Low Countries, by the Emperor Charles the
fifth reunited with Germany, and making the tenth circle of the Empire, called
from hence the circle of Burgundy. The Dukedom notwithstanding, their first
patrimony, still held under the fief of the French Kings, was in the reign of
Mary wrested from them, and united to the Crown of France by king Lewis the
eleaventh; nothing now hereof remaining unto them, but the title. The princes
follow. Theodoric, before mentioned, the first Duke, in the reign of Eudo,
king of France. He was styled only Duke of Authun. Richard son to Theodoric. He
first took upon him the title of Duke of Burgundy. Rodulph, son to Richard.
Becoming afterward Duke of Burgundy Transiuraine, he left this Dukedom unto
his younger brother, Hugh surnamed the Black. Hugh, surnamed the Black,
brother to Rodulph; the last Duke of Burgundy of the house of Theodoric, Duke
of Austun; succeeded unto by the house of Aniou, and the brethren of Hugh
Capet, king of France, by composition, and agreement made herewith, forced by
that potent family. Otho the first, Duke of Burgundy, younger brother to Hugh
Capet, the usurping King of France. Eudo the first, brother to Otho the first.
Henry the first, brother the Otho, and Eudo the first. They all three died
without heirs. Robert the first, King of France, son to Hugh Capet, Duke of
Burgundy by the greater swey of that family, and kingdom; Otho Guillaume,
first Earl of Burgundy, being excluded, to whom the Dukedom had been
assigned by Duke Henry the first, son to his wife Gerberge. Robert the second,
eldest son to Robert the first, French King. His younger brother Henry
succeeded in the kingdom of France. Hugh the second, son to Henry, son to
Robert the second. He became Monk of Cluny, resigning his temporal estates
unto his brother Otho. Otho the second, brother to Hugh the second. He founded
the famous Monastery of Cisteaux. Hugh the third, son to Otho the second. Otho
the third, son to Hugh the third. Hugh the fourth, son to Otho the third. He
deceased in the Holy Land, left commander there of the army of Philip
Augustus, French King, against Saladin, and the Infidels, after the return of
that prince toward France. Otho the fourth, son to Hugh the fourth. Hugh the
fifth, son to Otho the fourth. Robert the third, son to Hugh the fifth. Hugh the
sixth, son to Robert the third. He dyed unmarried. Eudo the second, brother to
Hugh the sixth, and son to Robert the third. Philip the first, son to Philip,
son to Eudo the second. He deceased sans issue, the last Duke of Burgundy of
the house, or name of Capet, succeeded unto by the house, or name of Valois.
John, French king, son to Philip de Valois, French King, and to Ioane of
Burgundy, daughter to Robert the third, and sister to Hugh the sixth, and Eudo
the third, succeeding in the Dukedom of Burgundy in the year 1361. Philip the
second, surnamed the Hardy, younger son to John, French King, Duke of Burgundy.
He married unto Margaret, daughter to Lewis Malan, Earl of Flanders, heir of
the houses of Flanders, the Free County of Burgundy, Artois, Nevers, Rethel,
Brabant, and Limburg; by means whereof they all became united in the family of
Burgundy. John the second, son to Philip the Hardy; slain by Charles, Daulphin
of Vienne, the occasion of the bloody civil wars in France betwixt the houses
of Burgundy, and Orleans. Philip the second, surnamed the Good, son to John the
second. As the next heir of that house after Iaqueline, before mentioned, he
became Earl of Hainault, Holland, and Zealandt, and Lord of West-Freislandt;
transmitted to his posterity. He also added to his house the Dukedom of
Luxemburg, bought of Elizabeth, the last Duchess thereof, and the Earldom of
Namur, purchased of Theodore, the last Earl. Charles surnamed the Fighter, son
to Philip the Good, slain in battle before Nancy in Lorraine by the Switzers,
and Lorrainers. Mary, Duchess of Burgundy, daughter to Charles the Fighter.
She lost this country unto Lewis the eleaventh, French King, ever since
incorporated with France, retayning only the title, left unto her Successors.
She married unto Maximilian the first, Archduke of Austria, and afterward
Emperor of the Romans, the last princess of the house, or name of Valois.
Philip the third, son to Maximiliam the first, Archduke of Austria, and
Emperor of the Romans, and to Mary de Valois aforesaid; succeeding in the
provinces, and estates of the Netherlands, and in the title of Duke of
Burgundy. He married unto Ioane, eldest daughter unto Ferdinand the fifth, and
Elizabeth, Kings of Spain. Charles, the second of the name, Duke of Burgundy,
and the fifth of the name Emperor of the Romans, son to Philip the third, Duke
of Burgundy, and to Ioane of Spain; heir of the three houses of Burgundy,
Spain, and Austria. He added to the dominions of Burgundy in the Low Countries
the countries of Gelderland, Zutphen, Vtreicht, Over-Ysel, and Groningen.
Philip, the second of that name king of Spain, and the fourth of the name Duke
of Burgundy. In the reign of this prince the provinces of Holland, Zealandt,
Vtreicht, Over-Ysel, Gelderlandt, Zutphen, West-Freisland, and Groningen, part
of the dominions of Burgundy, revolted from under the government of their
princes, known now by the name of the United Provinces. Isabella, daughter to
Philip the second king of Spain; by the gift, and assignment of her father
succeeding in the title of Burgundy, and in what is left of the Netherlands.
She married unto Albert Archduke of Austria, younger son to the Emperor
Maximilian the second, lately deceased.

THE EARLDOM of LION, and MASCON, now LIONOIS.
THey v. L' Histoire de Lion par Claude de Rubys livre 3. cap. 21. 23. and 31.
contained the rest of Burgundy, lying on this side the Soasne, divided by the
Emperor Charles the Bauld (as has been before related) into five lesser
Cantons; the Counties of Dijon, Austun, and Chalon, making the Dukedom of
Burgundy; and those other of Lion, and Mascon: commanded by their several
Earls, being then but such officers of the Emperor, thus named, becoming
after this to be Vsu-fructuaryes, and hereditary. They came afterward to the
right of the Bishops, and Church of Lion; united with France, and making the
country, now called Lionois, held (as was still the Dukedom of Burgundy)
under the right, and soveraignety of the French Kings.

THE DVKEDOME OF BVRGVNDY BEYOND THE IOVR.
IT vid. L'Histoire de Lion par Claude de Rubys liver 3. cap. 21. 24. 25. 26.
and 27.
was situated betwixt the Mountainous ridge of the Iour, and the Alps, and the
Rhijn; comprehending at this day the Dukedom of Savoy, and the confederacy of
the Switzers, and Grisons. It was first an Earldom, begun in the person of
Conrade, brother to Robert the great, and uncle to Eudo, afterward French
King, appointed first Count, or governor hereof by the Emperor Charles the
Bauld. In the person of Rodulph, son to Conrade, succeeding hereunto in the
Earldom, or government, it was raised to a petty kingdom, named of Burgundy,
by Eudo French King, the more hereby to enoble his house, and to affront Bozon,
Earl of Burgundy beyond the Soasne, who already had usurped the title of King
of Burgundy by the aid, and assistance of the German Emperors. Rodulph
notwithstanding after the decease of Eudo, being unwilling to displease the
Emperors, changed afterward his more odious title of King for that lesser of
Duke; continued by the succeeding princes. By Bozon the second, the last Duke
of Burgundy Transiuraine, upon the decease of his brother Rodulph the second
without heirs succeeding in the kingdom of Arles, or Burgundy, it became
united to that kingdom, continuing in this union until the expiration, and
end of that State. The princes follow. Conrade aforesaid, first Earl, or
Governor of Burgundy beyond the Iour, in the reign of the Emperor Charles
the Bald. Rodulph the first, son to Conrade; first King, afterward Duke of
Burgundy Transiuraine in the reigns of Eudo, and Charles the Simple, French
Kings. Charles the Simple being imprisoned, and deposed by his factious
nobility, he became afterward King of France. The better to strengthen his
side, and to assure his ill got kingdom he gave the Dukedom of Burgundy
Transiuraine unto Rodulph Duke of Burgundy on this side the Soasne. Rodulph the
second, Duke of Burgundy on this side the Soasne; by the gift of Rodulph French
King, succeeding in the Dukedom of Burgundy Transiuraine. Contending with
Hugh, King of Arles, and Burgundy for the Empire, and kingdom of Italy, he
exchanged his right unto Italy for the kingdom of Arles; resigning unto his
brother Hugh, surnamed the Black, the Dukedom of Burgundy on this side the
Soasne, and to his brother Bozon, this other of Burgundy Transiuraine. Bozon,
Duke of Burgundy Transiuraine by the gift of his brother Rodulph, king of
Arles. His brother Rodulph, King of Arles deceasing without issue, he became
also King of Arles, and Burgundy; in whom ended the name, and title of the
Dukedom of Burgundy Transiuraine, or beyond the Iour, united to the kingdom
of Arles.

The Kingdom of ARLES, and BVRGVNDY.
THis vid. L'Histoire de Lion par Claude de Rubys. live. 3. c. 21. 23. 26. 28.
and 31.
Kingdom was begun in the person of Bozon, brother to Judith, wife unto the
Emperor Charles the Bauld, by the gift of this prince made first Earl, or
Governor of Burgundy beyond the Soasne; after his decease in the reign of the
two bastard brothers, Lewis, and Carloman, French Kings, created king of Arles,
and Burgundy (for thus were these kings styled) by the Emperor Charles the
Fat, to be held under the right of the German Emperors. It contained at the
time, when it was first erected, only the division, or Earldom of Burgundy
beyond the Soasne, beforementioned: lying betwixt that river, and the
mountain Iour; the Rhosne, and the Alps; and the Vauge, and the Sea
Mediterranean, and co^prehending now the Countries of Provence, Daulphinye, and
the Free County of Burgundy. By Bozon the second, Duke of Burgundy
Transiuraine, upon the decease of his brother Rodulph the first sans issue,
succeeding in this kingdom, the Dukedom of Burgundy Transiuraine was added
hereunto. In Rodulph the second, deceasing without heirs, the kingdom, and
state took end, given by him to the Emperor Conrade the second, and to Henry
surnamed the Black, son hereunto, and of his sister Gisela; incorporated by
them to the German Kingdom, and Empire, and parted afterward into sundry
lesser Signeuryes and Gouerments, the Earledomes of Provence, and of the Free
County of Burgundy, the Dukedom of Savoy, Daulphinye, and the Confederacy of
the Switzers, and Grisons, partly at this day holding of the Empire, partly
united with the Kingdom of France, and partly being Free Estates. The order of
the Princes follow. Bozon the first, Earl of Burgundy, on this fide of the
Soasne; created first king of Burgundy or Arles, in the reign of the Emperor
Charles the Fat, and of Jews, and Carloman, French kings. Lewis son to Bozon,
and of Ermengarde daughter to the Emperor Jews the second. He was chosen, and
crowned king of Italy, and Roman Emperor by the factious Italians; betrayed
afterward at Verona to his Competitour Berengario, Duke of Friuli, and sent
back with his eyes plucked out. He dyed sans issue, leaving the kingdom unto
Hugh d' Arles (bastard son to Lotharius the second, King of Lorraine, and
Waldrada, his concubine) Earl of Provence. Hugh d' Arles by the gift of Lewis
succeeding in the kingdom of Arles, and Burgundy. Elected together with
Rodulph, Duke of Burgundy Transiuraine by their several factions king of
Italy, for his more easy, and quiet possession of Italy he gave Arles, and
Burgundy unto Rodulph his competitour. Rodulph the first, Duke of Burgundy
Transiuraine, upon composition with Hugh d' Arles succeeding in the kingdom of
Arles, and Burgundy. He gave the dukedom of Burgundy Transiuraine, unto his
brother Bozon the second, and died without issue. Bozon the second, Duke of
Burgundy Transiuraine, after the decease of his brother Rodulph the first,
succeeding in the kingdom of Arles, and Burgundy. By this Prince, and means,
Burgundy Transiuraine, or beyond the Iour, became united with the kingdom of
Arles, and Burgundy. Conrade, son to Bozon the second. He married unto Maude,
sister to Lotharius, and daughter to Jews the fourth, French kings. Rodulph
the second, son to Conrade, and Maude. Justly incensed against the French kings
of the house of Aniou in regard of their injuries done unto his family, and to
the house of Charles the Great (from the which he was descended by his mother)
in the usurpations of Burgundy on this side the Soasne, and of the kingdom of
France, destitute of heirs, and quitting the French party, he gave the
Kingdom of Arles, and Burgundy unto Conrade the second, Emperor of the
Germans, and to Henry, surnamed the Black, son to the Emperor Conrade, and of
his sister Gisela. By this means ended the kingdom of Arles, and Burgundy;
united by the Emperor Conrade the second, and his son Henry the Black, unto
the German Empire, and divided into the Provinces, and Estates,
beforementioned, of Provence, and Daulphiny, the Free County, Savoy, and of
the Switzers, whose beginnings, and continuance unto our times follow.

THE EARLDOM OF PROVENCE, OR ARLES.
BY this name v. C. Iulij Caesaris Com. Belli Gallici l. 1. c. 8. and
l'Histoire de Lion par Claude de Rubys. l. 3. c. 26 and 31.
we read in Caesar the whole more Southern division of Gaul, named
afterward Gaul Narbonensis, to have been called; in regard of the civility
of the inhabitants, and subjection hereof to the Roman laws, and much
difference from the other newly conquered, and barbarous Gallia, excluded by
this Author from the account of Gaul, and named the Further v. supra.
Province. The rest of this Roman Province of Gaul, by the invasion, and
conquests of the barbarous nations taking up new names, the appellation only
remained in the part hereof, contained betwixt the Rhosne, and Alps. Falling
to the share of Charles, son to the Emperor Lotharius, it became a parcel of
his kingdom of Burgundy. Afterward in the person of Bozon the first, it was
made a part of the kingdom of Arles, and Burgundy. In the person of Hugh d'
Arles (supposed by Rubys to have been the bastard son of Lotharius the second,
king of Lorraine, and of his Concubine Waldrada) it was first made an
Earldom, being given unto him with this title by king Bozon the first, to be
held under the sovereignty of the kings of Arles, and Burgundy. Hugh d' Arles,
Earl of Provence, by the gift of Lewis, son to Bozon, becoming afterward
king of Arles, and Burgundy, and not long after this resigning that kingdom
unto Rodulph the second, Duke of Burgundy Transiuraine (exchanged for the
kingdom of Italy,) reserved here only this Earldom for his son William,
to he held under the sovereign right of the kings of Arles, and Burgundy;
confirmed afterward by Conrade the second, and the Cerman Emperors, but with
condition to be held of the Emperors. By the Emperor Albert the first, the
fief, and whole right of the Earldom of Provence, belonging to the German
Emperors, was united to Philip Augustus and the French kings. By Charles d'
Aniou, the last Earl of Prove^ce; wanting heirs, the country was given to
Lewis the Eleventh, French K. by who^ it was incorporated with the kingdom of
France, in which union, and state it now remains. The order of the first
Earls we find not. From Raimu^d the last Earl of the house of Hugh d' Arles,
unto Charles d' Aniou aforesaid, and the union of Provence with the crown of
France, they were continued, as follows. Raimund, Earl of Provence,
descended from Hugh d' Arles, before mentioned. Charles the first, Earl of
Aniou, and Maine, and afterward K. of Naples, and Sicily, brother to Lewis the
ninth, surnamed the Saint, French King; Earl of Provence in right of his wife
Beatres, daughter to Raimund. Charles the second, King of Naples, and Earl of
Provence, son to Charles the first. Robert, King of Naples, and Earl of
Provence, son to Charles the second. Ioane the first, Queen of Naples, and
Countess of Provence, daughter to Charles, Duke of Calabria, son to King
Robert. By this Princess, the city, and country of Avignon were first
alienated from the Earldom of Provence, and given to the Popes in lieu of a
certain tribute, pretended to be due for the kingdom of Naples, held of the
Papacy, and for many years unpaid unto that sea. Lewis the first, younger
son to John, French King, adopted by Ioane the first. He succeeded only in
Provence. The kingdom of Naples after the decease of Queen Ioane became
seized by Charles Durazzo, descended from Charles the first; continued after in
his family unto queen Ioane the second. Lewis the second, son to Lewis the
first; Earl of Provence. Lewis the third, son to Lewis the second. He dyed
without heirs. Reiner, broto Lewis the third; Earl of Provence, and in right
of his wife Isabel, Duke of Lorraine. Deceasing without surviuing heirs male,
he gave the Earldom of Provence to his brother Charles, Earl of Maine.
Charles, Earl of Maine, and Provence, brother to Reiner. Wanting heirs he
bequeathed this country unto Lewis the Eleaventh, French King; since which
time it has continued united with the Crown of France.

DAVLPHINY.
THe v. L'Histoire de Lion par Claude de Rubys livre. 3. cap. 31. and Histoire
de France par Bernard de Girard, Seigneur du Haillan (en le roy Iehan.)
Estate was begun by Guy, surnamed the Fat, Earl of Albon, usurping, and
seazing upon the country hereof, with the title of Earl of Vienne, in the
reign of Rodulph the second, surnamed le Fay-neant, the last king of Arles,
and Burgundy. Guy the third of that name, Earl of Vienne, taking the Dolphin
for his arms, alluding to the nature of that fish, which of all other is
accounted the most familiar, and friendly unto man, first named himself
Dolphin of Vienne, from whom the succeeding princes have still continued the
style, and the country from thence been called Daulphiny. In the year 1340
Humbert, last Daulphin of Vienn^, destitute of heirs, deceasing gave this
country unto John, French king, with condition that the eldest sons of
France should always bear that title, and be immediate Princes; a custom
still afterward unto this day observed by the French. The Princes, for as many
as we find of them, were these. Guy the first, surnamed the Fat, before
mentioned, Earl of Albon, descended from Girard, Earl of Vienne,
dispossessed, and thrust out by the Emperor Charles the Bauld; the pretense of
this his usurpation, and title. Guy the second, son to Guy the first. Guy the
third, son to Guy the second. He first styled himself Dolphin of Vienne. The
order of the Dolphins from this prince we find not, and until Humbert.
Humbert the last Dolphin of Vienne of the house of Guy the Fat. Charles, eldest
son to John, French King, the first Dolphin of the house of France, by the gift
of Humbert, in whom this country was united with France; the title continued
still afterward in the eldest sons of the French Kings. This province (as part
of the kingdoms of Arles, and Burgundy) was aunciently held of the German
Empire. How it was cleared from the right hereof, we cannot certainly relate.

The Free Country of Burgundy.
IT v. Les Annals de Bourgogne par Guillaume Paradin.
has been thus named from the Free Estate, which the inhabitants enjoy under
their Princes. The Earldom was begun in the person of Otho-Guillaume, son to
Gerberge, Countess of Dijon, wife to Henry the first, Duke of Burgundy on this
side the Soasne; seized hereof by the aid, and power of Robert, French King,
in lieu of that Dukedom given unto him by Henry the first, and whereof he had
bin deprived by King Robert. By Ioane Countess hereof, and of Artois, (married
unto Philip, surnamed the Long, French King) it became with Artois possessed by
the house of France. By Margaret, daughter to Ioane, and Philip the Long,
French King, marrying to Lewis the first, Earl of Flanders; it was carryied to
the house of Flanders; from whence it descended to those of Burgundy, and
Austria, where now it rests. The order of the Earls follow. Otho-Guillaume
before mentioned, first Count Palatine of Burgundy in the reign of Robert,
King of France. Reinard the first, son to Otho-Guillaume. William the first,
son to Reinard. Stephen, son to William the first; slain in the holy wars
against the Infidel. William the second, son to Stephen. Reinard the second.
He gave to Berthold, son to the Emperor Conrade the third, the cities of
Geneve, and Lousanne. Frederique Barbarossa, Emperor of the Romans, in the
right of his wife Beatres, daughter to Reinard the second. Otho the first,
third son to the Emperor Frederique Barbarossa, and of Beatres. He deceased
without heir male. After the decease of Otho the first, the right was
questioned betwixt Otho, D. of Mera^, husband to Beatres, eldest daughter to
Otho; and Girard, Count of Vienne, husband to Ioane, younger daughter to Otho;
both princes being acknowledged by their factions, and usurping the title of
Earls of Burgundy; a cause of long war, and contention betwixt the sides. Otho
the second, Duke of Meran; and Girard, Count of Vienne in the right of their
wives, Beatres, and Ioane aforesaid, daughters to Otho the first. Otho the
third, Duke of Meran, son to Otho the second; and Stephen, son to William,
Earl of Chalon, and Salins, next heir to Girard, Count of Vienne. John, son
to Stephen. Hugh, son to John. This took to wife Aliz, daughter to Otho the
third, Duke of Meran; in whom the two different houses were united, and the
quarrel composed. Othelin, son to Hugh, and Aliz aforesaid. He took to wife
Maude, Countess of Artois. Ioane, Countess of Artois, and Burgundy, daughter
to Othelin, and Maude. She married unto Philip, surnamed the Long, French
King. Margaret, Countess of Artois, and Burgundy, daughter unto Philip, the
Long, French King, and Joan. She married unto Lewis the first, Earl of
Flanders. He was slain fighting against the English for the French in the
battle at Crecy. Lewis the second, surnamed Malan, Earl of Flanders,
Burgundy, and Artois, son to Lewis the first, and Margaret. Margaret, Countess
of Flanders, Burgundy, and Artois, daughter to Lewis the second, surnamed
Malan. She married unto Philip de Valois, surnamed the Hardy, Duke of
Burgundy, son to John, French King. By this means the three great Earledomes
of Burgundy, Flanders, and Artois became annexed to the family of Burgundy; by
Mary of Valois, wife to Maximilian the first, brought afterward to the house
of Austria. The Earldom of Burgundy has always been held under the Empire,
being a parcel of the kingdom of Arles, and Burgundy.

THE DVKEDOME OF SAVOY.
THe Chronique de Savoye par Paradin.
Estate was begun in the person of Beroald, surnamed the Saxon; in recompense
of his many good services done hereunto, created first Earl of Maurienne by
Rodulph the second, king of Arles, and Burgundy. Amadis the second of that
name, Earl of Maurienne, having given unto him by the Emperor Henry the
fourth the little country of Savoy (adding it hereunto, and leaving his former
title of Maurienne,) first took upon him the name of Earl of Savoy, continued
by the succeeding princes. In the Council of Constance, and in the person of
Amadis the eight it was made a Dukedom by the Emperor Sigismond. The Princes
follow. Beroald, first Earl of Maurienne, surnamed the Saxon, in the reign of
Rodulph the second, King of Arles, and Burgundy. Humbert the first, son to
Beroald, Earl of Maurienne; confirmed by the Emperor Conrade the second.
Amadis the first, Earl of Maurienne, son to Humbert the first. Humbert the
second, Earl of Maurienne, son to Amadis the first. Amadis the second, son to
Humbert the second. He first named himself Earl of Savoy, in the reign of
the Emperor Henry the fourth. Humbert the third, Earl of Savoy, sonto Amadis
the second. Thomas the first, son to Humbert the third. Amadis the third, son
to Thomas the first. Boniface, son to Amadis the third. He dyed without heirs.
Peter, son to Thomas the first, and brother to Amadis the third. He dyed
without male issue. Philip the first, brother to Peter. He deceased also
without heirs. Amadis the fourth, son to Thomas of Savoy, son to Thomas the
first. Edward the first, son to Amadis the fourth. He deceased without heirs.
Amadis the fifth, son to Amadis the fourth, and brother to Edward the first.
Amadis the sixth, son to Amadis the fifth. Amadis the seventh, Earl of Savoy,
son to Amadis the sixth. Amadis the eight son to Amadis the seventh, created
first Duke of Savoy in the Council of Constance by the Emperor Sigismond. He
turned Religious; living an Anchoret at Ripaille upon the Lake of Geneve. He
was afterward by the Council of Basil made Pope against Eugenius the fourth
by the name of Faelix the fourth, after some 9 years Papacy again quitting
the world, and returning to his Cell at Ripaille, where in a private state he
dyed. Lewis, Duke of Savoy, son to Amadis the eight. Amadis the ninth, son to
Lewis. Philibert the first, Duke of Savoy, son to Amadis the ninth. He deceased
without heirs. Charles the first, brother to Philibert the first. Charles the
second, son to Charles the first. He dyed without heirs. Philip the second,
son to Lewis, son to Amadis the eight, and great uncle to Charles the second.
Philibert the second, son to Philip the second. He also left no heirs of his
body. Charles the third; son to Philip the second, and brother to Philibert the
second. Emanuel Philibert son to Charles the 3d. Charles Emanuel, son to
Emanuel Phil. now Duke of Savoy.

The League, and Union of the Switzers.
THis Ex Iosia Simlero de Republica Helvetiorum.
is an aggregate state, consisting of sundry different particulars, united
only in a general league; named thus from the Canton of Switz, one of the
three first joining in this confederacy, occasioning, and bringing on the
union of the rest. They comprehend the whole ancient country of the Helvetij:
parts of the Allobroges, Rauraci, and Germans beyond the Rhijn, together with
the Mountain people of the Veragri, Seduni, Lepontij, Sarunetes, with others,
inhabiting the hollow bottomes of the Alps Lepontiae, Rhaeticae, and Paeninae:
at this day whatsoever is contained betwixt the Mountainous ridge of the Iour,
and the Lakes of Como, and Maggiore in Italy; and the Lake of Geneve, and the
Rhiin, intercepted from the head thereof unto below Basil. Simlerus devideth
them into three distinct ranks, the Cantons, the Confederate States, and the
Prefectures, subject to the Cantons.

The Cantons of the Switzers.
THese properly make the body of the Commonwealth of the Switzers; united in a
more strict league then the rest, and enjoying sundry rights, and prerogatives
before the other; who alone have voices in their general assemblies, consult,
and determine of war, and peace, command the Prefectureships, share the
spoils of their enemies, and partake of the sundry profits, and emoluments of
the union, and state. They are 13 in number, the Cantons of Vren, Switz,
Vnderwald, Lucern, Zurich, Glarona, Zug, Bern, Fribug, Soloturn, Basil,
Schaff-hausen, and Appenzel, all sometimes parcels of the kingdom of Arles,
and Burgundy (Schaff-hausen excepted, lying beyond the Rhijn;) conveyed
afterward to the Empire by the Emperor Conrade the second, and herein partly
beco^ming Free Estates, and partly subject to Monasteries, and to the house of
Habspurg, and Austria. How these were freed herefrom, and by what means, and
at what time they were incorporated into this Confederacy, and Union, we will
show in order.

The Cantons of Vren, Switz, and Vnderwald.
THese are rude mountainous countries without any town, or almost civil
habitation, bordering upon the Lukes of Lucern, and Waldstet see; neighboring
otherwise to the Grisons, Wallis-landt, and the Alps Lepontiae. Aunciently
they were Free estates, subject immediately to the German Empire, commanded by
the deputies hereof. Under the Emperor Albert the first, affecting the
dominion hereof, and their subjection to his house of Austria, thrusting out
his praefects (provoked with their insolent, and tyrannical government,) for
their better defense and stronger head against that potent enemy in the year
1307 they joined into a league, first temporary only of ten years, afterward
upon their great victory at Mortgarten obtained against the Archduke Leopold,
son to the Emperor Albert the first, in the year 1315, and reign of the
Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, made perpetual. These were the first, who began
this Confederacy, called afterward of the Switzers from the Canton Switz, the
more potent of these three, or because the most famous; the most exposed to the
injuries, and incursions of their enemies, deriuing the name, still as they
were incorporated, unto the other Confederates.

The Canton of Lucern.
THe town stands upon the river Russ, and the Lake named from hence the Lake
of Lucern, common hereunto, and to the three first Cantons. Aunciently this
belonged to the Abbey of Murbach, of whom it was bought by the Emperor Albert
the first, and added to the right, and Dominions of Austria. Vexed with
continual, and long wars of the three first Cantons, and invited by their
example, and liberty, in the year 1332, pretending the negligence, tyranny,
and injuries of the house of Austria, it shook off the yoke hereof, uniting
in the perpetual league of the Switzers.

The Canton of Zurich.
THe town is situated upon the river Limat, and the lake of Zurich. Heretofore
it appertained to two ancient Monasteries hereof, under the protection of the
Dukes of Zeringen, guardians of the town, and Monasteries. Berchtold the fifth,
the last Duke of Zeringen, and guardian hereof, deceasing without heirs, by
the Emperor Frederique the second in recompense of the faith, and loyalty
hereof still observed toward the Emperors in their long quarrels with the
Popes, it was exempted from all superior jurisdiction, saving of the Empire;
continuing afterward a free state. In the year 1351, threatened with a
dangerous and great war from Albert, Archduke of Austria, the malignant
neighboring nobility, and other bordering states, it joined in the perpetual
Confederacy of the four first Cantons.

The Canton of Glarona.
IT is a valley of some 3 German miles in length, exte^ded along the river
Limat, environed on al sides with high inaccessible mountains, and admitting
one only entrance; confining upon the West with Vren, and Switz; and upon the
East, and South with the Grisons, and named thus from a little town, so
called, the chief of the Country. This likewise aunciently enjoyed a free
estate under the Abbatesse of Seckingen, and the protection first of the
Emperors, then of the Earls of Burgundy, and Habspurg. By the pretense, and
title of this Protectourship it was made subject to the house of Austria by the
Emperor Albert the first, heir of Habspurg. Invaded by the five first
Cantons, in the year 1351 it revoulted from under the subjection of the
Princes of Austria, offended with their wrong, and insolent government;
voluntarily yielding hereunto, sworn unto their perpetual league, and
admitted amongst their Cantons.

The Canton of Zug.
THe town is situated upon the Lake, from hence called Zugen See, betwixt
Zurich, and Switz. It belonged to the Archdukes of Austria; by what right we
find not. In the year 1351, and war hereagainst, it was besieged, and taken
in by the five first Cantons; admitted into their perpetual confederacy, and
made a Canton.

The Canton of Bern.
THe town stands upon the river Aar, founded by Berchtold, the last Duke of
Zeringen; to which family the Country aunciently appertained. By this
Berchtold, the last Duke, having no heirs, it was enfranchised, and given to
the Empire; remaining after this for a long time Imperial. In the year 1352
it joined in a perpetual league with the three first Cantons; afterward by
the decree of Stantz, in the year 1381, made general with all the Cantons,
then Confederate.

The Canton of Friburg.
LYing upon the river Sana; founded by Berchtold the fourth, Duke of Zeringen,
not long before Bern. The house of the Dukes of Zeringen, the ancient Lords,
being extinguished in Berchtold the fifth, it descended to the Earls of Kyburg,
by whom it was sold to the Emperor Rodulph the first, Earl of Habspurg;
continued almost two hundred years afterward by this right in the house of
Habspurg, and Austria. In the time of the Archduke Albert, it revolted to the
side of the confederate Switzers; after some private leagues in the year 1481,
and assembly of Stantz, received with Solothurn into their perpetual
confederacy.

The Canton of Solothurn.
THe town was aunciently Imperial under the protection of the Dukes of
Zeringen; situated upon the river Aar. After some private Confederacies in the
year 1481, and meeting of Stantz, with Friburg, it was admitted into the
general league of the Switzers.

The Canton of Basil.
THe city lies upon the Rhiin, the greatest of the Confederates; aunciently
Imperial, and Free. Jealous of the ambition, and greatness of the house of
Austria, and of the malice of the bordering nobility, in the year 1501 it
united into the general, and perpetual league of the Confederate Switzers.

The Canton of Schaff-hausen.
THe town likewise is situated upon the Rhiin on the side, or shore of
Germany. It belonged once to the Abbot, and Monastery hereof, founded by the
Earls of Nellenburg in the reign of the Emperor Henry the third, first
beginning, and occasioning the town; by little, and little withdrawing from the
subjection hereof, and becoming Imperial, acknowledging only the Empire. By
the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, with other towns, it was alienated from the
Empire, and given to Frederique Archduke of Austria in lieu of a certain
sum of money, due unto him upon a peace, and composition made betwixt them.
The Archduke Frederique being proscribed, it was recovered again by the
Emperor Sigismond, and restored to the Empire. The Emperor Sigismond
deceasing, and succeeded unto by the Emperor Frederique the third, of the
house of Austria, Sigismond Archduke of Austria attempting again to surprise
it, the inhabitants hereof for their better defense obtained certain
temporary, and private leagues with the Cantons of Zurich, Bern, Lucern, Switz,
Zug, and Glarona; in the year 1501 made perpetual, and general with all the
Switzers, admitted unto the number of the Cantons.

The Canton of Appenzell.
IT is a mou^tainous country above S. Gal; neighboring to the Grisons, and
named thus from the little town of Appenzel, the chief of the country. The
ancient Lords hereof were the Abbots of S. Gal, naming the town; their usual
residence, or seiour. In the time of the Abbot Cuno, the inhabitants rebelled
from under their government, assuming liberty, which after long unprofitable
war, defended by their mountains, and the aid of the Switzers, they were at
length content to sell unto them. In the 1452 they joined in a perpetual
league with the 7 first Cantons, afterward in the year 1513 made general
with all the Switzers; the last received into this common Confederacy, and
amongst the number of their Cantons.

The Confederates of the Switzers.
HOw these differ from the Confederate Cantons we have before (...). They
contain the Abbot, and town of S. Gal, the Grisons, the Bishop of Sitten, and
Wallislandt, and the towns of Rotweil, Mulhausen, Biel, Geneve, and Nuwenburg.
Of these only Rotweil, and Mulhausen are confederate with all the Cantons. The
rest have league with particular Cantons.

The Abbot of Saint Gal
St Gal, whereof the Abbot is entitled, is a town, and monastery in Turgow,
so called from S. Gal, a Scotishman, the Apostle of those parts, about the
year 630 retiring amongst the mountains hereof; whose cell this was,
occasioning afterward the town, and monastery. The Abbot is prince of the
Empire; unto whom (besides what now otherwise he holds in Turgow) belonged
sometimes the town of S. Gal, and country of Appenzel. Appenzel, and S. Gall
revolting, and together confederating against him, Gaspar Landerberg, the 52
Abbot, to secure the rest (fearing also their defection) obtained of the
Cantons of Zurich, Lucern, Switz, and Glarona to be admitted into their
protection, and league; continued unto this day, notwithstanding the difference
hereof with some of these Cantons in matters of religion

The Town of Saint Gal.
THe town grew from the monastery. It was a town Imperial; in many things
notwithstanding obnoxious to the Abbots. In the war of the Abbots, with
Appenzel, it took part with Appenzel; continuing still afterward in the
friendship, and confederacy hereof. In the year 1452 (the Abbots having before
joined in league with the four Cantons before mentioned) the town to
strengthen it self with the same neighboring nation, obtained the protection,
and confederacy of the six Cantons of Zurich, Bern, Lucern, Switz, Zug, and
Glarona.

The Grisons.
THese possess the Valleys of the Alps about the heads of the rivers Inn,
Rhijn, and Adise. They have aunciently been confederate amongst themselves;
divided into three leagues; the league particularly called of the Grisons, or
the Higher League; the league of the House of God; and the Lower League. In the
year 1497, the League of the Grisons united in a perpetual League with the
seven first Cantons. In the next year following, the League of the House of
God, upon occasion of their quarrels with the house of Austria, Lords of the
neighboring Country of Tirol, joined in the same confederacy. The lower
League have no particular confederacy with the Switzers. They remain
notwithstanding firm in their friendship, and society, in regard of their
league with the other Grisons.

The Bishop of Sitten, and VVallislandt.
IT is a long valley of the Alps Paeninae, extended along the course of the
river Rhosne from the spring thereof unto the Lake of Geneve; divided into the
Upper, and Lower Wallislandt; whose chief city is Sitten, the seat of the
Bishops, the Lords of the Country. In the year 1475 these entered into a
perpetual league with the Canton of Bern, renewed in the time of my author.
Afterward in the year 1533 the Bishop, and the 7 Resorts of the Upper
Wallislandt (who command, and have dominion over the rest) joined in a more
strict league with the Cantons of the Switzers, professing the Roman religion,
of Lucern, Vren, Switz, Vnderwauld, Zug, Friburg, and Solothurn; wherein
amongst other conditions, usual in leagues, is provided their mutual defense
in the cause of Religion.

Rotweil.
THe town is Imperial; lying beyond the Rhijn in Schwaben upon the left shore
of the Neccar, not far from the head of that river, and of the Danow. In the
year 1519, it united in a perpetual league with all the 13 Cantons.

Mulhausen.
IT is also a town Imperial upon the river Ill in Sungow. In the year 1515
it also joined in a general, and perpetual league with all the Switzers.

Biel.
IT is a town situated upon the Lake, named from hence Bieler See; subject to
the Bishop of Basil, enjoying notwithstanding its sundry immunities, and
privileges. In the year 1306 it made a particular league with Bern, renewed
in the year 1352. Afterward in the year 1367, for their more firm union
these communicated to each other their Burgracht, or the freedom, or
privilege of their towns.

Geneve.
IT is a noted city upon the Lake of Geneve, and the river Rhosne, where it
issues forth of this Lake. It belonged sometimes to the Bishops hereof. Upon
the change of Religion (the Bishops driven out) the inhabitants became a free
estate; for their better defense against these, and the Dukes of Savoy,
attempting against their liberty, uniting in a perpetual league with Bern,
communicating to each other their Burgracht.

Nuwenburg.
THe town stands upon the Lake, named from hence Nuwenburger See. It is
subject to the Earls entitled hereof; who in the time of my author were the
Dukes of Longe-ville in France, confederate in a strict league with the Canton
of Bern.

The Prefectures of the Switzers
THese are certain lesser pieces, partly now lying in Switzerlandt, and partly
amongst, and beyond the Alps in Italy, subject to the joint command, and
authority of the many Cantons hereof, accrewing unto them by purchase, gift,
and by means of their wars with the princes of Austria, unto whom the
greatest part sometimes belonged. They are the country, and town of Baden,
Bremgarten, Mellingen, Rapperswyl, the Free Provinces in Wagenthal, Turgow, the
government of Rheineck, the town, and country of Sargans, Lugano, Locarno,
the Vale of Magia, Mendrisio, and Belinzano,

Baden.
THe town is situated upon the river Limat; named thus from the hot Bathes.
The ancient Earls hereof extinguished, it descended (by what means we find
not) unto the house of Habspurg, afterward of Austria. Frederique, Archduke
of Austria, being proscribed by the Emperor Sigismond, lost this town with
others unto the confederate Switzers in their wars beforementioned against
the Archduke Frederique. It now jointly also obeys the eight first Cantons.

Mellingen.
IT is a little town upon the same river of Russ^, below Bremgarten,
aunciently likewise belonging to the house of Habspurg, and Austria, and
surprised with Bremgarten, and Baden by the Confederate Switzers in their
wars against the Archduke Frederique; obeying now likewise the eight first
Cantons.

The Free Provinces in Wagenthall.
THese are certain castles, and towns thus named, below Lucern; the chief
whereof are Meyenberg, and Richensee upon the river* Russ, and the Lake
Richensee. They were also once subject to the Archdukes of Austria; in the
aforesaid wars of the Switzers against the Archduke Frederique surprised, and
taken from that house by the Canton of Lucerne. They are commanded now by the
seven first Cantons.

Rapperswyl.
IT is a town upon the Lake of Zurich, the seat sometimes of the Earls. thus
named; from whom it descended upon the Princes of Habspurg, and Austria. Under
the Archduke Sigismond in the year 1458, it was surprised by the Cantons of
Vren, Switz, Vnderwald, and Glarona; obeying ever since the joint authority of
these 4 confederate Switzers.

Turgow.
IT is a country bordering upon the Rhijn, called thus from the river Thur. It
sometimes also was subject for the most part to the Princes of the house of
Austria; won herefrom by the seven first Cantons in their wars against the
Archduke Sigismond in the year 1460. It obeys now the seven first Cantons;
the town of Si Gal, and the parts belonging to the Abbots of St Gal, and
Rinou, and to the Bishops of Constance excepted. The right notwithstanding of
judicature in criminal causes, for the part of the Switzers, appertains
jointly to all the ten first Confederates; taken first from the Archduke
Frederique by the Emperor Sigismond, pawned to the city of Constance, and upon
the peace betwixt the Emperor Maximilian the first, and the Switzers in the
conclusion of the Suevian war, and in the year 1499, yielded up to the ten
first Cantons.

The Country, and town of Sargans.
THese were the Sarunetes of Pliny; part of the Rhaeti Alpestres. Aunciently
they obeyed the Countes of VVerdenberg; Earls likewise hereof. In the year
1483, George Earl of Werdenberg, and Sargans, sold these to the seven first
Cantons; who now in this right jointly command the same.

The Prefectourship of Rheineck.
THis bordereth upon the left shore of the Rhiin, above the Lake of Constance.
It contains the town of Rheineck, whereof we name it, (the seat of the
Governor) Alstetten and a valley of the Alps, extended toward VVerdenberg.
It aunciently belonged to the Archdukes of Austria. After sundry changes of the
Lords thereof, it was sold to the inhabitants of Appenzel; taken afterward
from them during their wars with the Abbot of S. Gal by the 4 Cantons of
Zurich, Lucern, Switz, and Glarona, then confederate with the Abbot. It now
jointly is commanded by the seven first Cantons, together with the Canton of
Appenzel.

Locarno.
IT is a town in the borders of Italy upon the Lake Maggiore. It belonged
aunciently to the Dukes of Milan. In the year 1513 by Maximilian Sfortia it
was given to the 12 first Cantons, with the Vale of Magia, and the towns of
Lugano, and Mendrisio, in recompense of their good service done unto him
against the French, chased out of Italy, and his Dukedom of Milan, chiefly by
their aid; confirmed unto them by the succeeding Dukes. It is now governed by
the joint command of the 12 first Cantons, Appenzel excluded, not admitted
into their confederacy until after this gift.

The Vale of Magia.
IT is a valley of the Alps Lepontiae, named thus from the river Magia,
running thorough the valley, and received into the Lake Maggiore at Locarno. It
was sometimes likewise subject to the Dukes of Milan, belonging to Locarno,
made now a distinct Prefectourship. By the aforesaid gift of Maximilian
Sfortia, it came to the 12 first Cantons, commanded now jointly by them.

Lugano.
THe town is situated upon the Lake, thus called, in the same borders of
Italy. It also sometimes belonged to the Dukes of Millan; by Maximilian
Sfortia, given to the 12 first Cantons, now the Lords thereof.

Mendrisio.
IT lies upon the Lake of Lugano, belonging sometimes to that town; made now a
several government. By Maximilian Sfortia, with Lugano, Locarno, and the vale
of Magia, it was given to the 12 first Cantons, now possessed by them.

The country of Belinzano.
THis contains three prefectureships of Belinzano, Palenser-tal, and Riviera.
The town is situated upon the river Tesino betwixt the head thereof, and the
Lake Maggiore. The whole sometimes belonged to the Earls of Masox; sold by
them to the Cantons of Vren, and Vnderwald; about the year 1422 surprised by
the Dukes of Milan, and lastly delivered in the year 1500 by the inhabitants
to the Canton of Vren during the wars betwixt those Dukes, and the Frenchmen.
It now obeys the three first confederate Cantons of Vren, Switz, and
Vnderwald, commanding by course in the three several prefectureships.

The Kingdom of VVest-France.
v. l' Histoire de France par Bernard de Girard, Seigneu* du Haillan Annals de
France par Fr. de Belle-forest, avec la continuation par Gabr. Chappuy. Roberti
Gagwini Annals Rerum Gailicarum.
THis Kingdom was begun in the person of Charles, surnamed the Bauld, youngest
son unto the Emperor Lewis the godly; whose portion, or share it was in that
vnprovident devision of the French dominions made betwixt him, and his brethren
Lotharius, and Lewis. It was divided from the kingdoms of Lorraine, and
Burgundy, or the share of the Emperor Lotharius by the rivers of the Scheld,
and the Rhosne; containing the whole France lying upon the West of those rivers
unto the Pyrenaean Mountains, and the Aquitanique, French, and British Oceans;
Bretaigne only excepted. By Charles the Bauld, the first prince, Burgundy on
this side the Soasne (comprehending now the Dukedom of Burgundy, and the
country of Lionois) were added to this kingdom, and devision. By King John,
Daulphiny. By Lewis the eleaventh, the Earldom of Provence. By Francis the
first, Bretaigne; by which means the kingdom became this way enlarged unto
the river Soasne, and the Alps. On the other side by Henry the second, and the
league of Cambray, the Earledomes of Flanders, and Artois, aunciently held of
the crown, were quitted from all homage, and right hereof unto Philip the
second, King of Spain, and the heirs of the house of Burgundy.

The Kingdom of France
AT this day (the name, and posterity of the French worn out in all other
parts of the ancient French dominions, and the distinction of West-France
abolished) this now only retains the name of France. The order of the Kings
of West-France, or France follow. Charles, surnamed the Bauld, the founder of
the kingdom, youngest son to the Emperor Lewis the Godly. He was afterward
created Roman Emperor, and deceased in the year 857. Lewis the first,
surnamed the Stammerer, son to Charles the Bauld. He was also Roman Emperor.
He dyed without lawful heirs; Charles the Simple, his only legitimate son,
not being borne until after his decease. In regard of this defect the Empire
of the Romans became translated from the Kings of West-France unto the Kings of
Germany of the house of Charles the Great. Lewis the second, and Carloman,
natural sons to the Emperor Lewis, surnamed the Stammerer; joint Kings,
created in the minority of Charles the Simple, Lewis the second deceasing,
Carloman reigned alone, who dyed not long after. Lewis the third, surnamed le
Fay-neant, son to Carloman. His reign was but short, deposed for his
slought, and many vices, and shorn Monk of Saint Denis. Charles, surnamed the
Fat, son to Lewis the Ancient, King of Germany, and Emperor of the Romans;
called in by his faction, and elected King of West-France in the minority of
Charles the Simple. He was deposed not long after, and deprived of all his
estates, dying in great misery, and want nere unto Constance in Germany in the
year 889. Eudon, guardian to Charles the Simple, (son to Robert Earl of
Aniou, son to Witichind, prince of the Saxons in the reign of the Emperor
Charles the Great;) in the minority of his pupil after the Emperor Charles
the Fat, created French King. After some two years reign he was likewise
deposed by this factious, and unconstant nation; succeeded unto by Charles the
Simple. By means notwithstanding of this election, there followed afterward
long quarrels, and contention for the kingdom betwixt his kindred, the house
of Aniou, and Charles the Simple, and his issue during the whole Caroline line;
a chief pretense of Capets usurpation. Charles the Simple, the legitimate son
of the Emperor Lewis, surnamed the Stammerer. He had wars with Robert, Earl
of Aniou, brother to King Eudon; in regard of the election of Eudon pretending
right to the kingdom, and slain by him in a battaill. After a short, and
troublesome reign, caught, and imprisoned at Peronne by Hebert, Earl of
Vermandois, and forsaken by the nobility, he resigned the kingdom to Rodulph,
Duke of Burgundy Transiuraine. Rodulph Duke of Burgundy Transiuraine, son to
Conrade Earl of Burgundy Transiuraine, brother to Robert the first, Earl of
Aniou, and uncle to King Eudon, upon the imprisonment, and forced resignation
of Charles the Simple elected French King. Lewis the fourth, son to Charles the
Simple, and Elgina, daughter to Edward, surnamed the Elder, and sister to
Athelstan, Kings of England; surnamed the Forreiner for that during the
captivity of his father, and the usurpation of Rodulph, he lived exiled with
his uncle Athelstan in England: after the death of the usurper called home, and
restored to the kingdom. He had wars with Hugh, surnamed the Great, Earl of
Paris, and Majour of the Palace, son to Robert the second; jealous of the
popularity, greatness, and the ambition of that house. Lothaire, son to Lewis
the fourth. In the reign hereof Hugh Capet, heir of the house of Aniou, son
to Hugh the Great, begun again to renew the ancient quarrel of his family
touching the kingdom, the which not long after he obtained. Lewis the fifth,
son to Lothaire. He dyed young without issue, the last French King of the house
of Charles the Great. Hugh Capet, son to Hugh the Great, Earl of Paris, and
Majour of the Palace, after much quarrel betwixt the houses of Aniou, and of
Charles the Great, thorough a long baseness, slougth, and pusillanimity of the
degenerate princes of that line, the present dislike of Charles, Duke of
Lorraine, the next heir, the long greatness, and still growing popularity of
his house, his flattery, and crafty insinuations with the nobility, and people,
and religious pretenses, and of his right, and succession to King Eudo, and
Rodulph, in the year 965 elected king by this wavering nation; Charles, Duke
of Lorraine, excluded, caught afterward by him, and imprisoned during life.
Robert, son to Hugh Capet. Henry the first, younger son to Robert, preferred by
his father before Robert, his elder brother, succeeding in the Dukedom of
Burgundy. Philip the first, son to Henry the first. Lewis the sixth, son to
Philip the first. Lewis the seventh, son to Lewis the sixth. About the reign
of this prince dyed John de Temporibus by the stiff consent of the French, and
German writers reported to have lived from the Emperor Charles the Great unto
this time for above the space of 300 years. Philip the second, surnamed
Augustus, son to Lewis the seventh. Lewis the eight, son to Philip the
second. Lewis the ninth, surnamed the Saint, son to Lewis the eight. Philip the
third, son to Lewis the ninth. Philip the fourth, surnamed the Fair, son to
Philip the third. Lewis the tenth, surnamed Hutin, son to Philip the Fair. He
deceased without male issue. Philip the fifth, surnamed the Tall, brother to
Lewis the tenth. He also dyed without issue male. Charles the fourth, brother
to Lewis Hutin, and Philip the Tall. He also deceased without male issue.
Philip the sixth, surnamed of Valois, the next prince of the blood of the line
masculine; succeeding by the pretense of a Salique Law. In the reign hereof
began those long, and fierce wars betwixt the French, and Edward the third King
of England, descended of Isabel, daughter to Philip the fourth, pretending in
this right for the kingdoms: the issue whereof was the great overthrowes of
the French at the battails of Crecy, and Poictiers, the captivity of John,
French King, and the restitution of Normandy, and other parts of France taken
from the English by King Philip Augustus; lost notwithstanding not long after
to King Charles the fifth, with Aquitaine, and Guienne, until that time still
held by the English nation. John, French King, son to Philip the sixth, taken
prisoner in the English wars by Edward, Prince of Wales, son to Edward the
third, at the battle of Poictiers. Charles the fifth, son to John. He
recovered again the countries of Normandy, Aquitaine, and Guienne, and
whatsoever else the English held in the continent of France; the town, and
forts about Calis only excepted. Charles the sixth, son to Charles the fifth. In
the reign hereof fell out that fatal discord betwixt the houses of Orleans,
and Burgundy, by the advantage whereof, the weakness of this phrenetique king,
and their victory at Agincourt, (Charles the Dolphin disinherited, and Henry
the fifth, King of England, having married Catherinne his daughter, made Regent
of France) the English again got seized of the chiefest parts of the kingdom
hereof; Henry the sixth, King of England, being afterward crowned king of
France at Paris. Charles the seventh, son to Charles the sixth. After long
trouble, and wars (Philip the Good, and the faction of Burgundy reconciled)
he again cleared France of the English; the town, and country of Calis
excepted. Lewis the eleaventh, son to Charles the seventh. Charles the eight,
son to Lewis the eleaventh. He dyed sans issue. Lewis the twelth, Duke of
Orleans, and Valois, the next prince of the blood of the line masculine. He
married unto Anne, Duchess of Bretaigne, and deceased without heir male.
Francis the first, Duke of Engoulesme, the next prince of the blood of the race
masculine. He married unto Claude, Duchess of Bretaigne, daughter to Lewis
the twelth, and Anne, and incorporated Bretaigne to the crown of France. Henry
the second, son to Francis the first. He won the town, and country of Calis
from Mary, queen of England. Francis the second, son to Henry the second.
Charles the ninth, son to Henry the second, and brother to Francis the second.
Henry the third, son to Henry the second, and brother to Francis the second,
and Charles the ninth. These three brethren kings all dyed without issue; the
last princes of the house of Valois. Henry the fourth, King of Navarre, son to
Antony of Bourbon, Duke of Vendosme, and Ioane, queen of Navarre, the next
prince of the blood of the line masculine, descended from Lewis the ninth,
surnamed the Saint; slain at Paris by that wretched Assassinate Ravaillart.
Lewis the thirteenth, son to Henry the fourth, King of France, and Navarre now
reigning.

The Earldom of Flanders.
THis v. Les Antiquitez de Gaul Belgique per Richard de Walsenburg. livre. 3.
l' Histoire. de France par Bernard de Girard, Seigneur du Haillan. livre 5.
Chronique de Flandres par Denis Sauvage. Ponti Heuteri Comitum Flandriae
Genealogiam, and Commentarium.
belonged sometimes unto the kingdom of West-France, held still by the princes
thereof under the fief of this crown; quitted unto Philip and second, king of
Spain, and to the heirs of the house of Burgundy by Henry the second, French
King, and the late league of Cambray. Concerning the occasion, and beginning of
the name hereof we cannot relate any thing certainly. The estate was begun
after Wassenburg in the person of one Lideric Buc, unto whom the Country was
given with the title of Forester by Dagobert the first, French King; at that
time for the most part lying waste, and without almost inhabitants thorough the
vastnes of the woods, and marshes, and the pyracyes of the Danes. In the
person of Bauldwin, the last Forester, it was made an Earldom by the Emperor
Charles the Bauld, whose sister Judith he had married; in which style it has
ever since continued. It contained then besides modern Flanders the country
of Artois, and the parts of France, where now lie Vermanduois, and Boulognois,
or unto the Some. By Earl Philip the first, the parts of Vermanduois, Artois,
and Boulognois, were severed from Flanders (given in way of dowry with Isabel,
daughter to his sister Margaret, and Bauldwin Earl of Hainault, unto Philip
Augustus, French king,) since incorporated by this means unto the Crown of
France; part whereof became afterward the Earldom of Artois. The Princes
follow. Lideric Buc, the first Forester, son to Salvart, Prince of Diion,
created by Dagobert, French King according to Wassenburg in the year 611,
after Heuterus in the year 621. Antony Buc, son to Lideric Buc, slain by the
Danes. Boschart, son to Lideric Buc, and brother to Antony. He was driven out
by Theodoric, French king, having only left unto him the Lordship of Harlebec.
After this for about one hundred years space we read not of any Foresters, or
Lords hereof, the country in the mean time being miserably spoiled by the
Norman, and Danish pirates. Estored, Lord of Harlebec, afterward Forester, by
whom the Normans were expulsed. He lived in the time of Charles Martel, Regent
of France. Lideric the second, son to Estored. Inguelran, son to Lideric the
second. Odoacer, son to Inguelran. Bauldwin the first, son to Odoacer. Having
married Judith, sister to the Emperor Charles the Bauld, he was created by him
first Earl of Flanders, in whom ended the title of Foresters. Bauldwin the
second, son to Bauldwin the first. Arnold the first, son to Bauldwin the
second. Bauldwin the third, son to Arnold. Arnold the second, son to Bauldwin
the third. Bauldwin the fourth, son to Arnold the second. He had given unto
him the Island of Walcheren in Zealand by the Emperor Henry the second (the
cause of long contention betwixt the houses of Flanders, and Holland; quitted
afterward by Earl Guye of Flanders unto Florentius the fifth, Earl of
Holland. Bauldwin the fifth, son to Bauldwin the fourth. Bauldwin the sixth, son
to Bauldwin the fifth. He married Richilde, Countess of Hainault, daughter to
Regnier the third, uniting for a time those two Earledomes in his succession,
and family. He deceased in the year 1070. Arnold the third, son to Bauldwin
the sixth, Earl of Flanders, and Hainault; slain in battle sans issue by his
Uncle Robert. Robert the first, son to Bauldwin the fifth, and Uncle to Arnold
the third. His nephew Bauldwin, brother to Arnold the third, succeeded in the
Earldom of Hainault; by which means those two estates were again divided.
Robert the second, Earl of Flanders, son to Robert the first. Bauldwin the
seventh, son to Robert the second. Wanting heirs, he bequeathed Flanders unto
Charles surnamed the Good, son to Canutus, king of Denmark, and Adela. Charles
surnamed the Good, son to Canutus, king of Denmark, and Adela, daughter to
Robert the first. He dyed sans issue. William the first, son to Robert Duke of
Normandy, eldest son to William, surnamed the conqueror, Duke of Normandy, and
king of England, and Maude, wife unto the Conqueror, daughter to Bauldwin the
fifth, and sister to Bauldwin the sixth. He enjoyed not long the Earldom,
expulsed in regard of his tyranny, and cruelty. Theodoric, son to Theodoric,
Earl of Elsatz, and of Gertrud, daughter to Robert the first; William the
Norman being driven out, and slain. He deceased in the year 1168. Philip,
son to Theodoric. Margaret, eldest sister to Philip. She married unto Bauldwin
the sixth, Earl of Hainault, and Namur; uniting again these two Earledomes in
one family. Bauldwin the ninth, Earl of Flanders, and Hainault, son to
Bauldwin, and Margaret. Ioane, Countess of Flanders, and Hainault, daughter to
Bauldwin the ninth. She dyed sans issue. Margaret the second, Countess of
Flanders, and Hainault, daughter to Bauldwin the ninth, and younger sister to
Ioane. She married unto William of Bourbon, Lord of Dampierre. She had before
this marriage by Buscart (Prior of S. Peter in L'isle, her gurdian) a base son,
named John d'Avesnes, succeeding afterward in Hainault. William the second,
son to William of Bourbon, Lord of Dampier, and Margaret, Earl only of
Flanders; John d'Avesnes, son to Margaret, and Buscart, by composition amongst
the brethren succeeding in Hainault. He dyed without issue. Guy, Earl of
Flanders, son to Margaret, and William Lord of Dampier, younger brother to
William the second. Robert the third, son to Guy, Earl of Flanders. Lewis the
first, son to Lewis, son to Robert the third, and Mary, daughter to James,
Earl of Nevers, and Retel. He married unto Margaret, heir of the Earledomes
of Burgundy, and Artois. He was slain, fighting against the English in the
battle of Crecy. Lewis the second, surnamed Malan from a castle, thus called,
the place of his birth; Earl of Flanders, Artois, and Burgundy; son to Lewis
the first, and Margaret, daughter to Philip the Long, second king, and Ioane,
Countess of Artois, and Burgundy. Margaret, Countess of Flanders, Burgundy,
and Artois, daughter to Lewis the second. She married unto Philip de Valois,
surnamed the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, son to John, French king; by means
whereof these three Estates descended upon the house of Burgundy, afterward of
Austria.

The Earldom of ARTOIS.
THis took the name from v. Ponti Heuteri Comitum Atrebatensium Genealog. and
Comment.
the Atrebates, the ancient inhabitants, or otherwise from Arras, the chief
town. It was sometimes a part of Flanders, given with other pieces anciently
belonging to that Earldom, and now incorporated with France, by Earl Philip
unto Philip Augustus, French king, with Isabel of Hainault, daughter unto his
sister Margaret, and Bauldwin the sixth, Earl of Hainault, wife to Philip
Augustus. Lewis the eight, French king; son to Philip Augustus, and Isabel,
deceasing, bequeathed this country unto his youngest son Robert, to be held with
this style under the fief, and sovereignty of the kings of France; created
first Earl of Artois by his brother Lewis the ninth, French king. By the
marriage of Margaret, heir of the Counties of Burgundy, and Austria unto Lewis
the first, Earl of Flanders, it descended upon the house of Flanders, carried
afterward to those of the Dukes of Burgundy, and Austria, wherein now it
continues. The princes follow. Robert the first, fourth son to Lewis the
Eight, French king. He deceased in the Holy Land in the year 1249. Robert the
second, son to Robert the first. Maude, daughter to Robert the second,
Countess of Artois; the Parliament of Paris thus adiudging for her against
Robert, son to her brother Philip of Artois. She married unto Othelin, or
Otho the fourth, Earl of Burgundy. Ioane, eldest daughter to Otho the fourth,
and Maude. She married unto Philip, surnamed the Long* French King. Margaret
eldest daughter to Philip, French King, and Ioane, Countess of Artois, and
Burgundy. She married unto Lewis the first, Earl of Flanders. Lewis the
second, surnamed Malan, son to Lewis the first, and Margaret; Earl of Artois,
Flanders, and Burgundy, from whom these descended upon the house of the Dukes
of Burgundy, and Austria.

In this manner the rich country of Gaul, or France is become at this day
divided into, and contains the whole, or parts of 6 different Free
Commonwealths, and governments, not any wise now subject one to another. 1 the
provinces, or countries subject to the confederate States of the Netherlands. 2
to the princes of the house of Burgundy, and Austria. 3 to the empire, or
kingdom of the Germans. 4 to the Popes. 5 to the union, and confederacy of the
Switzers. 6 and the kingdom of France. To the confederate states of the
Low Countries belong all Holland, Zealandt, Vtreicht, the greatest part of
Gelderlandt, the towns of Sluis, Bergen upon Zome, Steenbergen, and Grave,
together with the Countries of Zutphen, Over-Ysel, West-Freislandt, and
Groningen, lying without the circuit of the ancient Gaul, and beyond the
Rhijn in Germany. To the princes of Austria, and Burgundy appertain all
Artois, Hainault, Namur, Limburg, and Luxemburg, the greatest parts of
Flanders, and Brabant, and part of Gelderlandt. Unto the Empire (held by their
princes under the right, and soveraignety hereof, and for the most part yet
coming unto, and acknowledging the Imperial Diets) the Free Countye of
Burgundy, immediately now possessed by the princes of the house of Burgundy,
and Austria, the Dukedomes of Lorraine, Zweibruck, Cleve, Gulick, and Savoy,
the Palatinate of the Rhijn, Elsass, Sungow, and the towns, and Bishoprics of
Mentz, Colen, Trier, Luick, Spire, Worms, and Strasburg. To the confederacy of
the Switzers the Cantons, confederate states, and Prefectureships before
mentioned. To the Popes the city, and country of Avignon. And to the kingdom
of France the rest of Gaul, or ancient France; divided now from Italy, the
German Empire, and the Netherlands with the Alps, and with the rivers of the
Soasne, Meuse, and the Some: our present subject.

The Country contains (as has been before related) 24 greater devisions, or
provinces of Bretaigne, Normandy, Picardy, Champaigne, Brie, France Special,
Beausse, Poictou, Engoulmois, Berry, Bourbonois, Forest, and Beauiolois,
Lionois, Auvergne, Limousin, Perigord, Guienne, Gascoigne, Quercy, Rovergne,
Languedoc, Provence, Daulphinie, and Bourgongne. Of these Poictou, Berry,
Auvergne, Limousin, Perigord, Guienne, Quercy, and Revergne have been thus
named from their first, and more ancient inhabitants, the Pictones, Bituriges
Cubi, Auverni, Lemovices, Petrocorij, Aquitani, Cadurci, and Rhuteni:
Bretaigne, Normandy, Gascoigne, Languedoc, Bourgongne, and France Special from
the Northern, and barbarous Nations, planted in them, the Bretons Insulaires,
Normans, Vascones, Goths, Burgundians, and Frenchmen: Engoulmois, Bourbonois,
Forest, and Lionois, from their chief towns, Engoulesme, Bourbon, Furs, and
Lions: Champaigne from its more plain, and even situation: Brie from the
shadines thereof, covered with trees, and woods: Beausse from its pleasure, and
fertility: Daulphinie from the princes thereof, styled Daulphins of Vienne:
Provence from the ancient name of the Country in the time of Caesar Vlterior
Provincia Iul. Caes. Comm. Belli Gal. l. 1. c. 8.
, being part of the further Roman Province of the Gauls. The occasion of the
name of Picardy we cannot of any certainety determine. Their descriptions
follow according to their Resorts, or Parliaments. L. D.

OF THE STATE OF EVROPE. The X Book.
COntaining a Chorographicall description of France.

THE PARLIAMENT OF RENES.
COmprehending only the Dukedom of Bretaigne.

BRETAIGNE. BRITANNIA.

HAving upon the North, West, and South-West the French, and British Oceans;
upon the South Aniou, and Poictou; and upon the East, Maine, and Normandy. It
contains some 200 French leagues in compass. The country is pleasant, and
fruitful, full of most delightful woods, downs, meadows, and of all other
pleasing, and profitable varieties; wines, and the hotter fruits excepted,
which, as neither does Normandy, this colder clime yields not, or not to any
purpose. It is divided into the Higher, and the Lower Bretaigne; severed after
Merula by a line drawn from Chasteau-Audron, a town near to St. Brieu, and
extended betwixt Corlay, and Quintain toward the farthest part of the Bay of
Vannes unto the river Vilaine; or, as Bertrand does delineate in his map
hereof, from Port Toriao upon the seacoast nere St. Brieu, betwixt Corlay, and
Quintain, unto the meetings of the rivers Vilaine, and the Aoust, and beyond
these unto the mouth of the Loire, nere the town of Croisic. Chiefer towns
here are Breast, a noted port, and strong town of war, the key, and chief
bulwark of the Lower Bretaigne, upon a spacious creeky bay of the Western
Ocean. The haven is the fairest, and largest in France, containing many
creekes, Fanum D. Pauli. Opidum Tricoriense. lon. 17. g. lat. 49. g. Merc.
and inlets of the sea, resembling so many several harbors, able to contain
an infinite number of shipping. St Pol de Leon, (civitas Osismorum of
Antoninus.) Treguier: both of them seacoast towns, and Bishops seas. Morlaix,
a well frequented port upon the same seacoast. The country about S. Pol were
the Ossismi of Antoninus, the Osissimi of Caesar, the Osismij of Strabo,
Ptolemie, and Pliny. Betwixt S. Pol, and Breast lies the noted promontory, le
Four (Gobaeum of Ptolemie.) Kemper-Corentin (civitas Corisopitum of Antoninus)
a Bishops sea, and the chief town in Cournovaille, upon the river Odet near
unto the cape Penmarch a noted promontory upon the South-west point of
Bretaigne, Cornubia.
answerable to le Four. Kimperle. Conscerneau. Poudagon: all three in
Cournovaille, or the Diocese of Kemper, the Curiosolites of Caesar, the
Cariosuelites of Pliny, and the Corisopiti of Antoninus. Hitherto, or in the
Dioceses of St Pol, Treguier, and Kemper (which take up all the Western part
of Bretaigne almost as far as St Brieu, or Vannes) the inhabitants speak
only the British language, Blavetum. Venetia. long. 18. g. lat. 48. g. Market.
for this cause named by the French la Bretaigne Bretonant. Blavet, a little
haven town at the mouth of the river thus called. Vannes (Dariorigum of
Ptolemie, and civitas Venetum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, seated upon a
goodly bay, nere unto the mouth of the river Vilaine. The town is old,
ruinous, and much decayed. The country hereabouts were the Veneti of Strabo,
Caesar, Ptolemy, Pliny, and Antoninus; from whom proceeded the ancient Veneti
in Italy, seated upon the coast of the sea Adriaticke, drawn thither in those
passages of the Gauls under Belovesus, and occasioning afterward the name of
the famous city, and people of the Venetians. In the time of Caesar they were
the mightiest people, and of greatest authority amongst the Armorici, strong in
shipping, and of great skill, and experience in seafaring matters. Nere
hereunto, in an Island within the bay hereof, stands the strong castle of
Sussinio. Guerrande. Croisic: little haven towns beyond the river Vilaine, at
the mouth of the Loire. Nantes (Condivincum of Ptolemie, Nannetum, lon. 19. g.
lat. 48. g. Merc.
and civitas Namnetum of Antoninus) a Bishops sea, and Bailliage; seated upon
the Loire. The city is large, fair, strong, and populous, the chiefest in
Bretaigne. The country hereabouts were the Nannetes of Caesar, and Pliny, the
Namnitae of Ptolemie, and the Namneti of Antoninus. Clisson, a strong town and
castle in the Duchy of Raiz; which is the part of Bretaigne, lying beyond the
Loire, or betwixt that river, and Poictou. Moncontour. S. Brieu, a Bishops sea,
and a well frequented port; seated upon the English channel betwixt two little
rivulets, Fanum D. Brioci. lon. 18. g. lat. 49. g.
Trieu, and Arguennon, supposed by Bertrand to be the rivers Titius, and
Argenis of Ptolemie. Lamballe. The people hereabouts are excellent deluers, or
pioners, unto which trade they chiefly addict themselves; thought by Bertrand
to be the Ambiliates of Caesar. Hitherto, or in the dioceses of Vannes, Nantes,
and S. Brieu, both the French, and British tongues are spoken, or, as in
Chesne, a mixed language of these two; which part for this cause is named by
the French la Bretaigne Mesle. Dinan, a rich, and pleasant town upon the river
Rance. Fanum S. Machlovij. lon. 19 g. l. 49. g. Mer.
S. Malo, a Bishops sea, and a noted Port, strongly seated upon a rock within
the sea, wherewith at every flowing water it is encompassed, being joined to
the continent only by an artificial narrow causey, or neck of land. Dola.
Montfort in the diocese of S. Malo. Dol, a Bishops sea, vnwholsomely situated
amongst marshes. Rhedonum. lon. 19. g. la 48. g. Market.
Renes (Condate of Ptolemie, and civitas Redonum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea,
and Ba^lliage, and the Parliament of Bretaigne. The city is not very large
(containing only some mile, and an half in compass) yet strong, and
populous, accounted the next after Nantes. The country hereabouts were the
Rhedones of Caesar, Ptolemie, and Pliny, the Redones of Antoninus.
Chasteau-Briand. La Vitre. Fougeres upon the river Covesnon: strong frontire
places toward Normandy, Maine, and Aniou. In this more Easterly part of
Bretaigne toward France, or in the diocese of S. Malo, Dol, and Renes, the
inhabitants speak only the French; named hereupon la Bretaigne Gallicant.

THE PARLIAMENT OF ROVEN.
COntaining only the Dukedom of Normandy.

NORMANDY. Normannia.

HAving upon the West, the river Covesnon, dividing it from Bretaigne; upon the
North, the English Channel; upon the East Picardie; and upon the South, and
South-East, the countries of Maine, and France Special. The country for
fertility, and large extent, number, strength, and state of towns, the
nobility, multitude of people, their wit, courage, and valor above the
ordinary of the nation may deservedly be accounted the chief Province of the
kingdom. It is divided into the Higher, and the Lower Normandy, whereof this
contains the seacoasts, the other the more inland parts. The Lower Normandy
again is subdivided into the parts, called la Caux, lying betwixt the Seine,
and Picardie; and the countries Bessin, and Constantin, contained betwixt the
Seine, and Bretaigne. Chiefer towns are Auranches (Ingena of Ptolemie,
Abrincanta. lon. 23. g. lat. 50. g. Market.
and civitas Abrincantum of Antoninus,) now a Bishops sea, seated upon a
scalpe, or rock, overlooking the English Channel, from the which it is not
far distant, as neither from Bretaigne. The country hereabouts were the
Abrincatui of Ptolemie, and Pliny, the Abrincanti of Antoninus. Constantia.
Constances (Constantia of Antoninus) a Bishops sea, and Bailiage, naming the
country, called from hence le Pais Constantin. The town ever since the English
wars has layen opne, without either wall, or fortificatio^ to defend it;
contrary to the custom of France, and manner of the French cities. Caesaris.
Bur. gum.
Cherbourg, a strong seacoast town in a sandy shote, unapt to plant Ordinance
upon, making it thereby uneasy to be besieged. It was the last place, the
English held in Normandy in the unfortunate reign of king Henry the sixth.
Baiocae.
S. Lo, a strong inland place, upon the river Vire. Bayeux (civitas Baiocassium
of Antoninus, Cadomum. lon. 21. g. lat. 50. g. Merc.
) a Bishops sea; naming le Pais Bessin. Caen, a Bishops sea, and Bailliage upon
the rivers Ouden, and Orne. The city is large, populous, and strong, the
second of the province, graced with an University, founded by Henry the fifth,
king of England. In an Abbey church in the subvrbs hereof are seen the tombs,
statues, and epitaphs of William the Conqueror, the first king of England of
the race of the Normans, and of Maude his wife, Falaisa. lon. 21. g. lat. 49.
g. Merc.
their enterred. Falaise upon the river Ante, the country of the Conqueror,
borne here of a mean Burgers daughter. The town is strong, in show resembling
a ship, whose poupe might be the castle, seated upon a high rock at the end
hereof. Alenconium. Sagium.
Alencon, a Bailliage. Hereof were entitled the Dukes of Alencon. Sees
(civitas Salarum, and Saiorum of Antoninus) a Bishops sea, Lexouium.
upon the river Orne. Lyseux (civitas Lexoviorum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea.
The country here abouts were the Lexovij of Caesar, Pliny, and Antoninus, and
the Lexubij of Ptolemy. Eureux, a Bishops sea, and Bailliage (Mediolanium of
Ptolemy,) upon the river Iton. The town is rich, populous, and flourishing;
the third in Normandy. The country were the Eburonices of Caesar, the Aulercij
Eburaici of Ptolemy, Gisortium. Rothomagum lon. 23. lat. 50. g. Merc.
and the Aulerci Eburovices of Pliny. Gisors, a Bailliage, and a strong
frontire town toward France special. Roven (Rothomagus of Ptolemy, and
civitas Rotomagensium of Antoninus,) upon the Seine, an Archbishops sea, and
the Parliament, and chief city of the country. The town is rich, great,
populous, and well traded by Merchants, by means of the river, here navigable,
the best of the kingdom after Paris, and Lions. The country were the
Venellocasses of Caesar, the Vellocasses of Pliny, Portus gratiae.
the Veneliocassij of Ptolemie, the Rotomagenses of Antoninus. Haure de Grace,
a noted Port, and strong town of war, at the mouth of the Seine, environed
upon the other sides with the sea, and with deep vnpassible marshes toward
the land. The town is new, built by king Francis the first to affront the
English. In the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth of most famous
memory it was surprised by the English, and for a time held by that nation for
Calice, detained by the French; surrendered thorough sickness amongst the
soldiers, and for want of fresh water, which is altogether conveyed hither
from the hills without by conduit pipes, (cut of by the enemy,) the only
weakness of the town. Within the land not far of is the town of Yvetot,
sometimes styled a kingdom in regard of the ancient exemptions, and
privileges of the Lords thereof from al homage, and subjection to the kings of
France. It is now a principality in the house of Bellay. Diepa. lon. 23. g.
lat. 50. Mer. Fanum. S. Valerij.
Diepe at the mouth of a little river, so called; a well frequented Port;
especially for the trade of the West Indies, and New Foundland. S. Valerie, an
other haven town; lying betwixt Diepe, and Havre de Grace. Caux, the country
hereof, were the Caletes of Caesar, the Caleti of Strabo.

THE PARLIAMENT OF PARIS.
COmprehending Picardie, Champaigne, Brie, France Special, Beausse, Poictou,
Engoulmois, Berry, Bourbonois, Forest, Beaujolois, Lionois, and Auvergne.

PICARDIE. Picardia.

BOunded upon the West with Normandy, and the British Ocean; upon the North
with Artois, and Hainault of the Low Countries; upon the East with Luxemburg,
and Lorraine; and upon the South with Champaigne, and France Special. The
country is fruitful in corn, the storehouse of Paris. Chiefer towns are
Abbe-ville, a Bishops sea, and Bailliage, the best town of Ponthieu upon the
river Some. Albatis-villa. Monstreuliu^.
Monstreul. Nere hereunto is Crecie, the French Cannae, famous for their great
overthrow, and the victory of the English in the reign of Philip the sixth.
These two lie in Ponthieu, which is a low fenny country, named thus from the
many bridges made over the moorish flats thereof. Bononia Maritima.
Boulogne (Portus Gessoriacus of Caesar, Gesoriacum Navale of Ptolemie, Portus
Morinorum of Pliny, and civitas Bononensium of Antoninus,) a Bailliage, and
Bishops sea upon the English channel. The town has been made strong,
especially since the surprisall thereof by K. Henry the eight, and the English;
divided into the Higher, and the Lower Boulogne, distant about an hundred paces
asunder, and severally walled, and fortified. The haven serves rather for
passage into England, then for traficke, and negotiation. The country
neighboring is named from hence le Pais Boulognois (Pagus Gessoriacus of
Pliny, and the Bononenses of Antoninus, part of the Morini of Caesar, Strabo,
and Pliny.) Calais (Portus Iccius of Caesar, Caletum. lon. 16. g. 2. m. lat.
52. g. Clav.
Portus Britannicus Morinorum of Pliny, and Promontorium Itium of Ptolemy,) a
strong seacoast town, at the entrance of the English channel, and the borders
of Artois. After the battaill of Crecy, and a whole years siege, it was taken
by Edward the third, king of England; held afterward, and peopled by the
English, with the neighboring forts, and towns of Oye, Hams, Ardres, and
Guisnes until the late less prosperous reign of Queen Mary, when it was
surprised by Henry the second, French king. Here the passage is shortest
betwixt the continent of Europe, Fretum Caletanum. Ambiana.
and the Island of Great Bretaigne; accounted some thirty miles over, named by
the French le Pas de Calais. Amiens (Samarobrina of Caesar, Samarobriga of
Ptolemy, and civitas Ambianensis of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and Bailliage,
and the chief city in Picardie; upon the river Some, with whose divided
streams it is round encompassed, the occasion (as some conjecture) of the
name. The town is strong, and well fortified, the bulwark of France on this
part toward Netherland. The country were the Ambiani of Caesar, Pliny, and
Ptolemy, occasioning most likely the name of the town. Mons Desiderij.
Corbie. Peronne, upon the Some. Roie. Mondidier: strong frontire places,
opposing the same enemy. The three last lie in the district, or territory,
named Santerre. Noion (Noviodunum of Caesar,) a Bishops sea, Fanum S. Quintini.
the country of reverent Calvin. S. Quintini (Augusta Romanduorum of Ptolemie,
and civitas Veromannorum of Antoninus,) a strong town in the same brother, the
chief of the country of Vermanduois. Fere, a strong town against the same
enemy, the chief of the country of Tartenois, part of the Vermanduois, (the
Veromandui of Caesar, and Pliny, the Rhomandues of Ptolemy, Laudunnm.
and the Veromanni of Antoninus.) Laon, a Bishops sea. The Bishop is one of the
12 Peers of France. Soissons (Augusta Vessonum of Ptolemie) a Bishops sea upon
the river Aisne; Augusta Suessonum.
the last place the Romans held in Gaul, under Siagrius driven out by Clovys,
he fifth king of the French. Afterward in the division of the French Monarchy
by the sons, and posterity of Clovys the Great, it was made the head of a
particular kingdom, called from hence the Kingdom of Soissons. Soissonois, or
the country hereof, were the Suessones of Caesar, the Suessiones of Strabo, and
Pliny, the Vessones of Ptolemy, and the Suessiani of Antoninus; with Noion, and
Laon, now part of the more general country, or name of Vermanduois. Retel,
frontiring upon Lorraine. From hence the neighboring country is called le Pais
Retelois. Guise, a strong town, and castle upon the same border, and the river
Oyse in the particular country of Tirasche. Hereof were entitled the late Dukes
of Guise, descended from the house of Lorraine.

CHAMPAIGNE. Campania.

SVrrounded with Picardy, Barrois, Lorraine, Charolois, the dukedom of
Burgundy, and France Special. The country is plain, pleasant, and fruitful,
affording plenty of corn, wines, shadie woods, meadows; rivers, and all sorts
of pleasing and useful varieties. Catalaunum.
Chiefer towns are Chaalon (Civitas Catalaunorum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea,
and Pairry upon the Marne. The country about Chaalon were the Catalauni of
Antoninus. In the neighboring plains (Campi Catalaunici of Cassiodorus) was
fought that great and famous battle betwixt Aetius, general of the Romans,
for the Emperor Valentinian the third, assisted by the Goths, and other
barbarous nations; Rhemi.
and Attila, king of the Huns. Rheims (Durocortum of Caesar, Durocottum of
Ptolemy, and Ciuitas Remorum of Antoninus) a Metropolitan sea, a Bailliage, and
the chief city of Champaigne; seated upon the river Vasle. The Archbishop is
one of the. 12. Peers of France. Hither come the French kings to be
consecrated. The country were the Rhemi of Caesar, Lignium. Victriacum.
Strabo, Pliny, Ptolemie, and Antoninus. Ligny upon the river Sault. Vitry,
surnamed le Franeois, upon the rivers Sault, and Marne; the Bailliag^, and
chief town of Parthois. Didier: Perte, naming the country Parthois: Fanum. 5.
Defiderij. Ager Pertensis. Territorium. Vallense.
both seated in Parthois, and upon the Marne. Ian-ville, a Seneschaussee, upon
the Marne in the country of Vallage. In the castle hereof, magnificently seated
upon the top of an inaccessable high hill, is seen the the tomb of Claude,
Duke of Guise, one of the most costly monuments in France. Vassey, lying also
in Vallage, upon the river Bloise, enjoying a most pleasant situation; Chaumont*
environed with shady forests, and woods. Chaumont upon the Marne, the
Bailliage for the country of Bassigny. The castle here is very strong, Trecae.
mounted upon an high, and steep scalpe, or rock. Trois (Augustomana of
Ptolemie, and civitas Tricaffium of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and Bailliage;
upon the Seine. The city is rich, fair, strong, and well traded, honored by
some with the title of the daughter of Paris; the chiefest in Champeigne after
Reims. The country about Trois were the Tricassij of Ptolemy, the Trecasses of
Pliny, the Tricasses of Antoninus. Ivigny upon the river Yonne. Senones.
Sens, (civitas Senonum of Antoninus) upon the Yonne, and Archbishops sea. Le
Pais Senonois, or the country of Sens, were part of the Senones of Caesar,
Ptolemy, Pliny, and Strabo (for they seemed to have been extended much
farther,) from whom descended those warlike Senones of Gaul Cisalpina, under
Brennus taking, and sacking Rome. Langres (Andomatunum of Ptolemy) a Bishops
sea, Lingones.
and Pairrye in the mountainous part of the Vauge; frontiring upon the Dukedom
of Burgundy. Le Pais Langroin, or the hilly country hereof, were the Lingones
of Caesar, Strabo, and Pliny, the Longones of Ptolemy, Vand'oeuvre, a strong
town and fortress in the same mountainous region, near to Langres;
coniectured from the name to have been build by the Vandals. Near hereunto is
the head of the great river of the Seine.

BRIE. Bria.

IT is a coing of land betwixt the rivers Seine, and Marne, and the countries
of Champaigne, and France Special. It is like to Champaigne, plain, and
fruitful, but more close, and full of woods, in regard of their shade, and
the shelter they yield, seeming to have given the name hereunto. The towns of
better note, are Provins (Agendicum of Caesar, and Agedicum of Ptolemy) a
Bailliage upon the river Yonne, seated in a most healthful, and pleasant
country, amongst other fragrant plants, and flowers, abounding with roses,
transplanted for their fairness into neighboring regions, and named Provins
roses. The country about Provins were part of the Senones, before mentioned.
Montereau, a strong town, and castle at the confluence of the rivers Seine,
Castellum Theodorici. Meldae. lon. 23. g. 30. m. lat. 48. g. 50. m. Clav.
and Yonne. Chasteau-Thierry, a Bailliage, upon the Marne; the chief town in
Hault Brie. Meaux (Iatinum of Ptolemy, and civitas Melduorum of Antoninus,) a
Bishops sea, and Bailliage, upon the Marne. Nere hereunto is Monceaux, a
magnificent Palace, built by the Queene-mother, Katherine de Medices. The
country about Meaux were the Meldae of Caesar, Strabo, and Ptolemie, the Meldi
of Pliny, the Meldui of Antoninus.

FRANCE SPECIAL. Francia.

HAving upon the North, Normandy, and part of Picardy; upon the East,
Champaigne, and Brie; and upon the South, and West, Beausse. The country is
plain for the most part, yet here, and there distinguished with hills, and
woods; generally very fruitful, and pleasant, Gastinois excepted, which part
is dry, barren, and ill inhabited. It contains the Prevoste, or County of
Paris, the Duchy of Valois, Heurepoix, and Gastinois. Chiefer towns are Senlis
(Silvanectum of Antoninus,) Siluanectum. Valesia.
a Bishops sea, and Bailliage, and the chief of Valois; seated in a shady, and
woody country. The country about Senlis were the Subanecti of Ptolemie, the
Vlbanectes of Pliny, the Silvanectes of Antoninus. Compendiu^.
Forte-Meillon upon the river Ourq. Compeigne upon the river Oyse, an ancient
seiour of the first French kings, invited thorough the pleasure, and commodity
of hunting, which the neighboring forests, and woods afford. Bellouacum. lon.
23. g. lat. 49. g. 30. m. Clav.
Beauvois (Caesaromagus of Ptolemy, and civitas Bellovacorum of Antoninus,) a
Bishops sea, and Pairrye upon the river Losne. The town is fair, large, and
well traded. Le Pais Beauvoisin, or the country of Beauvois, were anciently
(but of larger extent) the Bellovaci of Caesar, Strabo, Pliny, Ptolemy, and
Antoninus. It is now part of the greater country, Fanum. S. Dionysij.
and more general name of Valois. S. Denis, the chief town in the Isle of
France, part of the Prevoste of Paris. In the fair Abbey church hereof the
French kings lie enterred. Possiacum. Fanu^ S. Germani.
Poissy upon the Seine in the Isle of France. Upon the Seine nere unto Poissy
stands S. German, en Lay, one of the royal houses of the French kings.
Paris (Lutetia of Caesar, Lutetia. Ion. 23. g. 30. m. lat. 48. g 40. m. Clav.
and Strabo, and Lucotecia of Ptolemie,) upon the Seine, the chief Parliament,
and city of the kingdom, and the ordinary residence of the kings of France,
honored with an Episcopal sea, and with an ancient, and famous University,
founded by Charles the Great, whose first Professors were Alcuinus, and the
English. Through so many advantages the city for greatness, populousness,
state, and all kind of magnificence chalengeth now the second place in
Europe, containing some six miles in compass about the walls; lying almost
in a round form, and by the Seine divided into La ville, which is the greatest
part, situated upon the right shore of the Seine, beautified chiefelie with the
Louvre, the royal palace, and residence of the kings; L' Vniversite upon a
more high, and rising ground upon the South, and left shore of the river, the
part dedicated to the Muses, containing some 50 Colleges; and La Cite,
comprehending the Island of the Seine betwixt these two, the ancient Lutetia of
Caesar, (the rest of the town accrewing since the fixed residence here of the
kings) adorned chiefly with the fair, and magnificent Cathedral Church of
Nostre Dame, and the greater Palace, the seat of the Parliament, and courts of
Judicature. Le Parisis, or the country hereof, were the Parisij of Caesar, and
Ptolemy, Melodunum.
the Parrhisij of Pliny, and Parrisij of Strabo. Corbueil at the confluence of
the rivers Seine, and Essone* Melun (Melodunum of Caesar,) upon the Seine,
Fons-bellae-a quae.
the Bailliage, and chief town in Heurepoix. Not far off is
Fountaine-belle-eau, one of the royal houses of the kings, named thus from the
fresh streams and springs of water, amongst the which it is seated, standing
otherwise in a solitary, and barren country, forrest-like, stored cheifely with
woods, serving for hunting. These three lie in Heurepoix. Nemours, the chief
town in Gastinois upon the river Loing. The town is mean, Stampae.
as in a barren soil. Estampes also in Gastinois, in the mid way betwixt
Paris, and Orleans.

BEAVSSE. Belsia.

BOunded upon the East with France Special; upon the North with Normandy;
upon the West with Bretaigne; and upon the South with Poictou, Berry, and
Nivernois. It is divided into the Higher Beausse, containing Le Pais Chartrain,
Perch, Maine, and Aniou; the Middle Beausse, whose parts are Touraine, the
Duchy of Vendosme, the County Dunois, and the Countries Blesien, and
Tonneres; and the Lower Beausse, containing Orleannois, Lorris, and Soulogne.
Of these Touraine is extraordinarily fruitful, pleasant, and happy; as is the
whole tract of the Loire. Aniou is more hilly, yet very fruitful, and no less
pleasant, affording plenty of white wines, whose hills send out almost
infinite streams, and rivers, received into the Loire, accounted at some 40
greater besides lesser rivulets. The rest of Beausse is commonly more dry, then
the ordinary of France, yet abounding in corn, especially le Pais Chartrain.
Chiefer towns here are Montfort l' Amaulry, a Bailliage, near unto France
Special. Dreux upon the river Eureux; supposed to have been thus named from
the ancient Druides, the seat of their Parliaments, Carnutum. lon. 23. g. lat.
49. Merc.
or sessions for matters of justice. Chartres (Autricum of Ptolemie, and
Carnorum civitas of Antoninus,) upon the river Eureux, a Bishops sea, and
Bailliage, and the chief town of le Pais Chartrain. These two lie in
Chartrain, (the Carnutes of Caesar, and Strabo, the Carnuti of Pliny, the
Carnutae of Ptolemie, and the Carni of Antoninus.) Nogent le Rotrou, the chief
of le Perch Govet, or of the Lower Perch. Cenomanni.
Mortaigne, the chief of the Higher Perch. Man's (Vindinum of Ptolemie, and
Cenomannorum civitas of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and Bailliage, and the
chief town of Maine upon the rivers Huine, and Sartre. Maine upon the river
Maine, naming the Dukes of Maine of the house of Guise, and Lorraine. These two
lie in the country of Maine (the Cenomanni of Caesar, Andegavum. lon. 19. g.
lat. 47. g. 20. m. Clav.
Pliny, and Ptolemie. Angiers (Iuliomagus of Ptolemie, and civitas Andicavorum
of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and Seneschaussee, the chief town of Aniou;
upon the river Sartre. Here flourishes an University, founded by Lewis Duke
of Aniou, son to John French king. The city is fair, and of a large
circuit, containing some 15 parishes. Saumur seated also in Aniou, and upon the
Loire, a strong town. Hereof was sometimes governor the learned Philip de
Mournay, Lord of Plessis. The ancient inhabitants of Aniou were the Andes of
Caesar, the Andegavi of Pliny, the Andicani of Ptolemie, the Andicavi of
Antoninus. Chinon upon the river Vigenne, Insula Bouchardi.
Isle-Bouchard. Palmie. Lochez upon the river Indre. The castle hereof is one
of the strongest places of the kingdom, mounted upon the top of a steep, Mons
Ricardi.
and high rock, environed with deep ditches. Mont-Richard upon the river Chez,
inioying a pleasant situation; surrounded with mossie rocks, Turonum.
and sweet smelling meadows. Tours (Caesarodunum of Ptolemie, and civitas
Turonum of Antoninus,) an Archbishops sea, and Bailliage, and the chief town
of Touraine; upon the river Loire. The city is rich, fair, and well traded,
situated in a most fruitful, and pleasant country. Here begun Les Antiquit and
Recherches de France par Andre du Chesne (en la ville de Tours.
first after Chesne the name of Hugonots, vainly given to them of the reformed
Religion, as the Disciples of an Apparition, or Spirit, called by the people le
Roy Hugon, or king Hugh, supposed by night to haunt the streets; imposed upon
them in regard of their nightly meetings during the time of their restraint,
Ambosia lon. 20. g. 35. m. lat. 47. g. 35. m. Clav.
and persecution. Amboise, a pleasant town upon the Loire. Londun. These from
Chinon lie in Touraine (the Turones of Caesar, Pliny, and Antoninus, the
Turupij of Ptolemie.) Blois, a Bailliage, the chief of le Pais Blesien;
unevenly seated upon the Loire. Here for the extraordinary delight, and
pleasure of the air, and neighboring country, the French kings use much to
reside, with Amboise the ordinary nursery of their children, much resorted unto
for the same cause, and inhabited by the nobility. Near hereunto is the
great, and magnificent castle of Chambourg, Blesae.
one of the royal houses of the French kings. Vendosme upon the Loire;
Vindocinum.
the chief town of the Duchy of Vendosme. Chasteau-dun, Castrodunu^.
the chief town of the county Dunois, mounted upon the top of an high hill,
Comitatatus
near unto the confluence of the rivers Loire, and Aigre. Tonneres. Dunensis.
Lorris: naming the countries Lorris, and Tonneres. Orleans (Genabum of Caesar,
Aurelia. Ion. 20. g. 40. m. lat. 47. g. 10. m. Clav.
and Strabo, Cenabum of Ptolemie, and civitas Aurelianorum of Antoninus,) a
Bishops sea, and Bailliage, and a noted University for the civil laws,
founded by Philip le Bell; situated upon the Loire. The city is populous, rich,
and beautified with fair, and goodly buildings. Here the best French is
spoken. The neighboring vast forest of Orleans, contains 12 French miles in
length, or 24 English. Iargeau. Clery Nostre Dame. These three lie in
Orleannois, noted for excellent wines, (the Aureliani of Antoninus, part of the
Carnutes of Caesar.) Romorantin upon the river Souldre; the chief town in
Soulogne. Millanzay in Soulogne.

POICTOV.
HAving upon the East, Touraine, Berry, and Limousin, upon the North Bretaigne,
and Aniou; upon the West the Ocean; and upon the South Engoulmois, and
Xaintogne. The country is large, populous, and fruitful. The people are
naturally more rude then the rest of their countrymen; yet subtle, crafty, and
very quarelsome, vncivillie given to suits, and contentions in the law. They
speak a several dialect by themselves, much differing from the common French;
mixed with many proper words of their own. Chiefer towns here are Beau-moir, a
seacoast town, and port, nere to Bretaigne. Roche-sur-Ion upon the river Ion.
Talmont upon the Ocean. Lucon, a Bishops sea, and a port of good traficke upon
a navigable arm of the sea. Maillesais, a Bishops sea. Niort upon the river
Seure. S. Maxent. Partenay. Pictavium. lon. 20. g. lat. 46. g. 35. m. Clav.
Thovars. Mirebeau. Chastelleraud upon the river Vienne. Poictiers
(Augustoritum of Ptolemy, and civitas Pictavorum of Antoninus) upon the river
Clin; now a Bishops sea, and Seneschaussee, and the chief town of the
country. The city is very large within the walls, but not so well inhabited,
enclosing corn fields, meadows, and other wast grounds. Here flourishes a
noted university, cheifely for the civil laws. Of this was sometimes Bishop.
S. Hilary, a renowned Champion of the Catholic faith against the Arrian
Hereltickes in the reign of the Emperor Constantius. Lusignan, upon the river
Ion, naming the ancient family of Lusignan sometimes kings of Jerusalem,
afterward of Cyprus by the donation of Richard the first, king of England.
Siury upon the river Charente. Roche-chovard, near unto the confines of
Limousin. Dorat. Bridiers, near Limousin. Mont-Morillon upon the river
Gartempe. Poictou aunciently were the Pictones of Caesar, Strabo, Pliny, and
Ptolemy, the Pictaui of Antoninus.

ENGOVLMOIS. Icolismansis Ager.

BOunded upon the North with Poictou; upon the West with Xaintoinge; upon the
South with Perigort; and upon the East with Limousin. It contains 24 French
leagues in length, and in breadth some. 15. leagues; affording plenty of very
excellent, and perfect wines. Chiefer towns are Coignac upon the river
Charente. Chasteau-neuf, upon the Charente, nere to Xaintoigne, Enculisma.
and Poictou. Angolesme (Ciuitas Etolisnensium of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea,
Seneschaussee, and the chief town, upon the river Charente, and the coing of
a spacious plain, descending in a bank, or mountain, with whose steep, and
headlong rocks (wherewith the walls are almost round environed) and a double
trench'd castle toward the plain, it is strongly fenced, and secured. One of
the gates yet bears the name of Chande from from the Lord John Chandois,
sometimes Seneschal of the country under the English, by whom it was built.
Roche-Foucat upon the Charente. Villebois. Marevil. Engoulmois anciently were
the Etolisnenses of Antoninus. To the account hereof Merula adds le pais d'
Aulniz; which is a little country lying betwixt this, and Xaintoinge.

BERRY. Biturigum Regio,

BOunded upon the West, with Touraine, and Poictou; upon the North with
Soulogne, and the river Cher; upon the East with Heurepoix, Nivernois,
Bourbonois, and the river Faye; and upon the South with Limousin, and the river
Covre. The country is very fruitful, more especially commended for excellent
pasture, and meadow grounds, feeding great plenty of cattle, sent over the
kingdom. It affords likewise mines of iron. Chiefer towns are Chasteau-roux
upon the river Indre. Chatres upon the Indre, nere Limousin. Chasteau-Meillant.
Argenton upon the river Creuse. Issoudun upon the river Theo. Viarron, or
Viarzon, most pleasantly seated amongst woods, vines, and rivers, near unto
the meetings of the rivers Arnon, Cher, Theo, and Eure. Mehun upon the river
Yeure. Bourges (Avaricum of Caesar, Biturigum. lon. 24. lat. 48. Merc.
Varicum of Ptolemie, and civitas Biturigum of Antoninus) an Archbishops sea,
Bailliage, Seige Presidiall, and a noted University more especially for the
civil laws, founded by king Lewis is the Ninth, perfected by Charles, Duke of
Berry, brother to Lewis the Eleaventh, the chief town of the country;
situated in a low flat amongst deep impassible bogs, and marshes, and the
rivers of Yeure, Auron, Aurette, and Molon. The city is large, rich, and of
great state, strong in regard of its situation, and artificial means of
fortification, a sure fastness, and the best hold of king Charles the seventh
in his hard wars against the English. Dunum Regium. Sancerra.
Dun-le-roy upon the river Auron. Mont-Faulcon. Sancerre, a strong town,
situated upon the top of an high hill, under the which runs the river Loire,
memorable in the late civil wars for a desperate, and long siege; (holding
for the Protestants) in the reign of Charles the ninth. Concressaut upon the
river Sauldre. The castle hereof is very strong, and magnificently built. Berry
anciently were the Bituriges of Caesar, the Bituriges Cubi of Strabo, Pliny,
and Ptolemie, the Biturices of Antoninus.

BOVRBONOIS. Borbonius tractus.

HAving upon the West, Berry; upon the North, Nivernois; upon the East, the
Dukedom of Burgundy; and upon the South, Auvergne. Towns here of better note
are Moulins, Molinum. lon. 23. g. 30. m. lat. 46. g. Clav.
the Bailliage, and the chief of the country upon the river Allier; esteemed
the center, or middle of France. Bourbon l' Archambaud, naming the country,
seated upon the Loire in a deep hollow bottom, surrounded with hills; in
regard of the hot medicinable bathes thereof much resorted unto from all the
parts of France. Bourbonois were the Boij of Pliny, following out of Germany
the Helvetians in their wars against the Romans, and after their overthrow
planted by Caesar in these parts (belonging then to the Hedui,) at the request
hereof.

FOREST. Pagus Forensis.

BOunded with Bourbonois upon the North; upon the West with Auvergne; upon the
South with Velay, part of Languedoc; and upon the East with Beau-iolois. The
country is large, and populous, but not so fruitful; hilly, and mountainous,
covered with shady woods, chiefly of firres. Chiefer towns here are Feurs
(Forum Segusianorum of Ptolemy,) Forum Segusianorum.
situated upon the Loire, and giving the name to the country. Mombrison, the
chief town, Fanum. S. Galmari. Fanum. S. Stephani.
seated upon the same river. S. Gaulmier. S. Estienne de Furian, upon the
Loire, nearer to the head thereof. Forest more anciently were the Segutiani of
Caesar, the Segusiani of Strabo, and Ptolemy, the Secusiani of Pliny; clients
in the time of Caesar to the Hedui.

BEAVIOLOIS. Comitatus Belloiolesij.

LYing betwixt Forest, and Lionois, and named thus from the castle of Beauiou,
pleasantly seated (as the name imports) upon the brow of a rising mountain,
the only place here of note. Beau-jolois, and Forest are by Merula accounted
within Bourbonois; by Chesne in Lionois. They belong to the resort, or
Seneschaussee of Lions.

LIONOIS. Lugdunensis tractus.

HAving Beau-iolois, Forest, and Auvergne upon the West; upon the North
Charrolois; upon the East la Bresse, part sometimes of Savoy; and upon the
South Daulphinie, and Languedoc. The country is plain, and very fruitful,
Matiscona.
and pleasant. Chiefer towns are Mascon (Castrum Matisconense of Antoninus,) a
Bishops sea, giving the name to the part of the country, called from hence le
pais Masconnois; situated upon the Soasne. Lion (Lugdunum of Caesar, Strabo,
Pliny, and Ptolemy, and civitas Lugdunensis of Antoninus in his catalogue of
the cities, Lugdunum. lon. 23. g. 15. m. lat. 45. g. 10. m. Clav.
and provinces of Gaul, then a famous Romance colony, naming the province
Lugdunensis, founded by L. Munatius Plancus, governor of the Province) now an
Archbishops sea, and a Seneschaussee, seated at the confluence of the rivers
Soasne, and the Rhosne. It has always held the second place amongst the
cities of Gaul, and France, through its commodious situation upon the Rhosne
and Soasne, and neighborhood to the Dutch, and Italians, become at this day
the most populous, rich, and flourishing Empory of the kingdom, beautified
with fair, and stately buildings, and honored with an ancient University for
the Canon, and Civil laws. Lionois was anciently part of the Hedui after
Ptolemie; otherwise of the Segusiani according to Strabo, and Pliny, clients
to the Hedui.

AVVERGNE. Arvernia.

HAving upon the East, Forest, and Lionois; upon the North, Berry, and
Bourbonois; upon the West, Limousin, Perigort, and Quercy; and upon the South,
Velay, and Gevaudan, parts of Languedoc. It is divided into the Lower Auvergne,
Limania.
or Limaigne, and the Higher Auvergne. Limaigne, or the Lower Auvergne is
extraordinarily fruitful, and happy. The other is wholly mountainous, dry,
rockie, and barren. Chiefer towns in Limaigne are Mont-Pensier, whereof are
named the Dukes of Mont-Pensier. Rions, the Seneschaussee of Limaigne.
Mont-Ferrant. Clermont, a Bishops sea, and the chief town, situated amongst
brooks, and rivulets, descending from the neighboring mountains of the Higher
Auvergne. At Gergoie, a neighboring village, sometimes stood the city
Gergovia of Caesar, and Strabo, civitas Arvernorum of Antoninus. In the Higher
Auvergne S. Flour, Fanum S. Flori.
a Bishops sea, and the chief town of the division, seated upon the top of a
steep, and high rock. Aurillac, a Seneschaussee upon the river Iourdain,
defended with a strong Castle, standing upon an high rock. Beauregarde,
another Seneschaussee, upon the river Gardon. Limaigne, or the Seneschaussee of
Rions, is of the resort of the Parliament of Paris. The Seneschaussees of the
Higher Auvergne belong to the Parliament of Bourdeaux. The more remarkable
mountainous tops of the Higher Auvergne are le Poye de Dome, not far from
Clermont, yielding plenty of most excellent medicinable Simples: Les Montaignes
de Cantal in regard of their height, covered all the year long with snow: Le
Mont de Come, shaded with woods, and trees, and affording good pasturages: and
Le Mont d' Or, the mother of the great river Dordonne, and of sundry
medicinable bathes both of hot, and cold waters, much resorted unto from all
parts by sick, and diseased persons. Both the Auvergnes with Nivernois were
the Arverni of Livie, Caesar, Ptolemie, Strabo, Pliny, and Antoninus.

THE PARLIAMENT OF BOVRDEAVX.
COntaining the countries of Limousin, Perigort, and Guienne, with Albret,
Agennois, and Condommois, parts of Gascoigne.

LIMOVSIN. Lemovicum provincia.

BOunded upon the South, and South-East with Bourbonois, upon the North and
North East, with Berry, upon the North-West, with Poictou, and upon the West,
and South-West, with Perigort. The country is hilly, mountainous, healthie,
inioying a free, and pure air, but not so fruitful. The inhabitants are a
sober, and wise people, painful, frugall, and very moderate in their diet,
unless for bread, whereof they are such devourers, that they are grown into a
Proverb. It is divided into the Higher, and the Lower Limousin, called
otherwise La March de Limousin, which is the more hilly, and asperous part
toward Auvergne. Chiefer towns are Soubsterraine upon the river Le Grande
Creuse, near unto the confines of Berry. Dorat. Confoulat: Lemovicum.
both of them upon the river Vienne. Limoges (Ratiastum of Ptolemie, and
civitas Lemavicum of Antoninus) a Bishops sea, and the Seneschaussee, and
chief town; situated upon the river Vienne. The city is very populous for
the bigness, rich, and well governed, inhabited by an industrious people,
enemies of slough, and not enduring idle persons, but constraining all to work;
for this cause named by the French, the prison of beggars. In a solitary place
not far from hence is the Abbey of Grand-mont, naming the Religious order
thus called. These hitherto lie in the Higher Limousin. In the Lower Limousin
are Vzarche amongst mountains upon the river, or torrent Vezere, with whose
fierce, and violent streams it is round encompassed, strong, for this cause,
and by artificial means, occasioning the French Proverb, Qui a maison a
Vzerche, a chasteau en Limousin. Tullez, a Bishops sea. Brive la Gaillard.
Limousin anciently were the Lemovices of Caesar, Strabo, and Pliny, the
Limvici of Ptolemie, and the Lemavici of Antoninus.

PERIGORT. Petrocorium.

HAving upon the North, Limousin; upon the East, Auvergne, and Quercy; upon the
South, Gascoigne; and upon the West, Xaintoigne, part of Guienne. The country
is like to Limousin, dry, rockie, and mountainous, stuck with woods, and
trees of all sorts, especially of Chestnuts. The air is very pure, and
temperate, in regard whereof the people here, as in Limousin, Perigueux. lon.
22. lat. 46. Merc.
are very healthie, and usually live long. Cheifer towns are Perigueux
(Vessuna of Ptolemy, and Ciuitas Petrogoriorum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, a
Seneschaussee, and the best town in a pleasant vallie, environed with viny
downs; divided into two towns, distant some 100 paces asunder, whereof the
part, wherein the Bishop ordinarily resideth, retains still the name of
Vesune. Here remains yet sundry marks of its Roman greatness, amongst others
the vast ruins of an Amphi-theater. Sarlat, a Bishops sea. Bregerat upon the
river Dordonne. Nontron, defended with a strong castle. Marsac. Here springs
a well, which ebbeth, and flows with the river of Bourdeaux. Perigort was
aunciently the Petrocorij of Caesar, Strabo, and Ptolemy, the Petrogori of
Pliny, and the Petrogorij of Antoninus.

GVIENNE.
THis (as has been before related) is the corrupt word of Aquitania. During
the command of the English, the Dukedom, or general name hereof, comprehended
all Gascoigne, Rovergne, Quercy, Perigort, Limousin, Engoulmois, and Poictiers,
with the four Seneschaussees of Xainctes, Bourdeaux, Basatz, and Baionne. It
now only contains these four last Seneschaussees; the rest being excluded
from the name, and account hereof, since their revolt from under the English
government, and incorporation to the crown of France. The bounds now are upon
the North Poictou; upon the South, the Pyrenaean Mountains, and Spain; upon
the West, the Ocean, taken betwixt Spain, and Poictou; and upon the East,
Limousin, Engoulmois, Quercy, and Gascoigne. It comprehends the many lesser
countries of Rochelois, and Xaintoigne, Le Marquisate de Fronsadez, Le Pais
enter les deux Mers, Bourdelois, Le Pais de Medoc, Bucqs, Le Pais Lapourd, Les
Lands, and Bazadois, divided amongst the four Seneschaussees before
mentioned. The part toward the Pyrenaean Mountains is cold, mountainous and
barren, especially for wines. Betwixt Bourdeaux, and Baionne, where lie Les
Lands, and Le Pais de Bucqs, the country is sandy, desert, and almost
fruitless. The like affected are the parts betwixt Bourdeaux, and the mouth of
the river Gironde along the left shore thereof, saving that in steed of dry
sandy plains the wastes are here taken up with waters, and deep impassable
fennes, and marshes. The more fruitful are Xaintoigne, especially for corn;
generally all the inland country; extraordinarily above the rest Le Pais enter
les Deux Mers. The inhabitants are usually tall of stature, strong, active,
generous, free, haters of baseness, and servitude, and well practiced in
arms. Rupella. lon. 18. g. 15. m. lat 45. g. 50. m. Clav.
Towns of better note are Rochelle, (Santonum Portus of Ptolemy) the Bailliage
of the country, named from hence Le Rochelois; a noted Port, seated upon the
Western Ocean, and amongst deep marshes toward the land. The town is
exceeding strong, as well in regard of this situation, as of the many
platformes, bulwarks, and curious defenses, the jealous inhabitants of later
times have raised; famous for a miraculous nine months siege in the years
1572, and 1573, which it sustained against Charles the ninth, and the whole
power of France. It has still held for them of the reformed Religion, their
surest retrait in time of war, by ancient exemptions governed by its own
magistrates in the manner of a free state. Rochelois, or the country of
Rochelle is by Merula accounted within Xaintoigne. Saints (Mediolanium of
Ptolemie, Santonum. lon. 19. g. lat. 45. Clav.
Mediolanum of Strabo, and civitas Santonum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and
the Seneschaussee, and chief town of Xaintoigne; upon the river Charente. S.
Iean d' Angely upon the river Boutonne. Marans, a little Port, at that mouth of
the river in a marishy situation. Pons upon the river Seugne. Blaye, a town, a
castle upon the Gironde, held by a garrison, commanding the river, and passage
unto Bourdeaux. Here the English ships going for Bourdeaux through an ancient
jealousy of the French are to unlade their Ordnance. Blauia.
Bourg sur mer upon the Dordonne, surnamed thus from the wideness of the
river, containing here some two miles over. Retraite upon the Dordonne near
unto the confluence thereof, and of the Garonne. The towns hitherto lie in
Xaintoigne, the Santones of Caesar, Strabo, Pliny, Ptolemie, and Antoninus.
Fronsac, a strong town, upon the Dordonne in the Marquisate of Fronsadez.
Libourne at the meetings of the Dordonne, and the Garonne. Here the Garonne,
and Dordonne loose their names in the Gironde, or river of Bourdeaux. S.
Macier. These two last lie in the country Enter les Deux Mers, named thus from
its situation betwixt the two wide, Fanum. S. Macarij. Burdegala. lon. 18. g.
lat. 44. g. 30. m. Clav.
and great rivers of the Dordonne, and Garonne, Bourdeaux (Burdegala of Strabo,
and Ptolemie, and civits Burdegale^sium of Antoninus,) now an Archbishops sea,
and the Parliament, and chief city of Guienne, situated amongst marshes upon
the left shore of the Garonne. The city is very large, containing about a
third part of Paris, beautified with fair, and goodly buildings, populous, and
rich, one of the most flourishing Empories of the kingdom, the staple for
Gascoigne wines (well known unto the English, and Dutch Merchants,) and
honored with an University, founded by king Lewis the eleauenth. Esparre upon
the Gironde. These two lie in Bourdelois, anciently the Burdegalenses of
Antoninus, the Bituriges Iosci of Strabo, Bituriges Vbisci of Pliny, and the
Bituriges Vipisci of Ptolemy, surnamed thus to note their distinction from the
Bituriges Cubi, inhabiting sometimes Berry. Soulac, (Solacus vicus of
Antoninus,) seated at the mouth of the Gironde in the country of Medoc; which
is the wedge of land, lying betwixt the Gironde, or river of Bourdeaux upon the
North thereof, and the Ocean. More Southwards along the Seacoast betwixt Le
Pais de Medoc, and Baionne lies the principality of Bucqs, a contry miserably
poor, and barren; affording only plenty of oily woods, and of pitch, and
rosen, weekly convaied from hence to Bourdeaux. Here the river Leria is
received into the Ocean, thought to be Sygmanus of Ptolemy. The towns from
Fronsac hither belong to the Seneschaussee of Bourdeaux. Baiona. lon. 20. g.
lat. 44. g. Merc.
Baionne nearer Spain upon the same sea coast, a Bishops sea, and a noted Port
at the confluence of the rivers Adour, and Grave some four miles from the
maine Ocean; the chief town of Le Pais Lapourd. The town is strongly fenced
in regard of its neighborhood unto Spain. S. Iehan de Luz at the foot of the
Pyrenaean mountains, Fannm S. lohannis Lusij.
and the confines of Guipuscoa. Betwixt this town, and Fuentarabia the little
river Iton falls into the Ocean; after Chesne the bounds of France, and
Spain. Betwixt Baionne, and this river, or Spain, the Basquish is spoken,
common hereunto, and to the Biscains, and inhabitants of Guipuscoa. D' Acqs
(Aquae Augustae of Ptolemy, Aquae.
civitas Aquensium of Antoninus, and the Aquitani of Pliny, giving the name to
the Province, Aquitania,) now a Bishops sea, and a Seneschaussee. The town is
strongly fortified, frontiring upon Spain. The towns from Baionne hither lie
in the Seneschaussee, and country of Lapourd, with Les Lands, the Lapurdenses
of Sidonius, part of the Tarbelli of Strabo, and of the Tarbeli of Antoninus;
the part excepted betwixt Bajonne, and Spain, belonging to the Cantabri. Les
Lands before mentioned is the sandy desert country, which lies East of Le
Pais de Bucqs betwixt Baionne, and Bourdeaux. Air (civitas Atyrensium of
Antoninus,) a Bishops sea. The ancient inhabitants hereabouts were the
Atyrenses of Antoninus. Basats, near the confines of Gascoigne (Cossium of
Ptolemy, Vasatae.
and civitas Vasatum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and the Seneschaussee and
chief town of Bazadois. These two lie in the country of Bazadois, anciently
the Vassarij of Ptolemie, the Vassei of Pliny, and the Vasates of Antoninus.

GASCOIGNE. Vasconia.

HAving Guienne, upon the West; upon the South, the Pyrenaean Mountains; upon
the East, the river Garonne, and Languedoc; and upon the North, Perigort, and
Quercy. It comprehends the lesser districts of Agennois, Condomois, Albret,
Armaignac, Cominges, Bigorre, Foix, and Les Comtes d' Isle, de Gaure, and d'
Estrac. The country yields plenty of most excellent wines; especially
Agennois, and the tract of the Garonne. The towns here of better note are Again
(Aginum of Ptolemie, Aginum Nitiobrigum. lon. 22. g. lat. 45. g. Merc.
and civitas Agennensium of Antoninus,) now a Bishops sea, and Seneschaussee;
upon the Garonne in a most fertile, and pleasant country. The town is
populous, rich, and well traded; the chiefest in Gascoigne. Condom, a Bishops
sea, and Seneschaussee, upon the river Baise. Agennois, and Condomois, or the
countries of Again, and Condom were the Nitiobriges of Caesar, Strabo, and
Ptolemie. Nerac, the chief town of Albret; upon the river Baise. Lactoure
(civitas Lastoracium of Antoninus) a Bishops sea, Lactura.
and the Seneschaussee for Armaignac. The town is strong, the chief fortress
of the kingdom on this side toward Spain; seated upon the side of an high
hill of very difficult access, admitting one only passage, and fenced with a
triple wall, and with bulwarks, platformes, and an impregnable castle, standing
upon the top of an high hill without reach of canon. Auscia. lon. 22. glat. 44.
g. Merc.
Auchs (Augusta of Ptolemy, and ciuitas Ausciorum of Antoninus, the Metropolis,
or chief town of the Province of Novempopulania,) now an Archbishops sea
upon the river Gez. These two lie in Armaignac, the Auscij of Strabo, Ptolemy,
and Antoninus, and the Ausci of Pliny, and Mela. Tarbe (civitas Tursaubica
Tralugorra of Antoninus, Tarba.
) a Bishops sea, and the Seneschaussee, and chief town of Begorre; upon the
river Adour. Baigneres, where are hot medicinable bathes. Lourde. These three
are in Begorre, the Bigerrones of Caesar, the Begerri of Pliny. Coserans
(Ciuitas Consantanorum of Antoninus) a Bishops sea, situated nere unto the
Pyrenaean Mountains. The country hereabouts were the Consoranni of Pliny, the
Consantani of Antoninus. Fanum. S. Barnardi.
S. Beat. S. Bernard (Ciuitas Conuenarum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and the
chief town of Cominges. S. Fregeou. These 4 lie in the Higher, or more
mountainous Cominges. Lombez, a Bishops sea, enjoying a fruitful, and pleasant
situation. Samathan. Muret, upon the river Garonne. These stand in the Lower
Cominges. Cominges aunciently were the Convenae of Pliny, and Antoninus.
Mirande, the chief town of the Count d' Estrac. Bellomonrium.
Beaumont, a Senechaussee, and the chief town of the County of Gaure. Grenade
upon the Garonne. Gimont. These three lie in the county of Gavre. L' Isle de
Iourdaine in the County d' Isle, Reux, a Bishops sea, at the foot of the
Pyrenaean mountains, and upon the Garonne, nere unto the head thereof.
Caseres, a Bishops sea, upon the Garonne. Apamea. Fuxium. Mirapense opidum.
lon. 23. g. 43. m. Merc.
Pamieres, a Bishops sea, upon the rivers Lagiere, and Lets. Foix, upon the
river Lagiere, the chief town of the country of Foix. Mirepoix, a Bishops
sea. The towns hitherto from Rieux, lie in the country of Foix, anciently the
Flussates of Caesar, the Elusates of Pliny. Of these Agennois, and Condomois
are of the resort of Bourdeaux; the other countries belong unto the Parliament
of Toulouse. Scatered in this province of Gascoigne, but more chiefly in
Begorre, and in the Principality of Bearn, live a wretched sort of people,
called les Capots, and Gahets, in regard of their more ugly, and loathed
filthiness detested, and shunned of all men; forced to live apart by
themselves, and not to communicate with others. They are held to be infectious,
and leprous persons, having all most noisome, and stinking breathes, and in
their faces, carriages, and actions such monstrous, and unusual deformities,
as if they made a baser, and different rank from other men. They are commonly
Carpenters, or other base Mechanickes, earning their bread by day-labour, not
suffered to inherit any lands, and but only their curse, and misery, which
constantly they transmit to succession. Some feign them to be descended from
the leprous Iehezi, servant to the Prophet Elishah; others maliciously from the
Albigenses.

THE PARLIAMENT OF THOLOVSE.
COntaining Quercy, Rovergne, and Languedoc, with the parts of the Gascoigne,
already described.

QVERCY. Cadurci.

ENcompassed with Agennois, Perigort, Auvergne, Rovergne, and Limousin. The
country is hilly, but populous, and fruitful; especially for corn. Cadurci.
lon. 23. g. lat. 45. g. Merc.
Chiefer towns are Cahors (Dueona of Ptolemy, and civitas Cadorcorum of
Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and the Seneschaussee for the country; upon the
river Loath. The town is great, strong, and well traded, whereof the Bishop is
Lord both Spiritual, and Temporal. Castel-Sarasin, a strong town upon the
Garonne. Moisac upon the river Tarn; enjoying a fruitful, Montalbanum. lon.
23. g. lat. 45. g. Merc.
and pleasant seat. Montauban, a Bishops sea, upon the top of an high hill,
under which runs the river Tarn; the Seige Presidiall of the country.
Lanzette. Soulac upon the river Dordonne. Quercy anciently were the Cadurci of
Caesar, Strabo, Pliny, and Ptolemie, the Cadorci of Antoninus.

ROVERGNE. Rutenium.

HAving Quercy upon the East; and upon the other sides Auvergne, and Languedoc.
The country is little, mountainous, and not much to be commended for the
goodness, and firtilitie of the soil. Chiefer towns here are Rhodes (Segodunum
of Ptolemy, Rutena. l. 24. g. l. 45. g. Merc. Vabrae.
and civitas Rotenorum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and the Seneschaussee, and
chief town of the country; upon the Tarn. Ville-Franche* Vabres, a Bishops
sea. Rovergne anciently were the Rutheni of Caesar, and Pliny, the Ruteni of
Strabo, the Rhutani of Ptolemie, and the Roteni of Antoninus.

LANGVEDOC. Languedociu^.

HAving Rovergne, Auvergne, and Forest upon the North; upon the North-west,
Quercy; upon the West, Gascoigne; upon the South, the Pyrenaean Mountains, and
the Sea Mediterranean; and upon the East Provence, and Daulphinie. Merula
divides it into Le Pais Albigeois, Gevauldan, Velay, Vivaretz, and the more
proper Languedoc. The country is generally very fruitful, and happy, (the
mountainous parts, neighboring to Auvergne, excepted) besides those ordinary
of France, yielding plenty of Oil, Olives, Rasins, Figs, Orenges, and other
fruits, growing in hotter climates; proper only hereunto, and Provence.
Chiefer towns here are Alby (civitas Albigensium of Antoninus, Albiga. lon.
23. g. lat: 45. g. Merc.
) a Bishops sea, and the chief town of Albigeois, upon the river Tarn. Here
began first the name of those of the Reformed religion; called from hence the
Albigenses. Mende (civitas Gabalum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and the chief
of Gevaudan. Gevaudan was anciently the Gabales of Caesar, Strabo, Pliny, and
Antoninus, Le Puy lon. 25. g. lat. 45. g. Merc.
and the Tabali of Ptolemy. Le Puy (Aeria of Pliny, and civitas Vellaunorum of
Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, situated upon an high hill, or mountain,
occasioning the name; the chief town in Velay, anciently the Velauni of
Ptolemy, the Vellauni of Antoninus, and the Vellaunij of Strabo. Vivario.
Viviers (Alba Helvorum of Pliny, Albaugusta of Ptolemy, and civitas Vivario of
Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and the chief town of Vivaretz; upon the river
Rhosne. Pons. S. Spiritus.
Le Pont-S-Esprit, likewise upon the Rhosne, and in Vivaretz. Vivaretz
anciently were the Helvij of Caesar, the Helvi of Pliny, the Elycoci of
Ptolemie; a country wholly mountainous, as is Gevaudan. Tolosa lon. 23. g.
lat. 45. Market.
Tolouse (Tolosa of Caesar, Strabo, Ptolemie, and Antoninus, then a famous
Roman Colonie,) now an Archbishops sea, a Parliament, and a flourishing
University, the chief city in Languedoc, and one of the most populous, and
greatest in France; seated in a plentiful, and rich country, and upon the
river Garonne. From hence was named V. Strab. Geog. lib. 4. and Auli Gellij
Noct. Attic. lib. 3. c. 9.
, the Latin Proverb (Aurum (habet) Tolosanum,) applied to those, who had
fallen into any sudden, and great misfortune, occasioned from a bad destiny
believed still to attend the fatal treasure, locked up in the Temples hereof,
held always unfortunate to the owners, being the sacrilegious spoils of
Delphos, and of other Grecian Temples, brought hither by the Tectosages, part
of the Gauls, forraging Greece under the second Brennus; experienced in the
calamity of Q. Servilius Caepio, Consul of the Romans shortly after his
surprisall, and pillaging hereof slain with his whole army by the Cimbri. The
country about Tolouse were the Tectosages of Strabo, Pliny, Mela, and
Ptolemie, the Tolosates of Antoninus, Fanum. S. Papuli. Aletensis ciuitas.
Carcaso.
part of the Volcae. S. Papoul, a Bishops sea. Aleth, a Bishops sea, upon the
river Aude. Carcassone (Carcasum of Pliny, and Carcaso of Ptolemy,) a Bishops
sea, and Seneschaussee upon the Aude, divided by the river into two towns La
Cite, and Carcassonne. The inhabitants speak a corrupt French, mixed with the
Spanish through their neighborhood to that nation. Narbona lon. 24. g. lat.
43. g. Merc.
Narbonne (Narbo of Caesar, Narbo Martius of Pliny, and Mela, Narbon Colonia
of Ptolemie, Narbona of Suetonius, Eutropius, and Am. Marcellinus, and civitas
Narbonensium of Antoninus, then a great, and famous Roman Colonie, planted by
Quinctus Martius, from whom it took the surname, and M. Porcius Cato, the
chief city of Gaul, giving the name to the Province Narbonensis, and the
seat of the Roman Proconsuls.) It is now an Archbishops sea, and a strong town
of war, opposing the Land of Russeillon, and Catalonia in Spain; seated at
the mouth of the river Aude. The country about Narbonne were the Atacini of
Mela; named thus from the river Atax, Betirae Septumanorum.
now the Aude. Beziers (Betirae of Ptolemy, Biltera of Strabo, Blitera of
Pliny, Bliterae of Mela, and civitas Beterrensium of Antoninus, a Colonie the^
of the Septumani, or of the Roman soldiers of the 7 Legio^, Fanum. S. Pontij
Tomeriarum Agatha. Luteva.
) now a Bishops sea, situated upon the river Orb. S. Pont de Tonnieres, a
Bishops sea. Agde (Agatha of Strabo, Pliny, and Mela, Agathopolis of Ptolemie,
and civitas Agatensium of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and a well frequented
Port, at the mouth of river Erhaud, a colonie sometimes of the Greeks
Phocenses of Massilia. Lodesve (Lutava castrum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea
upon the river Orb. Mons Pessulanus. lon. 25. g. lat. 43. g. Market.
Mont-Pellier, a Bishops sea, and a noted University for the study of Physic,
the chiefest for this Profession in France, seated (as the name imports) upon
a high hill, under which runs the river Lez, distant about 10 miles from the
Ocean, in a most healthy, pleasant, and fruitful country, abounding with very
excellent, and perfect wines, and medicinable Simples. Nemausus. lon. 26. g.
lat. 44. g. Merc.
Nismes (Nemausus of Strabo, and Mela, Nemausum of Pliny, and Ptolemy, and
Ciuitas Nemausensium of Antoninus, a colony of the Romans, and the chief town
of the Arecomici) now a Bishpos sea, and a petty University; seated in a
pleasant, and happy country, flourishing with vines, olives, and fig trees, and
with sundry sort of sweet smelling plants and flowers. Vsetz (Ciuitas
Vsetiensis of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea. The Diocese, or country hereof, and of
Nismes, Mont-pellier, and Beziers were the Arecomici of Caesar, Strabo, Pliny,
and Mela, the Arecomij of Ptolemy, with the Tectosages, parts of the Volcae of
Strabo, Pliny, and Ptolemy, the Volgi of Caesar. Beaucaire, a Seneschaussee,
upon the river Rhosne; frontiring upon Provenaee.

THE PARLIAMENT OF AIX.
COntaining only the Earldom of Provence.

PROVENCE. Provincia.

BOunded upon the West with Languedoc, and the river Rhosne; upon the South
with the sea Mediterranean; upon the East with the Alps, and the river Varo;
and upon the North, with Daulphinie. The country is rather hilly, then either
plain, or mountainous, generally very pleasant, fruitful, and happy; of the
like quality with Languedoc. Chiefer towns here are Aurenge (Arusio of
Strabo, Arausio. lon. 26. g. 20. m. lat. 43. g. 20. m. Clav.
Arausio of Pliny, and Mela, Colonia Arausiorum of Ptolemy, and civitas
Arausinorum of Antoninus, a Roman colonie of the Secundani, or soldiers of the
second Legion,) now a Bishops sea, and Principality, seated upon the river
Meine. The Lords, or Princes hereof, govern in manner of Free states, quit
from all fief, and homage to the Earls of Provence by Earl Reiner, who sold
this right to Prince Lewis de Chalon, continued afterward to succession.
Philibert the last Prince of Aurenge of the house of Chalon, slain at the
siege of Florence in the reign of the Emperor Charles the fifth, deceasing
without heirs, the inheritance hereof descended upon Renate, Earl of Nassau,
son to Henry Earl of Nassau, and of Claude, sister to Philibert; in which
family it has ever since remained. It is now possessed by the illustrious
prince, Henry, Earl of Nassau, state-holder, and governor of the forces of
the united Provinces of Netherland; Philip of Nassau, the late Prince,
descended from his elder brother, Avenio. lon. 23. g. lat. 43. g. 52. m. Clav.
and Maurice deceasing without issue. Avignon (Avenio of Strabo, Pliny, and
Mela, Colonia Aveniorum of Ptolemy, and civitas Avenicorum of Antoninus,) an
Archbishops sea, and an University upon the Rhosne; on both sides of the
river. The town is rich, fair, and flourishing, belonging to the Popes,
remarkable for 7 times 7 singularities, 7 palaces, 7 gates, 7 parishes, 7
Colleges of the Liberal Arts, 7 Hospitals, 7 Nunneries, and 7 Convents of
Friars. Hither in the year 1303 Pope Clement the fifth removed the Papal sea;
after 74 years continuance in the year 1377, brought back again to Rome by
Pope Gregory the Eleaventh. Cabellio.
Cavaillon (Cabellio of Pliny, Cabalio of Strabo, Cabelliorum Colonia of
Ptolemy, and civitas Cabellicorum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea upon the river
Durance. The country about Cavaillon, Aurenge, and Avignon, with Grenoble in
Daulphinie were the Cavares of Strabo, Pliny, and Mela, the Cavari of Ptolemie.
Carpentoracte.
Carpentras (Carpentoracte of Ptolemy, and civitas Carpentoractensium of
Antoninus,) a Bishops sea. Betwixt this town, and Cavaillon lies the vallie,
and town of Val-cluse, begirt with hills, and rocks, whence issue out most
sweet, and clear streams; whither for the exceeding pleasure, and still
solitariness thereof, the famous Petrarch used to retire, when he would devote
himself to his Philosophical studies, and meditations. Tarascon (Tarascon of
Strabo, and Tarascum of Ptolemy,) a Bishops sea upon the river Rhosne, opposite
to Beaucaire. Vaison (Vasio of Pliny, and Mela, and civitas Vasionensium of
Antoninus.) The country about Vaison were the Vocontij of Strabo, Pliny,
Ptolemie, and Mela. These 4 towns lie in the country of Avignon, exempt from
the jurisdiction of the French kings; Arelatum, lon 22. g. 45. m. lat. 43. g.
20. m. Clav.
appertaining to the Popes Arles (Arelate of Pliny, and Mela, Arelatae of
Strabo, Arelatum colonia of Ptolemy, and civitas Arelatensiu^ of Antoninus,
then a rich colonie of the Sextani, or Roman soldiers of the 6 Legion) now an
Archbishops sea upon the Rhosne in a low, and marishie situation. This was
sometimes the royal seat, or chief residence of the later kings of Burgundy,
from hence named ordinarily in histories the kings of Arles. Near hereunto,
but on the other side of the river, begins the deep channel, or dreane,
called by Ptolemie Fossae Marianae, by the French Comargue, or Aigues Mortes,
Aquae Mortuae
drawn from the Rhosne unto the Ocean by the Roman Consul C. Marius for the
more easy convaiance of victuals unto his camp, during his wars in Gaul
against the Teutones. Aix (Aquae Calidae, or Sextiae of Strabo, Aquae Sextiae
lon. 22. g. 20. m. lat. 42. g. 10. m. Clav.
Aquae Sextiae of Pliny, Ptolemie, and Florus, and civitas Aquensium of
Antoninus, a Roman Colonie, the station of their 25 Legion, and the Metropolis,
or chief city of Narbonensis secunda, named thus from the hot bathes thereof,
and from the Consul C. Sextius, the conqueror of the Salyi, by whom it was
founded,) now an Archbishops sea, and the Parliament, and chief city of the
Province, situated upon the river Rhosne. Glandeves (Glanum of Pliny, and
Ptolemie, Glanon of Mela, and civitos Clannatena of Antoninus, Alps Mari^mae.
seated amongst the sea coast Alps,) now a Bishops sea upon the river Goremp.
The country about Clandeves, and of Aix, Arles, and Tarascon were the Salyi of
Pliny, and Florus, the Salies of Strabo, the Salvij of Livie, and the Salices
of Ptolemie, the first people of the Gauls beyond the Alps, with whom the
Romans had war; occasioned through their injuries, and difference with the
neighboring Massilians drawing on the wars, and conquest of the rest of
Gaul. S. Gillis upon the Comargue. Apta.
Apt (Apta Iulia of Pliny, and civitas Abtensium of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea
upon the river Colao. The country hereabouts were the Vulgientes of Pliny, the
Abtenses of Antoninus. Amongst the Mountains betwixt this, and the river
Durance, lie the little towns of Merindol and Chabrieres, memorable for a
bloody massacre made of the poor inhabitants thereof, murdered, and put to
death in the reign of Francis the first, French king; Reius. Massilia, lon.
24. g. 30. m. lat. 43. g. 10. m. Clav.
certain scattered remainders of the Albigenses. Ries (civitas Retensium of
Antoninus) a Bishops sea. Marseilles (Massilia of Livie, Caesar, and Pliny, a
Greek city, and colonie, anciently confederate with the Romans, founded by
the banished Phocenses in the 45 Olympiade, and reign of Tarquin, surnamed the
Proud, king of the Romans,) now a Bishops sea, and a great, and noted Port upon
the sea Mediterranean. In the Cathedral Church hereof they show the supposed
head of Lazarus, whom Christ raised from the dead, whom they accounted their
first Bishop. The hilly country hereabouts were the Albici of Caesar. Betwixt
Marseilles, and Arles, or the more Eastern branch of the Rhosne lies for a
great space of land (for sundry towns are seated within it) the part of the
country, named La Craux, Campus Lapideus.
by Strabo, and Pliny Campus Lapideus, and Campi Lapidei, and by Mela Littus
Lapideum, called thus from the innumerable multitude of stones, wherewith after
a strange manner it seems all strawed over. The ancients (as Mela relates)
fained this to be the place, where Hercules fought with Albion, and Bergion,
sons of Neptune, whom, when other weapons failed, his father Jupiter should
relieve with a shower of stones, whose remainders these should be. Tolonium.
Toulon (Tauroentium of Ptolemy, and Taurentium of Strabo,) upon the
Mediterranean, a Bishops sea, and a well frequented Port. Feriuls (Forum Iulium
of Strabo, Forum Iulii.
Pliny, and Ptolemie, Forum Iulij of Mela, and civitas Foro Iuliensium of
Antoninus, founded by the Massilians, and made afterward a Colonie of the
Romans) upon the Mediterranean, a Bishops sea. Antipolis.
Antibe (Antipolis of Strabo, Pliny, and Ptolemie, and civitas Antipolitana of
Antoninus,) a seacoast town upon the Mediterranean near unto the river Varo,
and the borders of Italy. The country hereabouts were the Deciates of Pliny,
and Deciatij of Ptolemie. La Grace, a Bishops sea, Opidum. Grassense. Ventium.
Sanitium. Dinia.
within the continent. S. Paul de Vences (civitas Venciensium of Antoninus,) a
Bishops sea. Senas (Civitas Saniciensium, and Sanicisio of Antoninus) a Bishops
sea. Digne (Dinia of Ptolemie, and civitas Diniensium of Antoni^us,) a Bishops
sea. The country hereof were the Sentij of Ptolemy. Cisteron (civitas
Segesterorum of Antoninus, Cessero.
) a Bishops sea, and Seneschaussee for part of Provence; upon the river
Durance, near unto the borders of Daulphinie. The town is very strongly
fortified. The country here abouts were the Segestorij of Antoninus.

THE PARLIAMENT OF GRENOBLE.
COntaining only Daulphinie.

DAVLPHINIE. D^lphinatus.

BOunded upon the West with the river Rhosne, whereby it is divided from
Lionnois, and Languedoc; upon the South with Provence; upon the North with La
Bresse, the Rhosne also coming betwixt; and upon the East with Savoye, and the
Alps. It comprehends the Higher, and the Lower Daulphinie. The Higher is
altogether mountainous, stony, and barren; neighboring to the Alps, with
whose branches it is overrun. The Lower Daulphinie is more plain, and
tolerably fruitful; coasting along the Rhosne. Chiefer towns here are
Briancon (Brigantio of Antoninus) near unto the head of the Durance,
Brigantio. Ebrodunum. lon. 28. g. let. 44. Merc.
naming the country Brianconnois. Embrun (Ebreduno of Antoninus, the Metropolis
then, or chief city of the Province of the Alps Maritmae) now a Archbishops
sea, and siege Presidiall, and the chief town of the Higher Daulphinie,
containing 7 Parishes; seated in a pleasant valley, surrounded with mountains,
upon an high rock, under the which runs the Durance. The hilly country
hereof is now called from hence Le Pais Ambrunois, adjudged to be the highest
part of France. S. Antoni de Tricastin (Ciuitas Ricartinorum of Antoninus,) a
Bishops sea. Fanum S. Antonij in Tricastinis. Vapingum.
The country hereof were the Tricastini of Pliny, the Tricasteni of Ptolemy.
Gap (ciuitas Apencensium of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and Seneschaussee, at
the foot of the mountain Le Col de Digo; the chiefest town in those hilly
parts after Embrun, giving the name to the part of the country, called from
hence Le Pais Gapincois, the Appencenses of Antoninus. Die (Ciuitas Decensium,
Dia Vocontiorum.
and Dia Vocontioru^ of Ant.) now a Bishops sea, upon the river Drosne;
Gratianopolis lon. 27. g. l. 45. g. 30. m. Clav.
naming Le Pais Diois, part sometimes of the Vocontij. These all lie in the
Higher Daulphinie. In the Lower Daulphinie, Grenoble (ciuitas Gratianopolitana
of Antoninus, Accusianorum Colonia of Ptolemy, and Gratianopolis of Sidonius,
and Paulus Diaconus,) a Bishops sea, and the Parliament, and chief city of
Daulphinie, upon the river Isere. The town is large, populous, and beautified
with fair buildings. The country hereabouts were part of the Cauari of
Ptolemy. Romans upon the Isere nere unto the co^fluence thereof, Valentia.
and of the Rhosne. Valence (Valentia of Pliny, and Ptolemy, and Ciuitas
Valentinorum of Antoninus, then a Roman Colony) now a Bishops sea,
Presidialitie, and University for the civil laws, situated upon the Rhosne.
The town is rich, strong, and well traded, giving the name to the country,
called from hence Le Pais Valentinois, anciently (probably more largely
extended) the Segalauni of Ptolemy, the Valentini of Antoninus, part of the
Cavares of Pliny. Vienna. lon. 23. g. lat. 45. g. Clav.
Vienne (Vienna of Strabo, Mela, Ptolemie, and Ammianus Marcellinus, the chief
City after Strabo of the Allobroges, afterward of the Province called from
hence Viennensis, and the seat of the Praetorio-Praefectus, or the supreme
Roman Magistrate, commanding Gaul.) Under the French it became an Earldom,
whereof were entitled the house of the Daulphins. It is now an Archbishops
sea, and Presidialitie, upon the Rhosne, the chief town of Le Pais Viennois,
part of the Allobroges of Caesar, Livie, Strabo, and others.

THE PARLIAMENT OF DIION.
COntaining the Dukedom of Burgundy, with the little countries of Bresse,
Breugey, Verromey, and Gex; in the years 1600, and 1601, partly conquered by
Henry the fourth, French king, from Charles, Duke of Savoy, and partly received
from him in exchange for the Marquisate of Salusses.

LA BRESSE, Bressia.
etc.
THese were lately part of Savoy. They lie betwixt the rivers of the Soasne and
Rhosne, where these grow straighter together, proceeding toward their
confluence. They are bounded upon the South, and West, with Daulphinie, and
Lionnois; and upon the other sides with Savoy, and the Dukedom of Burgundy.
The country is champian, fruitful, and pleasant, commended for excellent
wines. Burgus.
The only place of note is Bourg en Bresse, the chief town of La Bresse,
defended with a strong citadell, commanding the country. La Bresse was part of
the Segusiani, before mentioned.

LA BOVRGONGNE. Burgundiae Ducatus.

LA Bourgongne, or the Dukedom of Burgundy (for thus it is distinguished from
the other Burgundy, which is the County) has upon the South, La Bresse, and
Charrolois; upon the West Bourbonois; upon the North Champaigne; and upon the
East, Savoy, and the Free county of Burgundy. The country is most pleasant,
fruitful, and happy, affording plenty of most excellent wines. Chiefer towns
are Tournus, a strong town upon the Soasne, wherewith it is encompassed, in a
fertile soil, abounding with most perfect wines. Here flourishes a rich
Abbey, castle-wise defended with strong walls, and fortifications; the chief
of sundry other Monasteries of this Province, and in Daulphinie, Auvergne,
Poictou, Bretaigne, and other parts of France. Belna.
Beaulne upon the river Bursoize, seated in a plentiful, and fat soil,
yielding the best wines of the kingdom. The town is very strong, besides its
other defenses, secured with an impregnable castle, built by king Lewis the
twelfth. In the country hereof, far immersed within dark thick woods, lies
the great Monastery of Cisteaux, founded in the year 1098 by Otho the second,
Duke of Burgundy; the chief of some 2160 other Monasteries of both sexes in
the Christian world, Cistercium.
besides the military orders of Calatrava, Alcantara, Avis, and Montesa in
Spain, subject to the discipline, and rule hereof. Austun (Augustodunum of
Ptolemie, and Mela, Augustodunum. lon. 26. g. l. 47. Merc.
and civitas Eduorum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and Bailliage, giving the
name to the particular country of Authunois; seated upon the river Arroux at
the foot of the Mountains of Cenis. The town now is mean, chiefly beautified
with some fair Churches, which it yet shows, left marks of its ancient
greatness, Cabilonum. lon. 26. g. 30. lat. 46. 30. m. Clav.
and splendor. Chalon (Cabullinum of Strabo, Caballinum of Ptolemie, Castrum
Gaballionense of Antoninus, and Cavillonium of Caesar,) a Bishops sea, and a
Bailliage, upon the Soasne. Auxone upon the Soasne. Divio. lon. 25. g. 45. m.
lat. 47. g. Clav.
Dijon, a Bishops sea, and the Parliament, and chief city of La Bourgongne,
upon the rivers Suson, and Ousche, in a plain country, most fruitful in corn,
and wines. The town is large, fair, populous, and strongly fortified,
containing 12 parishes, the place of residence of the governor of the
Province. Without, upon the hills stand two strong castles; the one whereof
called La Talente is kept by a garrison of soldiers, the better to secure the
town. Nuys, situated betwixt Dijon, and Beaulne; conjectured from the name to
have been founded by the Nuithones, a part of the ancient Burgundians.
Flavigny. Semur, the Bailliage of the hilly country of Auxois, divided into the
parts, Le Bourg, Le Don-Ion, and Le Chasteau, all three severally fenced with
walls; the two last whereof serve, as strong Citadels, to guard the rest,
mounted upon steep, and precipitious rocks, and cliffes, wherewith they are
environed. Not far from hence, where is the village Alize, stood sometimes
the strong town of Alesia, the seat of war of Vercingetorix, and the Gauls
against Caesar, and the Romans. Avalon (Aballon of Antoninus, then the station
of the 16 Roman Legion.) These from Semur lie in the particular country of
Auxois, the Mandubij of Caesar, part of the Edui. Bourbon-Lancy, upon the top
of an high mountain, defended with a strong castle. At the foot of the hill,
lies the lesser town of S. Ligier, affording medicinable Bathes, both of hot,
and cold waters, preferred by king Henry the Third before all others of the
kingdom. La Bourgongne, with Lionnois, anciently were the Hedui of Caesar,
Strabo, and Mela, the Aedui of Ptolemie, and the Edui of Antoninus, honored by
the Romans with the title of their Allies, and Confederates, the chief people
of the nation of the Celtae; contending for a long time with the Arverni, and
Sequani for the principality of the Gauls, whose quarrels occasioned
afterward the conquest of Gaul Comata, or of the further Gaul, lying North
of the Mountains Cemmeni, by Caesar, and the Romans. Auxerre (Antissiodorum of
Antoninus in his Itinerary, then the Mansion of the 22 Legion of the Romans,
Antissiodor^, lon. 25. g. lat. 48. g. Merc.
and civitas Antisiodorum in his Catalogue of the cities of Gaul) now a
Bishops sea, and Bailliage; naming Le Pais Auxerrois. Nivernium. lon. 25. g.
lat. 47. Merc.
Nevers (Noviodunum of Caesar, and Nivernium of Antoninus in his Itinerary, and
the way betwixt Augustodunum, and Paris) a strong town upon the Loire, near
unto the confluence thereof, and of the river Allier, the seat of the Dukes of
Nevers, and naming the particular country, now called Nivernois. These two
towns are accounted in La Bourgongne, but belong unto the Resort of the
Parliament of Paris. Auxerre is numbered otherwise by Andre du Chesne amongst
the towns of Champaigne.

CHARROLOIS.
THe country is little, named thus from the town of Charroles. It is situated
betwixt the rivers of the Loire, and the Soasne, having upon the North, the
Dukedom of Burgundy; upon the West, Bourbonois, and Forest; upon the South,
Beau-jolois, and Lionnois; and upon the East La Bresse. It belonged anciently
to the Dukes of Burgundy, whose eldest sons were still named Earls of
Charrolois. With La Bourgongne surprised, and detained by Lewis the Eleventh,
and the succeeding French kings, it was for a long time controversed betwixt
them, and the kings of Spain, heirs of the house of Burgundy; after long
wars by king Henry the second, following the agreement of the League of
Cambraye, restored to Philip the second, king of Spain. It is now held by the
house of Burgundy, and Austria; but under the fief of the French kings; subject
in matters of judicature to the Parliament of Dole, in the County of Burgundy,
whither the inhabitants make their appeal.

BEARN. Bearnia.

LYing at the foot of the Pyrenaean Mountains betwixt these, and the countries
of Begorre, and Baionne; named thus from the town Benearnum of Antoninus, now
Orthes. The soil is fat, and rich, as well amongst the mountains, as in the
plain country, affording good pasturages; and plenty of cattaile, corn,
flax, hemp, butter, cheese, and in some parts perfect wines, Castrum Palum.
not yielding to the best in France. Here are likewise sundry springs of hot
medicinable waters. Chiefer towns are Pau, the Parliament, or supreme Court
of judicature of the country, and the seat of the Princes before their union
with France; beautified with a stately Palace, built by Henery d' Albret, K. of
Navarre, and Lord of Bearn. Lescar, a Bishops sea, the more ancient seat of
the Princes; removed afterward to Pau. Oleron (^uro of Antoninus in his
Itinerary, and way betwixt Caesar-Augusta, and Benearnum,) now a Bishops sea,
mounted on the top of an high hill in the more high, and mountainous part of
Bearn. Orthes (after Ios. Scaliger Benearnnm of Antoninus in his Itinerary, and
the way before mentioned, and Ciuitas Beranensium, and Benainas in his
Catalogue of the cities and Provinces of Gaul, and Benarnum of Gregory of
Tours in his 9 book, giving the name to the country,) Navarrins at the foot of
the Pyrenaean Mountains, a well fortified town. The country of Bearn was part
of the Province Nouem-populonia of Ant. Novempopulana of Rufus Festus, and
Novem-populi of Ammianus Marcellinus. The Princes hereof are absolute Lords,
not subject to the check, and fief of others; with the right of Navarre not
long since by Henry the fourth united in the house, and succession of the
French kings.

THE ISLANDS OF FRANCE.
THe Islands belonging to this continent, and subject to the Crown of France
are neither many, or of any great note, or worth. In the sea Mediterranean lie
the Isles d' Eres (the Staechades of Ptolemy) against Proven^ce betwixt Friuls,
and Toulon. Les Pomegues against Marseilles, L' Anguillade against the mouth of
the river Rhosne (probably Blascon of Ptolemy.) Maguelone against the province
of Languedoc. Without the Straights in the Western Ocean the Islands d' Oleron,
and de Re against Xaintogne, and Rochelle. Belle-Isle against Bretaigne, and
the town of Vannes. Here are likewise the Islands of Iersay, Garnsay, and
Alderney, lying against Le Pais Constantin in Normandy, appertaining to this
account, but subject to the kings of Great Bretaigne, being part of their
ancient, and hereditary Duchy of Normandy, and incorporated now with the
Crown of of England; belonging to the relation, and description of that
kingdom.

OF THE STATE OF EVROPE. The XI Book.
COntaining the present bounds, situation, and quality of Germany. The
inhabitants. Their Character, or description, languages, religion, Bishops, and
Clergy. The sacrilegious usurpation, and injuries done to the Church by the
Lay Princes. The manner of the civil government. The Prince. His authority,
titles, and manner of succession. The King of the Romans. The general Diets,
and States of the Empire. Their authority, and power. The Imperial Courts, and
Circles. A short survey of the imperfections, and disorders of the vast,
vnweildie, and ill-vnited body of the German Empire. The parts, or provinces
subject, or more properly belonging to the Empire.

GERMANY.
THE name of the Germans (to omit other more unlikely Etymologies) Strabo
deriveth from the Statim igitur trans Rhenu^ post Celticos populos Oriente^
versus sita loca Germani incolunt, a Gallis parum differentes, si feritatis,
corporum magnitudinis, and fulvi coloris excellentia^ spectes, sed and for^a,
and moribus, and victu adsimiles sunt Gallorum. Itaq, recte mihi videntur
Romani hoc nomen ijs indidisse, cum fratres eos Gallorum vellent ostendere.
Strabon. Geograph. lib. 7.
Latin word (Germani) which signifies brethren, or men of the same kindred, or
of a like nature, and disposition, first given unto them by the Romans, in
regard of their similitude with the neighboring Gauls, as in color, and
shape of body, so in manners, and custom of living. For the name otherwise in
the time of Tacitus was but new, and lately invented, being anciently called
only by the appellations of the many nations Caeterum Germaniae vocabulum
recens, and nuper additum, quoniam qui primi Rhenum transgressi, Gallos
expulerint, nunc Tungri, nunc Germani, vocatisint, ita nationis nomen, non
gentis evaluisse paulatim, vt omnes primum a Victore ob metum, mox a seipsis
invento nomine Germani vocarentur. Tacit. de Morib. Germanorum lib.
inhabiting the country.

The Land is bounded upon the West with Switzerlandt, France, the Low
Countries, and with the part of the German Ocean, intercepted betwixt the falls
of the rivers Eems, and Eydore, upon the North with Denmark, and the Sea
Baltique, upon the East with Poland, Prussen, and Hungary, and upon the South
with the Alps, and Italy.

Chappuys accompteth the length hereof to be 840. Italian miles, measuring
only Description, and government des Respubliques du Monde par Gab. Chappuys.
betwixt the Rhijn, and the Wixel, and the breadth from the town of Brixen in
Tirol unto the Ocean at 745 of the same miles.

It lies betwixt the 22, and 45 degrees of Longitude, accompting from the
Meridian by the Acores, and the 45 20/60, and 54 48/60 degrees of Northern
Latitude, or betwixt some 51 minutes on this side of the 15, or middle parallel
of the sixth clime, where the longest day has 15 hours, and an half, and the
19 minute beyond the 21, or middle parallel of the 9 clime, where it has 17
hours.

It is therefore wholly seated in the Northern halfe-part of the Temperate
Zone, and is for this cause much colder, then the more Southern parts before
described, yet of a more lively, and healthie temperature, and more potent for
generation, bringing forth men, cattle, and plants, whereof it is well
capable, in far more abundance, and of greater strength, and larger
proportion then the other, the fatal nursery of those numberless swarms of
barbarous nations, overwhelming the Roman Empire, and new peopling the
provinces of the West.

The soil is very fruitful, the mountainous parts of the Alps, Schwartzwald,
Otten-wald, and other wild relics of the old Hercynian forest, excepted. The
Country is large, and exceedingly populous, stored with infinite Cities, the
best, and fairest for any one Province in the world, what by means of the
industry of the inhabitants, and through the commodity of the situation
thereof, standing in the heart, and center of Europe, the ordinary way of all
the merchandise, and riches of the neighboring Provinces.

The more happy parts are the Southern betwixt the river of Meine, and the
Alps, yielding plenty of very excellent wines, especially the tract of the
Rhijn, of which the other is destitute. The Northern is generally more plain,
but worse inhabited, and accounted less fruitful, chiefly toward the Wixell,
and the Sea Baltique, yet abounding in corn, with other of the East-lands the
garner, and storehouse of Holland, and the Low Countries, and in time of
dearth of Italy, Spain, and of other countries. The chiefer commodities,
which are transported from hence, are Corn, and Wines, whereof these grow
only in the Southern parts, the other more abundantly in the Northern. It
abounds also with all sorts of metals, as of Iron, Lead, Brass, and of
other baser sorts, so of Silver, which the mines of Meissen, Bohemia, and Tirol
do very plentifully yield. Salt is here in a sufficient quantity, as boiled
out of Salt springs, so mineral extracted out of the earth. It affords also
store of Saffron in the upper Austria, and Bavaria, as it does of woolls in the
land of Hessen of extraordinary finesse for those transmarine regions.

The ancient inhabitants hereof were the Rhaeti, Vindelici, and Norici with
parts of the Pa^nonij, possessing the whole tract, exte^ded betwixt the Danow,
and the Alps: the Menapij, Treveri, Mediomatrices, Lenci, Vbij, Eburones,
Nemeti, Vangiones, Triboci, Ra^raci, and Sequani, parts of Gaul Belgique, and
inhabiting the Western shore of the Rhijn: the Germans, contained anciently
within the Rhijn, the Danow, the Wixel, and the Ocean: the Sc^avi, or Winithi,
succeeding in the left rooms of the Germans, flitting into the Western Roman
Provinces, taking up the moitie hereof, contained betwixt the rivers Elb, and
Saltza, the Wixel, and the Sea Baltique: the Huns, Avares, Lombards, and
Hungarians successively intruding amongst the Pannonij. The rest of the
Barbarians subdued, and driven out by this more strong, and mighty nation, the
whole are now accounted, and known only by the name of Germans.

The modern Germans are commonly of a tall stature, square, and big, by
complexion phlegmatique, or raw sanguine, or where moisture has the dominion
over heat, of hair yellow, or light brown, strong, and thick, having great
bones, and much flesh, with large ioints, nerves, and sinews, but for want of
heat not so firmly knit, neither abounding with such store of quick, and
nimble spirits, as might sufficiently weild so great a mass of body, being for
this cause of a dull, and heavy disposition, fitter to resist, then execute,
and strong rather with a weighty sway of flesh, then otherwise. They are by
nature plain, and honest, simple, without any mixture of deceit, haters of
impostures, and base dealing, religious, chaste, laborious, constant, stiff, or
rather opinatiue, and obstinate, as suspicious of their own weakness, and
hating to be circumvented, rough, or rather rude, and uncivil in their
carriage, but nothing dangerous, not notably given to any vice, drunkenness
excepted; common hereunto, and to all the Northern Nations, not so much by ill
habit, and custom, as by natural inclination, caused whither by a sympathy
of their moister bodies, or through a vehement appetite of their hotter
stronger digesting, and throat-scorching stomachs, intended by their cold. In
handy-crafts, and mechanical inventions they have always much excelled, the
first inventers of Gunnes, Gunpowder, Printing, Clocks, strange waterworks,
and other witty devises to the no less benefit, then admiration of the world.
In wars at this day they are not so well accounted, firm, and constant in
their order, but slow, and heavy, better to receive, then to give a charge,
and to fight a battle in the open field, then to assault a Town, the ordinary
warfare of those times, fearful, dull, and for this cause against dangers
often mutinous, as loath to ha^ard, subject to disrout by false alarums, and
sudden fears, and being once broken not easily brought to rally, and gather
head again.

The languages here spoken are the French, in Savoy, Lorraine, Luick, and the
Free county of Burgundy: the Sclavonian amongst the Bohemians, and Moravians,
and in some parts of Laus^its about the Elb: and the High Dutch common in a
manner to the whole province.

What was the ancient Religion of the nation see Tacitus in his description
hereof.

The first who here preached the Gospel was St Thomas, surnamed Didimus V.
Doroth^^ Synop^in.
, if Dorothaus may be credited, an author somewhat ancient, but whose truth
has always been suspected. The Magdeburgenses in their first Century and 2
book, Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 2
and chapter, muster up St Egistus, one of the 70 Disciples of our blessed
Savior, preaching at Bardewick upon the river Elmenow nere Lunenburg, St
Lucius of Cyrene in Rhaetia, and Vindelicia, St Mark S. Mark. Col. 4.^ chapter
at Laureacum amongst the Norici, St Crescens S. Crescens, Tim. 2. Ep. 4. chapter
at Ments, St Clemens at Mets, and St Maternus, and Eucharius at Colen, and
Triers, with others from the relations of Henricus de Erphordia, Aventinus, the
Lives of the Bishops of the Tungri, and some Histories of the Saints, later
authors, or uncertain, and not backed with the authorities of more ancient.
Irenaeus of Irenae. cont. Haeres. l. 1. c. 3.
of much better authority, living in the reign of the Emperor Antoninus
Verus, and year 170, in his 1 book and 3 chap. contra Haereses, makes
mention of the German Churches, but without naming their Apostles. That
Christianity during those primitive times had taken good root in the parts
lying without the Rhijn we more certainly gather from the Catalogue, and
names of Bishops V. Binij Council. Tom, 1. Sylvestri Papa.
in the first Council of Arles, held about the year 326, and in the reign of
Constantine the Great, where we find mention of Maternus Bishop of Colen, and
Agritius of Trier; but more manifestly from the Council of Colen, had in the
lb. Council. Tom. 1. Papa Iulio primo.
year 347, and reign of Constantius, son to the great Constantine, where
again we read of St Maximinus Bishop of Trier, Tessis of the Nemeti, or
Spier, Victor of the Vangiones, or Worms, Amandus of the Argentinenses, or
Strasburg, Martin of Mentz, Justinian of the Rauraci, or Basil, and Servatius
of the Tungri, amongst others present in that Synod. The like we cannot but
define in Rhaetia, Noricum, and Pannonia, or the parts betwixt the Danow, and
the Alps, subject then to the Christian, and Catholic Roman Empire of the
West. The Great, or proper Germany within the Rhijn, and the Danow for their
desert vastness, and incivilitie were not converted until the conquests, and
soveraigntie of the Frenchmen. The Western Roman Empire trodden under foot by
the barbarous nations, and the countries, or parts now mentioned being planted
with new Colonies of French, Almans, Bavarians, and Huns at that time Gentiles,
and enemies to Christianity, Religion for a time is again totally darkened, and
eclypsed. By means of the great victories of the Frenchmen not long after
converted, and besides Gaul subduing this whole Continent unto the rivers of
the Elb, and Saltza, Christianity begun again to be planted, as in the
tracts without the Rhijn, and the Danow, so within those rivers unto the
Saltza, and Elb now mentioned, the bounds then of their Empire: amongst the
Switzers V. Magdeb. Cent. 5. c. 10. de Episcopis and Doctoribus
, and Grisons by St Fridolinus, a Scottishman, in the reign of Clovis, the
first Christian king of the French: in Bavaria Baron. Annal. Eccles. An Chr.
590.
by S. Rupert, Bishop of Worms about the year 590, and the reign of
Theodebert, King of Austrasia, and of Theodo the third, prince of that country:
amongst the Ib. An. Chr. 697. and 710.
Frisons, Thuringians, and Lower Germans by S. Willebrord, the first Bishop of
Vtreicht, S. Weiro Bishop of Deira, and S. Plechelmus of Candida Casa, with
others in the regency of Pepin the Fat, Mayor of the Palace: in East-France Ib.
by S. Willebald, the first Bishop of Eystet about the same time: and in
Saxony by S. Swibert Ib. An. Chr. 711. Krantzij Metrop. lib. 1. c. 6. etc.
, Bishop of Verden in the year 711. and reign of the Emperor Justinian the
second, and by Krantzij Metrop. lib. 1. c. 7. etc.
S. VVillehade, first Bishop of Bremen in the reign of the Emperor Charles
the great. Chiefer instruments in this sacred work were the English of Great
Britain (for such were these V. supra.
here named) then a late Colonie of the Dutch, of the same language with them,
and but newly made Christians, and for these causes more especially employed
herein by the French Kings, and the Bishops of Rome. Of more eminent note
amongst these was Baron. Annal Ec. Ann. Chr. 716. etc.
S. Winifrid, or S. Boniface, the first Archbishop of Ments, coming hither in
the Regency of Pepin the Fat, by whose more effectual endeauours Christianity,
and the Orthodox faith became here more fully established, Gentilisme, and
haeresie rooted out, a Churches discipline framed, new Bishops erected, and
painful ministers, and laborers every where placed, in regard hereof
acknowledged yet by the Germans, as their Apostle, and the author of their
conversion. These hither parts thus enlightened, the further, lying beyond the
Saltza, and the Elb, and inhabited then by the sundry people of the Sclaui, by
means hereof not long after took flame: the Morauians by Magdeburg. Cent. 9.
c. 2.
the arms and conquest of Zwentibaldus base son to the Emperor Arnulph: the
Bohemians V. Dubravij hist. Bohemicae lib. 4.
under their king Borzivoius converted by S. Methodius Bishop of the Moravians
in the reign of that Emperor: the Sorabi V. Helmoldi Chron. Sclavorum, etc.
inhabiting where now is Meissen, and Lausnitz, subdued by the Emperor Henry
the first; the Helveldi, Leubuzi, with others, possessing sometimes the
country, called afterward the Marquisate of Brandenburg, forced by the same
Emperor, and their long wars with the Marquesses hereof: and the Wiltzi, and
Pomerani, now Pomeren, under their princes Wartislaw, and Casimir the first,
Christened, and won unto the faith by Otto bishop of Bamberg about the year
1124 in the reign of the Emperor Henry the Fifth. The last, which stood out
were the Obotriti, with other people, anciently possessing the modern
Dukedomes of Mecklenburg, and Lawenburg, after sundry apostacies, and much
stifnes in the defense of their idolatry, and liberty worn out by continual
wars with the neighboring Saxons, their country filled with new colonies of
this Christian Dutch nation by Henry surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony, and
Bauaria, in the reign of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, which happened in a
manner by the same means to all the rest of the Winithi. The whole country
being thus cleared from Gentilisme ran the same fortune with other the
Provinces of the West, enthralled to Popish impostures, and the tyranny of the
Sea of Rome. The first, who sensible of their erronr, begun to shake off this
yoke were the Bohemians V. Aeneae Sylvij histor. Bohem. Ioachimum Camerarium
de Fratrum Orthodoxorum Ecclesijs in Bohemia. Dubravij histor. Bohem. lib. 24.
27. etc.
about the year 1400, and in the reign of their king Wenceslaus the fourth,
incited hereunto through the preaching of John Husse, professor of Divinity at
Prage, drawing his opinions from John Wickliffe, not long before attempting the
like reformation in England in the reigns of Edward the third, and Richard the
second, after long tumults sundry battles fought, many victories gained, much
bloodshed, and cruelties committed on both sides, Husse and Hierome of Prage
burnt at Constance, and in revenge hereof Monasteries and Religious houses
pulled down by Ziska, and his followers, two General Counsels assembled at
Constance, and at Basil, at length in the reign of the Emperor Sigismund
obteining a liberty of their consciences, which, although commanded still by
Popish princes, they enjoyed notwithstanding until the present reign of the
Emperor Ferdinand the second, by who^ after his great victory at the battle
of Prage the public exercise of their religion has been lately prohibited,
their ministers, and such, as would not conform to the popish doctrine, being
banished the country, jealous of their better inclination, and love unto
Frederique the first Count Palatine of the Rhijn, his competitor for the
kingdom. Orthodox religion for a time confined almost within the mountains of
Bohemia about some 117 years after Huss in the year 1517 V. Joan. Sleidan.
Comment. de Statu Relionis, and Re^p. regnanti Carolo 5. Caesare
, and the reigns of the Emperor Maximilian the first, and Pope Leo the tenth,
for the further enlargement thereof it pleased god to raise up Luther in the
neighboring parts of Saxony, a Carmelite Friar by profession, borne at Islebie
in the County of Mansfield, with great vehemence declayming against the
errors, and impostures of the Church of Rome, stirred first up through the
abuse of indulgencies, exasperated, and drawn on to a more curious search by
the unseasonable violence, and opposition of the Popes, and their ministers,
adhaered unto by many Princes, and free Commonwealths of the Empire,
countenancing, and maintaining his doctrine in sundry Colloquies, and Diets,
afterward by force of arms, and open war; continued with variable success
betwixt them, and the Emperor Charles the fifth until in the year 1555, and
reign of the same Prince for the more secure defense, and saftie of the
Province, threatened with the wars of the Turks, and their stronger union
against that enemy, in a Diet, then held at Auspurg, a peace of Religion is
established, not without much rancour, and iealousies still observed unto this
day. Shortly after Luther in the year 1519, Zwinglius, a Canon of Zurich,
moved through the same impostures, and absurdities, began another reformation
in Zwitzerland, followed afterward by the reverent Calvin in Geneva, amending
some things in the Churches hereof, which the other omitted, the occasion of
the names, and reformations of the Zwinglianists, and Calvinists, besides Great
Britain, France, Ireland, and the Low Countries, where the Reformed are all of
this profession spreading fast, and gathering ground in this country to the no
small grievance, and discontent of both the other Religions. There are then now
four different names of Religions here openly professed, and allowed, of the
Romish pretended Catholics, the Zwinglianists, Caluinists, and Lutherans,
whereof the three latter consenting in the maine grounds, and in opposition to
the first, are otherwise all called by the general name of Protestants, a name
begun first amongst the Lutherans, given unto them upon occasion of the
Protestation of their Princes, and States made against the decree of Spire,
enacted in the year 1529, praejudiciall to their cause, communicated
afterward to the other two. The Zwinglianists, and Calvinists differ only in
name, whose doctrine is the same with ours. They contain the Reformed amongst
the Zwitzers, and in High Germany the Electour Palatine of the Rhijn, the
Electour, and Marquess of Brandenburg, the Lantgraue of Hessen, the Duke of
Zweibruck, the cities of Strasburg, and Bremen, with some other Princes, and
towns of inferior rank. The Lutherans dissent from the Calvinists, and
Zwinglianists in the points of the Eucharist, Praedestination, and Freewill, a
cause of much unseemly heat betwixt the sides. They are the greatest number,
prevailing especially in the Northern parts, amongst whom of chiefer note are
the Electour, and Dukes of Saxony, the Dukes of Brunswijck, Wirtenburg,
Lunenburg, Lawenberg, Mecklenburg, and Pomeren, together with the most part of
the Free Cities. The Papists are accounted by some to be the sixth part of the
whole, after others to have been a twelfth part. Amongst these of more eminent
sort are the Emperor, and house of Austria, (but whose subjects especially in
Austria, and Bohemia are for their greatest number Protestants) the Dukes of
Lorraine, Savoy, and Bavaria, the three Spiritual Electours, with the other
Bishops yet remaining. The Ecclesiastical dignities since the time of Luther
are partly here yet retained by the Clergy, partly detained by Lay usurpers.
Of these were sometimes reckned 6 Metropolitan, or Archbishops seas, 39.
Bishoppricks, 20 Priories, and 124 Abbeyes of both sexes. Their Bishops with
their Archbishops follow. Under Mentz the Bishops of Strasburg, Spire, Worms,
Wurtzburg, Auspurg, Constance, Chur, Ais^ett, Halberstat, Hildeshaim,
Paderborn, and Ferden: under Colen, the Bishop of Munster, Osenburg, Minden,
Liege, and Vtreicht in the Low Countries: under Trier the Bishops of Metz,
Toul, and Verdun: under Meydburg, the Primate of the kingdom, the Bishops of
Meissen, Mersburg, Naumburg, Brandenburg, and Havelburg: under Saltzburg, the
Bishops of Regensburg, Passaw, Frisingen, Trent, Brixen, Gurck, Kempse, Seckaw,
Lavenmundt, and Wien: and under Bremen the Bishops of Lubec, Ratzenburg, and
Suerin. The Bishop of Bamberg is exempt from all superior jurisdiction saving
of the Popes. Hereof some 25 yet remain. The revenewes of the rest of the
Bishoppricks are employed to other uses, or sacrilegiously withheld by the
Laity under the title of Administratours, the usual preyes of the Princes, upon
whom they border, or in whose countries they lie, the misery most reigning in
the Lutheran, and Northern parts, and common to the other Clergy. The names
of the Abbots, Priors, and Abbatesses read in the Commentary of Birtius, whom
for brevitie sake I omit.

This has been the continual affair, and estate of the Church, and Religion.

Concerning the civil, not well knowing by what name to call it, it is an
aggregate state, consisting of almost infinite particulars, the chiefes of all
which enjoy a kind of absolute government in their several districts,
executing justice according to the laws, and customs of their countries, with
power to coin money, lay taxes, and impositions upon the people, levy
Soldiers for the war, with all other rights of majesty, and privileges of
Free estates; yet always with reference to the General state, which they call
the Empire, with whose more sovereign authority these particulars are checked
in, whose laws, censures, and ordinances they are bound to obey, and whether,
and to the Imperial Court at Spire held under this authority appeal may be
made herefrom, unless in causes criminal.

It consists of a Prince, and the many particular states, before mentioned.

The Prince is called Emperor of the Romans, and King of Germany, the latter
of which titles was begun in Lewis the Ancient, unto whose share the province
fell with this style in the division of the French Monarchy amongst the sons
of the Emperor Lewis the Godly. The former title was added by Charles the Fat,
son to the Ancient, the only surviving male issue descended from Charles the
Great (in whom the dignity was restored) lawful, or fit to govern, the rest
of the posterity hereof being then illegitimate, in nonage, or failing, since
for the greater power, and swey of the Dutch nation, and the quarrels, and
divisions amongst the French men, and Italians continued herein unto this day.

His right anciently, and during the line of Charles the Great, or of the
French, was haereditarie, as afterward in a manner it continued during the
reign of the Saxons. By Otho the third, the last Prince of the house of
Saxony, wanting heirs, it was made elective, and for prevention of foreign
claim, as well for the Empire, as the Kingdom, entailed upon the German
nation, as ever since it has remained.

His authority now is almost only nominall (which has happened since, and by
means of his Election, they, who have had the right to choose, by little, and
little making themselves free, depriving him of all power, and deriuing it upon
themselves, and the rest of the subordinate states); praeseding with great
majesty in the general assemblyes, or diets, most sumptuously berobed, adorned
with the imperial crown, and scepter, and with the names of Caesar, and
Augustus, but without the least reality, answearable to so fair a show, the
first, and immediate command, as has been before related lying in the
particular states, and that chief, or sovereign of the empire in the Diets,
without that he can do any act of jurisdiction, more then in putting in
execution the Imperial decrees, unless in the particular countries he lordeth
over, or that upon a common interest, aided by one side, as not long since
happened under the Emperor Charles the fifth, he can oppress, and bear down
the other. The next successor, or heir apparent to the Empire is called King
of the Romans, designed by the Electours.

The particular or subordinate states, are divided into three different orders;
of the Princes Electours: the Inferior Princes; and of the imperial cities.

The Princes Electours are they, who have the power to choose the Emperor, for
this cause enjoying praecedency, and place before the other, and making a
several house by themselves in the general Diets. These are the Archbishop
of Mentz, Chancelour of Germany, the Archbishop of Colen, Chancelour of Italy,
the Archbishop of Triers, Chancelour of France, the Count Palatine of the
Rhijn, Sewer, the Duke of Saxony, chief Marshall of the Empire, and the
Marquess of Brandenburg, great Chamberlain. To these is added the King of
Bohemia, chief taster, whose place is next above the Paltzgraue, who has the
casting voice in case of aequality, and difference amongst the six.

The Inferior Princes, (whom I name, and distinguish thus in regard of the
praeheminence of the former because of their right of Election, for otherwise
some of them may equal, or surpass the other in riches, and revenue)
comprehend again two distinct ranks, those of the Spirituality and the Lay
Princes.

The Clergy, who have the right of Princes, are the Archbishops and Bishops
before mentioned, together (after Birtius) with some thirty of the Abbots,
Priours, and Abbatesses.

The Lay Princes contain sundry different names, and titles of Archduke,
Duke, Paltz-graue, Lant-graue, Burgraue, Marquis, Prince, Earl, Baron, and
Lord.

The more eminent sort of them, for this cause placed in the diets amongst the
clergy before the Abbots, are the Archdukes of Austria, the Dukes of Bauaria,
Burgundy, Lorraine, Savoy, Cleue, Gulick, Bergen, Saxony, Brunswijck,
Lunenburg, Pomere^, Mecklenburg, Wirtenberg, Zweibruck, Holstein, and
Lawenburg, the Lantgraues of Hessen, and Luchtenburg, the Marquisats of
Bra^deburg, and Baden, the princes of Anhalt, and the Earls of He^neburg.

The lesser Saeculars ranked after the Abbots, and Clergy follow. The Earls
of Helfe^stein; Kirchberg; Wisenstaig, Lauffen; Montfort; Furstenberg Zimmeren;
Otingen; Sultz, Hohen-Zollerne; Castle; Vertheim; Rheineck; Hohenloe; Erpach;
Leiningen; Falkenstein; Hanaw; Luchtenberg; Nassaw; Breda; and Dillenborg;
Wilbaden, and Iltstain; Sarbruchen; Waldtpurg; Nassaw en Weilpurg; Beilstein;
Koningstein, and Epstein; Eisenburg the higher; Eisenburg the Lower; Mersen;
Budinghen; Vinnerberg; Solme; of the Rhijn; Horn; Seyn; Arsnberg; Vintzlingen;
Reyen; Bitch; Salm; Veldentz; Dengen; Rappin; Hardeck; Hohenstein; Wolkenstein;
Schaumburg, and Giengen; Dierenburg, and Mullingen; Gleichen; Schwartzenberg;
Schonberg; Jude, the same Lord en Ruech; Pless; Weda, and Ringelburg; Olnburg;
Loebestain; Regenstain; West-Friestandt; Oost-Freislandt; Lip; Olde^burg;
Delmenhorst; Hoya, and Westenburg; Lemgow; Waldeck; Diepholt; Steinfort;
Benthe^; Bru^chorst; Wergestein; Spigerberg, and Bivers dorff; Tekelnberg;
Dortmund; Winsdorff; Ortenberg; Hagen; Hoonfels; Leiseneck; Berge^;
Manderscheid; Reiferscheid; Egmont, and Iselstein; Tubingen; Bla^kenberg, and
Kirchingen; the Marchgraue Ebetstain; the Barons Gundelfingen; Geroltzeck;
Ober-hewen; Rapotzkirchen; Stauffen; Plawen; Degenberg; Ober-Sultzberg; Bergen,
and Waelhem; Hauere; Wildenfels, and Tautenberg; the Lords Tussen; Stutgart;
Iustingen; and Schenslingen; Hohen-Richperg; Hohenfeldt, and Tipoltzkick:
Braides; Sonnenberg; Reichelspurg; Limburg; Falkestein; Kunseck; Kunseckerberg;
Geraw; Reichenstein; Muntzenburg; Loffenstain; Ridberg, Linges; Somiriss;
Senster; Roggendorff; Alendorf; Kuning fuckerberg; Morspurg; Brandestain, and
Rausse; Wolfstein; Permont; Fronsbeck; Flackenstein, and Witten.

The Imperial towns are such, which exempted from the command of the Princes,
immediately acknowledge the Empire, governed notwithstanding in manner of
absolute commonwealths by their own laws, and magistrates. They are the
cities, and towns of Colen, Aken, Worms, Spire, Strasburg, Francfurt, Lubec,
Hamburg, Vlme, Auspurg, Noremberg, Regenspurg, Costnitz, Metz, Toul, Verdun,
Basil, Besanton, Duisburg, Danzick, Elbingen, Turckheim, Hagenaw, Weissenburg,
Ober-Ebestain, Roshaim, Schlestat, Colmar, Altach, Kaisersburg, Mulhausen in
Sungow, S. Gregoris Munster, Landaw, Kausmans-Sarbruck, Camerick, Fridberg,
Wideraw, Gelnha^sen, Gosler, Gottingen, Barkel, Wartburg, Lemgow, Rotterburg
upon Tauber, Weissenburg in Nortgow, Donawerd, Winshaim, Schweinfurt, Wimpsen,
Hailbrun, Hal, Norlingen, Dinkelspuel, Giengen, Bopsinge^, Gemundt in Schwaben,
Estingen, Yssui, Lewkirch, Me^minge^, Kempten, Weil, Pfullendorff, Kaufbeurn,
Northausen, Vberlingen, Wange^, Buchorn, Raue^spurg, Bibrach, Lindaw,
Offe^burg, Gengenbach, Rotweil, Zel Hamersbach, Schaffhausen, S. Gal, and
Buchaw.

Of these 3 estates assembled together with the Emperor consist the
Parliaments, and Diets, wherein, as in some aggregate chief, lies that
sovereign power, we now called of the Empire, in whose only right, and free
disposition it is to give laws unto the princes, and states, to determine of
general war, and peace, to lay taxes, and impositions upon the people, to
appoint judges, and magistrates of the empire, with all other rights
appertayning to absolute, and sovereign jurisdiction. They are most commonly
appoin in the preceding Diets, or in cases extraordinary by the Emperor, and
the Electours, in such cities, as are thought for the time most fitting,
containing three several houses, of the Electours, of the Princes
Ecclesiastical, and Temporal, and of the delegates of the towns Imperial
after the number, and order of the states before mentioned, the matters
propounded being carried according to the mayor part hereof, which are any two
houses against the third, and these severally by a mayor part of their voices.

Under this authority is held the Imperial court at Spire, ordained for the
putting of the laws hereof in execution, and otherwise for the legal
determining of all suits, and controversies, which may happen betwixt state,
and state, these, and the Emperor (although both these most commonly are now
decided by arms,) and betwixt private persons in every particular
commo^-wealth, from whence appeal may be made hither; consisting (says Bodin)
of 24 judges appointed by the Diets, or after others of an annual president,
and 32 judges, whereof six are chosen by the Emperor, who are two princes, two
lawiers, and two knights, holding of the Empire; one by each Electour; and two
by each circle, half Lawiers, and half knights. Besides this here are the
Courts of the ten Circles (which are so many provinces the general state since
the Diet of Noremberg in the year 1422 has been divided into) of
Frankenlandt, Bayerne, Ostenreich, Schwaben, the Rhijn, the 4 Electours of this
limit, Westphalen, the two Saxonies, and Burgu^dy, which are for the ordering
of the special occurre^ces, proper to these divisions, and the speedier, and
more easy execution of the imperial edicts, directed by one chief judge, who
must be a prince of the empire, and 4 Cou^cellours assistants, all of the
Laity, and chosen out of their several Provinces, or Circles.

From this policy, and order we may gather the nature, strength, and condition
of this great body of state, huge, and vast, like the people, but slow, and
unweildy, since not to be moved but by direction of the Diets, which cannot
easily, or quickly be called, neither are obeyed, but as it shall please the
cities, and princes, or as the Emperor shall have power to constrain them. We
add the sundry factions, necessarily attending this divided government, or
otherwise casually happening hereunto, disabling the country well to preserve,
and defend it self, much less to enlarge its bounds, and to encroach, and
grow upon others. A first is betwixt the states, and the Emperor, whereof this
might endeavor to increase, and mainetaine his prerogatives, the other to
keep down his too eminent authority, for this cause being unwilling to assist
him in any his foreine attempts, the prosperous success whereof would but
advaunce his greatness, and the more enable him to usurp upon their
privileges. A second is betwixt the Free cities, and the Princes, these
attempting to enthrall, and make subject the Cities unto their tyrannies, the
other again to preserve their liberty, and, as it happened amongst the
Switzers, by their aides, and confederacies to set free the subjects of the
Princes, and to join them unto their union; of all others for this reason the
most abhorring foreine war, and enmity, which could not but hinder their
commerce, and trade, and for that the victories, and conquests gained could not
any wise profit them, and but turn unto their prejudice, falling to the share
of the Princes, or of the Emperor, of both whose power they stand a like
jealous. A third faction is that of Religion betwixt the Protestants, and
Papists, the most hurtful and prejudicial of all the rest, each side in
regard of their mutual rancours, and iealousies denying all aid against any
prince, or state of their own profession, but rather to the contrary in what
they are able furthering their cause, upon whose general further growth, and
prosperity, countenance, and good intelligence they especially depend, and
stand. By these disvnions, and imperfections the power, and credit hereof has
irrecouerably declined unto our times, each bordering nation presumptuously
nibling hereat and still lopping off some country, or town herefrom, when like
to some great natural body, encombred with sicknesses, and infirmities, it can
not any wise stir, and help it self: where to the contrary if these diseases
and lamenes were not, and that the whole, as sometimes it was, were united into
one perfect monarchy, for the sundry advantages it has, it would doubtless
bear great swaie in the Christian Commonwealth, if not endanger the
soueraignety, and dominion thereof.

The country (accompting only what is yet subject to the Empire, for it has
been otherwise of late years further extended) comprehends at this day some
forty general, or greater names, and divisions, of Savoy, the Free County of
Burgundy, Lorraine, the district of Trier, the Bishopric of Luick, the Land
of Gulicke, Cleueland, the diocese of Colen, the Lower Palatinate, Elsatz,
Sungow, Schwahen, Bavaria, the Bishopric of Saltzburg, Tirol, Karnten, Krain,
Steirmarcke, Austria, Bohemia, Moravia, Schlesi, Lausnitz, Franconia, Hessen,
Duringen, Meissen, Ober Sachsen, the Earldom of Mansfield, and the countries
of Brandenburg, Pomeren, Mecklenburg, Holstein, Bremen, Lunenburg, Brunswijck,
Meydenburg, Freislandt, and Westphalen, whose descriptions, succeed in their
order, after that first (following mywonted method) I have presented unto your
view, the many successions, and changes of estates, people, and names, which
have happened here unto our times, beginning, and occasioning the present, names,
state, and divisions.

OF THE STATE OF EVROPE. The XII Book.
COntaining the description of the more great, and famous mountains, woods,
and rivers of Germany. Their ancient, and present names. The countries
composing anciently the modern Germany. The description of the Provinces of
Rhaetia, Noricum, and Pannonia out of Ptolomie, Pliny, Strabo, and others.
Their subjection, and estate under the Romans. Their conquest, and plantation
by the Almans, and Boioarians, and uniting to the language, and name of
Germany. The description of the ancient, and more proper Germany out of
Tacitus, Ptolomie, Strabo, and the rest. The many different and uncertain
interpretations of the first people, or inhabitants hereof, with the reasons.
The savagenes, liberty, and undaunted fierceness of the ancient Germans. The
number of Roman Legions attending their motions, and guarding against them the
shoares of the Rivers Rhijn, and Danow. The history, seats, and conquests of
the Saxons, French, Almans, Thuringians, Boioarians, Huns, Longobards, Avares,
Hungarians, Danes, Norvegians, Suiones, or Suethidi, and Sclaves, with the
Kingdoms, and States, issuing from them. The beginning, and fortunes of the
Kingdoms of Germany, Danemarke, Norwey, Bohemia, Bavaria, Poland, and
Hungary, the Dukedomes of Saxony, Brunswijck, Lunenburg, Holstein, Bergen,
Westphalen, Schwaben, Wirtenberg, Zeringen, Franconia, Bavaria, Austria,
Steirmarcke, Karnten, Pomeren, Mecklenburg, and Schlesi, the Marquisates of
Brandenburg, Meissen, Marheren, and Baden, the Lantgraueships of Duringen, and
Hessen, and of the Earledomes of Habspurg, Friburg, Pfirt, or Sungow, and
Tirol. The present extent, names, and account of Germany, caused by so many
successions, and changes.

THE MOVNTAINES OF GERMANY.
THE Landmarkes, whereof we shall have occasion to make use in the Relation
following, are the Mountains, Rivers, and Woods hereof. The Mountains, of
which we find mention in ancient Authors, were the Alps, Abnobi, Sudetae,
Melibocus, Coecius, and of the Sarmatae.

THE ALPS Alps Plin. Not. hist. lib. 3. c. 20.

The name hereof Festus Sext. Pomp. Fest.
deriveth from their whiteness, called thus from their snowie tops; Isid.
Hispal.
Isidore from the word Alpas, signifying with the ancient Gauls a Mountain.
They contain all that long ridge of hills, wherewith, as with a wall, Italy is
encompassed, and divided from the rest of Europe, beginning at the Sea
Mediterranean, and the river Varo, and extended betwixt that Province, and the
maine lands of Germany, and France, unto the country of Istria, and the river
Arsia, falling into the sea Adriatique at the Gulf Cornero, where the most
part of authors do end the same. They were distinguished into diverse names
for their large extent, and their sundry famous passages, of the Alps
Maritimae, Coctiae, Graiae, Poeninae, Lepontia, Rheticae, Iuliae, and Carnicae.

THE ALPS MARITIMAE. Alps Maritimae Ptol. lib, 3. c. 1. Ammi. Marcellini lib.
15. Constant. Imperat Catalog. Prove. and Civ. Gal. Antonini.

These bordered upon the sea Mediterranean, from whence came their surname.
They severed anciently Gaul Narbonensis from Liguria, now Provence, from the
country of Genoa. They were otherwise called the Ligurian Alps Ligusticae.
Alps, for that they were neighboured upon, and inhabited by the people of the
Ligures. Their more noted top was the Mountain AcemaMons Plin. not. hist. lib.
3. c. 4.
Acema, now Monte Camelione, out of which the river Varo springs.

COCTIAE. Alps Coctiae Catalog. Prove. and Civ. Gal. Anton. Alps Cotiae*
Eutrop. lib. 7. in Nerone; Alps Cottiae Am. Mar^^ll. lib. 15. Constable.
Imperatore.

They lay next unto the Maritimae, so named from Coctius V. Sueton. Tranquil.
l. 6. Imper. Claud. Nerone; and Am. Marc^ll. lib. 15. Imp. Constantio.
King of the Allobroges. They contained the tract of the Alps betwixt
Piedmonte, and Daulphine, and Savoy. The more noted parts hereof were Mons
Vesulus mons Plin. not. hist. lib. 3. c. 16.
Vesulus, now Viso, whence do issue out the great rivers of the Poe, and
Durance in France: Mont Genebre, near Briancon in Daulphinye, where Hannibal
by Acciaolus De vita Hannibalis.
is thought to have passed over, now the ordinary way betwixt Piedmonte, and
Daulphinie: and Mont S. Denis, otherwise now called Mont Cenis, and by the
Italians, Strada Romanae, for that it is the ordinary road betwixt Rome and
France by the way of Lunebourg, and Susa.

GRAIAE. Alps Graiae Catal. Prove. and Civ. Gal. Anton. Am. Mar. lib. 15.
Imper. Constant. C. Plin. Not. hist. lib. 3. cap. 20. Alps Graeae. Ptol. lib.
3. c. 1. Geograph.

They follow the Alps Coctiae, thus most probably named from Hercules, and his
Grecian followers, reported by Pliny V. Plin. not. hist. lib. 3. c. 20. and
17.
sometimes to have this way passed over those Mountains. They are the part,
lying betwixt the town, and country of Tarantaise in Savoy, and the vallie of
Augsta in Italy. Their more famous tops are the Lesser St Bernard, and the
Mountain Gales, otherwise called the Greater Cines, whereof this is the direct
way betwixt Tarantaise, and Ougstal, or the vallie of Augsta.

PAENINAE Alps Poeninae Catal. Prove. and Civ. Gal. Antonin. Am. Marc. lib. 15.
Imp. Constant. Poeni Montes Ptol. Geog. l. 3. c. 1.

These succeed unto the Alps Graiae, named thus from the mountain god,
Paeninus, V. T. Live. lib. 21. hist. Romans
who^ the Veragri, the Painim inhabitants hereof did sometimes worship, or
otherwise from their sharp rocks. They contain those steep, and horrid
mountains, incircling Wallis-landt, or lying betwixt that Valley, and Ougstal
in Italy. The more noted top hereof is the greater S. Bernard, so named of a
monastery here extant, dedicated to a Monk of this name of Augsta, living
sometimes Anchoret in these deserts, famous in the Popish Legends.

LEPONTIAE. Alps Lepontiorum Plin. not. hist. lib. 3 c. 20. Alps Lepontinorum
Ptol. lib. 3. c. 1.

These are East of the Paeninae, called thus from the Lepontij, their ancient
inhabitants. They contain the rockie, and desert tract hereof, lying betwixt
the springs of the river Rhosne, and the Vorder Rhijn; or as Tschudus V. Aegid.
Tschud. Rhaetiae Alpin. Descript. c. 32.
more particularly boundeth the^, betwixt the Canton of Vren of the Switzers,
the upper Wallislandt, the Valley of Augsta; with part of Milanese against the
Lake of Como, and the Grisons, including the Valleys Palenser-tal, Meintal,
Eschental, Liuinertal, with others. The most remarkable, and more hugie tops
hereof are the Mountains Die Furcken, adioining to the Upper Wallislandt, out
of which springs the Rhosne; S. Gothard, the head of the rivers Russe and
Tesin, flowing toward contrary seas; Luckmanier Lucumonis Mons.
where arises the nearer branch, or head of the Rhijn.

RHAETICAE Alps Rhaetorum Strab. lib. 4. Alps Rhaeticae Cornelij Tacit. de
Mor. Germanorum lib.

These lay East of the Lepontiae, so named from their inhabitants, the Rhaeti
Alpestres. They are contained betwixt the Switzers, and the Lake of Como, and
Verona in Italy, and comprehend now the Grisons, and part of Tirol. The more
famous tops hereof were Adulas Mons Adulas mons Strab. Geogr. lib. 4. Ptol.
Gegraph. l. 2. c. 9.
, now Colmen d' Ocello to the Grisons, and in Dutch Der Vogel, where springs
the farther head of the Rhijn; Splugen-bergt, or Colmen del Orso; and
Rhaetico-mons Rhaetico-Mons Pomp. Mel. lib. 3.
, now Prettigouwer-berg.

IVLIAE. Alps Iuliae Am. Marc. lib. 21. Imp. Constant. and Iuliano; and Rufi
Festi Breviar. Alps Iuliae, and Venetae Am. Marc. lib. 31. Montes Tarvisan^
Plin. Not. hist. lib. 3. c. 18.

These were Eastward of the Rhaeticae, probably thus called from the famous
Julius Caesar, whom we read in Rufus Festus sometimes to have passed over this
part of the Alps. They were otherwise called the Alps Venetae from the
neighboring Veneti in Italy; likewise the Mountains Tarvisani, from that
people, upon whom likewise they joined in Italy. They are the tract of the
Alps, coasting along Marca Trivigiana, belonging to the Venetians, toward the
head of the Adriatique sea, having on the other side the Bishopric of
Saltzburg in Germany. Part hereof was called Mons Taurus mons Mel. lib. 3.
Taurus by Mela, which name seems yet to be preserved in Gastein Taurn,
Rastatter-Taurn, and other mountainous tops of the same termination in the
Diocese of Saltzburg.

CARNICAE. Alps Carnorum Strab. lib. 4.

These conclude the Alps, and were the Mountains of Carnia, now of Karnten,
and Krain, from whence came their name. A part of these Alps was the mountain
Ocra Mons Strab. Geogr. lib. 4. and Ptol. lib. 2. c 12.
Ocra of Strabo and Ptolomie. Of these the Alps Maritimae, and Carnicae are
but low in comparison to the other, rather to be accounted downs then
Mountains. The Coctiae and Graiae, are neither so high, but that their
ordinary passages lie open all the year long. The highest Alps, and of the
most grisley aspect are those accosting Germany, chiefly the Lepontiae, and
the hills of the Grisons, and Wallislandt, for their long, and steep ascents,
narrow, and craggie ways, deep, and dreadful precipices, strong
whirlewindes, and huge balls of snow, with great noise, and violence rouling
down the mountains some times of the year thuart the ways; yielding a most
troublesome, fearful and dangerous passage, altogether impassable by wagon,
and with great difficulty by horse. Here lie notwithstanding hidden in the
hollow bottomes sundry fair valleys, such as are Intal, Wallislandt,
Valtolina, and the Vale of Adise, scarcely yielding in fruitfulness to the
best plains, and in pleasure far exceeding them. Merula observes in his
Cosmog: Part: 2. lib: 4. c. 5.
travail over these mountains the extreme tops to be exceedingly barren, and
miserable, horride with an old perpetual ice, and snow; the sides, or lower
Mountains to be tolerable pasturage, and not altogether unfit for tillage;
the subject bottomes to be most plentiful, and fruitful, especially toward
Italy, and the Sun.

THE MOVNTAINES ABNOBI Abnobi Ptol: lib: 2. c. 11. Abnoba Mons Cor: Tacit: de
Moribus German: lib:

These comprehended that bank of wooddie Mountains, now called Schwartz-wald,
beginning near the town of Waldshut upon the Rhijn, and by the heads of the
rivers Danow, and the Neccar, and the towns of Villingen, Rotweil, Horb,
Shiltach, Nagolt, and Wildbad extended Northwards through part of Schwaben, and
the Dukedom of Wirtenberg, continued afterward from thence by other names
through the lower Palatinate, and a long the course of the river Cochen.

SVDETAE Sudetae Mo^tes Ptolem. lib: 2. c. 11.

They are the hills, encircling Bohemia, covered with the Woods Gabreta, and
Luna.

SARMATICI Sarmatici Montes Ptol: lib: 2. c. 11, and lib. 3. c. 5.

They seem to be the same with Seuo Mons Solini. c. 32.
Sevo of Solinus and Carpathus Mons Ptol: lib: 3. c. 8.
Carpathus of Ptolomie, dividing now the kingdoms of Poland, and Hungary,
common then to both nations of the Sarmatae, and Germans, but named from the
Sarmatae.

MELIBOCVS Melibocus Ptol: lib: 2. c. 11.

This after Pirkhermerus was a branch of the Abnobi continued from thence unto
Meissen, parts whereof should be Hartzwald, and the hilly tract, where are
found the rich silver mines. B. Rhenanus more probably puts it to be hilly
country of Hessen, wherein the name yet seems to be kept in the parts of
Catzen-elbogen, expressing as much as Melibocus of the Catti.

CARVANCAS Caruancas Mons Claudij Ptolemaei Geog. lib. 2. c. 15.

This after the same author contained at this day the hilly tracts of Krain,
Krabbaten and Gorecz.

ALBANVS Albanus mons Ptolem: Geograph lib. 2. c. 15. and 16. and 17.
AND BAEBII. Baeblj montes Ptolemaei Geogr: lib: 2. c. 15.

The former now seems to contain the mountain Schwanberger-Alb^, with
others of the like termination in Steirmarck. The Baebij most probably are now
the mountains of Krabbaten.

CETIVS Cetius mons Ptolem: Geogr: lib. 2. c. 15.

This is now the hill Calemberg in Austria continued here for a great length
betwixt the rivers of the Danow and the Dra, and distinguished into sundry
particular names of Schneberg, Semering, Kemperg, Hertperg, and Deubsperg,
Heustperg, and Plaitz, the common bounds sometimes of the countries Noricum,
and Pannonia.

THE WOODS v: Caesaris Com. Belli. Gallici. lib. 6. c. 6. and. 10: Strab: lib:
7. Ptolem: lib: 2. c. 11. Pomp. Mel: lib. 3. Pi^ckermeri Locorum per Germaniam
Explicat: Andraeae Althameri Scholia in Cor. Tacitum dc German: lod:
W^llichijin Tacit: de Germa: Com: B: Rhenani Rerum German: lib. 3.

They were the famous Hercynia, Martiana, Bacenis, or Semana, Gabreta, and Luna.

HERCYNIA Sylva Hercynia Caesaris Com. Belli. Gall. lib. 6. c. 10. Ptol. lib.
2. c. 11. Strab: lib: 7. Pomp: Mel: lib. 3.

Some derive this name from the Dutch word Hartz, signifying pitch, in regard
of the great plenty of that oilie matter it yields; others from the Greek
word (...), which signifies a hedge, since encompassing this province with its
spreading branches, the hedge or mound betwixt the same, and foreign nations.
It begun after Caesar at the Rhijn, and the confines of the Heluetij, and
Nemeti, or of Switzerlandt, Elsats, and the lower Palatinate, and was continued
from thence Eastward along the course of the Danow unto the Daci, now the upper
Hungary, and Transylvania, from whence it declined toward the Left hand from
the river, for the large extent thereof bordering upon many other countries,
containing some 9 days journey in breadth, the length then after 60 days
discovery not being found out by any. Of this Wood were parts all the other
woods before mentioned, and, as it seems here by the description of my
author, likewise all those vast deserts, and forests of the Daci and Sarmatae
possessed by the Poles, Transilvanians, Lithuanians, Muscovites, and ^usses,
since continued from hence. Some left remainders in Germany (for the greatest
part through long ciuility have been wasted and consumed, replenished now with
sundry cities, and towns) are at this day Schwartzwald Nigra Silua.
in (...), and in the Dukedom of Wirtenberg, before mentioned; Otten-wald
Silua Ottonica.
in the Palatinate betwixt the rivers Neccar, and the Maine; Wester-wald Silua
Occidua.
nere unto the Rhijn, and the town of Cobolentz; between Franken-landt, and
Hessen Silua Picearia.
Speysshartz: further up in Francken-landt betwixt W^rtzburg, and Bamberg Ardua
Silua.
Steyger-wald, in Duringen Sylua Turingica.
Duringen-waldt; upon the mountains of Bohemia toward the upper Palatinate
Sylua Bohemica.
Behaimerwaldt; upon the same hills toward the town of Passaw, and the Danow
Passawer-waldt; upon the same mountains toward Marrheren Der Scheid; in
Lusatz Spondawer-heid; Rattenawer-heid; Galber-heyd; and Pomerisch-heid* in
Oostenreich. Freistetterwaldt; and Koningwiser-waldt; in Bavaria Heinerdoch;
Grien-waldt; and Zeller waldt; in the country of Brunswijck; Hartzwaldt; and
Solinger-waldt; with others, wherewith this rough country is yet well stored,
and replenished.

MARTIANA Martiana Sylua.

These were the woods, covering the hills Abnobi, from their dark shadines
called now Schwartz-wald, or the Black wood.

BACENIS. Bacenis C^saris Comm. Belli Gall. lib. 6. c. 6. Semana sylva Pto.
lib. 2. c. 11.

This was the same with the wood Semana of Ptolemie. Pirckhe^^erus interprets
it to be Duringer-waldt.

GABRETA. Gabreta sylva Ptol. lib. 2. c. 11.

This now after Montanus is Behaimer-waldt, or rather more generally all the
woods of the Mountains Sudetae toward the West, and North.

LVNA. Luna sylva Ptol. l. 2. c. 11.

This is Passawer-waldt after the same author, or the woods of the Sudetae
toward Passaw, and the South.

The RIVERS.
Out of those Forests, and Mountains issue the Rivers. The chiefest hereof,
and whereinto the most part of the rest are disburdened, are the Rhijn, the
Danow, Eems, Weser, Elve, Oder, and the Wixel.

The RHIIN. Rhenus fluvius Caesaris Com. Bell. Gal* lib. 1. c. 1. etc.

This arises out of the Alps in two small rivulets, or torrents, whose heads
are distant about a days journey a sunder, whereof the nearer, called by the
Dutch the Vorder Anterior Rhenus,
Rhijn, sourceth out of the hills of the Lepontij, and the Mountain
Luckmanier, the further named the Hinder Posterior Rhenus.
Rhijn, out of the Alps of the Rhaeti, and the Mountain Der Vogel. These two,
meeting together about a Dutch mile from Chur of the Grisons, are afterward
continued in one channel toward the North by the famous cities of Constance,
Basil, Spire, Worms, Mentz, and Colen, increasing still by the way with the
additions of sundry other great rivers, unto the sort of Schenken-schans in the
land of Cleue, and confines of Gelderlandt, where again divided, then
encompassing Holland, Vtreicht, and Gelderland, under other nam^s it is emptied
into the river Maes, and the Zuider Zee. The maine Chanells of the Rhijn, by
which this great river was disburdened into the Ocean, were in the time of
Julius Caesar the Vahalis Cae^aris Comm. Belli Gal. lib. 4
Wael, and the Rhijn, whereof this latter passing then by V. Ptol. Geogr. lib.
2.
Lugdunum Batavorum, now Leyden, fell into the Ocean, at the place where now is
Catwijck in Holland, with the other branch, making the Island Insula Batavorum
Corn. Taciti Annaliumlib. 2. v. and Plutarch. in Othone, Plin. not. hist. lib.
4. c. 12. and Caesar. Comm. Belli Gall. lib. 4. Batavia Zosimi hist. lib. 3.
of the Batavians of Tacitus. In the next reign of the Emperor Augustus,
Dr^s^^ V. Sueton. Tranq. lib. 5. in Claudio Imperatore.
Germanicus, father to the Imperour Claudius, then Lieutenant of the wars of
Germany, to empty, and keep in the fuller channel of the Rhijn, or of the
more Northern branch, threatening an inundation of the subject Moorish
countries, drew from it the dreane, called afterward from hence Fossae Fossae
Drusinae Suetonij Tranquil. in Claudio Fossa Drusiana Cor. Taciti Annalium lib.
2.
Drusinae, now the Isala recentiorum.
Ysel. Not long after in the reign of the Emperor Vespasian, Civilis V. Corn.
Taciti hist. lib. 5.
the Batavian rebelling against the Romans, more strongly to entrench, and
fortify himself against that potent enemy, levelling the Moles Drusi Corn.
Tacit. hist. lib. 5. and Annal. lib. 13.
banks, made by Drusus to keep in the better the fuller water of the Rhijn, or
Middle branch, let the same loose toward the Wael, and the coast of Gaul,
whether for the lower situation of that part of the country it then naturally
inclined, leaving after this for its greater part its ancient current, and
wearing the channel, since called the Leck. Since this time V. Philippum
Cliverum deostijs Rheni, and eorum accolis.
, as at this day the Rhijn has been conveyed into the Ocean by four
branches, or chanells; of the Wael before named, from the first division hereof
at Schnken-schans, continued through Gelderlandt by Nimmengen, Tiel, and Bommel
until at the Castle of Lovestain it loses its name in the Maes; of the Rhijn
from the same division at Schenken-schans extended likewise through Gelderlandt
by Huessen, Arnhem, and Wageningen unto Duerstede, where the maine river being
diverted by the Lecke, with a small current it is continued by Vtreicht, and
through Holland unto Leyden, where leaving this name, and stopped by the
intervening sandy downs betwixt this, and the sea, under another name of the
Vliet it is turned toward the South; at Sluys, a little village against Brill,
falling into the Maes; Lecca fluv.
of the Lecke, into the which the Rhijn diverteth at Duerstede, by the towns
of Culenborch, Vianen, and Schoonhoven in the Provinces of Vtreicht, and
Holland carried into the Maes at a little town, called Crimpten, betwixt Dort,
and Rotterdam; and of the Ysel, drawn from the Rhijn near Arnhem in Gelders,
and by the towns of Zutphen, and Deventer betwixt Gelderlandt; and Over-Ysel
received into the Z^^ der Zee, or the sea of Amsterdam at Campen. Chiefer
rivers received hereinto are from the coast of Germany the Nicer. Fla^. V^pisci
in vir. Imp. Probi, and Am Marc. l. 28
Neccar, arising in (...)-wald near Rotweil, and through the countries of
Wirtenberg, and of the Lower Palatinate took in at Manheim below Heidelberg;
the Moenus Tacit de Mo^. Germ. etc.
Maine out of the Mountain Fichtelberg through Franckenlandt, and by the
towns of Bamberg, and Wurtzburg received in below Francfurt; the Rura:
Ruer, arising in Westphalen, and flowing hereinto at Duisburg in Cleueland;
the Lupias Strab lib. 7. Luppia. Taciti Ann* l ^
Lip, arising not far from Paderborn in Westphalen, by the Castle of Lip,
and other obscurer places emptied herein at the town of Wesel; from the side
of France, or Gaul the Arula.
Aar. issuing out of the Alps of the Lepontij near unto the hill of S.
Gothard, and through Switzerlandt, and the Lakes Brientzer, and Thuner Se^s,
and by the towns of Bern, and Solothurn discharged herein to nere Waldshut;
the Rusa.
Russ out of the Mountain S. Gothard through Switzerlandt, and the Lakes
Waldstet, and Lucerner-sees carried into the Aar at the town of Bruck; the
Limagus.
Limat out of the Alps of the Grisons through Switzerlandt, and the Lakes
Walen, and Zurich Sees received into the Aar nere unto the confluence thereof,
and of this river; the Ellus fluvius.
Ill out of Sungow near unto the town of Altkirch, by the towns of
Mulhausen, Einsheim, and Schlestat in Sungow, and Elsatz after the receipt of
almost infinite lesser rivulets, descending from the mountainous ridge of the
Vauge falling hereinto a little below Strasburg; and the Obrincus Pto. lib. 2.
Mosella Tacit. Annal. lib. 13. Mos^lla Ausonij Burd. Idyl. 10
Moselle arising out of the Mountain Vauge at the confines of Lorraine, and of
the Free country of Burgundy, and through Lorraine, and the country of Triers
by the cities Toul, Metz, and Treves disburdened hereinto at Cobolentz.

The DANOW. Danub. Ptol. lib. 2. c. 11. etc.

This river springs in Schwartzwald at a little V. Danielis Cellarij T^actus
Dan^bij Tab. 1.
town belonging to the Earls of Furstenberg, called Don-Eschingen, in a
plainer situation, the hill under which it rises, being the Churchyard of the
Village, not exceeding 16 cubits high, distant about an hours going from the
higher hills of this mountainous tract, some two hours journey from the head
of the Neccar, and about two Dutch miles from the shore of the Rhijn. Issuing
from hence it presently receaueth two other rivulets Die Prigen, and Die
Brigen, both sourcing from the same Mountains of Schwartz-wald, from whence
still augmented by the way, and running Eastward through the countries of
Schwaben, Bavaria, Austria, Hungary, Rascia, Bulgaria, and Valachia, by the
noted cities of Vlm, Regenspurg, Passaw, Wien, Rab, Offen, and Belgrad, with
others, after above a thousand miles course (reckning according to a right
line) it falls into the Euxine sea with such strength, and violence, that (if
Pliny V. Plin. not. hist.
may be credited,) driving back the fast waters for some 40 miles within the
maine the fresher streams hereof may be felt; after Pliny V. Plin. not. hist.
lib. 4. c. 12.
with six channels, or after V. Iul. Solini Polyhist. c. 23. Nomina ostiorum
Istri secu^dum Solinum Peucae, Naracustoma. Calostoma, Pseudostoma, Boreostoma,
Spireostoma, Pigrum.
Solinus, Strabo V. Strab. l. 7.
, and Ammianus Marcellinus V. Am. Marc. lib. 22. Impet. Julian. Nomina ostiorum
secundu^ Am. Marc. Peuce, Naracustoma, Calonstoma, Pseudostoma, Boreonstoma
Sthenostoma, septimum ingens, and palustri specie nigrum.
with seven. The lower part of this river was called Ister Ptol. l. 2 c. 11.
etc.
Ister by ancient authors, Strabo putting the beginning of this name at its
cataracts v. Strab. l. 7.
, Ptolomey v. Pt. l. 2. c. 11
at the town Axipolis, Pliny V. Plin. not. hist. l. 4. c. 12.
where it arriveth at Illyricum, more certainly V. App. Alexand. de bell.
Illyr. lib.
Appian at the meetings hereof, and the river Saw. The greater rivers, which
are received hereinto are the Isara.
Iser, Lycus.
Lech, Aenus Ptol: lib. 2. c. 12.
Inn, Altmul Aleman.
, Nab, Regen, Draun, Krems, Ens Anisus.
, Erlaph, Leita, Marckh Mara.
, Dra Dravus L. Flori: Histo: lib. 4. c. 12. etc.
, Rab Narab. P^ol. lib. 2. c. 16.
, Saw Savus L. Flori hist: lib: 4. c. 12. etc.
, Wag, Gran, Tissa, Pruth, and Isch, with some 40 other navigable rivers V. Am:
Marcellin: lib. 22. Imper: Iuli ano, and Iul: Sol: c: 23.
, not accompting infinite other lesser streams, flowing from the long tracts
of the Alps, the Carpathian, and Bohemian Mountains, and the many countries,
and Provinces this river passes through, and by this general channel,
received into the Ocean.

The EEMS. Amiss. Strab: lib. 7. Amisius Pto. l: 2. c. 11. and Plin: lib: 4: c.
14.

This arises in Westphalen near to Paderb^rn out of a ridge of hills,
accounted part of the Abnobi by Pirckhermerus. Passing thorough this country,
and Oost-Freistandt by the towns of Varendorp, Greve, Lingen, (...) Meppen at
Embden after having taken in the rivers Dalbe, and Hase with others lesser it
is disburthened into the German Ocean.

The WESER. Visurgis Strab: lib: 7.

It has its beginning in the hilly forest of Duringer-waldt. Thorough Hessen,
and Westphalen, by the towns of Minden, Gotingen, and Bremen below this city,
after having received the rivers Fuld, and Alre, it flows into the German
Ocean betwixt the Diocese hereof, and the Earldom of Oldenborch. The part
hereof in Duringen, and Hessen, or toward the head is otherwise there named
the Weirra.

The ELB. Albis Strab: lib: 7. etc.

This has its head near unto the town of Aust in Bohemia, and the confines
of Schlesi out of the hill Risenberg, being part of the Sudetae, or of the
Mountains incircling Bohemia. Thorough this kingdom, and the two Saxonies by
the towns of Dresen, Meissen, Wittenberg, and Meydburg, it falls into the
Germane Ocean below Hamburg. It is called otherwise toward its beginning, and
in Bohemia, the Labe. The greater rivers, which empty hereinto, are the
Muldavia.
Muld^w, arising out of the same Mountains, the Egra, and Saltza Sala Strab:
lib: 7.
out of the Mountain Pinifer Mons
Fichtelberg, the Havel, and the Suevus flu: Pto: Geogra: lib^: 2. c. 11.
Spree. Unto this river of the Elb reached only the Roman discoveries, and the
French conquests.

The ODER. Viadrus Pto: lib: 2. c: 11.

This arises out of the hill Oderberg near unto Olmuntz in Marheren, from
whence it took this name. Thorough Schlesi, the Marquisate of Brandenburg, and
Pomeren, by the noted towns of Breslaw, Francfurt, and Stetin, with the rivers
Neisse, and Warta received thereinto, it is disburdened into the Lake
Frisch-haff, then into the Sundt, or Ooster-sche against the Island Rugen.

The WIXEL. Vistula Pto: lib 2. c. 11.

This springs in the Carpathian Mountains, or confines of Poland, and
Hungary. Continued first thorough the kingdom of Poland by the cities Cracow,
Sendomir, and Warsow, then betwixt Pomeren, and Prussen, increased by the way
with the rivers San, Wij^prez, Pilcza, and Narew by three maine channels at
Dantzig, Lochstet, and Elbing, it is received into the Baltique, or Oost-sche.
This anciently was the furthest bounds of the Germane nation, dividing the
Dutch from the Sarmatians.

The ANCIENT NAMES OF GERMANY.
The modern account, and name of Germany contained anciently the whole, or
parts of five different countries, and names of Rhaetia, Noricum, Pannonia,
Gaul, and Germany, whose sundry estates, alterations, and unions into this
last, and general name are now to be related.

RHAETIA. Rhaetia Plin: Nature: Hist: l. 3. c. 20. etc.

The bounds hereof Strab: lib: 5. C. Ptol: lib: 2. c: 12 and 13. Plin: Na:
Hist: lib: 3. c: 20, and 24* ^. Flor: Hist: Rom: lib: 4 c. 12, Vel: Paterculi
Hist. lib: 2. Sext. Aurelij Vic. Epitomen Imper: Caesare Augusto; Rusi Festi
Breuiarium; Eutropij Hist: Romans lib. 7. Imperat. Caesare Augusto; Dion. Cassij
Hist. Romans lib. 54. Hora^ij lib. 4 Od. 4. and 14. Antonin. Itinerarium,
Notitiam Provin. Imperij occidentis; Comment. Guidoni^ Panciro^^ in Notitiam
Prouinciarum Imperij Occidentis; interpretationes Montani, and P. Birtij in
Cla: Ptol: lib: l. c. 12 and 13.
were upon the North the river Danow from the head thereof unto its meeting
with the Inn, upon the East the river Inn, upon the South the Alps of Italy,
and upon the West a line drawn from the Mountain Adulas, or the spring of the
Further Rhijn unto the head of the Danow. It contains now the country of the
Grisons, part of Tirol unto the river Inn, and so much of Schwaben, Bavaria,
and of the League of the Switzers, as are contained within the aforesaid
limits. The inhabitants hereof after Ptolemy were the Brixantes (Brixentes of
Pliny;) Suanitae (Suanetes of Pliny:) Riguscae (Rhugusci of Pliny*) and
(...) (Calucones of Pliny,) dwelling on this side of the Lech, and together
comprehending now Schwaben, and the Grison^* with part of the Switzers; and the
Vinnones (Vennones of Strabo;) Runicatae, (the Rucantij of Strabo,) Leuni,
Consuanta (Consuanetes of Pliny;) Breuni; and Licatij, (Licatij of Strabo,
Licates of Pliny) inhabiting beyond the Lech, and containing now Bavaria, and
part of Tirol, and of the Graupunters. Pliny adds the Sarunetes, now the
countries of Sargans, and Werdenberg; the Virunicates; and the Catenates. The
towns then were Bragodurum, now Pfullendorff, or Bibrach; Dracuina, now
Ghengen, or Tra^burg; Viana (Viana of Pliny) now Wise^horn; Ph^niana, now
Laubing, or Bebenbausen; Taxgetium, now Stulingen; Brigantium (Brigantia of
Antoninus) now Bregentz; Vicus; Ebodurum; Dr^somagus, now Memmingen; and
Hectodurum within the Lech; and without that river betwixt it, and the Inn,
Artobriga, now Veltemburg; Baeodurum (Boiodurum of Antoninus) now Passaw;
Augusta Vindelicorum (Augusta Vindeli^um of Antoninus) now Auspurg; Carrodurum,
now Kreinburg; Abudiacum, now Abach; Campodurum, now Kemmat, or Munchen;
Medullum, now Melding; and Invtrium, now Mittenwald. Unto these of Ptolemie are
added in the itinerarie of Antoninus Arbor Foelix, now Arbona; and Pons-Aenini
(Pons Oeni of the Notitia) now Inspruck. In the year of Rome 739, and in the
reign of Caesar Augustus, M. Drusus Libo and L. Calpurnius Piso being Consuls,
this country was first conquered to the Romans by Drusus, and Tiberius Nero,
sons in law to that Emperor. It became afterward divided by the Romans
into two juridicall Resorts, or Provinces, of Rhaetia Prima, Rhaetia Prima
Notit: Provinciarum.
extended from the line upon the West, before mentioned, unto the river Lech;
and of Rhaetia Rhaetia secunda notit. Prove. Vindelicia Ptol. Geog lib. 2. c. 13.
Secunda, called otherwise Vindelicia by Ptolemie, contained betwixt the Lech,
and the Inn, both of them governed a part by their Praesides, subordinate to
the Vicar general of Italy. The Roman Empire overthrown by the Barbarous
nations, about the reigns of the Emperor Valentinian the third, and
Anastasius, the whol^ was overrunne, and subdued by the Almans, and Bavarians,
planted by their new Dutch colonies, and leaving afterward this old name, and
containing part of Almaigne, or Schwaben, and Bavaria, which names for the
greatest part, and the account, and language of the Dutch it still hitherto
retains.

NORICVM. Noricum Pl. not. hist. lib. 3 c. 20. etc.

This was V. Strab. l. 5. Ptol. lib. 2. c. 14. Plin. not. hist. lib 3. c. 20.
and 24. L. Flor. hist. Romans l. 4. c. 12. Rufi Festi Brev. Dion. Cassij hist.
Ro^. 54. Anton. Ikiner. Notit. Prove. Imp. occiden (...) Com. Guide. Pancirolli
in Notitiam Provin. Imp. Occidentis; Interpret. Montani, and P. Birtij in Cl.
Ptol. Geog. lib. 2. c. 14.
situated betwixt the river Inn upon the West, the mountain Cecius upon the
East; the river Danow upon the North, intercepted betwixt the hill Cecius, and
the river Inn; and upon the South part of Pannonia, lying under that
mountainous ridg^. It contains now the countries of Saltzburg; Karnten,
Krain, and Goretz, with part of Tirol, the Lower Bauaria, and of Austria. The
ancient inhabitants after Ptolomie were the Seva^es; Ala^ni Ambisontij;
(Abisontes of Pliny*) Norici; Ambidrauni; and Ambilici. The cities were
Are^^le, now Lintz, Cla^divium (Claudia of Pliny) now Melk; Gavanodurum, now
Brunnau, Gesodunum, now (...); ^adacum, now Burckhausen, Aguntum Aguntum of
Pliny) now Inneken, Vacorium; P^^dicum; Virunum (Virunum of Pliny) now
Iudenburg; Teurnia (Teurnia of Pliny) now ^achstat; (...); Sianticum; Celia
(Celcia of Pliny) now Celi, and (...), now ^illich. To these of Ptolomy may be
added (...) of the Itin^^arie of Antonius Iuvavim (Invense of the Notitia
Provinciarum,) now Saltzburg; L^uriac^ (L^uriacum of the Notitia,) now Ens, and
Ce^^um, now Zeisseimaur. Noricum ^^pense Notit. Provincia^um*
The country was subdued to the Romans in the reign of Augustus by Claudius
Drusus his son in law, parted afterward into two distinct Provinces, or
Iuridicall Resorts, of Norieum Ripense coasting along the Danow, and
comprehending now the parts of Bavaria, and Austria; whose Metropolis, or
chief town, was Lauriacum, and of Nori^um Mediterraneum, Noric. Mediterraneum
Notit. Prove.
whose Metropolis was Solyum, containing the Inland, and Mountainous parts, now
Saltzburg, Krain, Karnten, and Gorecz. About the year 508, Anastasius being
then Emperor of the East, with (...), part of Rhaetia, it was overwhelmed with
a deluge of the Ba^arians, becoming wholly possessed with their German colonies,
and language, as ever since it has continued, a great part yet retaining from
hence the name of Bauarea.

These two countries are now wholly Dutch, accounted by Strabo Strab. lib. 7.
Pomp. Melae lib 3. Ptol. l. 2 c. 11. C. Tacit. de mor. Ger^ lib.
and Mela parts of ancient Germany, but with better judgment excluded thence
by Ptolemy and Tacitus, whom I have herein followed.

PANNONIA Pannonia Plin. not. hist. lib. 3. c. 25. etc.

It was v. Ptol. l. 2. c, 15. and 16. Plin. not. hist. l. 3. c. 25. Strab.
Geog. lib. 7. Aug. Antonini Itinetariu^. Not. Prove. Imper. Occid. L. Flori
hist. Romans l 4. c. 12. Vel Patere. hist. lib. 2. S. Aurel. Vict. Epit. Imp. Aug
Caes. and Tiberio, Rusi Festi Breviar: Eutropij histor. Romans l. 7. Imp. Caes.
Aug. Dion: Cassij hist. lib. 49. 54 and 55 Com. Guide. Pancirolli in Not
Provinc. Imp. Occiden. Interp. Montani. and Petri Bertij in Pto. l, 2. c: 15*
and 16.
bounded upon the west with the Mountain Cecius, and part of Carvancas; upon
the North and East with the Danow, intercepted betwixt the Mountain Cecius,
and the meetings of the Danow, and the river Saw; and upon the South with a
line drawn from the Western limit, before mentioned, by the hills Albanus,
and Baebij, unto the meetings of the rivers Saw, and Danow. It was divided into
the Higher, and the Lower Pa^nonia. The Higher Pannonia Pannon. superior Ptol.
Geog. l. 2. c. 15
was comprehended betwixt the Western limit, before described; the Danow
betwixt the Mountain Cecius, and the confluence of this river with the river
Narabon, now Rab upon the North; a line drawn from the confluence of the
rivers Rab, and Danow unto the Mountains Baebij upon the East, parting it from
the Lower Pannonia; and upon the South part of the former described line from
the hill Carvancas unto the Mountains Baebij. It contains now the rest of
the Higher Austria; Steirmarck, with the part of the Lower Hungary, included
betwixt the town of Presburg, and Rab. The ancient inhabitants after Ptolemy
were the Azali (Azali of Pliny;) Cygni; Latovici (Latovici of Pliny;)
Verciani (Verciani of Pliny;) Bij; Coletiani; Iassij (Iasi of Pliny,) and the
Osseriates (Oseriates of Pliny.) The towns were Iuliobona (Vindobona of
Antoninus, and Vindomana of the Author of the Notitia) now Wien; Carnus
(Carnuntum of Antoninus, and of the author of the Notitia) now Presburg; Flexum
(Flexum of the author of the Notitia) Bragetium; Chertobalus; Sala; Patavium
(Poetovia of Autoninus) now Petaw; Sabaria (Sabaria of Antoninus) now Leibnitz;
Rispia; Vinundria, now Windisch-Gratz; Bononia (Bononia of Antoninus, and of
the Author of the Notitia) now Bonmonster; Andantonium; Novidunum (Noviodunum
of Antoninus) now Oedenburg, or Neumat; Scarabantia (Scarabantia of Antoninus)
Mureola, now M^reck; Lentudum; Carrod^num, now Carnburg; Scissia (Sissia of
Pliny, and Antoninus, Syscia of Strabo) now Sisseg; Oleimacum, now Lymbach;
Valena; Bolentium; Soroga, now Zagabria; Sisopa; Vis^ntium; Praetorium;
Magniana; and Aemona (Aemona of Pliny, and Antoninus.) Unto these may be added
Arabon of Antoninus, now Rab. The Lower Pannon. Inferior Ptolem Geog. l. 2. c.
16.
Pannonia had upon the West the line before mentioned, taken betwixt the
Mountains Boebij, and the confluences of the rivers Rab, and the Danow; upon
the North, and East the river Danow from its confluence with the Rab unto the
meeting thereof, and the Saw; and upon the South part of the line, drawn from
the hill Carvancas unto the confluence of the Saw, and the Danow, dividing it
from Illyricum. It contains now Windischland, with the greatest part of the
Lower Hungary. The inhabitants were the Amanteni (Amantes of Pliny, Amantini
of Rufus Festus, betwixt the rivers Saw, and Dra) now Windischlandt; Ercuniates
(Hercuniates of Pliny*) Breuci (Breuci of Pliny) Aravisci (Aravisci of
Pliny) and the Scordisci, (Scordisci of Pliny.) The towns were Curta (Curta
of Antoninus) Salva; Carpis; Aquincum; Salinum* Lussonium (Lussunium of
Antoninus, and Lussunia of the Author of the Notitia) Lugionum; Teutoburgium
(Teutiburgium of Autoninus, and Teutiborgus of the Author of the Notitia) now
Fiffkirchen; Cornacum (Cornacum of Antoninus, and of the Author of the Notitia)
Acumincum (Acumincum of Antoninus, and Acimincum of the Author of the Notitia)
now Cametz; Rittium (Rittum of Antoninus, and Rictum of the Author of the
Notitia) Taururam (Taurunum of Pliny, Antoninus, and the Author of the
Notitia) now Greichz-Weissenburg; Berbis; Serbinum; Ivollum; Certissa (Certisa
of Antoninus) Mursella; Cib^lis; Marsonia; Vacontium; Mursia Colonia (Mursa of
Antoninus) now Muroviza; Salis; Bassiana; Tarsium; Sirmiu^ (Sirmium of Strabo,
Pliny, An^oninus, and of the Author of the Notitia) now Sirmisch. Strabo
adds to these of Ptolemie, the Andizetij; Diasnotes; Peir^stae; Mazaei; and
Daesiata; and of towns Segestica. Pliny adds the Serretes; Serrapilli;
Andrizetes; Col^piani; Arivates; Belgites; Catari; and Corneates: but in which
of the Divisions, or Provinces these lay neither distinguish. The country was
first subdued to the Romans in the year of Rome 719, L. Cornificius, and
Sextus Pompeius, being then Consuls, rebelling notwithstanding sundry times
afterward, and not fully quieted until the tumult, and insurrection of Bato
ended, which happened in the years of Rome 759, and 760, and in the reign of
Augustus Caesar, M. Aemilius Lepidus, and L. Arruntius, and Q. Caecilius
Metellus, and A. Licinnius Nerva then Consuls, divided afterward into four
distinct goverments, or Provinces of Pannonia Prima Notit: Provinciarium.
Pannonia Prima, or Superior, whose Metropolis, or chief town was Sabaria;
Pannonia secunda Pannonia Secunda Not: Prouinciaru^.
, or Inferior, containing together the greatest part of the two Pannonies
before mentioned; Valeria Valeria inter Dravum. and Danubiu^ Rusi Festi
Brevaar: etc.
, containing now Steirmark; and of Suavia Suauia, and Regio Svauiensis inter
Suavum, and Dravum flu: Rusi-Festi Breuiar: S^uia. seu Pannonia Ripariensis
Notit: Provinc. etc.
, lying betwixt the Saw, and the Dra, and comprehending now Windischlandt. In
the waine of the Roman Empire it underwent the fortune of the Provinces of the
West, trodden under foot by the barbarous nations, the seat of Attilas, and the
Huns; then of the Ostrogothes; afterward of the Longobards; and lastly of the
Avares. The Avares being subdued by the Emperor Charles the Great, it was
added to the Province of the Bavarians, peopled with Colonies of that nation.
In the reign of the Emperor Lewis the third it was conquered by the
Hungarians; part whereof, which is the Lower Pannonie, they have held unto this
day, enthralled now for the greatest part unto the Turks. The rest, containing
now Stiermarck, and the Dukedom of Austria, is partly yet retained by the
Bavarians, recovered by the Princes of Austria, by that means still remaining
Dutch.

GAVLE. Gallia Caesaris etc.
.
This country we have before bounded, and described. Besides France, it
comprehended the parts of Modern Germany, situated betwixt the Alps, and the
river So^sne, Meuse, and the Rhijn, containing now the Dukedomes of Lorraine;
Gulicke; Sweybruck; and Savoy; the Free County of Burgundy; Elsats the
districts, and Bishoppricks of Mentz; Colen, Trier, and Luick, and part of the
land of Cleue, and of the Lower Palatinate. What have been the sundry
fortunes, successions, and affairs hereof, and how these parts became Dutch,
or Germany, see France.

GERMANY. Germania Strab: lib. 7 etc. Germania Magna Ptol: lib: 2. c. 11.
.
Ptolemie names V. Strab: Geog. lib. 7; Ptolem: lib: 2. c. 11; Plin: Not:
Hist: lib: 4. c. 14. Cor: Taciti lib. de Moribus Germanorum; Pom: Melae. l. 3.
Iul. Solini Polyhist: c. 32: and 33. Iodoci Willichij in l. Taciti de Moribus
Germanorum Commentarium; And: Altham^ri in Cor-Taciti lib. de Germanis Schol:
Henr-Glareani de Germania Taciti commentarium; Bilibaldi Pirkher meri Germaniae
Explicationem; P. Montani, and P. Birtij in Ptol. l. 2. c. 11. Geog. Interp. P.
Bertij Rerum Germanicarum Co^mentarij lib: 1 de Germania.
this the Great Germany for a distinction from the two lesser, called the
First, and the Second Germanies, and lying upon the other side of the Rhijn in
Gaul. The bounds hereof are not alike set down by all. Strabo, and Mela extend
them Southwards, as far as the Alps, including Rhaetia, and Noricum. Orosius
East-wards unto the Euxine sea, comprehending the Sarmatae, and Daci. More
rightly Tacitus, Ptolemie, and Solinus confine it within the Danow, and the
Wixel, or the borders of Sarmati^. The more exact limits hereof (as they are
set down by Ptolemie) were upon the South, the river Danow from its first
spring unto the city Diogenea, dividing it from the Rhoeti, Norici, and the
Pannones; upon the West the Rhijn unto the Ocean; upon the North the Ocean; and
upon the East first the river Wixel during its whole course, then a line from
the head of the Wixel continued over the Mountains of the Sarmatae unto the
town Di^gen^^ upon the Danow. Tacitus adds to this account whatsoever lay
North of this Continent unto the Frozensea, named by Ptolemie with some mistake
the Islands Scandiae: for thus the greater Scandia, now Norwey, and Swethen, not
then fully discovered was esteemed. The whole contains now the parts of
Schwaben, and Bavaria, lying within the Danow, part of the Lower Palatinate,
the Lower Austria, the Upper Palatinate, Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, Lusatia,
Franconia, Hess^n, Duringen, Westphalen, the East and West Freislandts,
Over-ysel, North-Hollandt, part of Cleuelandt, the Marquisate of Brandenburg,
Pomeren, the Higher, and the Lower Saxonies, Holsten, the kingdoms of
Denmarck, Norwey, and Swethen, with the part of the kingdom of Poland, lying
on this side of the side of the Wixel. The ancient inhabitants hereof, as they
are more fully set down by Tacitus, Procurator sometimes of the neighboring
Gaul Belgicke under the Emperor Vespasian, with reference to Strabo, Mela,
Pliny, and Ptolemie, with their many different interpretations follow.

The Mattiaci, after Birtius the part now of Hessen about the town of
Martpurg, and the river Lon.

The Catti (the Chatti of Strabo, Ptolemie, and Pliny) after Willichius the
Marquisate of Baden, Heilprun, Heildelberg, with other neighboring parts to
Otten-wald, after Althamorus Lusatz, or Duringen; after Ph. M. Catzenelbogen,
and part of Franconia, and Duringen; after Montanus Hessen, and Duringen; more
rightly after Pirckhermerus the land of Hessen, in which country, some few
lett^rs only changed; the name yet seems to be preserved.

The Vsipij (Vispi of Ptolemie) after Willichius now the country about
Francfurt upon the Meine; Luick after Althamerus; Luick, or Cleueland after
Glareanus; the Marquisate of Baden, with Brisgow after Pirckhermerus; the
country of Wirtenberg after Montanus; more probably after Birtius the country
of Zutphen.

The Tencteri (the Tingri of Ptolemie) now according to Willichius the country
about the rivers Lon, Lip, and the Rhijn, with part of Franconia; upon the
shore of Rhijn, opposite to Colen, after Althamerus, and Glareanus.

The Bructeri (Bucteri of Strabo, and Busacteri of Ptolemy) now after
Willithius the country about the Lip, Munster, and Osn^burg in West^halia;
after Ph. M. part of Saxony about Hildesheim, and Brunswi^ck; after Althamerus
inhabiting betwixt the river Ems, and the Lip; after Pirckhermerus Over-ysel,
where lie the towns of Deventer, and Swol; Westphali^ after Montanus. In the
time of my author these were wholly extinguished Inter Tencteros Bructeri olim
occurrebant: nunc Chamauo^, and Angriuarios immigrasse narratur, pulsis
Bructeris, and penitus excisis vicinarum consensu nationum, seu superbiae odio
seu praedae dulcedine, seu fauore quodam erga nos deorum. Cor. Taciti lib: de
Moribus Germanorum.
, slain, and chased out by the Chamavi, and Angrivarij, and through a joint
conspiracy, and agreement of the neighboring nations.

The Chamavi, and Angrivarij (the Camavi, and Angrivarij of Ptolemy) succeeding
in the left rooms of the Bructeri.

The Dulgib^ni (the Dulgumnij of Ptolemy) now after Willichius the countries of
Brunswijck, Halberstatt, and Hildesheim; with the Casuarij Duringe^ after
Glareanus; about Gottingen in West^halia after Althamerus; with the Lacobardi
the Diocese of Meydburg, and the old Marches of Brandenburg after Pirckhermerus.

The Chasuari (Casuari of Ptolemie, and Chattuarij of Strabo,) now part of the
land of Hessen, where stands the town of Cassel after Willichius; part of
Duringen after Glareanus: D^^ingen after Althamerus, and Montanus.

The Frisij Maiores (the Frisii Maiores of Strabo) now West Freislandt,
Over-ysel, and Veluwe in Gelderlandt.

The Frisii Minores (the Frisii Minores of Strabo) now North-Hollandt, with the
part of the country of Vtreicht lying betwixt the middle branch of the Rhiin,
or the chanel by Vtreicht, and the Zuyder Zee.

The Chauci (the Chauci of Ptolemie, and Pliny, and the Cauci of Strabo,)
extended betwixt the rivers of Eems, and the Elb, and comprehending now
Oost-Freislandt, and the Bishopric of Bremen.

The Cherusci (the Cherusci of Strabo, Ptolemie, and Pliny,) now the country
of Anhalt after Willichius, and Althamerus; after Glareanus part of Saxony, and
of the old Marches of Brandenburg; after Ph. M. part of Duringen; with the
Chamavi the countries of Mansfeldt, or Lunenburg after Montanus; more probably
after Pirckhe^^erus Duringen with part of Saxoni^. By this people V. L. Flori
Hist: Rom: lib: 4. c. 12. Corn: Tacit: Annal: lib. 1. Strab. Geog: lib: 7.
in the reign of the Emperor Caesar Augustus Quintilius Varus was slain with
all the Roman Legions attending him, the undoubted deliverers of the Germans
from the yoke, and bondage of the Romans, not long before in the same reign
of Augustus having ma^^ered, and subdued this nation by Drusus, and by means
of this overthrow withdrawing into the parts without the Rhijn, the after
perpetual bounde^ of their Empire.

The Cimbri (the Cimbri of Strabo, Ptolemie, Pliny, and Mela,) now the
Dukedom of Holstein, and Iutlandt after Willichius; more certainly Iutlandt
in Denmark, named from hence by Ptolemie the Cimbrian Chersonese. Of these
people were sometimes a colonie those Cimbri, with the Teutones, and Tigurini
with great fury, and violence descending sometimes into the Roman Provinces
of the C. Corn: Tacit: de Moribus Germ:
West, after the defeat of (...) Consularie armies under their generals Carbo,
Cassius, Scaurus Aurelius, Cepio, and Manlius over thrown in Gaul, and Italy
by Marius, and Luctatius Catulus.

The Marsi, not improbably now Ditmarse, and Stormarse in the Dukedom of
Holstein.

The Semnones (the Semnones of Strabo, and Ptolemie,) now after Willichius the
diocese of H^velb^^g; after Glareanus Lusatz; after Altham^^ L^s^tz, or part
hereof, and of Meissen continued betwixt the rivers Elb, and the Spreee; after
Pirckhermerus part of the Marquisate of Brandenburg betwixt the Elb, and the
Spree; the Dukedom of Pomere^ after Mont^^^. Here begun the great, and famous
nation of the Suevi, containing all the North, and East-parts of Germany, and
besides these comprehending the sundry different names, and people following in
my author.

The Longobardi (the Longobardi of Ptolemy, and Lancosargi of Strabo,) after
Willichius, and Ph. M. inhabiting the Diocese of Meydburg, and Halbersta^t in
Saxony; Meissen, or VVestphal^n after Glareanus; after Pirckhermerus the parts
only of Westph^lia, where lie the countries of Marck, and Bergen. These
afterward removed into Pannonia, from whence after a short abode they V. infra.
again flitted into Italy, called in by Narses, Lieutenant in the Gothish
wars for the Emperor Justinian, occasioning their the name, nation, and
kingdom of the Lombards.

The Reudigni, now after Willichius the part of Pomere^, neighboring unto
D^ntzijck; with the Aviones now part of Pomeren, and Mecklenburg after
Glareanus; adioining to the Wixel after Pirckhermerus.

The Angli (the Angili of Ptolemy.) Birtius seems to place these in the
Dukedom of Schleswijck, where is the town, now called Angelen. In the waine
of the Roman Empire, and in the reign of the Venerab^ Bedae Eccles: Histor:
gentis Anglorum l. 1 c. 15.
Emperor Valentinian the third, with the Saxons these removed into the Island
of Great Britain, giving afterward the name unto the most renowned English
nation.

The Varini (the Varini of Pliny, and Viruni of Ptolomy,) after Willichius, now
the New Marches of Brandenburg.

The Eudoses.

The Suardones, now part of Meissen after Althamerus.

The Nuithones (the Teutones of Ptolemy, and Mela,) after Ph. M. now the
Diocese of Havelburg in the Middle Marches of Brandenburg; after Pirckhermerus
with the Avarpi the country about the towns of Berlin, and Brandenburg.

The Hermunduri (the Hermunduri of Pliny, the Hermondori of Strabo,) after
Willichius now part of Bohemia, and Meissen, extended along the course of the
river Elb from the head thereof unto the Semnones; after Althamerus the part of
Bohemia about the head of the Elb; Meissen after Montanus.

The Narisci, after Willichius Voitlandt, and Nortgow; Nortgow after Althamerus.

The Marcomanni (the Marcomanni of Ptolemy, and Strabo,) after Willichius now
the country of Moravia about Olmuntz, and Brin, and unto Presburg in Hungary,
and the Danow; after Glareanus part of Moravia; after Althamerus inhabiting
first Moravia, afterward Bohemia, the Boij being vanquished, and driven out;
after Pirckhermerus Moravia with part of Hungary unto the Danow, and the town
of Presburg; Moravia after Montanus.

The Quadi (the Quadi of Ptolemy,) after Willichius now the part of Moravia
about Glocow, and Iegersdorff, with part of the Lesser Poland, and of Schlesi
about Sweinitz; part of Moravia after Glareanus; after Ph. M. Moravia, and part
of Sclesi; Moravia, and Schlesi after Althamerus; after Montanus the Lower
Austria.

The Marsigni, after Willichius with the Gothini now part of Schlesi, and of
the Upper Hungary; Schlesi, and Poland after Glareanus; Duringen after
Althamerus; after Pirckhermerus with the Turoni the parts of Nortgow about
Amberg, and to the Mountains of B^h^imerwald; with the Turoni, now Schlesi
after Montanus.

The Burii, after Ph. M. now the farthest part of Schlesi toward the river
Wixel; Poland toward the head of the Wixel after Althamerus: after
Pirckh^^merus now Schlesi about Pres^^w with part of Poland on this side of the
river Wixel.

The Osi part now of Mor^via after Ph. M* Ditmarse after Althamerus.

The Gothini.

The Arij (...) Elysij; and Naharvali, parts of the Suevi Lygij; after
Willichius now the part of Poland, neighboring to the Wixel, where lie the
towns of Petro^^w, Posna, Gnesna, and Cur, with others.

The Gotho^es (the Guttones of Pliny, and not improbably the Batones of
Strabo,) after Glareanus now Prussen; after Althamerus part of Prussen (...).

The Rugij, now the Island of Rugen, belonging to the Dukes of Pomeren.

The Suiones, situated in the Ocean, now Norwaie after Birtiu^; Sweathland
after Willichius; with the Sitones Sweathland after Glareanus, and Alth^merus;
after Pirckhermerus Sweathland and Denmark. From hence V. infra.
doubtless has proceeded the name of the Succi, or the Sweathlanders, with the
Sitones the inhabitants of the greater Scandia of Ptolomie, containing now
Swethen, Norway, and part of Denmark, bounded upon the North after Tacitus
with a slow immovable sea, now the Frozen.

The Lemouij, now Pomeren, or part thereof after Willichius; with the Rugij,
Leistandt in Glareanus: after Althamerus Leiflandt.

The Aestyi, on the right shore of the Suenian sea, now Leiflandt after
Willichius; after Althamerus Pomeren, or, Prussen.

The Sitones, neighboring to the Suiones, now Finlandt in Swethen after
Willichius; after Pirckhermerus Lei^^andt; after Birtin^ Sweathlandt; part of
Sweathlandt after Althamerus. Here ended the S^evi, and Germans of Tacitus; for
concerning the Pencini, Vene^i, and Fenni (which people he likewise here
mentions) they lay beyond the river Wixel on the side of the Sarmatae,
reckned by my author amongst the Dutch only in regard of their affinity with
them in language, manners, and custom of living.

Ptolemy adds unto these of Tacitus the Sycambri (Sicambri of Caesar)
extended after Pontanus most probably betwixt the Ysel, and the rivers Lip,
and the Roer, and containing now A^nheim, and Veluwe in Gelderland, with part
of Cleve on the further shore of the Rhijn.

The Ingriones, with the Tencteri after Pirckhermerus now part of the Land of
Hessen, bordering upon the Rhijn, containing Hochruck, the Earledomes of
Nassaw, Koningstein, and Wederaw, Wester-wald, with other places.

The Intuergi, after Pirckhermerus now the part of the Lower Palatin^^^ lying
without the Rhijn.

The Caritni, after Ph: M: now the Dukedom of Wirtenberg; after Pirckhermerus,
the Dukedom of Wirtenberg, with the neighboring part of Schwaben.

The Saxones, feated upon the neck of the Cimbrian Cherfonese, and containing
now the Dukedom of Holstein, or the part thereof, lying next to the Elb. In
succeeding times these grew very mighty, V. infra.
and famous, with the Angli, before mentioned, disbourding into Great Britain,
where they conquered the best, and greatest part of that Noble Island, since
called England, and in this continent spreading along the Ocean from the river
Eydore unto the Rhijn, amassed of sundry other of the Dutch nations, vn^^^ng
into this name.

The Sig^^ones; Subalingij; Cobandi; Ch^li; Phandusij; and Char^^des; with the
Cimbri inhabiting the Cimbrian Chersonese, now the two (...).

The Sident, after Pirckhermerus, now parts of the Dukedomes of Micklenburg,
and Pomeren.

The Pharodeni, now part of Saxony after Pirckhermerus.

The Bugunti, inhabiting betwixt the rivers Odera, and Wixel.

The Ch^^mae, containing now after Pirckhermerus with the (...) M^iores, and
Angrivarij the parts of Westphalia, and Saxony, where lie the Bishoprics of
Munster, Paderborn, Breme, and Hildesheim, with Engern, and the Earldom of
Ravensperg.

The Laccobardi. Duling^. Te^tonari. Avarpi.

The Longi-mani; and Longi-Did^ni, where now (...) in (...).

The Calucones.

The Banochaemae, inhabiting after Pirckhermerus about Cottowitz, and Dresen.

The Batini, Corconti, Luti-Buri.

The Sidones, now the Dukedom of Oppolen.

The Cogni.

The Visburgij, after Pirckhermerus the part of Morauia about Olmuntz.

The Nertereanes, after Pirckhermerus with the Casuari, and Danduti co^taining
now the Earldom of Henneberg, the countries Puchen, and Ron, and the towns
of Smalcald, Koberg, Egra, and others.

The Danduti.

The Tubanti, after Pirckhermerus now the country Essfeld, and the wood Hartz.

The Turioch^mae.

The Curiones, containing after Pirckhermerus with the Chaetuori, and Parmae
Campi, now the Lower Austria, where lie the towns of Krems, Znaem, and
Niclaspurg.

The Chaetuori. Parmae Campi. Teracatriae, and Racatae.

The Baemi, encompassed with the wood Hercynian, containing then the
Marcomanni; and inhabiting now the country of Bohemia. In these parts dwelt
Igitur intur Hercyniam syluan^, Rhenumque and Maenum amnes H^l^^^tij, vlteriom
P^^ij, Gallica v^raque gena, ^^^^erunt. Mane^ (...), significatque l^^iveterem
memoria^^, quamvis mutatis cul^oribus. C. (...) lib: de (...). German^rum.
sometimes a remainder of the vanquished Boij of the Gauls Cisalpine of Italy,
after some abode here expulsed hence before the time of my author by the
Praecipua Matcomanorum gloria, (...).
Marcomanni, leaving notwithstanding here their name, and memorial of their
dwelling, the people being called here B^mi by Ptolemy; as was their country
Boiemum by Tacitus, by V. (...).
Paterculus Boioh^mium, and now after sundry changes of inhabitants Bohemia.

Pliny adds the Vindili (the V^ndalij of Tacitus, the Vand^li of V* M* Aurel:
Cassi^dori (...), and (...).
Cassiodorus,) Ingaevones; Istaevones; and Hermiones, with the Pe^cini being
the five general all parts, or nations, whereinto he distributeth the whole
country, containing sundry lesser people.

The Burgundiones, part of the Vindili, after Ph. M. adioining to the sea
Baltique, and containing the parts of the Dukedom^s of Mecklembarg, and
Pomeren, where stand the towns of Rostoch, and S^nd. In the reign of the
Emperor Valenti^ian the first, these leaving that their (...).
ancient habitation to the number of fowresoare thousand fighting men descended
to the Rhijn, and borders of Gaul, received shortly afterward into Gaul by
Stilico in the reign of the Emperor Honorius, giving there the name unto the
people, and country of Burgundy.

Strabo adds the (...), whose interpretations we find not.

The Islands belonging to this continent were after Ptolemy those of the
Saxones, distant 750 sladia from the mo^^th of the river Albis: three named
Alociae, lying about the (...) Chersones^^: and four called the Standiae,
situated toward the East of the Chersonese, of which the three lying next unto
the Chersonese were lesser Islands. The fourth, standing more Easterly, and more
properly named S^andia, was of very large extent, seated thwart of the river
Vistula. Solinus names this last the Il^nd Scandinavia, the biggest after his
account of the German Islands. It contains now the kingdoms of Sweathlandt,
and Norwaie, with Schonen, and Halland^ belonging unto Denmark by later, and
more exact discoueries found to join unto the continent. Besides these Mela
makes mention of the seven Hemodes, situated then in the bay Codanus Sinus
Codanus.
co^taining now the islands of De^marke, lying in the mouth of the Sundt. The
greatest, and the most fruitful hereof he names the island Codanonia, most
probably now Zealandt, the royal seat, and residence of the kings of Denmark,
from whence most probably, and the Baye Codanus in succeeding times, begun
first, and was occasioned the name of the Danes.

A chief cause of so great differences, and defects we have found here in the
interpretations of the many German Nations, has been the ancient rudenes of
the country, being without Nullas Germanorum populos vrbes habitati satis notum
est, nepati quidem inter se ^unctas seeds. Colunt discreti, ac diversi, vt
fons, vt campus, vt nemus placuit. C. Tac. lib. de Mor. Germ.
city, or civil habitation, by which, as with more certain landmarkes,
remaining to posterity, they might afterward be distinguished, and known. We
add the sauagenes of the people, not safely to be travailed amongst, and
conuersed withal by strangers, in danger still of their cruelty, and
unnatural sacrifices. We may add again their often flittings, as each nation
had power, and will to kill, and to drive out an other, and to remove into
their void places. These during the Roman greatness, had only the fortune not
to be enthralled to the bondage hereof, endangered once by Drusus in the reign
of Caesar Augustus, but freed by the victory of Arminius, and the death of
Varus, and his Legions L. Flor. hist. Romans l. 4. c. 12.
, neglected afterward, as a people for their valor unconquerable, or not
worth the conquest in regard of their poverty, or through a satiety of that
Empire, and state, ouerburdened with provinces, solicitous to keep what they
had gotten, and not ouer-greedy of more; for this cause in regard of their
restles, and undaunted (...) p^un'd in with most powerful garrisons, and
armies hereof, consisting in the reign of the Emperor Tiberiu^ of twelve
Legions, with their wings, and aides, whereof eight Sed praecipuum robour
Rhenum juxta, commune in Germanos, Gallosque subsidium, octo Legiones erant.
Co^. Tac Annal. lib. 4. Prima, Quinta, (...). Vndevigesima Legionea Inferioris,
Germani^. Serunda, (...), Quarta^ decu^^a and Sexta-decuma Legiones
^^i-Superioris Germa. ad (...) Tib. ex Tacit. An. lib. ^.
attended the shore of the Rhijn, and Ripamque Danubij Legionum duae in
Pannonia; duae in My^^ attineban^, C. Tac. An. lib. 4.
four that of the Danow, by means of their continual alarums, and
schirmishes herewith, accounted the most warlicke, and best experienced
soldiers that commonwealth had. Toward the waine of the Roman^Empire, as
after the same was expired, those ancient names of inhabitants, before
mentioned, and set down, being by little, and little worn out, and quite
extinguished through their fights, and butcheries amongst themselves, their
transmigrations into foreign countries, their affection, and unions into new
names, and the flittings, and invasions of the Sarmati^ns, and more East^rne
people, the country including Pannonia, Rhaetia and Noricum, shortly after
confounded in the name, and account hereof, became peopled with 13, for the
most part different, names of the Saxons, Almans, French, Th^ringians,
Boioarians, Hunnes, Lombards, Av^res, Hungarian^, Da^^s, Nor^egians, S^ethidi,
and Solaeves, whose original, and whole fortunes, and of the modern
kingdoms, and states issuing from them we are in the next place to relate,
beginning with the Saxons. Saxones Ptolemaei lib. 2. c. 11. Geog^*


The SAXONS.
Amongst other more vid. Claud. Ptol. G^og. l. 2. c. 11. E^tropij Hist. Romans l.
9. Imp. Di^clesiano, (...) lib. 7. c. 16. Imp. Diot (...), and lib. 7. c. 19.
Imp. Valentinian o Senio^^; Zosimi hist. lib. 3. Imp. Constantio, and Iulia^^^;
Am. Marc. l. 26. 27. 28, and 30. Imp. Valentiniano, and Valente* (...) de
Regni* and Temp. successione; (...) Imp. Valen^. primo; M. Aurelij Cassiodori
Chronicon Imp. Valent. primo; Bedae Eccl. hist. gentis Anglorum l. 1. c. 5.
Aimonij de Ge^^is Francorum l. ^. c. 8. l. 2. c. 27. l. 4. c. 18, 26. 52. 56.
59. 62* 69. 70. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. 80. 86. 87. 88* 89. 91. 96. and l.
5. c. 2. 64. 70. 71. 73. and 74. Greg. Turonensis l. 4* c. 14. Helmoldi
Chronicon Sclavorum. Chytraei Saxoniam; Alberti Krantzij Saxoniae lib. 5. Gul.
Cambd. Brit. Georg. Fabritij Originum Saxonicarum lib. 1. and 2.
unlikely Etymologies some derive the name hereof from a short kind of weapon
they used, called in their language Saxa. Others from the Saci, a people of
Asia, remembered by Herodotus, Xenophon, and Pliny, and with the Getae, Daci,
and other Barbarous nations, removing into these Western parts. Others from
the Sassones, a people in the North part of Asia, mentioned by Ptol^mie, which
name of all the rest suiteth best with the present, now called in their
language Sasses, and their country Sassen, or Sachs^n. I rather think that the
name is first, and ancient without any known derivation, as were those other
names of the Dutch people, before mentioned. Their first mention we find in
Ptolemie, who lived about the reign of the Emperor Antoninus Pius; placed, as
is before set down. In Histories we first read of them in the reign of the
Emperor Diocle^^^^, with the French, infesting then the Seacoast of Gaul
Belgicke, and Armorique. Afterward we again hear of them in the reign of
Constantius, and Iulianus by Zosimus in his third book, where he gives them
the chief place for strength, hardiness, and valor above the rest of the
Barbarians of those parts. Then in the reign of the Emperor Valentinian the
first with the Scots, and Picts sorraging Bretaigne, and with the Frenchmen
Ga^^e. It was after this in the reign of the Emperors Valentinian the third,
and Marcianus, that accompanied with the Angli, and Vitae they subdued
Bretaigne, giving the name of England unto the best, and largest part of that
great, and famous Island. Their first dwelling was after Ptolemies description
wholly beyond the Elb, bounding according to Chytr^us upon that river upon the
South; on the Ocean upon the West; upon the Cimbri on the North; and on the
East upon the Tentones, and Tentonoari, and inhabiting where now is the
Dukedom of Holstein. In the time of the latter Roman Emperors passing over
the Elb they spread Southwards as far as the French, whether beating out the
ancient inhabitants, or (which is more probable) communicating unto them this
their more noble, and victorious name. For otherwise it is altogether
impossible that so small a nation, as these were in Ptolemies time, should of
themselves possess, and fill so large, and spacious a country. The Western
Empire overthrown, and the French withdrawing toward the heart of Gaul they
enlarged to the Rhijn unto against Colen. Their more precise bounds in the
reign of the Emperor Charles the Great was upon the North the river Eydore
dividing them from the Danes; upon the West, first the Ocean betwixt the river
Eydore, and the Rhijn, then the Rhijn from the mouth, or fall thereof unto
about Colen, parting them from France; upon the East first a line from Stargard
upon the sea Balticke drawn unto the Elb about Hamburg, then the Elb from
about Hamburg unto the meeting of that river with the Saltza, then the Saltza,
together seuering them from the Scla^es Winithi; and upon the South the
Thuringians, now Duringen, and Hessen. They contained now the Dukedomes of
Holstein (Wagerland excepted,) of Brunswijck, and L^nenburg, the Bishops of
Bremen, Ferden, Hildesheim, Halberstat, and Meydburg, the Earldom of
Mansfeldt, the old Marches of Brandenburg, Westphalia, the two Freislandts, and
Over-Ysel, with parts of Gelderlan^t, and Hollandt. They were divided into 4
distinct nations, or parts; of the Saxons beyond the Elb, comprehended betwixt
that river, the Ocean, and the rivers Eydore, and Trave, and containing now
Holstein; of the Ostphali, contained betwixt the Elb, the Ocean, and the rivers
Weser, and Sa^tza, and containing now the five Bishoprics, before mentioned,
and the Dukedomes of Brunswijck, and Lunenburg; of the Angriuarij, coasting
along the South-west shore of the Weser, now the part of Westp^alia, where lie
the towns of Wildehusen, Minden, Hervorden, L^^gow, Osenburg, Diepholt, Soest,
Waldes, Arnsb^rg, with Surland in the diocese of Colen; and of the Westphali,
now the rest of modern Westphalia, extended unto the Rh^^, and co^prehe^ding
now the Dukedom of Berg^^, the Earldom of Marck, Tremond, Wesel, Embrick,
Zutphen, Relingh^se^, Benthem, M^ster, with others. After sundry revolts from
under the French, by which nation under their princes Cl^tarius, Charles
M^^tel, Carlom^n, and Pepin they had diverse time^ before been vanquished, and
made tributarie, they were at length after 35. years war utterly subdued by
the Emperor Charles the Great, and re^^ced into a French province, or
Dukedom, the title whereof remains unto this day. By the Emperor Henry the
first, and the succeeding princes of the house, and nation of the Saxons, the
Winithi, or Sclaves, lying beyond the rivers Elb, and Saltza, where now are
Meissen, L^usnitz, Brandenburg, Mecklenburg, Lewenburg, and Pomeren, were
conquered, or otherwise added unto this name, and account, peopled with their
language, and colonies. Henry, surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony, and Bavaria,
being proscribed by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, the whole broke into
sundry lesser states, and goverments, the chief whereof, and which remain
unto this day, are the Dukedomes of Brunswijck; Lunenburg, Holstein,
Westphalen, Cl^ve, and Bergen, of whose beginnings, successions, and
con^^^ance, together with the Dukedo^e, and Electorship entitled of Saxony,
although now lying without the bounds of the ancient, we will speak inord^^.

The ELECTORSHIP, and DVKEDOME of SAXONY.
This Dukedom was first V. Georgij Fab^^tij Originum Saxonicarum lib. 2. Petri
Birtij Commentarium Rerum Germanicarum lib. 2. c. 11
begun by the Emperor Charles the Great, after his conquest of the Saxons,
ordering the subdued country hereof into a province, thus styled. The first
Duke was Witichind, king of this nation during their wars with Charles the
Great, appointed by this Emperor. After other Bruno was the first Duke,
brother unto Witichind. From Bruno Fabritius deriveth the succeeding Dukes in
manner following. Luitulphus the first, son to Bruno. Bruno the second, son
to Luitulphus the first. He dyed sans issue. Otho the first, brother to Bruno
the second. Henry the first, surnamed the Fowler, son to Otho the first. The
house of France, and of Charles the Great being extinguished in Conrade the
first, he was elected Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany, continuing
for a time in his posterity. During the reign of the Emperors of the house of
Saxony this Dukedom, or country was divided amongst sundry lesser princes,
whereof all did bear this title, amongst whom was Ber^ard Duke of Saxony,
Engern, and Westphalen, and Lord of Lunenburg, created Electour of the Empire
by the Emperor Otho the third. Bernard Duke of Saxony, Engern, and Westphalen,
and Lord of Lunenburg, first Electour of the Empire of the Dukes, and house of
Saxony. From this Bernard the Duke Electours of Saxony have been continued, as
follows. Bernard the second, Electour, and Duke of Saxony, son to Bernard
the first. Ordulphus, son to Bernard the second. Magnus, son to Ordulphus.
Taking part with Rodulph Duke of Schwaben against the Emperor Henry the 4, he
was taken prisoner, and deprived of all his dignities, the last Duke Elector of
Saxony of the house of Bernard. Lotharius the first, Earl of Supplinburg, and
Arnsperg created Electour, and Duke of Saxony by the Emperor Henry the first.
After the decease of the Emperor Henry the fifth, he was made Roman Emperor,
and king of the Germans. Henry the first surnamed the Proud, Duke of Bavaria,
created Duke Electour of Saxony by the Emperor Lotharius, his father in law,
whose daughter Gertrude he had married, proscribed by the Emperor Conrade.
Henry the second, surnamed the Lion, son to Henry the first. He married unto
Maude, daughter to Henry the second, king of England, besides the ancient
Saxony, which, excepting Holstein, and what the Bishops possessed, he almost
wholly enjoyed, Lord of both Bavariaes, and of the parts beyond the Elb, where
now lie the Dukedomes of Mecklenburg, and Lawenburg, conquered by him from the
Winithi, the greatest of all the German Princes before, and almost since his
time. Forsaking the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, excommunicated by the Pope,
at the seige of Alexandria in the Dukedom of Milan, he was proscribed by him,
and deprived of all his dignities, and possessions, Brunswijck, and Lunenburg
excepted, restored upon his reconciliation, at the mediation of his father in
law the king of England, the occasion of those Dukedomes. After this
proscription the country of Saxony until this time, for the most part
continuing entire, and under one, became scattered (as has been before
related) into sundry lesser pieces, and names, Brunswijck, and Lunenburg being
erected into the Dukedomes before mentioned; Westphalia usurped by Philip,
Bishop of Colen, whose successors still hold the title of Dukes hereof; the
parts beyond the Weser by Bernard, Bishop of Paderborn* the Palatinate of
Saxony by Herman, Lantgraue of Duringen; Lubeck being annexed to the Empire;
and other parts otherwise carried. Bernard the third, descended of the family
of Anhalt, son to Albertus Vrsus, Marquess of Brandenburg, created Duke
Electour of Saxony by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa after the
proscription of Henry the second, surnamed the Lion. He had the town, and
little country of Wittenberg given unto him by the Emperor Conrade the third,
his seat, and of sundry the succeeding Dukes, which part although lying without
the river Saltza, and the bounds of the ancient, has since notwithstanding
obtained the account, and name of Saxony, called now the Higher Saxony.
Albert the first, son to Bernard the third. Albert the second, son to
Albert the first. Rodulph the first, son to Albert the second. Rodulph the
second, son to Rodulph the first. Wenceslaus brother to Rodulph the second.
Rodulph the third, son to Wenceslaus. He died without issue male. Albert the
third, brother to Rodulph the third. He deceased without issue in the year
1422, in whom ended the Duke Electours of Saxony of the house of Anhalt.
Frederick the first surnamed the warlike, Lantgraue of Duringen, Marquess of
Meissen, and Count Palatine of Saxony, created Duke Electour of Saxony by the
Emperor Sigismond. By this means after so many flittings, the title, and
dignit^e of the Electours, and Dukes of Saxony has become quite removed out
of the ancient, and true Saxony, confined within Duringen, Meissen, and the
country about Wittenberg, the only possessions of the modern Dukes. Frederick
the second, son to Frederick the first. Ernest the first, son to
Frederick the second. Frederick the third, son to Ernest the first. He
deceased unmarried. John brother to Frederick the third, and son to Ernest
the first. Iohn-Fredericke son to John the first. He was taken prisoner in
the Protestants wars in the year 1547 by the Emperor Charles the fifth, by
whom he was deprived of his Electourship, conferred upon Duke Maurice; his
Dukedom, and patrimony yet continuing in his house. Maurice Duke of Saxony of
a younger house, son to Henry Duke of Saxony, son to Albert, brother to the
Electour Ernest the first, appointed Electour in the place of John Frederick
by the Emperor Charles the fifth. He died without male issue. Augustus Duke
Electour of Saxony, brother unto Maurice. Christian the first, son to Augustus.
Christian the second, son to Christian the first, deceasing in the year 1611
without heirs. John George, brother to Christian the second, Duke Electour of
Saxony in the year 1616.

The DVKEDOME of BRVNSWIICK.
This was sometimes a part of the ancient Dukedom of Saxony V. Alberti
Krantzij Saxoniae l. 9. and P. Birtij Com: Rer^: Germ: lib. 2. c. 18.
. The Estate (as before) was occasioned by means of the proscription of Henry
surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony, and Bavaria, who being deprived of all his
large possessions, and honors by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, and
afterward by the mediation of his father in law, Henry the second, king of
England, being again reconciled unto the Emperor, had the two cities of
Br^nswijck, and Lunenburg with their countries restored unto him, which, left
by him unto his sons William, and Henry with the title of Earls, were
afterward in their persons erected into Dukedomes by the Emperor Frederick
the second. In memory of their English descent the Princes hereof, and of
Lunenburg have still since borne the arms of the first Kings of England in
their escotcheons, which the^ were only two Lions rampant. The Princes follow.
Henry Earl of Brunswijck, son to Henry surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony,
and Bavaria, created afterward Duke of Brunswijck by the Emperor Frederick
the second. He deceased without issue male, succeeded unto by Otho, son to his
brother William, Duke of Lunenburg. Otho, Duke of Lunenburg, son to William
Duke of Lunenburg, and grandchild unto Henry the Lion duke of Saxony, and
Bavaria, after the decease of his uncle Henry without issue male succeeding
likewise in the Dukedom of Brunswijck by the gift of the Emperor Frederick
the second. By lands partly bought, and partly given unto him by the Emperor
Frederick the second, he much augmented the dukedom hereof in circuit, and
revenues. Albert the First, son to Otho the first, duke of Brunswijck. His
brother John succeeded in the Dukedom of Lunenburg, the two Dukedomes being
again divided. Albert the second, son to Albert the first. His brother Henry
succeeded in the part of this Dukedom, lying beyond the wood Hartz, called
afterward from the seat of the prince the Dukedom of Grubenhagen, continued
in his successors unto Wolfang, and Philip, in whom the line was extinguished.
Magnus the first, son to Albert the second, Duke of Brunswijck. He became
also Duke of Lunenburg, the house of John, brother to Albert the first, being
extinguished in Otho, and William. Magnus the second, surnamed with the chain,
Duke of Brunswijck, and Lunenburg, son to Magnus the first. Henry Duke of
Brunswijck, and Lunenburg, son to Magnus the second. William Duke of
Brunswijck, and Lunenburg, son to Henry. Upon composition made with his uncle
Bernard, son to Magnus the second, he yielded up unto him the Dukedom of
Lunenburg, continued in his posterity. William Duke of Brunswijck, son to
William. Henry Duke of Brunswijck, son to William the second. Henry Duke of
Brunswijck, son to Henry. Julius Duke of Brunswijck, son to Henry the
younger. Henry Julius, son to Julius, Duke of Brunswijck. He married unto
Elizabeth, daughter to Frederick the second, and sister unto Christierne the
fourth, kings of Denmark. Fredericke-Vlric, and Christian Administratour of
Halberstat, sons to Henricus Julius, and Elizabeth, sister to Christian the
fourth king of Denmark. The rest of the princes of this house, styled likewise
Dukes of Brunswijck, but not continuing the house, (their lines being
extinguished) in regard of their number, and to avoid confusion, we have
purposely omitted, which method we will observe in the orders of the rest of
the German Princes.

The DVKEDOME of LVNENBVRG.
How this state was first begun, and occasioned, we have showed in Pet. Bertij
Com. Rerum Germ. l. 2. c. 18
the Dukedom of Brunswijck. The order of the Princes, continuing the house,
follow. William first Earl of Lunenburg, afterward Duke, son to Henry the
Lion, Duke of Saxony, and Bavaria. Otho Duke of Lunenburg, son to William. His
uncle Henry deceasing without male he succeeded likewise in the Dukedom of
Brunswijcke. John Duke of Lunenburg, son to Otho, Duke of Brunswijck, and
Lunenburg. His brother Albert succeeded in Brunswijck, the two Dukedomes again
divided. Otho Duke of Lunenburg, son to John. Otho, and William Dukes of
Lunenburg, sons to Otho the Elder. They both deceased without issue male, by
which means after the custom of Germany the inheritance hereof descended upon
Magnus the first, and the surviving house of Brunswijck. Magnus the first Duke
of Brunswijck, and Lunenburg. Magnus the second Duke of Brunswijck, and
Lunenburg, son to Magnus the first. Henry Duke of Brunswijck, and Lunenburg,
son to Magnus the second. William Duke of Brunswijck, and Lunenburg, son to
Henry. He yielded up the Dukedom of Lunenburg unto his uncle Bernard, son to
Magnus the second. Bernard Duke of Lunenburg, son to Magnus with the chain,
Duke of Brunswijck, and Lunenburg, and uncle unto William. Frederick Duke of
Lunenburg, son to Bernard. Otho Duke of Lunenburg, son to Frederick. Henry
Duke of Lunenburg, son to Otho. Otho, and Ernest Dukes of Lunenburg, son to
Henry. Otho the younger, son to Otho. Otho: Freder: etc. sons to Otho the
younger. William, and Henry sons to Ernest. Ernest etc. sons to William
Julius: Ernestus etc. sons to Henry.

THE DVKEDOME OF HOLSTEIN.
The Country is the same with the ancient Saxony beyond the Elb, V. Alb
Krantzij Saxoniae lib. 5. 11. and* 1^.
the seat of the Saxons of Ptolemie; containing now four parts, or divisions,
of Ditmarse, Stormarse, Wagerland, and of Holstein, particularly thus called.
It was first an Earldom, divided from the great Dukedom of Saxony by Duke
Lotharius, who afterward was Emperor, and given by him with this title unto
Adolph, Earl of Schowenburg, whose successors, continued still in the line
masculine, for 400 years afterward enjoyed the same. In the year 1459. Adolph
the last Earl hereof and Duke of Schleswick deceasing without lawful heirs,
the right hereof was controversed betwixt Christierne the first king of
Denmark, son unto the sister of Adolph; and Otho, Earl of Schowenburg,
further off, but descending in a direct line masculine from the first Adolph.
Otho being compounded with for a sum of money Christierne enjoyed the
Earldom of Ho^stein, with the Dukedom of Schleswick, whereof Schleswick he
immediately incorporated with the kingdom of Denmark, the other his successors
still have held under the fief, and sovereignty of the Empire unto this day.
The Emperor Frederick the third to gratify this Prince, giving unto him
Ditmarse, pretended then to be without Lord, united the same herewith together
with Stormarse into one entire Dukedom, thus named, which under the homage,
and right of the Empire the house of Denmark still hitherto has possessed.

THE DVKEDOME OF WESTPHALIA.
This is now merely a title, usurped by the Archbishops of Colen ever since
the proscription of Duke Henry, surnamed the Lion. The country is divided
amongst sundry Bishops, and inferior States, and Princes.

THE DVKEDOME OF BERGEN, AND EARLDOM OF MARCK.
Concerning these see Cleue in the Relation of France, to the right of whose
Princes they now belong.

THE ALMANS Alamanni Aur: Victoris de Caesaribus Imp: Antonino Caracalla.
Alemanni Am: Marcellini lib. 27. Alamanni M. Aur: Cassiodori Chron: Imp:
Valentiniano seniore.

The V. Sext. Aurelium Victorem de Caesaribus Imperat. Bassiano Caracalla.
Eiusdem Epitomen Imp: Claudio secundo, Bassiano, and Constantino; Eutropij lib.
9. Imperat: Gallieno, Dioclesiano, Maximiano, and Constantio Magni Constantini
filio; Aelij Spartiani Caracallam; M. Aur: Cassiodori Chronicon Imperat:
Dioclesi^no, Constantio filio Constantini Magni, and Gratiano; Am. Marcellini
lib. 14. Imper. Constantio Iuniore; and lib. 26. 27. 29. and 30. Imp.
Valentiniano and Valente; and lib. 31. Imp. Valente, and G^atiano; Agathiae
lib. 1. Iornandis de Reg. and Temp. successione lib. Imperat. Dioclesiano and
Constantio; Aymonij de Rebus gestis Francorum lib. 1. c. 15. and lib. 4. c. 79,
Bea^i Rhenani de Rebus Germaniae lib. 1. (Alemanni trans Rhenum etc.) Martini
Crusi) Annals Sueuicos.
name hereof some fabulously derive from one Alman, whom they would have to
have been the 11 King of the Dutch, or Germans about the year of the world
2391. Others no less absurdly from the Lake Leman^^ Lemanus Lacus Caesaris
Com: B^lli Gal. l. 1.
of Caesar, now the Lake of Geneve; but whose name, and dominions never
extended so far. Others from the river Altmul in Nortgow, called in Latin by
some later writers Alemannus, whereunto they should border. Others more
probably from the Dutch words (Allensen mann) signifying as much as all sorts
of men, which name perhaps Alemanni (si As^^io Quadtato viro Italicensi fides
praestanda est, quire^ Germanorum diligenter perscripsit) adventitij sunt, and
ex varia hominum colluuione: quod sone eorum cognomento praefertur. Agathiae
lib: 1.
at their first coming down to the Rhijn, and the Roman frontiers they might
take up, or be called by others, being then a medly of sundry Dutch nations,
and not known by any one distinct name. The best do Etymologize them from the
words (All mann) expressing in the Dutch Language, as in our English, either a
promiscuous number of all sorts of men, or men all hardy, and valiant; a name
most likely usurped by these Germans in o^tentation of their valor at their
coming down to those borders, and for a greater terror to the Roman
Garrisons, whom they affronted on the further side of the Rhijn, and the Danow.
They were originally Suevians (into which name after their subjection to the
Frenchmen by little and little they resolved again, as into their first
Element) inhabiting sometimes about the Elb, and toward the declining of the
Roman Empire, as Crusius conjectureth, in the reign of the Emperor Septimius
Severus descending to the Rhijn, and Danow, or the Marches, and borders of that
state; whether that they were driven out of their first, and native countries,
or drawing hither as toward a warmer sun, and more rich, and certain pray; or
whether that they expulsed from hence the ancient inhabitants, or that these,
their country being large enough for both, incorporated into their common name.
For nothing toward this purpose can be gathered out of the snatching
epitomizing Histories of those times. The first time, wherein we hear them
mentioned, was in the reign of the Emperor Antoninus Bassianus Caracall^, who
should overcome them in a battle fought nere unto the river of the M^i^e. From
hence (I think,) it is, that Crusius conjectureth their first descent unto the
Rhijn to have happened about the reign of Severus, father to this Emperor.
After this we hear of them frequently upon occasion of their inroades, and
excursions into the neighboring Roman Provinces: in the reign of Gallienus
spoiling, and forraging Gaul, and thorough this province breaking into Italy:
of Claudius the second, overthrown by this prince with great slaughter in
Italy nere unto the Lake Benacus: of Dioclesian, and Maximianus to the number
of 60 thousand slain in Gaul in the country of the Lingones by Constantius,
father to the Great Constantine: Of Constantius, father unto Constantine the
Great, and succeeding unto Dioclesian, served in Bretaigne by Erocus, a king of
this nation: of Constantius son to Constantine the Great, wasting then, and
spoiling Gaul, and overcom'd in battle at Argentoratum by Iulianus, and driven
home into their country, Chrodomarius, one of their kings being taken prisoner:
of Valentinian the first, and Valens forraging Gaul, and Rhaetia, and again
beaten, and overthrown by the Romans: of Gratian, again inuading Gaul, and
by the army hereof slain at Argentaria to the number of 30 thousand. Their
seat here during these their affairs, and since that they were known by the
name of Almans was the right shore of the Rhijn from beyond the Meine, or from
the confluence of the Rhijn, and the Moselle, and the borders of the Frenchmen
unto the part of the Rhijn, against the Rauraci, now the country of Basil; or
(as in Crusius) unto he town of Waldshut above Basil, a sort sometimes of the
Almans, affronting the Romans; confined upon the South with the Danow, and
thwa^ting on the farther sides of the rivers Danow, and the Rhijn the provinces
of Rhaetia Prima, Germania Prima, and Maxima Sequanorum. They contained then
the parts, where now he the Dukedomes of Franconia, and Wittenberg, the
Marquisate of Baden, Brisgow, and Mort^^w, with the part of Schwaben,
comprehended within the Danow, and of the Lower Palatinate, lying within the
Rhijn. About, or shortly after the reign of Valentinian the third (for no
ancient author mentions the exact time,) as Rhenanus conjectureth presently
after the invasion of Attilas, and the death of Aetius, following the tract of
the Huns, who beating down the Roman towns, and fortresses, had levelled,
and made plain the way before them, passing over the rivers of the Rhijn, and
the Danow, they made themselves masters of the first Rhaetia, with the First
Germany, and part of Maxima Sequanorum in Gaul; whose conquest in the more
flourishing estate of Rome, they had often before to their loss attempted,
enlarging by this means their dominions, and the name, language, and account
of the Dutch unto the Alps, and beyond the Rhijn unto the confines of the
Burgundians, bounding then upon the South with Italy; upon the West with the
river Russ, and the Mountain Vauge from Burgundy; upon the North with the
Moselle; and and upon the East with the river Lech from the Bavarians, or from
those, who then held Vindilicia; containing at this day besides the parts
before mentioned, the rest of the Lower Palatinate, and of Schwaben, the
Grisons, Switzerlandt unto the river Russ, the territory of Basil, Sungow,
Elsass, and Westreich. Not long after this their enlargement quarrelling with
the French, jealous of their victories, and conquests, they were overthrown by
king Clovys at Tolbiacum, now the town of Zulph nere Colen, in a memorable,
and great battle; subdued after by this Prince, and, least they should
recover again, upon a barbarous jealousy of their strength, and greatness
oppressed with a miserable, and lasting servitude; some marks whereof in the
common sort of the Suevians do still hitherto remain. Their estate, whilst
they were free, and during the Roman Monarchy, was under Kings, every lesser
Canton having their several Princes, whereof we read in Am. Marcellinus no
fewer then eight to have reigned at one time, besides others probably not
mentioned. Upon their subjection to the French men they were made a Dukedom;
named first the Dukedom of Almaigne, afterward of Schwaben, continuing as
during the whole government of the French, so after the expiration of the French
Empire, and since this became elective, whereof, and of the States raised from
hence, we are now to relate.

THE DVKEDOME OF ALMAIGNE OR SCHWABEN.
By these two names we find the ancient Dukedom promiscuously Ex martini
Crusij Annalibus Sueuicis.
to have been called. The State was erected under this title by Clovys, King
of the Frenchmen presently upon his conquest of the nation. The first Dukes
were only but such governors under the French, thus styled, chosen by the free
grace of the Princes, and in whose free power it was to remove, and displace
them at their pleasure. It was after the division of the French Empire by the
sons of the Emperor Lewis the Godly, and that the Empire was translated to
the Germans that they became hereditary, the first that transmitted this honor
to posterity being Frederick the first, created by the Emperor Henry the
fourth. The Dukes of Almaigne, or Schwaben (for as many as we can find of them
out of the lame Dutch Antiquaries) follow. Leutharis, and Bultinus. Gonzo,
Luitfridus, and Vncelinus in the reign of Childebert, French king. Martin, and
Godfrey in the time of Pepin the Fat, Maiour of the Palace. Maso about the same
time. Ortuvinus in the time of S. Gal. Luitfridus, and Theodovalda in the
Regency of Charles Martel, Maiour of the Palace. At this time Crusius
accounts in Almaigne (to use his own words) Elsass, Zurichgow, Schwaben, and
the Higher Germany, whereby it appears that little until then had been
diminished of the ancient. Theobaldus, Bertholdus, Veius, Gotfridus, and Watilo
in the same reign. Hildebrandus, Imanus, Gotfrey, and Lantofrichus during the
same Regencie, for many then commanded together. Geroldus, Hiltebrandus, and
Berchtoldus in the reign of the Emperor Charles the Great. Nothardus in the
reign of the Emperor Lotharius the first. Wighartus, and Rupertus about the
same time in the reign of Lewis, surnamed the Ancient King of Germany.
Berchtoldus, and Erchinger in the reign of the Emperor Arnulph. In the reign
of the same Prince Rodulphus, and Burchardus. Hitherto the order of the Dukes
is broken, and confused. There follows a more continuate succession, but
neither yet hereditary. Burchard, descended from the Earls of Buchorn, created
Duke of Almaigne, or Schwaben in the year 916 by the Emperor Conrade the
first. Herman. Luitulphus. Duke of Saxony, son to the Emperor Otho the
first. Burchard the second, son to Burchard the first. Otho the first, son
to Luitulphus before mentioned. Conrade. Herman the second. Herman the third,
son to Herman the second. Ernest the first. Ernest the second, son to
Ernest the first. Herman the fourth. Henry, brother to the Emperor Conrade the
second. Otho the second, Count Palatine of Witlispach, Nephew to the Emperor
Otho the third. Otho the third, Marquess of Sweinfurt. Rodulph, Earl of
Rheinfeilden, by the practice of Pope Hildebrand chosen afterward Emperor of
the Romans against the Emperor Henry the fourth. He died of a wound at
Mersburg received against this Emperor in the battle sought at the River of
Elster in Meissen. By this time sundry new Estates being erected, and lopped
off from the vast body of the Dukedom of Schwaben the name, and account
hereof became straightened within more narrow bounds. Frederick the first,
surnamed the Ancient, Baron of Hohen-staufen, created Duke of Schwaben by the
Emperor Henry the fourth in the place of Rodulph. He first made the Dukedom
hereditary, the former Dukes after Crusius commanding but in the nature of
deputies, and leiutenants of the Emperors. Frederick surnamed with the one
eye, son to Frederick the Ancient. Frederick surnamed Barbarossa, son to
Frederick with the one eye. He was elected Roman Emperor, unfortunately
drowned in the river Saphet in Armenia in his journey toward Syria for the
recovery of the Holy Land, buried at Tire. Frederick the fourth, younger son
to the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. Henry the eldest brother, was elected
Emperor of the Romans after his father. Conrade, brother to Frederick the
fourth. Philip brother to Frederick the fourth, and Conrade. He became Roman
Emperor after the decease of Henry the Sixth. He was slain at Bamberg by Otho
Count Palatine. Frederick the fifth, son to the Emperor Henry the Sixth. He
was also made Emperor by the name of Frederick the second after Otho Count
Palatine, son to Henry surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony, poisoned in Italy by
his base son Manfrede. Conrade son to Frederick the fifth, poisoned by
Manfrede, his base brother. Conradinus, son to Conrade, taken prisoner in Italy
in his wars against Charles Duke of Aniou, beheaded afterward at Naples by
the commandment hereof, jealous, and impatient of a corrivall, young, and
without heirs, the last Duke of Schwaben, and in whom ended the succession,
and family of Frederick the Ancient. After this disastre the Dukedom of
Schwaben, for want of heirs falling to the Empire, became scattered into
sundry lesser States, too many to recite, containing besides the Bishoppricks
almost infinite of Imperial towns, Dukedomes, Earledomes, and petty
Baronies. The estates of chiefer note, partly arising out of those ruins, and
partly before this maine dissolution divided, and cut off from the great body
hereof were the Dukedom of Zeringen, the Earledomes of Habspurg, Pfirt,
Friburg, and Elsass, the Marquisate of Baden, the Dukedom of Wirtenberg, and
the Palatinate of the Rhijn, whereof part are at this day extinguished, and not
in being, part yet remain, of which in the next place.

THE DVKEDOME OF ZERINGEN.
This V. Francisci Irenici Germaniae Exeges: lib. 3. c. 10^; Iosiae Simleri de
Rep. Heluetiorum lib: 1. (de ciuitate Bernae); Getardi de Roo Histo:
Austriacae. lib. 1. (de Comitibus Habspurgi); Mart: Crusij An: Sueuicorum part:
2. l. 8. c. 4. part. 3. lib. 1. c. 2.; and p. 2. lib. 7. c. 3.
took the name from a Castle thus called, whose ruins are yet seen nere unto
the town of Friburg in Brisgow. The Princes thus named were sometimes Lords of
Brisgow with a great part of modern Zwitzerlandt. Of these we find much
mention in the Dutch, and French Antiquaries, but obscure, and confused. The
last Duke of Zeringen was Berchtold (a name affected by this family) deceasing
in the year 1218 upon the birthday of the Emperor Rodulph the first. What
became of the possessions hereof it will appear afterward.

THE EARLDOM OF HABSPVRG.
This was V. Gerardi de Roo Histor: Austriacae l: 1:
so called from a Castle of this name standing sometimes upon the river Aar in
Argow in Switzerlandt, now ruinated. It contained Argow, or the greatest part
thereof. The Princes hereof after Gerard de Roo were first named Earls of
Altemburg, or of Argow; the first of whom, whereof there is any certain
mention, was one Guntram, living about the year 950. It was after that this
Castle was builded, that they were entitled Earls of Habspurg. From Guntram
they were continued, as follows. Betzelinus, Earl of Altemburg, son to
Guntram. Rapato, son to Betzelinus, conjectured by Gerard de Roo to have
first founded the castle of Habspurg, and to have taken upon him the title of
Earl of Habspurg. Warnerus the first, Earl of Habspurg, son to Rapato.
Otho, son to Warnerus the first. Warnerus the second son to Otho. Albert the
first son to Warnerus the second. Rodulph the first, son to Albert the first.
Albert the second, son to Rodulph the first. He laid to the possessions of the
house of Habspurg the Upper Elsatz. Rodulph the second, son to Albert the
second, created afterward Roman Emperor by the name of Rodulph the first.
Falling at odds with Ottocarus, king of Bohemia, he took from him the
countries of Austria, Steirmarck, Karnten, and Krain, with other neighboring
pieces, which he then lately had got seized of, since possessed by this
family: the first raiser of the house of Habspurg, since named of Austria, the
most numerous, great, and potent of Europe, at this day branching over the most
part of the princely houses of Christendom, whereof more eminently amongst
others are the German Emperors, and the Kings of Spain.

THE EARLDOM, OR ADVOCATESHIP OF FRIBVRG.
V. Martini Crusij Annalium Sueuicorum. part. 3. lib. 1. c. 2; and Gerardi de
Roo Histor: Austriacae l: 3.
This comprehends Brisgow, named thus from the town of Friburg, the chief
of the country. The Princes hereof succeeded unto the Dukes of Zeringen, but by
what means, and who was the first, it is uncertain. Eggon the last Earl, or
Advocate of Friburg, turmoiled with civil wars of his rebellious subjects,
sold his whole right, and interest hereof for 12000 Ducats to Albert, and
Leopold, Archdukes of Austria, and sons to Albert the Short, whose
successors of the house of Austria are now Lords hereof.

THE DVKEDOME OF PFIRT.
THis V. Gerardi de Roc Histor: Austriacae lib. 3. de Alberto cogn: Contra^cto.
contained Sungow, and was named thus from the town of Pfirt, yet standing
herein. When this Earldom began we find not. Vlric, the last Earl,
deceasing without heir male, the estate became seized by Albert, surnamed the
Short, Archduke of Austria in right of his wife Ioane, daughter hereunto,
Vrsula the other sister being compounded with for her part for the sum of
8000 crowns. By this means the Princes of the house of Austria unto this day
have continued in the possession hereof.

THE DVKEDOME OF WIRTENBERG.
THis was V. Mart: Crusij Annalium Suevicorum part: 2. lib. 3. c. 10. and part.
2. lib 7. c. 9. Eiusdem Annal: Sueuicorum lib: Paralip. c. 2. and Petri Birtij
Comment. Rerum Germ: lib. 2. c. 20.
first a petty Earldom, containing only the Castle of Wirtenberg (standing
now not far from the town of Stutgard, and the Neccar) with some little
portion of country about it, occasioning the name. It increased to its present
greatness through the addition of sundry neighboring states, accruing to the
princes hereof by marriages, purchase, and arms, and their ancient names
abolished, uniting into this common. These were after Crusius the Dukedom, of
Teck, (whereof the princes are yet entitled) and of Vrslingen, and Schiltach,
the Earledomes of Calb, Tubingen, Gryningen, Vrach, Achellen, Vahingen,
Herrenbergen, and Aspergen, together with the Baronnyes of Niffen, Winspergen,
Hohen-stauffen, Ebenspachen, and Helfenstein. Birtius adds Zabergow,
Kreichgow, and Zolleren. The Princes follow. Conrade, the first which we can
find of the Earls of Wirtenberg, descended from the ancient Barous of
Beutelspach, and living about the year 1100, and in the reign of the Emperor
Henry the fourth. Vlric the first, son to Conrade. John, son to Vlric the
first, Lewis, son to John. Henry, son to Lewis. Eberhard son to Henry. Vlric,
son to Eberhard. Eberhard, and Vlric, sons to Vlric. Vlric, and Henry, sons to
Eberhard. Eberhard and Vlricke sons to Vlric. Vlrick son to Eberhard. Eberhard
son to Vlrick. Eberhard, son to Eberhard. This Prince having married Henrica,
daughter to Henry, Earl of Mompelgard augmented his house with that Earldom.
Lewis, and Vlric, sons to Eberhard. Eberhard, son to Lewis, first Duke of
Wirtenberg, created by the Emperor Maximilian the first. He founded the
University of Tubingen. He dyed without surviving lawful heirs. Eberhard, and
Henry, sons to Vlric, brother to Lewis, father to Eberhard the first Duke.
Vlric, son to Henry, expulsed by the confederate states of the Suevian League,
his Dukedom by the Emperor Charles the Fifth being given to his brother
Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria, restored again by the arms of Philip
Lantgraue of Hessen. His younger brother George succeeded in the Earldom of
Mompelgard. Christopher, son to Vlric. Lewis son to Christopher. He deceased
without issue. Frederick, son to George Earl of Mompelgard, brother to Vlric,
(the house, or succession of Vlric being extinguished in Lewis) succeeding in
the Dukedom. Iohn-Fredericke, son to Frederick now Duke of Wirtenberg.

THE PALATINATE OF THE RHIIN
COncerning this state see France.

THE MARQVISATE OF BADEN.
THe estate V. Francisci Irenici Exeges: Germa: niae lib. 3. c. 104. 105. and
108; and Principum Christianorum Stemmata per Antoniu^ Albizium.
was occasioned by the Emperor Otho the third, ordaining in this frontire
against the Frenchmen a Limenarch, or Marquess, in continuance of time
becoming haereditary, and named thus of the town of Baden, his seat, or
residence. The first Marquess after Irenicus was one Herman, living about the
year 1120. agreeing with the time of the Emperor Henry the fifth; more
probably the first, who derived this title, and honor to his issue, and
succession. Others more distinctly place this Herman in the year 1155, and in
the reign of Frederick Barbarossa, created Marquess by this Emperor. The
Princes, continuing the house, follow. Herman the first, before mentioned,
Marquess of Verona, created Marquess of the Empire by the Emperor Frederick
the first. He is said to have married Imutha daughter to a former Earl of
Baden. From the town of Baden, their first seat, the Princes since have been
named the Marquesses of Baden. Herman the second, Marquess of Baden, son to
Herman the first. Herman the third, son to Herman the second. Herman the
fourth, Marquess of Baden, son to Herman the third. Rodulph, son to Herman
the fourth. Herman son to Rodulph. Rodulph, son to Herman. Frederick son
to Rodulph. Rodulph, son to Frederick. Bernard, son to Rodulph. James,
son to Bernard. Charles, son to James. Christopher, son to Charles,
Marquess of Baden, and Hochberg, and Earl of Spanheim. Bernard, Marquess of
Baden, son to Christopher. His brother Ernest succeeded in the Marquisate of
Hochberg. Christopher the Younger, son to Bernard. Edward, Marquess of
Baden, son to Christopher the younger. Indebted, and going about to sell, and
alienate the estate from his house, he was driven out, and deprived of all by
his kinsman Ernest, Marquess of Hochberg. Ernest, and George Frederick,
Marquesses of Hochberg, sons to Charles, son to Ernest Marquess of Hochberg,
son to Christopher the Elder, Marquess of Baden, and Hochberg, and Earl of
Spanheim, and brother to Bernard, Marquess of Baden; after the expulsion of
Edward succeeding in the Marquisate,, and country of Baden. Ernest deceasing
without issue male, George Frederick remained sole heir of the house,
Marquess of Baden, and Hochberg in the time of Albizius. How the country by
continual additions became enlarged unto its present extent see the third
book of Irenicus, and the 108. chapter.

THE FRENCHMEN. Franci Am: Marcellini lib: 27. etc.

OF the Original, Empire, and whole fortune of this nation we have already
fully related in the discourse of the famous, and potent kingdom of France.
The name, and memory hereof is yet continued here in the country of Franconia,
one of the four maine Dukedomes, or Provinces, during the command of the
French the part of Germany, then subject unto them, was divided into. The title
of the Duke of Franconia is yet borne, and and maintained by the Bishop of
Wurtzburg.

THE THVRINGIANS. Toringi Sidon: Apollinaris Paneg: Avito. Thoringi Procop:
lib. 1. de Bello Gothico. Turingi Aymonij lib. 4. c. 76. etc.

THese V. Am. Marcellini lib: 31. Imperat: Valente, and Gratiano; Clau: Ptolem:
lib: 3. c. 5. Geogr. Sidonij Apollinaris Panegyricum Avito; Procopij lib. 1. de
Bello Gothico; Gregorij Turonensis lib. 2. c. 12, and lib. 3. c. 4. and 7.
Aymonij de gestis Francotum lib. 1. c. 7. and lib: 2: c: 9. Georgij Fabritij
Originum Saxonicarum lib. 6.
probably might be the Thervingi, mentioned by Ammiarius Marcellinus in his 31
book in the Emperors Valens, and Gratianus, driven then by the Huns unto the
hither side of the river Danow; but from what country he names not. Not
improbably otherwise they might be the Tyrangetae of Ptolemie Tyrangetae Ptol.
l. 3. c. 5. Tyregetae. Strab: lib. 7. Geog.
, a nation then inhabiting Sarmatia. Perhaps these three might all be the names
of one, and the same people. But in this nothing is certain. The first time,
wherein we read of this express name, was in the reign of the Emperor
Valentinian the third; when they are Chunus, Bellonotus, Neurus, Bastarna,
Toringus. Sidon. Apollinaris Panegyr: Avito.
mustered up by Sidonius Apollinaris amongst other Barbarous nations following
Attilas toward Gaul, and the West. Their first certain mention in this
country of Germany we find to have been in the reign of Childerick the
fourth king of the Frenchmen from Pharamond, father to the great Clovys
(Avitus, and Maiorianus then succeeding in the expiring Roman Empire of the
West) at what time we hear of one Bissinus, King of this nation, and of his
adulteress wife Bissina, entertaining Childerick, living there exiled,
expulsed out of his kingdom. Procopius notwithstanding in his Gothish wars
fetches their antiquity, and arrival hither much further from the time of
the Emperor Augustus, coming, and inhabiting here by his permission; but
without the testimony of more ancient authors, and for this cause not deserving
any credit. The parts they took up here, whilst they were a free estate, and
before they became subject to the Frenchmen, were the modern Duringen, and
Hessen. They were subject under kings, whereof since their first notice in
regard of their short continuance we find only two, Bissinus now mentioned,
and Erminfridus. Under Erminfridus their liberty, and kingdom took end,
overcome, and after perfidiously slain at Tolbiacum, now Zulp, by Theodorik
king of Austrasia, aided by his brother Clotarius, king of Soissons, sons to
king Clouys the great. Their country by this means became subject to the
French of Austrasia; added unto East-France; whereunto it remained after for a
long time annexed. It was afterward under the Dutch Emperors made a
Lantgraue-dome, then after divided amongst two Lantgraues of Duringen, and
Hessen. The manner follows.

THE EARLDOM, OR LANTGRAVEDOME OF DVRINGEN.
IT V. Georgij Fabritij Originum Saxonicarum lib. 6.
was so named from the ancient inhabitants thereof, the Thuringians. The
estate after a long vacancy was begun about the year 1025 by the Emperor
Conrade the second in the person of Lewis, son by one of the Dukes of Orleans
unto Blancaschidis, sister to Gisela, wife of this Emperor, and daughter unto
Lewis the fourth French king. It contained then the whole ancient Duringen;
the province not yet being divided. The Princes follow. Lewis, before
mentioned, son unto Blancaschidis. Lewis the second, son to Lewis the first.
Lewis the third, son to Lewis the second. Unto this prince (If I mistake not my
author) The Emperor Lotharius the second gave first the title of Lantgraue,
signifying with the Dutch a Provincial Earl, the former Princes being only
called by the simple title of Earls. Lewis the fourth, Lantgraue of Duringen,
son to Lewis the third. Lewis the fifth son to Lewis the fourth. He deceased
without issue. Herman brother to Lewis the fifth. He obtained of the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa the Palatinate of Saxony, derived by the succeeding
Lantgraues to the Marqueses of Meissen. Lewis the sixth, snnne to Herman. He
dyed without suruiuing male issue. Henry brother to Lewis the sixth. He deceased
without issue, in whom ended the family, or male succession of the house of
Orleans, after that it had therein continued for the space of 232 years. These
being deceased, there strove for the inheritance, and right hereof Henry
Marquess of Meissen, whose mother was Judith, or Iutta, daughter unto Herman,
and Henry Duke of Brabant, whose wife was Sophia daughter to Lewis the sixth.
After some 9 years contention, and war, by agreement betwixt the pretendants
the country was divided betwixt them, whereof the Marquese of Meissen had the
Eastern moity for his share with the title of Lantgraue of Duringen; and the
Duke of Brabant West-Duringen with the title of Lantgraue of Hessen. How the
Lantgraues of Duringen have been since continued in the house of Meissen read
those Marqueses. The Lantgraues of Hessen follow.

THE LANTGRAVE-SHIP OF HESSEN.
THis V. Georgij Fabritij Originum Saxonicarum lib: 6. Petri Birtij Com: Rerum
Germanicarum lib: 2. c. 22.
was sometimes a parcel of the greater province of Duringen, from its western
situation called then West-Duringen, and otherwise from the Catti, its ancient
inhabitants, corruptly Hessen. It was divided from Duringen about the year
1262 in the person (as was before mentioned) of Henry Duke of Brabant upon
composition, and agreement made betwixt him, and Henry Marquis of Meissen,
contending for the Lantgraueship of Duringen. The Lantgraues continuing the
house, follow. Henry the first, surnamed the Magnanimous, Duke of Brabant, in
right of his wife Sophia, first Lantgraue of Hessen. Henry the second, surnamed
the Infant, Lantgraue of Hessen, son to Henry the first, and Sophia. Henry
surnamed the Meek, his elder brother, but by an other Venture, succeeded unto
his father in the Dukedom of Brabant. Otho, and John, Lantgraues of Hessen,
sons to Henry, surnamed the Infant. Henry, and Jews, Lantgraues of Hessen,
sons to Otho. Herman Lantgraue of Hessen, son to Lewis, Lewis, surnamed the
Mild, Lantgraue of Hessen, son to Herman. He added to the house of the
Lantgraues the Earledomes of Zigenheim, and Nidda. Henry, and Jews, Lantgraues
of Hessen, son to Jews the mild. This Henry became likewise Earl of
Catzenelbogen, having married Anne, daughter unto Philip the last Earl.
William the Elder, and William surnamed the Middle, Lantgraues of Hessen, sons
to Jews; distinguished thus from William surnamed the younger, son to their
uncle Henry. Philip, Lantgraue of Hessen, and sole heir of the house, son to
William, surnamed the Middle, famous in the Protestant wars, detained prisoner
by the Emperor Charles the fifth, freed by Maurice, Duke Electour of Saxony. He
lastly added to his house the Earldom of Catzen-elbogen, formerly adjudged by
the Emperor to the Earls of Nassau, giving unto the Earls for composition
six hundred thousand crowns, and the Earldom of Dietz, reserving
notwithstanding the title. William, Jews, Philip, and George, Lantgraues of
Hessen, sons to Philip. Maurice, son to William; and Jews of Darmstadt sonto
George, Lantgraues of Hessen at this present.

THE BOIOARIANS. Boioarij Aymonij lib: 1. c. 15. de Gestis Francorum etc: Boij
Joan: Aventini Histor. Boiorum. Bavari recentiorum.

TO find V. T. Livij histor. Romans l. 5. 21. 32. 33. 35. and 36 Strab. Geog:
lib: 5 and 7. C. Iul. Caesaris Comment. Belli Gallici lib. 1. c. 2. 9. and 11.
Corn. Taciti lib. de Moribus Germanorum; Plin: Not: Hist: lib: 3. cap. 24. Vel
Paterculi Histor. lib. 2. Ptolem. Geograph. l. 3. c. 1. and l. 2. c. 11.
Aymonij de Gestis Francoru^ lib. 1. c. 15. and lib. 4. c. 61. 64. 66. 73. 81.
and 82. Eginhartum de Vita and Rebus Gestis Caroli Magni; O thonis Frisingen
sis Chro. l. 5. cap. 9. 20. 25. and 30. Joan. Adventini Histori^ Boiorum. B.
Rhenani Rerum Germanicarum lib. 1. and 2. Wolfangi Lazij de Gentium
Migrationibus lib. 7. (de Boijs.
out the original of this nation we are first briefly to set down the ancient
seat, progress, flittings, and story of the Boij, from whom the best authors
derive, if not their descent, yet their name. The Boij (to let pass the
dreams of Lazius, and Aventinus, drawing them (I know not by what ways) from
Asia, and the Armenians, were a people of the Gauls beyond the Alps. Pliny in
the fourth book of his Natural history, and 19. chapter makes mention of a
people of this name inhabiting in his time part of Gaul Lugdunensis,
containing after modern interpreters the country now called Burbonois. But,
whether these were some left remainders of the first Boij, it is uncertain. It
is more probable, that they were the remainder of the Boij, following the
Helvetians in their wars against Caesar, and the Romans, and after their
overthrow at the request of the Hedui placed in their country. In that great
disbourdment of the Gauls in the reign of Ambigatus king of the Celtae, and
of Tarquinius Priscus, king of Rome, these first Boij amongst other people
followed Bellovesus into Italy, seating themselves betwixt the Mountain
Apennine, and the river Po, where for many hundred years they continued,
famous for their sundry battles fought with the Romans, although most commonly
with their loss. In the 21. book of Livy, and toward the beginning of the
second Punique war we hear of them rebelling against, and invading the
Roman country about Mutina. In the 32 book themselves invaded, and scattered
by the Consul Minutius. In the 33 book under their king Corolamus killing 3
thousand of the army of the Consul Marcellus, subdued shortly after by the
same Consul, and by his Colleage L. Furius Purpureo. In the 35 book slain in
a great battle at Mutina by L. Cornelius Merula to the number of 14. thousand.
In the 36. book in an other great fight overcom'd, and slain by P. Cornelius
Scipio Nasica according to Valerius Antias his computation herein to above 32
thousand; wholly submitting themselves after this overthrow unto the mercy of
this enemy, and amercyed with the loss of half their country. After this
their memory in Italy languisheth, and dies, driven from hence after Strabo in
his 5. book beyond the Alps amongst the Taurisci, and toward the Danow, but
without setting down the express time of their flitting. Most probably this
happened betwixt the second Punicke war, about which time fell out these their
affairs with the Romans, and the wars of the Cimbri; whom in the 7. book
of the same author we read in their passage toward Italy setting upon the
Boij, then inhabiting the wood Hercynian, and to have been repulsed by them.
From these scattered troops of the Boij we find four several colonies, thus
named, to have descended, inhabiting within the Great Germany, or the
neighboring parts thereunto; if not rather all these were but one company, by
means of their sundry misfortunes, and flittings seeming diverse. 1. The Boij,
mentioned by Caesar in the first book of his Commentaries of the wars of
Gaul, seated amongst the Norici, and ioining with the Helvetians in their
wars against Caesar, after their overthrow planted by him in the country of
the Hedui at the entreaty hereof. 2. The Boij, mentioned by Strabo in his 5.
book, dwelling amongst the Taurisci, and utterly extirpated by the Daci. 3.
The Boij, mentioned by Strabo in his 7. book, but without naming their place,
consumed, and rooted out by Baeribista, king of the Getae, whose left country
most likely was that Deserta Boiorum Regio of Pliny in the 3. book of his
Natural History. 4. And the Boij, mentioned by Tacitus in his book de Igitur
inter Hercyniam syluam, Rhenumque and Maenum amnes Helvetij; vlteriora Boij;
Gallica gens, tenuerunt. Manet adhuc Boiemi nomen, significatque loci veterem
memoriam, quamvis mutatis cultoribus. Cor: Taciti: lib. de Moribus Germanoru^.
Moribus Germanorum, dwelling beyond the wood Hercynian, driven out, and
succeeded unto by the Marcomanni, leaving notwithstanding their name unto their
left seat, called from hence by Tacitus Boiemum; by Sentio Saturnino mandatum,
vt per Cattos, excisis continentibus Hercyniae sylvis, legiones Boiohaemum (id
regioni nome^, qua^ incolebat Maroboduus) ipse a Carnu^to, qui locus Norici
regni prozimus ab hac part erat, exercitum, qui in Illyrico merebat, in
Marcomannos orsus est. C. Velleij Paterculi lib. 2.
Paterculus Boiohaemum; and at this day Bohemia. From these last Boij, or
rather from the Marcomanni, inhabiting their left rooms Beatus Rhenanus
conjectureth the name Marcomannos, qui Boiohemum incolebant, suspicor a loco
Boieros (id est) non Boios, sed Boicos esse dictos, vnde etiam Boioariorum
nomen, and ditio trans Danubium. Beati Rhenani Reru^ Germanicarum l. 1.
(Marcomanni cum Noriscis, and Hermunduris in Noricum, and Rhetiam Secundam.
and nation of the Boioarians to have descended; from their country Boiemum of
Tacitus named by Ptolemy the Baemi; afterward by long corruption not
improbably the Boioarij; in the waine of the Roman Empire, and the general
flittings of the Barbarous nations removing more nere toward the Danow, and
the Roman frontires amongst the Narisci, and Hermunduri, consenting, and
ioining with them in their common name. The first express name of the Boioarij
we find in the reign of Clovys the Great, king of the French, in Gregory de
Tours, Aymonius, Vrspergensis, with other French, and Dutch authors (for more
ancient authority we have not,) under their king Adalgerio aiding the Almans in
that their great battle at Tolbiacum against the Frenchmen; partakers of their
overthrow, and French subjection. Their seat then was that of the Hermunduri,
and Norisci before mentioned, inhabiting altogether beyond the Danow, and
containing now the country, called Nortgow, or the Upper Palatinat, with
Voitlandt. Theodo, son to Adalgerio, their first Duke, about the year 508, and
the 17. year of Anastasius, Emperor of the East, passing over the river Danow
by the aid of the Frenchmen, and the association of sundry other barbarous
people, took in the second Rhaetia, or Vindilicia, with part of Noricum,
subduing, and driving out the Romans, and extending by this means their
dominion, and the Dutch name, and language as far as the Alps, and Italy,
confining upon the South with Gaul Cisalpine, possessed then by the
Ostrogothes; upon the West with the river Lech, and the Almans; upon the East
with the river Ens, and the Avares; and upon the North with the Sorabi, or the
Sclaves inhabiting Meissen. They comprehended now besides Nortgow, and
Voitlandt their first, and more ancient country, the Dukedomes of Bavaria, and
Karnten, Krain, the Earldom of Tirol, the Bishoppricke of Saltzburg, with the
part of Austria, lying betwixt the rivers of Ens, and the Inn; which was the
whole extent of Boioaria, or Bavaria until Tassilo, and the reign of the
Emperor Charles the Great. Long afterward the Emperor Charles the Great
having conquered, and driven out the nation of the Avares, possessing then
Pannonia, with the rest of Noricum, added those two countries, co^taining now
the Upper Austria, Steirmarck, Windischlandt, and the Lower Hungary, unto the
Province of the Boioarians, peopled with their Colonies, in which account, and
name these continued until the time of the Emperor Lewis the fourth, in whose
reign they were again won from this nation, and the Dutch by the
Hungarians. Their estate, whilst they were free, was under kings; of which
name was Adalgerio before mentioned; for higher, or more we read not of.
Overcome with the Almans at Tolbiacum, they shared of their fortunes, being
made subject to king Clovys, and the Frenchmen, yet permitted, as a free
people, to live under their own laws, and Princes, but with the title only of
Dukes. Their Princes, as they are set down by Lazius, follow. Theodo, son to
king Adalgerio, slain at Tolbiacum, their first Duke. Passing the river Danow
he subdued Noricum and Vindilicia, won from the Romans. Theodo the second.
Theodebert. Theodo the third. This was the first Christian Prince of the
Bavarians, converted by Rupert, Bishop of Worms about the year 580, and in the
reign of Theodebert, king of Austrasia. Tassilo the first. Garibaldus. Theodo
the fourth. Tassilo the second. Theodo the fifth. Theodebert. Theodo the sixth.
Grimold. Hugobert. Vtilo. and Tassilo the third, the last Duke of Bavaria of
the house of king Adalgerio, deposed for treason, and shorn Monk by the
Emperor Charles the Great, conspiring against him with Desiderius, king of the
Lombards. The country after this was made immediately subject to the French,
governed by their prefects, and enlarged by the addition of Pannonia, won
from the Avares. Not long after in the reign of the Emperor Lewis, surnamed
the Godly, it was erected to a kingdom, in which title, and in the house of
the Emperor Charles the Great it continued unto the reign of the Emperor
Henry the first, and the expiration of the house of France in Germany, when
again it became a Dukedom. The Princes, who have borne the title of kings of
Bavaria, follow out of Aventinus. Lotharius, afterward Emperor of the
Romans, the first king of Bavaria of the house of Charles the Great, created
by his father, the Emperor Lewis the Godly. Lewis, surnamed the Ancient,
brother to Lotharius. Carloman; Lewis; and Charles, surnamed the Fat,
afterward Roman Emperor, sons to Lewis the Ancient. Arnulph, afterward
Emperor, son to Carloman. Lewis, afterward Emperor, son to Arnulph. In
this Princes time Pannonia was conquered, and lopped off from the name and
account of Bavaria by the Hungarians. Arnulph, descended from Charles the
Great, after the decease of the Emperor Lewis the fourth without issue,
elected by the people king of Bavaria, opposed by the Emperors Conrade, and
Henry the first. After long contention being reconciled with the Emperor Henry
the first he changed his title of king into that less envious style of Duke;
continued still by his successors, the occasion, and beginning of the Dukedom
of Bavaria, whereof in the discourse following.

THE DVKEDOME OF BAVARIA. Boioaria Aymonij lib 4 c. 61. Boiaria Joan: Aventini
lib. 4. Annalium Boiorum; Bauaria recentiorum.

THe V. Joan: Aventini Annals Boiorum; Petri Birtij Commenta. Rerum
Germanicarum l: 2. c. 10. and Principum Christianorum. stemmata per Antonium
Albizium.
name of Bavaria is affected, and new, called more properly Boioaria (for thus
we find it written in all the more ancient Dutch Histories.) The estate, or
rather the title of Duke was begun in the reign of the Emperor Henry the
first in the person of Arnulph, before mentioned, some times king of Bavaria.
The manner how we have showed. It comprehended then in a manner the whole ancient
Bavaria, subject to the kings, the parts conquered by the Hungarians excepted.
Since by sundry casualties, and mutilations it has become confined within
straighter bounds. The order of the Dukes follow. Arnulph aforesaid the first
Duke. Everhard, son to Arnulph, deposed by the Emperor Otho the first.
Berchtold brother to Arnulph by the gift of the first Otho Emperor, the last
Duke of Bavaria of the French offspring, and house of Charles the Great. Henry
Duke of Bavaria, brother to the Emperor Otho the first. Henry son to Henry the
first. Henry surnamed the Saint. He succeeded afterward unto Otho the third in
the Empire, the first Emperor elected. Henry, surnamed Heczel, brother unto
Chunigund, wife unto Henry, the first Emperor elected. He was afterward
deposed, conspiring here against. Henry Welph, son to Robert, Earl of
Altorp, created by the Emperor Conrade the second. Welpho the second, son to
Henry Welph. Ernest by the gift of the Emperor Conrade the second. He was
again deposed, conspiring against this Emperor. Henry. Cuno, accused of
conspiracy, and deposed by the Emperor Henry the third. Henry, son to the
Emperor Henry the third. He was afterward elected Roman Emperor by the name
of Henry the fourth. Conrade, brother to the Emperor Henry the fourth. Agnes,
Empress, and mother to the Emperor Henry the fourth by the gift hereof. Otho
by the gift of the Empress Agnes. He was deposed by the Emperor Henry the
fourth. Welpho the third; son to Coniza, daughter to Welpho the second by one
Azon, a Marquess in Italy; created Duke of Bavaria by the Emperor Henry the
fourth. Welpho the fourth, son to Welpho the third. Henry, surnamed the Proud,
brother unto Welpho the fourth. Marrying unto Gertrude, daughter to the
Emperor Lotharius the second, he became Duke, and Electour of Saxony. He was
proscribed, and deprived of both Dukedomes by the Emperor Conrade the third.
Leopold, son to Leopold the fourth, Marquis of Austria, by the gift of the
Emperor Conrade the third. Henry brother unto Leopold, Marquis, and
afterward Duke of Austria. Henry, surnamed the Lion, Duke Electour of Saxony,
son to Henry the Proud, by the arbitrament of the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa, the right hereunto being controversed betwixt him, and Henry
Marquis of Austria. Upon composition, and in lieu hereof the Marquis of Austria
had given unto him the country lying betwixt the rivers Ens, and the Inn,
anciently a part of Bavaria, annexed ever since to the Dukedom, and family of
Austria. He was proscribed, and deprived of both Dukedomes of Saxony, and
Bavaria by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. His posterity have since
succeeded in the Dukedomes of Brunswijck, and Lunenburg, parts of Saxony. Otho,
Count Palatine of Scheuren, and Witelspach, descended from Arnulph the first
Duke, created Duke of Bavaria by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. This
Prince first constantly derived to his issue, and posterity the title, and
right of Dukes of Bavaria, before his time uncertainly wandering from one
Dutch family to another, and placed, and removed at the pleasure of the
Emperors, the founder of the two houses of Bavaria, and of the Electours of
the Rhijn. Lewis the first, Duke of Bavaria, son to Otho. Otho the second, son
to Lewis the first. Marrying unto Gertrude, sole daughter unto Henry, Count
Palatine of the Rhijn, he added to his house the Palatinat, and Electorship of
the Rhijn, created Paltzgraue, and Electour by the Emperor Frederick the
second. Henry, Duke of Bavaria, and Count Palatine of the Rhijn, son to Otho
the second. Lewis the second, Duke of Bavaria, and Count Palatine of the Rhijn,
son to Otho the second, and brother unto Henry. Lewis the third, Duke of
Bavaria, son to Lewis the second. He was elected Roman Emperor, and
deceased in the year 1347. His elder brother Rodulph, had for his share the
Palatinate of the Rhijn; and Nortgow, or the upper Palatinate, together with
the title of Electour, the founder of the house of the present Paltzgraues, and
Electours. Stephen, Duke of Bavaria, son to the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria.
His brothers William, and Albert were successively Earls of Haynault,
Hollandt, and Zealandt, and Lords of West-Frieselandt. Lewis, another brother,
succeeded in the Marquisate, and the Electourall dignity of Brandenburg.
Stephen of Ingolstadt, John of Munchen, and Fridericke of Landshut (named thus
from such parts of the Dukedom they possessed) Dukes of Bavaria, sons to
Stephen the first. Ernest Duke of Bavaria, son to John of Munchen. Albert,
surnamed the Godly, son to Ernest. Albert the second, son to Albert the
first. William, son to Albert the second. Albert the third, son to William.
William, son to Albert the third. Maximilian, and Albert, sons to William
the second, Dukes of Bavaria in the year 1610. The rest of those who have
borne the title of Dukes of Bavaria, and have deceased without issue, or not
continued the house, in regard of our promised method we omit. Hereof were
sometimes parts the Dukedomes of Steirmark, and Karnten, and Earldom of
Tirol, with part of Austria, whose relations follow.

THE DVKEDOME OF AUSTRIA.
THis Johan. Cuspiniani Austriam; Gerardi de Roo Historiam Austriacam; Petri
Birtij Co^mentar: Rerum Germanicarum lib: 2. c. 17.
State was first occasioned upon the wars of the Hungarians, who vexing
Germany with continual excursions, and alarums during the reigns of the
Emperors Lewis the fourth, Conrade; and Henry the first, were the cause that
there were ordained by these Princes in the border of the Empire betwixt this
enemy, and the Bavarians certain limitary prefects to defend that frontiere,
from Oosten-reich, or the Eastern kingdom (by which name Germany was then
distinguished from France) of whose limit they were Guardians, called then the
Marquesses of Oosten-reich, and by Latin writers corruptly Austrasia, and
Austria, becoming afterward haereditary, and deriving this their title, and
name to the country, now thus called, accruing unto them by their conquests,
and winnings from the Hungarians, and by their after encroachments upon the
Dukes of Bavaria. Unto the Princes of this family, the most potent at this day
through the Christian world are now subject the Kingdoms of Spain, of the
Indies, Naples, Sicilie, Bohemia, and Hungary; the great Dukedomes of Milan,
Schlesi, Steirmarke, Karnten, and Krain; the Marquisates of Lausnitz, and
Marheren; the Earledomes of Burgundy, and Tirol, Brisgow, Sung^w, the upper
Elsatz, the greatest part of the Low Countries, together with the kingdom of
Germany, and the Empire of the Romans. They were first as before styled
Marquesses, then Dukes, and now lastly Archdukes. Their order, and succession
follow. Leopold, surnamed the illustrious, son to Henry Earl of Bamberg;
descended from the Dukes of Schwaben, the first Marquess of Austria, deriving
the title, and honor hereof to his offspring, and posterity (the former after
the custom of those Nomina Principum, ducum, and caeterorum olim tantum nomina
munerum, seu officiorum erant, non haereditaria officia. Successu vero temporum
Imperatores certis conditionibus persuasi ea propria illis tratradiderunt, sive
allodia ex ijs fecerunt, vt iam de inceps haereditaria essent, and magis
alienata a Caelaribus. Imperiales tamen civitates manserunt Imperatoribus,
certa tributa pendendo, quo postea quaedam leuatae, liberae Civitates
appellantur. Martini Crusij Annalium Sueuicorum lib. Paralip: c. 22. Allodium
proprium bonum, non feudum. Martini Crusij Sueu: Annalium par. 1. lib. 11. c. 1.
times being only but such Leiftenants; or Deputies of the Emperors,) created
by the Emperor Henry the first, about the year 928. Henry the first, son to
Leopold the Illustrious. Albert, son to Henry the first. Ernest; son to
Albert. Leopold the second, son to Ernest. Leopold the third, son to
Leopold the second. Leopold the fourth, son to Leopold the third. Henry the
second, son to Leopold the fourth, Marquess of Austria, and Duke of Bavaria.
He was the first Duke of Austria, and added to the name, and account hereof the
country betwixt the rivers Ens, and Inn, given unto him by the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa in lieu of the Dukedom of Bavaria, adjudged from him
unto Henry, surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony. Leopold the fifth, Duke of
Austria, brother to Henry, and son to Leopold the fourth. He most
injuriously detained prisoner Richard the first, king of England, in his voyage
homewards out of the Holy Land suffering shipwreck upon the coast of Istria,
and surprised traveling disguised through his country. He added to the house
of Austria the Dukedom of Steirmark, purchased from Ottacarus the last Duke,
with the money gotten by the ransom of the king of England. Frederick the
first, Duke of Austria son to Leopold the fifth. His elder brother Leopold
succeeded in the Dukedom of Steirmarck. He deceased without heirs of his
body. Leopold the sixth, eldest son to Leopold the fifth, and brother to
Frederick the first, Duke of Austria, and Steirmarck. Frederick the second,
Duke of Austria, and Steirmarck, son to Leopold the sixth. He deceased sans
issue, in whom failed the line masculine of Leopold the Illustrious; the two
Provinces of Austria, and Steirmarck becoming after this usurped by stranger
families. Ottocarus, son to Wenceslaus the first, king of Bohemia, by the
pretended right of his wife Margaret, daughter to Leopold the sixth, succeeding
in both Dukedomes. He became likewise seized of the countries of Karnten,
Krain, and Marca Trevisana, sold by Vlric, their last Prince. Overmatched by
the greater power of the Emperor Rodulph the first, he quitted unto him, and
the Empire all these his new got possessions, upon a new quarrel not long
after slain by him in battle at the river of Marckh. Rodulph the first,
Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany, by right of war, and of the
Empire Lord of Austria, Steirmarck, Karnten, Krain, and Marca Trevisana, gotten
from Ottocarus. In the year 1283, by consent of the estates of the Empire
assembled in a Diet at Auspurg he divided these countries, and other his
hereditary possessions amongst his two sons Albert, and Rodulph; and Meinard
Earl of Tirol, his brother in law; whereof Albert the elder brother had
Austria, Steirmarck, and Krain; Rodulph Argow, the upper Elsatz, and other
pieces in Schwaben, the proper inheritance of the house of Habspurg with the
title of Duke of Schwaben; and Meinard Karnten, and Marca Trevifana. Albert the
first, eldest son to the Emperor Rodulph, the first Duke of Austria,
Steirmarck, and Krain of the family of Habsping, created in the year 1283.
After the decease of his father he was elected Emperor of the Romans, and
king of Germany. He was slain by John, son to his brother Rodulph Duke of
Schwaben, whose guardian he had been in his minority, discontented with him
for detaining his inheritance from him. Rodulph, created the first Archduke in
a Diet held at Nurenberg, Frederick the third, Leopold the seventh, Henry the
third, Otho, surnamed the Pleasant, and Albert the second, surnamed the Short,
Dukes of Austria, sons to the Emperor Albert, succeeding in both the parts,
and divisions of their father and their uncle Rodulph Duke of Schwaben,
forfeited by the treason of John, son to Rodulph, the murderer of the Emperor
Albert. The four first brethren deceasing without male issue, as did
Frederick, and Leopold, sons to Otho the Pleasant, the whole possessions of
the house of Habspurg, and Austria fell upon Albert the Short, the sole
surviving male issue of the Emperor Albert, and heir of the house. He
enriched his house with the additions of Karnten, Marca Treuisana, and Sungow;
descending upon him by marriage, and the donation of the Emperor Lewis of
Bauaria. Rodulph the second, Albert the third, and Leopold the ninth, Archdukes
of Austria, sons to Albert, surnamed the Short. Unto these three brethren
accrued the Earldom of Tirol, given unto them by Margaret, surnamed Maltasch,
the last princess, her young son Meinard deceasing before her, and being
without hope of more issue. Rodulph the second dying sans issue, the dominions
belonging to the house of Austria were shared betwixt the two younger brethren
Albert, and Leopold; of which Albert had Austria, Steirmarck, Karnten, Krain,
and Marca Trevisana; and Leopold Sungow, Argow, the Upper Elsatz, with the
parts of Scwaben, belonging to this family, the ancient possessions of the
house of Habspurg. In those two princes were again added to the house of
Austria Brisgow, or the Earldom of Friburg, sold unto them by Eggon the last
Earl. Leopold, being oppressed with a numerous issue, obtained afterward of
his brother Albert Steirmarck, Karnten, Krain, and Marca Trevisana, contented
only with the province of Austria. Albert the fourth, Archduke of Austria, son
to Albert the third. Albert the fifth, son to Albert the fourth. He married
unto Elizabeth, heir unto the Emperor Sigismond, unto whom he succeeded in
the Empire of the Romans, and the kingdoms of Bohemia, and Hungary.
Ladislaus, son to the Emperor Albert, and Elizabeth, Archduke of Austria,
and king of Hungary, and Bohemia. He dyed without issue, the last of the house
of Albert the third, by which means the right, and inheritance of the country
of Austria descended upon the posterity of Leopold the ninth. William, Leopold
the tenth, Frederick the fifth, and Ernest Archdukes of Austria, sons to
Leopold the ninth, succeeding with joint authority in the whole. William dying
without issue, the other brethren divided the inheritance; whereof Leopold had
Brisgow, Sungow, Turgow, the Upper Elsatz, with the parts yet left belonging to
this house amongst the Helvetians, and in Schwaben; Frederick had the
Earldom of Tirol; and Ernest Steirmarck, Karnten, and Krain. Marca Trevisana
was before this time upon composition surrendered by Leopold the ninth to the
house of the Carrarioes, Lords of Padua, possessed afterward by the more
powerful Venetians, subduing that city, and family, by whom now it is held.
Leopold the tenth deceasing without heirs, as did likewise Sigismond, son to
Frederick the fifth, the whole right, and possessions of the house of Leopold
the ninth fell upon the succession of Ernest. Frederick the sixth, and Albert
the fourth, Archdukes of Austria, sons to Ernest. His brother Albert the
fourth, and Ladislaus king of Hungary, and Bohemia dying without issue,
Frederick the sixth remained sole Lord of the dominions of the house of
Austria. He was elected Roman Emperor after Albert the second by the name of
Frederick the third, continued ever since in his house. The possessions then
of the house of Austria were Austria, Steirmarcke, Karnten, Krain, Tirol,
Brisgow, Sungow, and the Upper Elsatz, with some pieces in the proper Schwaben.
The parts these sometimes held amongst the Helvetians (which V. Iosiam Simlerum
de Rep. Heluetiorum.
were Lucerne, Glarona, Zug, Friburg, Schaffhausen, Baden, Bremgarten,
Mellingen, the Free provinces in Wagenthal, Raperswyl, and Turgow) were before
this time lost unto the confederate Switzers during the long wars of that
nation against the Archdukes Leopold the ninth, Frederick the fifth, Sigismond,
and other Princes of this house. Maximilian the first, Emperor of the Romans,
and Archduke of Austria, son to the Emperor Frederick the third. He married
unto Mary Duchess of Burgundy, and Princess of the Low countries. Charles
the fifth, and Ferdinand the first, Archdukes of Austria, and successively
Emperors of the Romans, sons to Philip, Duke of Burgundy, (son to the
Emperor Maximilian the first, and Mary Duchess of Burgundy,) and to Ioane,
eldest daughter to Ferdinand the fifth, and Elizabeth, kings of Castile, and
Aragon. The Emperor Charles the fifth contented with the dominions of Spain,
and Burgundy, left those of Austria unto his younger brother Ferdinand the
first. This likewise succeeded in the two kingdoms of Hungary, and Bohemia,
(having married Anne, sister unto Lewis, slain without issue in the battle at
Mohacz against Soliman, the Great Turk,) continued ever since in his house.
Philip the second, king of Spain, and Archduke of Austria, son to the
Emperor Charles the fifth. Philip the third, king of Spain, and Archduke of
Austria, son to Philip the second. Philip the fourth, king of Spain, and
Archduke of Austria, now reigning, son to Philip the third. Maximilian the
second, Roman Emperor, and king of Hungary, and Bohemia, Ferdinand the
second, and Charles the second, Archdukes of Austria, sons to the Emperor
Ferdinand the first. Rodulph the second, and Matthias, successively Emperors
of the Romans, and kings of Hungary, and Bohemia, Maximilian, Master of the
Dutch order, and Albert, Lord of the Low countries, Archdukes of Austria,
sons to the Emperor Maximilian the second. Ferdinand the second of that name
Roman Emperor, and king of Hungary, and Bohemia, Leopold Bishop of Passaw,
and Charles Bishop of Breslaw, Archdukes of Austria in the year 1616, sons
to Charles. The issue of Ferdinand the second, son to the Emperor Ferdinand
the first in regard of their base parentage on the mothers side, being a
Burgers daughter of Augspurg, were excluded from this title, and honor.

THE DVKEDOME OF STEIRMARCK.
THe V. Wolphan: Lazij de Gentium aliquot migrationibus lib. 6. (de Tau:
riscis, Carnis etc.
name of Steirmarck, The word (Steir) with the Dutch signifies a Bullock, as
doth-Tauriscus with the Latins.
signified in the Dutch language the Marches of the Taurisci, V. Strab. Geog.
lib. 5.
the ancient inhabitants of the country, and the limit, or bounds on this side
of the Germane empire. It was first an Earldom, then a Marquisate, afterward
a Dukedom. The first Earl after Lazius was one Ottocarus, to whom the country
should be given with this title by the Emperor Conrade the second. The princes
until their union with the house of Austria follow out of the same author.
Ottocarus before mentioned, first Earl of Steirmarck, created by the Emperor
Conrade the second. Ottocarus the second, son to Ottocarus the first.
Ottocarus the third, the first Marquis. Leopold, Marquis of Steirmarck, son
to Ottocarus the third. Ottocarus the fourth, son to Leopold, created Duke of
Steirmarck by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. Infected with the incurable
disease of leprosy, and without hope of issue he sold the Dukedom, and
country hereof for an easy price unto Leopold the fifth, Duke of Austria, in
which family it has been ever since continued.

THE DVKEDOME OF KARNTEN.
THe country V. Ioannis Aventini Boiorum Annalium lib. 6. and 7. Gerardi de Roo
Historiae Austriacae lib. 1. and 3.
took the name from the Carni of Pliny its ancient inhabitants. When the state
begun we find not. The first Duke we hear of was one Henry, mentioned by
Aventinus, son to Berchtold Duke of Bavaria, and living in the reign of the
Emperor Otho the third. Whether that their had been former Dukes it is
uncertain. The Dukes after this follow in order. Conrade, son to Otho Duke
of Franconia, after the decease of Henry, Duke of Karnten by the gift of the
Emperor Otho the third. Adalbero by the gift of the Emperor Henry the second.
Conrade the second son to Conrade the first, created by the Emperor Conrade
the second. Welpho by the gift of the Emperor Henry the third. Luitolphus
appointed by the Emperor Henry the fourth. Henry of Epperstain. Henry son to
Engelbert prefect of Histria, adopted by Henry of Epperstain, deceasing without
issue. He also died without children. By this most probably Krain, and Marca
Trevisana became first added to the house of the Dukes of Karnten. Engelbert,
brother to Henry. Vlric son to Engelbert. Henry son to Vlric. Herman brother to
Henry. Vlric son to Herman. This Duke being aged, and without children sold
the country hereof with its appendices unto Ottocarus, king of Bohemia.
Ottocarus king of Bohemia, and Duke of Karnten by purchase from the last Vlric.
Falling at variance with Rodulph the first, Emperor of the Romans upon a
peace, and reconciliation made betwixt them he yielded over unto him Karnten,
Krain, and Marca Trevisana, together with Austria, and Steirmarck. Rodulph the
first Emperor of the Romans by right of war, and of the Empire, Lord of
Karnten, Krain, Marca Trevisana, Austria, and Steirmarck, taken from Ottocarus
king of Bohemia. In a Diet held at Augspurg in the year 1283, by consent of
the estates of the Empire he gave Karnten, and Marca Trevisana unto Meinard,
Earl of Tirol, his brother in law, reserving Austria, Krain, and Steirmarck
for his eldest son Albert. Meinard, brother in law to the Emperor Rodulph
the first, Earl of Tirol, and Duke of Karnten. Henry, Earl of Tirol, and Duke
of Karnten, son to Meinard. He deceased without issue male. Otho surnamed the
Pleasant, and Albert surnamed the Short Dukes of Austria, and sons to the
Emperor Albert the first, Dukes of Karnten by the gift of the Emperor Lewis
of Bavaria, the male issue of the house of Tirol failing in Henry. By this
means the Dukedom of Karnten, Krain, and Marca Trevisana became possessed by
the family of Austria.

THE EARLDOM OF TIROL.
IT V. Gerardi de Roo Historiae Austriacae lib. 1. and 3. and Principum
Christianorum Stemmata per Antonium Albizium.
was thus named from the ancient Castle of Tirol, standing yet near unto the
town of Meran, and toward the head of the river Adise. When the Earldom
begun we find not. The Princes from more clear times follow. Meinard the
first, Earl of Tirol, and Gorecz, deceasing in the year 1258. Meinard the
second, Earl of Tirol, son to Meinard the first. He became likewise Duke of
Karnten by the gift of the Emperor Rodulph the first. His brother Albert
succeeded in the Earldom of Gorecz. Henry Duke of Karnten, and Earl of
Tirol, son to Meinard the first. Leaving no issue male Karnten, and Marca
Trevisana returned upon the Princes of the house of Austria by the gift of the
Emperor Lewis of Bavaria. Margaret surnamed Maultasch, Countess of Tirol,
daughter to Henry. Haning no surviving issue by the consent of her people she
estated this rich Earldom upon Rodulph, Albert, and Leopold Archdukes of
Austria, sons to Albert the Short; by which means the house of Austria have
ever since been seized hereof. The Earldom of Gorecz by the same right upon
the decease of Leonard the last Earl in the year 1501 without issue,
descended upon the Emperor Maximilian the first, the heir of the house.

THE HVNNS. Chuni Claud: Ptolem: Geog: l. 3. c. 5. and Sidonij Apollinaris
Panegyr. Avi^o. Hunni Zosimi Hist. lib. 4. etc. Chunni Claudiani de Laudibus
Stiliconis lib. 1.

THese I take with Becanus V. Claud. Ptolem. Geog: lib. 3. c. 5. Zosimi Hist:
lib: 4: Imp: Valente, and Gratiano; and Gratiano, and Theodosio; and lib: 5.
Imper Arcadio, and Honorio; Sexti Aurelij Victoris Epitomen Imperat: Gratiano
and Theodosio Seniore; Ammiani Marcellini lib. 31. Imper: Valente, and
Gratiano; Cassiod: Chron: Imper. Theodosio Iuniore, and Valentiniano tertio;
and Imp: Valentiniano tertio, and Marciano; Iornandis de Regn: and Tempor:
Successione lib: Imper, Gratiano; Theodosio iuniore, and Valentinia no tertio;
and Anastasio. Agathiae Histor: lib. 5. Goropij Becani Originum lib. 7.
(Goto-Danic.) Proc. lib.
to have been the Chuni of Ptolemie, a people of the Sarmatae. Their first
express mention in histories we find to have been in the reigns of the
Emperors Valens, and Gratian, at what time coming first unto the bank of the
Ister, being a nation before unknown, and not heard of, they expulsed thence,
and drove unto the farther side of that river into the Roman provinces the
fatal nation of the Goths, the after treaders down of the Roman majesty,
and Empire. Their name after this is common. In the reign of the Emperor
Gratian, we read of them with the Goths, Alans, and Taifali then to inhabit
Dacia, and Thrace: of Gratianus, and Theodosius with the Scyri, and Cappadocae
to have been overcom'd hereby in battle, and to have been forced again
beyond the Ister, most likely out of Thrace, and the Roman countries, which
but lately before they had seized upon: of Arcadius and Honorius under their
Prince Vldes, overthrowing, and killing in battle one Gains, rebelling in the
East against Arcadius, and with his weak, and conquered troops flying over
unto their barbarous coast of the Ister: again then with the Alans aiding
Stilico, Leiutenant to Honorius in his war against Radagaisus, king of the
Goths: of Theodosius the second, and Valentinian the third, aiding John
usurping against Valentinian: again then the Romans against the Goths: again
in the same reign miserably wasting, and spoiling Illyricum, and Thrace: of
Valentinian the third, and Marcianus under their great Captain Attilas,
accompanied with an innumerable multitude of other Barbarians, descending into
Gaul, and toward the West, and in the plains Campi Catalauniel Cassiodori
Chr. Imper: Valentiniano tertio, and Marciano.
of Chaalon upon Marne in a great, and memorable battle overthrown by Aetius
General of the Romans, and by the aides of the French, Goths, and
Burgundians, driven back again into the Provinces of the East* again^ shortly
after, and under the same Captain returning back toward Italy, and sacking
the town of Aquileia: of the Emperor Anastasius, serving him in his wars
against the rebel Vitalianus, and betraying Hypatius, General of his army,
into the hands of that enemy. After this we read little of them, unless Aviri,
Graecis Avares dicti, pa^^ Hunnorum Iornandis lib. de Rebus Geticis.
amongst the Avares, of whom Iornandes (I know not with what trust) makes
them to have been a part. Agathias notwithstanding, who lived about the reign
of the Emperor Justin the second, relates their name in his time to have
been utterly extinct, and no where heard of; whether that they were then quite
destroyed by the slaughter, and cruelty of other Barbarians, or that they
removed into far remote, and unknown parts. Their first and more ancient
dwelling, most probably was within the maine land of Sarmatia, where were the
Chuni of Ptolemy. In the reign of the Emperors Valens, and Gratian, removing
from thence the Goths, they flitted unto the left shore of the Ister,
thwarting upon the further side Pannonia, and Thrace, infesting from thence for
a long time the neighboring Roman Provinces. Under the Great Attilas they were
seated in Pannonia, with the opposite side of Dacia, where now are Hungary, and
Austria, but how long they there inhabited, and when they should remove from
thence, we find not. It is certain that they stayed there not long, shortly
after succeeded unto by the Longobards.

THE LONGOBARDS. Longobardi, Corn: Taciti lib^de Moribus Germanorum etc.

THese were a German people V. Corn. Taciti lib. de Moribus Germanorum;
Eginhartum de Vita, and Rebus gestis Caroli Magni; Paulum Diacon^ de reg.
Longobardorum; Caroli Sigonij de Regno Italiae l. 1. 2. and 3.
, mentioned by Tacitus, being then a part of the Suevi, containing sometimes
after Willichius the parts, where now lie the two Dioceses of Halberstat, and
Meydburg in Saxony. In the general flittings of Barbarous nations they drew
into Pannonia, where after Sigonius his computation for the space of 42 years
they continued, famous for their conquest there, and victory of the Gepidae.
Afterward in the year 568 under their king Alboinus they removed into Italy,
subduing Gaul on this side of the Gallia Cisalpin^.
Alps, named since from these Lombardy, made then void by the late conquest,
and departure of the Ostrogothes, drawn in by Narses, Lieutenant of the
Emperor Justinian in his Gothish wars, provoked with the contumely, and
injuries of the Emperor Justin, and of his Queen Sophia. In the year 774,
quarrelling with the Popes they were upon a religious pretense of Holy War
invaded, and subdued by the Emperor Charles the Great, their king Desiderius
being besieged at Pavia, and taken prisoner, and their kingdom abolished, and
made a French Province after that they had continued here under 23 of their
Princes the space of 206 years.

THE AVARES. Avares Zonarae Annalium Tom: 3. Hunni Auares Aymonij de Rebus
Gestis Francorum, li. 4. c. 9. Aviri, Graecis Avares dicti, part Hunnorum.
Io^nandis de R^bus Geticis lib.

IOrnandes makes these to have V. Ptolem. lib. (...). c. 5. Iornandis librum
de Rebus Geticis; Zonarae Annalium Tom. 3. Imperat: Orientis Tiberio, Mauritio,
Phoca, and Heraclio; Aymonij de Reb. gest. Fra. lib. 3. c. 11. and 84. and l 4.
c. 24. 81, 82, 86, and 93. Eginhartum de vita, and Rebus gestis Caroli Magni;
Ioann. Aventini Annalium Boiorum l. 4. Geropij Becani Originum lib. 7.
(Goto-Danica)
been a part of the Huns; distinguished into this people, whom with some
difference he surnameth the Aviri, and the Aulziagri. Not improbably otherwise
they might be the Avarini, mentioned Avarini juxta caput Vistulae amnis. Pto.
Geog. l. 3. c. 5.
by Ptolemy amongst the Sarmatae. The later Greek authors call them simply
Abares, or Avaeres. The more ancient Dutch, and French the Huns Avares. Becanus
conjectureth these to have been the names of two such different nations, who
ioining forces in their wars, and invasions became by this means
promiscuously called by both names, a cause of the after mistake of Historians
accompting them one, and the same people. But herein al is uncertain. Their
first certain, and express mention in Greek authors we find to have been
in the reign of Tiberius the second, Emperor of the East upon occasion of
certain carpenters sent herefrom unto them, and misimployed by them in the
building of a bridge over the Danow, with intent to transport by this means
their armies over the river, and to invade the Roman provinces. Afterward we
read of them in the reign of the next Emperor Mauritius under their Caganus,
the common name of all their princes, by sundry excursions spoiling Illyricum,
and Thrace. After this we again hear of them under the next Emperor Phocas,
likewise forraging Thrace: then in the reign of the Emperor Heraclius
pilling, and forraging Thrace, unto the walls of Constantinople, and
overthrown, and beaten back by the citizens hereof under the leading of Bonus
Patritius, and the Patriarcke of that sea. By the French Historians they are
first mentioned in the reign of Sigisbert, king of Austrasia, or otherwise,
but more uncertainly, and confusedly, of Theodoric king of the Ostrogothes V.
Aymonij de Gestis Frico^ l: 1. c. 10.
in Italy. Their dwelling during their affairs with the French was Pannonia,
and part of Noricum, divided from the Boioarians with the river Ens. They
contained now the Lower Hungary with part of Austria. By the arms of the
mighty Emperor Charles the Great after 8. years war they were utterly
subdued, and driven out of those parts, their country being peopled with new
colonies of the Dutch, and added to the Province of the Boioarians. The poor
vanquished remainders hereof betook themselves afterward into Dacia beyond
the rivers Danow, and Tibiscus, where now is Transylvania, with part of the
Upper Hungary, where they continued unto the reign of the Emperor Arnulph,
when being subject to Suantabogus, King of the Moravians, and set upon by the
fierce new-com'd people of the Hungarians, they were utterly extinguished,
their name being since no where heard of.

THE HVNGARIANS. Vgri Joan: Aventini Annal. Boiorum lib. 4. Hungari B. Rhenani
lib. 1. etc. forsan Hunugari Iornandis de. Reb. G^^icis.

THese Beatus Rhenanus V. Beati Rhenani Rerum Germanicarum lib. 1. (Hungari in
Pannoniam Secundam) Ioann. Aventini Annaliu^ Boiorum l. 4.
conjectureth to have been a remainder of the vanquished, and expulsed Avares,
kept alive by the Emperor Charles the Great, and by a small trench severed
from the dominions hereof; in the waine of the French Empire returning again,
and recovering their lost country. Aventinus would have them to have been a
Scythian people, inhabiting sometimes toward the Frozen sea beyond the rivers
Tanais, and Volga in the parts, where now lies Russia, subject to the Great
Duke of Mosco. Bonfinius makes them a mixed nation of the Huns, and Avares,
sometimes Lords of Pannonia. All of them speak but upon conjecture without any
sure proof. Iornandes de Rebus Geticis makes mention of the Hunugari, then
inhabiting part of Stythia: but whether or no these were the present
Hungarians, we cannot determine. They first became known unto the Christian
world in the reign of the Emperor Arnulph, at what time wandering in Sarmatia
without any certain abode, and invited by this Prince against Suantabogius,
king of the Moravians, they took from him Dacia, with the country of the
Iaziges Metanastae, lying on both sides of the river Tibiscus, inhabited then
by the Sclaves, and the remnant of the scattered Avares; killing up, and
driving out these old inhabitants, and planting the country with their new
barbarous Colonies, which since from them has been called the Upper Hungary.
Not contented herewith in the next reign of the Emperor Lewis the fourth,
passing the river Danow they subdued Pannonia, belonging then to the Bavarians,
and the Empire, and kingdom of the Dutch, with more then barbarous cruelty,
and with fury irresistable afterward ranging over all Germany, Italy, Greece,
Bulgaria, Mysia, Sclavonia, Illyricum, and Thrace during the reign hereof, and
of Conrade, and Henry the first, conquerours in sundry battles.

THE KINGDOM OF HUNGARY.
V. Antonij Bonfinij Decad: Rerum Hungaricarum; Petri Birtij Comment: Rerum
Germanicarum lib: 2. c. 14. Principum Christianoru^ Stemmata per Antonium
Albizium.
THeir fierceness, and heat abating through religion, and civilitie, and the
arms of the Dutch Emperors, they settled into a peaceable government first
under Dukes, then under Kings, giving the name to the country since called the
kingdom of Hungary, extending on both sides of the river Danow, and containing
the ancient Dacia, the greatest part of the Lower Pannonia, with some part of
Pannonia Superior, famous a long time for religion, and arms, the fortress,
and bulwark of Christendom against the Infidells. The greatest part of the
Higher Pannonia sometimes likewise possessed by this nation was recovered from
them by the Marqueses of Austria, known since by that name. The year 1526,
and battle at Mohacz gave a period to their kingdom, and ancient glory,
overthrown with great slaughter by Soliman, the mighty Emperor of the Turks,
Lewis their last king being slain, and the country since enthralled to
stranger nations, the greatest part remaining now subject to the Turks, the
rest with the title of king of Hungary to the German Emperors of the family
of Austria. The Princes follow. Cusala, under whom we first hear of the nation
of the Hu^garians. He conquered Dacia, or the Upper Hungary, and first passed
over the Danow, slain in his invasion, and attempt upon Pannonia. Toxus. He
subdued Pannonia, or the Lower Hungary. Geiza the first, son to Toxus. Stephen,
surnamed the Saint, the first King of Hungary, son to Geiza. He embraced
the Christian Religion by the especial means, and procurement of the Emperor
Henry the second, giving unto him upon that condition his sister Gisla in
marriage, and through the preaching, and industry of Albert, Bishop of Prage,
continued since in the nation, and his successors. Peter surnamed the Alman,
Nephew to Stephen, deposed by Andrew, and Bela the first. Andrew, and Bela the
first, sons to Ladislaus, son to Geiza the first, and brother unto Stephen
the Saint. Solomon son to Andrew. He was driven out by Geiza the second. Geiza
the second, son to Bela the first. Ladislaus the first, surnamed the Saint,
brother to Geiza the second, and son to Bela the first. He annexed to the
kingdom of Hungary the countries of Dalmatia, and Croatia, bequeathed unto him
by his sister Zelomira, widow to their last king. Coloman son to Geiza the
second. Stephen the second, son to Coloman. Bela the second son to Almus, son
to Geiza the second. Geiza the third, son to Bela the second. Stephen the
third, son to Geiza the third. Bela the third, brother to Stephen, and son to
Geiza the third. Emericus, son to Bela the third. Ladislaus the second, son to
Emericus. He died young, slain by treason. Andrew the second, son to Bela the
third, and brother to Emericus. Bela the fourth, son to Andrew the second.
Stephen the fourth, son to Bela the fourth. He made Mysia, and Bulgaria
tributary. Ladislaus the third, son to Stephen the fourth. Andrew the third,
son to Stephen, brother to Bela the fourth, opposed by Charles Martel, aided by
the authority of the sea of Rome. Charles Martel, son to Charles surnamed the
Lame, king of Naples, by Mary daughter to Stephen the fourth; Wenceslaus the
third, king of Bohemia, son to Wenceslaus the second, king of Bohemia, by Anne,
daughter to Bela the fourth; and Otho Duke of Bavaria, descended from
Elizabeth, sister to Anne, and daughter to Bela the fourth, after the decease
of Andrew the third chosen kings of Hungary by their several factions.
Wenceslaus weary of troubles, and surrendering his right to Otho D. of Bavaria,
and this not long after being taken prisoner by Ladislaus Vaywood of
Transylvania, and forced to renounce his title, and interest, Charles Martel
remained sole king of Hungary. Lewis the first, son to Caribert, (son to
Charles Martel) by Elizabeth sister to Casimir the second, king of Poland. He
succeeded likewise in the kingdom of Poland after the decease of Casimir the
second without heirs. Charles the second, king of Naples, descended from Mary,
daughter to Stephen the fourth, and Charles surnamed the Lame, king of Naples,
after the decease of Lewis the first chosen king of Hungary, Mary, and Hedwigis
the two daughters hereof refused in regard of their sex. He was slain not long
after by the joint conspiracy of the two sisters. Sigismond Emperor of the
Romans, and king of Bohemia, in right of his wife Mary, eldest daughter to
Lewis the first, king of Hungary. Hedwigis, the other sister, inherited Poland,
married to Iagello, great Duke of Lithuania. During the reign hereof, and
contention with the house of Naples, Iadera, and what else remained of Dalmatia
was sold, and delivered up to the Venetians by Ladislaus king of Naples, a
long time before controversed betwixt the Hungarians, and that state. Albert
the second, Emperor of the Romans, and king of Bohemia, and Hungary in right
of his wife Elizabeth, daughter to the Emperor Sigismond, and Mary.
Vladislaus, or Ladislaus the fourth, son to Iagello, king of Poland, and
Hungary in the minority of Ladislaus, son to the Emperor Albert, and
Elizabeth. He was disastrously slain in that great battle of the Christians
fought at Varna against Amurath the second, king of the Turks, young, and
without heirs, in the year 1444. Ladislaus the fifth, king of Bohemia, son to
the Emperor Albert the second by Elizabeth, daughter to the Emperor
Sigismond, and Mary, after the decease of Ladislaus the fourth succeeding in
Hungary. He dyed without issue young, and unmarried. Matthias Corvinus, son to
John Huniades, elected king of Hungary after Ladislaus the fifth. He neither
left any lawful issue, by which means the crown of Hungary returned again
upon the right heirs, the princes of the house of Poland. Vladislaus, or
Ladislaus the sixth, son to Casimir the fourth king of Poland by Elizabeth,
daughter to the Emperor Albert the second, and Elizabeth before mentioned,
succeeding in both kingdoms of Hungary, and Bohemia. His younger brothers
Iohn-Albert; Alexander, and Sigismond the first succeeded in the kingdom of
Poland. Lewis the second, king of Hungary, and Bohemia, son to Ladislaus the
sixth, unfortunately slain in the battle at Mohacz by Soliman, Emperor of the
Turks. John de Zapolia, Vaiwood of Transylvania, after the decease of Lewis
the second, slain at Mohacz, elected king of Hungary by the favor of Soliman
the Great Turk, whose vassal he was. He was afterward driven out by
Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, restored again by Soliman, deceasing in the
year 1540. Ferdinand the first, Archduke of Austria, brother to the Emperor
Charles the fifth, king of Hungary, and Bohemia in right of his wife Anne,
sister to Lewis the second. After the decease of his brother Charles the fifth
he succeeded in the Empire of the Romans. Maximilian the second, Archduke of
Austria, and Emperor of the Romans, son to the Emperor Ferdinand the
first. Rodulph, Archduke of Austria, and Emperor of the Romans, son to the
Emperor Maximilian the second. Matthias Archduke of Austria, and Emperor of
the Romans, son to the Emperor Maximilian the second, and brother unto
Rodulph. Ferdinand the second, Archduke of Austria, and Emperor of the
Romans, son to Charles, Archduke of Austria, son to the Emperor Ferdinand the
first, in the year 1624 king of Bohemia, and of what remains of Hungary,
unconquered by the Turks.

THE SCLAVES. Sclavini Procopij lib. 1. and 3. de Bello Gothico etc. Slavi
Helmoldi Chron: Sclavi Zonarae Anlium Tom. 3. Aymonij lib. 4. etc. Sclauini
pars Winidarum Iornandis de Rebus Geticis.

THe name hereof V Procopij de Bello Gothico lib. 1. and 3. Imperatore
Iustiniano primo. Zonarae Annalium Tom. 3. Imperatore Mauritio. Suidae
Historica in Litera (...). Iornandis de Rebus Geticis librum. Gregorij Magni
Pap. Epistol. ad Episcopos Istriae. Aymonij de rebus gestis Francorum lib. 4.
c. 9. 23. 74. 81. 88. 92. 93. 94. and 96. Helmoldi Chronicon Sclauorum; Blondi
1. Dec ad lib. 8. Beati Rhenani Rerum Germanicarum lib. 1. Martini Cromeri de
Rebus Polonorum lib. 1. c. 8. Goropij Becani Originum. lib.
some derive from Slowo, signifying in the Sclavonian tongue a speech, or word,
by which general name the many people of the Sarmatians, in the waine of the
Roman Empire overswarming Europe, should all be called in regard of their one
common language. Others no less probably fetch their name from the word Slawa,
signifying with them fame, or glory, a name most likely affected hereby in
regard of their great fame, and renown, which they thought they had achieved
by arms, begun first by the Sarmatians inhabiting the shore of the Ister upon
occasion of their prosperous success, and victories obtained against the
neighboring Graecians, and derived afterward to the rest of this nation by
their emulation, and imitation hereof, or for that they were accounted the same
people, since speaking the same language. We first hear of this express name
in the reign of the Emperor Justinian the first, by sundry excursions, and
with strange, and unheard of cruelty spoiling Thrace, Macedonie, and Illyricum.
Shortly afterward we again read of them in the reign of the Emperor
Mauritius, miserably vexing, and afflicting the Roman provinces. Their
dwelling during this their first mention was altogether in Sarmatia beyond the
Ister, with the Antae coasting along the greatest part of the shore thereof,
and thwarting upon the other side of that river the countries of Illyricum, and
Thrace. Iornandes, who lived in the reign of Justinian the first, names them
then a part of the Winidarum populosa natio ad ortum Vistulae fluminis etc.
quorum nomina licet nunc per varias familias, and loca mute^tur, principaliter
tamen Sclavini, and Antes nominantur. Iornand: de Rebus Geticis.
populous nation of the Winidae. Their name, and account being communicated
afterward to all the rest of the Sarmatians, and these after the custom of
other barbarous nations swarming into neighboring countries, they overspread
in a short time the whole Eastern moitie of Europe, extending from the river
Tanais, and the Euxine sea Westwards as far as the river Elb in Germany, and
Southwards from the sea Baltique, and the Frozen Ocean unto the Mountains of
the Alps, and Haemus, besides the whole Sarmatia comprehending Mysia,
Dardania, Illyricum, and Dalmatia, with part of Pannonia, now the Russes,
Muscovites, Hungarians, Polonians, Moldavians, Walachians, Transylvanians,
Bulgarians, Rascians, Servians, Croatians, and Sclavonians particularly so
called, all descended from, and speaking their language, together with one
half part of the ancient Germany, contained betwixt the river Wixel, and the
rivers Saltza, and the Elb, the occasion of this discourse. When these first
disbourded into the continent of Germany cannot be defined out of any approved
authors. Most probably with Becanus this happened presently upon, or shortly
after the departure of the Almans, Burgundians, Boioarians, and other people of
the Suevians toward the South, and the Roman confines, whose left, or ill
inhabited rooms they took up. We first find them here named in the reign of
Clotarius the second, king of the Frenchmen, (agreeing with the reign of
Heraclius, Emperor of the East) upon occasion of one Samo a Frenchman by
birth, chosen king of the Scalves Winidi. They comprehended the whole
North-east moity hereof, divided from the rest of Germany by a line drawn from
the town of Stargard upon the sea Baltique unto the river of Elb about
Hamburg, parting them from the Saxons beyond the Elb; the river Elb from
Hamburg unto the meeting thereof with the river Saltza, dividing them from the
Saxons Ostphali; the river Saltza parting them from the Thuringians; and the
mountains of Bohemia from the Boioarians. They contained here at this day the
Dukedomes of Schlesi, Mecklenburg, Pomeren, and Lawenburg, the Marquisates of
Meissen, Lausnitz, and Marheren, the Middle, and New Marches of Brandenburg,
Saxony about Wittenberg, Wagerlandt, the kingdom of Bohemia, with parts of
Poland, and Hungary. They were divided into four general names, or nations,
the Winithi, Bohemians, Moravians, and Poles, whereof in order.

THE WINITHI. Winithi Helmoldi: Chr: l. 1. c. 15. Winidae Iornandis lib: de
Rebus Geticis. Winidi Aymonij de Rebus Gestis Francorum lib. 4. c. 9. Winuli
Helmoldi Chron: Sclauotum l. 1. c. 18. Heneti Continuat: Vand: and Saxoniae
Krantzij per quendam Studiosum. Vendi; and Vindae Cromeri de Rebus Gestis
Polonorum lib. 1. c. 6.

THese, with the Winidae, Winidi, Vendi, Vindae, Winuli, V. Claud. Ptolem lib.
3 c. 5. Aymonij de Rebus gestis Francorum lib. 4. c. 9. 23. 74. 81. 88. 92. 94.
96. and 100. Helmoldi Chronicon Sclauorum. Vandaliae, and Saxoniae Krantzij
continuation: per Studiosum quendam Anonymum.
and Heneti (for all those names we find) were but the corrupt languages of
the ancient Veneti, or Venedae, accounted Venedae per totum Venedicum sinu^ Pt.
lib: 3. c. 5. Venedi Corn: Taciti. lib. de Moribus Germanorum.
by Ptolomie amongst the nations of the Sarmatae. The more exact bounds hereof,
after their descent into Germany, were upon the North the sea Balticke
intercepted betwixt the town of Stargard, and the river Wixel; upon the West a
line drawn from the town of Stargard upon the sea Baltique unto the river
Elb; or Hamburg, the part of the Elb taken from Hamburg unto the meeting of
that river with the Saltza, together with the river Saltza, dividing them from
the Saxons, and Thuringians; upon the South the Mountains of Bohemia; and upon
the East the river Wixel, and Poland. They comprehended the sundry names, and
people of the Wagrij, containing now Wagerland, part of Holstein; the Obotriti,
Polabi, Linguones, Warnani, Kircani, Circipani, Redarij, and Tholenzi, now the
Dukedomes of Mecklenburg, and Lawenburg; the Wiltzi, now Pomeren on this side
of the river of Odera; the Pomerani, the part now of Pomeren betwixt the rivers
Odera, and Wixel; the Rani, or Rugiani, now the Island Rugen; the Helveldi,
Leubuzi, Wilini, Stoderani, and Brizani, now the Middle, and New Marches of
Brandenburg; and the Sorabi, containing now Meissen, and Lausnitz. Their
government, whilst that they were a free people was under sundry Princes. Their
Religion was Gentilisme, maintained with great stiffenesse, and hatred to
Christianity until their subjection, or rather extirpation by the Dutch. After
long wars with the neighboring Saxons, sundry revolts, and much obstinacy
they were by the reign of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa at length totally
hereby subdued; their country being planted with new Dutch Colonies, accounted
afterward part of Saxony, containing at this day besides some lesser states
the Marquisates of Meissen, Brandenburg, and Lausnitz, and the Dukedomes of
Mecklenburg, Lawenburg, and Pomeren, whose beginnings, and fortunes unto our
times follow.

THE MARQVISATE OF MEISSEN.
THe estate hereof was first occasioned about the year 930 V. Reinerum
Reineccium de Misenorum origin; Georgij Fabritij Originum Saxoni^carum lib 2.
Eundem de rebus Misnicis. P. Birtij Comment arium Rerum Germanicarum lib. 2. c.
11. Stemmara Principum Christianorum per Antonium Albizium.
by the Emperor Henry the first, upon his conquest of the Sorabi building the
city Meissen, and after the policy then of the Dutch Empire appointing there
a Limenarck, or Marquis to guard that frontire against the Poles, and other
neighboring Sclaves, becoming afterward hereditarie, and giving the title,
and name to the whole limit, or border. The first Marquis was one Bruno,
descended from Witichind, king of the Saxons, appointed by the Emperor Henry
the first. Unto him succeeded Ridacus, Earl of Mersburg; unto whom Echard
succeeded, son to Gunter, Earl of Ostland, the first prince, or vsu-fructuary,
and proprietarie Marquis by the gift of the Emperor Otho the third, the former
being only such deputies of the Emperors, commanding in nature of Lord
Marchers with us. The order of the Marqueses continuing the house from more
certain, and clear times follow. Conrade Marquis of Landsberg, and Lusatz
created Marquis of Meissen by the Emperor Henry the fifth. He deceased in the
year 1156. Otho the first, surnamed the rich, son to Conrade the first.
Theodoric son to Otho the first. He married unto Judith, daughter to Herman,
Lantgraue of Duringen. Henry son to Theodoric, and Judith, daughter to Herman
Lantgraue of Duringen. Henry the last Lantgraue deceasing without issue he
succeeded by right from his mother in the Lantgraue-ship of Duringen, and the
Palatinate of Saxony, continued ever since in his house. Albert Marquis of
Meissen, and Lantgraue of Duringen, son to Henry. Frederick the first, son to
Albert. Frederick the second, son to Frederick the first. Frederick the
third, son to Frederick the second. Frederick the fourth, Marquis of Meissen,
and Lantgraue of Duringen, son to Frederick the third. He was created
Electour, and Duke of Saxony by the Emperor Sigismond. The succeeding
Marqueses of Meissen, and Lantgraues of Duringen we have continued in the
order of the Duke-Electours of Saxony.

THE MARQVISATE OF BRANDENBVRG.
IT has been V. Helmoldi Chronicon Sclavorum l. 1. c. 89. Georgij Fabritij
Originum Saxonicarum lib. 2. Petri Birtij Comment. Rerum Germaniarum. lib. 2.
c. 12.
so called from the town of Brandenburg, situated upon the river Havel;
sometimes the chief town of the country, and the seat of the Marqueses. The
Emperor Henry the first before mentioned, having won that city from the
bordering Heneti, or Sclaves, first ordained the Marquisate to affront, and
keep in that enemy. It increased afterward to its present extent, and
greatness by the daily winnings, and encroachings of the Marqueses upon the
Sclaves. The Marqueses, like unto the other Princes of Germany, were at the
first but such officers of the Emperors. By the free grace hereof they became
hereditary, Princes, and Electours of the Empire, which honor they still
retain. Their order, and succession follow. Sigifrid Earl of Ringelheim, the
first Marquis; set over this border about the year 927 by the Emperor Henry
the first. Gero, appointed by the Emperor Otho the first. Bruno Earl of
Within, appointed by the same Emperor. Hugh son to Bruno, appointed by the
Emperor Otho the third. Sigard, brother to Hugh, appointed by the same
Emperor. About this time the Marqueses began to be Electours. Theodoric, son
to Sigard, driven out by Mistivoius, prince of the Sclaves Obotriti. The
Sclaves beaten out, Vdo the first, Earl of Soltwedel by the gift of the
Emperor Conrade the second. Vdo the second, son to Eudo the first. He was
proscribed by the Emperor Henry the fourth, conspiring against him with
Rodulph, Duke of Schwaben. His country was given, and seized upon by Primislaus
king of the Obotriti. Albert surnamed Vrsus, In illo tempore orientalem Slauiam
tenebat Adelbertus Marchio, cui cognomen Vrsus, qui etiam propitio sibi Deo,
amplissime fortunatus est in funiculo sortis suae. Omnem enim terram
Brizanorum, Stoderanorum, multarumque gentium habitantium iuxta Havelam, and
Albiam misit sub iugo, and infraenavit rebels eorum. Ad vltimum deficientibus
sensim Slavis, misit Traiectum, et ad loca vicina, insuper ad eos, qui habitant
iuxta Oceanum, and patiebantur vim maris, videlicet ad Hollandos, Selandos,
Flandros, and adduxit ex ijs populum magnum nimis, and habitare eos fecit in
vrbibus, and oppidis Slavorum. Helmoldi Chronic: Slavorum lib. 1. c. 89.
prince of Anhalt, after the decease of Primislaus king of the Obotriti,
created Marquis, and Electour of Brandenburg by the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa. He much augmented, and increased the Marquisate by his great
conquests upon the Sclaves, and his plantation of Dutch colonies* in their
forsaken, and uninhabited countries. Otho the first, son to Albert, surnamed
Vrsus. His brother Bernard was created Electour, and Duke of Saxony by the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, succeeding unto Duke Henry surnamed the Lion.
Otho the second, Electour, and Marquis of Brandenburg, son to Otho the first.
He deceafed without issue. Albert; the second, Electour, and Marquis of
Brandenburg, brother to Otho the second. John the first, son to Albert the
second. John the second son to John the first. He deceased without surviving
issue. Conrade the first, Electour, and Marquis of Brandenburg, brother to John
the second. John the third; son to Conrade the first. He dyed without issue.
Waldemar the first, brother to John the third. He dyed without issue male.
Waldemar the second, son to Henry surnamed with land, brother to Waldemar the
first, and John the third. Of this prince likewise we find no heirs. John
the fourth brother to Waldemar the second. He died without issue, the last
Marquis, and Electour of Brandenburg of the family of Anhalt. Lewis, son to the
Emperor Lewis of Bauaria, created by his father Marquis, and Elector of
Brandenburg, the house of Anhalt being extinguished in John the fourth.
Desirous of ease, troubled with the impostures of a false Waldemar, he resigned
over his right to his brother Lewis, surnamed the Roman. Lewis surnamed the
Roman, son to the Emperor Lewis of Bauaria. He drove out the Cou^terfeit
Waldemar, and deceased without heirs of his Body. Otho the third, Electour and
Marquis of Brandenburg, son to the Emperor Lewis of Bauaria, and brother to
the two former Leweses. He sold the Marquisate, and country of Brandenburg for
200000 ducats of Hungary unto the Emperor Charles the fourth. Wenceslaus
Marquis and Elector of Brandenburg, and afterward Emperor of the Romans, and
king of Bohemia, by the gift of his father the Emperor Charles the fourth.
Sigismond son to the Emperor Charles the fourth, and brother to Wenceslaus
Emperor of the Romans king of Bohemia, and Hungary, and Marquis and Electour
of Brandenburg. The better to furnish himself for his wars against the
rebellious Hungarians, and Charles king of Naples, chalenging, and usurping the
kingdom of Hungary, he sold the Marquisate of Brandenburg unto Iodocus,
Marquis of Morauia; redeemed afterward by him from William, Marquis of
Meissen, to whom the Marquis of Morauia had pawned it, and in the council of
Constance in the year 1417 given to Frederick Burgraue of Nurenberg for
reward of his faithful service in the wars of Bohemia, and Hu^gary, paying
unto him only 408000 Florens in lieu of the charges he had been at. Frederick
Burgraue of Nurenburg, Marquis, and Elector of Brandenburg by the gift of the
Emperor Sigismond. Frederick the second, Marquis, and Elector of Brandenburg,
younger son to Frederick the first; the elder brother John surnamed the
Alchymist neglected, and passed over, as lazye, and unfit to govern. He had
given unto him the Dukedom of Stetin by the Emperor Frederick the third; upon
composition relinquished shortly after to Bugslaus the tenth by his brother
Albert, reserving only the title, and arms of the Dukes of Pomeren,
maintained yet by the house of Brandenburg. He also obtained of the king of
Poland the upper Lausnitz, surrendered afterward (Cotbus, and some few other
towns excepted) to George, king of Bohemia. He deceased without suruiuing
heirs. Albert the first brother to Frederick the second; Marquis, and Electour
of Brandenburg. Iohn-Magnus, son to Albert the first. Ioachim the first, son
to Iohn-Magnus. Ioachim the second, Electour, and Marquis of Brandenburg, son
to Ioachim the first. Iohn-George son to Ioachim the second.
Ioachim-Frederick son to Iohn-George. Iohn-Sigismund, son to
Ioachim-Frederick. He married unto Anne, daughter to Albert-Frederick, Marquis
of Brandenburg, and Duke of Prussen, and to Mary-Leonor; daughter to William
the first, Duke of Cleue, and Iuliers. George-William, son to John Sigismond,
and to Anne, before mentioned, now Marquis, and Electour of Brandenburg, Duke
of Pomeren, Stetin, the Cassubians, and Vandals, Prussen, Cleve, Iuliers, and
Bergen, Earl of Marck, and Ravenspurg, and Lord of Ravenstein. The Marqueses
of this house not Electours, in regard of their number, and to avoid
confusion, we let pass.

THE DVKEDOME OF POMEREN.
THe V. Helmoldi Chron. Sclauorum lib. 2. c. 4. Cromer: de Rebus gestis
Polonoru^. Petri Birtij Rerum Germanicarum l. 2. c. 21.
country was thus named from the Pamortzi, or Pomerani, the inhabitants
thereof, and these from their Sunt igitur Pomerani maris accolae. Atque hoc
vult vox Pamortzi. P. Birtij Rerum Germ. lib: 2. c. 21.
situation, bordering upon the sea (for thus the words do signify in the
Sclavonian tongue.) Helmoldu^, who lived in the reign of the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa confineth the name of the Pomerani within the Odera,
contained betwixt that river, and the Wixel. At this day their account, and
name is farther extended, enlarged beyond the Odera Westward unto the river
Bartzee, and the borders of the Dukedom of Mecklenburg. Cromerus relates this
people with the whole nation of the Sclaves Winithi to have sometimes been
subject to the Princes of Poland, severed from their immediate command, and
jurisdiction by means of the division of the dominions hereof amongst the
numerous issue of Lescus the third, Duke of Poland in the reign of the
Emperor Charles the Great. More certainly after Helmoldus they were subdued,
and made tributary to the Poles by king Boleslaus in the reign of the Emperor
Otho the third; under whose right, and souerainety they remained until the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, when leaving the side of the Polanders they were
hereby annexed to the Germans, their princes Bugslaus, and Casimir created
then Dukes, and made princes of the Empire, the occasion, and beginning of the
present Dukedom. The order of the Princes continuing the succession follow.
Bugslaus, and Casimir, sons to Wartislaus, the first Christian prince,
created Dukes of Pomeren by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. Bugslaus the
second, son to Bugslaus the first. Barnimus the first, son to Bugslaus the
second. Bugslaus, son to Barnimus the first. His brother Otho (the country
after the custom of the Germans being divided betwixt them) succeeded in
Stetin; whose posterity failing in Otho the third, his part, as void, and
returning upon the Empire, was by the Emperor Frederick the third given unto
Frederick the second, Electour, and Marquis of Brandenburg, a cause of much
contention, and war betwixt the house of Brandenburg, and the Dukes of
Pomeren of Wolgast descended from Bugslaus. The controversy being decided
betwixt them, Brandenburg retained the arms, and title; and the Dukes of
Pomeren the country. Wartislaus, son to Bugslaus. Barnimus son to Wartislaus.
Wartislaus, son to Barnimus. Barnimus son to Wartislaus. Wartislaus, son
Barnim^s. Eric, son to Wartislaus. Bugslaus the tenth of that name, son to
Eric, sole Duke of Pomeren; Stetin, or the part belonging to the house of Otho
being by composition yielded unto him by Albert the first, Electour, and
Marquis of Brandenburg. George, son to Bugslaus the tenth. Philip son to
George. Bugslaus the eleaventh, and Ernest-Lewis sons to Philip. Bugslaus the
12th; and George, sonns to Bugslaus the Eleaventh; and Philippus Julius son to
Ernest-Lewis, Dukes of Pomeren in the time of my author.

THE DVKEDOME OF MECKLENBVRG.
IT was thus named V. Alberti Krantzij Vandaliae lib. 5. and 8. and Principum
Christianorum Stemmata per Antonium Albizium.
from the great, and ancient town Hos sequuntur Obotriti. Ciui tas illorum
Mecklenburg. Incerti Authoris Chron. Sclau.
of Mecklenburg, situated sometimes where now is Wismar, sounded after
Krantzius out of the ruins hereof. The estate was first occasioned by
Primistaus prince of the Obotriti, subdued, and made subject to the Dutch with
the whole nation of the Sclaues Winithi, inhabiting this country, by Henry
surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony, and Bauaria; the progenitor of the modern
princes. His posterity notwithstanding enjoyed not the title of Dukes of
Mecklenburg, neither the right, and privilege of princes of the Empire until
the year 1348, and the reign of the Emperor Charles the fourth. The order of
the princes since the Dutch conquest hereof commanding the country, follow.
Primislaus, before mentioned, Prince of the Obotriti, subdued, and driven out
by Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxony, and Bauaria, and Primislaus Princeps
Obotritorum, Henrici Leonis in gratiam restitulus, cui Henricus Leo reddidit
omnem haereditatem Patris sui, terram scilicet Obotritorum praeter Zuerinum, et
attinentia eius. Et fecit Primislaus Duci, and amicis eius securitatem
fidelitatis etc. Alberti Krantzij Wandaliae l. 5.
afterward taken into favor, and restored to the possessions, and inheritance
of his ancestors, to be held under the right, and homage of the house of
Saxony. Henry the first, son to Primislaus. Henry the second son to Henry
the first. His brother Niclot (the inheritance being divided) succeeded in the
Principality, and title Principatus Wandaliae.
of the Vandals* John, surnamed the Divine, son to Henry the second. Henry,
surnamed of Jerusalem, son to John the Divine. Henry surnamed the Lion,
son to Henry of Jerusalem. Albert, and John, sons to Henry surnamed the
Lion, created first Dukes Albertus, and Johannes ftatres, cum primum Carolus 4.
in Romanorum regem esset assumptus, solenni Comitatu curiam Regis, quam tum
Praga in Bohemia fouerat, adierunt. Aucti suntia Rege ducali dignitate, vt
duces in reliquu^ Magnopo* and scriberentur and essent. Alberti Krantzij
Wandaliae lib. 8.
of Mecklenburg, and made Princes of the Empire by the Emperor Charles the
fourth. Magnus, Duke of Mecklenburg son to Albert. John Duke of Mecklenburg,
son to Magnus. He founded the University of Rostock. Henry, surnamed the Fat,
Duke of Mecklenburg, son to John. William the last prince of the Vandals,
descended from Niclot, and Primislaus before named, deceasing without male
issue, he added that part unto the Dukedom of Mecklenburg. Magnus Duke of
Mecklenburg, son to Henry the Fat. Albert Duke of Mecklenburg, son to
Magnus. Iohn-Albert, Duke of Mecklenburg, son to Albert. Sophia, the only
daughter of his brother Vlrick, Duke of Mecklenburg, was married unto Frederick
the second, king of Denmarck, from whom were descended amongst other issue
Christian the fourth, now king of Denmarck, and the most illustrious princess
Anne, Queen of Great Britain. Adolph-Frederick, and Iohn-Albert, sons to
Iohn-Albert, Dukes of Mecklenburg in the time of my author.

THE BOHEMIANS Baemi Ptolemaei lib: 2. c. 11. Boemi Helmoldi Chron: Sclauorum
lib. 2. c. 5. Bohemi Recentiorum.

THese V. Corn. Tacit. lib. de Moribus Germanorum. Vellei Paterculi Histor.
lib. 2.
took their name from the country Boiohoemum of Paterculus, and Boiemum of
Tacitus, now Bohemia, called thus from the more ancient, and first known
inhabitants hereof the Boij, and through sundry different successions of people
continuing the name unto our times. The Sclaves, thus distinguished, first
arrived here (if we may believe their historians) under Zechus, brother unto
Lechus, the founder of the Polish monarchy, and nation, about the year 649,
agreeing with the time of Constans, Emperor of the East, and of Clovys the
second, son to Dagobert, Monarch of the Frenchmen; succeeding to the
Marcomans. A time notwithstanding more near unto the dissolution of the
Western Roman Empire, and the general flittings of Barbarous nations seems
much more probable. By Charles the Great, and the succeeding Emperors of the
West they were subdued, and made a part of the French, and Germane Empires.
Their first Religion was Gentilisme. Under their prince Borsivoius in the
reign of the Emperor Arnulph they received the Christian faith, converted by
S. Methodius, Bishop of the Moravians.

THE KINGDOM OF BOHEMIA. Boiohaemum Paterculi. Boiemum Taciti. Bethemum
Aymonij de Rebus Gestis Francorum lib. 4. c. 93. Bohemia Recentiorum.

THEIR V. Aymonij de Rebus gestis Francorum l. 4. c. 93, Ioannis Dubrauij. and
Aeneae Sylvij Histor: Bohem. and Petri Birtij Com. Rerum Germanic. lib. 2. c.
13.
government was for the most part Monarchical, first under Dukes, then under
Kings, created by the Dutch Emperors, afterward made elective, and obtaining
a place in the general Diets, and the privilege of Electours, and Princes of
the Empire. Their order follows. Zechus, under whom the Sclaves first
disbourded hither, the founder of the nation. He died without issue, after whom
the state for a time became popular. Cracus, the Lawgiver of the Polonians,
created Duke of the Bohemians, weary of their rude, and confused Democracie. He
deceased about the year 709. Lybussa, daughter to Cracus, married unto
Primislaus. Primislaus husband to Lybussa, Duke of Bohemia, after the decease
hereof. He founded the town of Prage. Nezamislaus, son to Primislaus.
Mnatha, son to Nezamissaus, Duke of the Bohemians in the reign of the
Emperor Charles the Great. About this time the nation became first subject to
foreign jurisdiction, tamed, and brought under by the arms of the French, not
fully quieted notwithstanding, and incorporated with Germany until the reign
of the Dutch Emperors. Voricius, son to Mnatha. Wenceslaus. Bela.
Nostricius, son to Bela. Borzivoius, the first Christian Prince, in the
reign of the Emperor Arnulph. Sbitignaeus, son to Borzivoius. Vladislaus
the first, brother to Sbitignaeus. Wenceslaus the second, surnamed the Saint,
son to Vladislaus the first, slain by his brother Boleslaus. Boleslaus the
first, brother to Saint Wenceslaus, and son to Vladislaus the first.
Boleslaus the second, son to Boleslaus the first. He mightily increased the
Christian religion (not yet here fully established) by arms, and the planting
of industrious Pastors. Boleslaus the third, son to Boleslaus the second.
Iaromir, son to Boleslaus the third. Vdalricus, Duke of Bohemia, brother to
Boleslaus the third, and uncle unto Iaromir. Predislaus, son to Vdalricus.
Sbitignaeus the second, son to Predislaus. He deceased about the year 1061.
Hitherto they governed only in title of Dukes. Vladislaus, brother to
Sbitignaeus, the first of the nation, and name King of Bohemia, created in a
Diet at Mentz by the Emperor Henry the fourth in the year 1086. The Princes
following for some few successions resumed again the title of Dukes of
Bohemia. Predislaus, Duke of Bohemia son to Vladislaus the first. Borsivoius
Duke of Bohemia, son to Vladislaus the first, and brother to Predislaus.
Sobeslaus, Duke of Bohemia, brother to Predislaus, and Borsivoius. Vladislaus
the second, son to Predislaus, made king of Bohemia by the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa for reward of his faithful service performed at the siege of Milan
in Italy. He first took for his arms the Lion Argent with a forcked tail,
given unto him by the Emperor Frederick the first, and ever since borne by the
house. Primislaus, son to Vladislaus the second, elected king by the Emperor
Philip in the year 1199, with power given to the states afterward to choose
their Prince, before this time elected by the extraordinary grace only of the
Emperors. Since this time the kingdom of Bohemia has continued still
elective by the states of the country, although most commonly enjoyed by the
next of blood. Wenceslaus the first, king of Bohemia, son to Primislaus the
first. Primislaus the second, named otherwise Ottocarus, king of Bohemia, son
to Wenceslaus the first. He got seized of the countries of Austria, Steirmarck,
Karnten, Krain, and Marca Trevisana, surrendered not long after to Rodulph the
first, Emperor of the Romans. He was slain in battle at the river of Marck in
Moravia in the year 1278, fighting against the Emperor Rodulph the first.
Wenceslaus the second, son to Primislaus the second. He added to the house
hereof the dignity of Electour, and chief taster of the Empire, conferred by
the Emperor Rodulph the first. Vladislaus Locticus deposed he was chosen king
of Poland, recovered afterward again from him by Locticus. Wenceslaus the
third, son to Wenceslaus the second. He was chosen by his faction king of
Hungary, which right he not long after yielded up to Otho, Duke of Bavaria. He
deceased without issue in the year 1306. Rodulph Archduke of Austria, eldest
son to the Emperor Albert the first, upon his marriage with Elizabeth,
widow to the deceased Prince, elected king of Bohemia. His reign was short,
dying within the year. Henry, son to Meinard, Duke of Karnten, and Earl of
Tirol, chosen king of Bohemia against the Archduke Rodulph, having married
Anne sister to Wenceslaus the third. John of the house of Luxemburg, son to
the Emperor Henry the seventh, having married Elizabeth, another of the
sisters of Wenceslaus the third, chosen king of Bohemia in the year 1310, his
competitour Henry Duke of Karnten, and Earl of Tirol being vanquished, and
driven out. He was slain fighting for the French against the English in the
battle of Crecy. Charles the fourth, Emperor of the Romans, and king of
Bohemia, son to John of Luxemburg, and Elizabeth before mentioned. He founded
the University of Prage in the year 1348. Wenceslaus the fourth, Emperor of
the Romans, and king of Bohemia, eldest son to the Emperor Charles the
fourth. He was deposed for his sloth, and insufficiency in governing. In the
reign hereof begun the wars, or tumults of the Hussites, the more encouraged
through his vice, and imperfections. Sigismond Emperor of the Romans, and king
of Bohemia, brother to Wenceslaus the fourth, and son to the Emperor Charles
the fourth. He married unto Mary, heir of Hungary, by which means the right
of that kingdom became first united with Bohemia in the house, and posterity
hereof. He deceased without male issue. Albert the second, Emperor of the
Romans, and Archduke of Austria, succeeding in both kingdoms of Bohemia, and
Hungary, having married Elizabeth, daughter to the Emperor Sigismond, and Mary
aforesaid. Ladislaus king of Hungary, and Bohemia, son to the Emperor Albert
the second, and Elizabeth, daughter to the Emperor Sigismond. He deceased
young, unmarried, and without issue. George, governor of the kingdom in the
minority of Ladislaus, after the decease hereof elected king of Bohemia. At the
same time Matthias Corvinus, son to the great Huniades, usurped the kingdom
of Hungary, aided, and drawn hereunto by king George. Vladislaus, or Ladislaus
the fourth, eldest son to Casimir, king of Poland, and of Elizabeth, sister
to king Ladislaus the third, and daughter to the Emperor Albert the second,
and Elizabeth. After the decease of Matthias Corvinus he succeeded likewise in
the kingdom of Hungary, the root of the succeeding kings of both countries of
Hungary, and Bohemia. Lewis, king of Hungary, and Bohemia, son to Ladislaus
the fourth. He was slain in Hungary against Soliman the great Turk at the
battle of Mohacz. Ferdinand the first, Archduke of Austria, Emperor of the
Romans, and king of Bohemia, and Hungary, having married Anne, daughter to
Vladislaus the fourth, and sister to Lewis slain against Soliman the Turk.
Maximilian the second, Archduke of Austria, Emperor of the Romans, and king of
Bohemia, and Hungary, eldest son to the Emperor Ferdinand the first, and
Anne. Rodulph the second Emperor of the Romans, Archduke of Austria, and king
of Bohemia, and Hungary, eldest son to the Emperor Maximilian the second. He
deceased without issue. Matthias Archduke of Austria, Emperor of the Romans,
and king of Bohemia, and Hungary, younger brother to the Emperor Rodulph the
second, and son to the Emperor Maximilian the second. Ferdinand the second,
Archduke of Austria, Emperor of the Romans, and king of Hungary, son to
Charles Archduke of Austria, son to the Emperor Ferdinand the first; and
Frederick the fifth, Electour, and Count Palatine of the Rhijn, elected kings
of Bohemia, both still retaining the title.

THE MORAVIANS. Morauia Ioannis Aventini Annalium Boiorum l. 4.

THey were thus V Ioannis Aventini Annalium Boiorum lib. 4. Aeneae Silvij
Historiae Bohemicae c. 13. Ioannis Dubrauij Histor: Bohem: lib: 4.
named from the river In praesentiarum quoniam circumscriptos Mora fluuio habet
fines, ab eodem incolae Moraui and ipsa regio Morauia appellatur; Joan:
Dubrauij Histor. Bohem: lib. 4.
Marckh, about which they inhabited. Their express mention we find not until
the French Empire and the reign of the Emperor Lewis the Godly. Their
dominion, and name extended along the left shore of the Danow from the
Mountains of the Bohemians unto beyond the river Tibiscus. They contained the
parts of Germany, where now lie Marheren, and the Lower Austria, together with
Dacia, now the Upper Hungary. They were governed by kings, the first whereof,
of whom we find any mention, was one Raslai, living in the reign of the
Emperor Lewis the Godly, by whom he was taken prisoner, and had his eyes
plucked out. There succeeded hereunto Hormidorus. Suantoplucus, the first
Christian king. Suantobogius, son to Suantoplucus. In this Prince the
kingdom of the Moravians took end, proscribed, and driven out by the Emperor
Arnulph, his country being given in prey to the bordering nations; the greatest
part whereof became presently seized upon by Cusala, and the Hungarians, since
accounted part of Hungary.

THE MARQVISATE OF MARHEREN.
THe rest voluntarily became subject to the neighboring Bohemians, erected by
these into a Marquisate, retaining still from hence the name of Moravia, or
Marheren. Part was also usurped by the Marqueses of Austria, and contains now
the Lower Oosten reich; but by what means we find not, or whether lopped off
from the part of the Bohemians, or of the Hungarians.

THE POLONIANS. Poloni Helmoldi Chronic. Sclauorum lib. 2. c. 5.

THese have V. Martinum Cromerum de Rebus Gestis Polonorum; and Alexandri
Gagvini Chron: Poloniae compendium.
had this name, and distinction given them either from the evennesse of their
country; lying flat, and without hills; or from their frequent hunting, an
exercise, whereunto this nation has always been much addicted: for the word
Pole in the Sclavonian tongue signifies both. The former is the more received
opinion. The ordinary sort of the Polish, and Bohemian historians relate these
with the Bohemians to have been originally Croatians, descended from the
Sclaves inhabiting Krabbaten, and Windischlandt, and brought into these parts
by Zechus, and Lechus two brethren, flying hither, and banished out of their
country for homicide. But this fable is judiciously refuted by Cromerus. The
more certain opinion is that, which we have before delivered, that they were
no other then the natural Sarmatians, upon the departure of the Dutch nations
toward the Roman frontires flocking hither, and in regard of their
neighborhood filling up, and inhabiting their left countries, and by reason of
their common language with the Sclaves of Illyricum, and the East thus
accounted. Notwithstanding that Zechus, and Lechus were the founders of the two
nations it is a constant tradition, received by all their Historians, and not
lightly to be rejected. Although whether that these were strangers; or native
inhabitants, and only the beginners, and raisers of two such states, and
goverments, the thing is altogether uncertain, since that all ancient
histories, and monuments are silent. The time when these first should arrive
hither after the report of their Historians was the year 649 under Lechus. A
time notwithstanding more near unto the great* and general flittings of the
Barbarous, and Northren nation (as before we have showed) is much more
probable. Their country since their first notice was the modern Poland, with
Schlesi; divided with the river Wixel, and containing part of Sarmatia. By king
Boleslaus the first Pomeren was added, contained then betwixt the river Odera,
and the Wixel, recovered afterward by Frederick Barbarossa to the Dutch
Empire. Schlesi was likewise annexed to the kingdom of the Bohemians, the
occasion, and manner whereof we will show hereafter.

THE KINGDOM OF POLAND.
THeir government was for the most part monarchical, first under Dukes, then
under princes, afterward under kings. Their order follows. Lechus, first
Duke of the Poles, or of Poland, brother unto Zechus, the first prince of the
Bohemians. His posterity for a while succeeded, but whose names, as neither
their number, are not known. These failing, 12 Palatines commanded. The
Aristocracie put down, Cracus is chosen. Lechus the second, son to Cracus.
Venda sister to Lechus the second. 12. Palatines. Lescus the first, the
monarchy again restored. He deceased without issue. Lescus the second. Lescus
the third son to Lescus the second. He lived in the reign of Charles the
Great. Unto this time (if we dare believe their Histories) the Dukes of Poland
besides the modern country, and Schlesi commanded over the whole coast of the
Sea Baltic, inhabited by the many people of the Winithi; divided then first
amongst the numerous issue of this prince, and, the posterity of these
revolting, becoming afterward conquered, and united to the Dutch, filled
with their colonies. But this whole narration seems altogether to be
fabulous. Popielus the first, Duke of Poland, son to Lescus the third. Popielus
the second, son to Popielus the first. He died without surviving heirs of his
body after a monstrous, and strange manner eaten up, and devoured with mice,
together with his wife, and whole issue. Piastus the first elected Duke of
Poland after Popielus the second. Zemovitus the first, son to Piastus the
first. Lescus the fourth, son to Zemovitus the first. Zemomyslus the first, son
to Lescus the fourth. Miezislaus the first, son to Zemomyslus the first, the
last Duke of Poland. Boleslaus the first son to Miezislaus the first, created
first king of Poland by the Emperor Otho the third about the year 1001. He
subdued, and made tributary the Pomerani. Miezislaus the second, K. of Poland,
son to Boleslaus the first. Casimir the first, son to Miezislaus the second.
Boleslaus the second son to Casimir the first, deposed from the kingdom, and
dying exiled in Hungary. Vladislaus the first brother to Boleslaus the second,
elected after his brother. He left the title of king, and was styled only
Prince of Poland, continued by his successors unto Praemislus. Boleslaus the
third, prince of Poland, son to Vladislaus the first. Vladislaus the second,
eldest son to Boleslaus the third, Prince, or sovereign Lord of the whole
Poland, but commanding immediately only in a part, the country being divided
betwixt him, and his other brethren. He was driven out by the joint arms, and
conspiracy hereof. Upon composition with his brethren by the mediation, of the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, he had allotted unto him for his share the
country of Schlesi, sometimes part of Poland; left unto his three sons
Boleslaus, Conrade, and Miezeslaus, whose successors enjoyed it a long time
after, first under the right of the kings of Poland, afterward of the kings of
Bohemia, the beginning, and occasion of the Dukedom thus called, and of the
rent hereof from the name, and account of Poland. Boleslaus the fourth, brother
to Vladislaus the second. Miezeslaus the third, brother to Boleslaus the
fourth, and Vladislaus. He was likewise deposed. Casimir the second, brother to
Miezeslaus the third. Lescus the fifth son to Casimir the second, deposed
again by Miezeslaus the third. Miezeslaus the third. Vladislaus the third,
son to Miezeslaus the third, deposed by Lescus the fifth. Lescus the fifth, the
last prince of Poland; after whom the long languishing monarchy hereof became
for a time quite extinguished, the country being divided amongst many petty
Lords all absolute, no one having sovereign authority over the rest. After
some vacancy Praemislus, Duke of Posna. He united in his person the greatest
part of the many divided Provinces hereof, and was elected king of Poland in
the year 1295; after that this title here had been intermitted for the space
of 215 years, continued ever since in his successors. Vladislaus the fourth,
king of Poland, elected after Primislus. Casimir the third, king of Poland,
son to Vladislaus the fourth. He deceased without heirs. Lewis the first,
king of Hungary, son to Caribert by Elizabeth sister to Casimir the third,
elected king of Poland after Casimir. He deceased without heir male.
Hedwigis, younger daughter to Lewis the first, Queen of Poland. She married
unto Iagello, great Duke of Lithuania. Her elder sister Mary succeeded in the
kingdom of Hungary, married unto the Emperor Sigismond. Iagello, great Duke
of Lithuania, after his baptism, and conversion to Christianity from
Paganism named Vladislaus, after the decease of Hedwigis without surviving
issue continuing king of Poland, transmitting the right hereof to his issue,
and posterity. By this Prince the great Dukedom of Lithuania with the
appending countries became annexed to the crown of Poland, and added to the
Church of Christ. Vladislaus the sixth eldest son to Iagello by his wife Sconza,
daughter to And rew-Iohn Duke of Kiovi. In the minority of Ladislaus, son to
the Emperor Albert the second, he was elected king of Hungary, slain in the
battle of Varna by Amurath the second, king of the Turks; young, and without
heirs. Casimir the fourth, king of Poland, and great Duke of Lithuania, son to
Iagello, and Sconza, and brother to Vladislaus the sixth. John. Albert, one of
the younger sons of Casimir the fourth, king of Poland. He deceased
unmarried. His elder brother Vladislaus after the decease of King George, and
of Matthias Corvinus succeeded in the kingdoms of Bohemia, and Hungary.
Alexander Duke of Lithuania, younger brother to Iohn-Albert. Sigismond the
first, younger brother to king Alexander. He conquered the land of Prussen
from the Dutch-knights; ever since annexed to the crown of Poland, with the
part of East Pomeren, belonging sometimes to that order. Sigismond the second,
great Duke of Lithuania, son to Sigismond the first. He took from the
Dutch-knights of Lieflandt the parts which the Kings of Poland now hold in that
country. He died without heirs, in whom ended the race masculine of the kings
of Poland descended from the great Iagello. By so many great enlargements the
dominions of the kings of Poland are become at this day extended besides the
two Polands over Prussen, Lithuania, Black Russia, and Podolia, with part of
Pomeren, and Lieflandt. Henry Duke of Aniou, brother to Francis the second, and
Charles the ninth French kings; elected king of Poland after Sigismond the
second. His brother Charles the ninth deceasing without heirs he voluntarily
left the kingdom of Poland, contented with his hereditarie of France. Stephen
Bathori, Vaiwood of Transylvania, after the departure of Henry the third,
French king, elected king of Poland, having married Anne, sister to Sigismond
the second. Sigismond the third, son to John, king of Sweathland, by
Catharine sister to Sigismond the second, elected king of Poland after Stephen
Bathori, now reigning.

THE DVKEDOME OF SCHLESI.
THe name V. Martini Cromeri de Reb. Polonorum lib. 6. 10, 11, and 12.
after Cromerus seems to have been given Silesiae vero nomen ex co^fluxu
multorum populoru^ ind^tum videtur. Cromeri de Reb. Pol. l. 6.
hereunto from the meeting here of sundry different people: for thus the word
Silesij, quasi Slezaci, id est, convenae dicuntur lingua Polonica, ibid.
Slezaci signifies in the Polonian tongue. It was sometimes part of Poland;
rent there from by the division of that country amongst the numerous issue of
Prince Boleslaus the 3d, the share of Vladislaus the 2d, his eldest son. The
manner we have showed in the succession of Poland. Vladislaus deceasing during
his banishment before he could return home, his part, or divisio^ in the year
1163 was surre^dred to his three sons, Boleslaus, Conrade, and Miezeslaus to be
held under the homage, and right of the sovereign Lords of Poland; the first
Dukes of Schlesi, and root in a manner of all the succeeding, commanding in
their several divisio^s. By Wenceslaus the second the Dukes of Schlesi of
Breslaw, Oppolen, Ratibor, Cessin, and Bithom were made subject to the kings of
Bohemia, jealous of the power hereof, and distrusting the ability of the
factious, and divided Poles. By king John of Lutzenburg the Dukes of Glogaw,
Zegan, Olentz, Steinaw, and Falkenburg (for many then commanded togithet, every
son of a prince after the custom of those parts having his share, and in their
several divisions bearing the title of the whole.) By the Emperor Charles the
fourth the Dukedom of Schlesi of Sweinitz, bequeathed unto him by Boleslaus
the last Duke. In this manner the whole Schlesi quitting the part of the Poles
became annexed to the crown of Bohemia, in which right it now rests.

THE DANES. Dani Iornandis de Rebus Geticis lib. etc.

THese V. Iornandis lib. de Rebus ^ Geticis. Pom: Mela. lib. 3. Greg:
Turorensis lib: 3. c. 3. Aymonij de rebus Gestis Francorum l. 4. c. 9. 92. 96.
97. 98. 99. 100. 101. Eginhartum de Vita, and Rebus Gestis Caroli Magni.
Saxonis Grammatici Historiam Danorum. Albetti Krantzij Chronicon Regnorum
Aquilonarium. Beati Rhenani lib. 1. Rerum Germanicarum (Dani in Cimbricam
Chersonesu^.) Goropij Becani Originum lib. 7. (Goto-Danica.) Camdeni Britaniam.
Petri Birtij Rerum Germanicarum lib. 2. c. 15. Montan: in Mercator: Atlan. 1.
were sometimes otherwise called the Ipsos Germanos indigenas crediderim,
minimeque aliarum gentium aduenis, and hospitiis mixtos: quia nec terra olim
sed classibus advehebantur, qui mu^are seeds quaerebant, and immensus vltra,
vtque sic dixerim, adversus oceanus raris orb nostro nauibus additur. Quis
porro praeter periculum horridi, and ignoti maris, Asia, aut Africa, aut Italia
relicta Germaniam peteret, informem terris, asperam coelo, tristem cultu,
aspectuque nifi patria sit? C. Corn. Tac. de moribus Germanorum.
Normans, signifying with the Dutch, as in our modern English tongue,
Northren-men; named thus from such their situation, the word being then common
hereunto, and to the Norweies, and Sweathlanders, and to all other unknown
Barbarians, issuing from the frozen tract of Scandia, and the North. The word
(Dane) Saxo Grammaticus, Crantzius, and others from their authority fabulously
derive from one Dan, who should be king hereof about the year of the world
2898. Becanus no less absurdly, but further about, and with more trouble from
Henen, or Denen, signifying in the Danish language a Cock; the device, or arms
sometimes of the Alans their progenitors (I marvel through what extraordinary
pleasure of the heavens, or clime c, and fruitfulness of the soil, or by what
secret, and untrodden ways) invited, and disbourding hither. Andreas Velleius
in Camden from the Dahi, a people of Asia, and the word Marck, signifying a
border. Ethelwardus from Donia, a town sometimes situated herein. Montanus
upon Mercator conjecturally from the Dutch word Aha, signifying water; in
regard of the situation of their country, being wholly either insulary, or
bounding upon the Ocean. The more judicious fetch their name from the baye, or
straight of the sea, lying betwixt the Cimbrian Chersonese, and Scandia, called
by Mela Sinus Codanus; about which straight, and in the Islands thereof the
nation since their first notice have still to this day inhabited. Of these we
read not in any of the more ancient Greek, and Latin authors excepting
Iornandes, and Venantius Fortunatus, who yet but slightly pass them over. In
the French, and English histories they are more frequently remembered by
occasion of their long piracies, and spoils upon the coasts hereof. Their
first clear mention is in the reign of Theodorick, king of Austrasia, about
the year 516, agreeing with the time of Anastasius, Emperor of the East,
under their King Cochliarius, forraging upon the Seacoast of Gaul Belgicke,
belonging to the kingdom of Austrasia, slain in the return by Theodebert,
son to Theodoricke. After this we hear no more of them until the reign of
the Emperor Charles the Great, under their Prince Godfrey then warring upon
the neighboring Obotriti; invading Freistandt with a fleet of 200 sail;
threatening the neighboring Saxons with subjection, and servitude; and much
endangering the Empire of the French, if by the sudden, and unexpected death
hereof, and their after dissension about the succession to the kingdom this
mischief had not been prevented. Their mention afterward is very frequent,
and famous during the race of the French kings of the Caroline line, and of the
Monarchs of the English Saxons, with sundry fleetes and armies, and with
might, and fury irresistable invading France, and England, conquering, and
subduing the English nation, and occasioning in France the name, and people of
the Normans. Their natural, and first country were the Islands of the Sundt,
now Zealandt, Funen, and others, with part of the neighboring Quamuis and Dani
ex ipsorum stirpe progressi Erulos ex proproprijs sedibus expulerunt: qui inter
omnes Scanziae nationes nomen sibi ob nimiam proceritatem affectant praecipuum.
Iornand. de Rebus Geticis.
continent of Scandia. But how far they enlarged herein it is uncertain.
Afterward they overspread the adioining Cimbrian Chersonese (as Becanus
conjectureth,) not long after their slaughter, and overthrow under Gochliarius
by Theodebert, disharmed thorough this diaster for attempting any more so
hastily upon the French, and remoter provinces, and in regard of their
pestering multitudes thrusting into this next land, made void by the departure
of the Iutes, and English, accompanying the Saxons into Great Britain. A time
notwithstanding more near unto the Emperor Charles the Great seems more
probable, for that Beda, Porro de Anglis, hoc est, de illa patria quae Angulus
dicitur, and ab eo tempore vsque hodie manner desertas inter prouincias
Vitarum, and Saxonum perhibetur. Bedae Ecclesiasticae Historae gentis Anglorum
lib. 1. c. 15.
who lived not long before his reign relates the part of the Chersonese,
where sometimes dwelt the English, in his time to have lain wast, and empty of
inhabitants, without mentioning the Danes. At this day they contain the parts
of Hallandt, and Sohonen in the maine land of Scandia, all the Islands within
the straights of the Sundt, with the North, and South Iutlandts, and the
Dukedom of Schleswic in the Cimbrian Chersonese, divided from the Saxons, or
Dutch by the river Eydore, al now together called by the name of Dane marck, or
Denmarck, signifying the limit of the Danes, given first by the neighboring
Dutch to the marches, or border hereof, derived afterward to the whole
country.

THE KINGDOM OF DENMARCK.
THe government hereof has been still under Kings, elective, but where the next
of blood most commonly have succeeded, now besides Denmarck, Lords of Norwey,
Islandt, and in a manner of whatsoever cold, and inhabitable regions subject to
the Pole Articke, and the North, together with the great Dukedom of Holstein,
lying in Germany betwixt the rivers Eydore, and the Elb, containing the
particular country of Holstein, Ditmarse, Stormarse, and Wagerlandt, held
hereby under the fire of the Dutch Emperors. The first of their kings, whereof
we read in histories deserving credit (for those long descents from Dan in
Grammaticus Saxo, and Krantzius are merely counterfeit, and fabulous) were
Cochliarius before mentioned, slain with his whole army by Theodebert, son
to Theoderick, king of Austrasia. Godfrey in the reign of the Emperor Charles
the Great. Hemingus, nephew to Godfrey. Sigifridus, and Amilo, nephews also to
Godfrey, chosen by their several factions, and slain in battle one against
the other, the side of Amilo prevailing. Harioldus, and Ragenfridus, brothers
unto Amilo, driven out by the sons of Godfrey, and exiled amongst the
Suiones. These all commanded in the time of Charles the Great. From Christopher
the second, deceasing about the year 1333. (to omit the more ancient, for a
great part fabulous, or very confused) the succession has been continued, as
follows. Waldemar the third, king of Denmark, son to Christopher. He deceased
without issue male. Margaret, daughter to Waldemar the third. She married unto
Haquin king of Norwey. After the decease of her husband; and of her young son
Olaus she ruled both kingdoms, transmitting them to succession. She overcame,
and took prisoner Albert, king of Sweathland, whom she forced to resign his
kingdom; added by this means to her other possessions, and enthralled for a
long time after to the Danish yoke. She died without surviving issue about the
year 1410. Eric Duke of Pomeren adopted by Queen Margaret, descended of her
sister Ingelburgis, elected king of Denmarck, Norwey, and Swethen. Wearied with
tedious, and hard wars against the rebellious Sweathlanders, the town of
Schleswic, and the Hanse-citties, he voluntarily left those kingdoms,
retiring into his Dukedom of Pomeren, where he died. Christopher the third,
Count Palatine of the Rhijn, son to Margaret, sister to Eric, after the
departure hereof elected, and succeeding in all the three kingdoms. He
deceased without issue. Christiern the first, Earl of Oldenburg, and
Delmenhorst after the decease of Christopher elected king of Denmarck, and
Norwey in the year 1448; Sweathland revolting, and choosing a Prince of their
own nation. He annexed to the house of Denmarcke the countries of Holstein,
Ditmarse, Stormarse, and Wagerland, erected into a Dukedom by the Emperor
Frederick the third. He recovered likewise the kingdom of Swethen. John, son
to Christiern the first, succeeding in all three kingdoms. Christiern the
second, son to John. In this Prince the Sweathlanders after sundry revolts,
and revnions finally shoake off the yoke of the Danes, governed ever since by
their own kings. In the year 1522 hated for his cruelty he was driven out,
and deprived of all his estates, succeeded unto by his uncle Frederick, after
ten years banishment, and 27 years captivity miserably dying in bonds.
Frederick the first, younger brother to John, and son to Christiern the
first, after Christierne the second elected king of Denmarck, and Norwey. He
first reformed religion in his dominions. Christiern the third, king of
Denmarck, and Norwey, son to Frederick the first. Frederick the second, son
to Christiern the third. Christiern the fourth, king of Denmarck, and Norwey,
son to Frederick the second, now reigning.

THE SVIONES. Suiones Corn: Taciti de Moribus Germanorum. Sueones Aymonij de
Rebus gestis Francorum l. 4. c. 101. Suethidi Iornandis de Rebus Geticis. Sueci
Recentiorum.

THis people V. Corn: Tac. de Morib. Germanorum. Iornandem de Rebus Geticis.
Aymonij de Rebus Gestis Francorum lib. 4. c. 101. Alberti Krantzij Chron:
Regnorum Aquilonatium. Olai Magni Histor: Gothorum, and Suecorum. Petri Birtij
Com. Rerum Germanicarum l. 2. c. 16.
are mentioned by Tacitus in his description of Germany, being then a part of
the Suevi, and with the Sitones Suionibus Sitonum gentes continuantur: Corn:
Tac. de Mor. Ger. lib.
inhabiting Suionum hinc civitates ipso in Oceano, praeter viros, armaque
classibus valent. Cor. Tac. lib. de Mor. Germanorum
the greater Scandia of Ptolomie. By Aimonius with small difference they are
named the Sueones in his fourth book, and 101 chapter. By Iornandes de Rebus
Geticis the Suethidi more near unto the modern. At this day by long
corruption the Sueci, giving the name to the country now called Suecia, or
Sweathland, extended for a great space of land betwixt the Balticke, and the
Frozen seas. Their mention in more ancient authors is very sparing, not
bordering unto, or having then any affair with the Romans, French, or other
civil nations, who might relate their acts; or passing under the general name
of the Normans.

THE KINGDOM OF SWEATHLAND.
THeir government anciently and in the time of Tacitus was under kings,
commanding in full liberty Est apud illos (Suiones) and opibus honos, eoque
vnus imperitat, nullis iam exceptionibus, non precario iure regnandi. Corn:
Tac. ibid.
, and not at the will of the subject; continued thither (if we dare believe
their histories) from Magog, son to Iaphet, the year of the world 1745, and
the 90 from the Deluge, and unto our times. In the reign of the Emperor
Charles the Great we find them likewise to have been a free state, different
from that of the Danes; entertaining then Harioldus, and Ragenfridus kings of
that nation, driven out by the sons of Godfrey. In the reign of Sueno the
first, and of Canutus the Great, agreeing with the reigns of the Emperors
Henry, and Conrade the second, we hear of them, subject to the Danes; but by
what means it is not manifest, as neither how they became clear from their
servitude. By Queen Margaret about the year 1387, and during the reign of
the Emperor Wenceslaus they were again subdued to the Danish yoke; after
long wars, sundry defections, and recoveries not fully delivered herefrom
until the year 1525, and the reign of the Emperor Charles the fifth, freed
by Gustave; whose posterity, the Danes being expulsed, have ever since held the
crown. The order of the first kings fabulous, and confused we purposely omit,
From Albert, and more clear times they were continued, as follows. Albert
living in the reigns of the Emperors Charles the fourth, and Wenceslaus, Duke
of Mecklenburg, and king of Sweathland; warred upon, and taken prisoner by
Margaret Queen of Denmarck, and Norwey. Desirous of liberty he resigned his
right of the kingdom unto Margaret aforesaid. Margaret Queen of Denmarck,
Norwey, and Swethen by right of Arms, and the resignation of Albert. Eric Duke
of Pomeren, king of Denmarck, Norwey, and Swethen, adopted by Margaret.
Christopher Count Palatine of the Rhijn, king of Denmarck, Norwey, and Swethen,
son to Margaret, sister to Eric aforesaid. He deceased without issue. Charles
son to Canutus, a knight of the country, elected king of Sweathland after
Christopher, the Danes excluded. Christiern the first king of Denmarck, Norwey,
and Swethen, Charles being driven out. Charles king of Swethen, restored the
second time, Christiern the first king of Denmarck being again excluded. After
the decease of Charles, Steno a nobleman of the country governed the affairs
of the realm during the rest of the time of Christiern the first. John king of
Denmarck, Norwey, and Swethen, son to Christierne the first, about the year
1448 admitted by Steno, and the Sweathlanders, pressed with the wars of the
Russes. Christierne the second, son to John, king of Denmarck, Norwey, and
Swethen by arms, and the right of his ancestors. He afterward lost all the
three kingdoms, driven out in regard of his tyranny, and cruelty. Gustaue, son
to Eric, a noble man of the country, given by the Sweathlanders amongst the
pledges for their fidelity to Christiern the second; upon the fame of
Christiernes, and the Danish tyranny, making an escape out of prison, expulsing
that enemy, and elected king of Sweathland. Since this time the Sweathlanders,
free from the Danish servitude, have been still commanded by princes of their
own nation. Eric, eldest son to Gustaue, deposed upon pretense of tyranny, and
misgoverning the state; succeeded unto by his brother John, Duke of Finlandt.
John Duke of Finlandt, son to Gustaue the first, and brother to king Eric. He
married unto Catharine, daughter to Sigismond the first, and sister to
Sigismond the second, kings of Poland. Sigismond son to John, and Catharine
aforesaid, before the decease of his father elected king of Poland, afterward
of Swethen; upon the cause of his different religion, and the pretense of his
breach of covenants with the people excluded, and deposed by his factious
nobility, succeeded unto by his uncle Charles. Charles Duke of Suderman, uncle
unto Sigismond the third king of Poland, and younger son to Gustaue the
first; during the absence, and wars of Sigismond, and the Polonians created
Administratour, and governor of the kingdom, afterward in the year 1608
elected, and crowned king of Sweathland. Gustave the second, son to Charles,
king of Sweathland, now reigning.

THE NORVEGIANS.
Whether these were called thus from the country of Norwey, or the country
from them, it is uncertain. We have not yet read either name in any ancient
author. Both seem more lately to have been given from their Northren situation.

THE KINGDOM OF NORWEY.
THe country by Aymonius was sometimes otherwise named Westerfold, a part then
of the Danish kingdom. For thus it appears by his description hereof in his
fourth book, and 101. chapter; situated then to the West, and North, and
thwarting the extreme point of the Island of Great Britain. It afterward
became a distinct kingdom. By means of the marriage of Haquin the last prince
unto Margaret Queen of Denmarcke it became annexed to the house of Denmarcke,
where it has ever since continued.

After this manner the name of Germany is become at this day enlarged beyond the
ancient over the provinces of Rhaetia, and Noricum with parts of Gaul, and
Pannonia, as on the other side, extended sometimes unto the river Wixel, and
the Frozen sea, is since become straightened within the Eydore, the sea Balticke,
and the confines of the Polonians: the ancient then comprehending without the
account of the modern the kingdoms of Denmark, Norwey, and Swethen, with the
greatest part of Poland; and the modern now containing, lying without the
limits and account of the ancient, the countries of Seirmarck, Karnten, Krain,
and Tirol, the parts of Austria, Bauaria, and Schwaben without the river Danow,
and of France betwixt the rivers Rhijn, the Meuse, and the Soasne. The whole
now accounted Germany, speaking Dutch, or subject to the soverainety hereof,
may be divided into three different States. 1. the provinces of the Low
Countries. 2. the confederacy of the Switzers, 3. and the Empire, or kingdom
of the Germans, the present subject of this discourse. The original of the
many particular states we have now related. There remains the general state,
or kingdom, whereof the other are parts, and subordinate.

THE KINGDOM OF GERMANY.
THis is otherwise called the Empire in regard of the residence therein of the
Imperial Roman Majesty; Italy being subdued by Odoacer, and the Heruli, and
the rest of the Roman provinces of the West by other Barbarous nations, about
the year 475 left of by Augustulus; after an interregnum of 326 years resumed
again by Charles the Great king of the Frenchmen; and by succession herefrom,
the French dominions being divided, afterward in the year 880 derived upon
Charles surnamed the Fat, king of Germany; maintained ever since in the Princes
hereof. The country after that it became subject to the Frenchmen was for a
long time a part of their kingdom of Austrasia, after the policy of those
times divided into 4 maine provinces, or Dukedomes, of Franconia, Saxony,
Almaigne and Bauaria; the parts lying now beyond the rivers of the Elb; and
Saltza, and possessed then by the many nations of the Sclaues, not being added
until afterward. About the year 841 in the person of Lewis surnamed the
ancient, son to the Emperor Lewis surnamed the Godly (the French Empire
being then shared amongst the many sons hereof) it was first made a distinct
kingdom, in which title the Princes have still enjoyed it; their name of
Emperor having been since added unto them, only as they are sovereign Lords
of Rome, and Italy, successors to Charles the Great, and the French. The
kingdom contained only at the time of its first erection, the parts now
bounded in with the Mountains of Bohemia, the Alps, the German Ocean, and the
rivers of the Rhijn, Eydore, Elb, and Saltza; including Pannonia, a part then
of Bauaria, afterward taken herefrom by the Hungarians. By the Emperors, Otho
the third, and Conrade the second the parts lying in Gaul betwixt the rivers
of the Rhijn, the Soasne, and the Meuse were added. The manner we have showed
in France. By Henry the first, and the succeeding Emperors unto Frederick
Barbarossa, and by the arms of the Dukes of Saxony, and the Marqueses of
Brandenburg, were added the parts beyond the rivers Saltza and Elb, containing
now Mecklenburg, Lawenburg, Pomeren, Meissen, Lausnitz, and the Middle and New
Marches of Brandenburg, held under the right hereof. The order of the kings of
Germany follow. Lewis, before mentioned, surnamed the Ancient, second son to
the Emperor Lewis the Godly, first king of Germany, whose portion it was in
the division of the French Monarchy betwixt him, and his other brethren,
Lotharius, and Charles the Bald. Carloman, Lewis, and Charles, surnamed the
Fat, kings of Germany, sons to Lewis the Ancient. Charles the Fat, sole king
of Germany, his two brothers Lewis, and Carloman deceasing without heirs, or
lawful. The male issue of his uncle the Emperor Lotharius failing, and
Charles the Simple, the only left legitimate issue of Charles the Bald, being
then young, and unfit to govern, he got seized of Italy, and the Roman Empire,
the title still afterward continuing in his successors. Forsaken, and deposed
by his inconstant nobility he died in extreme want, and misery in the greater
Augia near Constance, a memorable example of the incertitude of this
transitory, and earthly happiness, succeeded unto by Arnulph. Arnulph Emperor
of the Romans, and King of Germany, natural son to Carloman, brother to the
Emperor Charles the Fat. Lewis Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany,
son to Arnulph. He deceased without issue. Conrade the first, son to
Conrade, brother to Lewis, the last Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany
of the house of Charles the Great. He deceased in the year 919. Henry the
first, surnamed the Fowler, Duke of Saxony, by the choice of the Dutch, and
the assignement of Conrade the first elected Emperor of the Romans, and king
of Germany, the Caroline line here being extinguished, and that succeeding in
France being excluded, as strangers. Otho the first, surnamed the Great, son
to Henry the first, Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany. Otho the
second, son to Otho the first. Otho the third, son to Otho the second.
Wanting heirs, and for prevention of all future claim of the French, and
Italians by the aid, and authority of Pope Gregory the fifth, a Dutchman, and of
the citizens of Rome, he made the Empire of the Romans, and the kingdom of
Germany to be perpetually elective, and entailed them upon the German nation.
After this Prince the state has ever since for the space of 627 years
remained elective, continued chiefly in four Dutch families of Franconia,
Suevia, Lutzenburg, and Austria, where now it rests. He died in the year
1000. Henry the second Duke of Bavaria, the first elected Emperor of the
Romans, and king of Germany. Conrade the second, Duke of Franconia. Henry the
third son to Conrade the second. Henry the fourth son to Henry the third.
Falling out with, and excommunicated by the Popes, he was lastly by their
curse deprived of all imperial, and kingly dignity (his son Henry the fifth
authorized, and set up against him) dying afterward in great distress, and
poverty. Henry the fifth, the unnatural son of Henry the fourth, the last
Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany of the house of Franconia, after
long quarrels with the Popes deceasing in the year 1124. Lotharius the second
Duke of Saxony Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany. He deceased in
the year 1137. Conrade the third, Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany,
son to Frederick, surnamed the Ancient, Duke of Suevia. Frederick the first,
surnamed Barbarossa, Duke of Suevia, son to Frederick with the one eye,
brother to the Emperor Conrade the third. Henry the sixth, son to Frederick
Barbarossa. Philip Duke of Suevia brother to Henry the sixth, slain by Otho
Count Palatine. Otho the fourth, son to Henry surnamed the Lion Duke of
Saxony, and Bavaria, chosen Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany against
Philip by the contrary faction of Pope Innocent the third, enimie^ the house of
Suevia; after the decease of Philip crowned at Rome. Excommunicated shortly
after through the inconstancy, and injury here of he became forsaken and
deprived of all, dying in a private state at Brunswijck in the year 1218.
Frederick the second, Duke of Suevia, son to the Emperor Henry the sixth, in
the year 1212 chosen against Otho the fourth, after long wars, and
contention with the Popes deceasing in the year 1251, the last Emperor of the
Romans, and king of Germany of the house of Suevia. During the reign hereof
begin the faction of the Guelphes, and Gibelines amongst the Italians,
whereof these later sided for the Emperors, the other for the Popes,
occasioned by the quarrels hereof* the side of the Popes through the power,
and authority of that sea at length prevailing, and the Emperors quite
dispossessed of Italy, the title only remaining* William Earl of Holland,
elected Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany during the reign of the
Emperor Frederick the second thorough the authority of the sea of Rome, and
the immense charge of Pope Innocent the Fourth, enemy to Frederick the
second. He was slain the year 1257 in his wars against the rebellious
Fris^^s. Richard Earl of Cornwall, brother to Henry the third king of
England; and Alphonso the tenth, king of Castille, and Leon, chosen Emperors
of the Romans, and kings of Germany by their factions, the Electours being
divided* R^d^lph the first, Earl of Habsp^rg, after long disorder, and
vacancie in the year 1273 chosen by the joint consent of the Electours* the
founder of (...) family of Austria, and the first Emperor of the Romans* and
king of Germany of that house. Albert the first Duke of Austria, son to the
Emperor Rodulph the first, and Ad^lph Earl of Nass^^ chosen one against the
other, Albert prevailing, by whom Adolph was slain in battle. Henry the
seventh, Earl of L^^ze^burg, elected after the decease of Albert. Lewis the
fifth, Duke of Bavaria, elected Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany;
opposed by Frederick Archduke of Austria. Charles the fourth, king of
Bohemia, and son to the Emperor Henry the seventh, elected during the reign
of the Emperor Lewis (excommunicated by the Popes John the two and twentieth,
Benedict the tenth, and Clement the sixth) thorough the authority hereof. After
the decease of Lewis being again disliked by the Electours Edward the 3d king
of England is designed, who refusing the Empire, (as did afterward Frederick
Lantgraue of Duringen,) Gunther Earl of Schwartzenburg is elected, dying
shortly after; unto whom he again succeeded for the space of 33 years. By
this prince in the year 1356 the Golden Bull was ordained, containing the
manner of choosing the Emperors. Wenceslaus king of Bohemia, son to the Emperor
Charles the fourth; deposed for his floth, and many other vices. Frederick
Duke of Brunswijck, elected after Wenceslaus* slain shortly after at Frislar
by the teason of the Bishop of Me^t^. Rupert Count Palatine of the Rhijn. He
made war in Italy for the recovery of that province, but with unfortunate
success, that Italians every where now shaking of the yoke of the Empire,
favored by the Popes, jealous of the neighborhood, and greatness of the
Germans. Iodocur, Marquis of Moravia, uncle to Wenceslaus, elected after
Rupert. His reign was but short, not lasting fully six months. Sigismond
king of Hungary, and Bohemia, son to the Emperor Charles the fourth, and
brother to Wenceslaus, the last Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany of
the house of Lutzenburg. He deceased in the year 1437. Albert the second,
Archduke of Austria, and king of Hungary, and Bohemia, son in law to the
Emperor Sigismond. From this prince the house of Austria have ever since
possessed the Imperial, and Royal Diadem. Frederick the third, Archduke of
Austria, Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany. Ma^imilian the first
Archduke of Austria, son to Frederick the third Charles the fifth, King of
Spain, and Duke of Burgundy, and Austria, son to Philip, son to Maximilian the
first. Ferdinand the first King of Hungary, and Bohemia, and Archduke of
Austria, brother to Charles the fifth, Emperor of the Romans, and King of
Germany. Maximilian the second, King of Hungary, and Bohemia, and Archduke of
Austria, eldest son to the Emperor Ferdinand the first. Rodulph the second,
King of Hungary, and Bohemia, and Archduke of Austria, eldest son to
Maximilian the second. Matthias, King of Hungary, and Bohemia, and Archduke of
Austria, younger brother to Rodulph. Ferdinand the second, king of Hungary, and
Bohemia, and Archduke of Austria, son to the Archduke Charles, son to the
Emperor Ferdinand the first, Emperor of the Romans, and king of Germany in
the year 1627. The more proper Germany, or the Empire, and kingdom of the
Germans, we have already divided into 39 different names, or countries, of
Savoy, the Free county of Burgundy, Lotrain^ the District of Triers, the
Bishopprick of ^^ick, the land of Gulich, Cleveland, the Diocese of Colen, the
Lower Palatinate, (...) Sungow, Schwaben, Ba^ari^, the Bishoppricke of
Saltzburg, Tirol, Karnten, Krain, Steirmarck, Austria, Bohemia, Mo^avia,
Sch^^^, (...), Franconia, Hessen, Duringen, Meissen, Ober-Saa^sen, the
Earldom of Manisfeildt, Freislandt, W^stphalon, P^^eren, Stiffran Bre^en,
Meydenburg, Lu^enburg, Brunswijck, Holstein, Brandenburg, and Mecklenburg. The
original, and occasion of their names we have showed. Their descriptions come
in the new place.

OF THE STATE OF EVROPE. The XIII Book.
COntaining a Chorographicall description of the present Germany.

SAVOYE. Subaudia.

BOVNDED upon the South with Daulphinie in France; upon the West with
Daulphinie, and la Bresse; upon the North with the Lake of Geneve, and
Switzerlandt; and upon the East with the Alps of Wallislandt. The country is
for the most part hilly, and mountainous, overspred with the branches of the
neighboring Alps; healthie, but not so fruitful, some bottomes of the Alps
excepted, lying open to the Western Sun, and the plainer tract about Ripaille,
adjoining to the Lake Lemane. Towns here of better note are Chamberi, the
chief of the country, the Parliament hereof, or primary seat of justice;
situated upon the river L' Arch in a pleasant valley surrounded with
Mountains. Montmelian* Aig^e-belle. St Iehan de Maurienne, surnamed thus from
a valley of the Alps thus called, in the which it stands. From this part
were named the Earls of Maurienne V. supra.
before mentioned, whose inhabitants were the Medulli of Strabo. Luneburg.
Betwixt this, and the town of Susa in Piemonte lies the Mountain S. Denis,
otherwise called Mont-Cenis, the more ordinary road over the Alps betwixt
France, Tarantasia lon. 29. g. la^. 45. Clav.
and Italy. Nicy. Tarantaise (Tarantasia, and Civitas Centronum of Antoninus,
then the Metropolitan town of the Province of the Alps Graiae, and Paeninae,)
now an Archbishops sea, situated amongst Mountains. The particular country
hereof were the Centrones of the same author. Ripaille in a sweet, and
pleasant situation upon the South shore of the Lake of Geneve. The country
hereabouts, as the whole plain tract along the Lake, is exceedingly fruitful,
and happy, amongst other fruits commended for very excellent wines. The
general inhabitants of Savoy were anciently the Allobroges of Livie, and
others. Their language now is the French.

THE FREE COVNTIE OF BVRGVNDIE. Burgundiae Comitatus.

BOunded upon the West with the Dukedom of Burgundy; upon the South with la
Bresse; upon the South-East with the mountainous ridge of the Iour from
Switzerlandt; and upon the East, and North with the Mountain Vauge from
Sungow, Elsatz, and Lorraine. The country is hilly, and uneven, rising with
continual downs, and mountains, covered with vineyards, and shadie woods,
and ouerlooking fertile, and pleasant valleys, watered with infinite brooks,
and rivulets, purling down the hollow bottomes hereof. Dola. long 18. g. 3. m.
lat. 49. g. 5. m. Clav.
Chiefer towns here are Dole, a Bailliage, and the Parliament, and chief
town of the country belonging to the Earls of Burgundy; situated upon the
river Doux. Here flourishes an ancient University, where now especially the
Civil laws are professed. Besancon (Vesuntio of Caesar, Vesuntio. lon. 25 g
40. m. lat. 47 g. 36. m. Clav.
Visontium of Ptolomie, and Civitas Visontiensis of Antoninus, the Metropolis
then of the Province Maxima Sequanorum,) now an Archbishops sea, and town
Imperial, seated in a fruitful valley betwixt two Mountains, beset with
vines, upon the Doux, with whose streams it is almost round encompassed. Here
is also a little University founded in the year 1540, and in the reign of
the Emperor Charles the fifth. The town is free, belonging immediately to the
Empire, exceedingly strong both in regard of its natural site, Salinae.
and artificial means of fortification. Salins so named from the Salt-springs
thereof, from whence infinite store of salt is made, and transported into the
neighboring countries, the greatest part of the revenues of the Prince. The
town is large, strong, and fairly built, lying in a deep hollow valley
amongst mountains upon an impetuous rivulet, named Forica Nozereth, a fair,
and well traded Emporie near unto the Mountainous ridge of the Iour; fortified
with a strong Castle, in regard of the pleasure, and opportunity of hunting in
the neighboring mountains, sometimes the seiour, and ordinary recesse of the
Princes of Aurange. Orgelet in a mountainous, and barren part, inhabited with
an industrious people. Poligny, the Bailliage of the Lower Burgundy. Arboise,
noted for excellent, and long lasting wines. Vesoul, the Bailliage of the
Higher Burgundy. Luxoul under the Vauge, remarkable for the hot medicinable
Bathes thereof. Baume, for the most ancicnt, and famous monastery of Cluny,
environed with rocks, and crags, whence issues out the river Cella. The whole
country, Besancon excepted, is subject to the Princes of Burgundy, and Austria
of the house of Spain, governed by their deputies, and for the better
administration of justice divided into three Shires, or Bailliages, of Dole,
Poligny, and Vesoul, before mentioned, subordinate to the supreme Court, or
Parliament of Dole. The ancient inhabitants were the Sequani of Caesar, and of
others. Their language now is the French. There adioyneth hereunto (or which
rather is part hereof, but subject unto other Lords) the Earldom of
Mont-peligard, belonging now to the house of Wirtenberg* named thus from the
town of Mont-peligard, the chief of this part of the country.

LORAINE. Lotharingia.

BOunded upon the South with the Mountain Vauge, and the Free County of
Burgundy; upon the East with the Vauge, and Elsatz, with Westreich; upon the
West with the river Mouse, and Barrois in France; and upon the North with the
Diocese of Trier, and the country of Lutzenburg. The country is very woody, and
somewhat mountainous (ouerspred with the branches of the Forest Ardenne, and
the Vauge,) yet stored sufficiently with all necessary provision. It affords
plenty of Iron, Lead, Tin, and other mineralls. The horses here are much
commended for their courage, and goodness. Nancaeum. long 28. g. 45 m. lat:
49. g. 20 m. Clav.
The chiefer towns hereof are Nancy (Nasium of Ptolemie,) now the best town
of the Dukedom, and the ^eat of the Prince, seated upon the river Martha,
remarkable for the fate, and disaster of Charles surnamed the Fighter; the last
Duke of Burgundy of the house, or name of Valois, overthrown, and slain here
in a memorable battle by the ioinct arms of Re^ner, Fanum D. Nicolai.
Duke of Lorraine, and of the Switzers. S. Nicolas upon the same river;
founded, and occasioned through the superstitious worship of some pretended
relics of S. Nicolas, sometimes bishop of Mira in Lycia in the lesser Asia,
preserved here, and thronged unto from all parts with great devotion. Tullum
long. 27. g. 11. m. lat. 48. g. 39. m. Market.
Toal (Tullum of Ptolomie, and Ciuitas Leucorum, and Tullo of Antoninus) a
Bishops sea, and a town imperial, seated upon the river Moselle. The country
lying about this town, and Nancy were the Leuci of Strabo, Ptolomie, and
Antoninus, the Leuci Liberi of Pliny. Metz (Diuodurum of Ptolomie, Metis. long.
25. g. 30. m. lat. 27. g. 30. m. Clav. 27. g. 40. m. lon 49. g 9. m. lat.
Market.
and Tacitus, and Diuodurum, Metis, and Ciuitas Mediomatricum of Antoninus) the
royal seat sometimes of the French kings of Austrasia, now a city Imperial;
and a Bishops sea; rising in a spacious, and pleasant plain at the confluence
of the rivers Mosselle, and Sora. The ancient inhabitants of the neighboring
country were the Mediomatrices of Strabo* and Ptolemie, the Mediomatrici of
Pliny, and Tacitus. Verdun (Civitas Veredonensium of Antoninus) a town
Imperial, and a Bishops sea, seated upon the river Meuse. These three last
towns have of late years been surprised by Henry the second, and the
Frenchmen; detained now by this means, and lopped off from the Dutch Empire,
and held under the French subjection. The rest of the country is in a manner
wholly subject to the Dukes of Lorraine. The language of the inhabitants is the
French.

These three countries, although held of the Empire, yet at this day come not
to the Diets, neither obey the Edicts, and authority hereof; governed by their
princes in nature of sovereign, and absolute states, and in regard of their
language by the most accounted French.

THE DIOCESE OF TRIER. Diocesis Treverensis.

EXtended along the course of the Moselle from the confines of Lorraine unto
the great river of the Rhijn; bounded upon the other sides with Lutzenburg, and
Westreich. The country is rather pleasant, then fruitful, hilly, and full of
woods, rich chiefly in minerals, especially of Iron, and lead. The more
fruitful parts are about the town of Trier, and near unto the Rhijn. The
more wild, and barren lie toward Lorraine, and Lutzenburg. The air for
those transmarine parts is very close, and rainie, moistened by continual fogs,
and vapors, ascending from the shady, wet, and vndreyned woodlands, and hills
hereof. Chiefer towns here are Sarbrucken (Pons Sarvix of Antoninus,) a town
Imperial, seated upon the river Sar near unto the meetings thereof with the
Moselle, and the border of Lorraine. Trier (Colonia Treuerorum of Tacitus,
Augusta of Mela, Augusta Treuerorum of Ptolemie, Treueris Lon. 26. g. Lat. 49.
g. 30. m. Clav.
Augusta Libera of Pliny, Treueris of Saluianus, and Ciuitas Treuerorum of
Antoninus, the Metropolis then of the first Belgica, and residence of the Vicar
General of Gaul,) seated upon the Moselle. It is now an Archbishops sea, and
the chief town of the country, subject to the Bishops. Veldentz. Tr^rbach.
Ceel. Beilstein; all standing upon the same river of Moselle. Confluentes and
Confluentia. Lon. 27. g. 30. m Lat. 50. g. 30. m. Clav.
Cobolentz. (Legio Prima Traiana of Ptolemie, and Confluentes of Antoninus)
seated at the meeting of the river Rhijn, and the Moselle. The town is
populous, and fairly built, belonging to the Electours of Triers. The country
about it is very pleasant, and fertile. Upon the other side of the Rhijn
stands, mounted upon the top of an high hill, the strong Castle of
Ernbretstein, subject to the Bishops, and commanding the town, and river.
Boppart (Baudobrica of Antoninus, and Bodobrica of the Notitia, after Bir^ius
one of the 50 Castles erected by Drusus upon the Rhijn, occasioning the town)
situated upon the Rhijn. Meien. Arburg in the particular country of Eysell. The
ancient inhabitants hereof were the famous Treveri of Caesar, Tacitus,
Ptolemie, and others. The country is subject to the Archbishops, and Electours
of Trier.

THE BISHOPPRICK OF LVICK. Diocesis Leodiensis.

BOunded upon the East with the countries of Gulick, and Limburg; upon the
South with Lutzenburg, and Namur; and upon the West, and North with Brabant.
The country is very healthy, and pleasant, called by a common proverb, the
Paradise of Priests, for such are the Lords thereof, and in regard of the
great number there of Monasteries, and religious persons, no small part of the
inhabitants. The more champian, and fruitful parts are those toward the
North, and Brabant, stored with corn, and all other necessary provision, wines
excepted, which here grow but in few places. The Southern, lying toward
France; and Lutzenburg, are more barren, swelling with hills, and shady
Forests, the remainders of the great Ardenne, abounding chiefly with
Mineralls, especially of Marble of sundry sorts, Sea-coale, and Iron of
exceeding hardness. Here are reckned 25 walled towns, and 1700 Villages,
having Churches. Places of chiefer note are Dinant upon the Meuse, and borders
of Hainault. Huy upon the same river toward Namur. Leodium. Lon. 22. g. Lat.
50. g. 50. m. Clav.
Luick pleasantly seated amongst sundry streams, and rivulets, parts of the
Meuse, wat'ring the many streets hereof; the seat, and residence of the
Bishops, and the chief town of the country. The city is fair, open, and
large, containing four Italian miles in compass, and some 32 parishes. The
Churches here for their number, riches, and beauty excel all others in both
kingdoms of France, and Germany, the Cathedral whereof is dedicated to S.
Lambert, the patron of the city; whose Canons are the Bishops Counselors,
all nobly descended, Doctors, or Licentiats, Ecclesiastical, and partly
Secular, whereof these later may marry. Here are besides 8 Collegiate Churches,
endowed with great revenues, besides almost infinite Religious houses, and
Monasteries, wherewith the town seems in a manner almost wholly to be
peopled. Here also yet flourishes an ancient University, wherein nine sons of
Kings, 24 of Dukes, and 29 of Earls are reported at one time to have been
students. Traiectum ad Mosam. ^
Mastreich upon the Meuse. Of this town only the one half lies in Luick; the
rest in Brabant. Peer. Bissen. Hasselt upon the river Demer. Horck. S. Truden.
Borckloe. Tongeren (civitas Tungrorum of Ptolemie.) Here flourished in the time
of the Romans an ancient Bishops sea; after the invasion, and spoil of
Attilas, and the Huns, (by whom the town was sacked, and destroyed) in the
year 498 by S. Servatius removed unto Mastreich; afterward in the year 713
by S. Hubert unto Luick, where now it rests. Borckworm. Francimont. Buillon,
an ancient castle, mounted upon the top of an high hill, whereof sometimes was
named that famous Godfrey of Buillon Duke of Lorraine, and the first of the
Latins king of Jerusalem. The ancient inhabitants were the Eburones of
Caesar, and Strabo, whose name yet seems to be preserved in a little village
called Ebure, distant about a Dutch mile from Luick. The country is wholly
subject in matters both temporal and ecclesiastical, to the Bishops of Luick.
The language hereof is the Wallon, a corrupt kind of French.

THE LAND OF GVLICK. Territorium Iuliacense.

THe bounds hereof are upon the West Luick, and Gelderlandt; upon the South the
Land of Colen; upon the East Colen, and the Earldom of Murs; and upon the
North Clevelandt. The air here is healthy, and pleasant; and the soil
fruitful, rich in come, and pasturages, yet rough, and woody in some places,
endented with the branches of the forest Ardenne. Chiefer towns are Dueren
upon the Roer. Gulick (Iuliacum of Antoninus) seated upon the same river,
Iuliacum. lon. 27. g. 30. m. Lat. 52. g. Cla.
the chief of the country. Ercklens. Dalem. Berchen upon the river Erp. The
ancient inhabitants hereof were the Menapij of Ptolemy, Pliny, and Strabo;
with part of the Eburones.

CLEVELAND. Cli^ia.

IT has upon the South Gulick, Murs, Colen, and Bergen; upon the West
Gelderlandt; upon the North the Earldom of Zutphen; and upon the East
Westphalen. The soil is like unto Gulick-land, plain, healthie, pleasant, and
fruitful in corn, and pasturages. Chiefer towns are A^gerot. Dusburgum.
Duisburg. Emmerick. Orsoy. Burick. Wesel. Santen (Castra Vetera of Tacitus,
and Vetera civitas of Ptolemie.) Reess. Griet. Embrick. and Griethusen: all
situated upon the Rhijn. Nere hereunto, and the frontires of Gelderlandt the
river of the Rhijn, entering upon lower grounds, and to big for one channel,
divides it self into two branches, the Rhijn, and the Wael. Within the land
Cleve, the chief town of the country. Calcar. Goch upon the river Niers.
Clivia. lon. 29. g. 35. m. lat. 51. g. 58. m. Clav.
Gennep. The right of the country with the Land of Gulick, Bergen; and Marck
belongs now to the Princes of Brandenburg, and Nuburg, the heirs general of
the house of Cleve; possessed by means of their quarrels for the greatest part
by the arms of the confederate states, and of the princes of Burgundy, Lords
of the Low countries, pretending the defense, and aid of their sides; the
Archdukes pretending for Nuburg, and the states for Brandenburg.

THE DIOCESE OF COLEN. Diocesis Coloniensis.

THis lies along the left shore of the Rhijn; extended from the country of
Trier upon the South thereof unto the Earldom of Murs, and Clevelandt upon
the North; confining on the other sides with Gulick-landt upon the West; and
with the Dukedom of Bergen upon the East, divided herefrom by the Rhijn.
Towns here of chiefer note are Nuys (Novesium V. Cor. Tac. Hist. lib. 4.
Antonini Itinerarium; Am: Marcellini lib. 18. Nouesium. 29. lon. 52. lat.
Mercat-Colonia lon. 27. g. 40. m. Lat. 51. g. Clav.
of Tacitus, and Antoninus, and Nivesia of Ammianus Marcellinus) situated upon
the river Erp, near unto the confluence thereof, and the Rhijn. Colen upon the
left shore of the Rhijn (Colonia Agrippinensis of Pliny, Agrippinensis of
Ptolemie, Colonia Agrippinensis, and Oppidum Sed and Agrippina, quo vim suam
socijs nationibus ostentaret, in oppidum Vbiorum, in quo genita erat,
Veteranos, coloniamque; deduci imperat, cui nomen inditum ex vocabulo ipsius.
Acforte acciderat, vt eam gentem Rheno transgressam avus Agrippa in fidem
acciperet C. Taciti Annalium lib. 12. Bonna 29. lon. 51 lat. Market.
Vbiorum of Tacitus, Colonia Agrippina, and Agrippinensis of Antoninus, the
Metropolis then of the Province of Germania Secunda, and a famous Colony of the
Romans, brought hither in the reign of the Emperor Tiberius by Agrippina,
daughter to Caesar Germanicus, and wife to the Emperor Claudius, occasioning
the surname.) It is now an Archbishops sea, and a town Imperial, rich, large,
populous, and every way magnificent, containing some five mile in circuit. The
Cathedral Church of S. Peter is of a vast, and stupendous greatness, but rude,
and imperfect. Besides this the city contains (dedicated to religious uses)
some 9 parish Churches, 10 Collegiate, 30 Chapels of our Lady, 37 Monasteries
of both sexes; and 19 Hospitals* Bon upon the same shore of the Rhijn, (Bonna
of Ptolemie, and V. Cor: Tac: Histor. lib. 4. and 5.
Castra Bonnensia, and Bonna of Tacitus, then the wintring camp of the first
Roman Legion.) It is now the ordinary seat of the Electour, and Archbishop of
Colen, situated in a very fruitful, and pleasant part of the country. Zulp
(Tolbiacum of Tacitus, V. C. Taciti Histor: lib. 4. Antonini Augusti
Itinerarium.
and Antoninus,) memorable for the great victory of the Frenchmen obtained
against the Almans under Clovys their fifth king; and the death of Ermenfridus,
the last king of the Thuringians, treacherously here slain by Theodoric, king
of Austrasia. It is now a mean village. The more ancient inhabitants of the
country were the Vbij of Caesar, Strabo, and Tacitus, a more peaceable German
nation, in the time of Caesar confederate with the Romans; afterward, being
vexed with the wars, and injuries of the Suevians, for their more quiet
dwelling drawn unto the hither side of the Rhijn, and placed here by Agrippa,
son in law to the Emperor Augustus; honored with the birth of Agrippina,
wife to the Emperor Claudius, and mother unto Nero.

THE LOWER PALATINATE. Palatinatus Inferior.

IT is extended on both sides of the river of the Rhijn, bounding upon the
North with the river Meine, and Franconia; upon the East with Franconia, and
the Dukedom of Wirtenberg; upon the South with Elsatz, and the Marquisate of
Baden; and upon the West with the Dukedom of Zweibruck. The country before
those late unhappy wars betwixt the Emperor Ferdinand the second, and
Frederick the fifth, Count Palatine of the Rhijn (whereby it has been much
ruinated) was accounted the most fruitfuil, and pleasant through the whole
Germany, commended for its plenty of excellent Rhenish wines. Moguntia. lon.
27. g. 30. m. lat. 50. g. 30. m Clav.
Cheifer towns are Mentz (Mocontiacum of Ptolemie, Mogontiacum of Tacitus,
Mogontiacus, and Mogontiacum of Ammianus Marcellinus, and Civitas
Maguntiacensis of Antoninus, the Metropolis then of the Province Germania
Prima,) now an Archbishops sea, situated upon the left shore of the Rhijn
against the confluence thereof, and the Meine. The town is large, stretched in
a great length along the Rhijn, thick and fair built, but further off from
the river not so well inhabited. It is subject to the Archbishops. Here was
first invented the noble art of printing by John Gutenberg, knight in the year
1440, and reign of the Emperor Albert the second. Bracharac upon the same
shore of the Rhijn. Ingelheim upon the same shore. Oppenheim (Ruffiniana of
Ptolemie) upon the same shore. Wormacia lon. 28. g. lat. 49 g. 45. m. Clav.
Worms (Borbetomagus of Ptolemie, and Bormitomagus, civitas Vangionensis, and
Wormensis of Antoninus) now a Bishops sea, and town Imperial, seated upon the
same shore of Rhijn. The country hereof were the Vangiones of Pliny, Spira.
lon. 27. g 40. m. lat 49 g. 20. m. Clav.
and Ptolemie. Spire upon the same side of the Rhijn (Naeomagus of Ptolemie,
Noviomagus, Civitas Nemetum, and Spira of Antoninus,) a town Imperial, and a
Bishops sea. Here now is held the Imperial Court, more anciently still
following the Emperors; in the reign of the Emperor Maximilian the first
fixed at Francfurt; afterward at Worms; and now lastly in the year 1530, and
reign of the Emperor Charles the fifth translated hither. The more ancient
inhabitants of the country hereof were the Nemeti of Ptolemie, the Nemetes of
Pliny, and Antoninus. Neapolis Nemetum.
Alzaei. Neustat: Prefectureships. Franckendal. Keisers-luter. Upon the further
side of the Rhijn Manheim, a town, and strong fort at the confluence of the
rivers Neccar, and the Rhijn. Ladeburg upon the Neccar; subject to the Bishops
of Spire. Heidelberg Heidelberga. lon. 28. g. lat. 49 g. 35. m. Clav.
seated in a bottom amongst hills upon the right shore of the river Neccar,
the chief town of the country subject to the Paltzgraues; before those late
troubles renowned with a famous University founded in the year 1336 by Rupert
Count Palatine of the Rhijn. In the Castle hereof, situated upon the side of an
hill without the town, the Paltzgraues ordinarily resided. Neighboring
hereupon is the great forest of Otten-waldt; extended Northwards in breadth
from hence, and the Neccar unto the river of the Maine, and in length Eastwards
from the mountainous way leading to Francfurt, called Bergstras, unto the river
Tauber, and Franckenlandt, peopled with many lesser towns, and villages.
Mosbach, a Prefectureship, or Bailliage upon the Neccar nere the borders of
Wirtenberg. The inhabitants hereof in the parts lying without the Rhijn, or in
Gaul the Nemetes, and Vangiones, with part of the Treveri. Within the Rhijn,
or in the part of ancient Germany were the Intuergi of Ptolemie after
Pirckhermerus. The states commanding here are the Archbishops of Mentz, the
Bishops of Spire, and Worms, the towns of Worms, and Spire, and the Electours,
and Paltzgraues of the Rhijn, to whom the greatest part is subject.

ELSATZ. Alsatia.

THe bounds hereof are upon the North the Lower Palatinate; upon the West the
Mountain Vauge, dividing it from Lorraine, and the Free County of Burgundy;
upon the South Sungow, severed there from by the river Thur; and upon the East
Brisgow, and the Marquisate of Baden; parted by the Rhijn. The country scarce
yields to the best in Germany for pleasure, and fertility, abounding with
corn, wines, and sundry sorts of delicious fruits. It is divided into the
Upper, and the Lower Elsatz. Chiefer towns in the Lower Elsatz are
Weissenburg, a town Imperial, bordering upon the Lower Palatinate. Hagenoa.
Tabernae.
Hagenaw, a town Imperial. Zabern (Tabernae of Antoninus) now the place of
residence, and the chief seat of justice of the Bishops of Strasburg. Rufacum.
Argentora^tum. lon. 27. g. 50. m. lat: 48. g. 44. m. Clav.
Rufach upon the river Ombach. It belongs also to the Bishops of Strasburg.
Strasburg (Argentoratum, Legio octaua Augusta, of Ptolemie, and Argentoratum,
and Ciuitas Argentoracensium of Antoninus,) now a Bishops sea, and a city
Imperial, situated upon the rivers Brusch, and Ill, near unto their
confluence with the Rhijn. The town is of great state, rich, populous, large,
and very strongly fortified, furnished with a well stored armory, and with
public Garners, and Wine-cellars against dearth, and distresses of War. The
steeple of the Cathedral Church hereof for curious workmanship, and its
stupendous height surpasses all others in the Christian world, containing 574
foot, or 95 fathoms, and four foot. In the Upper Elsatz Turchheim. S.
Gregory's Munster. Keiserburg. Rosheim: all towns Imperial. Selestadium. lon.
28. g. 6. m. lat, 48. g. 22. m. Clav.
Schlestat (Elcebus of Ptolemie, and Antoninus, the station of the 19 Legion,)
a town Imperial upon the river Ill. Colmar upon the river Lauch near unto
the Ill, a town Imperial; built out of the ruins of the city Argentuaria of
Ptolemie, Colmaria lon. 30. g. lat. 48. g. Market.
and Antoninus, situated sometimes upon the Ill, where now stands Horburg,
destroyed by Attilas, and the Huns. Ensisheim upon the Ill (Vruncis of
Antoninus, the station of the tenth Roman Legion.) It is now the Parliament, or
supreme court of Judicature of the Archdukes of Austria for the parts
belonging unto them in Elsatz, Sungow, and Brisgow. The ancient inhabitants of
Elsatz were the Tribochi of Strabo, or the Triboci of Pliny; with parts of the
Rauraci, and Nemeti. The upper Elsatz (the Imperial towns excepted) belongs
wholly in a manner to the Archdukes of Austria. The Lower to the Bishops of
Strasburg. Both challenge the title of Lantgraues of Elsatz.

SVNGOW.
BOunded upon the North with Elsatz, and the river Thur. Upon the West with the
Free country of Burgundy; upon the South with the Canton of Basil of the
Switzers; and upon the East with the Rhijn, and Brisgow. The country is
fruitful; rich in corn, and wine, whereof it affords good plenty unto the
Switzers, Schwartzwaldt, and other more barren neighboring parts. Chiefer
towns are Mulhausen upon the river Ill, a town Imperial, confederate with
the Switzers. S. Amarin. Otmarsen. Tha^^. Altkirck, near unto the head of the
river Ill. Sattenriet. Befort. Rosenfels. Masm^nster. P^irt. Sanh^ym. It
belongs for the greatest part to the Princes of the house of Austria. The
ancient iuhabitants were part of the Rauraci of Ptolemy, Pliny, and Antoninus.

The countries hitherto described were all contained in Gaul.

SCHWABEN. Suevia.

THe name, and account hereof is confined toward the North with the Lower
Palatinate, and Franconia; upon the West with the Rhijn, dividing it from
Elsatz, and Sungow; upon the South with the Rhijn, and Switzerlandt, and the
Alps of Tirol; and upon the East with Bavaria, and the river Lech. The whole
comprehends Brisgow, the Marquisate of Baden, the Dukedom of Wirtenberg, and
the Proper Schwaben.

BRISGOW.
BOunded upon the West with the Rhijn from the Upper Elsatz; and Sungow; upon
the South with the Rhijn from the Canton of Basil of the Switzers; upon the
East with the mountain Schwartzwaldt, and the Dukedom of Wirternberg; and
upon the North with the Marquisate of Baden. The soil yields plenty of come,
and of very excellent wines. The towns here of better note are Brisach (Mons
Brisiacus of Antoninus, afortresse then of the Romans, opposed against the
Almanes, and seated upon the left shore of the Rhijn in the province of Gaul,
the course of the river being since that time turned to the other side.) The
town is fair; populous, and strong; standing castle-wise on a round hill upon
the right shore of the Rhijn. Friburgum. long. 28. g. lat. 48. g. 1. m. Cla.
Friburg upon the river Triess, and sundry other lesser streams descending
from the mountainous ridge of Schwartzwaldt, under which it lies; a well
frequented University, and the chief town of the country, builded by
Betchtold, Duke of Zeringen in the year 1112, and in the reign of the
Emperor Henry the fifth, and called thus from the rich silver mines, which the
neighboring country then very plentifully yielded. About half a Dutch mile
from hence are yet seen the ruins of the castle of Zeringen, whereof the
ancient Dukes thus called were entitled. Geng^nbach, a town Imperial, upon
the river Kintzich. Offenbach, a town Imperial, upon the same river, named
thus from one Offa, an Englishman, the Apostle of those parts of Schwaben. Zel
in Hamerspach, sometimes Imperial, now subject to the Marqueses of Baden. The
greatest part of the country belongs to the Archdukes of Austria.

THE COUNTRY OF BADEN. Ditio Badensis.

COntinued with Brisgow, beginning at Mortnaw, lying upon the South hereof; and
bounded on the other sides, upon the West with the Rhijn from the Lower Elsatz;
upon the North with the Lower Palatinate; and upon the East with
Schwartz-waldt, and the Dukedom of Wirtenberg. The country is pleasant; and
the ^oile fruitful, unless in the more hilly, and ruder parts of
Scwartz-waldt. Chiefer towns are Baden naming the country, and called thus
from the hot medicinable bathes thereof. Turlach. Gerspach in Schwartzwaldt.
Liebenzel in the same mountainous tract, where are also hot medicinable
springs. Pfortheim, adioining to the great wood Hagenscheis, part of
Schwartz-waldt. The country is subject to the Marqueses of Baden.

THE COVNTRIE OF WIRTENBERG. Wirtenberge^sis Ducatus.

Containing all that large portion of Schwaben, lying in a round circle about
the river Neccar, and extended in a manner from the head of that river unto
the Palatinate; bounded with the Palatinate upon the North; upon the West with
Brisgow, and the Marquisate of Baden; and upon the other sides with the Proper
Schwaben. In this country lies the greatest part of the hilly forest of
Schwartz-waldt, confining the same, and Brisgow, and Baden. The soil for this
cause is much different in quality. The parts of Schwartz-wa^^^, and the Alps
of Schwaben (which is an other mountainous tract, branching from, and continued
from Schwartz-waldt, and the head of the Danow along the course of that river
unto the town of Vlm,) that is all the South, and West parts are barren,
stony, and asperous; yet affording good pasturage, and in many places plenty of
corn by the industry of the inhabitants, but yiedling no wines. The like
affected are the Northern toward Franconia, and the Lower Palatinate,
coasting along the river Cochen, ouerrun with the branches of Schwartz-wald.
The more happy are the middle parts about the Neccar; plain, pleasant, and
abundantly fruitful. Cheifer towns are Wimpsen. Hailbrun; towns imperial;
seated upon the Neccar. Lauffen upon the Neccar. Cansta^ upon the Neccar. Nere
hereunto upon the top of an high hill stands the castle of Wirtenberg, the
seat sometimes of the Earls of Wirtenberg, occasioning the name of the
country. Nierting upon the Neccar. Tubinga long. 30. g. 30. m. lat. 48. g. 40.
m. Clav.
Tubingen a neat, and rich town upon the Neccar, where florisheth an
University, founded by Duke Everard the first. Reutling a town Imperial.
Aurach. Weil a town imperial. Kirchen. Gepping a town Imperial upon the
river Vils. Schorndorff upon the river Ree^^ss, where are hot bathes, whose
waters are bitter. Stutgard, Stutgard. lon. 31. g. lat. 49 g. Market.
seated nere unto the Neccar, in a fruitful, and pleasant country. The town
is fair, rich, and populous, the chief of the country, and the seat of the
Prince. In the ruder parts of Schwartzwald Nagolt upon the river, thus called.
Wiltpurg. Kalb: both upon the same river. Newnburg upon the river En^z. Wildbad
upon the same river in a solitary, and desert tract, occasioned by the hot
medicinable bathes thereof, much resorted unto from all parts. Dornstett.
Schiltach. The whole country (the towns Imperial excepted) belongs to the
Dukes of Wirtenberg. The ancient inhabitants seem to have been the Charitini
of Ptolemy.

THE PROPER SCHWABEN. Suevia.

BOunded upon the West with the Dukedom of Wirtenberg; upon the North with
Franco^i^; upon the South with Switzerlandt, and the Rhijn; and upon the East
with the river Lech, and Bava^ia. The country is mountainous, and hilly,
overrun with the branches of the Alps, and Schwartz-waldt; very populous
notwithstanding, full of good towns, and by the industry of the inhabitants
yielding sufficient store of all necessary provision. The more fruitful parts
are Hegow, and the shore of the Lake of Constance, affording plenty of good
wi^es, whereof they other in regard of their height, and colder lyeing are in a
manner destitute. Towns here of better note are Rotweil, a town Imperial, now
confederate with the Switzers; situated upon the river Neccar, near unto the
head thereof. Villingen upon the Brigen, a river falling into the Danow. The
town belongs to the princes of Austria. Not far off stands the castle of
Furstenberg, whereof the Earls of Furstenberg are entitled, Vlma. lon. 32. g.
30. m. lat. 48. g. 20. m. Clav.
princes of the Empire. Vlm a city Imperial, seated at the meetings of the
rivers Iler, Blave, and the Danow. The town is of great state, large rich, and
strongly fortified against hostile invasion, containing 6 miles in compass.
Here the Danow begins first to be navigable. Betwixt this town, and
Schwartz-waldt along the course of the river Danow lie the Suevian. Alps,
named thus from their white color, which they show a far off; distinguished
after Munster into the many particular na^es of the Alb, where stand the towns
of Rotenburg, and Hechingen, with the castle of Zolle^^ S^her, called thus from
a town of that name upon the Danow: Albuch: and Hertz-feldt, where are the
castles Hohenberg, and Kockenberg. Wendt, a town Imperial at the meetings of
the river Danow, and War^^^, (...), a town Imperial upon the river Warnitz.
Hall seated on both sides of the river Cochen in a deep vallie amongst steep,
and high mountains, a town Imperial, named, and occasioned from the
Salt-wiches thereof. Alen, a town Imperial, upon the river Cochen. The ^illy
country hereabout, and along the Cochen is by Pickhermerus accounted part of
the Mountains Ab^obi of Ptolemie ^op^ingen, No^linga. lon. 33. g. lat. 49. g.
Market.
a town Imperial, upon the river Egra. No^lingen upon the river Egra in a
low, and moorish part of the country, a town Imperial, and a well traded
emporie. Gmundt, a town Imperial upon the river Rheemss. Upon the other side
of the Danow betwixt that river, Augusta Vindelicorum. l. 32. g. 30. m. lat.
48. g. 20. m. Clav.
and the Alps A^spurg. (Augusta Vindelicorum of Ptolemy, and Augusta
Vindelicum of Antoninus, named thus from the rivers Vinda, and Lycus, now the
Werd, and the Lech, upon which is situated, and from the Emperor Augustus
Caesar, by whom it was made a colony of the Romans,) now a Bishops sea, and a
town Imperial of great magnificence, and state, rich, populous, and strongly
fortified, containing after Munster some nine miles in circuit. Kauffbeurn,
Campodunu^ lon. 33. g. lat. 48. g. Market. Memminga. lon. 33. g. lat. 48. g.
Market.
a town Imperial. Kempten, (Campodunum of Strabo, and Antoninus) a town
Imperial. Memmingen, (Drusomagus of Ptolemy,) a town Imperial, populous,
rich, and well traded, containing three miles in circuit. Leukirch, a town
Imperial. Wangen (Nemauia of Antoninus,) a town Imperial. Rauenspurg.
Bibrach. Buchaw upon the lake Federsee. Pfullendorff. Yssna: all towns
imperial. These from Augspurg lie in the part, called Algow, contained after
Munster within the rivers Lech, and the Danow, the Alps, and the Lake of
Constance; a country hilly, cold, and ba^ren, whose inhabitants live chiefly
upon manufactures. Vberl^^gen, a town Imperial upon the (...) of Constance
Merspurg upon the same lake, belonging to the Bishop of Constance, his ordinary
seat, and place of residence. Lindaw, a town Imperial, seated Iland-like
within the same lake, wherewith it is almost round encompassed; joined to the
continent with a long bridge, or causey of 290 pac^s. Buchorn upon the same
Lake, a town Imperial. Arbon upon the same lake (Arbor ^oelix of Strabo, and
Antoninus.) Constantia. lon. 28. g. 30. m. lat. 47. g. 30. m. Clav.
It belongs to the Bishops of Constance. Constance seated upon both sides of
the Rhijn, where it issues forth of the lake, a Bishops sea, a town
Imperial, and a rich, and flourishing empory. The Nobility here, as in other
cities of Germany, by a sullen, and proud disdain converse not with the
tradesmen, or burgers, living upon their rents, and marrying, and keeping
company a part; a cause of much faction, jealousy, and hatred betwixt the
sides. The lake named from hence is otherwise called Boden see by the Dutch
from the castle (...), and by Pliny more anciently Lacus Acronius, and
Brigan^^us; made by the (...) of the Rhijn, and other lesser rivers, Lacus
Acronius.
falling hereinto, and containing about three Dutch miles in breadth, eight in
length, and in its greatest depth at Merspurg some 600 yards, Lacus Venetus.
or 300 fathoms. Below is the lake Venetus of Pliny, made also by the Rhijn,
and now named by the Dutch the lake of Cel from a town of that name,
appertaining to the house of Austria. Schaffhuisen upon the right shore of the
Rhijn, a town Imperial, confederate now with the Switzers, and reckoned
amongst their 13 Cantons. Here all the vessels descending down the Rhijn from
the Lakes of Cel, and Constance are necessarily vnladed, the Rhijn some few
miles below in regard of the dreadful falls, and cataracts thereof denying all
further passage; together with the Monastery here of S. Savior (founded by the
Earls of Nellenburg in the reign of the Emperor Henry the third) occasioning
the beginning, name, and increase of the town. The part of the country here is
named Hegow by the natives; populous, fruitful, and contained after Munster
within the Rhijn, the Danow, and the Lake of Cel. Near to Schwartz-wald,
Waldshut, upon the right shore of the Rhijn; in Kle^gow, a cold, barren, and
mountainous region, stored chiefly with woods, the best revenue of the
inhabitants. Schwaben is partly subject to the towns Imperial, before
mentioned, and partly to the Archdukes of Austria, the Bishops of Augspurg, and
Constance, and the Earls of Ot^ngen, Helfestain, Furstenberg, and other lesser
Seculars. The ancient inhabitants of the parts, lying betwixt the Danow, and
the Alps, were the Brixantes, S^anitae, and Calucones, parts of the Rhaeti of
Ptolemie.

BAVARIA.
EXtended on both sides of the (...), and bounding upon the West with Schwaben,
and Franconia; upon the North with Voitlandt; upon the South with the Alps of
Tirol; and upon the East with Bohemia, and Austria. It contains the
Palatinate, and the Dukedom of Bava^ia.

THE PALATINATE OF BAVARIA. Palatinatus Superior.

CAlled otherwise the Upper Palatinate for a distinction from that of the
Rhijn, named the Lower Palatinate^: and likewise Nortgow from the more
Northern situation thereof, compared with the Dukedom. It is bounded upon the
West with Schwaben, and Franconia; upon the North with Voitlandt; upon the East
with Bohemia; and upon the South with the Dukedom of Bavaria. The country is
rough, and hilly, rich chiefly in mineralls of iron. Norimberga. long. 31, g.
30. m. lat. 49 g. 30. m. Clav.
Chiefer towns are Nurnberg, a city Imperial, situated in a square form
upon the river Pegnitz, near unto the borders of Franconia, in a wild, sandy,
and barren country (part sometimes of the Forest Hercynian,) and named thus
from the neighboring people of Noricum, in that fierce invasion of Attilas,
and the Huns, and the waine of the Western Roman Empire retiring within the
safer shelters hereof, and beginning, and occasioning the town. The city is
of great state, encompassed with a triple wall, strongly guarded with all sorts
of munition, peopled with industrious inhabitants (especially for iron works,
the inuenters of sundry new excellent mechanics,) and by the opportunity of the
situation thereof, lying in the heart of Germany, and Europe, greatly resorted
unto by Merchants from all parts, the very seat of negotiation, and shop of
warlike provision, governed wholly by the nobility, and containing eight miles
in circuit. Weissenburg bordering upon Schwaben, a town Imperial. Eistet upon
the river Altmul, a Bishops sea. Kelha^^ at the confluence of the rivers
Altmul, and Danow. Amberga, Ion. 32. g. 40. m. lat. 49. g. 26. m. Clav.
Amberg upon the river Vils, the best town belonging to the Pal^^graues,
enriched chiefly by the commodity of iron, dug out of the neighboring
hills, and partly raw, and wrought into sundry sorts of vtensils, convaied in
great abundance unto the parts adjoining. Napurg upon the river Nab. Pfreimbt
upon the same river, the residence, and chief town of the Lan^graues of
Luchtenberg. Further up mounted upon an hill is the castle of Luchtenberg,
whereof the Lan^graues thus named are entitled. Sultzbach. Neuburg upon the
river Swartzach, whereof are styled the Princes Palatine of Neuburg of the
house of the Electours of the Rhijn. Cham upon the river Regen, neighboring to
Bohenia. The greatest part of the country belongs to the house of the Count
Palatines of the Rhijn. The more ancient inhabitants were the Narisci of
Tacitus; afterward the Boioarians, or Bavarians, their first known habitation.

THE DVKEDOME OF BAVARIA. Bavaria.

BOunded upon the North with the Upper Palatinate; upon the West with Schwaben,
and the river Lech; upon the with South the Earldom of Tirol; and upon the
East with the Dukedom of Austria. It is divided into the Higher, and the Lower
Bavaria. The higher part, adioining to the Alps, is hilly, cold, and barren,
yielding no wines, and not much corn; serving rather for pasturage, and the
fatting of swine, feeding upon the wild fruits hereof. The Lower Bavaria is
more fertile, and better inhabited; especially the parts lying near unto the
rivers Danow and Iser. The whole is very thick with woods, seeming one
continuate forest* some remainders of the old Hercynian. Ingolstadium. long.
32. g. 10. m. lat. 48. g. 40. m. Clav.
The chiefer towns in the Lower Bavaria are Ingolstat upon the Danow, a noted
University, founded in the year 1471. by Lewis Duke of Bavaria. Regenspurg at
the confluence of the rivers Danow, Nab, and Regen, the seat sometimes of the
more ancient Dukes of Bavaria; Ratisbona. lo. 32. g. 15. m. lat. 48. g. 59. m.
Clav.
now a Bishops sea, and a town Imperial. The city is fair, and large,
beautified with an infinite number of Churches, Chappells, and other places
dedicated to religious uses, whose Apostle, and first Bishop is reported to
have been S. Mark, Disciple to S. Paul. Here of later years the general Diets
of the Empire have more ordinarily been kept. The bridge here over the Danow
is the greatest upon both rivers hereof, and the Rhijn; containing 470 paces in
length* Patavium, Ion. 33. g. 50. m. lat. 48. g. 40. m. Clav.
Passaw (Boiodurum of Ptolemie, and Antoninus, and Batava of the author of
Notitia, then a garrison town of the Romans, the station of a Cohort of the
Batavians,) now a Bishops sea, seated at the meetings of the rivers Danow, Inn,
and Ils. The city through the benefit, and commodity hereof is rich, fair,
and well traded, divided into three towns, severed by the rivers; of Inhstadt,
situated upon the right shore of the river Inn; of Passaw lying in a corner, or
wedge of land betwixt the left shore of the of the Inn, and the Danow; and of
Ihlstadt, lying on the farther side of the Danow at the confluence thereof, and
of the river Ils. Upon the hill of S. George, adjoining unto Ihlstadt, stands
the castle Oberhusen, the seat of the Bishop of Passaw, Landishutum. lon. 31.
g. lat. 48. g. 20. m. Clav.
the Lord of the town. Landshut, a fair town upon the Iser, seated in a most
fruitful, and pleasant part of the country. Freisingen mounted upon an hill,
under the which runs the river Iser; a Bishops sea. Monachium. Ion. 32. g.
50. m. lat. 48. g. Clav.
In the Upper Bavaria Munchen upon the Iser, the seat of the Dukes of Bavaria.
The city is fair, large, and populous, enjoying a most sweet, and happy
situation amongst woods, gardens, and rivulets. In the Dukes palace is a
library of 11 thousand volumes, the greatest part whereof are manuscripts.
Landsperg nearer unto the Alps of Tirol. The most part of the country is
subject to the Dukes of Bavaria. The more ancient inhabitants were the
Vindelici of Florus, and others.

THE BISHOPRIC OF SALTZBVRG. Episcopatus Saltzburgensis.

LYing amidst the Alps Iuliae; and confined with the Dukedomes of Bavaria,
Austria, and Karnten, and the Earldom of Tirol. The soil is dry, rockie,
and barren (some fresher vallyes excepted;) rich chiefly in minerals.
Salisburgum lon. 35. g. 40. m. lat. 47. g. 40. m. Clav.
The only town of note is Saltzburg* (Iuvavim, and Iuvavia of Antoninus, and
Iuvense of the Notitia, the mansion then, and fixed residence of part of a
Cohort of Roman soldiers, belonging to the first Legion.) It is now an
Archbishops sea, situated upon the river Saltzach; occasioning the name
thereof. The ancient inhabitants were part of the Norici Me^^^erran^i.

THE COUNTRY OF TIROL. Comitatus Tit^le^^^.

EXtended in a manner over the whole breadth of the Alps Rhaeticae, and Iuliae
(comprehending part of both,) and having upon the North-Bevaria; upon the West
the Switzers, and Grisons; upon the South Lombardie in Italy, and upon the East
the Bishopric of Saltzburg, and Marca Tri^igi^na, belonging to the Venetians.
The country is almost wholly* possessed with wild, and asperous mountains; yet
which afford many excellent valleys, scarce yielding in fruitfulnes to the best
plains, the chiefest whereof are Intal, containing 18 Dutch miles in length,
and 4. in breadth, continued along the course of the river Inn toward Bavaria;
and the Vallie of the river Adise of some. 3. Dutch miles in breadth, and about
16 in length, reaching along that stream toward Italy, and the South. The
hills abound with minerals of all kinds; chiefly of brass in Falke^stein, and
Erbstollern; and of silver at the towns of Schwatz, and Stertzingen; the
yearly revenue of which later, accruing to the prince, in the time of Cuspinian
amounted to 300 thousand crowns, belonging to the house of Austria. The
Emperor Maximilian the first in regard hereof was wont to compare this rich
province to a plain countrymans coat, to the eye course, illfavoured, and
bare, yet fresh within the folds, warm, commodious, and profitable. The Towns
here of better note are Schwatz, rich in silver mines. H^l upon the Inn,
Aeni-pons. lon 32. g 50. m. lat. 46. g. 55. m. Clav.
named thus from the Salt Wiches thereof. Inspru^^, the Parliament, and chief
town of the country (occasioned, and named thus from the passage of the
river,) seated upon the I^n amongst rivulets, meadows, corne-fields, viny
downs, and woody mountains, stored with Dear, and wilde-goates for hunting.
The town is fairly built of stone, where the Archdukes have a magnificent
palace, the ordinary seat sometimes of the Emperors Charles the fifth, and of
Ferdinand the first; amongst other princely ornaments enriched with a fair,
and well furnished armory. These lie in Intall. Stertzingen, plentiful in
silver mines, seated under the great mountain Der Brenner, lying in the way to
Italy from Augspurg. Mals nere unto the head of the river Adise. Meran. Near
hereunto stands the castle of Ti^ol* naming the country. Tridentum. lon 33.
g. 40. m. lat. 45. g. 20. m. Clav.
Trent, upon the river Adise, a Bishops sea, famous thorough the Christian
world for the late council pretended Oecumenicall, there celebrated. The
inhabitants of the town on the part toward Italy speak the Italian tongue,
on the side toward the Germans the Dutch; seated in the confines of both
provinces. Possen in the same border, called otherwise Bolgiano, and Bolsano by
the Italians. The more ancient people were parts of the Norici Mediterranei,
and of the Rhaeti Alpestres. The country for the greatest part appertains to
the Archdukes of Austria.

KARNTEN. Carinthia. Fanum. S. Viti lon. 37. lat. 47. Market. Villacum lon. 36.
g. 15. m. lat. 46. g. 8. m. Clav.

SItuated amongst the Alps Carnicae, and Iuliae, and bounded upon the West
with the Diocese of Saltzburg, and the river Saltzach; upon the North with
Austria, upon the East with Steirmarck, and the river Lavanat; and upon the
South with Krain, and the river Dra. It reaches along the course of the Dra an
hundred Italian miles in length, and in breadth betwixt the Mur, and the Dra
some 47 of the same miles. The country is rich chiefly in mineralls. Chiefer
towns are Clagnfurt near the Lake Werdsee, and the Dra. S. V^it at the (...)
of the rivers Glan, and W^nicz, the chief town. Gurck, a Bishops sea.
Freisach upon the river Olcza. Wolfsperg upon the river Lava^dt, and the
confines of Steirmarck. Lavamundt in the same border at the meetings of the
Lavandt, and the Dra, a Bishops sea. Hainburg upon the Dra. Vill^^h (Iulium
Carnicum of Ptolemie) upon the Dra. The country belongs to the Archdukes of
Austria. The more ancient inhabitants were part of the Carni, V. Claud. Ptol.
Geog. l. 3. c. 1: and Plin* not. hist. l. 3. c. 18.
of Ptolemie and Pliny, part of the Italians. Pliny names these in Venetia,
the tenth region of Italy.

KRAIN.
SEated amongst the Alps Carnicae. It has upon the North Karnten, and Cily;
upon the West Friul^, part of Italy, upon the South Istria; and upon the East
Dalmatiae, Krabbaten, and Windischlandt; extending in length from East to West
along the river Saw 120 Italian miles, and in breadth from North to South about
76 of the same miles. The soil is here rich in Corn, Wine, Oil, and all
manner of fruits; the Alps more low, and less cold, asperous, and rockie,
then are those toward the West. Chiefer towns are Laibach, upon the river
thus named (Pamportum of Strabo Ocra autem pars est Alpi^^ humillima, qua ad
Carnos itur, and per quam ab Aquileia curribus portantur merces ad locum, cui
nomen Pamportum, itinere no^ vltra 400 Stadiorum. Hinc fluvijs ad Istrum, and
adsitas ei regiones devehuntur. Pamportum enim fluvio alluitur navigabili ex
Illyrico decurrenti, and in Saum exeunti, Strabo; Geog. l. 5.
) and Deceptos credo, quoniam Argonavis flumine in mare Adriaticum descendit,
non procul Tergeste: nec jam constat quo flumine. Humeris tamen transvectam
Alps diligentiores tradu^t. Subijsse autem Istro, deinde Sao, deinde Nauporto,
^ui nomen ex ea causa est. Plin. not. hist. lib. 3. c. 18. Goricium. long. 37.
g. lat. 36. g. Market.
Nauportus of Pliny, called thus from the ship of the Argonautae, wherein was
brought the Golden fleece from Pontus; from the Euxine sea conveyed up thus
far by this river, and the Danow, and the Saw; stopped here by the bordering
mountains; and carried over land to the sea Adriaticke, whereby it was brought
back again unto Greece.) Gorecz upon the river Lusontio not far from the
Adriatic. The contry is subject to the Archdukes of Austria. The ancient
inhabitants were part of the Car^^.

STEIRMARCK.
BOunded upon the North with Austri^; upon the East with the Lower Hungary;
upon the South with Krain; and upon the West with Karnten, from the which it is
divided by the river Lavandt. The country is hilly, and mountainous, overspred
with the branches of the neighboring Alps; rich chiefly in Mineralls. A
familiar disease here amongst the inhabitants, is the Struma, or the
kings-Evill, proceeding from their more cold, and moist air, or from their
more sharp, and piercing waters, mingled with snow, descending from off their
mountains. Towns here of better note are Voitsperg, upon the river Kaynach.
The neighboring mountains of Schwanberger-Albn, lying betwixt this town, and
the Dra, yield mines of silver. Pruck upon the river Mur. Gratia. lon. 39. g.
lat. 48. g. Market.
Gratz upon the Mur, the chief town of the country. Rachelspurg upon the Mur.
Seckaw, a Bishops sea, upon the Dra near unto the confluence thereof, and the
Mur. Paetovio. lon. 39. g. lat. 47. g. Market.
Petaw (Patavium of Ptolemie, Petobio of Ammianus Marcellinus, and Paetovio of
Antoninus) upon the Dra. Lambach (Ovilabis of Antoninus) upon the Dra. warasin
beyond the Dra toward Italy. Cely (Celeia of Pliny.) The country belongs to
the Archdukes of Austria. The ancient inhabitants were the Taurisci of V.
Strab. Geog lib. 5.
Strabo, part of the Norici after the same author. They seem notwithstanding
by their situation to have been rather a part of the Pannonij.

AUSTRIA. Austria.

BOunded upon the South with Steirmarck; upon the East with Hungary, parted by
the river Rab; upon the West with Bavaria; and upon the North with Bohemia (the
mountains thereof intervening,) together with Moravia, from the which it is
divided by the river Teya. The country is pleasant, healthie, and abundantly
fruitful in corn, and very excellent Wines. Here grows likewise plenty of
Saffron, also Ginger at the foot of the Mountains near Haimburg. It is
divided by the Danow into the Higher, and the Lower Austria. Chiefer towns in
the Higher Austria are Lintz (Aredate of Ptolemie) at the confluence of the
rivers Draun, and the Danow. Ens at the meetings of the rivers Danow, and Ens.
Near hereunto (where now is Lorch) stood sometimes the town Laureacum of
Antoninus, and the Author of Notitia; the station then of the second Roman
Legion, and the Metropolis of Noricum Ripense. Ips (Gesodunum of Ptolemie) at
the meetings of the Danow, Vienna. long. 37. g 45. m. lat. 48. g. 20. m. Clav.
and the Ips. Wien upon the Danow (Iuliobona of Ptolemie, Vendum of Strabo,
Vindibona of Antoninus, and Vindomana of the Author of Notitia, the station
then of the Tenth Roman Legion.) It is now the chief town of the country, a
Bishops sea, a noted University, and a strong fortress against the Infidells;
renowned for a stout, and resolute siege which in the year 1529 it sustained
against Soliman, and the whole power of the Turkish Empire. The walls hereof
were built with part of the money obtained for the ransom of Richard the first,
king of England, taken prisoner by Leopold the fifth Duke of Austria. Haimburg
at the confluence of the Danow, and the Marckh. Nere hereunto begins a ridge
of Mountains, continued unto the Rab, named Cognamus Mons by Ptolemie, and now
by the Dutch from hence Haimburger-perg. Newsidl upon a great Lake, thus
called. Newstat. Waydhoven upon the river Ips. Wels upon the Draun. Gmundt upon
the lake Gemundersee, and the river Draun, where it issues from hence. Here is
great truck for salt, dug forth of the bordering mountains, and by the
Draun, and Danow carried to Wien, and unto other neighboring places. In the
Lower Austria Krems upon the left shore of the Danow. The ancient inhabitants
of the Lower Austria were part of the Marcomanni of Tacitus: Those of the
Higher Austria were parts of the Norici Ripenses, and of the Upper Pannonia.
The whole in a manner appertains now to the Archdukes of Austria.

BOHEMIA. Bohemia.

LIyng in a round circle in the heart of Germany, and encompassed with wooddie
mountains, part of the Hercynian; bounded upon the South with Austria, and
Bavaria; upon the West with the Upper Palatinate, and Voitlandt; upon the North
with Meissen, Lausnitz, and part of Schlesi; and upon the East with Moravia.
The air here is sharp, and piercing. The country is rough, and hilly, rich in
mineralls, and yielding sufficient plenty of corn, and all other necessary
provision, wines excepted, which here grow not, or sour. Chiefer towns are
Augst nere unto the head of the river Elb. Konigingretz upon the river Labe, or
Elb. Iaromir upon the Elb. Kuttenberg, where are mines of silver. Littomissel
near unto the borders of Moravia. Czaslaw. Tabor, a strong town, built by
Ziska. Budweis (Maroboduum of Ptolemie after Lazius.) Praga. lon. 39. g. 15. m.
lat. 50. g. 10. m. Clav.
Prage an Archbishops sea, and the chief city of the kingdom, seated in an
open, and pleasant valley upon both sides of the river Muldaw; divided into
three towns, the Old, and the New Prage, lying upon the right shore of the
Muldaw, sometimes severally walled, and now only parted, and distinguished with
a shallow ditch; and the Lesser Prage standing upon the left shore of the
river, and joined to the old town by a wide, and spacious stone bridge of 24
arches. Here now flourishes a noted University, founded by the Emperor
Charles the Fourth. Upon a hill, adjoining to the Lesser Prage stands the
Castle of S. Wenceslaus, the ordinary seat, and royal palace of the kings of
Bohemia, and of the last Roman Emperors of the house of Austria. Pilsen.
Schlani. Laun upon the river Egra. Egra. long. 35. g. lat. 51. g. Market.
Elbogen upon the Egra, where are hot medicinable bathes. Egra a fair, and
large city, containing some three miles in compass, and seated upon the river
Egra in the confines of Bohemia, and Nortgow; sometimes Imperial, now subject
to the kings of Bohemia. The ancient inhabitants of Bohemia were the Boij,
before mentioned; afterward the Marcomanni; and lastly the Sclaves.

MORAVIA. Morauia.

BOunded upon the South with the Lower Austria, and the river Teya; upon the
West with Bohemia (the Mountains thereof intervening;) upon the East with
Hungary; and upon the North with Schlesi; divided from either likewise by
Mountains, (the Asciburgius of Ptolemy) branching from the Sudetae, or the
Bohemian Mountains. The country in regard of such its situation resembles the
Area of an half Theater, lying open only toward Austria, and the South, and
upon the other sides environed with great hills, and rough forests; being plain
within, and exceedingly populous, and fruitful for corn, wines, and fat, and
rich pasturages. The air is noted to be somewhat unhealthy, as it commonly
happens to fatter soiles, debarred from the cleansing East, and Northern
winds. Chiefer towns are Igla upon the river thus named, Olmuntz. lon. 41. g.
lat. 49. g. 30. m. Clav.
and the frontire of Bohemia. Znaim upon the river Teya. Niclasburg, frontiring
upon Austria. Brin upon the river Schwatz. Olmuntz the chief town of the
country, and an University, seated upon the river Marckh. Not far from hence in
the hill Oderberg (part of the mountains confining this country, and Schlesi)
springs the great river Odera. Cremser upon the Marckh. Radisch upon the
Marckh. The ancient, and first inhabitants of Moravia were the Marcomanni of
Tacitus; afterward the Sclaves thus distinguished. The natural language of
the people, as also of the Bohemians, is the Sclavonian. The country belongs
to the kings of Bohemia, an appendant of that State.

SCHLESI. Silesia.

BOunded upon the South with Moravia, and Bohemia; upon the West with La^snitz;
upon the East with Poland; and upon the North, with the Marquisate of
Brandenburg. It is likewise wholly encompassed with hills, and mountains, the
North toward Brandenburg only excepted. Within it is plain, rough, and
woody, yet abounding in corn. The hilly parts yield plenty of brass, and
copper beside other metals. The air is sharp, and piercing, since lying open
to the cold blustering winds of the North. Vratislauia. 40. lon. lat. 51. g.
10. m. Clav.
Towns here of better note are Oppelen upon the Odera. Breslaw upon the Odera,
a Bishops sea, and the chief town of the country, large, populous, fair, and
orderly built, with straight, and open streets. Glogaw upon the Odera toward
Brandenburg. Lignitium. Sweinitium.
Lignitz. Sweinitz. Neisse, a Bishops sea, upon the river thus called. The
ancient inhabitants were parts of the Quadi, Marsigni, Gothini, and Burij of
Tacitus; afterward the Sclaves of Poland, a part sometimes of that kingdom.
Their common language now is the Dutch; excepting in the parts beyond the Odera
toward Poland, where the Sclavonian more prevails. It is an appendant state
of the kingdom of Bohemia, subject to the princes thereof.

LAVSNITZ. Lusatia.

BOunded upon the East with Schlesi; upon the South with Bohemia; upon the West
with Meissen; and upon the North with the Marquisate of Brandenburg. The
country is rough, and full of woods: the soil fat, and plentiful of all
things necessary. It is divided into the Higher Lausnitz, which is the part
confining upon Bohemia, and the Lower Lausnitz, neighboring to Brandenburg.
Gorlicium. lon. 34. g. 45. m. lat. 51. g. Clav.
Chiefer towns in the Higher Lausnitz are Gorlitz, a fair, and well built
town upon the river Neisse. Bautzen, the seat of the governor of the country
for the Emperor, and king of Bohemia, upon the Spree. Budissina. lon. 37. g.
lat. 52. g. Market. Zittauia.
Zittaw, bordering upon Bohemia. Lauben. Lubben. Gamitz. These together by the
inhabitants are named the Six towns, confederate amongst themselves in a
strict league. In the Lower Lausnitz Spremberg upon the Spree. Laubena.
Lobauia. Cammenzium. Hexapolis.
Cottbuss upon the Spree. Cottbuss, and part of the Lower Lausnitz belong to
the Marqueses of Brandenburg; the rest to the kings of Bohemia. The ancient
inhabitants after Glareanus were the Semnones of Tacitus; afterward part of
the Sorabi of the Sclaves Winithi.

FRANCONIA. Franconia.

BOunded upon the West with the river Rhijn; upon the South with the Lower
Palatinate, and Schwaben; upon the East with the Upper Palatinate, and
Voitlandt; and upon the North with Hessen, and Duringen. It is hedged in on all
sides with rough forests, Sylua Ottonica. Ardua Sylva.
and mountains, parts of the Old Hercynian, the most noted whereof are toward
Heidelberg, and the Lower Palatinate Otten-waldt; toward the Upper Palatinate
Steigerwaldt, and the woods of Nurnberg; Sylua Turingica, Sylua Picea.
and in Duringen, and toward Hessen Duringerwaldt, and Speysshartz. Within it
is plain, healthie, and pleasant; sandy in many places, yet every where
tolerably fruitful, well stored with corn, and perfect wines. It affords
also plenty of Rapes, Onions, and Liquorice. Chiefer towns are Bomberg upon
the river Regnitz, Bamberga. lon. 31. g. 45. m. lat. 49. g. 56. m. Clav.
near unto the meeting thereof, and the Mein, a Bishops sea. The country
hereof yields great abundance of Liquorice. Schweinfurt a town Imperial
upon the Mein, seated in a most fruitful soil. Kitzing upon the Mein, subject
to the house of Brandenburg. Herbipolis. lon. 30. g. 10. m. lat. 49. g. 57. m.
Clav.
Wurtzburg, a Bishops sea, upon the Mein, in a pleasant plain, environed with
meadows, gardens, and vinie downs. The city belongs to the Bishops of
Wurtzburg, titularie Dukes of Franconia, residing in a strong Castle, situated
without the town. Gemund at the meeting of the rivers Mein, and the Sal. It
belongs also to the Bishops of Wurtzburg. Francfurt, Francofurtum ad Moenum.
lon. 30. g. lat. 50. g. 30. m. Clav.
a city Imperial, upon the Mein, divided into two towns; of Francfurt, which
is the greater part, upon the left shore of the river; and of Saxen-hausen,
standing upon the right shore, both commanded by one magistrate. The town is
large, rich, and populous, famous for two great Marts, the first held about
Mid-lent, the later toward the midst of September, resorted unto from all
parts. Here still the Roman Emperors are chosen. Rottenburg a town Imperial
upon the river Tauber. Winsheim, a town Imperial. Coburg, appertaining to the
Dukes of Saxony. Franconia is divided amongst sundry Free states, the towns
of Franckfurt, Schweinfurt, Rottenburg, and Winsheim; the Bishops of Wurtzburg,
and Bamberg; the Dukes of Saxony, the Marqueses of Brandenburg, and the Earls
of Henneberg, Werthaim, Hohenloe, Erpach, and Schwartzenburg with others.

HESSEN. Hassia.

BOunded upon the South with Franconia; upon the West with the Rhijn, and part
of Westphalen; upon the North with the Dukedom of Brunswijck; and upon the
East with Saxony, and Duringen. The air here is healthy, and the soil
fruitful in corn, and pasturages; hilly, and in many places shaded with
thick woods, replenished with Dear, and sundry sorts of wild beasts. The
sheep hereof yield a fine staple for these foreign parts. The hilly parts of
Catzen-Elbogen amongst other minerals afford plenty of brass, and lead.
Chiefer towns are Treefurt. Eschewege: both situated upon the Weirra, Fulda.
lon. 32. g. lat. 51. g. Merc.
or Weser. Allendorf upon the Weser, enriched with Salt-springs. Fuld upon the
river Fuld, occasioned by the great Monastery thus named, founded by S.
Boniface, an Englishman, the Apostle of the Dutch nation; whose Abbot is prince
of the Empire, and Chauncelour of the Empress. The Abby-Church of S. Savior
has a well furnished library, consisting all of Manuscripts. The Woodland
country hereof is called from hence Stift Fuld, and Buchen from the ^enty of
Beeches it yields, belonging to the Abbots. Cassella.
Melsingen upon the Fuld. Cassel upon the Fuld, the chief seat of the
Lantgraues. Frankenburg upon the river Eder. Waldeck, Frislaria. lon. 32. g.
lat. 52. g. Merc.
a free County, upon the Eder. Frislar upon the Eder. The town belongs to
the Bishops of Mentz. Hanaw, a free County, upon the river Bintz. Marpurgum.
lon. 30. g. 10. m lat. 51. g. Clav.
Martpurg, the chief town belonging to the Lantgraues, seated amongst viny
downs, and woody mountains upon the river Lon, where flourishes a
University, fonnded in the year 1426 by Lewis, Bishop of Munster. Here the
Lantgraues have a stately, and magnificent castle, mounted upon a high hill
without the town, enjoying a pleasant prospect, one of their chief places of
residence. Giessen. Dietz upon the Lon. Nassaw, a free County of the Empire,
upon the Lon. From the Earls hereof the family of Nassaw in the Low Countries,
are descended. Cub upon the right shore of the Rhijn, a town belonging to the
Paltz-graues. The greatest part of the Land of Hessen belongs to the house of
the Lantgraues. The rest is subject to the Abbot of Fuld, the Earls of Solms,
Wiltgestein, Nassaw, Waldeck, Hanaw, and Isenbruck. The ancient inhabitants
were the Catti of Tacitus.

DVRINGEN. Turingia.

BOunded upon the West with the Land of Hessen, and the river Weirra; upon the
South with Franconia, being divided therefrom by the great forest
Duringer-waldt; upon the North with the Higher Saxony, and the wood Hartz; and
upon the East with the river Saltza, and Meisseu. The country is on every side
environed with mountainous, and woody forests. Within it is plain, and
extraordinarily populous, and fruitful for corn. Here also grows woad in
very great abundance. Gotha. lon. 33. g. lat. 52. g. Merc.
Chiefer towns are Gota upon the river Lin. Here sometimes stood the strong
castle of Grimmenstein, in the reign of the Emperor Maximilian the second the
nest, and receptacle of certain seditious persons, proscribed by the Emperor;
besieged, and taken in by Augustus Electour of Saxony, and in the year 1567
raised, and pulled down by the command of the Estates of the Empire,
assembled in a Diet at Regenspurg. Erfurdia. lon. 34. g. 30. m. lat. 51. g. 10.
m. Clav.
Erdfurt upon the divided streams of the river Gers, watring, and running
through the many streets thereof. The city is large, rich, populous, and
every way great, accounted amongst the chiefest in Germany; belonging sometimes
to the Bishops of Mentz, now governed in manner of a free state. Here
flourishes an University founded in the year 1392, and reign of the Emperor
Wenceslaus. The rich country hereof yields great plenty of woad. Vinaria.
Weimar, enjoying a fruitful, and pleasant situation upon the river Ilm; the
chief seat of the Dukes of Saxony, Iena. lon. 34. g. lat. 52. g. Merc.
descended from Iohn-Fredericke, deposed from the Electourship by the Emperor
Charles the Fifth, residing here in a stately, and magnificent castle. Iene in a
deep valley upon the river Saltza, and the borders of Meissen, a noted
University, founded in the year 1555 by Iohn-Fredericke, and Iohn-William,
sons to the Electour Iohn-Fredericke, taken prisoner by the Emperor Charles
the Fifth. The country for the most part is subject to the Dukes of Saxony. The
first, and more ancient inhabitants according to Montanus were the Chasuari of
Tacitus, afterward the Thuringians.

MEISSEN. Misnia.

BOunded upon the West, with the river Saltza, and Duringen; upon the South
with Voytlandt, and Bohemia; upon the East with Lausnitz; and upon the North
with the Dukedom of Saxony, and the Marquisate of Bra^denburg. The land is
hilly, and full of woods, remainders of the old Hercynian, wherewith sometimes
in a manner the country has been wholly ouerspred. In regard hereof, and of
continual vapors, ascending from such wet vndreyned grounds, the air here in
times past has been very close, and illfavoured, darkened for a great part of
the year with continual fogges, and mists, especially in Ioachims-tal, and
the more mountainous part, neighboring to Bohemia. Through long civilitie, and
better plantation (the woods in part cut down, and the bogs let out) the air
since is become more clear, and the country more rich, and healthie, yielding
plenty of corn, and of all manner of fruits. Amongst other metals it
affords very much silver in the Mines of Ioachims-tal, Freiberg, Anneberg,
Schneberg, and other parts of the hills Sudetae. Chiefer towns are Mersburg.
Naumburg: Bishops seas, Hala Saxonu^. lon. 36. g. 18. m. lat. 51. g. 37. m. P.
Birtij.
both seated upon the river Saltza. Hal upon the river Saltza. Here great store
of salt is made from the salt-springs; the occasion of the town, and of that
great war betwixt the Hermunduri, and the Catti, whereunto they both then
bordered, mentioned with some V. Corn. Taciti Annal. lib. 13.
mistake by Tacitus. Leipzig at the confluence of the rivers Pleiss, Pard, and
Elster, the Parliament, and chief town of the country. Lipsia. lon. 30: g.
30. m. lat. 51. g. 20. m. Clav.
The town is not very large, but wealthy, and populous, and beautified with
fair buildings, made all of stone, and standing in an equal height, and just
order; a rich Emporie, and a noted University, Misna. lon. 38. g. 10. m. lat.
51. g. 10. m. Clav.
founded in the year 1409. Meissen, a Bishops sea, the most ancient, and first
seat of the Marqueses of Meissen, occasioning the name of the country, and
built by the Emperor Henry the first to affront the Sclaues; situated upon the
West, and left shore of the Elb in a hilly, and uneven ground, beautified
chiefly with three eminent, and fair castles, or palaces, of the Bishops, the
Burgraues, and of the Dukes of Saxony, the Lords of the town, mounted close
together upon a high hill with a fair prospect overlooking the city. Dresda.
lon. 36. g. lat. 51. g. 3. m. P. Birtij.
Torgaw upon the Elb. Dresen, situated in a fruitful, and pleasant part of the
country; divided by the river Elb into the old, and the new towns, (whereof
the old lies in Lausnitz,) and joined with a fair bridge of 800 paces in
length, the seat of the Duke Electours of Saxony, residing here in a strong,
and magnificent castle. Here the Dukes have a rich armory, stored with all
sorts of munition, and warlike provision, sufficient to furnish a great army.
Friberga. lon. 35. g. 28. m. lat. 50. g. 53. m. Birt.
Friberg under the Bohemian mountains, rich in silver mines. The country is
subject to the Dukes of Saxony. The ancient inhabitants were the Hermunduri of
Tacitus; afterward the Sorabi, part of the Sclaves Winithi.

OBER SACHSEN. Saxonia Superior.

THis only now retains the name of Saxony. It is extended along the Elb
betwixt Meissen, and the Diocese of Meydburg, having on the other sides the
Earldom of Mansfeild, and the Marquisate of Brandenburg. The air is sharp,
Wittenberga* lon. 35. g. 10. m. lat. 50. g. 55. m. Birt.
but healthful; the soil fruitful. The chief town is Wittenberg, standing
in an open plain upon the Elb, and strongly fenced with bulwarks, rampires,
walls, and wide, and deep ditches; the seat sometimes of the Electours of
Saxony, now a noted University chiefly for Lutheran Divines, founded in the
year 1052 by Frederick the third, Duke Electour. The country is subject to
the Dukes of Saxony.

THE EARLDOM OF MANSFELDT. Comitatus Mansfeldius.

LYing betwixt the rivers Saltza, and Wieper; and bounded in with the Higher
Saxony, Meissen, Hessen, Duringen, and Brunswijck. The country is hilly, and
uneven; especially toward the South-West, or toward Duringen, and Hessen,
Mansfeldia. Eis^ebia. lon. 32. g. m. 30. m. lat. 51. g. 46. m. Birt.
where rises the woody forest of Hartz. The soil is chiefly rich in
mineralls in the mountainous parts before mentioned. Chiefer towns are
Mansfeldt upon the river Wieper, naming the country. Eisleben, the country of
Luther. Quer^furt. Rotenburg. Alstad. It belongs to the Earls of Mansfeldt.

THE COVNTRIE OF BRANDENBVRG Ditio Brandeburgica.

BOunded upon the West with the Dukedomes of Mecklenburg, and Lunenburg; upon
the South with Meissen, Lausnitz, and Schlesi; upon the East with the kingdom
of Poland; and upon the North with Pomeren. The country is large, containing in
length from East to West 60 Dutch, or 240 Italian miles. It affords plenty of
corn, as do generally all those more Northern parts; but otherwise is vast,
and ill inhabited. It is divided into Altemarck, Vetus Marchia.
or the Old Marches, lying betwixt the river Elb, and Lunenburg: Mittel-marck,
Media Marchia. Superior Marchia. No^a Marchia.
and Vber-marck betwixt the Elb, and the Odera: and Neu-marck, contained
betwixt the Odera, and Poland. Chiefer towns in Altemarck are Bueck upon the
Elb. Tangermondt at the confluence of the rivers Elb, and Anger. Steindal.
Osterburg. Sehausen upon the river Veht. Bismarck. Gardeleben. Kalb. Soltwedel.
Betwixt the Odera, and the Elb Havelburg, a Bishops sea, upon the river Havel.
Ratenaw upon the same river. Brandeburgum. lon. 35. g. 30. m. lat. 52. g. 36.
m. Clav. Berlinum.
Brandenburg upon the same river, a Bishops sea, and the first seat of the
Marqueses, naming the country. Spandaw. Berlin upon the river Spree, the chief
seat of the present Marqueses of Brandenburg. Francfurt, Francofurtum ad Oderam
lon. 37. g. lat. 52. g. 23. m, Birt.
enjoying a pleasant situation amongst vinie downs upon the left shore of the
Odera. Here flourishes a noted University, founded in the year 1506 by
Ioachim the first, Electour, and Albert his brother, Marqueses of Brandenburg.
In the new Marches Kustrin upon the rivers Warte, and Odera. Sunnerbergh upon
the Warte. Landsperg upon the Warte. Berwald. Konigsbergk. Berlinichen.
Bernstein. Arnswald. The Lords hereof are the Electours, and Marqueses of the
house of Brandenburg, whereunto besides this country, and other straggling
possessions, appertain the Dukedom of Crossen in Schlesi, the Dukedom of
Prussen, with the town of Cottbuss, and part of Lausnitz; and with the Dukes
of Nuburg, the right of the Earldom of Marck, Bergen, Cleve, and Gulick,
Princes of very ample, and large possessions. The more ancient inhabitants were
the Varini, and Nuithones of Tacitus, parts of the Suevi; as afterward the
Helveldi, Leubuzi, Wilini, Stoderani, and Brizani, parts of the Sclaves Winithi.

POMEREN. Pomerania.

EXtended for the space of 200 English miles along the coast of the sea
Balticke (lying upon the North thereof,) from the river Bartze, and the
Dukedom of Mecklenburg upon the West, unto the river Weissel, and the Land of
Prussen upon the East; and confining upon the South with the Marquisate of
Brandenburg. It is divided into the Upper Pomeren, bordering upon Mecklenburg,
and contained betwixt the Bartze, and the Odera; and the Lower Pomeren, lying
betwixt the Odera, and the Weissel, and adioining upon Prussen. The air is
sharp, and piercing; the country plain, populous, and abundantly fruitful,
rich in come, pasturges, honey, butter, wax, Bardum. lon. 35. g. lat. 54. g.
28. m. secundum Birtium. Gripswaldia.
and flax. Chiefer towns are Barth, standing upon the Ocean, and the mouth of
the river Bartze, a rich Empory; the seat of the Dukes of Pomeren of Wolgast.
Straelsundt, a well traded Empory upon the same seacoast against the Island
Rugen. Gripswald upon the same seacoast, thwart of the same Island, a noted
university. Wolgast upon the same coast of the sea Balticke against the Island
Vsidom. Camin, a Bishops sea, upon the same shore, against the Island Wollin.
Colberg at the mouth of the river Persandt. Gedanum, and Dantiscum. lon. 45. g.
lat. 54. g. 50. m. Clav.
Dantzag, Gdanske, or Danske, upon the river Weissel, named thus from the sea
Balticke, or the Oster-sche, whereunto it neighboureth, called by the more
ancient Dutch Cdan, Gdan, or Dan, and corruptly by Mela, and the Latins Sinus
Codanus. The city is rich, populous, magnificent, and every way flourishing,
the second in rank of the Hanse-townes, much frequented by merchants from all
parts; sometimes Imperial, now governed in manner of a free estate under the
kings of Poland. Within the land Coslin upon the river Radnie. Griffenberck
upon the Rega. Newgarten upon the Hamersbeck. Stetinum. lon. 37. g. 45. m. lat.
54. g. Clav.
Stargard upon the Ina. Stettin, standing in a square form upon the left shore
of the Odera, the seat of the Dukes of Pomeren of Stettin. Dantzig, and the
more Eastern part, adioining upon the Weissel, are subject to the kings of
Poland. The rest appertains to the Dukes of Pomeren. The ancient inhabitants
were the Reudigni, Rugij, Longi-Mani, and Longi-Diduni, with part of the
Burgundiones, and Heruli of Tacitus, Ptolemy, Pliny, and others; afterward
the Wiltzi, Pomerani, and Rani, parts of the Sclaves Winithi.

The countries hither from Duringen are accounted parts of the Higher Saxony,
and comprehend the 8 circle of the Empire.

THE COUNTRY OF MECKLENBVRG. Ducatus Megapolensis.

BOunded upon the East with the Dukedom of Pomeren, and the river Bartze; upon
the South with Brandenburg, and Lawenburg; upon the West with Holstein; and
upon the North with the Sundt, or Sea Balticke. The soil is fruitful, and
rich in come. Chiefer towns are Schwerin, a Bishops sea, seated in a square
form upon the South shore of the lake thus named; Wismaria. lon. 33. g. 30. m.
lat. 54. g. 14. m. Birt. Wismar, Saxonica, seu Germanoru^ lingua idem ac Certum
mar^. P. Birtij Com: Rerum Germanicarum lib. 3. c. 33. Rostochium. lon. 34. g.
18. m. lat. 54. g. 20. m. Birt.
divided into four lesser towns. VVismar, a Hans-towne, and a noted port upon
a creek, or inlet of the sea Balticke, founded after Krantzius out of the
ruins of the great, and ancient city of Mecklenburg by Gunselin Earl of
Schwerin about the year 1240, and in the reign of John, surnamed the Divine,
Prince of the Obotriti. The haven hereof is deep, and capable of great
vessels, affording a large, and safe road; giving the name to the town.
Rostock, a Hans-citty, and a noted port upon the river Warn near unto the
fall thereof into the Sundt. The town is large, rich, and well traded, the
best upon the coast of the sea Balticke after Lubeck, and Dantzig, containing
five English miles, and an half in circuit; amongst other ornaments commended
for an University, founded by John Duke of Mecklenburg, consisting at this day
of nine Colleges. The houses after the manner of the country are for the most
part flat-roofed. The Lords hereof are the Dukes of Mecklenburg. The ancient
inhabitants were parts of the Sideni, and Burgundiones of Pliny; afterward
the Obotriti, Polabi, Linguones, Warnani, Kircani, Circipani, Rhedarij, and
Tholenzi, parts of the Sclaues Winithi; the last people of Germany, converted
to Christianity, forced by conquest, and the arms of Henry surnamed the Lion,
Duke of Saxony, and Bauaria in the reign of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa.

THE DVKEDOME OF HOLSTEIN. Holsatia.

BOunded upon the East with the Sundt, and Dukedom of Mecklenburg; upon the
North with the kingdom of Denmark, and the river Eydore; upon the West with
the German Ocean, taken betwixt the rivers Eydore and Elb; and upon the South
with the Elb, dividing it from the Diocese of Bremen. The country is low,
marishie, and full of woods; chiefly affording good pasturages. It
comprehends four distinct names, or countries; of Wagerlandt, adioining unto
Mecklenburg, and the Sundt; of Stormarse, lying along the right shore of the
Elb betwixt the mouth of this river, and Hamburg, or the rivers Stor, and
Billen; of Ditmarse coasting along the Ocean betwixt the rivers Stor, and
Eydore; and of Holstein, (particularly thus called) taking up the more inland
parts, or those betwixt Stormarse, and the Dukedom of Schleswijck in Denmark.
Chiefer towns are in Wagerlandt Lubeck, Lubeca. lon. 31. g. 20. m. lat. 54. g.
48. m. Clav.
a Bishops sea, and a city Imperial; seated upon a hill, or rising ground
amongst waters, and marshes at the confluence of the rivers Traue, and Billeua
near the fall thereof into the Sundt. The town is very strong, great, rich,
and populous, the chief of the Hanse-townes, and of the ports of the sea
Balticke; containing about six miles in compass. Segeberg upon the river
Traue. Hamburgum. lon. 30. g. lat. 54. g. 30. m. Birt.
In Stormarse Hamburg upon the river Billen, and the right shore of the Elb, a
Hanse-towne, Imperial, and a noted Emporie, well known unto the English
marchant-adventurers. Crempe upon a little river, thus named, near unto the
Elb. Ietzeho upon the river Stor. In Ditmarse Meldorp upon the Ocean, the
chief town. Heininckste. Tellinckste. Londen. Chilonium. lon. 32. g. lat. 55.
g. Birt.
In the proper Holstein Kiel, a well traded port upon a nauigable arm of the
Sundt. The country is subject (the towns Imperial excepted) to the house of
Denmarc k, held hereby under the right, and acknowledgement of the Dutch
Empire. The ancient inhabitants were the Saxons of Ptolemie, their first seat.
The name spreading more Southwards, they were afterward distinguished, and
known by the name of the Saxons beyond the Elb.

THE DIOCESE OF BREMEN. Episco patus Bremensis.

BOunded upon the North with the Elb, and the Dukedom of Holstein; upon the
West with the German Ocean; upon the South with the river Weser from
East-Freislandt, and Westphalen; and upon the East with the Dukedom of
Lunenburg, parted from it by a line drawn from the rivers Elb, and Este unto
the Weser a little below the confluence thereof, and the Alre. The extreme
parts coasting along the Elb, and Weser, are very fertile for corn, and
pasturages; the more inner parts wild, and barren, full of dry sands, Stada
lon. 30. g. 46. m. lat. 54. g. 4. m. Birt.
marshes, and heathes. Chiefer towns are Stadt, a noted Hanse town, standing
upon the river Zuinghe (hitherto navigable) near unto the fall thereof into
the Elb. The town is accounted the most ancient in Saxony, waxing fresh, and
reviving again of late years chiefly by means of the Staple there fixed of
the English Marchant-aduenturers; beautified with fair buildings, and strongly
fortified. Here all the ships, passing up the Elb toward Hamburg, pay tole.
The townsmen have also their choice of the wines hereof for their public
Tavern. Buxtehude upon the river Este, Brema. lon. 30. g. 20. m. lat. 53. g.
23. m. Birt.
near unto Hamburg. Bremen an Archbishops sea, the chief town of the
country; upon the right shore of the great river Weser. The town is large,
populous, and by the advantage of the river (which is hereunto navigable) rich,
and well traded; beautified with fair, and even streets, and strongly fenced
against hostile invasion. The first Bishop here of was S. Willehade, an
Englishman, the Apostle of those more Northern parts of Saxony. The country
is subject to the Lay Bishops, or Administratours of Bremen. The more ancient
inhabitants were the Chauci Maiores of Ptolemie; afterward part of the Saxons
Ostphalians.

THE COUNTRY OF LVNENBVRG. Ducatus Luneburgensis.

LYing betwixt the rivers Elb, and Alre, and bounded upon the West, with the
Diocese of Bremen; upon the North with the Elb, and the Dukedom of Lawenburg;
upon the East with the Old Marches of Brandenbrg; and upon the South with the
Dukedom of Brunswijck. The country is plain, the air sharp, and healthful,
and the soil fruitful, the part adjoining to the Old Marches of Brandenburg
excepted. The chief town is Lunenburg, Luneburgum. lon. 32. g. 18. m. lat.
53. g. 27. m. Birt.
standing in a square form upon the river Elmenow, one of the six prime
Hanse-townes, large, populous, and adorned with fair buildings, containing six
Parishes, a mile and a half in length, and about a mile in breadth; whose
chiefest truck, and commodity is falt, made here in great abundance from the
Salt-springs, bought up by the Hamburgers, and Lubecers, and from thence
transported abroad. The country belongs to the Dukes of Lunenburg, being of
the same house with Brunswijck, desended from Henry surnamed the Lion, and the
more ancient Dukes of Saxony. The more ancient inhabitants were parts of the
Cherusci, and Chauci of Tacitus.

THE COUNTRY OF BRVNSWIICK Ducatus Brusvicensis.

COntained betwixt the rivers Alre, and the Weser. It has the Dukedom of
Lunenburg upon the North; upon the East the Diocese of Meydburg, and the
Earldom of Mansfeldt; upon the South Duringen, and Hessen; and upon the West
and Weser, and Westphalen. The South, and East parts toward Hessen, Duringen,
and Mansfeldt swell with woodie Mountains, and hills, parts of the ancient
Hercynian; called now Hundsrucke, Hartzwald, Hainsette, and by other names. The
Northern, and more proper Brunswijck is more plain, exceedingly fruitful for
corn, and all other commodities, which the colder clime is well capable of.
Chiefer towns are Grubenhagen. From hence the Dukes of Brunswijck of
Grubenhagen were styled. Goslaria. lon. 32. g. 40. m. lat. 52. g. Clav.
Halberstadiu^. lon. 32. g. 40. m lat. 52. g, 10. m. Clav.
Goslar a town Imperial upon the river Gose. Halberstat. Hildesheim; Bishops
seas. Quedelburg, occasioned by the rich Nunnery thus called, whose Abbatesse
was sometimes Princess of the Empire. The town now is subject to the house of
Saxony. Brunswijck upon the river Onacter, the chief of the country, and one
of the six chief Hanse-townes. The town is large (containing about seven
miles in compass, Brunsviga. lon. 32. g. 40. m. lat. 52. g. 30. m. Birt.
) fair, populous, and strongly fortified, encompassed with a double wall,
peopled with industrious, and stout inhabitants, jealous of their liberty, and
governed in manner of a free estate, held under the right of the Princes. The
greatest part of the country is subject to the Dukes of Brunswijck. The more
ancient inhabitants were the Dulgibini of Tacitus, with part of the Chauci
Maiores of Ptolemie; afterward part of the Saxons Ostphalians.

THE DIOCESE OF MEYDENBVRG. Ditio Magdeburgensis.

EXtended upon both sides of the river Elb betwixt the Marquisate of
Bra^denburg, Magdeburgu^. lon. 33. g. 58. m. lat. 52. g. 18. m. Birt.
and the proper Saxony. The chief town is Meydenburg, an Archbishops sea,
and naming the country, seated upon the left shore of the Elb; built, or rather
reedified by Edith, wife unto the Emperor Henry the first, and daughter to
Edmund King of England, and named thus in honor of her sex. The Town is of
great State, large, fair, and strongly fortified, famous in the Protestants
wars for a whole years siege, which it sustained against the Emperor
Charles the Fifth; amongst the Protestant states remaining only unconquerable,
the rest being subdued to the will of that mighty Prince. The country is
subject to the Lay Bishops, or Administratours of Meydenburg, of the house now
of Brandenburg. The more ancient inhabitants were the Lacobardi of Tacitus;
part afterward of the Saxons Ostphalians.

The countries hitherto from Mecklenburg are accounted the parts of the Lower
Saxony, and contain the ninth circle of the Empire.

FREISLANDT. Frisia.

THe name is at this day enlarged along the shore of the Germane Ocean from the
Zuyder Zee, parting the same from Hollandt, unto the river Weser. It contains
the West, and the East-Freislandts.

OOST-FREISLANDT. Frisia Orientalis.

COntinued betwixt the river Eems, and the Weser; and bounded upon the other
sides with the Ocean, and the land of West-phalen. The country is plain, and
exceedingly populous, the soil fat; rich in corn, and pasturages. Chiefer
towns are Aurich, a rich, and pleasant inland town, much frequented by the
Frison nobility in regard of the commodity of hunting in the adjoining woods,
Embda. lon. 28. g. 26. m. lat. 53. g. 34. m. Birt.
and forests. Embden upon the Dollaert, or the mouth of the Eems, a noted
port, and Empory, the chief town, and the seat of the prince; residing here
in a magnificent, and strong castle, seated at the entrance of the haven,
environed with sea-waters. Here not long since was the staple for Germany of
the English Merchant-adventurers, removed since to Stadt, and Hamburg. The
country belongs to the Earls of Oost-Freistandt. The ancient inhabitants
were the Chauci Minores of Ptolemy; of later times through the neighborhood of
that nation, lying upon the farther side of the Eems, falsely named Frisons.

WEST-FREISLANDT. Frisia Occidencali^.

THis belongs to the description of the Netherlandts; accounted now amongst
the 17 provinces thereof.

WESTPHALEN. Westphalia.

COntaining the parts of the ancient Saxony, which were included betwixt the
rivers Weser, and Rhijn, (the two Freislandts, Over-ysel, and the parts hereof
in Hollandt, and Gelderlandt excepted.) It is bounded upon the North with
Oost-Freislandt, and the Diocese of Bremen; upon the East with the Weser, and
the Dukedom of Brunswijck; upon the South with the Land of Hessen; and upon
the West with the Rhijn from the Diocese of Colen, and with Clevelandt,
Over-ysel, and West-Freislandt. The air is sharp, and cold. The soil
generally is fruitful rather in pasturages, and in commodities serving for the
fatting of beasts, then for the nourishment of man; apples, nuts, akomes, and
sundry sorts of wild fruits, wherewith amongst other kinds infinite herds of
Swine are fed, whose bacon is much commended, and desired in foreign parts.
The most fertile parts for corn are about the Lip, Paderborn, and Soest. The
most desert, and barren those adioining to the Weser. Surlandt, and the
Dukedom of Bergen are hilly, and full of woods. The Diocese of Munster
yields the best pasturages. Chiefer towns are Duseldorp upon the right shore
of the Rhijn in the Dukedom of Bergen. Tremonia. lon. 28. g. 18. m. lat. 51.
g. 30. m. Birt.
In the country of Marck Vnna; Dortmund; and Soest. Paderborn a Bishops sea.
Munster, a Bishops sea, seated in a plain upon the river Eems. The town has
been made very strong since the surprisall thereof by the Anabaptists.
Susatum. Monasterium. lon. 29. g. 10. m. lat. 52. g. Birt.
It belongs to the Bishops, thus styled. Mynden, a Bishops sea, upon the
Weser. Osenburg, a Bishops sea. Of these the Dukedom of Bergen, and the
Earldom of Marck appertain to the Marquis of Brandenburg, and the Duke of
Nuburg, the heirs general of the house of Cleue. Minda lon. 31. g. 30. m.
lat. 52. g. 28. m. Birt.
Engern, and Surland belong unto the Bishops of Colen, who are titulary Dukes
of Westphalen. The rest is divided amongst sundry petty Lords, Bishops, and Lay
Princes. The ancient inhabitants were the Chamavi, Osnaburgum. lon. 29 g. 36.
m. lat. 52 g. 25. m. Birt.
and Angrivarij, with parts of the Tencteri, and Cherusct of Tacitus;
afterward the Westphali, and Angrivarij, part of the Saxons. The Vbij before
Caesar, and the Romans seem to have possessed sometimes the parts now of
Bergen, and Marck; removed afterward by Agrippa beyond the Rhijn into the part
of ancient Gaul, where now stands Colen.

THE ISLANDS OF GERMANY.
THere are not any Islands of note belonging to this continent, excepting those
of Rugen, Vsedom, and Wollin in the Ooster-Sche; lying now thwart of Pomeren,
and accounted parts thereof.

The rest, appertaining sometimes unto Ancient Germany, are subject at this day
unto the confederate states of the Netherlands, and to the kings of Denmarck,
and Swethen; whereof we shall have occasion to relate in the Description of
those countries.

OF THE STATE OF EVROPE. The XIIII Book.
COntaining the descriptions, and relations of the Commonwealth, and league of
the Switzers, Netherland, Danemarck, Norwey, Swethen, Poland, and Hungary. The
difference in ancient authors about the extent, and limits of Illyricum. The
more true, and precise bounds, and description of Illyricum, or of Illyris, and
Dalmatia, collected out of Ptolemy, with reference to Pliny, and others. The
dominion, and conquest of Illyricum by the Romans, Herruli, Visigothes, the
Greekish Emperors, and the Sclaves. The cause here, and beginning of the name
of Sclavonia. The annexing of Croatia, and Dalmatia, or of the kingdom of
Sclavonia, unto the right of the kings of Hungary. The dominion, and conquest
of Dalmatia, or of the seacoasts of Sclavonia by the Venetians. The affairs
hereof with the Hungarians. The conquests, and intrusion of the Turks. The
present state of Sclavonia, or Illyricum. The modern particular names, and
countries hereof. The Chorographicall discriptions of Windischland, Krabbaten,
Bosna, Contado di Zara, Dalmatia, now thus properly termed, and Albania with
their Islands.

THE COMMONWEALTH, AND LEAGVE OF THE SWITZERS.
THIS was sometimes a part of the kingdom, and Empire of the Germans, from the
which it is now divided through a long crazines, and indisposition of that
loose, and heavy body.

It lies in the confines of France, Germany, and Italy; containing part of
each of those provinces, with the heights of the Alps Lepontiae, Paeninae, and
Rhaeticae, al which now are either united, or subject to the Confederacy
hereof.

The bounds hereof are upon the East the Earldom of Tirol; upon the North
Sungow, and the Rhijn, and Lake of Constance, dividing it from Schwaben (the
Canton of Schaff-hausen excepted, which lies beyond the Rhijn;) upon the West
the Lake Lemane, and the mountainous ridge of the Iour, parting it from Savoy,
and the Free County of Burgundy; and upon the South the Dukedom of Milan in
Italy.

It is situated betwixt the 28, and 32 degrees of Longitude, and the 44, and 47
degrees of Northern Latitude; or betwixt the 15, or middle parallel of the 6
Clime, where the longest day has 15 hours, and a half, and the 16 parallel,
and beginning of the 7 Clime, where the longest day has 15 hours, and 3
quarters.

Caesar accompteth the length hereof to be 211 Italian miles, the breadth at
180 of the same miles, measuring only the Helvetij; the other parts not being
reckned.

The country is altogether possessed with steep, and mighty mountains, the
mother of sundry great, and famous rivers, of the Tesin, Inn, Adise, Rhosne,
Russ, Aar, Limat, and the Rhijn, flowing from hence, as from the greatest
height, and top of Europe toward far distant, and contrary Oceans, the
Adriaticke, Euxine, French, and German seas.

The soil for this cause is for the most part cold, rockie, and barren,
yielding little wines, neither of corn sufficient store for the necessary use
of the inhabitants; plentiful chiefly in pasturages, Cattle, Flesh, and
milke-meats. Here lie notwithstanding hidden amongst the hills, and rocks many
fruitful, and pleasant valleys, abounding in all sorts of most excellent
commodities; such as are the Valtolina, Wallislandt, and other bottomes of the
Alps, especially those which open toward Italy, and the South.

V. Caesaris Comment. Belli Gallici lib. 1. c. 1. etc. Strab. Geogr. lib. 5.
Ptolem. Geog: lib. 2. c. 9. and lib. 2. c. 12. and 13. and lib. 3. c. 1.
Plin-Natur. Histor. lib. 3. c. 20. Aegidij Tschudi Rhaetiae Alpinae
Descriptionem.
The ancient inhabitants were the Helvetij, possessing the parts, which were
included within the Rhijn, the Alps, the mountain Iour, and the Lake of
Geneue, containing now the 13 Cantons of the Switzers (Basil, and Schaff-hausen
excepted,) Turgow, Baden, Rapers-wyl, Bremgarten, Mellingen, the Free provinces
in Wagenthal, Newenburg, and Biel; part of the Rauraci, now the country of
Basil; part of the Allobroges, now Geneve; the Veragri, now the Lower
Wallislandt; the Seduni, the part now of the Upper Wallislandt about Sitten;
the Lepontij, inhabiting the creeks, and valleys of the Alps Alps Lepontiorum
Plin. Nature. Histor. lib. 3. c. 20
thus named, and comprehending now the higher part of the Upper Wallislandt,
where springs the river Rhosne, Vrseren, or the valley of the river Russ, and
on the other side of the Alps toward Italy Liviner-tal, Palenser-tal,
Eschental, Meintal, Val Hugonia, Masoxer-tal, and Galanckertal, with the towns
of Bellizona, and Locarno upon the Lake Maggiore; the Vennonetes, containing
now after Tschudus (whom he makes a distinct people from the Vennones) the
valleys of Cleven, Valtolina, Gampoltshin, and Bergel of the Grisons, or the
courses of the rivers Maira, Lyra, and Aada until their entrances into the
Lake of Como; the Aetuatij, now part of the Grisons about the Vorder, and the
Hinder Rhijn, where are Rhijnwalder, Schams, Tusis, Retzuns, Tavetch,
Diserntis, Trans, Ilantz, Grub, Flymss, Stussafien, the valley of Lugnitz, and
the Higher Sax. The Cotnantij, the parts now of the Grisons, where lie the
towns of Chur, Ortestein, Furstnow, Vatz, Churwald, Porpon, Burgunn,
Schanfick, Tafaas, Alfenow, Tuffen-casten, Gryffenstein, Tintzen, Stalla,
Reamss, and Wels, with others; the Rucantij, now Pfevers, and Prettigow of the
Grisons, or the course of the river Lanquarte; the Vennones, now Engadin,
Vinstermuntz, and Vinstgow of the Grisons, or the country about the heads of
the rivers Inn, and Adise; the Rheguscae, now Rhijntal, or the Prefectureship
of Rheineck, belonging to the Switzers, with the opposite shore of the Rhijn,
appertaining to the house of Austria, extended from thence toward Werdenberg,
and Veldkirch along the course of that river unto the Lake of Constance; and
the Sarunetes, now the countries of Sargans, and Werdenberg, and until the
Lake Walensee. Of these the Helvetij, Rauraci, Allobroges, Seduni, and Veragri
were parts of the Gauls; containing part of the Provinces of the Alps Graiae,
and Paeninae, Maxima Sequanorum, and Vienniensis. The Vennonetes, Aetuatij,
Cotuantij, Rucantij, Vennones, Rheguscae, and Sarunetes were parts of the
Rhaeti, and Rhaeti vsque ad Italiam pertinent supra Comum, and Veronam Strab.
Geog. lib. 5.
Vindelici. The Lepontij Strabo places Huius gentis (Rhaetorum) sunt etiam
Lepontij Strab. Geog. lib. 5.
amongst the Rhaeti, Ptolemie Lepontini Ptolem Geog. lib. 3. c. 1.
amongst the people inhabiting Italy. The Vennones Vennones Sirab. Geogr. lib.
5. Vinnones Ptolem. Geog. lib. 2. c. 13. Vennonetes Plin. Nature. Histor. lib.
3. c. 20.
, and Vennonetes seem to have been the same nation, and to have been
mistaken by Tschudus. A cause of this error might be their different placing
in their authors, the Vennones by Petulantissimi Vindelicorum habiti sunt
Licatij, Clautinarij, and Vennones Strab. Geog. lib. 5.
Strabo being put amongst the Vindelici; and the Vennonetes by Pliny amongst
the Rhaeti Rhaetorum Vennonetes, Sarunetesque ortus Rheni amnis accolunt. Plin:
Not: Histor. lib. 3. c. 20.
.

By Caius, and Augustus Caesar's in their wars of Gaul, and with the
Rhaetians the whole was made subject to the Commonwealth of the Romans,
contained afterward under their Provinces of the two Rhaetiae, Maxima
Sequanorum, Vienniensis, and of the Alps Graiae, and Paeninae. After the
overthrow of the Western Roman Empire by the deluge of Barbarous nations the
country became shared betwixt the Almans, and Burgundians; the river of Russ
parting them, whereof these had what lay west of the river, the other the parts
beyond. These two nations not long after being subdued by the Frenchmen it
became subject to that nation; comprehending part of the names, and Provinces
of Burgundy, and Almaigne under the soueraignetie, and command hereof. After
this, the large dominions of the French being divided amongst the sons, and
posterity of the Emperor Lewis the Godly, it was made a parcel of the kingdom
of Burgundy in the person of Charles son to the Emperor Lotharius, as
afterward in Bozon the second a part of the kingdom of Arles, and Burgundy.
By Rodulph the second the last K. of Arles, and Burgundy, wanting heirs, it
was given with the rest of that kingdom unto the Emperor Conrade the second,
and his son Henry the Black, by whom it was incorporated unto the German
Empire, to which right it has ever since appertained, by long union herewith
for the greatest part now accounted, and speaking Dutch. Under the German
Empire after the manner of other Dutch provinces it fell divided into sundry
lesser states, and goverments, whereof part were Imperial, immediately
acknowledging the Empire; part were subject to the Bishops of Chur, Sitten,
Basil, and Geneve, the Abbot of S. Gal, and sundry Monasteries, and Religious
houses; and part to the Dukes of Zeringen, the Earls of Habspurg, afterward
of Austria, the Earls of Kyburg, Werdenberg, and other inferior Nobility.
Occasioned by the injuries, and wars of the princes of the house of Austria,
affecting the dominion hereof, the favor, and partiality of some of the Dutch
Emperors, enemies to that house, and the negligence, sloth, and sundry
factions of the Empire, the whole has now by little, and little shoke of the
yoke of the Empire, and of the most part of their particular Lords, each part
assuming liberty, and the rights, and privileges of absolute, and free
estates; for their more strong defense against all foreign invaders, and the
preservation of justice, peace, and amity amongst themselves, uniting into
sundry Leagues, from the Canton of Switz, one of the three first confederates,
all since named of the Switzers, consisting at this day of 21 lesser
Commonwealths, no way depending one of an other, or of any other superior
state, the Cantons of Vren, Switz, Vnderwalden, Lucern, Zurich, Glaris, Zug,
Friburg, Bern, Solothurn, Basil, Schaff-hausen, Appen-zel, the three Leagues of
the Grisons, the Bishop of Sitten, and Wallis-landt, the Abbot of S. Gal, and
Geneve, with the Prefectureships subject hereunto (the towns of Rotweil, and
Mulhausen being not reckoned, immersed within the Continent of Germany, and
lying severed from the body hereof;) the manner of whose revolt, and
incorporation into this Confederacy we have particularly related in the
discourse of France.

The languages here spoken are the Dutch, common to the most part of the
Switzers, to the Grisons about Chur, and to the seven resorts of the Upper
Wallislandt; the French to the Lower Wallis-landt, to the town of Geneve, and
to the Switzers bordering upon the lake Lemane; and the Italian to the greatest
part of the Communalties of the Grisons, and to the Italian prefecture-ships,
subject unto these, and the Switzers.

The Religion hereof is partly that of the Reformed Churches, and partly the
Romish Catholic. The States wholly professing the Reformed Religion are the
four greater Cantons of Zurich, Bern, Basil, and Schaff-hausen amongst the
Switzers, and the towns of Geneve, and S. Gal of the Confederats. Of the
Romish superstition are the Bishops of Basil, and Sitten, the Abbot of S. Gal,
and the 7. Cantons of Vren, Switz, Vnderwalden, Lucern, Zug, Friburg, and
Solothurn. In the two Cantons of Glaris, and Appenzel both Religions are
allowed. The Communalties of the Grisons are confusedly divided betwixt the
two, the Protestants notwithstanding more prevailing in number. The
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction belongs to the Bishops of Constance, and
Lausanne; unto whom appertains the greatest part of Switzer-landt; the
Bishops of Basil to whom that country; the Bishop of Sion to whom
VVallis-landt; and the Bishop of Chur unto whom the Grisons.

The civil state (as before we have showed) is not subject to any one
government, being divided amongst many petty, yet absolute commonwealths;
united only in their sundry leagues. These leagues are of two sorts. A first
is of the 13 Cantons of Vren, Switz, Vnderwalden, Lucern, Zurich, Glaris, Bern,
Friburg, Solothurn, Basil, Schaff-hausen, and Appen-zel, general, and
perpetual, and more near, and strict then the rest; the parts whereof do only
properly make the body of this Commonwealth, obtaining solely the prerogative
of giving voices in the general Diets, participating of the public spoils of
their enemies, and of determining of war, and peace, and of whatsoever
affairs of the public state. A second sort is of the Allies, confederate with
the 13 Cantons, but not admitted into their body, and more firm union. Of
these only the towns of Rotweil, and Mul-honse (...) of Longue-ville in
France. Both are confederate with Bern.

THE CANTOM OF SOLOTHVRN.
LYing about the Aar, and confining to the mountainous ridge of the Iour.
Solothurn the chief town (Solothurum of Antoninus) stands upon the Aar in a
fruitful, Solodurum. lon. 29. g. 5. m. lat. 46. g. 7. m. Birt.
and plain situation, the place of Martyrdom of S. Versus, and his 66 Theban
soldiers in the reign of the Emperor Dioclesian.

THE CANTON OF FRIBVRG.
SEated in the part of Wiflispurgergow, the most western of the Cantons;
Friburgum. lon. 28. g. 12. m. lat. 47. g 4. m. Clav.
divided into 19 Prefectureships, or goverments. Friburg, the chief town,
stands upon the river Sana, being partly plain, and partly lying upon a
rockie, and uneven hill, founded by Berchtold the fourth, Duke of Zeringen not
many years before Bern.

These two last Cantons are accounted amongst the Romish, or Catholic.

THE CANTON OF ZVRICH.
LYing upon the Lake Zuricher-see, and containing 31 Resorts, or
Prefectureships. Tigurum. lon. 30. g. 20. m. lat. 47. g. Birt.
Chief towns here Zurich, situated upon both sides of the river Limat, where
it issues out of the Lake. The city is large, renowned with a famous
University. Stein. Winterthurn. Unto this, the most honorable, and chiefest
of the Cantons, belongs the power, and authority of summoning the general
Diets, as of those particular of the Protestant League; whose legates presede,
and have the first place in both assemblies. The Religion hereof is that of the
Reformed Churches.

Below Zurich upon the Limat, enjoying a most happy, and pleasant situation,
Bada Helue^io^um. lon. 31. g. lat. 48. g. 44. m. Clav.
lies the town of Baden, named thus from the hot bathes thereof; now a
Prefectureship, commanded by the eight first Cantons, beautified with fair
buildings, and seated in the heart of Switzerlandt, in regard of so many
advantages much frequented, and resorted unto by the Helvetians, and bordering
people, and made the seat of their general all Diets, ordinarily here
assembling in the month of June (as upon extraordinary occasions at other
times) to consult of, and conclude public businesses concerning the whole
League, and for taking the accounts of the governors, and officers of the
Common Prefectureships. Further up upon the right shore of the Lake of Zurich
stands Raperswyl, a Prefectureship, appertaining to the same Cantons.

THE CANTON OF BASIL.
INcluded within the Rhijn, the mountains Iour, and Vauge, and the borders of
Sungow. Basilea lon. 28. g. lat. 48. g. 30. m. Birt.
The soil is rockie, and full of woods, but affording good pasturage, plenty
of corn, and very excellent wines. Basil the chief town stands upon the
Rhijn in a pleasant, and open seat; at what place the rivers Weiss, and Byrsa
are received into that greater channel, the former out of Schwartzwald, this by
crooked, and winding valleies from the neighboring Iour. The city is rich,
populous, great, and flourishing, sometimes Imperial, now a Bishops sea, and a
noted University; divided by the Rhijn into two towns, the greater Basil,
lying upon the left shore of the Rhijn on the side toward France, and the
Lesser Basil, lying on the further side of the river toward Germany. Near
hereunto, where i^s the village, now called Augst, stood sometimes the city
Augusta Rauracorum of Ptolemie, Rauriaca of Pliny, and Basilea, and Civitas
Basiliensinm of Antoninus. The Religion of this Canton is the Reformed.

THE CANTON OF SCHAFFHAVSEN.
THis town, Scaphusium. lon. 30. g. 20. m. lat. 47. g. 24. m. Birt.
and country we have described in our discourse of Schwaben. The inhabitants
profess the Religion of the Reformed Churches, confederate in a more strict
league with the Cantons of Zurich, Bern, and Basil, and the towns of S. Gal,
and Geneve.

The soveraigntie, and jurisdiction of those 7 last Cantons reside solely in
the people, and inhabitants of the chief towns, whereof they are named,
Lucern, Bern, Solothurn, Friburg, Zurich, Basil, and Shaff-hausen; by whose
free suffrages are chosen the Senate, Magistrates, Leiftenants, and officers,
managing the affairs of their several districts. The chief Magistrate in
every of the four first is called Scultet. In the three latter he is named
Burgermeister.

TVRGOW. Turgea.

NAmed thus from the river Thur, dividing the country. It confineth upon the
Rhijn, the Lake of Constance, Zurich-gow, and the Prefectureships of Rheineck,
Opidum. S. Galli. lon. 31. g. 20. m. lat. 47. g. Birt.
and Sargans. The chief towns are S. Gal, seated amongst mountains not far
from the Rhijn, and the Lake Boden see. The city is rich, and well governed;
inhabited by an industrious people, amongst other trades chiefly occupied in
making of stuf^es, and linnen-cloathes. Arbor Faelix.
It enjoys a free estate under the protection, and confederacy of the
Cantons of Zurich, Bern, Lucern, Switz, Zug, and Glaris. The Religion is
Protestant. From the famous Monastery hereof, occasioned by the Cel, and
religious recesse of S. Gal, are named the Abbots thus called, Princes of the
Empire, and of great power, and revenue in this country. Frawenfeld upon the
river Thur, the chief belonging to the confederate Cantons. Arben (Arbor
Faelix of Antoninus) upon the Lake Boden see. It belongs to the Bishops of
Constance. Rosach upon the Lake of Constance, belonging to the Abbots of S.
Gal. Will upon the Thur, the chief town subject to the Abbots. The free
estates commanding here are the Bishops of Constance, unto whom belongs the
town of Arben: the Abbot of S. Gal, to whom Will, and Rosach, and in the Higher
Turgow the parts called Gotthuss-lijt: the town of S. Gal: and the Abbot of
Rinow. The rest with the town of Frawenfeld is commanded by the seven first
confederate Cantons.

THE PRAEFECTVRESHIP OF RHEINECK.
COntaining the part of Rhijntal, or of the valley of the Rhijn, extended from
toward Werdenberg along the left shore of that river unto the entrance thereof
into the Lake of Constantz. Chiefer places are Altstettin; and Rheineck,
whereof this lies at the entrance of the Rhijn into the Lake; the seat of the
governor of the country for the Switzers, and commanded by the seven Cantons
of Vren, Switz, Vnderwalden, Lucern, Zurich, Glaris, Zug, and Appen-zel. The
part of the valley, lying upon the farther side of the Rhijn, with the town of
Bregentz, and Veldkirck belong to the princes of the house of Austria.

THE COUNTRY OF SARGANS. Sarunetum regio.

LYing about the Lake Walen see in the way betwixt Zurich, and Chur of the
Grisons. The town of Sargans, whereof the country is named, is seated in that
road near unto the river Sara, and the borders of the Grisons. The country is
subject to the seven first Cantons, commanding here by course.

WALLIS-LANDT. Vallesia.

IT is a long, and a deep bottom of the Alps PAENINAE, reaching from the
Mountain Die Furcken, or from the spring of the river Rhosne along the course
of that river unto the town of S. Moritz, where again the hills do close, and
shut up the Valley; bounding upon the North with the Switzers; upon the West
with Savoye; upon the South with part of Italy; and upon the East with the hill
S. Gothard, and other tops of the Alps of the Lepontij, where spring the
rivers Rhijn, Rhuss, Tesin, and Aar. The country within is most pleasant,
fruitful, and happy, abounding with very excellent pasture, and meadow grounds,
corn, butter, cheese, saffron, and sundry sorts of very delicate fruits. It
affords likewise Saltsprings, discovered in the year 1544 near unto Sitten;
also diverse fountains of hot medicinable waters. Without it is environed with
a continual wall of horride, and steep mountains, covered all the year long
in their tops with a thick everlasting crust of ice, and snow, not passable by
armies, and with much trouble, and danger by single travailers; castle-like
admitting one only narrow gap, or entrance at the town of S. Moritz, before
mentioned. The inhabitants are noted to be very courteous toward strangers,
but rough, and uncivil one toward an other, by their drinking of sharp cold
waters, intermingled with snow, descending from off their mountains much
subject to the Struma; or the Kings-evill. It is divided into the Upper, and
the Lower Wallis-landt. The Upper Wallislandt begins at the Mountain Die
Furcken, and is continued along the Rhosne unto the confluence thereof, and the
river Morsia; containing seven resorts, which they call Desenas, or Zenden,
and thirty Parishes. The chief town hereof, and of the whole valley is Sitten,
or Sion, (the seat of the Bishop,) situated upon the Rhosne in a plain under a
steep biforked mountain, Sedunum. lon. 29. g. lat. 45. g. Birt.
spiring up in manner of two high, and precipitious rocks; upon the top of the
one whereof, named Valeria, are reared the Cathedral Church, and the houses of
the Canons; upon the other, which is much the higher, (fearful with headlong
cliffes) the strong castle, called Tyrbile, for the temperate, and cool air
it enjoys, the pleasant recesse of the Bishops amidst the summers heat. The
Lower Wallis-landt reaches along the course of the Rhosne from its meeting
with the river Morsia unto the town of S. Moritz; comprehending only six
resorts, and 24 Parishes. Chiefer towns here are Martinach (Octodurus of
Caesar, and Octodurus, and Civitas Valensium of Antoninus;) and S. Moritz,
situated upon the Rhosne, where this river issues forth of the valley. The
Mountains here shut so near together, that the bridge, under which the Rhosne
passes, will admit but one arch; closed with a castle, and two gates upon the
bridge. The whole valley is subject to the Bishop of Sitten, chosen by the
Canons of the Collegiate Church of Sion, and the seven resorts of the Upper
Wallis-landt; with whom notwithstanding do join in the Diets the Deputies of
the seven resorts, creating the magistrates, and officers, hearing appeals,
and determining the public businesses of state. The Lower Wallis-landt
obeys the Upper; made subject by long arms, and war, and commanded by
their governors. The religion hereof is that of the Church of Rome.

THE COUNTRY OF THE GRISONS. Rhaeti, and Grisones.

COmprehending the parts of the Alps, lying betwixt the springs of the rivers
Rhijn, Inn, Adise, and Aada; confining upon the North with the Switzers; upon
the West with Palenser-tal, a prefectureship, and vallie belonging to the three
first Cantons; upon the South with Lombardy in Italy; and upon the East with
the Earldom of Tirol. It is divided into three Leagues, or Cantons; the upper
League; the League of the house of God; and the Lower league, or the league of
the ten Jurisdictions, distinguished, and named thus in regard of the
confederacies, as of the many communalties in the several Cantons, so of these
one with another.

THE UPPER LEAGVE. S^perius, and Canum Foedus

LYing betwixt the hill Luckmannier, and the vallie Palensertal upon the West,
and the League of the house of God upon the East; and containing the springs,
and courses of the Vorder, and Hinder Rhijn until about their meetings near
Chur, with the inter-vening mountains, and valleys of Lugnitz and Medels, and
beyond the mountain der Vogel, on the side toward Italy, the valleys
Masoxer-tal, and Galancker-tal until beyond Rufflee. It has no city, or town
of note. Chiefer places are first along the course of the Vorder Rhijn Medels,
giving the name to the valley of Medels; the way from Diserntis unto
Palenser-tal of the Switzers. In the high road betwixt the valley of Medels,
and Palensertal stands the huge mountain Luckmannier, affording only a
passage in Summer. Tavetch. Diserntis, a rich monastery. Ilantz, sometimes the
place of the General Diets of the Cantons. Nere hereunto the river Lugnitz
falls into the Rhijn, giving the name to the valley of Lugnitz. Along the
Hinder Rhijn Retzuns near unto the meeting hereof, and the Vorder Rhijn. Tusis
in the road of Italy from Chur by the mountains Vrsler, and der Vogel. Here
the way over the Alps begins to be exceeding troublesome, and dangerous by
means of the strait ways, headlong precipices, and almost continual bridges
hanging over the dreadful falls, and cataracts of the Rhijn. Splugen, a noted
borough in the same road near unto the head of the Hinder Rhijn. Here the way
of Italy divides, the one part leading from hence over the mountains Vrsler,
or Splugen-bergh into the valley Gampoltschin, and toward Chiavenna, and the
Lake of Como; and the other over the Vogel into Masoxer-tal, and to the towns
of Bellizona, and Locarno, and the Lake Maggiore. On the other side of the
mountains toward Italy S. Bernardino, situated at the foot of the Vogel, and
the beginning of Masoxer-tal; which is a valley continued South from hence
toward Rufflee, and Bellizona along the course of the river Muesa. Masox,
sometimes an Earldom, giving now the name to the valley, Masoxer-tal. Rufflee
further down upon the Muesa, nearer to Bellizona, and the Lake Maggiore. West
of Masoxer-tal betwixt this valley, and Palenser-tal along the course of an
obscure river, falling into the Muesa about Rufflee, lies the valley
Galancker-tal, inhabited by basket-makers. The government of this Canton is
popular, divided into 19 resorts, or Communalties. 1 Of Tavetch, and Diserntis.
2 The Valley of Lugnitz. 3 Ilantz, and Grub. 4 Ober-sachs. 5 Walterspurg. 6
Schlawyss. 7 Laax, and Siniss. 8 Flymiss, 9 Trumbs. 10 Raetzuns. 11
Heintzenburg, Tusis, and Katz. 12 Scams. 13 Rhijnwald in Splugen. 14
Masoxer-tal, and Galancker-tal. 15 Rufflee. 16 Safien. 17 Thennen. 18 Schopina.
19 and Falls, governed by their several Ammans, chosen yearly by the suffrages
of all the inhabitants of the Canton. The 4. 13. 16. 17. 18. and 19.
Communalties speak the Dutch language. The rest a corrupt Italian.

THE LEAGVE OF THE HOUSE OF GOD. Faedus Domus Dei.

COntaining the middle tract of the Grisons, having the Upper League upon the
West, and upon the East the League of the ten Jurisdictions; divided after
Simlerus into 21 Communalties. 1. of Chur. 2. Zizers etc. 3. Furstnow. 4. the
Higher Sax. 5. Reambs. 6. Tieffencasten. 7. Grifenstein. 8. Stalla. 9. and
Wels, lying on this side of ^he Mountains toward Germany; and beyond the
Mountains toward Italy. 10 Bregalien, Vnderport etc. 11 Zutz. 12 Sinnada. 13
Postlaaf. 14. Steinsperg. 15 Schuls. 16 Remuss. 17. Munstertal. 18 Mals. 19
Schantzen. 20 Churburg. 21 and Ortestein; the largest of the three Grison
Cantons. The more remarkable places here are Chur, situated about a Dutch mile
from the meetings of the Vorder, and the Hinder Rhijn (Curia of Antoninus) now
a Bishops sea, Curia. lon. 32. g. lat. 47. g. Market.
and the only city of the Grisons, subject sometimes to the Bishops, at this
day governed in manner of a free State. Tinnetio.
Tintzen (Tinnetio of Antoninus) seated amongst inaccessible, and high
mountains betwixt Chur, and the Valley of Bergel. Stalla, called otherwise
Bevio for that the way over the Mountains does here divide it self; situated
in a wild, and desert tract. Sinnada near unto the spring of the Inn. Zutz.
Steinsperg. Schuls. The part of the valley of the Inn extended hither from
Sinnada, or from the head of that river is named Engadin. Mals. Near hereunto
on the opposite side of the same Mountains, out of the which sourceth the Inn,
springs the river Adise. Schantzen. Churburg. The part of the Valley of the
Adise, continued hither from Mals, Murus.
or from the head of that river, is called Vinsgow. Mur (Murus of Antoninus) in
the valley of Bergel, which valley is continued from the head of the river
Maira along the course thereof toward Chiavenna, and the meeting of the same
with the river Lyra. S. Iacomo (Tarvasede of Antoninus) situated in the valley
of Gampoltschin, which valley reaches from the mountain Vrsler, or from the
head of the Lyra along the course of that river toward Cleven, and the
confluence thereof, and the Maira. Postlaaf over against the Valtolina. The
jurisdiction of this Canton (like unto that of the higher League) rests in
all the inhabitants of the several Communalties thereof. The chief Magistrate
of the city, and Communalty of Chur is named Burger-meister. The rest by the
names of Amman, Vogt, and Potestat; elected by the Commons of each resort. The
language of the two first Communalties is the Dutch. All the other speak a
corrupt Italian.

THE LEAGVE OF THE X IVRISDICTIONS. Foedus 10. Iurisdictionu^

COntaining the North-east part of the Grisons, frontiring upon the Earldom
of Tirol, and divided into 10. resorts, which they call jurisdictions. 1. of
Tafaass. 2. Zum Closterlin in Prattigow. 3. Ienats. 4. Schiers. 5. Churwalden.
6. Alvenow. 7. S. Peter in Schamfick. 8. Langwiss. 9. Malans. and 10.
Meienfeild; the least of the Cantons. It has no town of note. Chiefer places
are Tauaas, an open village; the chief town of the League, and the place of
the Court, and of the particular Diets of the Canton. Alvenow. Castles, the
seat of the governor for the princes of Austria. Ienats. Schiers. These three
lie in Prettigow, which is a narrow village of some 4. Dutch miles in length,
extended along the course of the river Lanquarte; named thus from the part of
the Alps under which it lies, called by Mela Rhaetico-Mons, now
Prettigower-berg. Malans. Meienfeld: both neighboring to the Rhijn. The eight
first jurisdictions are subject to the house of Austria; governed by their
prefects, residing in Castles in the vallie of Prettigow, enjoying
notwithstanding their several customs, and privileges, which carefully they
maintain, kept safe in the common Archiues hereof at Tavaas. The two last obey
the ioinct command of the three Cantons of the Grisons. In the year 1436 all
the ten Resorts united into one common League; conditioning their mutual
defense against their enemies, preservation of peace, maintenance of their
privileges, and their loyalty, and due obedience toward their natural Lords.

Besides these particular leagues all the three Cantons are linked together in
one common confederacy; for this cause assembling yearly their general
Diets, consisting of 63 Delegates, or suffrages, whereof 28 are sent from the
Higher League, 23 from the League of the house of God, and 14 from the League
of the ten jurisdictions: by whom are heard the Appeals from their common
Prefectures, and the public businesses of state handled, and consulted of
concerning war, and peace, confederacies, embassies, new laws to be enacted,
and whatsoever else might concern the General Commonwealth. From these
notwithstanding it is lawful to appeal unto the the communalties of every
Canton; the causes being severally proposed in them, and determined according
to their mayor part. Sometimes also in matters of lesser moment, thought
unworthy of the public Diets, meet only the chief magistrates of each
League, who are the Provincial judge of the Higher League, the Burger-meister
of Chur, and the Amman of Tavaas, assisted with select persons out of each
Canton; but who have no full power to conclude, and but only to relate, what
is done, to their several Communalties. The place of the public Diets is most
commonly Chur in the League of the house of God, sometime Ilantz in the Upper
League, or Tavaas in the Canton of the Ten jurisdictions. If any controversy
arise betwixt the three Leagues, three, or four, are chosen out of each
Canton, who either friendly compose the matter, (being freed first from their
oaths to their several Cantons) or otherwise determine it according to equity,
as each one shall think fit. If their voices be equal, an vmpeere is chosen
by the common suffrages of the three Leagues. If the quarrel happen betwixt
any two Cantons, the third does end the jarre. If betwixt two Cantons, and the
third, six delegates out of either side; or if these cannot effect it, an
vmpeere chosen by the voices of all the three Cantons. If Betwixt 2
Communalties of the same Canton, the next Communalty. If betwixt Communalties
of diverse Cantons, judges appointed by the general Delegates of all the
three. If lastly betwixt particular persons, or Communalties, and the Cantons,
two, or three judges out of each Canton.

THE ITALIAN PRAEFECTVRE-SHIPS. Praefecturae Italicae.

THese lie amongst the Alps of Italy, accounted part of that Province,
belonging sometimes to the Dukes of Milan, and Earls of Masox, and since by
gift, purchase, and arms added to the Confederacy hereof. They contain the
towns, and goverments of Locarno, Lugano, Bellizona, Plurs, Chiavenna, the
Valley of Magia, Liviner-tal, Palenser-tal, and Valtolina.

1. LOCARNO. Locarnum.

THe town is seated in a pleasant, and fruitful plain betwixt high
Mountains, and the head of the Lake Maggiore, at what place the river Magia is
received hereinto. It contains 400 households, or families. In the district,
or country hereof are numbered some 20 Parishes.

2. 3. LVGANO, Luganum. Mendrisium.
AND MENDRISIO.
THose two towns lie upon the Lake Lugano, almost in the middle way betwixt
the Lakes of Como, and Maggiore. They are several prefectureships. The country
of Lugano exceeds in bigness that of Locarno, whose governor is called
captain, and is the Lieutenant of the four Prefectureships, belonging to the
12 Cantons of the Switzers; in chances of war, insurrections, and dangers,
which may arise in the province, commanding over all the other prefects, and
officers.

4. THE VALLEY OF MAGIA. Vallis Madia.

IT is a bottom of the Alps Lepontiae, continued along the course of the
river Magia (whereof it is named) from the Mountains of Wallis-landt toward
Locarno, and the Lake Maggiore. It was sometimes united in the same government,
or country with Locarno; now made a distinct prefectureship.

5. LIVINER-TAL. Vallis Lepontina.

IT is a valley of the same Alps, whereof it yet retains the name. It is
extended along the course of the river Tesino from the mountain S. Gothard
toward Belinzana; and betwixt the vallyes of Magia, and Palenser-tal.

6. PALENSER-TAL. Vallis Palensa.

IT is also a bottom of the same Alps, called otherwise Val Breunia by the
Italians. It lies betwixt Liviner-tal, and Galancker-tal along the course of
an obscure river, falling into the Tesino short of Belinzana. Betwixt the head
of this valley, and that of Medels of the Grisons arises the great mountain
Luckmannier, out of which sourceth the nearer spring of the Rhijn, named by the
Dutch the Vorder Rhijn.

7. 8. BELINZANA, Bilitionium.
AND RIVIERA.
THe former is a town situated upon the Tesino a little below the confluence
thereof, and the river Muesa. Hereunto belonged sometimes Palenser-tal, and
Riuiera; now distinct prefectureships. All three were once part of the
Earldom of Masox, and of the Misauci of Pliny, part of the Lepontij.

These 8 prefectureships appertain unto the Switzers; whereof the four first
are subject to the 12 first Cantons; Liviner-tal only to the Canton of Vren;
and Palenser-tal, Belinzana, and Riviera to the three first Cantons of Vren,
Switz, and Vnderwalden; commanded by their several governors, and officers.

1. PLVRS. Plurium.

THis is a great borough, seated in a plain under the Alps upon the river
Maira betwixt the valley Bregalien, and Chiavenna; the chief of sundry
villages, lying in the same bottom, and subject to the prefect hereof.

2. CHIAVENNA. Clauena. lon. 32. g. lat. 46. g. Merc:

THe town, and name is ancient; called Clavena by Antoninus in his
Itinerarium. It stands in a pleasant valley upon the river Maira some 10
Italian miles above the Lake of Como. The country, or valley hereof, extended
along the Maira toward the Lake, is named from hence by the Dutch
Clevener-tal, or the valley of Cleuen.

3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. VALTOLINA. Vallis Telina, and Volturena Prouincia.

IT is a fruitful, and pleasant valley of some 60 Italian miles in length;
continued from the head of the Aada along the course of that river until the
entrance thereof into the Lake of Como, divided into 6. goverments, or
prefectureships. The wines of this country are much commended, transported in a
great abundance over the Alps into Bavaria, Switzer-landt, and other parts.
Chiefer towns, following the course of the river Aada, are Bormio, a
prefectureship, seated at the head of the valley, and the river under the
mountain Bra^lio, called otherwise by the Dutch Wormsser ioch. Tiran, a
prefectureship. Teio, a prefectureship, the chief fortress of the valley.
Sondrio, the chief town; a prefectureship. The governor, or captain hereof
(for so he is named) is Lieutenant of the whole country; having here the like
command, as has the Captain of Lugano in the prefectures belonging to the 12
Cantons. Morbengo, a prefectureship, situated near unto the Lake of Como.

These 8 prefectureships of Plurs, Chiavenna, and the Valtolina are subject to
the joint command of the three Leagues, or Cantons of the Grisons. The
language hereof, as of those other appertaining to the Switzers is the Italian.

NETHERLAND. Belgium. Inferior Germania.

THE Country has been thus named from its maritime, and more flat, and lower
situation. It is accounted part of Germany, with the Free Country of Burgundy
making the tenth circle of the Empire; although at this day it neither
acknowledges the Emperors, not obeys the Laws, and orders appointed by the
Diets, divided amongst sundry free states, and gouerments, partly now commanded
by the Princes of the house of Burgundy, and Austria, and partly by the
general States of the United Provinces.

It boundeth upon the East with the districts of Trier, Luick, Gulick, Cleve,
and Westphalen, upon the North with the river Eems, and East-Freislandt; upon
the South with Lorraine, Champaigne, and Picardie in France; and upon the
North-West with the German Ocean.

It lies betwixt the 22, and 30 degrees of Longitude, and the 48, and 53,
degrees of Northern Latitude, or betwixt the 16, or middle parallel of the 7
clime, and the 21 parallel, or end of the 8 clime. The longest day beyond Arras
in the furthest South contains 16 hours; beyond the town of Dam, or at the
river Eems in the furthest North 16 hours, and three quarters. The circuit of
the whole is 340. Flemish miles, or some one thousand Italian, or English.

The parts hereof toward the West, and North along the Seacoast are flat,
plain, and marishie; abounding chiefly in pasturages, milk, butter, cheese,
horses, and beeues of an extraordinary stature, and bigness. Those
contrariwise toward the South-East, or bordering upon Luick, and Lorraine
swell with rising hills, and woods; relics of the great forest of Ardenne.
All parts are tolerably fruitful. No country for the quantity is more
populous; replenished with 225 walled towns, and cities (besides above 6600
buroughs and villages,) for the most part very strong, and numerously
inhabited by industrious, and curious artificers, and rich tradesmen, and
merchants. The shipping of the maritime coasts seem to exceed in number all
the rest of the world amassed together, swarming in all seas, and Oceans, and
bringing hither, as to a common magazin, whatsoever riches, and commodities the
earth, or sea affords; by the commodious situation thereof, and opportunity
of the great rivers of the Scheldt, Mase, and Rhijn, distributed from hence
into all lands, the seat of negotiation, and trading.

The ancient inhabitants were the Frisij, now West-Freislandt, and
North-Hollandt, with part of the district of Vtreicht: the Batavi inhabiting
the Island of the Rhijn, intercepted betwixt the middle branch thereof, and the
Wael, with the neighboring shore of Gaul, containing now South-Holland with
parts of Vtreicht, and Gelderlandt: the Caninefates, containing also part of
the same Island: the Bructeri, where now Deventer, and Swol in Over-ysel: the
Vsipij, now the country of Zutphen: part of the Sicambri, now Arnhem, and
Veluwe in Gelderlandt: the Advatici, now Brabant, or part thereof about
Bosleduc, or Doway: the Morini, now Flanders: the Atrebates, now Artois: the
Nervij, now Hainault, and the country about Tournay: the Tongri, now part of
Brabant about Antwerpe: and part of the Treveri, now the Dukedom of Luxemburg.
The five first nations were Germans, inhabiting beyond the Rhijn. The rest were
parts of the Gauls Belgicke; descended notwithstanding from the Germans. By C.
Julius Caesar in his wars of Gaul these last were subdued to the Romans;
under which subjection they continued until the expiration of that Empire,
comprehended under the Provinces of Belgica Secunda, and Germania Secunda. The
other remained still free from foreign yoke, with other neighboring Dutch
people by occasion hereof, not long after uniting into the common name of the
most warlike, and victorious French; famous in the later Roman histories, and
in short time conquering, and overspreading all Gaul, Germany unto the rivers
Elb, and Saltza, Pannonie, the greatest part of Italy; with part of
Tarraconensis in Spain, won from the Moors. Under the French, who here
succeeded unto the Romans, the whole was contained under the name and kingdom
of Austrasia, or Oosten-reich. After that the French Monarchy became divided
amongst the posterity of the Emperor Lewis the Godly, the part hereof broke
into sundry new principalities, and goverments remaining unto this day, partly
holding of the French kings, or successors of Charles the Bald, and partly of
the German Emperors: the Dukedomes of Brabant, Luxemburg, Gelderlandt, and
Limburg, the Earledomes of Flanders, Hollandt, Zealandt, Haynault, Artois,
Namur, and Zutphen, the Lordships of Freislandt, Groningen, Vtreicht,
Over-ysel, and Malines, and the Marquisate of the Sacred Empire; the manner,
and occasion of whose beginnings, together with their continuance, and state
unto our times is set down in the Description of France. Of these, Flanders,
and Artois appertained to the soveraigntie of the kings of France, quitted unto
Philip the second king of Spain, and the Princes hereof by Henry the second,
French king, in the late league of Cambraye. The rest were held under the Dutch
Emperors. By Philip the Hardy the countries of Brabant, Flanders, Artois, and
Limburg with Malines, and the Marquisate of the Sacred Empire became added to
the dominion, and family of Burgundy: by Philip the Good, Holland, Zealandt,
West-Freislandt, Hainault, Luxemburg, and Namur: by the Emperor Charles the
fifth, Gelderland, Zutphen, Vtreicht, Over ysel, and Groningen, the manner
whereof is likewise showed in France. Since this union by the power, and
greatness of their Princes the Provinces have been wholly with drawn from all
acknowledgement, and subjection of the German Emperors, and French kings,
their ancient Lords; governed in manner of free States by their Princes, and
magistrates, and making a distinct nation, and commonwealth by themselves;
known now by the names of Netherland, the Low Countries, the Lower Germany,
and of the 17 Provinces, called thus from their number, language, and
situation. Duke Charles, surnamed the Fighter, Prince hereof, son to Philip the
Good, had an intent to unite the parts then under his government into one entire
kingdom by the name of Burgundy. But because all the Provinces were
sovereign, and had their several laws, privileges, and revenues, neither
had ever granted to their Princes any other then limited power, this project
took none effect. In the reign of Philip the second king of Spain, heir of
the house of Burgundy, and in the year 1566 begun those memorable civil
broiles so long afflicting those rich, and flourishing countries, continued
with the spoil, and ransacking of all their chief towns, and cities, much
bloodshed, and unspeakable misery, and calamity for above the space of 40
years during the Regencies of Margaret Duchess of Parma, Fernando Alvares de
Toledo Duke of Alva, Lewis Requeseims great Commendador of Castille, Don John
d' Austria, natural son to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, Alexander Fernese,
Prince of Parma, and Ernest Count Mansselt, deputies, and Le^uftenants hereof,
and after the decease of that king, and the assignment of the Netherlands unto
the Archdukes Albert, and Isabella until the year 1609; occasioned first upon
pretense of the violation of their privileges by the erecting of new
Bishoppricks, and attempting to bring in the Spanish Inquisition, and
afterward through the harshnesse of some of the Spanish governors, the
insolency, and rapine of their soldiers, the natural hatred of the people
against strangers, and impatiency of foreign subjection, the stiffnesse of the
Prince in opposing the Reformed Religion, and maintaining the authority, and
rites of the sea of Rome, his pretended many injuries, oppression, and tyranny
in the year 1581 breaking out into manifest, and open revolt of the most part
of the Provinces, renouncing utterly their faith, and allegiance hereunto, and
offering their subjection, and sovereignty to neighboring Princes, refused by
Henry the third, French King, and Elizabeth Queen of England: the issue of all
which was (Brabant, and Flanders regained by arms, and better moderation) the
liberty of Hollandt, Zealandt, Vtreicht, Over-ysel, Gelderlandt, Zutphen,
West-Freislandt, and Groningen, better assured by their seas, and marshes, and
the advantage of their shipping, protected, and aided by the English during the
reign of the late Queen of famous memory, and for their stronger defense, and
more firm union amongst themselves joined, and confederate together in a
strict league, since from hence famously called the United Provinces, in the
year 1609 after long unprofitable war treated withal, and acknowledged, as
free countries, by Philip the third king of Spain and the Archdukes, (yet
notwithstanding some contradiction with reservation of their rights hereunto)
in which quality, and separation (although the truce of 12 years being
expired, the wars are again renewed) they still to this day remain.

By means hereof Netherlandt is now become divided into two different parts,
and, as it were, Commonwealths; the Provinces subject to the Princes of the
house of Burgundy, and Austria; and those other of the Free confederate States.

THE PROVINCES OF NETHERLANDT SVBIECT TO THE PRINCES.
THese also in the beginning of the tumults rebelled with the rest; recovered
by force of arms, and better moderation of their governors. They confine upon
the East with the districts of Gulick, Luick, and Trier in Germany; upon the
South with Lorraine, and Champaigne, and Picardie in France; upon the
North-West with the German Ocean; and upon the North with the Free united
Provinces. They contain 9 of the 17 Provinces, and 7 maine countries, of
Limburg, Luxemburg, Namur, Haynault, Artois, Flanders, and Brabant, in which
last the Provinces of Mechlin, and of the Marquisate of the Sacred Empire are
included.

THE COUNTRY OF LIMBVRG. Limburgi ducatus.

SItuated betwixt the Bishoppricke of Luyck, Gulich land, and the Dukedom of
Luxemburg. The soil is fruitful for all needful commodities; wines
excepted. Limburg the chief town is pleasantly seated amongst shadie woods
(full of medicinable simples) upon an high hill, under which runs the river
Wesdo; defended with a strong Castle, mounted upon a steep, and precipitious
rock. Amidst the shades, and thickets of the great forest of Ardenne, about
two Dutch miles and an half from hence in the Diocese of Luick, lies the
famous borough, and water Tungri, ciuitas Galliae, fontem habet insignem,
plurimis bullis stillantem, ferruginei saporis, quod ipsum non nisi in fine
potus intelligitur. Purgat hic corpora: tertianas f^bres discutit,
calculorumque vitia. Eadem aqua igne admoto turbida fit; ad postremum rubescit.
Plin. Not. Histor. lib. 31. c. 2. Eum fontcm hodie vocant le baing de Spah.
lac. Dale champij Annot: in. C. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 31. c. 2. Lutzenburgu^
lon. 28. g. lat. 50. g. Market.
of the Spa. Here are reckned some five walled towns, and 125 boroughs, and
villages. The ancient inhabitants seem to have been part of the Eburones of
Caesar.

THE DVKEDOME OF LVXEMBVRG.
BOunded upon the North with Luyck, and Namur; upon the East with the Moselle,
and the district of Trier; upon the South with Eorraine; and upon the West with
Eyfel, and the river Meuse. The country is hilly, and shaded with thick woods,
remainders of the great forest Ardenne. The soil is fruitful. The more hilly,
and woodland part retains yet the name of Ardenne; stored with plenty of all
manner of game. Here are accounted 23 walled towns, and 1168 buroughs, and
villages. Chiefer towns are Theon-ville, a strong frontire place, seated upon
the Moselle near unto Metz, and the border of Lorraine. Rode-Macheren.
Greven-Macheren near unto Trier. Echternach. Dechry: both situated upon the
river Saur. Vianden. Nueburg. Lutzenburg, unequally seated in a plain, and
upon the brow, and top of a rising hill, divided by the river Alsaltz; the
chief town of the country. Arlon upon the top of an high hill. Bastoigne.
Neuf-chastelle. Mont-medy. Marville. Dampvillers. The ancient inhabitants were
part of the Treveri.

NAMVR. Provincia Namurcensis.

LYing betwixt Brabant, Haynault, and the district of Triers. The country
swells with woodie hills; enjoying a sweet, and pleasant air, and affording
plenty of all necessary commodities. Herein are contained 4 walled towns, and
184 villages. Chiefer towns are Bouignes upon the Meuse. Namurcum.
Namur a Bishops sea, and the chief town of the country; seated in a vallie
betwixt two hills, or mountains on both sides of the river Sambre, at what
place this enters into the Meuse. The city is rich, and adorned with fair
buildings, and fortified with a strong, and well furnished Castle, or Citadel.
The ancient inhabitants seem to have been part of the Nervij of Caesar.

HAYNALT. Hannonia.

BOunded upon the East with Namur, and Luick; upon the South with Champaigne;
and upon the West, and North with Flanders. The country is hilly, and full of
shady woods; like unto the parts before described. The soil is very fruitful;
abounding in come. Here are numbered 24 walled towns, and cities, and 950.
burrowes, and villages. Chiefer towns are Charlemont, upon the top of an
high hill under which runs the Meuse. Marieburg. Philippe-ville; strong
frontire places, opposed against the French, and named thus from their
founders, the Emperor Charles the fifth, Mary Queen of Hungary, and Philip the
second king of Spain. Avesnes upon the river Hepre, a strong town affronting
the same enemy. Chimay seated amongst woods upon the river Blanc. Landresy
upon the Sambre. Malbuge upon the Sambre. Beaumont upon the same river. Binche.
Halle; famous for the image of the blessed Virgin, and the impostures, and
fained miracles there done. Bergen, seated upon a little rivulet, named Trulle.
The city is large, Mons. lon. 26. g. lat. 51. g. Merc.
and strongly fortified, rich, inhabited by an industrious people; Valencienae.
lon. 26. g. 29. m lat. 50. g. 10. m. Clav.
the chief town of the country. Valenciennes upon the Scheldt, where it
begins to be nauigable. The town is also large, strong, and well traded;
the next unto Bergen. Conde upon the Scheldt. Bauais. The ancient inhabitants
were part of the Nervij, the most valiant people of the Gauls.

ARTOIS. Artesia.

BOunded upon the East with Cambresy, and Flanders Gallicant; upon the South
and West with Picardy in France; and upon the North with Flanders Teutonant,
and the river Lys. The air is temperate, and pleasant, the soil fruitful in
come, especially for wheat; the common granarie, and storehouse for Mechlin,
Antwerpe, and other parts of Brabant, and Flanders. Atrebatum. lon. 24. g. lat.
51. g. Merc.
Chiefer towns are Bappaulme, frontiring upon France. Arras (Rigiacum of
Ptolemy, and Civitas Atrauatum of Antoninus,) a Bishops sea, and the chief
town. The city is very strongly fenced with rampires, and bulwarks, large,
populous, and replenished with industrious inhabitants; divided into two
distinct towns severally walled; the lesser called la Cite, subject to the
Bishop, beautified amongst other ornaments with a magnificent Cathedral
Church, dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and a library containing many
excellent manuscripts; and la Ville, appertaining to the Prince, having fair
streets, and a rich monastery of 20 thousand crowns yearly revenue. Bethune.
Air upon the river Lys. Further up the Lys about two Dutch miles from Air
sometimes stood the strong town of Teroane (Tervanna of Ptolemie, and civitas
Morinum of Antoninus) in the reign of Henry the Eight besieged, and won by
the English; afterward in the wars betwixt the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
and the French again surprised, and destroyed by the Imperialists. Hesdin a
strong frontire place, opposed against the French; built by the Imperialists in
the reign of the Emperor Charles the fifth. Fanum S. Audomari. lon. 24. g.
lat. 51. g. Merc.
S. Omar a fair, and populous town, the second of the country, situated upon
the Aha, some 8. Dutch miles from the Ocean; named thus from S. Omar, about the
year 670 Bishop of the Morini, and a monastery by him here erected, the
occasion, and beginning of the town. Here some put the haven named Portus
Iccius by Caesar, coniectured from the high shores, encompassing the town, and
some old fragments of anchers, and of ships found under the ground; the Ocean
(as it seems) having since withdrawn it self further back, and the channel
filled up. It contains 10* walled towns, and 754 buroughs, or villages. The
ancient inhabitants were the Atrebates, with part of the Morini.

FLANDERS. Flandria.

BOunded upon the South with Hainault, Artois, and Picardie, extending this way
as far as Calais; upon the East with Hainault, and Brabant; upon North-West
with the German Ocean; and upon the North with the seas of Zealandt and the
Honte, or the left branch of the Scheldt, dividing it from those Islands. It
contains three divisions, or names, of Flanders Gallicant, Dutch Flanders,
and Flanders Imperial.

FLANDERS GALLICANT.
Surnamed thus from its Wallon, or French language. The bounds are upon the
East Hainault, and the Scheldt; upon the South Cambresy; upon the West the
river Lys, and Artois; and upon the North Dutch Flanders. The soil is very
fruifull in corn, and pasturages; the air is healthful, Insula.
temperate, and pleasant. Chiefer towns are L'isle, named thus from its
situation, seated sometimes Iland-like amongst fens, and mariches. Duacum. lon.
25. g. lat. 51. g. Merc.
The city is populous, rich, and well traded. Douay upon the river Scarpe,
where is an university erected by Philip the second king of Spain, a late
seminary of English fugitives. Taurnay upon the Scheldt (Baganum of Ptolemy,
and Ciuitas Turnacensium of Antoninus,) beseiged, and taken in by Henry the
eight, and the English in their wars against Lewis the Twelfth French King.
Orchies. The more ancient inhabitants seem part of the Nervij of Caesar before
mentioned.

DVTCH FLANDERS.
Surnamed thus from its Dutch language. The bounds are upon the South the river
Lys, and Flanders Gallitant, the New Fosse, and Artois, with part of Picardy;
upon the North-west the German Ocean; upon the North the sea of Zealandt; and
upon the East the Scheldt, and Flanders Imperial. The country is marishie,
sandy, lean, and less fruitful. Chiefer towns are first upon the seacoast
Greveling. Duyenkerck, famous for pyracies. Oostend, for a memorable three
years siege sustained against the Archdukes Albert, and Isabella, and the
whole power of the house of Burgundy, and Spain in the years 1602, 1603, and
1604. Neuport, for the victory of Count Maurice of Nassau, and of the English,
and Netherlands, obtained against the same enemy in the year 1600. Sluys upon
a spacious creek, or inlet of the Ocean. The haven is the fairest upon those
Flemmish seacoasts, Brugae. lon. 24. g. 36. m. lat. 51. g. 30. m. Clav.
capeable at once of 500 vessels. Within the land Brugge; seated about 3 Dutch
miles from the sea upon two navigable fosses, drawn from the Sluys. The city
is rich, fair, and of great state, containing 4 Italian miles and an half in
circuit about the walls, and some 60 parishes. The inhabitants hereof were the
first discouerers of the Acores, from hence now otherwise called the Flemmish
Islands. Gandavum. lon. 25. g. lat. 52. g. Market.
Gendt, the chief city of the province, and the largest through all the
Netherlands, containing 7 Italian miles about the walls; situated at the
confluence of the rivers Scheldt, and the Lys, and the Dikes called the Lieue,
and the Moere. The town is at this day nothing so wealthy, and potent as in
times past, occasioned through the injury of their princes, offended with
their often rebellions, and tumults, the miseries of the present and late
wars, and their want of trade, and foreign negotiation, shut in, and
debarred by the Hollanders, and the condeferate states, more powerful at sea;
a common calamity at this day of all the Netherlands, subject to the
Arch-duchesse. Yperen a Bishops sea upon a rivulet thus named.

FLANDERS IMPERIAL.
NAmed thus for that it was anciently held under the fies, and sovereignty of
the German Emperors. It is the most Easterly part of the country; lying on
both sides of the Scheldt, and confining upon Brabant. Towns here of better
note are Hulst, the chief town in the land of Waes. Axel, likewise lying in
Tlant van Waes. Rupelmonde at the confluence of the Rivers Scheldt, Teneramunda.
and Rupel, the country of Gerardus Mercator. Dendermonde at the meetings of
the Scheldt, and the Dender. Beyond the Scheldt Aeist upon the river Dender.
The town is large and strongly fortified.

There moreover belongs to the continent hereof the Island of Cadsandt,
neighboring to Sluys, and called thus from a town of this name; and that of
Biervliet, named also from a fort thus called, and lying in the Dollaert
betwixt Sluys, and Axel. In the whole country are accounted thirty walled
towns, and 1154 boroughs, and villages, so thick thronging together, that to
the Spaniards, at their first coming hither under Philip the second, they
seemed like one continuate city. None of the towns are very ancient (Tournay
excepted,) by an industrious inhabitant being all built since the conquest, and
dominion of the French under the Forresters, and Earls hereof; the country
before their times being nothing else but a perpetual wast of Forests, and
woods. The ancient inhabitants were parts of the Morini, and Nervij of Caesar.

BRABANT. Brabantia.

BOunded upon the West with the river Scheldt, and Flanders Imperial; upon the
South with Haynault, and Namur; upon the East with the Bishopprick of Luick;
and upon the North with the river Mase, dividing it from Hollandt, and
Gelderlandt. It contains 80 Dutch miles in circuit, in length betwixt
Gemblours, and S. Gertruden-berg 22, and in breadth betwixt Helmont, and Bergen
op Zoom 20 of the same miles. The country is plain, healthie, and pleasant.
The more Southern parts, lying beyond the river Demer, are extraordinarily
fruitful, especially for corn. The more Northern part, especially
Kempen-landt, is sandy, less fertile, and worse inhabited. Bruxellae. lon.
26. g. 42. m. lat. 51. g. 24. m. Clav.
Chiefer towns are Nivelle, frontiring upon Hainault. Bruxelles, pleasantly
seated amongst springs, and rivulets in a rich, and fertile soil; the seat of
the Prince. Loeuen upon the river Dyle, of some 4 English miles in compass,
Lovanium.
containing within the large circumference of the walls vineyards,
corne-fields, and pasture grounds, a sweet seiour of the Muses, and a noted
University founded in the year 1416 by John the fourth of that name, Antverp.
lon. 24. g. 30. m. la. 51. g. 48. m. Clav.
Duke of Brabant. Antverpen upon the right shore of the Scheldt, a Bishops sea,
and of late years through the commodity of the river, and situation, the most
rich, and famous Empory of Christendom, resorted unto by merchants from all
parts. At this day through the injury of the neighboring confederate states,
by their strength of shipping stopping the navigation, and passage of the
Scheldt, it has quite lost the trade, and negotiation it had with foreign
nations (diverted since from hence to Amsterdam, and the towns of Hollandt,
and Zealandt,) now only frequented by some few Lawyers, and the receivers of
the princes revenue, who do a little support the estate hereof. The citadel,
or castle hereof is accounted amongst the strongest pieces of Europe, raised to
bridle, and keep in the town by Fernando Alvares de Toledo Duke of Alva,
governor of the Low countries for Philip the second king of Spain. These
four towns make up the particular province, called the Marquisate of the
sacred Empire; named thus from their situation, lying in the Marches, or
farthest bounds this way of the Germane Empire, frontiring upon Flanders,
belonging ancientlie to the fief of the kings of France. Malines upon the river
Demer, a sovereign city, and siegneurie; with the little country subject unto
it consisting of about 9 boroughes, or villages, and making one of the 17
provinces of the Low countries. Here is held the Parliament, or supreme court
of justice for the parts, remaining yet subject to the princes of the house of
Burgundy, and Austria, where are heard the appeals of the several provinces.
Gemblours. Tienen upon the river Geete. Lier. Herentals. Grave upon the Mase
the chief town of the Land of Cuyck. Shertogen-bosch, a Bishops sea, Buscum
Ducis
and a strong town of war, accounted amongst the 4 principal cities of the
province; seated upon a little rivulet called Dise about a Dutch mile from the
meeting thereof, and the Mase, and the confines of Gelderland. S.
Gertruden-berg upon the river Douge near unto the confluence thereof, and the
Mase. Breda a strong town of war, upon the river Mercke, some 2 Dutch miles
from S. Gertruden-berg; The town, belongs to the family of Nassau, more
lately after a stout, resolute, and long siege taken in by the Arch-dutchesse
Isabella. Steenbergen. Bergen op Zoom, named thus from the river, or water
whereupon it stands, near unto the Scheldt; a strong frontire town against
the Island of Tolen in Zealandt. Unto this province belongs the Island of
Willenstat, lying betwixt the towns of Steenbergen, and Dort in Holland. There
are contained in the whole country besides Malines, 26 walled towns, and 700
buroughs, or villages. The more ancient inhabitants were the Advatici, with
part of the Tongri.

These 9 provinces lie in the part, belonging sometimes to Gaul Belgique, and
co^taine some two thirds of the whole Low Countries. In pleasure, health, and
firtilitie of soil they much surpass those other commanded by the confederate
states, but in riches, populousnes, and trade of merchandise are far exceeded
by the other; shut up by them within their ports, commanders of the sea, and
hindered from their wonted traficke they had with foreign nations. They
continue yet subject to the house of Burgundy, and Spain, their ancient Lords,
the towns of Axel, Teurnheuse, Ardenburg, and Sluys, with the neighboring
forts, and Islands of Cadsandt, and Biervliet in Flanders excepted, and in
Brabant Bergen op Zoom, Steenbergen, S. Gertrudenberg, and Grave, with the
Island of Willenstat, held now by the garrisons of the united provinces. The
laws, whereby they are governed, are the customs, and privileges, and those
municipall of each province, together with the civil; united under one prince,
but not into one order, and commonwealth, attempted long since, (as hathbin
related) by Duke Charles, surnamed the Warrior, but not hitherto effected.
Their religion, which only is allowed, is the pretended Romish Catholic.
Their languages are the French, or Wallon, spoken in Flanders Gallicant, the
South part of Brabant, Artois, Haynault, Luxemburg, and Namur, whose
inhabitants are for this cause now commonly called the Wallons; and the Dutch
spoken in the rest of the country.

THE FREE CONFEDERATE PROVINCES. Provinciae confoederatae.

THey are bounded upon the South with Flanders, and Brabant; and the rivers
Mase, and Scheldt; upon the East with Cleveland, and Westphalen; upon the
North-East with O^st-Freislandt, divided by the Eems; and upon the North-west
with the Germane Ocean. They comprehend 8 provinces of the 17, containing in
quantity about a third part of the whole Netherlandt, the Dukedom of Gelders,
the Earledomes of Zutphen, Holland, and Zealandt, and the Lordships of
West-Freislandt, Groeningen, Vtreicht, and Over-ysel.

ZEALANDT. Zelandia.

COnsisting of sundry lesser Islands, and contained betwixt the Scheldt, and the
Mase. They have upon the South the Honte, or left channel of the Scheldt,
dividing them from Flanders; upon the East Brabant; upon the West the German
Ocean; and upon the North the Islands of Hollandt. The country is low, flat, and
marishie, rich in corn, and pasturage, but in regard of the moist, and foggie
air thereof unhealthful, and much subject to inundations; kept in, and
defended from the sea by banks. It is divided by the Scheldt into the parts
named by the Dutch Be-oester-scheldt, and Be-wester-scheldt.

BE-WESTERS CHELDT.
IT lies betwixt the right channel of the Scheldt; and the Honte, or Flanders.
It contains the Islands of Walcheren, Zuyt-beverlandt, Nort-beverlant, and
Wolfersdijck.

WALCHEREN. Walachria.

LYing toward the South-west against Sluys in Flanders; the most rich,
populous, and best traded of the Islands, containing about 10 Dutch miles in
Compass. Towns here are Vlissingen. Armuyde: populous, and well traded ports
upon the Ocean. Middlebur. gum. lon. 25. g. lat. 52. g. Merc.
Vere. Middleburg more within the land, upon a navigable arm, or creek of the
sea. The city is large, rich, populous, and of great state; inhabited by
wealthy merchants, and industrious tradesmen, the chief town of Zealandt, and
one of the most flourishing Empories of Europe. About a Dutch mile from hence
upon the Ocean stands the strong castle of Rammekens.

ZVIT-BEVERLANT.
SItuated betwixt Walcheren, and Brabant. The only town of note is Goes,
standing on the North side of the Island. Betwixt this, and Brabant lies a
drowned land, sometimes part of the Island.

NORT-BEVERLANT.
LYing betwixt Zuyt-beverlant, and Schouwen. The Island is little, not having
any walled town; peopled only with villages.

WOLFERSDIICK.
IT is a little Island betwixt Nort, and Zuyt-Beverlants; containing only two
boroughs, or villages.

BE-OESTER-SCHELT.
LYing betwixt the right channel of the Scheldt, and the Islands Gaurede, and
Voorn of Holland. It contains the Islands of Schouwen, Duvelant, and Tolen.

SCHOVWEN.
SEated toward the North-West, and Hollandt, the chiefest of the division;
containing six Dutch miles in circuit. Towns here are Zerick-zee upon the
Ocean. Brauwershaven, inhabited by Fishermen.

DVVELANT.
HAving in compass about four Dutch miles, and situated near unto Schouwen
betwixt that Island, and Tholen; named thus from the abundance of Pigeons, there
breeding. It has no town of note, containing only Villages, In the year
1520, the sea breaking in, the whole was overwhelmed with a deluge of waters.
The breaches since that time have been made up, and the land recovered.

TOLEN.
CAlled thus from a town of that name. It lies betwixt Duvelant, and the
North-West point of Brabant, against Steenbergen, and Bergen op Zoom; divided
from that continent by a narrow creek, or arm of the sea.

All these Islands together contain 8 walled towns, and about 100 boroughs, or
villages. The more ancient inhabitants were the Mattiaci of Tacitus.

HOLLANDT. Hollandia.

BOunded upon the South with the Islands of Zealandt; upon the West, and North
with the German Ocean; upon the North-East, with the Zuyder Zee, and
West-Freislandt; and upon the East with the Zuyder Zee, Vtreicht, and
Gelderlandt. The country is low, and fenny (the Western seacoasts excepted,
which like unto those of Flanders swell with a perpetual ridge of sandy
downs;) trenched with innumerable dikes, and watercourse for the dreaning of
the marshes, and the more easy conveyance of merchandise, affording plenty of
very excellent pasturages, milk, butter, cheese, cattle, and horses of
extraordinary bigness, but yielding little fruits, corn, or other staple
commodities. No place notwithstanding is for the quantity more populous, more
full of rich, and well governed towns, or better stored with all sorts of
provision, whether for necessity, or ornament; conveyed hither by sea from all
countries, and nations by the industrious inhabitants thereof. It is divided
into the South, and North-Hollandts.

SOVTH-HOLLANDT.
COntained betwixt the Islands of Zealandt, and the middle Channel of the
Rhijn, continued from Vtreicht to Leyden. Chiefer towns are Schoonhoven upon
the Leck. Dordracu^^. lon. 26. g. lat. 52. g. Merc.
Dort, seated Iland-like amongst waters upon the Merwe, or Nieuwe Maes; broke
off from the Continent by an inundation happening in the year 1421. The town is
large, populous, rich, and well traded; commanding the trafique, and navigation
of the Maes, and Waell, below whose confluence it stands. Betwixt it, and S.
Gertrudenberg in Brabant lie for a great space the drowned lands of Herderwert,
Munsterkirck, Dubbelmund, and other villages, overwhelmed by the forenamed
deluge in the year 1421, many of whose ruins now appear under water.
Rotterdam situated nere unto the Maes upon the Rotter, a dike, or channel so
called, giving the name hereunto; a rich Empory, and a noted port, the country
of the learned Erasmus. Betwixt this, and Dort at a little town called Krimpen
the Lecke, one of the three mainer branches of the Rhijn, falls into the
Maes. Oudewater upon the Ysel, a dike drawn from the middle channel of the
Rhijn. Haga Commit. lon. 26. g. lat. 53. g. Market.
Goude upon the Ysel. Delf. Graven-Hage, a fair, and populous open town,
seated under the downs in the most healthful, and open part of the country;
the Parliament, or chief Court of justice for Hollandt, and the ordinary
residence of the Delegates, or General States of the confederate Provinces,
containing about two thousand houses. Lugdunum Batauorum. lon. 26. g. lat. 53.
g. Merc.
Leyden (Lugdunum Batavorum of Ptolemie) now a noted University. Hither
sometimes passed the middle channel of the Rhijn, received into the Ocean not
far from hence betwixt the towns of Catwijck, and Nortwijck; since (the
maine stream being diverted another way by the Leck) continued hither by a
small current, stopped here by the intervening sandy downs, and under another
name of the V^iet turned into the Maes at Sluys, a little village against
Brill. There belongs to this division the Islands of Voorn, wherein is seated
the strong town of Brill; Somersdijck; Corendijck; Rierschille; and Gaurede;
divided from the maine land by the Maes, and continued betwixt this river, and
the Islands of Schouwen, Duvelant, and Tolen of Zealandt.

NORTH-HOLLANDT.
COntaining the division lying betwixt the middle channel of the Rhijn, and
the Zuyder-Zee, and West-Freislandt. Chiefer towns are Naerden upon the
Zuyder-Zee. Haerlem. lon. 26. g. lat. 53. g. Merc.
Haerlem near unto the Lake, named from hence Haerlem-meer. Alcmaer,
encompassed round with deep fens, and Marshes. Amstelodamum. lon. 27. g. 34.
m. lat. 52. g. 40. m. Birt.
Amsterdam upon the Ye, a navigable gullet, or inlet of the Zuyder-Zee, and the
dyke, or river Amstel, parting, and giving the name to the town. The city is
new, not much exceeding the date of 400 years, at this day especially since
the wars of the Low Countries, and the decay of trade in Antwerpe, and the
towns subject to the Archduchesse, grown to that state that for beauty,
riches, and all sorts of bravery, and magnificence it may contend with the best
Cities of Europe, and for number, and strength of shipping does far exceed
the most great, and flourishing Empories of the world. A no small cause hereof
besides the opportunity of the sea, and the reasons alleged, has heen the
vnpleasantnes of the neighboring country, wholly possessed with deep, and
il-favoured marshes, forcing the people hither, as to a more commodious
dwelling, and to the exercise of trade, and negotiation, and desire of seeing
foreign better countries. Horn upon a spacious crook, or bay of the Zuyder
Zee. Enchuysen at the entrance of the Zuyder Zee, thwart of West-Freislandt;
noted ports. Medenblick upon the Ocean. There appertain to this division the
Islands of Wieringen, and Texel; situated toward the North betwixt this, and
the Ocean. The more ancient inhabitants of South-Hollandt were part of the
warlike nation of the Batavi. Those of North-Hollandt were part of the Frisij
Minores of Ptolemie. The whole contains some 33 walled towns, and 400
villages.

STIFF VTRECHT. Provincia Vltra-iectensis.

Enclosed upon the West, South, and North with Hollandt, and confining upon the
East with Gelderlandt. Towns here are Cuilenborg upon the Leck. Wijck de
Duersteden (Batauodurum of Tacitus in his. 5 book, the mansion then of the
second Roman Legion,) situated now upon the middle channel of the Rhijn; at
what place this diuerteth into the Lecke. Amersfort. Vltraiectum. lon. 27. g.
33. m. lat. 52. g. 10. m. Birt.
Vtreicht the chief town; named thus from the ancient passage here over the
middle channel of the Rhijn, whereupon it was situated. It was sometimes the
royal seat of Radbod, king of the Frisons; afterward made a Bishops sea,
begun first by S. Willibrord, an Englishman, the Apostle of the Frisons in the
regencie of Pepin the Fat, Maiour of the Palace in France. The Bishops hereof
until of late years were Lords both spiritual and temporal of this Country,
and Over-ysel. The ancient inhabitants were parts of the Batavi, and Frisij
Minores; lying in both Provinces of Gaul, and Germany, divided asunder by the
middle Channel of the Rhijn.

GELDERLANDT. Geldria.

BOunded upon the West with Hollandt, and the district of Vtreicht; upon the
South with the Maes, Brabant, and the Land of Gulick; upon the East with
Clevelandt, and the Earldom of Zutphen; and upon the North with the Zuyder
Zee, and Over-ysel. The parts betwixt the Middle Channel of the Rhijn, and the
Maes (especially Betuwe included betwixt the middle Rhijn, and the Wael) are
extraordinarily fruitful; yielding plenty of corn, and pasturage. Veluwe, or
the part contained within the Rhijn, the Ysel, and the Zuyder-Zee is more
lean, sandy, and worse inhabited; yet affording a more pure air, and much
more pleasant dwelling, full of downs, woods, and forests replenished with
game. Chiefer towns here are Bommel, a strong frontire place upon the left
shore of the Wael. Not far from hence the Wael, and Maes come so near
together that communicating their waters they almost join streams. Afterward
again dividing, they meet not until the Castle of Lovestain near Worcum;
where the Wael loses its name in the Maes. The flat country, extended betwixt
these two meetings, is named from hence Bommeler-Weert, or the Island of Bommel.
Betwixt the Wael, and the Maes, where the rivers first meet, stands the
strong fort of S. Andrew, raised by the Archduke Albert to command the
navigations of the Maes, and Wael; in the year 1600 took in by Maurice Count
of Nassau, held now by the garrisons of the united Provinces. Tiel further up
the Wael. Neomagus. lon. 28. g. lat. 52. g. Merc.
Nimminghen mounted upon a steep hill upon the left shore of the Wael, the
chief town of the parts on this side the Rhijn. In Betuwe opposite hereunto
upon the further shore of the Wael is the strong fort of Knodsenburg. Venlo
upon the Maes. Ruremonde at the meetings of the Maes, and the Roer. Gelre,
giving the name to the Province. Arnheim (Arenacum of Tacitus, Arnheim. lon.
28. g. lat. 52. g. Merc.
the wint'ring camp of the 10 Roman Legion.) It is now the chief town of
Gelderland; situated upon the right shore of the Rhijn. About a mile further up
the river the Ysel divides it self from this greater stream, called by
Tacitus Fossa Drusiana, by Suetonius Fossae Drusinae, and by Ptolemie the third
branch of the Rhijn; drawn forth to empty the fuller channel hereof by Drusus
Germanicus, Leiftenant here for the Emperor Augustus, and through the maine
land of Germany continued unto the bay, or creek of the Ocean named Flevus by
Pliny, now the Zuyder Zee. Wageningen upon the Rhijn (Vada of Tacitus.)
Harderwijck upon the Zuyder Zee. The ancient inhabitants were parts of the
Batavi (whereof the part called Betuwe retains yet the name,) and of the
Menapij. Beyond the middle branch of the Rhijn (where is Amheim, and Veluwe)
inhabited the Sicambri; part afterward of the victorious Frenchmen.

THE EARLDOM OF ZVTPHEN. Comitatus Zutphaniae.

THis is accounted part of Gelderlandt; having continued for a long time under
the same Princes. It lies beyond the Ysel, having upon the West Veluwe; and
bounded upon the other sides with the land of Cleue, Westphalen, and Overysel.
Towns here are Zutphen, the chief town, seated upon the right shore of the
Ysel, named thus from its low, and moorish situation. Dotechem upon the Ysel;
which is a river arising in Westphalen, and at Doesborch received into the
Fosse of Drusus, or the more Eastern branch of the Rhijn, imparting its name
of Ysel thereunto. Isaacius Pontanus would have this to have been the river
Sala Strab. Geog. lib. 7. Isala Vetus recentiorum.
Sala of Strabo in his 7. book; occasioning afterward the name of the Salij
of Ammianus Marcellinus, part of the Frenchmen. Doesborch at the confluence of
the Old Ysel, V. Joan: Isacij Pontani Originum Francicarum lib. 1 c. 9.
and the New. Lochem. Grol. There are contained here, and in Gelderlandt 22
walled towns, and about 300 villages.

OVER-YSEL. Provincia Transisalana.

NAmed thus from its situation beyond the river Ysel. It is bounded upon the
South with the river Ysel, and Gelderlandt; upon the East with Westphalen; upon
the West with the Zuyder Zee; and upon the North with West-Freislandt:
distinguished into three parts, or divisions, Iselant, or Zallandt, lying next
to the Ysel; Drent beyond the river Vecht; and Twent confining upon Westphalen.
The country is plain, flat, and moorish; the soil is fruitful in corn, and
pasturage. Towns here of better note are Deventer a Hanse town, Deuentria.
lon. 28. g. lat. 53. g. Merc.
and the chief hereof; situated upon the right shore of the Ysel. Campen
amongst inaccessible marshes upon the left shore, and fall of the Ysel into
the Zuyder Zee. Swol. Steenwijck upon the river Blockzyel near unto the Zuyder
Zee at the passage, or entrance into West-Freisland. Coeverden. In the whole
are accounted 11 walled towns, and 101 villages. The ancient inhabitants seem
to have been part of the Bructeri of Tacitus. Pontanus places here the Salij
of Ammianus Marcellinus, (part of the Franci of the same author,) conjectured
from the name here of Zallandt.

WEST-FREISLANDT. Frisia Occidentalis.

COntinued along the Germane Ocean betwixt the Zuyder Zee, and the river of
Eems. It has upon the South Over-ysel, and the Zuyder Zee; upon the North-west
the Germane Ocean; upon the East Westphalen; and upon the North-East the Eems,
and Oost-Freislandt. The air, like unto Hollandt, is moist, and foggy; the
land low, flat, fennie, and moorish, abounding in grass, and pasturage, milk,
butter, cheese, kine, and horses of large stature; but unapt for corn, brought
hither for the most part by sea from Dantzijck, and the Eastern countries. It
generally wants wood (as in like manner does Hollandt,) unless in the part
called Seven-wolden; in regard whereof they use turfe, and in some places the
dried dung of beasts. It contains two distinct provinces Ommelanden, or the
territory of Groningen; and West-Freislandt, more properly thus named.

THE PROPER WEST-FREISLANDT.
LYing betwixt the Zuyder-Zee, and Groninger-landt; and divided into the parts
of Ooster-goe, Wester-goe, and Zeven-wolden; called thus from their quality,
or situation.

WESTER-GOE.
COntaining the seacoast toward the West, and Hollandt. Chiefer towns are
Harlingen a populous, and well traded port upon the Ocean, defended with a
strong Castle. Upon the same seacoast Hindeloppen. Staveren, a Hanse town,
thwart of Enchusen. The town is old, and decayed, commended only for a strong
castle, commanding the haven; begun in the year 1522 by George Schenck,
governor of West-Freislandt. Sneca. lon. 27. g. lat. 54. Merc.
Within the land Sloten. Ylst. Sneck in a low, and watrish situation. The town
for largeness, neatenesse of building, and for straight, and well contrived
streets chalengeth the next place to Leewarden amongst the towns of
West-Freislandt. Franikera. lon. 27. g. lat. 54. g. Merc.
The wet, and moorish ground about it affords rich pasturages; but is
altogether unfit for corn. Franicker a school, or petty University.
Bolswaerdt.

OOSTER-GOE.
COntaining the Seacoast betwixt Wester-goe, and the country of Groningen.
Leewarden. lon. 27. g. lat. 54. g. Merc.
Towns here are Lieward, or Leewarden, the court presidial, chancerie, and
chief town of the proper West-Freislant; rich, fair, and strongly fortified.
Doccum near unto Groninger-landt.

ZEVEN-WOLDEN.
COntaining the woodland part toward the South-East, and Ouer-ysel. It has
not any town of note.

THE TERRITORY OF GRONINGEN.
THis is the most Eastern part of West-Freislandt; contained betwixt
Ooster-goe, and the river Eems, or Oost-Freislandt. Towns here are Dam near
unto the Eems, and Oost-Frislandt. Gron^^ga.
Groeningen, the chief town, giving the name to the province. The town is of
great state, large, rich, and strongly fortified. There are contained in the
whole West-Freislandt 12. walled towns, and some 490 Villages. The more
ancient inhabitants were the Frisij Maiores of Ptolemy.

Of these 8 provinces, South-Holland, Vtrecht on the hither side of the Rhijn,
with Bommeler-Weert, Maes-Wael, and Betuwe in Gelderlandt appertain unto Gaul
Belgic. North-Hollandt, Veluwe of Gelderlandt, Zutphen, Over-ysel,
West-Freislandt, and Groningerlandt belong unto Germany; the middle channel of
the Rhijn aunciently parting those two mighty provinces. In bigness, pleasure,
and goodness of soil they are inferior to those of the Princes, but in trade,
populousnes, wealth, strength, and number of shipping they much surpass the
other. In a manner all their towns stand upon the Ocean, and upon great
nauigable rivers, creeks, or inlets of the sea, or amongst deep impassable
marshes, and waters, whereby, and through their strength of shipping (never
being able sully to be besieged, and victuals, munition, and men being hereby
easily conveyed unto them) they are become invincible against the most potent
enemies, not easily to be mastered unless by their disunion, and the dominion
of the sea taken from them. Their government, since that they shoake of the
Spanish yoke, has been under the particular states of each province (a third
part of Gelderlandt, and Zutphen excepted, where stand the towns of Ruremond,
Guelders, Venlo, Watchtendonc, Strale, and Grol remaining yet subject to the
Arch-dutchesse;) not united into any one entire body of commonwealth, and but
only for their better defense confederate together in a more strict league:
whose delegates, resident for the most part at the Hage in Hollandt, are called
the States General. Their laws are their several municipall laws, customs,
and privileges, together with the civil, or Roman law. Their religion, which
only publicly is allowed, is the reformed, following or allowing the doctrine
of Calvin. Their language is the Dutch.

DENMARCK. DANIA.

THE bounds hereof are upon the South the river Eydore, parting it from
Holstein, and the kingdom of the Germans; upon the West the German Ocean; upon
the East the Sea Balticke, or the Ooster-sche; and upon the North the kingdoms
of Norwey, and Swethen. It lies betwixt the 55 45/60, and 59 5/60 degrees of
Northern Latitude. The length betwixt North, and South is 265 Italian miles,
the breadth some 200 of the same miles.

The more ancient inhabitants were the Sigulones, Subalingij, Cobandi, Chali,
Phundusij, Charudes, and Cimbri V. Clau. Ptolem. Geog. lib. 2. c. 11.
of Ptolemie, and V. Cor. Tac. lib. de Morib. Germanorum.
Tacitus, inhabiting the neck of land named by Ptolemy from that more famous
nation the Cimbrian Chersonese, now the 2 Iutlandts: the Teutoni of Mela V.
Pom. Melae, lib. 3.
inhabiting the Island Codanonia, now Zeland: and the Sitones, or Sueones of
Tacitus (for we cannot out of his description certainly distinguish whether)
V. Cor. Tac. ib.
, inhabiting the parts hereof lying in the Continent of Scandia, now Hallandt,
Schonen, and Bleking. These ancient names toward the waine of the Roman Empire
worn out, and extinguished, we read in Bedae Eccl. Hist. gentis Anglorum lib.
1. c. 15.
Beda of the Angli, and Vitae inhabiting the Cimbrian Chersonese; whereof these
later possessed the more Northern parts; the former after the same author were
seated betwixt the Vitae, and the Saxons. From the Vitae the Cimbrian
Chersonese now bears the name of Iutlandt. The name of the Angli is yet
preserved here in the Dukedom of Scleswijck in the town, or name of Angelen.
In the reign of the Emperor Valentinian the third V. Bedam ib.
these two nations removing with the Saxons into the Island of Great Britain,
not long after V. Greg. Turon. lib. 3. c. 3.
in the reigns of Theodoric French, King of Austrasia, and of Anastasius,
Emperor of the East, we lastly find here the Danes; more certainly named
thus (as has been V. supra.
related) from the bay Codanus, whose Islands, and neighboring Continent they
inhabited. Iornandes V. Iornand. de reb. Geticis
, who lived in the reign of the Emperor Justinian the first, places these in
the Continent of Scanzia, or Scandia. Under their Prince Godfrey V. Aymon: de
reb. Gestis Francorum lib. 4. c. 96.
in the reign of the Emperor Charles the Great we find them enlarged
Southwards unto the river Eydore, dividing from them the Saxons, or Dutch, as
they remain at this present. From this nation the country has since been V.
supra.
called Denmarck; famous a long time for arms, and their great and many
victories achieved abroad (themselves never conquered by foraine power,) Lords
sometimes of England, and Swethen, and at this day of the large kingdom of
Norwey, and of all the navigations, and Islands, situated toward the Pole
Arcticke, and the North.

The religion hereof, which is publicly allowed, is only the Protestant, or
Confession of Augspurg, V. Adam Brem. Hist. Eccles. Histor. Danor. per. Erpold.
Lindenbruc. Bar* An. Eccl. An. Christi 826.
first converted to Christianity by S. Ansgarius, Bishop of Bremen, the
general Apostle of these Northern parts, in the reigns of king Eric the
second, and of Lewis the Godly, Emperor of the West; and reformed to the
Orthodox tenent by the authority of king Frederick the first.

The Ecclesiastical affairs are directed by the Archbishop of Lunden, and
six other Bishops of Rotschilt, Odensee, Ripen, Wiborch, Arhusen, and Sleswijck.

The state is monarchical, the eldest son most commonly succeeding unto the
father; yet where the states do challenge a right of choosing. None of the
nobility exceed the dignity of Knights, conferred by the free grace of the
Prince. The titles of Dukes, Marqueses, Earls, Vicounts, and Barons are not
heard of, unless amongst the issue royal.

The kingdom for the better distribution of justice contains 184
Prefectures, or juridicall resorts, which they call Herets.

It lies partly in the continent of Germany, and partly in the maine land of
Scandia, and in the Islands of the Sundt betwixt these; containing five more
general parts, or names, of Iutlandt, the Islands of the Sundt, Halland,
Schonen, and Bleking.

IVTLANDT. Iutia.

COntaining the neck of land in the continent of Germany, called by Ptolemie
the Cimbrian Chersonese. It has upon the West, and North the German Ocean;
upon the East the Sundt; and upon the South the river Eydore, parting it from
Holstein, and the German Empire. It is divided into the North, Iutia Australis,
vel Ducat^ Iutiae, and Sleswici.
and the South Iutlands. South Iutland has been otherwise named the Dukedom
of Iutlandt; likewise the Dukedom of Sleswijck from the town of Sleswijck,
about the year 1280 in the person of Waldemar severed from the kingdom by
Eric, to be held with this title under the sovereignty, and right of the kings
of Denmark. The line masculine of the Dukes extinguished, it returned again
to the crown; given not long after by Queen Margaret unto Gerard Count of
Holstein, whose male succession in the year 1459 failing in Adolph the last
Earl, it was lastly incorporated with the kingdom by Christierne the first,
as it now continues. Chiefer towns are Sleswijck before mentioned, Sleswicum.
lon. 31. g. 20. m. lat. 55. g. 15. m. Birt.
a Bishops sea, named thus from the river Slay, upon which it is situated.
Close by stands the fair Castle of Gottorp, the seat of the Dukes of
Sleswijck, where tol is paid of the many droues of Oxen, passing yearly this
way out of the Chersonese into Germany. From hence in imitation of the Picts
wall in England has been drawn westward over land a long trench, or wall,
called now by the inhabitants Dennewerck, raised Aymon. de Rebus gestis Franc.
lib. 4. c. 96.
after Aymonius for the better defense of the Chersonese against the
neighboring Saxons by Godfrey king of the Danes in the reign of the Emperor
Charles the Great. Husem upon the German, or western Ocean, Flensburgum. lon.
31. g. 25. m. lat. 55. g. 30. m. Birt.
not far from the mouth of the river Eydore. Flensborch a noted empory, seated
amongst hills upon a nauigable creek, or inlet of the Sundt. Hadersleue, a
Bishops sea, upon a nauigable inlet of the sea Baltic, where with it is round
encompassed, Haderslebia. lon. 31. g. 8. m. lat. 56. g. 4. m. Birt.
against the Island Funen; graced with the beautiful castle of Hansburg, begun
by John duke of Holstein, but finished by Frederick the 2d K. of Denmarcke.
These lie in Suder-Iutland, or the dukedom of Sleswijck. Beda V. supra.
seems to place here the famous Angli, the founders of the modern English
nation; during the reign of the Emperor Valentinian the 3d departing from
hence into the Island of Great Bretaine. In Nort-Iutland Kolding upon a creek
of the sea Balticke. Arhusen a Bishops sea, and a noted port, upon the Sundt.
Against this, and the great promontory Hellenis lie the Islands, Samsoe, Hielm,
Hilgenes, with others, belonging to the continent hereof. Wiborch within the
land, a Bishops sea, and the chief place of judicature of the Chersonese.
Alborch upon the baye Limfort; which is a long creek of the sea Baltic,
extending through the maine land westwards, almost as far as the German
Ocean. The part of the Chersonese, lying upon the North of this bay is named by
the inhabitants Wendsyssel. West hereof the country is called Hanhaeret, where
is the high rock Skarringklint, a noted sea marck. The German Ocean, coasting
Iutland, especially the part neighboring to this rock, is full of sholes, and
quicksands, for this cause carefully avoided by mariners sailing toward
Norwey, and the Islands of the Sundt. Tysted. Nicoping. Ripen a Bishops sea upon
the German Ocean. The length of both the Iutlands, with the neighboring
dukedom of Holstein, or from the river Elb unto the town of Schagen, Schagen.
lon. 32. g. lat. 60. g. Merc.
the most Northerly point of the Chersonese, Cellarius accompteth at 80 German
miles, the breadth at twenty of the same miles.

THE ISLANDS OF THE SVNDT.
THese lie in the mouth of the Sundt betwixt Iutlandt, and Schonen. The more
remarqueable, and greater Islands are Funen, and Zelandt.

FVNEN. Fionia.

LYing against the towns of Kolding, and Hadersleue in Iutland, containing 12
Dutch miles in length, and 4 in breadth. The chief town is Odensee, a Bishops
sea.

ZELANDT. Zelandia.

SEated betwixt Funen, and the maine land of Schonen; the greatest of the
Islands, and the seat of the Prince. Chiefer towns here are Rotschilt a Bishops
sea. The Bishops hereof have the honor to anoint the kings at the time of
their inauguration. Elsenor. lon. 36. g. 30. m. lat. 57. g. Birt.
Helschenor, or Elsenor, at the entrance of the Sundt. The narrow sea betwixt
this, and Schonen contains only a Dutch mile in breadth, commanded by two
castles lying upon each side of the straight; that of Helsenburg in Schonen,
and of Cronenburg in Zealandt. Here all the ships, which in great numbers pass
continually toward Swethen, Prussen, and the East-lands stop, and pay custom;
the best part of the princes revenues. In the strong, and magnificent castle of
Cronenburg, founded by Frederick the second, Hafnia. lon. 34. g. 50. m. lat.
56. g. Birt.
the king more commonly resideth. Koppen hagen, farther down upon the Sundt, a
noted port, and the chief town of the kingdom; where flourishes an
University of the Danes, and Norvegians, begun by Eric the ninth, but perfected
by Christian the first, and the succeeding princes, endowed with liberal
revenues. Upon the East hereof lies the Island Amagger making a safe road for
ships which ride at ancher betwixt it, and the town.

Other Danish Islands are Alsen against Flensborch, and Suder-Iutland, unto the
which it appertains, containing 4 Dutch miles in length, and two in breadth.
Aar, having three parishes, and seated betwixt Alsen, and Zelandt. Langeland,
betwixt Aar, and Zelandt, in length 7 Dutch miles. Falstre in length 8 Dutch
miles, upon the South of Zelandt, Lawland, upon the West of Falstre, from the
which it is divided by a narrow creek of the sea, besides almost infinite
others, whose names we know not, or which are not worth relating. These Islands
are together called by Me^a the Hemodes. Zealandt he names the Island
Codanonia, the greatest of the Hemodes.

HALLANDT.
LYing in the maine land of Scandia against North-Iutlandt. The only place of
note is the strong castle of Warsberg.

SCHONEN. Scania.

COntaining the part of the same continent, against the Island of Zelandt.
Places of better note are Helsenburg, a town, and castle, opposite to Elsenor.
Lunden, an Archbishops sea. Malmuyen, or Ellebogen, a noted Empory upon the
Sundt against Koppen-hagen.

BLEKING.
PArt of the same continent, and having upon the West, Schonen. The chief
place is Vsted.

THE KINGDOM OF NORWEY. NORVEGIA

BOunded upon the South with Denmarck; upon the West, and North with the Ocean;
and upon the East with the kingdom of Swethen, from the which it is divided by
a perpetual ridge of asperous, and high mountains. The sea here is exceeding
deep, and affords plenty of good fishing. The land is very large, and
spacious, but rockie, mountainous, and barren, full of thick, wild, and vast
woods, cold, and ill inhabited. It yields but little corn, and in the parts
more near to Lapland, and the Pole Articke, not any at all; in regard of which
want the inhabitants eat bread made of Stockfish. It chiefly venteth abroad
fish, furs, and skins of wild beasts, masts, raft, pitch, tar, and the
like commodities, issuing from wood. The people are plain, honest, lovers of
strangers, hospital for their ability, haters of pilfering, and theeuing. They
are not suffered by the Danes to use shipping, or to export their own
merchandise out of the kingdom, which profit these solely engrosse unto
themselves. Their religion is the Lutheran, or Protestant, the same with the
Danes, belonging in matters Ecclesiastical unto the Archbishop of Trundtheim,
and the Bishops of Bergen, Berga. lon. 24. g. 16. m. lat. 61. g. 25. m. Birt.
Anslo, Staffanger, and Hammar. They were sometimes commanded by Princes of
their own, now by the kings of Denmarck, divided into 5 Prefectures, or
juridicall resorts, of Bahuys, Aggerhuys, Bergerhuys, Trundtheim, and Wardhuys,
named thus from such Castles royal, wherein their governors reside. Towns of
better note are Congel, a town of merchandising upon the Sundt, or sea
Balticke, opposite to Schagen in Denmarcke. Anslo. Hammar. Staffanger; Bishops
seas. Bergen the chief town of the country, seated amongst high mountains at
the bottom of a nauigable, and deep arm, or creek of the maine Ocean, named
Carmesunt; a Bishops sea, and a noted port, much resorted unto by forrainers,
bringing in corn, meal, bread, beer, wine, and Aqua vitae, to supply the
want that way of the country, and transporting from hence fish, furs, and
wood; with London, Bruges in the Low Countries, and Novogrod in Russia, one of
the four chief Staple towns of the Dutch Hanse merchants. The inhabitants in
regard hereof are a mixed people, compounded of the natives, Dutch, and other
strangers. The meaner sort of houses after the rude fashion of the Country are
covered with sods, or turfes of earth. West of the town stands Bergenhuys
one of the five castles royal, the seat of the governor of the Province,
Nidrosia. lon 39. g. 45. m. lat. 60. g. 50. m. Clav. Ward-huys. lat. 71. g. 30.
m.
thus named. Trundtheim, an Archbishops sea, beautified with a fair Cathedral
Church, dedicated to S. Olave. The town otherwise is mean. Ward-huys within
the circle Artick in the Island Ward, from whence it has been thus called, a
mean castle with a little town adjoining; in the summer time (for in the
winter by reason of the extremity of the cold, and the long darkness, and
absence of the Sun it is not well habitable) the seat of the governor for
these more cold, and frozen parts. The Pole Articke is here elevated 71
degrees. The longest continuance of the sun above the Horizon lasts two
whole months three weeks one day, and some 7 hours, the farthest point
North-wards of Norwey, and the continent of Europe.

THE ISLANDS OF NORWEY.
Unto the Crown of Norwey belong Islandt, Freislandt, and Groenlandt, Islands
situated in the wide Ocean, held now in this right by the kings of Denmark.

ISLANDT
LYing under the Circle Articke, and containing 100 German miles in length, and
about 60 in breadth. The country is cold, rockie, mountainous, barren, and ill
inhabited, yielding not any corn, neither trees, except the Juniper. In regard
hereof the common people eat bread made of stockfish, and in steed of houses,
built with timber, dwell in cells, and cauernes, dug in the bottomes of
their rocks, and mountains. Through the benefit notwithstanding of the sea,
and the access of strangers, they have brought unto them corn, meal, bread,
wine, bear, iron, tin, money, timber, wood, and all other commodities, which
they need, whereof the richer sort make use. The sea coasts are better stored
with inhabitants through the advantage of their trade with forrainers, and of
their fishing; the chief revenue of the Ilanders. The native profits the Land
affords are flesh of beeues, and mutton, butter, skins of wild beasts,
horses, hawks, a course kind of cloth, they call Watman, and brimstone. It
contains four main divisions, named from their situations West fiordung,
Auslending a fiordung, Norlending a fiordung, and Sundlending a fiordung,
signifying the Western, Eastern, Northern, and Southern quarters. The only
places of note are Halar in the Northern part of the Island. Halar. lon. 3. g.
lat. 67. g. 14. m. Merc.
Schalholt in the Southern: Bishops seas, having petty schools, wherein the
Latin tongue is taught, whereof each contains 24 scholars, Schalholt. lon.
3. g. 24. m. lat. 65. g. 42. m. Market.
maintained by the Bishops. Bestede, a castle, the seat of the governor for
the king of Denmarck. The more eminent mountains are Hecla, fearful with
apparitions of dead men, nourishing the opinion of Popish Purgatory. Bestede.
lon. 360. g. 36. m. lat. 65. g. 21. m. Merc.
Helga. and that of the Cross: Aethna-like flaming with fires. Not far from
Hecla brimstone is dug in great abundance, sent into foreign parts. The
inhabitants are originally Norvegians, thought first to have arrived here about
the year 1000, driven out of their country by king Harold, surnamed with the
fair locks. We hear not of them notwithstanding until the time of Adelbert
Bishop of Bremen, whom they should send unto, desiring Preachers and Ministers
of the Gospel, whereby they might be instructed, deceasing about the year
1070. Their religion is the confession of Augspurg, or that of the Danes;
governed by two Bishops of Halar, and Schalholt, before mentioned, brought up
in the University of Copen-hagen. Their language is the Danish, or an old
corrupt Dutch. Thyle Taciti in Vita Agricolae.
Most authors place here Thyle of Tacitus, and the ancients. Ortelius judges
this rather to be Norway. Others Schetland, near the Orcades. It wants
altogether probability, that the Romans, by whom sailing about Great
Bretaigne, that Island should be first discovered, advanced ever thus far
Northwards.

FREISLANDT.
STanding upon the Southwest of Islandt; unknown to the ancients, and bigger
in quantity then Ireland, like Islandt cold, barren, and without corn, and
fruits. The principal town is of the same name with the Island. The
inhabitants live most upon fish, got in their sea, their chief food, and truck
with forrainers. They obey the kings of Denmarck.

GROENLANDT.
NAmed thus from the greenenesse thereof (affording good pasturage in Summer,)
as are the other two Islands from their Ice, and Frosts. It is seated betwixt
the 65, and 77 degrees of Northern Latitude, and lies for the greatest part
within the Circle Articke, and Frigid Zone; large, and of great extent, much
resorted unto by the English, and Dutch nations, fishing there for Whales. Here
is a monastery of Predicant Friars seated in the North-East part of the Island,
not far from a flaming, or burning mountain, upon hot scalding springs,
whose waters serve the Monastery, as a stoue, and to boil the meat of the
order. The gardens hereof, a thing miraculous in such a latitude, in regard of
this heat, qualifying the natural temper of the air, flourish all the year
long with herbs, and sweet smelling flowers. The neighboring Ocean also by
means hereof never freezeth, affording great plenty of foul, and fish for the
relief of the Monks, and bordering Ilanders. Here is likewise Alba, situated
not far from the Monastery. Other habitations either are not, or not hitherto
known; the Island not being yet fully discovered. All places, where the
mariners touch, yield Dear, white bears, and plenty of wood, cast upon the
shore. The kings of Denmarck challenge the right hereof.

SVVEATHLAND. SVECIA.

BOunded upon the South with Denmarcke, the sea Balticke, and Leifland; upon
the West with Norwey; upon the North with Myrmanskoy More, or the Frozen sea;
and upon the East with the dominions of the Great Duke of Muscovia. The country
is large, extended above a thousand miles in length betwixt the Balticke, and
the Frozen seas, full of mountains, and vast woods, yet well inhabited, and
fertile for these Northern parts, Lapland, and the regions lying within the
Circle Arcticke almost excepted, which yield no corn, or any other fruits, as
do all lands else of that miserable, and cold Latitude. No place affords
greater plenty of minerals, especially of brass, whence infinite store of
great ordinance are made. It has many great lakes, and rivers, but in regard
of their ice, and trunckes of trees, floating in them, not much navigable. The
people are provident, sober, patient, and industrious. Those of the country
exercise no manual trades, every man by a singular frugality being his own
artificer. The nobility exceed not the dignity of knights, an honor
conferred by the Prince. Their language differs only in dialect from the
Dutch, excepting that of the Fins, which resembles the Russes. Their religion
is the Lutheran, or confession of Augspurg, won first to Christianity under
their king Beorn by S. Ansgarius, v. supra.
the Apostle of the Danes. They belong in matters Ecclesiastical unto the
Bishop of Vpsal, and those of Lincopen, Scara, Vexio, Strengenes, and Abo.
Birtius reckons in the whole some 1400 parishes. The king is elective, but
most commonly of the blood royal, and the next of kin to the deceased. He is
styled king of Sweathland, and of the Goths, and Vandals. The truth of the two
latter titles is uncertain, and to be much doubted of. V. Iornand. de Rebus
Geticis.
Iornandes places in the peninsula hereof the Goths; Gothia, Sudermannia,
Westmannia, Wermelandia, Coppordalia. Helsingia, Dalecarlia, Angermannia.
Boddia Orientalis, and Occidentalis, F^nlandia, Corelia.
but who is not seconded by any more ancient, and credited Historians. At this
day notwithstanding the more Southern part of the kingdom confining with
Denmarcke, bears the name of Gothia, or Gotland, whether from this nation it
cannot well be known, or falsely affecting that more glorious name. The
Vandals (it is certain) spread not thus far North, seated in the continent
of Germany along the South shore of the Suevian, or Balticke sea. It contains
sundry names, and divisions of Gotland, Suderman, VVestman, VVermeland,
Copperdale, Helsingen, Dalecarle, Angerman, East, and West Bodden, Finland,
Corel, with others. The more chief towns are in Gotland, Lincopia. Scara.
and next to Denmarcke Calmer, a noted port upon the sea Balticke. Lincopen.
Scar: Bishops seas. Against these within the Balticke lies the Island Gotlandt,
subject to the kings of Denmarcke, whose chief town is Wisbuy upon the East
side of the Island, Wisbia. lon. 39. g. 30. m. lat. 57. g. 30. m. Birt.
a famous Empory sometimes, now ruinous, and much decayed. Here is likewise
Oelandt, an Island against Calmer, defended with the strong castle of Borgholm,
subject to the kings of Swethen. In Suderman Strengnes, a Bishops sea: and
Telge upon the lake, or bay Meler, an arm of the sea Baltic. Upon the rocks
nere Strengnes, as likewise at Scar, and Wisbuy in Gotlandt, are engraven
sundry ancient unknown characters, and inscriptions, supposed to be of the
Goths. In Westman Arosia, rich in silver mines. In Vpland Vpsal an Archbishops
sea, the primate of the kingdom. Here the kings of Sweath-land lie enterred.
Vpsalia. lon. 40. g. 30. m. lat. 60. g. 52. m. Merc.
Stockholm in an Island at the mouth of the lake Meler, a rich, and flourishing
emporie, and the chief city of the kingdom, defended with a magnificent, and
strong castle, fortified with 400 great brass ordinance. Stockholmia. lon. 42.
g. lat. 60. g. 15. m. Birt.
In Finland Wiburg, a strong fortress, and town of war opposed against the
Russes. Wiburgum. lon. 55. g. 58. m. lat. 63. g. 6. m. Merc.
The more ancient inhabitants of the part of the kingdom within the Sea
Baltic were the Suiones Taciti lib. de Moribus Germanorum.
Suiones of Tacitus, part of the great nation of the Suevi of the Germans. The
part of Finlandt seems to have been thus first named, and inhabited by the
Fenni Fenni, Corn. Tacit: ibid.
of the same author. The sea lying upon the South hereof was named by Suevicum
mare Taciti. de Moribus Germ. lib.
Tacitus the Sueuian sea from the famous Sueui before mentioned, which nation
it divided; by Sinus Codanus Pomp. Mel. lib. 3.
Mela Sinus Codanus, from whence doubtless proceeded the name of the Danes; and
by Ptolemie Oceanus Sarmaticus, Sarmaticus Oceanus Ptolemei lib. 11.
and Sinus Sinus Venedicus. Ptolem. ibid. Lappia.
Venedicus from the bordering Sarmatae, and Venidae. It is a long and spacious
creek of the Western Ocean, continued East, and North from Denmark for many
hundred miles unto beyond the Circle Articke. It is called now the Sundt, the
Balticke, or Oost Zee, and more toward the North the Finnisch, and Bodner Zees
from Finland, and Boden, which countries it parts from the more proper, and
West Sweathland. North of Sweathland, incorporated with the crown hereof, is
Lapland, cold, barren, and without corn, fruits, and civil habitation. The
people through their cold, pigmie-like, are of an exceeding little, and
dwarfish stature, barbarous, rude, and without arts, feeding upon fish, and the
flesh of wild beasts, crafty, and much given to witchcraft, and magical
incantations. The commodities, which they vent abroad, are skins, and fish,
exchanged with forrainers. The Septentrionalis Oceanus. Amalchium eum Hecataeus
appellat, a Paropamiso amne, qua Scythiam aliuit, quod nomen eius gentis lingua
significar congelatum. Philemo^ Morimarusam a Cimbris vocari, hoc est, mortuum
mare vsque ad promontorium Rubeas, vltra deinde Cronium. C. Plinij Not. Hist.
lib. 4. c. 13.
Ocean upon the North hereof, and Russia, Hecataeus in Pliny names Amalchium,
or the Frozen sea; Philemon in the same author from the Cimbri the sea Cronium,
and Morimarusa, or the Dead sea; Tacitus otherwise the Trans Suionas aliud
mare, pigrum, ac prope immotum, quo cingi, cludique terrarum orbem hinc fides.
etc. Corn: Taciti de Moribus Germanorum lib.
Slow, and Immovable sea. The Russes call it at this day Myrmanskoy More,
signifying in their language the Norvegian, and Danish sea; first of civil
people sailed, and adventured into by Richard The English voiages.
Chancelour, Englishman, arriving in Russia in the year 1553, and tracing out
the way, which the English, and Flemmings ever since have used. Through this
sea, since the first discovery, sundry honorable, and worthy persons have
attempted to find out a passage toward China, and the East; but hitherto
without any good success, let by contrary winds, fogges, and mists, usual in
that clime, flotes of Ice, cold, perpetual nights for many months together in
winter, and with the length of the way. Their farthest discoueries have reached
only to the nearer coasts of Tartarie, short of the river Oby. Toward the
North they have sailed unto 80 degrees, within ten of the Pole Articke.

Norwey, Hallandt, Schonen, and Bleking in Denmarck, with so much of the
kingdom of Sweathland, as lies West of the Finnisch, and Bodner Sees, creekes
of the Balticke, contain together the great Peninsula, called by Scandia,
Ptol. Geogr. lib. 2. c. 11.
Ptolemie Scandia, by Pliny, and Solinus Scandinavia, Plin. not. hist. lib 4.
c. 13. and Solini, c. 32.
Scandinavia, and by Iornandes Scanzia Iornandis de Rebus Geticis.
Scanzia; encompassed with the sea Balticke, and the Western, and Northern
Oceans, and joined to the continent by a neck of land, intercepted betwixt the
bottom of the sea Bodner and the town, and castle of Wardhuys. By Pytheas
Xenophon Lampsacenusa litore Scytharum tridui navigatione insulam esse
incompertae magnitudinis Baltiamtradit. Eandem Pythias Basiliam nominat. C.
Plin. not. hist. lib. 4. c. 13.
in Pliny we find this otherwise named Basilia; by Xenophon Lampsacenus in
the same author Balthia, naming the sea Balticke. Ptolemie, and the rest of the
ancients, before mentioned, account this an Island; their error proceeding from
the ignorance, and vnexperience of those times, the more Northern, and inner
parts hereof Quarum cla^issima Scandinavia est incompertae magnitudinis. Plin.
ib.
not being then fully discovered.

POLAND. POLONIA.

HAving upon the West Schlesi, and the Marquisate of Brandenburg in Germany;
upon the North the land of Prussen; upon the East Masovia, and Lithuania; and
upon the South the kingdom of Hungary, from the which it is divided by the
mountains Tatri, or Carpathian. It is in length 480 Italian miles, in breadth
300. The air is pure, but sharp, and cold; the country plain, like unto the
rest of those Eastlands, shaded with dark, and thick woods, parts of the
great Hercynian, full of sundry sorts of wild beasts for hunting, and of an
incredible number of Bees, hiving almost in each tree, and breeding wax, and
honey in great abundance. No country affords more plenty of grain in regard
of the continual fresh, and newly broken grounds, taken from the woods, sent
down by the river Wijssel unto Dantzig, and Elbing in Prussen, and from thence
conveyed into foreign parts, the vnexhausted treasury, and storehouse of
corn for Europe, and the West. The common people are poor, base, and
miserable, the slaves of the gentry. The nobility are brave, high minded,
valiant, liberal, free, or rather superfluous in their gifts, attendance, and
expenses. They are all of the same rank, professing arms, and called Equites
in the Latin Polish historians, which we interpret knights, or soldiers;
differing only in their greater, or lesser revenues, and by the magistracies,
and offices, which the more eminent sort hold for term of life, conferred by
the king. They pay the prince no tallages, in lieu whereof they are to serve,
and attend him in his wars. Their language is the Sclavonian, but who much
affect, and elegantly speak the Latin. Their religion is that which every man
best likes; all sorts of gross heresies, if not publicly allowed, yet being
here suffered (which has happened through the over great liberty, of the
Nobility, and people, and the weak power of the king, and of such a confused
state, to control them,) yet where notwithstanding the Romish superstition by
means of the princes great zeal that way at this day most prevails. Their
first conversion to Christianity was under their prince Miecislaus, son to
Nemomislus in the year 965. Their Bishops are Cracow, Posna, Vladislaw, v.
Cromer. de Rebus Polon. lib. 3.
and Ploczko under the Archbishop of Gnesna; who is primate of the kingdom,
and by ancient privilege the Popes Legate for Sarmatia, and in the absence, or
vacancie of the prince the Vicar general of the kingdom, having power to
summon the council, and diets, and to conclude, and publish their decrees. The
state is Monarchical, and elective, yet where the next of the blood royal
most commonly succeed. Their kings more anciently were free, and sovereign.
By a common calamity of all elective states, they are now bereft of all royal
right, and prerogatives, having only limited power, and governing according to
strict laws, and the direction of the council, and diets; who solely have
full liberty to consult of, and determine the maine affairs of the
commonwealth. These are of two sorts, I the senate, or grand council
consisting of all the Bishops, Palatines, and Castellans, together with the
great Marshals of state, and Court, and the Chancelour, Vice-chancelour, and
Treasurer of each dominion of Poland, and Lithuania, or of so many of them, as
can conveniently be drawn together, or be consulted with. 2. and the General
Diets (which are for the more high, and important businesses of the weal
public not determinable by the Senate) amassed of the orders before set
down, and of the Delegates of each province, and chiefer city, sent in the
name of the rest of the nobility. These sworn to preserve the public honor,
and liberty, speak freely in the council, and Diets, oftentimes challenging,
and reproving the prince, and controuling his actions, if they think them
prejudicial. The country is divided into the Greater, and the lesser Polands.

THE GREATER POLAND
DIstinguished thus either because it is the bigger, or because it is the more
honorable; the seat sometimes of Lechus the founder of the Polish nation. It
contains 9 parts, or divisions, named thus from the chief town of each
jurisdiction, the Palatinates (thus called from their Palatines) or countries
of Posna, Kalisch, Siradia, Lancicia, Vratislaw, Bresty, Rava, Ploczko, and
Dobrzin, whose more principal towns, and states, commanding, and residing in
them follow in order.

THE PALATINATE OF POSNA. Posnania lon. 42. g. lat. 52. g. 45. m. Clav.

THe towns here having jurisdiction are Posna, a Bishops sea, and the chief
town of the Greater Poland, seated amongst hills upon the river Warta. The
city is fairly built of stone, having large suburbs beyond the river, much
subject to inundations. Koscien a double walled town in a plain amongst
dirtie marshes. Miedzyrzecze, a strong town, opposing Schlesi, and the
Germans, whereunto it bordereth, impregnably seated amongst waters, and
marshes. Ostresow, neighboring to Schlesi, and standing in a wide plain
environed with woods. Vschow, a walled town in a plain. Sremsk. Premetz.
Rogozno. The States here are the Bishops Palatine, Crivinensis.
and Castellan of Posna, and the Castellans of Sremsk, Miedzyrzecze, Premetz,
and Rogozno. Cromerus adds the Castellan of Krivin.

THE PALATINATE OF KALISCH.
Towns here are Calisch, a walled town upon the river Prosna amongst
marshes, Gnesna. lon. 42. g. lat. 52. g. 40. m. Clav.
naming the country. Gnesna a walled town, and an Archbishops sea, in a
plain, the most ancient town of Poland, founded by Lechus; the seat of the
first kings, removed afterward to Cracow. Pizdry, a walled town upon the
river Warta in a plain amongst woods. Warta upon the river Warta. Land upon
the Warta. Konin, a walled town encompassed with the Warta. Slupcza, a strong
town upon the Warta. Kolo, surrounded with the Warta. Naklo upon the river
Notez. Camenecz. The States are the Archbishop of Gnesna, the Palatine, and
Castellan of Calisch, and the Castellans of Gnesna, Naklo, Camenecz, and Land.

THE PALATINATE OF SIRADIA.
SOmetimes a Dukedom, belonging to the second sons of the kings of Poland.
Siradia.
The chief towns are Siradia, a walled town, and castle, naming the country,
seated in a plain upon the river Warta. Wielun, a strong town, Petrocow.
and castle upon the river Prosna. Schadeck. Petrocow, a walled town in a
moorish soil, the place sometimes of the general diets of the kingdom,
removed now to Warsow. Without the town under the shade of a pleasant forest
stands Bugey one of the royal seiours of the kings, whether in regard of the
more fresh, and healthie air they retired during the time of the Diets.
Rosprza in a plain amongst marshes. Spicimeria. The States are the Palatine,
and Castellan of Siradia, with the Castellans of Rosprza, Spicimeria, and
Wielun.

THE PALATINATE OF LANCICIA.
THe towns are Lancicia, a walled town, with a castle mounted on a rock, upon
the river Bsura. Orlow, amongst marshes. Bresinia. Konarzew. Inowlodz.
Biechow. The States are the Palatine, and Castellan of Lancicia, with the
Castellans of Bresinia, Konarzew, Inowlodz, and Biechow. Cromerus places this
last in the Palatinate of Kalisch.

CVIAVIA, OR THE PALATINATE OF WLADISLAW.
FOr a great part marishie, and without woods. The chief towns are Wladislaw,
Vladislaw.
naming the country, a Bishops sea upon the river Wijssel. Bidgost, a walled
town upon the Bard, a navigable river, convaying merchandise out of the
greater Poland unto the Wijssel. The States are the Bishops, Palatine, and
Castellan of Wladislaw, with the Castellan of Bidgost.

THE PALATINATE OF BRZESTYE. Brzestye.

THe Towns here are Brzestye, a well fenced town, naming the country,
standing in a plain amongst marshes. Radzieiow, a wooden town. Kruswick,
built all of wood with a castle, the most ancient of the kingdom after Gnesna,
the seat sometimes of the Princes; standing upon a great lake named Gopla. In
the castle hereof Popielus the second, Duke of Poland, was after a monstrous,
and strange manner devoured with Ratts, swarming out of the Lake. Kowalow, in a
moorish situation. The States are the Palatine, and Castellan of Brzestye, and
the Castellans of Kruswick, and Kowalow.

THE PALATINATE OF RAVA Rava.

THe towns are Rava, built all of wood with a castle, naming the country,
seated in a plain upon the river thus called. Socharzow, a town, and castle
upon the river Bsura. Gostinin, a town, and Castle in a plain amongst
marshes. Gamblin. The chief states are the Palatine, of and Castellan of
Raua, with the Castellans of Sochaczow, and Gostinin.

THE PALATINATE OF PLOCZKO Ploczko.

Towns here are Ploczko, a walled town, and Castle upon the river Wijssel,
the seat of a Bishop. Bielsko in a plain. Raczyayas, amongst fens. Sierprcz,
upon a hill environed with marshes. Srensko, a town, and castle amongst fens.
Mlawa, neighboring to Prussen. Plonsko. Radzanow, a town, and castle upon the
river Vkra. The states are the Bishop, Palatine, and Castellan of Ploczko, with
the Castellans of Raczyayas, and Syerprcz.

THE PALATINATE, OR COUNTRY OF DOBRZIN.
Towns here are Dobrzin, naming the country, upon the river Wijssel. Slonsk.
Ripin, in a plain upon the river Odekam* Gornzno, upon a hill amongst woods.
The states are the Castellans of Dobrzin, Ripin, and Slonsk.

These divisions lie almost wholly within the ancient Germany of Tacitus, and
Ptolemie, bordering upon the river Wijssel. Willichius seems to place here
the Arij, Helvecona, Manimi, Elysij, and Naharvali, parts of the Suevi Lygij of
Tacitus.

THE LESSER POLAND.
LYing upon the South of the Greater Poland; divided with the Wijssel, and
bordering upon the kingdom of Hungary. It only comprehends three Provinces,
or divisions, the Palatinates of Cracow, Sendomir, and Lublin.

THE PALATINATE OF CRACOW.
Towns here are Cracow, Cracovia. lon. 42. g. 40. m. lat. 50. g. 12. m. Clav.
a Bishop sea, and the chief city of the kingdom, the seat of the Prince,
upon the river Wijssel, in a plain. Biecz, a walled town in a plain upon the
river Rapa. Woynicz, upon the river Dunaiecz. Lelow, a walled town with a
castle upon the river Bialo. Kzyaz. Proszovice. Oswiecim, built all of wood
with a castle, the chief sometimes of a Dukedom; part of Schlesi incorporated
now with the crown. Zator, a town, and castle in a plain upon the Wijssel,
sometimes likewise a Dukedom, part of Schlesi; now incorporated with the
Crown. Sandecz, a walled town in a plain upon the river Dunaiecz. The chief
States are the Bishop, Castellan, and Palatine of Cracow, with the Castellans
of Sandecz, Woynicz, Byecz, and Oswiecim. The Castellan of Cracow here
presedeth the Palatine, contrary to the dignity, and rank of the Castellans,
whose place is inferior; which has been a disgrace put upon the Palatines
for the shameful flight, and cowardice of one of their predecessors,
forsaking the king in a fight against the Russes. He is the chief of the
nobility, or lay States of the Polish Empire, whose seat in the Diets is next
after the Bishops.

THE PALATINATE OF SENDOMIRE.
Chief towns here are Sendomire, Sendomiria.
a walled town, and castle, upon a hill, under the which runs the river
Wijssel. Checiny, a town with a castle. Korczin, a town, and castle,
encompassed with marshes. Wislicza, a walled town among marshes, encompassed
with the river Nid. Pilzno. Opozno, a walled town, upon the river Pilcza.
Radomie, a walled town, in a plain. Polaniecz. Zawichost, built all of wood
with a castle upon the river Wijssel. Zarnow. Malogost. The states are the
Palatine, and Castellan of Sendomir, and the Castellans of Wislicza, Radomie,
Zawichost, Zarnow, Malogost, Cechoviensis.
and Polaniecz. Cromerus adds the Castellan of Cechow.

THE PALATINATE OF LVBLIN.
THe towns are Lublin, a walled town with a strong castle, environed with
waters, and marshes; naming the country. The Jews inhabit the greatest part
of the suburbs, where they have a Synagogue. Here are held three great faires
in the year, at the feasts of Pentecost, S. Simon, and Jude, and Candlemas;
resorted unto by strange Merchants from most remote parts, Turks, Armenians,
Greeks, Germans, Lithuanians, Muscovites, and Russes. Vrzendow. Lulow. Parcow.
Casimir upon the Wijssel. The chief states are the Palatine, and Castellan of
Lublin.

The Palatines are the Princes Lieutenants, and the supreme magistrates of
state in the provinces, whereof they are named. Their chief office is to bring
into the field, and to command in wars the troops of the nobility of their
several divisions; in regard whereof in their native language they are called
Vayvods. Each province for this purpose has its several Standard, or Colors,
whereby they are distinguished. The Castellans are the deputies of the
Palatines, and in wars command the nobility of their subdivisions, or
particular districts. Neither of these are hereditarie, chosen, and appointed
by the king out of the most worthy, and eminent gentry, and continuing during
life. They are the most honorable lay orders of the realm, of whom with the
Bishops, and the Marshals, Chancelours, and Treasurers before mentioned, the
grand council only consists.

The Lesser Poland lies in both countries of the ancient Germany, and Sarmatia
of Ptolemie; the river Wijssel dividing them. In the part of Germany Glareanus
seems to place the Gothini of Tacitus.

Unto Poland are annexed the land of Prussen, the dukedomes of Lithuania, and
Masovia, Samogithia, Black Russia, Podlassia, Podolia, and Volinia,
incorporated into the kingdom, and union hereof; whose Palatines, Castellans,
chief officers, and nobility have equal voices in the great Council, and
Diets; accrueing by conquest, marriage, and mutual assent for their more
strong defense against the neighboring Turks, Tartars, and Russes, whose
descriptions, since wholly lying in Sarmatia without the river Wijssel, and the
account of ancient Germany appertain not unto this first section of my
proposed discourse.

HVNGARIE.
BOunded upon the North with Poland, and the Mountains Carpathian; upon the
West with Marheren, Oosten-reich, and Steirmarck, parts of Germany; upon the
East with Transylvania; and upon the South with Servia, and Krabbaten, divided
by the Saw, and Dra. It is extended in length from Presburg along the Danow
unto the confluence thereof and the river Alute after Cellarius 304 Italian
miles; and in breadth after the same author 190 of the same miles. The air is
most temperate, and pleasant. The soil is exceedingly fertile, and happy, rich
in corn, most excellent wines, and deep pasturages, stored with infinite
herds of large, and fat Beeues, sent into foreign parts in very great
abundance. The hilly parts toward Poland afford plenty of silver, copper, and
other mineralls. Here flow (besides sundry lesser) the greater, and famous
rivers of the Saw, Dra, Danow, and Tissa. The ancient inhabitants were the
Iaziges Metanastae of Ptolemie, included within the rivers Danow, and Tissa,
and the Sarmatian, or Carpathian mountains; part of the Daci, containing the
parts lying upon the North of the Danow, and East of the Tibiscus; and the
Poeones, or Pannonij, inhabiting beyond the Danow betwixt that river, and the
Saw. It was afterward the seat of the Huns, Longobards, and Avares, and lastly
of the Hungarians, the modern inhabitants. The people now through their long
exercise of arms are good soldiers, serving most on horseback after the
manner of the Eastern nations, otherwise lasie, and idle, more addicted unto
wars, then to trades, and manual occupations, poor through their sloth,
and the oppression of their Lords, the Turks, and German Emperors. Their
language is a kind of Sclavonian, differing from the Poles. In the parts,
neighboring unto Germany, the Dutch likewise is spoken. Their Religion is the
Romish Catholic, and that of the Reformed Churches; for both are tolerated.
The reformed less prevails in the countries, subject to the Turks, through
a jealousy of that nation, forbidding all new opinions, quarrels, and
disputes of faith, which might cause innouations, and troubles of the State.
This was sometimes a flourishing, and great kingdom, the bulwark of
Christendom against the Infidells. After long wars, sundry victories, and
brave resistance it is now for the greatest part enthralled to the Turk. The
rest, containing some third part, obeys the German Emperors of the house of
Austria, now kings (for what is left) of Hungary, descended from Anne, sister
to Lewis the second, the last native Prince, slain by Soliman at the battle of
Mohacz. It is divided by the Danow into the upper Hungary, lying North of the
river, and the Lower Hungary, lying toward the South; containing together
before the Turkish subjection 50 juridicall resorts, which they called
counties, 24. betwixt the Tissa, Danow, and Germany. 8. East of the Tissa in
the same division. 12. betwixt the Danow, and the Dra, and 6 betwixt the Danow,
and the Saw toward Greichs-Weissenburg. The parts under the Turks are
governed by their Bassaes, and other names of Magistrates after the custom of
that Empire. Chiefer towns in the upper Hungary are Presburg, Posoniu^ lon.
40. g. lat. 48. g. 26. m. Birt.
enjoying a pleasant, and healthful situation, upon the left shore of the
Danow near to vinie mountains, and the confines of Oosten-reich, defended
with a strong castle mounted upon a hill, the chief town subject to the
German Emperors. Vaccia upon the Danow, a Bishops sea. Pest upon the Danow,
opposite to Buda. Colocza upon the Danow, an Archbishops sea. Bath upon the
same shore of the Danow. North of the river, Segedin upon the right shore of
the river Tissa. Agria a Bishops sea. Newsol, a strong town upon the river
Gran. Nitri, a Bishops sea upon the river Boch. Transchin, upon the river Wag.
Tirnau. East of the Tissa. Debreczen. Temeswar upon the river Temez. Varadin.
Beyond the Danow in the Lower Hungary, Belgradum, and Alba Graeca. lon. 45. g.
lat. 47. g. 40. m. Clav.
Belgrade, or Greichs-Weissenburg (Taururum of Ptolemie,) a strong town of
war, hemmed in upon the East with the Danow, and upon the South with the Saw,
where it is emptied hereinto; defended on the other sides with strong walls,
and deepeditches, sometimes the gate, and entrance into Hungary, and the
fortress of the kingdom against the Infidells, surprised by Soliman, Emperor
of the Turks. Buda lon. 42. g. lat. 47. Birt.
Buda, or Ofen (Curta of Ptolemie,) unevenly seated upon the right shore of the
Danow, a fair, and strong town, the seat of the principal Bassa of the
Turks, and the chief city of the kingdom. Here are bathes, and springs of
hot waters. Strigonium lon. 42. g. 30. m. lat. 48. g. Clav.
Gran upon the same shore of the Danow, opposite to the fall, or mouth of the
river Gran out of the higher Hungary, from whence it has been thus named; a
strong town of war, and an Archbishops sea, Iaurinum, lon. 40. g. 35. m.
lat. 48. g. 50. m. Birt.
the Primate hereof. Comora, upon the Danow in an Island. Rab a Bishops sea, and
a strong town of war, upon the right shore, and confluence of the Danow, and
the Rab, naming the town, and distinguishing anciently the Higher, and the
Lower Pannonies. Betwixt the Danow, and the Dra, Alba Regalis.
Stul-Weissenburg, strongly, but vnwholsomely seated in the midst of a great
Lake, or inaccessable marish, joined to the firm land with three high, and
broad causies, built with houses, and blocked up at their ends with great
Bulwarks, guarded in time of war, and defending these suburbs. Here the kings
of Hungary were crowned, as likewise enterred. Betwixt this, and the Dra lies
the great lake Balaton, containing 24 Italian miles in length. Zigeth, a strong
town, standing in a marish upon the North side of the river Dra, famous for
the death of Soliman, the mighty Emperor of the Turks, during his siege
hereof. Fiefkirken upon the Dra so named from such a number of Churches;
Quinque Ecclesiae.
a Bishops sea.

Unto the crown of Hungary, belonged sometimes (as they do partly at this
day) the countries of Transylvania, Walachia, Rascia, Servia, Bosna,
Windischlandt, Croatia, and Dalmatia; governed by the deputies of the kings
hereof, or held by their princes under their tribute, and sovereign right. The
four first, since lying wholly within the ancient Dacia, and Maesia, pertain
not to this division.

The descriptions of the other remain, after that first briefly I have
related the ancient estates of Illyricum, whereof they were sometimes parts,
together with the many changes, and successions of people and Lords,
commanding herein unto this present, occasioning the present estate, and names.

ILLYRICVM. Illyricum Polybij Hist. lib. 2. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 3. c. 21.
Illyris C. Ptol. lib. 2. c. 17. Geog. Illyricus Iornand. de Reg. and Temp.
Succes.

THE V. Strab. Geog. lib. 7. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 3. c. 21. Ptolem. Geog. lib.
2. c. 17. Iuli. Solin. Polyhist. L. Flo. Hist. Romans lib. 2. c. 5. Appiani
Alexand. de Bellis Illyricis lib. Rufi Festi Breviarium. Zosimi Histor. lib. 2.
Imperatore Constantino Magno. Iornandis de Regn. and Tem. successione lib.
Provin. Roman. Libellum. Notit. Prove. Imperij Orientis. Comm. Guide: Pancirollij
in Notitiam Imperij Orientis.
name hereof Solinus fabulously deriveth from Illyrius, son to the one-ey'd
monster Polyphaemus, and Galataea; commanding sometimes the country. The bounds
are diversely set down by ancient authors. Florus, and Pliny continue the
name along the coast of the sea Adriaticke betwixt the rivers Arsia, and
Titius, or the countries Histria, and Dalmatia. Ptolemie including Dalmatia,
enlarges the account hereof unto the river Drilon, and borders of Macedonia,
confining upon the other sides with Histria, the two Pannonyes, and the Higher
Mysia. Strabo extends it along the seacoast toward Greece, and the
South-East unto the mountains Ceraunij, and inwards toward the North, and
West unto the river Danow, and the Lake of the Rhaetians, or Acronius; besides
the parts before mentioned comprehending Rhaetia, Noricum, Pannonye, Histria,
and Dardania, with the part of Macedonia, where lay the towns of Dyrrachium,
Apollonia, and Oricum. Unto these of Strabo we find added in Appian the
Tribali, and Mysij; reaching Eastwards along the course of the Danow unto the
sea Euxinus, now Maggiore. The Emperor Constantine the Great, having divided
the Roman Empire into 4 supreme jurisdictions, or gouerments V. Zosimi Histor.
lib. 2. Imper. Constantino.
under the Praetorio. praefecti of Italy, Gaul, Asia, and Illyricum, we read
afterward by this occasion all the parts of Europe, subject to that Empire,
and lying East of Gaul, and Italy (Thrace only, and the Lower Maesia
excepted) to have been contained under the general name hereof; called thus
after the title, or name of the chief prefect, or province of the division.
Sextus Rufus living in the time of the Emperor Honorius reckons 17 provinces
of Illyricus, or Illyricum, two of Noricum, two of Pannonia, Valeria, Savia,
Dalmatia, Maesia, two of Dacia, Macedonia, Thessalia, Achaia, two of Epirus,
Prevalis, and Crete. Iornandes names 18 provinces, two of Noricum, two of
Pannonia, two of Valeria, Mendose pro Savia.
Suevia, Dalmatia, the Higher Maesia, Dardania, two of Dacia, Macedonye,
Thessalye, Epirus, Crete, Praevalis, and Achaia. The author of the Notitia
with some difference names likewise 18 provinces, but accompteth only 17 in
the gross, six of Macedonye, which were Achaia, Macedonia, Thessalye, Crete,
Old, and New Epirus; and 5 of Dacia, which were Dacia Mediterranea, Dacia
Ripensis, the first, and second Maesia (both containing one province,)
Dardania, and Praevalitana, all lying in East Illyricum; and governed by the
Praetorio-praefectus of Illyricum; and in West Illyricum, the First, and Second
Pannonies, Savia, or Pannonia Ripariensis, Valeria, Dalmatia, Noricum
Mediterraneum, and Noricum Ripense. These last he places under the
Praetorio-praefectus of Italy (which happened through the after division of the
Empire by the successors of Constantine,) by agreement of the princes
appertaining to the Emperors of the West; the cause also of the distinction,
and names of the East, and West Illyricum. The author of the book of the
Roman Provinces makes otherwise 19 divisions, or provinces of the whole, the
first, and second Pannonies, Valeria, Praevalitana, the Higher Maesia, the
Old, and New Epirus, Pampica, Noricus Ripensis, and Mediterranea, Savia,
Dardania, the Mountain Haemus, Dacia, Scythia, Crete, Achaia, Macedonia, and
Thessalia. These differences pointed, the more exact bounds, and ancient state,
and description hereof follow out of Ptolemy (the author whom only I have
made choice of,) with reference notwithstanding to Strabo, and the rest.

ILLYRIS, LIBVRNIA, AND DALMATIA. Illyris, aut Liburnia, seu Dalmatia Ptolem:
Geog. lib. 2. c. 17.

BOunded V. Ptolem. Geog. lib. 2. c. 17.
upon the North with a line, drawn by the mountains Albanus, and Baebij unto
the meetings of the rivers Saw, and Danow, by the which it was divided from the
two Pannonies upon the West with a line brought from the Higher Pannony, unto
the sea Adriaticke (whose beginning contained 36 degrees of Longitude, and 45
1/6 degrees of Latitude, and the term, or end (at the Adriaticke) 44- degrees
of Latitude, and 36 1/6 of Lo^gitude,) dividing it from Histria; upon the East
with a line from the meetings of the Saw, and Danow, Southwards unto the 47
degree of Longitude, and the 41 of Latitude, dividing it from the Higher Mysia;
and upon the South with a line, drawn from the East line now mentioned unto
the sea Adriaticke, and the degrees 41 of Latitude, and 45 of Longitude,
dividing it from Mocedonia, and lastly with the part of the Adriaticke,
intercepted betwixt this, or Macedonia, and Histria. It contained Illyris
properly so called, (from which, as the more famous, or noble province, the
many countries before recited took the common name of Illyris, or Illyricum,)
and Dalmatia.

ILLYRIS. Illyris, and Liburnia Ptol. lib. 2. c. 17. Illyric^, and Liburnia.
Plin. Not. Histor. lib. 3. c. 21. and 22.

NAmed V. Ptolem. Geogr. lib. 2. c. 17. Strab. Georg. lib. 7. Plin. Not. Hist.
lib. 3. c. 21. Appian. Alexand. de Bellis Illyricis. Dominici Marij Nigri
Geograp. Comment. 6. Petri Montani and Petri Birt. in. Ptolem. lib. 2. c. 17.
Geog. Interpretat.
otherwise Liburnia from the city Liburna of Strabo. It was extended along the
coast of the sea Adriaticke betwixt Histria, and Dalmatia. Pliny more precisely
boundeth it betwixt the rivers Arsia, and Titius, now Arsa, and Variecha. It
contained after Dominicus Niger the country, now called Sclavonia from the
Sclaves the last barbarous inhabitants; more distinctly Krabbaten, Kraist,
Carbavia, and Contado di Zara. The towns along the seacoast were first next
to Histria, Alvona (Alvona of Pliny,) now Albona. Flavona (Flavona of Pliny)
now Fianona. Tursarica (Tursarica of Pliny, and Thursarica of Antoninus,) now
Fiume. Senia (Senia of Pliny, and Antoninus) now Segna. Lopsica (Lopsica of
Pliny.) Ortopla (Ortupula of Pliny.) Vetia (Vegium of Pliny.) The town is
perished, but the place, where it stood, is yet called Veza. Argyrutum
(Argyruntum of Pliny,) where now is the village, called Scrisia. Corynium
(Corinium of Pliny,) now Gliuba. Aenona (Aenona of Pliny,) now Nona. Iader a
colonie (Colonia Iadera, and Iader of Pliny, Iader of Antoninus, and Iadera of
Mela,) now Zara. Scardona (Scardon of Strabo, Scardona of Pliny, a juridicall
resort) now the village Scardona. The inland towns were Taediastum. Arucia,
now Bregna. Ardotium, now Mogenicha. Stluspi. Curum. Ausancula. Varvaria.
Salvia. Adra, now the fort, or Castle Zerunaz. Arauzona, now Ostroviza.
Assissia, where now are the ruins, or place called Beribir. Burnum (Burnum, a
fort, or Castle of the Dalmatae after Pliny,) now Grachova. Sidrona, now
Sdrigna. Blanona, now Stramitio. Ouportum. Nedinum, now Susied. From the
Liburni, Post hos Liburni navibus plurimum insignes fuisse memorantur,
Illyriorum natio alia, qui Ionium, Insulasque praedabantur, navibus citis vsi,
and levitate praecipuis; qua ex causa Romani nunc naves, quae levitate, and
celeritate praestarent, Liburnicas solentappellare. Appiani Alexandrini de
Bellis Illyricis Lib.
or Illyricans, with light swift ships infesting with continual pyracies the
neighboring Ocean such kind of vessels anciently, as at this day in Latin
writers, were called Naves Liburnicae.

DALMATIA. Dalmatia Ptol. lib. 2. c. 17 Geogr. Dalmatia Plin. not. hist. lib.
3. c. 22.

CAlled V. Ptol. Geog. lib. 2. c. 17. Strab. Geog. l. 7. Plin. not. hist. lib.
3. c. 22. and 26. Appiani Alexand* de Bellis Illyricis lib. Dominici Marij
Nigri Geogr. Comment. 6. Petri Birtij, and Petri Montani in Ptolem. Geogr. lib.
2. c. 17. Interpretat.
from the city Dalminium of Strabo. It was continued along the sea Adriaticke
from Illyris, or Liburnia unto the borders of Macedonia; or betwixt the rivers
Titius, and Drylon. It contained after Dominicus Niger the parts, yet retaining
the name of Dalmatia, together with Albania. The Sea coast towns were first
next to Illyris, Sicum (Sicum of Pliny, a colonie of old Roman soldiers sent
hither by the Emperor Claudius the first,) now Sibenico. Salonae, a colonie
(Solona of Pliny, a colonie, and juridicall resort, Salona of Strabo, the
arsinall of the Dalmatians, Salona of Mela, Salonae of Antoninus,) where now is
Clissa, a fort, or castle upon the river Soliuschiza, not far from the town
of Spalato. Epetium, now Spezzo. Piguntium (Piguntiae of Pliny,) now Almissa.
Onaeum. Epidaurus (Epidaurum of Pliny, a colonie,) now Ragusi. Rhidinum.
Ascruium (Ascrivium of Pliny, inhabited by Roman citizens,) now Catharo.
Bulva, (Butua of Pliny,) now Budua. Vlcinium (Olchinium, or Colchinium of
Pliny, founded by the Colchans,) now Dulcigno. Lissus (Lissus of Strabo, and
Lissum of Pliny, a colonie of Roman citizens,) now Alesio. Within the land
were Andrecrium. Aleta, now Mosth. Herona. Delminium (Dalminium, naming the
country after Strabo, Delminium of Appian, and Florus,) now Dumnio, or Donna.
Aequum, a colonie. Saloniana. Narbona a colonie (Narona of Mela, and Antoninus,
Narona of Pliny, a colonie, and juridicall resort.) Enderum, now Drivesto.
Chinna. Doclea, near unto the town of Medon, raised out of the ruins hereof.
Rhizana (the town of the Rhizaei of Strabo, and Rhizinium of Pliny, inhabited
by Roman citizens,) now Rhisine within the gulf of Catharo. Scodra (Scodra of
Antoninus, and Scordra of Pliny,) now Scutari. Thermidana. Siparuntum.
Epicaria. Iminacium.

What people inhabited each division my author clearly does not distinguish.
He names promiscuously the Iapyeres, bordering upon Histria (Iapodes of
Strabo, lying under the mountain Albius concluding the Alps, and Iapodes of
Pliny, extended to the river Tedanium.) Mazaei (Mezaei of Pliny of the resort
of Salona, and Mazaei of Strabo, part of the Pannones.) Derriopes. Derrij.
Dindarij (Dindari of Pliny.) Ditiones (Ditiones of Pliny.) Ceraunij (Cerauni
of Pliny.) Daursij (Darsij of Appian.) Comenij. Vardaei (Vardaei, sometimes
forraging Italy after Pliny, not improbably the Ardiaei of Strabo, and
Appian.) Sardiotae (Sardiates of Pliny.) Siculotae (Siculotae of Pliny.)
Docleatae (Docleatae of Pliny, and Appian.) Pirustae (Peirustae, part of the
Pannones after Strabo, not improbably the Pyraei of Pliny, and Pyrei of Mela.)
Scirtones toward Macedonie (not improbably the Scirtari of Pliny.) The
rivers, whereof he makes mention, were Tedanium, lying betwixt Lopsica, and
Ortopla (Tedanium of Pliny.) Titus (Titius of Pliny, parting Liburnia, and
Dalmatia,) now Variecha. Narso, or Narson betwixt Onaeum, and Epidaurus (Naro
of Strabo,) now Narenta. Drilo (Drilo of Strabo, and Pliny) now Boliana.
Drinus (Drinius of Pliny,) emptied into the Saw, West of Taururum. The
mountains were Sardonius, Scardus, and Scardonici (Ardium of Strabo, dividing
Dalmatia in the midst along the Sea coast, or length hereof,) now the hilly, or
mountainous tracts of Dalmatia, and Albania. Of Islands, belonging unto, and
thwarting Liburnia, he names Absorus (Absirtium of Pliny,) now Osseros; whose
towns were Absorus, and Crepsa, now Cherso. Curicta (Curictae of Pliny,) now
Vegia, or Viglio; whose cities were Pfulfinium, and Curicum. These Dominicus
Niger puts to be the Absyrtides of Strabo, and Pliny, named thus from
Absyrtus, brother to Medaea, slain here by his sister, pursuing her in her
voyage toward Greece, accompanying Jason. Strabo notwithstanding seems to
extend further the account of these Islands. Scardona (Arba of Pliny,) now
Arba; whose cities were Collentum, and Arba, yet retaining the appellation,
and naming the Island. Along the coast of Dalmatia Issa, a town, and Island
(Issa of Strabo, and Issa of Pliny, inhabited by Roman citizens,) now Pago.
Tragurium, a town, and Island (Tragurium, founded by the Issenses after Strabo,
Tragurium of Pliny, and Tagurium of Mela,) now Trau. Pharia, a town, and
Island (Pharus, or Parus, a colonie of the Parij, and the country of Demetrius
Pharius after Strabo, Pharos, Paros, and Pharia of Pliny) now Lexina. Corcuria,
or Melana (Melaena, or Corcyra, with a city, founded by the Cnidians after
Strabo, Corcyra surnamed Melaena, with a town of the Gnidians after Pliny,)
now Curzola. Meligina.

Pliny adds to those of Ptolemie the forts, or towns of Turiona, now Tnina,
at the mouth of the river Variecha. Mandretium (Mandretium of Strabo.)
Tribulium. Ratanaeum: The river Pausinus. The promontories of Diomedes, or
Hyllis, now Cabo di Cista. And Nymphaum. The Islands Crexa. Gissa. Portunata.
Cissa. Pullariae. Elephates. Lissa. thwart of Iader. Cretaeae. Celadussae.
Brattia, now Braza. Melita, breeding excellent dogs, now Meleda. The people
Lacinienses. Stulpini. Burnistae. Albonenses. Alutae. Flanates, naming the bay
Flanaticus, now the Gulf of Cornero. Lopsi. Varubarini. Assetiates.
Fulsinates. Decuni. Issaei. Colentini. Separi. Epetini. Daorizi. Desitiates.
Deretini. Deremistae. Glinditiones (Clintidiones of Appian.) Melcomani. Oenei.
Partheni (Partheni of Mela, and Appian.) Hemasini. Arthitae. Armistae.
Labeatae. Enderudini. Sassaei. Grabaei. Traulantij (Taulantij of Appian.)
Strabo adds the city Liburna. Appian Promona. Terponium, now Terpono. and
Metulium. The whole length of Illyricum betwixt the rivers Arsia, and Drinius
Pliny accompteth at 800 Italian miles. The greatest breadth at 325 of the same
miles. Along this coast he reckneth above a thousand Islands. The sea Adriaticke
(named thus after Pliny from Atria a city (in Italy) of this name) Strabo, V.
Pl. l. 3. c. 16.
and Pliny call otherwise Mare Superum, or the Higher sea in regard of the
higher situation thereof, and remoteness from the maine Ocean. Strabo
continues this name from Histria unto the mountains Ceraunij in Macedonie.
Dominicus Niger in his sixth Commentary reckneth the length hereof at 600
Italian miles, the greatest breadth at 200 miles, where it is more narrow at
150 miles, at the beginning, or mouth hereof betwixt the mountains Ceraunij,
and Italy, where it is the straightest, at 60 of the same miles. Parts hereof
were the bays Trigestinus, Flanaticus, and Rhizoniscus of Ptolemie; named thus
from the people Flanates, and the towns Trigeste in Histria, and Rhizana, or
Rhizinium; now Gulfo di Trieste, di Cornero, and di Catharo.

The V. Polybij Histor. lib. 2. and 3. T. Livij Romans Histor. lib. 20. 44. and
45. and eiusdem Epitom. lib. 133. and* 139. Dionis Cassij Histor. Romans lib. 55
Appiani Alexandrini. de bellis Illyricis lib. L. Flori Romans Historiae lib 2. c.
5 and 13. and lib. 4. c. 12. Velleij Pater^uli Histor. lib. 2. Sext. Aurelij
Victoris de viris illustribus lib. in. P. Scip. Nasica. Eiusdem Epitomen
Imperante Caesare Octauiano Augusto. Rufi Festi Breviarium. Eutropij Histor:
Romans lib. 3. Lucio Posthumio Albino, and Cn. Fuluio Centimalo Coss. eiusd. lib.
3. and 6. and lib. 7 Imp. Augusto. Iornandis de Regn. and Tempor. successione
lib. Procopij de Bello Gothico lib. 1. and 3. Imperatore Iustiniano. Zonarae
Annalium Tom. 3. Impe^ratore Mauritio. Gregorij Magni Papae Romans Epistol. ad
Episcopos Histriae. Caroli Sigonij Historiarum Occidentis Imperij lib. 16. and
20. Eiusdem Commentarium in Fa^tos, and Triumphos Romans Blond Histor. decad. 1.
lib. 8. and 9. and decad. 2. lib. 2. Anton: Bonfinij Rerum Hungaricarum decad.
2. lib. 10. and decad. 3. lib. 2. of the history of Venice by Thomas de
Fougasses the 1 decade, and 1. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and 9. b^okes; the 2. dec. and 4.
and 9. books. loan. Sambuci Append. Rerum Hungar: Martini Barletij de vita,
and Rebus gestis Scanderbegi lib. 13. eiusdem de Scodrensi vrbe a Turca
expugnata libros. Knowles his history of the Turks.
Romans were the first known forrainers, who invaded, and subdued this
country. In the year of Rome 524 happened their first war with Queen Teuta,
occasioned through her pride, and cruelty, killing one of their Ambassadors,
sent unto her, and a pretense of the pyracies of the nation, and of their
injuries done unto the neighboring Graecians, managed by the Consuls Cn:
Fulvius Flaccus Centimalus, and A. Postumius; the success whereof was the
overthrow, and subjection of the Queen, (amercyed with a yearly tribute, and
the loss of the greatest part of her kingdom) and the setting up of Demetrius
Pharius, their confederate in the war. At this time we find the name, and
kingdom of the Illyricans, to have extended Southwards toward Greece unto the
town of Lissus upon the sea Adriaticke, agreeing with the description of
Ptolemie before related. In the year 534 immediately before the second
Carthaginian war, fell out their next war with Demetrius Pharius, whom not
long before they had made king, rebelling against, and wasting, and invading
the parts hereof, subject unto them since the first war, thinking himself
secure in regard of their new broils, and troubles from Hannibal, and the
Carthaginians; the cities Damalus, and Pharus taken, driven out by the Consul
L. Paulus Aemilius into Macedony, and the whole nation again subdued. Some 52
years afterward, and year of Rome 586 chanced their third war against king
Gentius (confederate with, and aiding Perseus king of the Macedonians,)
overcome, and taken prisoner by the Praetor Lucius Anicius. After this, the
authority, and name of kings being abrogated, the nation was immediately made
subject to the Roman Empire; rebelling notwithstanding sundry times
afterward, and not fully brought under subjection until the reign of Caesar
Augustus. By this prince, and by his captains Asinius Pollio, and Tiberius
Nero, with others, they were at length finally conquered, and first reduced
into the order of a province, governed by Roman Magistrates, and laws. Greece,
and the more Eastern provinces of Europe taking afterward the common name of
Illyricum, these contained the Province, or part hereof named Dalmatia in the
Author of the Notitia, part of West Illyricum, and of the Western Empire;
commanded by a President under the Praetorio-praefectus of Italy. The
Western Empire torn in pieces by the Barbarous nations, in the reign of
Zenon Emperor of the East they fell to the share of Odoacer, and the Heruli,
Lords of Italy, together with Sicily, and Rhaetia, part of their Italian
conquests. These subdued by Theodoricus, and the Ostrogothes in the same
reign, they became subject unto that prince, and people. The Goths being
conquered by the Emperor Justinian the first, they were again united to the
Roman Empire, accounted amongst the Eastern, or Greekish provinces. Not long
after this reunion, in the reigns of Justinian the first, and Mauritius, brake
in hither the Sclaves, by whom the country was again torn off from the
Greekish Empire, with Histria, part of Italy, and Savia, part of Pannonia,
peopled with their barbarous colonies, and language, and since known from
hence by the general name of V. Blondi Histor: Dec. 2. lib. 2.
Sclavonia; commanded for a long time after by kings of this nation, free from
foreign command. The precise time, when these first settled here their abode,
ancient authors do not determine. Blondus conjectureth this to have happened in
the reign of the Emperor Phocas. Their first Christian king was Sueropilus,
about the time of the Emp. Charles the Bald. The widow of Zelomirus, the last
king of the Illyrican Sclaves, or of Croatia, and Dalmatia (for thus then the
princes Croatia, and Dalmatia Bo^finij Rerum Vngaricarum dec: 2. lib. 4. and 10.
were styled) unto whom her deceased husband, having no heirs, had bequeathed
the kingdom, deceasing also without issue, gave this country unto her brother
Ladislaus the first, surnamed the Saint, and to his successors, the kings of
Hungary. By this means the line, and succession of the princes of Sclavonia,
or Croatia failing, the kings of Hungary have ever since that time been
possessed of the right hereof. Before this union with the crown of Hungary,
in the reigns of Basslius, and Alexis, joint Emperors of the Grecians, and of
Murcemirus king of Croatia, the Venetians under Pietro Vrceola, their 26 Duke,
to secure their trade, and shipping upon the Adriaticke, from this shore
continually infested with pyracies (the Islands of Curzola, and Lezina, with the
Narentines upon the Continent being forced by arms, and the rest of the towns
voluntarily submitting) subjected unto their Empire all the seacoasts hereof,
and of Histria from the Gulf of Trieste unto the borders of Macedony, and
Greece; confirmed unto them afterward by an other Alexis, Emperor of the
East, in the time of Vitalis Phalerio their 32 Duke. By king Coliman, who
succeeded unto S. Ladislaus, Zara, and the rest of the Dalmatians revolting,
were regained to the Hungarians, lost again not long after to the Venetians
under Dominico Michaeli their 35 Duke, or otherwise (for the Venetian
Historians are herein uncertain) under this Prince, and Vitalis Michaeli their
38 Duke. Afterward Bela king of Hungary quitteth his whole right of Dalmatia
unto this state^, and to Giacomo Tepulo their 43 Duke. After this, king Lewis
the first inuading Dalmatia with a mighty army, the Venetians under their 57
Duke Giovanni Delphino, being unable to retain the country, (busied in more
dangerous wars nearer home) to make their peace with this more potent enemy,
utterly abandoned, and quitted unto him, and his successors, the princes of
Hungary, all their conquests hereof from Histria, or the Gulf Cornero unto
Durazzo, and Greece, leaving off the title of Dukes of Dalmatia, which till
then they had usurped. Not long after Ladislaus, king of Naples, contending
with the Emperor Sigismond for the realm of Hungary, sold, and again
delivered up Dalmatia unto the Venetians for 100000 crowns; or after others
only Zara, and the haven, and territory thereof. Since this time, the
Hungarians being detained with more important wars against the Turks, the
Venetians became the third time possessed in a manner of the whole sea coasts
hereof from the river Arsa, or Histria unto the borders of Greece. In the
reigns of Amurath, and Mahomet the second, kings of the Turks, and during the
wars hereof with Scanderbeg, king of the Epirots, we find the Empire of the
Venetians here to have reached Eastwards along the shore of the sea Adriaticke
toward Macedonie as far as Lissus, or Alesio in Albania, the farthest
extension that way of Sclavonia, or Illyricum. By Mahomet the second, Emperor
of the Turks, the towns of Scutari, Drivasto, and Alesio were enthralled to
the Turkish tyranny, taken from the Venetians; and beyond the mountains
(Stephen the last prince thereof being captivated, and afterward cruelly
murdered,) the kingdom of Bosna, a part sometimes of Croatia, and held under
the fief, and tribute of the kings of Hungary, reduced since into a Turkish
province, and governed by a Bassa. By after succeeding Turkish monarchs other
parts were added to that Empire. The town of Ragusi, belonging once unto the
Venetians, is now a free commonwealth; subject notwithstanding to the tribute
of the Turks. The rest of Illyricum, or Sclavonia, unconquered by the
Infidels, is yet held by the Venetians, and the German Emperors of the house
of Austria, successors to the kings of Hungary; whereof these command in the
inland parts of Croatia, and Windischlandt, the former in the greatest part of
the Islands, and sea coast towns, of Dalmatia unto the gulf, and town of
Catharo. The languages, here now spoken, are within the land the Sarmatian, or
Sclavonian; upon the sea coasts the Italian through their long subjection to
the Venetians, and commerce with that nation. The Religion hereof, besides the
Mahumetan, or Turkish, is the pretended Romish Catholic. The whole Sclavonia
(besides Istria, belonging unto Italy) contained more anciently the greater
parts, or divisions of Croatia Servat aetatis nostrae, co^suetudo, vt ea omnis
Dalmatiae quondam ora, in Superum mare vergens, Dalmatia, and quicquid ejusdem
morites, mediterraneaque fuerunt, Croatia nominetur, Rasciaque and Bosna pro
regni Croatiae regionibus habeantur. Blondi dec. 2. lib. ^. v. and Bonfinij
Rerum Vngaricarum dec. 2. lib. 4. and 10.
, lying on this side of the mountain Ardium, (which mountain after Strabo
divided Illyricum length-wise in the midst;) and Dalmatia lying beyond that
mountainous ridge along the coast of the Adriatic sea. For by those two
general names we find in histories the kings of Sclavonia anciently to have
been styled. Croatia comprehended at this day the parts, or names, before
mentioned, of Windischlandt; Croatia particularly now thus called; and Bosna.
Dalmatia contained Contado di Zara; Dalmatia, thus now properly named; and
Albania, whose descriptions in the last place.

WINDISCHLANDT. Sclavonia.

BY this name the Dutch, (whose word it is, calling the Sclaues by the names of
the Winuli, and Vendi,) understand Sclavonia, as otherwise it is expressed by
Latin authors; the general appellation of the country in continuance of time
flitting unto, and confined within this part. It lies for the most part in
Pannonia without the bounds of ancient Illyricum, containing more anciently the
Province, from the river Saw named Suavia in Ru^us Festus, and Savia in the
author of the Notitia. It has Carniola, or K^ain upon the West; upon the North
the river Dra, and the Lower Hungary; upon the East, the part of the Lower
Hungary, contained betwixt the Dra, and Saw unto Belgrade, and comprehending
the counties of Poseg, Walko, and Sirmisch; and upon the South (extending here
beyond the Saw) Croatia, from the which it is divided by the river Huna or Vna.
Chief places here are Zagabria, the chief town, seated upon the river Saw.
Sisseg, a strong fort, or castle, and monastery, at the confluence of the
rivers Kulp, and Saw. The right of the country belongs to the kings of
Hungary, now the princes of the house of Austria; enthralled at this day for
the greatest part unto the Turks.

CROATIA, Croatia.
OR KRABBATEN BY THE DVTCH.
BY this general V. sup. Blondi hist. lib. 2. dec. 2.
name were sometimes called all the more inland parts of Sclavonia, lying
toward the North of the mountain Ardium of Strabo. The reason of the name we
yet find not. It was brought first hither by the Sclaues. The bounds are upon
the North, Windischlandt; upon the West, Carniola, or Krain; upon the South,
Dalmatia, or Contado di Zara; and upon the East, the kingdom of Bosna. The
country is cold, hilly, and mountainous, yet sufficiently fruitful, and stored
with all necessary provision; if it were not for the oppression, and
neighborhood of the Turks, to whose injuries it is continually exposed. The
hills hereof seem to be the mountains Baebij of Ptolemie in his second book
of Geographie, and 17 Chapter. The towns here of better note are Wihitz,
called otherwise, Bigihen by the Dutch; the metropolitan, or chief town,
strongly encompassed Island like by the river Vna. Zeng. Wackat. Turnaw.
Modrisch. The country contained anciently the more inland part of Liburnia,
North of the mountain Ardium of Strabo.

THE KINGDOM OF BOSNA
NAmed thus from the river Bosna; after others from the Bessi Thraciae populus
Plin. not. hist lib. 4. c. 11. Bessi maiorem partem Aemi tenent, and a
praedonibus Praedones nominantur, tuguria in col^ntes, vitamque degentes duram,
attingentes Rhodopen and Pannones, and de Illyrijs Autariatas, and Dardanios.
Strab. Geog. lib. 7.
Bessi, a people of the Lower Maesia v. P. Montan. in Gerard. Market.
, explused thence by the Bulgarians, and flitting hither. The most part place
this in the Higher Maesia. By V. Supra.
Ptolemy in his before mentioned description it is plainly excluded thence;
lying in Illyricum, since contained within his line, drawn from the borders of
Macedony unto the meetings of the rivers Saw, and Danow. It was anciently v.
Blondi Hist. l. 2. dec. 2.
a part of Croatia, erected afterward (but when we find not) into a petty
kingdom, held by the princes thereof under the cheifage, and tribute of the
kings of Hungary. It has now upon the West, Croatia, upon the North, the Saw,
with the part of the Lower Hungary, contained betwixt that river, and the Dra;
upon the East, Servia; and upon the South, Dalmatia. Chiefer towns are Iaitza,
seated upon a high hill, encompassed at the bottom with two rivers. Schwonica.
Warbosaine. The country seems to contain the more inland parts of Dalmatia
of Pliny, and Ptolemie. The last Christian prince hereof was Stephen, in the
year 1464 (his kingdom taken in, and subdued) surprised, and afterward
inhumanely murdered by Mahomet the second, the first Emperor of the Turks,
by whom the country was made a Turkish province, commanded ever since by a
Bassa.

CONTADO DI ZARA.
THus named from Zara, the chief town. This otherwise after Dominicus Niger
v. Dom. Nig. Geog. Comment. 6.
retains yet the proper name of Sclavonia. It contains the part of Liburnia
of Ptolemie, and Pliny, extended along the sea coast. The bounds hereof are
the mountain Ardium of Strabo from Krabbaten; the river Arsa from Histria; the
sea Adriaticke; and the river Titius, now Variecha, from the more proper
Dalmatia. The towns of chiefer note are along the Sea coast, Alvona.
Albona (Alvona of Ptolemie, and Pliny,) next to Histria, and the river Arsa.
Fianona (Flavona Flauona.
of Ptolemy, and Pliny,) against the Gulf Phlanaticus, now Quernero. Zegna
(Senia Senia.
of Ptolemie, Pliny, and Antoninus,) seated in a plain. Nona (Aenona Aenona.
of Ptolemie, and Pliny,) encompassed with the sea. Zara (Iadera Iadera, and
Iadra.
of Mela, Iader of Ptolemie, Pliny, and Antoninus, a Roman colonie,) now an
Archbishops sea, and the chief town belonging to the Venetians; enjoying a
large, and safe port, and seated in a low Chersonese, or neck of land upon the
Adriaticke, strongly fenced against hostile injuries. Beyond this town the
river Titius, now Variecha, falls into the Adriaticke, issuing out of woody
mountains upon the North hereof.

DALMATIA. Dalmatia.

REtaining yet the ancient name, and continued South-east along the same shore
of the sea Adriaticke from the river Variecha, or Titius, (by the which it is
divided from Contado di Zara) unto the river Rhata beyond the Gulf of Catharo,
parting it from Albania; bounded otherwise toward the North with the country
of Bosna. The chief towns along the seacoast are Sibenico (Sicum of Pliny,
Sibenicum.
and Ptolemie,) upon the river Variecha. Tragurium.
Trahu, or Trau (Tragurium of Strabo, Ptolemie, and Pliny, and Tagurium of
Mela, founded by the inhabitants of Issa,) seated in a small Island close by the
continent. Spalatum.
Spalato an Archbishops sea. Nere hereunto betwixt this, and Trahu, where now
is the fort, or castle, named Clissa upon the river Solinschiza, stood
sometimes the city Salona of Strabo, Pliny, and Mela, and Salonae of Ptolemy,
and Antoninus, a famous colonie, and juridicall resort of the Romans. Some old
fragments hereof yet appear upon the Western bank of the river called still
by the name of Salona. Almissa (Piguntium of Ptolemy, and Piguntiae of Pliny)
upon the river Zetino; defended with a strong castle, Stagnum.
mounted upon a rock. Stagno upon the neck of a spacious, and long
Chersonese, or promontory, joined here unto the continent with a narrow strait
of land. Against this the river Narenta (Naron of Strabo, and Narson of
Ptolemy) is disburdened into the Adriaticke. Ragusa, and Epidaurus. lon. 44. g.
40. m. lat. 42. g. 30. m.
Ragusi, founded out of the ruins of the famous city Epidaurus of Ptolemy,
and Epidaurum of Pliny, (a Roman colonie, destroyed by the Goths,) now a
free Commonwealth, and a rich, and a flourishing Emporie, strong in shipping,
and with walls, and a well fortified castle; tributarie to the Turks.
Castel-novo, within the gulf of Catharo a strong town, now held by the
Turks. Catharum.
Catharo, naming the gulf of Catharo, seated on the farther side of the bay
toward Scutari (Ascruvium of Ptolemie, Ascrivium of Pliny, inhabited by
Roman Citizens,) now a strong town of war, opposed against, and environed
with the Turks; held by the Venetians. Rhizine at the bottom of the Bay (the
town of the Rhizaei of Strabo, Rhizinium.
Rhizana of Ptolemy, and Rhizinium of Pliny,) naming the Bay Rhizoniscus of
Ptolemy, now Golfo di Catharo.

ALBANIA. Albania*

NAmed thus from the Epirots, or Albanesies; neighboring, and intruding
hereupon. The name extends much farther within the continent of Greece. My
purpose is to describe only the part, lying within the bounds of the ancient
Dalmatia, or Illyricum. This reaches along the seacoast from V. Dom. Nigr.
Geog. Comment. 6. Butua. Antibarrus. Colchinium. Lissus. Scodra. Lacus
Scodrensis. Drivestum.
the river Rhata, dividing it from the proper Dalmatia, unto Alesio. Places
here of better note are upon the seacoast Budoa (Bulua of Ptolemie, and Butua
of Pliny.) Antivari. Dolcigno (Vlcinium of Ptolemie, and Olchinium, and
Colchinium of Pliny, founded by the Colchans.) Alesio (Lissus of Strabo, and
Ptolemy, and Lissum of Pliny,) the farthest place of the ancient Dalmatia
toward Greece, memorable for the death, and grave of Scanderbeg, the
victorious king of the Epirots. Within the land Scutari (Scodra of Ptolemy, and
Antoninus, and Scordra of Pliny,) strongly seated upon a steep rock, at what
place the river Boliana issues forth of the lake, named from hence the Lake of
Scutari; the chief town of the country, famous for a brave, and resolute
siege maintained against Mahomet the second, Emperor of the Turks. The Lake
Scutari is named Labeates by Strabo. It contains 130 miles in compass,
surrounded on all sides with mountains, saving toward the North, and distant
18 miles from the sea. The rockie, and mountainous region betwixt it, and the
Adriaticke Dom: Niger names Criana, or Craina. Drivesto (Enderum of Ptolemy.)
Medon. Nere hereunto upon the river now called Moraza (falling into the Lake of
Scutari) stood sometimes the city Doclea of Ptolemy, and Dioclea Dioclesianus
Delmata Anulini senatoris libertinus matre pariter, atque opido nomine Dioclea,
quorum vocabulis, donec imperium sumeret, Diocles appellatus, vbi orbis Romani
potentiam cepit, Graium nomen in Romanum morem conuertit. Sexti Aurelij
Victoris Epit. Impetante Dioclesiano.
of Sextus Aurelius Victor, the country of the mighty Emperor Dioclesian. This
part of Albania not long since obeyed the Venetians. It is now subject to the
Turkish Empire. The whole extent, or length of the general account, or name of
Dalmatia from Histria, and the river Arsa unto Alesio in Albania along the
course of the Adriaticke, Matalius accompteth at 480 Italian miles; the breadth
from the Adriaticke unto the mountains of Croatia at 120 of the same miles.

THE ISLANDS OF DALMATIA.
CLose along the shore hereof lie a great multitude of Islands. Pliny
hyperbolically increases their number to a thousand, whereof many
notwithstanding for their smalnesse may rather be accounted rocks, then
Islands. The rest for the greatest part are asperous, stony, barren, bad
husbanded, and ill inhabited. They contain together after Matalius some 40000
inhabitants. Their chiefest, and best known are Cherso. Ossero. Vegia. Arbe.
Pago. Lezina. Curzola. Lagusta. and Melida.

CHERSO, AND OSSERO. Absorus.

STanding in the Gulf, or Bay Carnero; called thus from their towns Cherso,
and Ossero. They were sometimes both one Island, named Absorus by Ptolemy, and
Absirtium by Pliny; cut through, and divided into two by their Lords, the
Venetians, and joined, since by a bridge. Both of them contain together about
140 Italian miles in compass, and not above 5000 inhabitants.

VEGIA. Caricta.

NAmed Caricta by Ptolemie, and Carictae by Pliny. It lies betwixt the Island
Cherso, and the town of Zegna in the firm land; containing some 80, or after
others 100 miles in circuit, and 10000 inhabitants; much more populous, then
the former. It has a town of the same name, with a convenient harbor.

ARBE. Arba.

NAmed Scardona by Ptolemy; by Pliny Arba from a town thus called, yet
retaining the name. The land is pleasant, but without harbor, having 30 miles
in compass, and some 3000 inhabitants.

PAGO Issa.

LYing against Nona in the continent, and name Issa by Strabo, Ptolemy, and
Pliny. It has a town of this name, and contains 100 miles in compass. The
Salt-workes here yield great profit to the inhabitants, and the commonwealth
of Venice.

LEZINA.
NAmed Parus, Pharus.
and Pharus by Strabo; by Ptolemie Pharia; by Pliny Pharia, Paros, and Pharos.
It is biggest of the Islands, having a town of the same name, with a good, and
spacious harbor.

CVRZOLA. Corcyra.

CAlled thus from the town of this name. Strabo names this Island Corcyra, or
Melaena, Ptolemy Corcura, or Melana; more rightly Pliny Corcyra surnamed
Melaena, or the Black. It contains 90 miles in circuit; distant about a mile
from the Continent.

MELIDA Melita.

LYing betwixt the town of Raguzi, and Curzola, and named Melita by Pliny.
With the Islands Lagusta, and Dandrem it is subject to the Commonwealth of
Raguzi.

FINIS.

