HOLY PICTVRES of the mystical Figures of the most holy Sacrifice and
Sacrament of the EVCHARIST: Set forth in French by LEWIS RICHOME, Provincial
of the Society of JESUS; AND Translated into English for the benefit of those
of that Nation, as well Protestants as Catholics.

By C. A.

Printed with License. 1619.

THE TRANSLATORS PREFACE TO THE READER.
GOOD Reader, I present unto thy view the Embleame of thy temporal life,
Translation, (nihil enim noui sub sole) and a sovereign preservative of thy
spiritual life, which is holy meditation, the indigested crudities of these
times, occasioned by raw study and superficial prayer, send up such gross
fumes into the head, and breed such wayward spirits in the heart, as in
matters of Religion, do make the greater sort, even at man's estate, to think
as a child, to speak as a child, with no less ignorance then contention. A
strange preuarication, that the childrens game in jest, should prove good
earnest amongst men. Cock sodden half eaten: surely the most, that know any
thing, do live upon the swim, and think the first seething of the pot to be
sufficient, wanting the maturity of deeper meditation. Sweet Jesus, how is thy
net rent, and great fishes slip out, for want of due consideration? How many
divisions, and subdiuisions does thy seamelesse coat endure? Indeed, in
earthly things, variety is cause of pleasure, but in case of Religion, variety
is the mother of nullity, a position no whit paradoxall, being grounded upon a
principle of secular policy it self, confirmed even by the God of wisdom,
saying, That a Kingdom divided against it self (there is variety) cannot
stand, there is the nullity. The Lutheran, the Caluinist, the Puritan, the
Brownist, and Anabaptist, make the Devils Set of fine Parts, consisting of
discords; who always running Division in a wrong key upon the plain song of
Scripture, do mar the soul, which God made a harmony; yea, and all the
music too in the Church of God; and which is the worst of all, never rest so
little as a brief, no nor yet are (...) haste, for any order I see taken, to
conjure down these spirits, which make the Church become monstrous, and to
(...) monstrously predicated of, that it should be compoted of incompatible
contradictions. These are much like so many race-Poasts, that step before
each other a mile in madness (for that is distraction) and he that runs the
course over, is sure to overrun the Constable; and is sure to run his
sight out, though not out of sight; which every pious mind, and studious of
the Churches weal, cannot but heartily wish might soon betide them.

But now behold again; although in respect of the dreadful and disasterous
issue of these wicked designs, Ipitie these men more, then they do
themselves: yet I shame to see the ground, and first original of this
intoxication. And what? have they neither hearts, nor foreheads for
themselves? not a Ianus amongst them to look behind, and before, whence and
whither? good God, that neither pity, nor shame, is able to strike one notch
into their whirling heads, to stop those exentrick motions of a brainsick
giddiness, whose punishment condign, and suitable to the sin, must be a
whirle-pit. But I have almost forgotten my self, being rapt beyond measure,
when I seriously meditate upon those woeful aberrations. The thing, I would
utter, is this. Ask a Sectary (Puritan, Brownist, or other) the ground of his
opinion, and he lays you down a Bible, and many words makes he of the Word,
which he will be tried by, though for the sense thereof, in conclusion, it must
be tried by him, and he vntutored, slave to his own shallow weenings, will be
hammering out some improper word, of his own proper forge, and appropriate it
to that most sacred Word it self; and then presently prevent prevention, by
cursing his Adversary, that shall add, or diminish from it. This, oh this is
it, that makes me blush, for their impudency, laugh at their folly, and grieve
at the injury, done to those heauen-inspired Oracles, yea that blessed Spirit
of God himself, by those fanaticall enthusiasme.

I could speak upon mine own experience very much in discovery of this folly
and impiety, (and to discover it, is to refute it): but I may not exceed the
limits of an Epistle, and future occasion may offer it self for more ample
discourse herein. For the present, I heartily desire thee (good courteous and
Christian Reader) to learn truly, and exactly, what that Scripture means,
by testifying of it self, That no scripture is of any private interpretation.
Next, to that rule put this example, set before the eyes of thine imagination,
the sects above mentioned, with all the petty rioters, calued out of them; and
(if thou can have patience to endure the while) suppose also the holy
Scriptures laid in common before them, then let them demand each of other, from
the first to the last, and reciprocally, what infallible assurance and warrant
they have, to build their particular opinions, different amongst themselves,
and impugned by the demander, upon such and such places of sacred Writ, as they
pretend; and it is not to be uttered, what a spirit of contradiction thou
shall soon discern in them upon strict examination, and yet what a spirit of
flumber too, that all this while they cannot see it themselves.

But to leave those out-flying hunters, which the Church (if it were so well
manned, as to top them) should whip in at the first breaking our, or whippe out
at last for ever coming in again. It is now high time to turn my speech to
thee, good Christian, that with true humility, and unfeigned sincerity seek
the plain way to heaven, and thy souls happiness. To render thee a general
account of this particular design; understand, that this Treatise is chosen by
me, amongst many other, for that it something concerns that point of the
warrant of holy Scripture, before touched, as being founded thereupon, and
seconded also by the interpretation of the Doctors in the firster age of the
new Testame^ts Church. Besides, the most of those places alleged (and there be
14. of them in all) are so profound in search, so pleasant in the finding, so
correspondent in the Type, so reverend in the Mystery, so every way absolute,
as (setting all controversies aside, with the which I will not meddle) I
profess I could not hold off my hands from translating, though it were for my
own private use, only to keep me both from idleness, and from employments
of inferior condition. And after peceiuing that, whereas I intended to make
the Translation only less private, some were instantly endeavoring to make
it altogether public; for the worthy respect I must ever bear to the first
moouer hereunto, and the general good of my own Country, in the increase of
piety and true devotion; I was sooner yielding hereunto, as being not a little
glad, that my poor labors should ever prove to be accounted worthy of the
Churches acceptance. Now my greatest fear is, lest I have done the Author
himself some wrong through the tenuity of my skill. I must confess, I have
not been apprentise to this trade of translating, nor did I ever breath that
stranger air of France; what I have got herein, is by my travails at home.
Besides, those that are well practiced in this course, will yield me that the
elegancy of speech, used by the composer, is by diffrence of language much
abated in the translation, be in never so exact; yet my hope is, I have given
you the same man still, though in an English habit; and though the manner of
the style be changed yet the matter of the book is the same it was. Thou have
here my fears, and my hopes, take my prayers also with thee (good Reader) in
stead of a blessing upon thy perusal hereof, and if it like thee, give me
thine again in change, for further illumination: it is all I crave of thee for
my pains; thou should not deny these prayers to thine enemy, though he
skorne them, sure thou can not, but give them thy friend, that begs them, and
desires to rest

Thy servant in Jesus Christ, C. A.

A BRIEF EXTRACT OVT OF THE AVTHORS Epistle Dedicatory to the Queen of FRANCE.
THe French Author in his Epistle Dedicatory, to the most Christian Queen of
France, sets down an instruction for the more profitable use of these holy
Pictures, which I thought good to impart unto thee (gentle Reader) the
instruction is this. Before thou present thy self to the Royal Table of the
Son of God, cast the eyes of thy understanding upon one of these Pictures, as
first upon the Tree of life, meditating upon the nature, qualities, and virtue
thereof, according as they are set down in that Picture: another time upon the
Sacrifice of Abel, upon the Paschall Lamb, upon Manna, or some one of the
rest: the which Pictures, with their Expositions, will furnish thee, with ample
matter of spiritual meditation, by which thou shall go the better prepared to
that great Feast, and after that thou have attentinely run over the draughts
of the ancient Figure, thou may turn thy self to the consideration of the
truth of them, lively expressed in our Sacrament, and shall enjoy thereby the
spiritual delights thereof, so much more profitably, by how much this
contemplation shall have made the eye of thy soul more quicke-sighted and
piercing, and thy heart more desirous of that heavenly food. After this manner
these Pictures shall serve, as it were a piece of Tapestry, in beholding
whereof, thy understanding may take a heavenly repast; they shall serve also as
an ornament, and holy preparation of the soul, for the more worthy receiving
of that heanenly food, and together therewith a refection of all the most
goodly, and worthy virtues, which adorn a Christian soul. For this Sacrament
contains not only the grace of God, as other Sacraments do, but even the
Author of Grace himself our Savior Jesus Christ, attended upon with the
magnificence of all his rich treasury. In this Sacrament every devout soul
shall receive light for her faith, force and strength for her hope and a
continual fire, wherewith to inflame her charity, seeing that it is a
glittering mystery of the wonders of God, a lively Image of our future
happiness, and felicity, and a nuptial feast of heavenly love; she shall
there learn humility, the foundation of Christian virtue, beholding with the
eyes of faith, the King of Kings there present, and yet nevertheless, clothed
exteriorly with a base garment of the vulgar accidents of two sensible
creatures, Bread and Wine, condescending therus mercifully, with some abasement
of his Majesty, the more familiarly to communicate himself to his creatures
infirmity, and necessity. The Christian soul may there practice religious
piety toward God, adoring Sovereign Majesty, in the presence of his holy
humanity, vaned thereunto. To conclude, she may there take a necessary
viaticum, during her pilgrimage in this mortality of all spiritual and
eternal riches, the increase of which, she is with all diligence to seek,
that she may become the more great in the eyes of God, and men.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader: Whereas the Descriptions whereupon the several parts of this
work are framed, do suppose as thou will find so many painted Tables of the
matters themselves described in them, to be set, as it were, before thine
eyes, which the Author himself, in his French book, thought good to supply
with so many printed Pictures prefixed before them: I have been induced, by
the advice of others, to omit those Pictures altogether, for the reasons here
mentioned.

First, because having received order to procure them from the French Press. I
found the stamps so ouer-worne by means of a second Edition, which came forth
at the same time, that I thought the Pictures not worth the buying.

Secondly, because when they were first printed, though no doubt they were done
with great art: yet were they so defective, not only for want of color, but
also in respect of the work it self, that the Printer was feign to excuse
them in a Note to the Reader, remitting him thereby, for the better
understanding of those stories presented in them, to the Authors Descriptions
of those Painted Tables, which he faineth to have before the eyes of his
Readers. Whereby it appears, that the printed Pictures came far short of
the Authors Descriptions: and therefore served to little purpose, not being
able to express very many of those things, which the Author describes, as
contained in them.

Thirdly, because the descriptions themselves, are so glorious, so lively, and
so complete, as there is no need of the Pictures; which therefore, though
easily perceived to be missing, can no way be thought wanting by any judicious
Reader: especially considering, that such descriptions are made to supply the
want of those Painted Tables which they describe; as Pictures again were
invented to supply the office of Descriptions. The Painted Table being nothing
else but a visible report, or a certain kind of speech to the eye of the
beholder: as the Description thereof again is fitly termed by our Author in
his Prologue, a certain Picture devised for the ear of the Reader. The Orator
or Poet, no less then the Painter, endeavoring to beget with pleasure and
delight, a lively conceit of those things in us, which their Descriptions and
Pictures do set before us. Wherefore, if either of them be excellent, there is
no need of the other: and to join a Picture to the Description of a Picture,
is in a sort to disgrace them both, and to show in effect, that they are both
defectine. And I doubt not, that Philostrat as himself, whom our Author was
content to imitate, would have taken it very ill at his hands, who for the
better conceiving of his Descriptions, should have thought it necessary to have
had those Pictures added, which he describes as present before the eyes of his
Reader.

For these reasons therefore, if it were not the best, I hope thou will not
judge it to be much amiss, that I have altogether omitted those Printed
Tables, being in truth no less defective then superfluous, in respect of their
excellent Descriptions, which of the two are far the better Pictures.

That which does more conceme me, is to excuse some faults of mine own, which
have escaped me here and there, in the Printing of this notable Work, the
Copy which was sent me being very soul; and having no body by me that could
correct me. All that I can do at this present in satisfaction thereof, is
only to make a particular confession, or recantation of them; which you shall
find in the latter end of this Book, set down in such manner, as thou may
easily reform them in thy reading: for the number of the page and line where
the error is being noted there, will easily show thee how to mend it. And so
desiring Almighty God to pardon also those secret faults of thine, with the
rest of mine, which I fear are far the greater. I bid thee heartily farewell.

THE LICENSE FOR THE PRINT, which goes before the French Copy.
WE Doctors of Divinity in Paris do subscribe, certifying that we have read
all this present Book, entitled Holy Pictures, etc. Composed by the Reverend
Father LEWIS RICHOME, of the Society of the name of Jesus: and not having
found any thing herein contrary to the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Faith,
nor to good manners; but many excellent things, excellently deduced, and most
learnedly explained with a singular transparantnesse, touching the high
mysteries of the holy Eucharist: therefore we have judged it most worthy to
come to light, as much for the reducing of wanderers, as for the edifying and
consolation of all true Catholics. Done at Sorborne this 17. of March. 1601.

Ph. De Gamaches I. Mulet.

HOLY PICTVRES OF THE MYSTICAL FIGVRES APpertaining to the most excellent
Sacrament and Sacrifice of the Eucharist.
THE AVTHORS PREFACE OF PICTVRES IN GENERAL.
What a Picture is, and how many kinds of Pictures there are.
THe Sacrament and Sacrifice of the Eucharist, is a work of God so high and so
great, that no tongue of man or of Angels can sufficiently speak, or worthily
discourse thereof; we have said some thing in the four books of the holy
Mass, confuting error, and confirming the Catholic Faith; we address now
this Treatise without mingling of Controversies, to the honor of this mystery,
confirmation of our says concerning the same, and in favor of those who have
not had the leisure to read the former work; we take for the subject of our
discourse, the most notable Figures of this mystery, drawn from the book of
God, which for this occasion we have entitled Sacred Pictures, The inscription
of this work.
which setting before our eyes the holy Images and prophetical Figures of the
mystery that we adore. Such as have seen the truth in armor of proof,
laying about her in the field of dispute, will also take pleasure to see her
sit here triumphant in her roabes of peace: those which have not seen her in
the field, shall have occasion to confirm themselves without noise of war,
and without contention, in the belief of the Church of God.

For Prologue of all this work, The subject of this (...).
we ought briefly to declare what a Picture is, how we take it here, and of
how many sorts there be. Moreover, why God would that in the Law of Nature, and
of Moses, there should be set down so lively Figures of the mysteries
appertaining to the Law of Grace.

By the first declaration we shall have a general knowledge of those Pictures,
which hereafter shall be decyphered to us more particularly. By the second we
shall understand, that God has most wisely used this fashion to teach us his
Law, as well for the manifestation of his glory, as also for the profit of his
children, which are the two feet or Bases, whereon our Figures or Pictures are
erected.

First then we are to note, Natural Figures.
that a Picture or Figure, if we take it naturally, does according to the name
signify nothing else, but the exterior form of some body. So as the outward
form, the lineaments, and the proportion of the parts of a Plant, of a Beast,
or a Man, is a figure of each of these; but a natural figure, Artificial
Figures.
of which we speak not here, this subject appertaining to the Naturalists.
Wherefore according to our sense and meaning here, it is a thing made or
framed to represent and signify another thing; and this is an artificial
Figure, otherwise called a Picture, of which we find three sorts. Dumb
Pictures.
The first is that, which to our eyes represents by lineaments and colors
some things without words, called for this cause by the Ancients, Dumb
Pictures: such are the Images as well of imbosted work, as of painted fables.
Numar, the Cherub. (...). 6.29.
Such was the Serpent of Brass, cast in metal, by Moses; the Cherubims, the
Palme-trees, and the other Images portraited in the Temple of Solomon; also the
Pictures of the Seasons of the year, of Vices, of Virtues, and other fained
pieces represented by the Cheesell in caruing, or by the Pensell upon a plain
board. Of this sort also are the Visions framed in our Imagination; for though
these be in some sort spiritual: yet notwithstanding in the likeness of
corporal objects, so they are represented to the sight of our inward sense.

The second sort of Pictures serves for the ear, Speaking Pictures.
and for that quality we may call them Speaking Pictures; such are the
descriptions or fictions which the Poets or Historians make in words of a Tree,
of a River, of a living Creature, of a Tempest, of a Virtue, of a Vice, or of
other imaginary things. This sort contains also the declarations which are
made to explane some artificial figures either present, or fained as present.
Such are the discourses of Philostratus, for in them there is neither color
nor painting, but the bare word which faines the Images and Figures, and
deciphers the fantasies of the Author, as having the Pictures before his eyes.

The third sort of figures are any things or actions instituted to represent
other mysteries. Allegorical or mystical Pictures,
And if the mystery be civil or profane, the Figure is civil or profane;
as was the Hierogliphes of the old Egyptians, consisting in certain figures
of beasts, or of instruments, put for to signify some hidden thing; as a
Crocodile was the figure of a Traitor; the Eagle the figure of the soul. But
if it be a mystery of Religion, it is an holy figure. So Manna was an holy
Picture, not in regard of colors or of words; but of signification; so
Circumcision was an action signifying and figuring Baptism. This kind of
Figure is otherwise called an Allegory, that is to say, a mystical Picture,
containing in it self a spiritual sense, known to spiritual people, and hid
to the rude. This last sort makes the fundamental subject of our holy Tables
or Pictures of the Eucharist. For our principal end is to explane the things,
and the remarkable actions instituted in the Law of Nature, and of Moses, to
signify the Sacrifice and Sacrament of the body of our Savior.
Notwithstanding in displaying the volume of these figures, we have served our
selves of the other two kinds of Pictures; that is to say, of the Dumb
Picture in the printed figures themselves; and of the Speaking Picture, in our
descriptions or declarations of them. We have also made many excursions in
recommendation of Virtue, and in detestation of Vice, for the institution of
manners; and often encited the Reader to the contemplation and love of the
celestial country; touching by this means the four Cardinal Senses, ^^ure
Senses of Scripture. S. Them. Wart. (...). Greg lib. 10. nor. cap. 1. The
Literal. The Allegorical. The Moral. The Anagogicall.
which commonly are found in the treasures of the holy Scripture; the Literal
or Historical, which goes the first; the Allegorical or Figurative, which is
the spirit of the Literal; the Tropologicall or Moral, which forms the
manners, and the Anagogicall, which shows the triumphant Church: the Literal
is the foundation of the other three; the Allegorical is the mystical
signification of the Literal; the Tropologicall, is the fruit of the one and
of the other; and the Anagogicall is the end of them all. And in this fashion
have we comprehended four sorts of Expositions, and three sorts of Pictures,
to teach with fruit and pleasure the most great mystery of our Religion: for if
there be no other better nor profitable Methods, then these four: and if there
be nothing more delightful then a picture, not which makes a thing glide more
sweetly within the soul then a picture: nor which more profoundly engraues it
in the memory: nor more effectually calls forth the will to love or hate any
object, good or evil, which to it shall be proposed: I see not in what manner
one can more profitably, lively, and delitiously teach the virtues, the fruits,
and the delicateness of this divine and holy meat, of the body of the Son
of God, then with the above named Expositions, and with this triple picture of
the pensell of the Word and of the signification.

If my labor in this excellent matter, To all Christian Writers.
(truly Christian, and worthy of the attention of all honorable men) bring any
profit or luster to our faith, or to the public weal, as I desire with all my
heart it should: all the praise be to God, which has furnished me with spirit
and body, ink and paper, to write thereof. And if by the example of these
Pictures any men of good spirit take occasion to use the like method, in
discoursing pleasantly on some worthy subject, to teach with honest recreatio^
and profit, the means to follow Virtue, and fly Vice; I shall receive my part
thereby of singular contentment and solace, and they their recompense of honor
and glory, from the hand of him, which never leaves any good work done for his
name without reward; nor any ill committed against his Laws, without
punishment.

Truly (to say this by the way) it is a misery as worthy of compassion as
shame, that so many Poets and Orators amongst Christians, and namely here in
France, Employ the goodness and fruitfulness of their spirits, to write tales
and fables, of Love, and other things, either unprofitable or pernicious, and
who like to Spiders (that draw out their own bowels in making copwebs to catch
Flies) do occupy themselves in such vanities, letting pass a thousand fair
subjects, upon which they might with eternal praise, both learnedly and
eloquently write. It is a great shame to the name of Christians, to see a Pagan
Pindarus, an Euripides, a Virgil, an Appelles, a Philostratus, and other like
profane Authors, travail so carefully to set forth, sing, paint, and
represent their Captains, their Acts, their Gods, their Vices, and their
Vanities, for the glory of their superstition: and that many Christians know
not how to choose, neither matter nor manner a greeing to their name, for to
write Christianly to the praise of the true God, or to the honor and
illustration of their only true Religion. A thing yet far more unworthy, and
yet most deplorable it is, to see others temper their pensel and their pen in
the sink and puddle of profane things, Pictures of scandal.
to represent Pictures of abomination and scandal, and to write and paint
forth such fooleries, and vilonies as they do, more profanely, then the
prophanest themselves, without care of losing their souls; so they may gain
some brute of reputation amongst the lighter sort. And what lamentable folly is
it to purchase at so dear a rate the smoke of vanity? to incur ignominy
and eternal pain, only to have their names swim in the mouths and
estimation of fools, for cunning Artizans of folly. But let us come to the
second point of our introduction, and declare wherefore God has of old used
such Figures going before the Law of Grace.

THE CAUSES, USES, AND EFFECTS of Pictures and Figures in holy Scripture.
IT remains yet to declare according to our power, wherefore the Divine
providence would use foregoing Figures in the Law of Nature and Moses, before
that he sent his Son, to establish his own Law in his proper Person. Whereof
we give this reason in general, that it was to declare that he is God; and for
the more profitable instruction of his creature in this point. And thus we
prove what we have said. It is the familiar manner of Gods proceeding, to
perfect his admirable works upon little principles and small beginnings; God
works by little principles.
thereby to make it appear that he is God in little things, as well as in
great, and no less in the first beginning and going forward, then in the end
and conclusion of his work.

In creating the world, he began it of nothing, and in the government thereof
he continues the propagation of his creatures, by means of their seed,
which in a manner is also no thing. For, which is worthy of admiration, this
little seed contains in its littleness, all that which is to be borne out of
it afterward. This Method of God is very fit to manisest clearly his
wisdom, power, and bounty; and very proper, sweetly to make himself known
unto man, according to his capacity. Who sees a fair great Palm Tree well
branched, thick of boughs. and laden with Palms; has he not, wherefore to
admire the Creator in this creature? but he who shall contemplate the little
stone, from whence all this come forth, Their beginning and end.
the root the body, the branches, the leaves, and the fruit of this tree; will
magnify on the one side his divine wisdom, which secretly proceeding from
such a beginning, to such an end, from such imperfection, to such perfection,
teaches properly the greatness of it self, by the opposition to the
littleness, whereon it wrought: and on the otherside, he will no less admire
his infinite virtue, which of so little a sprout could produce such a goodly
tree, then praise his bounty, which in fine has made a Present of all this
for the use of man.

This manner of proceeding is as clear as marvelous in all the parts of this
universal world: but thrice illustrious, and thrice admirable it is in that
Monarchy, which God the Son has established in the rule of his Church;
whereof the foundations have been marvelous in the Law of Nature; the
progress yet more marvelous under the Law of the Jews, but the
accomplishment made in the Law of Grace, surpasses all admiration. The
foundations in the Law of Nature, and the progress in that of Moses, are
meruail ous, because that in their littleness they contain the model and the
figure of the greatness of our Saviors Law: and in this Law of our Savior,
the accomplishment is infinitely more admirable, because it contains the
perfection of all that, which of old was conceived and figured in the other
Laws that went before it. And this is it which the Scripture sets before us so
often, as a clear demonstration of the Majesty, and greatness of our Creator.
Saint Paul writes, that all things chanced in Figure to the Jews, that is to
say, 1. Cor. 10.
that the old Law was a Picture of the new; and our Savior protests often,
that he will accomplish the Law, even to a little lot, One ior. Matthew. 5.18.
meaning that the Law of Grace was a most absolute accomplishment of the other
Laws before it.

Now then, God shows himself God in the reserence of things past, to things
present. Esaias 41.23.
if in any other work of his; Almighty God most divinely has made himself
appear to be God, he has in this connection and reference of things past, to
things to come, so far distant one from the other. In the first place,
foretelling that which was to ensue, he has showed to have present before his
eyes, all things, were they passed, or to come; a sign of supreme dignity.
For without this knowledge, he could not have ordained and foretold these so
great, and so fair designs of so many mysteries, which were not to be
effected till after the ensuing of many thousand years; neither have pointed
out the Lineaments of the Law of Moses in the Law of Nature; and have made in
the Law of Moses, a body of Figures, which represented the Law of the Messiah,
as we see he has.

For the Circumcision given to Abraham, the Red^ses, the Desert, the Manna, the
Mountain of Sina; in sum, all the Judicial Mysteries, were but so many
Pictures containing in signification the truth of our Religion.

Who then could know how to draw these so Divine draughts from time to time, S.
Cyril. de Adoratione.
from season to season; except he which holds in his understanding, the
knowledge and the face of times and seasons, and of all things, passed,
present, and to come? And who could make accord the past with the present, and
the present with the past? Who is it can join the figure to the body, Against
Atheists.
and the body to the figure, the shadow to the truth, and the truth to the
shadow? And with so fair, just, and equal proportion, consummate the work
from point to point, according to the first design, except he which can all
that he will?

As this manner of working by little beginnings and figures, arising to
perfection, and to the truth it self, by means proportioned, both to the
beginning, and to the ending, was convenient to witness the Majesty of God:
so also it was necessary for to iustruct the Jews, when the Law was in her
childe-hood, and meruailously proper to perfect the Christians, when it came to
the perfection of man's estate. These Jews were rude, like young children: and
therefore their Law was a Schoolmasters. God taught them by Figures;
threatened them with the whip: promised them milk and honey; thus were they
taught according to their capacity, bridled with their own bitt, and drawn
by their own cords, which were most agreeable with their own dispositions.
Plato.
Plato says that young people ought to begin their School with the
Mathematikes, because it is a Science which teaches them by things agreeable
to their wits, by lines, by triangles, squares, rulers, figures, which enter
sweetly into their spirits. The Jews then being children, were to be taught
Religion, by figures of Religion, as familiar Alphabets to their infancy; and
such was the usage of them amongst the Jews; but with Christians it is far
otherwise. If the Jews fed upon Figures, by which they were taught; as their
Paschall Lamb, their Manna, their Sacrifices, their Offerings, and their other
more remarkable signs, wherein if they were spiritual, they did contemplate
the future truth of the Law of Grace; the Christians do not so, but
contrariwise they hold the truth it self present, and in it they contemplate
the Figures past, without any more using of them after the manner of the Jews.
From which contemplation they draw to themselves many good uses. The first
whereof is, That they admire this supreme wisdom of God, who has from the
beginning so well grounded the Kingdom of his Son, and conducted it to the
perfection of the Law of Grace, from so little beginnings in appearance, and
yet so great in signification; seeing he has so divinely laid the lively and
last colors of the Law of Grace, upon those shadows and lineaments which he
had drawn before in the Laws of old.

The second is, that they admire the selfsame wisdom, contemplating the fair
report of the new and old Testament to one another, beholding each other, like
the two Cherubims which were turned face to face before the Arc; the one
containing the true portraiture, the other the lively truth; the one saying the
Messiah shall come, the other, the Messiah is come,; the one the Messiah shall
endure the death of the Cross, the other the Messiah has endured the death of
the Cross: the one the Messiah shall institute an eternal Sacrament, and
Sacrifice of his body, the other that he has instituted the eternal
Sacrament and Sacrifice of his body, and so of other mysteries.

These two admirations bring us three other fruits. First, they illustrate our
faith; for when the mysteries which we believe are declared to us by Figures
and Prophecies given many ages ago, our faith takes foundation and root upon
the authority and certainty of things past. And this is the reason why the
Scripture (to plant this faith in the heart of the hearer) sends him so often
to the Tables and Testimonies of the ancient Law. So our Savior going about to
make a faithful Christian of his secret Disciple, Nicodemus, Joan 3. Number. 21.
illustrates the mystery of his Passion by the history of the Serpent of
Brass, long before erected in the Desert, to be a Figure of his Passion; so
insinuated he the victory of his Resurrection, by the shipwreck and coming
forth of Jonas out of the Whales belly: Jonas. Iona. 2.2. Matthew. 12.19.
so the Evangelists and the Apostles use often the witness of the old
Testament, to give foot and credit to the faith they preached.

Secondly, the Figures confirm our hope, for seeing that which God has so
long before figured and foretold, is faithfully accomplished, we are induced
to hope that what is yet to come as the judgment, the Reward the glory, the
pain and the rest, shall be likewise accomplished with the same fidelity.

Finally, they inflame our love toward God, because this contemplation of the
ancient Figures, reported to the present truth, makes us see the eternal
charity with which God has loved us, preparing for us by so long
Prescience, the Good which in the end he has given us; and still promising us
more to come hereafter. And because love and benefits engender love, here-hence
it is, that if we be not unnatural, we increase in our love toward God by
this meditation. These are the causes, effects, and use of Figures. It remains
to enter into the Temple of God, there to see the holy Pictures of the
Sacrament and Sacrifice of the body of his Son, drawn from the writings of
his holy Testament, explained by his own Word, and that according to the
Doctrine of his Divine Painters and Writers, the Interpreters of his Word; the
dumb Picture shall be for your eyes, the description of them for your ears;
and the exposition of one and of the other, shall serve for your spirits or
understandings. The first is of the earthly Paradise, and of the Tree of Life
planted therein, set forth as you, see in the Picture follovving.

THE FIRST PICTVRE. PARADISE AND THE TREE OF LIFE.
The Description.
CHRISTIAN Beholders, Genesis 2.^.
you know that this admirable Chronicler, and divine Cosmographer, Moses, said
in the History of the Creation, that God had in the beginning planted a Garden
of pleasure toward the East, in which he put the Man that he had formed. This
is that fair and spacious Region that the Painter represents to you in this
Table or Picture. It is high in seat, rich in goodness, rare in beauty,
gracious in habitation, and abundant in all forts of delights. The earth in
some quarters thereof is leuelled into a plain champion field; and in other
places raised up in little harrowes or hills, replenished with plants and
trees of excellent goodness. In the place where it is highest, you may there
mark a fountain, which rising in great bubbles, is formed into a River,
winding and watering all the Garden: toward the end whereof, it is divided
into four heads, and makes four great slouds, running into diverse quarters
of the earth. The first of which, is called Phison, casting upon the shore her
golden sands, and many fair precious stones, but no person gathered them up,
because there was none as yet but Adam and Eve in the world; their children,
you may imagine, will not lose them for want of gathering. The air there is
most pure and subtle: and therefore we see not any token of clouds or mists,
the Sun shining clear and bright always. As for the fire which is of elements
the most supreme, it holds it self still and quiet in its kingdom above the
air; yet contributing, notwithstanding, light and heat, with a sweet
temperature, as it were, after the manner of a Torch lighted in heaven. This
gay verdure wherewith the earth is still apparrelled, and these odoriferous
flowers, which with a thousand flourishing colors adorn the same; and
wherewith those trees in like sort are all so trimly dressed, show forth the
Spring, in whose company the other Seasons make here their quarters all
together. And therefore Summer has here already made yellow the Harvest in
this golden field, and ripened many fruits in those Meadows and neighbor
Orchards, which are ready for the gathering. As also Autumn shows forth her
goodly clusters of ripe Grapes in those little hills, where Noah as yet had
never planted Vineyard. And lastly, the Winter gives repose without any
sharpness of cold, See Saint Bafil. ^. Paradis.
for it is mitigated partly by the light of the Sun, which at al times casts
his clear beams upon the Horizon of this divine Region, without estranging it
self very much toward the South; partly by the moist warm breath of those
winds, which blow sweetly from the South, to abate the coldness of this
Pegising air. So that there is a perpetual accord of all the sour Seasons,
whereof the Springtime holds the pre-eminence. This goodly wood of high
trees and thick Cops about it, are full of little birds, which make the air
resound with a thousand sorts of warblings; and above all the Nitinghall,
incessantly, and in many quires make melodious muficke all the year long. But
the Painter could not represent to the ear their sweet harmony, as he
represents to the eye the Birds; and in particular, that Bird, which men call
the Bird of Paradise, hanging here in this Palm Tree, little of body, with
long feathers, all over adorned with beautiful colors; her head yellow, her
neck enameled with a gay green, her wings spotted with a cawny purple, and the
rest of her body with a pale gold color, Citizen of the sky, fair wits
excellency; and admirable in this, that she is always in the air, without
ever touching the earth, for that she has no feet, and when she will rest
her self, she grapples about the trees, with two long feathers, made in
fashion of wire threeds; like as it is represented here. These Lions,
Elephants, S. Bas. Orat. de Parad. Aug. lib. 4 de Ciuit. D^i, 9.11.
Tigers, and other living creatures that you see in diverse places, are not
cruel, nor furious, but gentle and obedient; and therefore Eve had not any
fear of them, no more then Adam her husband, who walked near them in coasting
these woods.

But that which is most exquisite and admirable in this Garden. is the Tree of
Life, or of Lives, according to the Hebrew word, planted in the midst of the
others, so called, because the fruit thereof is of such virtue, that it cannot
only nourish the body for a time, as other fruits do, but also repair all
defecteousnesse, and give it strength and vigor of life, to make it perdurable
and immortal. And as God has made in man an Abreuiation of all other
creatures; even so has he comprised in this Tree, the virtues and perfections
of all other Plants. And I believe it to be that Nectar and Ambrosia, called
also Nepenthes, Ambrosia and Nectar. Nepenthes. Moly. Plin. lib. 25. cap. 4.
and Moly, which the ancient Poets inuoluing the truth in fables, affirm to
have force to make young again, to preserve from death, and to drive away all
cause of grief and coffeehouse.

The first Tree which you see on the left hand toward the West, is the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, laden with Apples, fair to behold, and delitious
to the taste. Eve which is there standing, beholds them with an ambitious and
eager desire, and would feign be at them, but she is advertised by her
husband, that God had forbidden them to be eaten. The Enemy to mankind moved
with envy, and lying in wait for the nonce, when he perceived her weakness by
her curious beholding, took occasion to seduce her; and clothed with the body
of a Serpent, a crafty subtle creature, qua^ities agreeing to this Deceiuer,
by many compasses and windings about the Tree having now gotten up, began from
above to speak with her, and persuade her to take thereof: the poor fool
being easily persuaded, falls upon the fruit, and begins to ^ate, never
doubting any deceit, nor fearing death it self, that lay hidden therein; and
which is worst, she will persuade her husband Adam to do the like. Alas! how
dear must this one bit cost him? What a deadly bit will chis be? How many
wounds and deaths shall he swallow down with this one morsel? Ah good
mother, lend not your ear to this wicked Abuser, who for his revolt is newly
cast down from heaven, and being now full of rage and fury, seeks nothing on
the earth, but your confusion. Keep you, for Gods sake, from touching these
Apples, which are only forbidden you, among so much other dainty fruits, set
before you on the spacious table of this delightful Garden. Offend not for a
little pleasure of your tongue, the Majesty of a Lord so bountiful and
liberal, as he has been unto you. But if you desire to eat some fruit, which
is indeed most exquisite and divine, lift up your hand to this Tree of Life,
and not to that of death, and kill not your self with all your race in you, by
this enormous crime of foul ingratitude, for the committing whereof you have
so small occasion.

1. THE CHVRCH OF GOD LIVELY set forth in earthly Paradise.
GOD teaches us celestial things by terestriall, and spiritual, by those
that are corporal. This fair Garden, which has been here before
represented, according to the History of Moses, by two diverse Pictures, the
one serving for the eye, the other for the ear, is a Figure of the Church of
God; Cant. 4. Isay 51.61. A^^^. 2.
which the Scripture calls sometime a Garden, sometime a Vineyard planted by
the hand of the Almighty. And truly, if this fair earthly place figured some
dwelling, it could figure none more reasonably then that, where God reigns, S.
Greg. 5. Cant. 4. S. Aug. lib. 8. de Genes. ad lit. c. ^
and works after a singular manner, and where his children are divinely
nourished, which is his Church. A heavenly habitation of men, and truly
elevated above the earth, for so much as the desires of those Saints, of whom
it is cornposed, dwell in heaven. An abode of spiritual delights, the true
Palace and proper Mansion of the children of God. S. A^g. de Ciuitate Dei.
lib. 13. cap. 21.
S. Augustine having proved that this Garden had his being in a corporal
place, and such a one, according to the literal sense, as Moses has
described, he declares of what it was the Figure, and says, That Paradise is
the life of good people; the four Floods, the four Cardinal Virtues, to wit,
Wisdom, Fortitude, Temperance, lustice; the Trees the Arts; and the fruits of
the Trees the works of good men; the Tree of Life, Wisdom the mother of all
goodness; the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, the experience of a
Commandment broken. And he adds (which is more remarkable) a second
signification; That all these things may be understood of the Church, for to be
the better received, as signs prophetical of things to come. The Church then
is a Paradise, so called in the book of the Canticles; the four Floods are
the four Evangelists; C^nt. ^.
the fruits of the Trees are good works; the Tree of Life, is the Holy of
Holies, Jesus Christ; the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, the free
Ithertie of the will: S. Aug. lib. de Ciuit. cap. 21.
So Saint Augustine allegorizing upon this History of the earthly Paradise.

2. OF THE GIFTS, AND EXCELLENT qualities of the Church described in the
pattern of earthly Paradise.
IN the Church then may be seen spiritually, all that which corporally was
contained in the Garden of Pleasure. She is situated toward the East; for
she is always turned toward Jesus Christ, the true Orient, and so called,
because he is the East, which she always beholds, adores, Zach. 9.11.
contemplates, loves, and admires. In sign whereof, the material Temples of
Christians are turned to the East: whereas the Temple of the Jews looked
toward the West. In her is to be seen the accord of the four Evangelists,
foundations and springs of our faith, as the four Elements, and the four
universal Floods of this spiritual Garden: The Sun of Justice, which is
God, shines here always; by the bright beam of his truth, Sacrament,
Baptism, Confirmation, Penance, and the rest; the Virtues, Faith, Hope, and
Charity; and other like qualities, hold there the places of trees and plants;
the holy actions of the just are as the greenes, the flowers, the fruits, and
the delitious odours thereof, the preaching of Gods Word, the Writings of the
holy Fathers, and their cloquence, are the gold and pearls cast upon the
shore, by the four divine Floods of the Evangelists; the Birds which sing in
this Paradise, are the devout souls, which in all times with heart, word and
deed, sound forth the praises of God: the Bird of Paradise, so called in
particular, is every perfect Christian, whose conversation is always in
heaven, whose thoughts, desires, and works, like unto purple and golden
feathers, are all gilded and inflamed with charity; the Lions, Bears, Tigers,
and other nobleliuing creatures present the Christian Kings and Potentates, who
notwithstanding their greatness and power, obey, as the least, to the voice of
our Savior, speaking and commanding by the Pastors and Governors of his
Church. The Church then is a Paradise on earth, figured by the former, and is
her self also a figure of a future Paradise, which we look for in heaven. A
Figure so much more divine, as the delights of the souls, which are found in
her, are far more precious, and more nearly resembling true felicity, then
the corporal gifts contained in that earthly Garden, which was prepared for
the first Adam. Come we now to the Tree of Life, the ornament of this Paradise,
and the prope^ subject of our present discourse.

3. THE HOLY SACRAMENT OF THE Altar, figured by the Tree of Life.
THe Tree, and the fruit of Life, Paschasius lib. 1. de corp. Domini. cap. 7.
Philo Iud. de planct. Noe ex Platone.
planted in the midst of earthly Paradise, was a Figure of Jesus Christ, and of
the Sacrament of his body. Man is a Tree, says Philo the Jew, after Plato; but
a celestial Tree, and turned vp-side down; for earthly trees have their heads
fixed in the ground, to wit, their root; Man contrariwise has his lifted up
to heaven: he is then a divine heavenly Tree. Mat. 7.17, 12, 13. Mark 6.24.
Our Savior often compares the good man to a good tree, and the wicked to an
evil; and one of the blind, which were healed by him, being asked, if he saw
any thing, answered, that he saw men, like trees, walking upon the earth. If
then this marvelous Tree were the picture of any man, or meat, what could it
more worthily figure in the Church of God, then Jesus Christ, God and Man, and
his body, the most divine meat of all? But the better to know the
correspondencie of this Picture to the truth, we ought to note the draughts or
lines of the old mystery, and so compare them with the qualities of the new.

4. RESEMBLANCES OF THE TREE of Life, to the holy Sacrament of the Alter.
THe portraitures, and lineaments of the resemblances, and likeness, that is
between our Sacrament and the Tree of Life, are these that follow. The Tree of
Life was the Tree of Trees, that is to say, the collection of the virtue of all
trees and plants, as man of all creatures, and the Sun of all lights: the
body of Jesus Christ also, is the most noble of all bodies, the rich storehouse
of all virtues, and the treasure of the Divinity it self; conceived in Virgin
earth by the work of the holy Spirit, and borne of a Virgin; a Body, wherein
dwells truly the fullness of all goodness. S. Aug. lib. 1. cont. aduers.
legis. cap. 18.
The Sacrament also of this body, is the collection of all the ancient
Sacraments and Sacrifices, and for this cause, Sacrament of Sacraments, and
Sacrifice of Sacrifices; as the Tree of Life was the Tree of Trees, and the
Fruit of Fruits; Sacrament, truly planted in the midst of the Church, that
is to say, lifted up to a most noble height amongst the other celestial
mysteries; as the Tree of Life was planted in the midst and most eminent place
of the Garden, among the other Trees.

The Tree of Life was ordained, not to nourish the body by little and little,
as did the other fruits, but for to repair all the defects thereof at once, to
render it vigorous, to give it a perfect life without end, and to nourish it in
the highest degree, that a body can possibly be nourished. Even so the body of
our Savior is left in refection to his Church, not to sustain us after the
fashion of corruptible meats, which are converted into the substance of our
bodies, but rather to convert our bodies into it, imprinting in them his divine
qualities, and giving them a living spring of immortality; according to that
which our Savior said, He that eats this bread shall live eternally: Joan.
6.51.44.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, be has life eternal, and I
will raise bins up in the last day.

The tree of life was no where to be found, but only within the enclosed
earthily Paradise; neither was there any more then one alone; the Sacrifice
also, and Sacrament of the body of our Savior is not made, but in his Church,
by such as are lawfully called thereunto; and if it be found amongst Heretics,
they have it from the Church; and it is every where one selfsame body, and
not many; so as there is no profitable Sacrament of this precious meat,
neither any Tree of Life in the assemblies of Heretics, no more then in that
of the Paynims; and if they carry it out of the Church with them, and take it,
being Infidels, it is to their damnation, because they are forth of the holy
Church, the true and only earthly Paradise, in which is planted the Tree of
Life for the children of God. Exodus 12. S. Aug. Sermon. de Temp. 181. c. 12.
The Lamb (says Saint Augustine) is sacrificed in one only house, for that
the true Sacrifice of the Redeemer is sacrificed in one Catholic Church; the
flesh of which the Law forbids to be carried forth, for so much as we must
not cast to dogs that, which is holy.

The Tree of Life was prepared for meat unto Adam, no longer then he remained
in state of Innocence, and therefore, after he had sinned, he was excluded
from it: which depriving him thereof, was Gods Justice and Mercy together;
Justice, because that sinful man, merited by his disobedience to be deprived
of the use of that fruit which was reserved, for the reward of his obedience,
says Saint Chrysostom and Theodoret. S. Chrysostom. hom. (...) Genesis 18. The^d.
^. 126. in Genesis
Mercy, for that having been condemned to many miseries, if he had eaten, he
had bin made immortal, and so immortally miserable upon the earth; whereas in
living but a little time, his misery is so much shortened. Tren l. 3. c. 37. S.
Greg. Naz. ^^ at. 2. de Pasch.
Wherefore, says Saint Gregory Nazianzen, after Saint Ireneus, his punishment
is turned into mercy; for if he had tasted of this fruit, his life had become
immortal, and his evils endless. And even so the fruit of our Sacrament is
also prepared for those, which have a clean soul; so that if any one take it
with conscience of mortal sin, he takes death, and puts himself in danger
to be eternally miserable. This is it which Saint Paul says. 1. Cor. 11.27.
Whosoever shall eat and shall drink the Chalice of our Lord unworthily, he
shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord: and for that cause let
every one prove himself, and so eat of this bread, and drink of this
Chalice; for whosoever eats and drinks unworthily, he eats and drinks his
own condemnation, not discerning the body of our Lord. He exaggerates the
greatness of the crime, and threatens the criminals by great and piercing
words, to make every Christian attentive and wary, that he do his endeavor to
prepare himself worthily to the eating of this bread; and herewith he shows,
in what consists the means to make this preparation, which is by cleansing
the soul by an holy confession of all the sins, which we can remember; in
doing penance, and making satisfaction for the same: for this the examining,
and proouing, of which he speaks; S. Chrysostom, hom. 24. in 1. Cor. hom. 3.
ep. Ephesians. S. Amb. lib. 6. in Luc. c. 37. S. Cyp. l. 3. ep. 14. S. Aug. tract.
16. in Joan.
and that he commands, is no other thing then this, as Saint Chrysostom, Saint
Ambrose, Saint Cyprian, Saint Augustine, and all the holy Fathers have
explaned. To this purpose said Saint John, Blessed are those which wash their
robes to the end that their strength be in the wood of life; that is to say,
happy are those, which do penance, and cleause themselves of all their sin,
Apoc. 12.
to the end that they may worthily participate the fruit of this divine
Sacrament, the Tree planted in the Church of God, for the attaining of life
eternal.

5. OF THE EXCELLENCY OF THE HOly Sacrament of the Altar, far above the Tree
of Life.
THe likeness of the Tree of Life, with our Sacrament, makes us to admire the
wisdom and power of God, who had both knowledge and power to exhibit so
divine a portraiture of this most excellent Sacrament; but if we contemplate
the difference, and the excellency of the one so far above the other; we
shall more admire his unmeasurable liberality toward us. The difference is
first in this, that the Tree of Life was but an earthly body, and corruptible,
brought forth and nourished by the earth, insensible, after the manner of
other created things, quickened with the life of a plant, having neither sense
nor discourse. Our Tree of Life is an immortal body, celestial and divine,
engendered in the womb of a Virgin, by the work of the holy Ghost; quickened
by an intellectual soul, carrying the Image and likeness of God, expressed
therein with the most lively and complete draughts of perfection and beauty,
that ever humane soul enjoyed; so that if the working hand of the Creator show
it self admirable in the common Fabric of man's body, what tongue shall be
able to tell, what spirit to comprehend, the beauty of the body of his Son?
Or so much as of that earth out of which he brought forth, and with which he
nourished this body, which was the holy body of the Virgin Mary. O deified body
of the Son! O di^i^e body of the Mother! O fruitful Virgin above all
mothers! O chaste Mother above all virgins, having engendered such a Son! O
heavenly earth; true earth of theliuing; pattern of the Church; Garden of God,
infinitely more noble then this first earthly Paradise! Virgin divinely and
truly fruitful, which have brought forth a Tree of so precious fruit,
surpassing in goodness and beauty all the fruits of the earth! O the bountiful
liberality of him that gave it!

6. THE BODY OF THE SAVIOVR, NOVrishment of the soul, and cause of the
glorious resurrection of the body.
THe second difference between our Sacrament and the Tree of Life, is, that
this Tree was only for the body, to make it immortal, and to preserve it from
death. Our Tree of Life is also for the soul, which it beautifieth,
nourishes, and makes sat with celestial and divine virtues; and besides, it
imparts much more to the body, then did the other; for it disposes it not
only to immortality, but also to a glorious resurrection; and therefore it is,
without comparison, more worthy to be called Tree of Lives, then the other to
be termed the Tree of Life; for this gives three lives, the life of grace to
the soul, the corporal life to the body; and to both the life of glory;
prerogatives most divine, and alone proper to the body of the Son of God; for
although the heavens, the stars, and other natural bodies furnish the soul
with some spiritual nourishment, serving her for an object to contemplate
their fiame and beauty, and to feed and refresh her with the knowledge of their
natures, it is notwithstanding a far off, and by imagination alone, whereas
this deified body marieth it self unto her by a contracted knot of celestial
and divine love, and being really present with her, imprinteth in her his
qualities of grace and glory, which no other natural body can do, it being
above their force and virtue, and reserved to the only body of the Master of
Nature.

7. THE SACRAMENT OF THE BODY of the Son of God, Tree of all the earth.
FInally, the first Tree of Life had for her only and last dwelling the earth,
and that for a little time, and in one parcel alone. It may be it had been
multiplied in many quarters, if that man had perseuered constant in his first
innocence. But the second is in many places of the earth continuing always
one, and abides not for a little time, but remain in heaven for ever: for on
earth, as contained in this Sacrament, it feeds the children of God during
their peregrination, in whatsoever coast of the world they be dispersed; and to
them it is and shall be the high object and eternal meat of felicity in
proper form and clear vision of glory, when the soul implunged, as it were,
in the profound contemplation and love of his God, shall enjoy to the full, the
riches of his Divinity, and the body clothed with immortality and honor, shall
see and admire with corporal eyes, the wonderful glory of that body, by which
it was redeemed.

8. CERTAIN SPIRITVALL ASPIRATIons of the soul, desiring the clear vision of
the body of our Savior, and a giving thanks for the same.
O Good Jesus, when shall the Sun of that day shine, wherein we shall openly
see this bright body of thy holy humanity, which yet we here behold by faith,
hidden in the depth of this profound mystery? when shall that season be, in
which we shall enjoy with full liberty, this Tree of selicitie, always
youthful, green, flourishing and bearing fruit; planted within the enclosure
of the celestial Paradise, in the Land of the Living. A Land in which the
Orient-Sunne shines perpetually, causing an everlasting Spring to abound with
the Autumn fruits of immortality, watered with delicate rivers of pure
delights, ennobled with all sorts of beauty, inhabited with divine spirits;
Habitation of honor, felicity and peace everlasting. When, O sweet Jesus,
shall we be in possession of this happiness? thou know when, O Lord, from
whom nothing can be hid: and thou alone have the clear knowledge hereof; we
have nothing but faithful hope, and know no more thereof, then that which the
mouth of thy dear Spouse has told us. This shall be, when thou shall please.
This shall be, when the decree of thy wise mercy shall have put an end to all
our misery, and the term of our mortal life, shall give beginning to that,
which knows neither death, nor ending. This shall be then, when far from
all grief, we shall rejoice with the fullness of all goodness in thee, and by
thee, eternally happy: But in the mean while, O Sovereign Creator, we have
an eternal oblation to thy infinite bounty, that prepared for our first
Father and us, the divine benefit of that Tree, which was to have been a
preservative from death, and a sovereign electuary of immortality, with a
thousand other goods for the sustenance, and pleasure of the life of our body.
And if he received not the fruitful use of this Tree, it was his own most
faulty ingratitude, no less enormious, then thy liberality was great toward
him; and the practice thereof so much the greater, that thou wast not hindered
from conferring so great a benefit upon him, although thou did foresee that
he would offend thee, and so deprive himself by his own crime, of this
comfort.

Much more ought we to thank thee, that thou have given us in the Law of Grace
a Sacrament of Life, infinitely better then the Tree of Life; for what
comparison is there between thy celestial body, and the wood of earthly
Paradise? between the price of a body, which has redeemed all the world; and
a Tree, that is not the thousandth part of the world? between the excellency
of the body, in which inhabites the fountain of life, and the fruit, in which
remains only but a part of life? between the virtue of a deified body,
bearing God, and being vpheld of God: and a lively plant of God, having in it
self but the virtue of a mortal creature? What is then thy bounty (O
merciful Lord)? and who could ever imagine, that after having been so
grievously offended of men, and having justly deprived them of the use of this
first fruit, thou would so mercifully substitute another, which so
infinitely surpassed the former in all good qualities? and who could be so
good, and so liberal, but thou which art self goodness and liberality
without measure, or end? be blessed, O Lord, for thy gifts, and since without
end thou art sweet and gracious, give us yet means and grace to praise thee,
thank thee, and serve thee, with all the forces of our soul, even till the
last breath of our life and so holily to make an end of our pilgrimage in this
o^^ mortal race, strengthened with the viaticum of the precious Sacrament of
thy body, that one day we may eternally enjoy the fruit of life, which thou
have prepared in heaven, to be meat and nutriment of everlasting happiness,
for thy beloved.

THE SECOND PICTVRE. THE SACRIFICE OF ABEL.
The Description.
SIlence, masters, and attention, Genes. 4.^.
well to pierce into the draughts and the sense of this sacred Picture, to
learn, how we ought to make Sacrifice to God, and to yield him faithful
homage. ABEL, first shepherd, and first just of the children of Adam, and
first Priest of the Law of Nature, offers Sacrifice to the divine Majesty:
The Altar is prepared by nature, without art; for the world is but newborn,
there are not yet any builders, or houses amongst mortal men: the Priest is
also clothed simply, after the fashion of Adam his Father, half naked, and
covered only with a sheep skin, but the offering is a choice one, and
culled for the best, that he could choose in all his flock, but the heart of
the Offerer is yet much better; you read his profound devotion and humility
in the posture of his body, he prays upon his knees bowed to the earth; his
eyes weeping, and cast up toward heaven; his mouth modestly open, pronouncing
the praises of God, his arms and hands moderately lifted up, imploring his
divine mercy, and the whole composition of his sweet and gracious visage,
witnesses his godliness, his faith, his hope, his charity, and other divine
virtues of his soul, with which he offered both the Sacrifice, and himself to
his Creator: so as the heart of the Offerer, and the sweet smell of the
Offering ascended even to the heavens; S. Cyprian serm^ de Natiuitate.
from whence, as you see, God makes descend his fire, inflaming the air, and
lighting upon the Altar, to devour the Burnt-offering in sign that it is very
acceptable in his sight. It is not so in Caine, the older brother of Abel, who
by manner of acquiting himself, he cares not how, and as though he meant to
deceive his divine Majesty; makes his oblation on the other side, offering
certain ill-fauoured sheaues of straw, keeping the best corn for himself: no
marvel, therefore, though it had no sign of approbation from heaven, as the
Sacrifice of Abel had; whereat he is all enraged, and gives manifest signs of
his fury; Genesis ^.^.
see you how lumpishly he looks? how he roules his eyes in his head, and
bends his brows as a forlorn madman? God from above perceived him well, and
chidde and corrected him as a Father; showing him, that the eye of his
knowledge pierced the depth of his secret thoughts; and that an Hypocrite,
thinking by fair shows to deceive God, deceives himself. Moreover, that it
is in his liberty to do well, and that in doing well, he shall have him for
his friend, and well shall come of him. But Caine remains Caine, hardened and
obstinate by his fatherly correction, and turning the point of his spite
against his innocent brother Abel, he now resolves to have his life, and goes
forthwith to put his malicious design in execution; so that making the earth
to drink man's blood in the beginning of the world, and the blood of the
innocent, and of his own proper brother, he carries the mark of the first
Murderer, first Tyrant, and first Paracide in his forehead, and becomes the
fundamental stone of the kingdom of Satan. But thou, O meek child, which
art attentive to thy Sacrifice, without any suspicion or thought of the envy of
thy unnatural brother, thou shall be the first member of the Church of God,
representing both in thy name, and in thy person, all the tears, travels,
anguishes, persecutions, and laborious courses of the just in this life. But
especially in thy Sacrifice, and in thy death, thou shall bear the figure of
the just Messiah, killed to kill our sin, and to restore us again to the
life of Grace. Farewell Abel, farewell the blessedness of the Family of thy
Father, farewell the honor of the world; thou art taken away from the earth in
the flower of thy years; the very Stars mourn for thee, and turn away
their eyes in detestation of the foul crime of thy brother. O you tender
souls, which see and hear all this, melt your hearts into grief, and your
eyes into tears with sorrow and compassion. But comfort your selves; Abel is
yet alive; Abel is now in the safety of the hand of God, he shall die no more,
but live for ever, and we shall live with him in heaven, if we imitate him on
earth; as all those that are obstinate and wicked, with obstinate Caine, must
perish eternally.

1. THE SACRIFICE OF ABEL, A FIGVRE of the Cross, and of the Eucharist.
THe Sacrifice of Abel was a manifest Figure, as well of the death of our
Savior, as of the Sacrament and Sacrifice of his body, left for a memorial of
his death. That it was a Figure of Christ's death, the Scripture teaches, when
it says, Apoc. 13.2.
That the Lamb has been slain from the beginning of the world, that is to
say, that Jesus Christ has been put to death from the beginning in Figure,
which Figure consists not only in the death of Abel, but also in the death of
the Lamb which he offered. Tertullian, Tertul, de Car. Christi. S. Aug. lib.
15. cap. 18. and lib. 28. cont. Faust, cap. 9.11. Rup. lib. 4. Genes. 4. Joan.
10.
Saint Augustine and other Doctors declare the resemblance between them in
this manner. Abel brother of unjust Caine; most Just Jesus, brother of the most
unjust Jews; Abel a shepherd, Jesus Christ the Good shepherd; the sacrifice
of Abel was acceptable to God; Jesus Christ by his Sacrifice appeaseth God;
Abel offered his Lamb; Jesus Christ himself, the true Lamb; Abel was slain
through envy; Marc. 15.10.
Jesus Christ was crucified out of envy; Abel was killed in the fields; Jesus
Christ without the gates of Jerusalem.

That this was also the Figure of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, it is evident
by the faith of the Church, which has always so believed, as is witnessed by
the ancient Prayer she uses in offering that Sacrifice, which is inserted in
the Canon of the Mass, and is to be found in the writings of Saint Ambrose, S.
Ambros. lib. 4. de Sacr. cap 6. and in Can. Miss.
in these terms; Upon which Oblations vouchsafe to look down, Lord, with a
gracious eye, as thou did look down upon the Presents of thy just servant
ABEL. But let us see the works, and lineaments of this Figure.

2. THE ACCORD OF THE FIGVRE OF the Sacrifice of ABEL, with that of the Mass.
BEhold now some draughts of this Figure, answering to the truth. The Sacrifice
of Abel was the first Sacrifice of the Law of Nature: for albeit that Adam, no
doubt, did Sacrifice; yet notwithstanding the Scripture makes no mention
thereof, but sets down this of Abel, as the first; and without doubt, this
was also the first in dignity. In like manner, the first Sacrifice, offered by
Jesus Christ, true ABEL, is this of the Eucharist, for that on the Cross was
the second. As Abel sacrificed his firstborn Lamb; so Jesus Christ offers
in the Eucharist, the Firstborn of his Father, and of his Mother, and
Firstborn amongst many brethren. As Abel, a little after he had sacrificed,
was led by his brother out of the house, and by him put to death. So our most
happy Savior, after that he had offered his first Sacrifice, was made
prisoner, and the morrow after was led out of the City of Jerusalem to Mount
Caluary, and there crucified. The Sacrifice of Abel was pleasing, by reason of
the innocence and piety of the Offerer: the Sacrifice of the Eucharist is
always pleasing to God, by reason of his Beloned Son, in whom he is well
pleased: for it is he which is always the first and principal Offerer in the
Mass, as he is also the principal agent in all the other Sacraments; for as
it is he, which makes his Body; it is he also, that Baptiseth; it is he that
Confirms; it is he that Absolueth us from our sins, and which does all the
rest; the Priest being no more but his Vicar and Instrument therein: but the
Sacrifice of the Eucharist, in one thing, far excels the other of ABEL,
because it is an Offering grateful of it self to God, for it is Jesus Christ
himself; it is he, which is the Offerer, and Offering together.

Finally, the Sacrifice of ABEL contains alone three Sorts of Sacrifices,
which after were instituted by God in the Law of Moses, as it shall be showed
in the Type of Melchisedech; which are the Holocaust, the Host Pacificall, and
the Host Propitiatory. In the first, all the Offering was burnt, and offered
directly to the honor of God, in acknowledgement of the homage, which we owe
to his divine Majesty. The second was offered in giving thanks, and in sign
of a joyful union and alliance between the Creator and the creature. The
third was offered to obtain remission of sins. These three sorts were in the
Sacrifice of ABEL, and are found clearly in the Sacrament of the Mass; for
all is offered to God, and to his honor. In it, is a thanksgiving of the
highest degree, by a Return, as it were, made unto him of the most excellent
gift, that ever he bestowed, and therefore it is called the Eucharist; by it we
have Propitiation, for finnes by it are pardoned. As for the Sacrifice of the
Cross, although it was truly an Holocaust, and vertually a thanksgiving to
God, yet was it properly Propitiatory; and therefore the Scripture assigning
the cause, wherefore Jesus Christ died, Romans 4 25. 1. Cor. 15.3.
mentions always sin; He was delivered (says Saint Paul) for our sins,
and often elsewhere; it is then Propitiatory. The Sacrifice of ABEL therefore
containing the three forenamed sorts of Sacrifices, was an express Figure of
the Eucharist, and so you may behold how the truth has accomplished the
ancient Figure.

Of two sorts of Sacrificers.
BEsides the proper Sacrifices which are made by Priests and ordained Officers,
with such Oblations, and Presents, as Abel and Caine did offer upon the Altar
of stone: there are other, called also Sacrifices, in a more ample
signification of the word Sacrifice, which are the works of virtue, as of
Faith, Hope, Charity, Prayers, Alms, Fasting, Mercy, Tears, good Desires, and
other actions of piety, that not only Priests, but every one ought to offer
on the Altar of his soul, after the fashion of ABEL, in innocence and
sincerity, and (in a word) to offer himself also, as ABEL offered himself,
taking from him the pattern of a perfect Sacrificer. Saint Cyprian speaking of
Christian Sacrifices; S. Cyprian. de ^ra. Domi.
ABEL (says he) innocent and just, sacrificing to God with purity, teaches
others, that they ought to come to the Altar with the fear of God, and
simplicity of heart. S. Ambros. de Ord. Dominic. Incar. cap. 1.
And Saint Ambrose. ABEL offered sacrifices of the firstborn of his flock,
teaching us thereby, that the Presents of the earth please not God; but only
those, in whom shined the grace of divine mystery.

But as for Caine, he is a pattern and example of the wicked: he offered
negligently by way of acquitance; deceitfully giving of the worst; and thinking
to deceive God: so do perverse men, after his imitation, offer always the
worst upon the Altar of God; the worst corn, the worst grapes, for their
Tithes; the worst bread for their alms; their worst children to the Church,
for men of the Clergy; and this, not for the honor and glory of God, but for
the vanity of the world, for particular interest, and temporal commodity.
Such Sacrificers are imitators of Caine, and partakers of his crime, and shall
be contemned of God, and be made companions of his pain.

3. GOD PERMITS EVIL, TO DRAW good forth of it for his glory, and the profit
of his children.
But Abel was slain by his brother Caine; what is, O Lord, the secret of thy
providence in this permission? How have thou endured, that thy first Just,
first Sacrificer, first faithful servant in thy house, should be so unjustly
oppressed, and that the envious has had the upper hand against the innocent?
Such a demand man's heart might make at the first view, admiring the judgments
of God, which he does not understand. But we must know that God permits
nothing, which is not holy, and honorable to his Majesty; he does then permit,
that the unjust oppress the innocent, for two principal reasons; of which the
first is taken from his wisdom, which requires, that Caine should be left in
his liberty, working after the nature of man, as the other creatures do
according to theirs: Gods will is, that the fire do heat necessarily; that
the water moysten necessarily; and so of the rest, of other like creatures. But
that man, made according to the Image and likeness of his Maker, should have
freedom and liberty in his actions, like unto him, and therefore has
bestowed a free will upon him, Eccles. 15.17.
and has set before him water and fire, permitting him to stretch forth his
hand, to which he will; with this charge, that if he choose Virtue, he shall
have reward; if he transgress his Laws, he shall carry his punishment. This is
it, that God said to Caine a little before, Genes. 4.6.7.
If thou do well, shall thou not receive good? and if thou do evil, thy
sin, shall it not be also before the door; but thy appetite shall be in thy
power, and thou shall rule it. Without this liberty, Man should not be man, but
a beast, working not with election and choice, but by force of nature, as a
horse; and if God should bind the arms of the wicked, men should not be able
to know the good from the bad. He suffered then Caine to kill his brother, for
to demonstrate his wisdom, permitting sice working to a free creature; as by
the selfsame wisdom, a little before, he had suffered Adam to transgress
his Commandments, and to give himself and all his race a deadly blow, because
he had created him with such freedom. The second reason wherefore he suffered
this murder, as many other ^uils, is drawn from his power and bounty; his
power can turn to good all the evil which is done by his permission, and his
bounty will; and therefore he permits it. Men ought never to permit evil, if
they can hinder it; for they are not all powerful to repair it, being done;
but God permits it, because he can draw profit from it. Upon which, ^. Aug.
lib. de ^iuit. cap. 8.
excellently says Saint Augustine, It has bin agreeable to the omnipotency
of God, to permit evils coming from free will: for his almighty bounty is so
great, that he can do no ill, be it in pardoning the evil done, be it in the
healing of it, be it in turning it to the profit of the just be it in revenging
the same by just punishment. And a little after, There is none of the better or
more mighty power, then he, which not doing any ill, turns the euillinto
good, and draws profit from it. In another place giving the reason, wherefore
God did permit the Angels to fall; S. Aug. lib. 22. de Ciuit. cap. 1.
It is (says he) because God judged it to be a thing more worthy his power and
bounty, to draw good from an evil committed, then not to permit any evil to
be done. At that time then, for this reason, he suffered Caine to do as he did,
and for the same reason he permitted many others as bad as he, to exercise
their malice, even to the killing of his own proper Son, which was the
greatest enormity that ever was committed, nay that ever could be committed or
imagined: for God was put to death; the Creator, by his creature; the Father by
his children; the King by his vassals, a crime which surpasses the atrocitie
of all other crimes. And yet notwithstanding, from this death, from this
ignominy and enormity, his power and divine bounty has drawn forth not only
his own glory, and the honor of his Son, but the life and salvation of all
mankind. Which is it that Saint Augustine admireth, S. Aug. in Psalm. 73.
saying, How great a good has God given us, from out the evil of the Traitor
Judas? and how great good have all the Gentiles from the sentence of the Jews,
condemning our Savior to death? Even death? Even so converted he the cuill
which his servants endured, to their good and honor: the death of Abel, to the
profit and honor of Abel, and to the confusion of Cain: the one is made an
honorable Martyr, the other became an infamous Murderer; Abel is honored with
glory to be the first Martyr; Caine marked with the ignominy of the first
Paracide; and so of other persecuted Saints, and their wicked Persecutors: They
here exercise their fury, S. Aug. lib. de Contin. cap. 6. Psalm. 115.
God making by them Martyrs, says Saint AUGUSTINE: the good seem to be
neglected, but their death is protious before God, they have been esteemed dead
before the eyes of fools, Sap. 3.
but they are in pease; and the wicked which seem to triumph, shall in the end
have their change, punished in the mean while, even in this life. For if
sin, S. Aug. lib. de Contin. cap. 6.
says Saint AUGUSTINE, which seems unpunished, carry after it the pain it
deserves, so that there is no person which is not grieved to have committed
it, or if he feel not any grief for it, he is stark blind in soul: how
then ask thou, wherefore death God permit sin, if sin displease him? and
I would ask of thee again, if he punish sin, how can sin be pleasing to
him? Saint Chrysost^me shows in this very History the experience of the
Doctrine of Saint Augustine: S. Chrysostom. ep. ^d Romans Hom. 8. act si^^m.
Think (says he) upon this; CAINE has committed a murder; ABEL was
murdered; which of these died, he that cried, being dead, who was ABEL; the
blood of whom cried; or he that feared and trembled, which is a greater misery
then death it self. And toward the end of his Homily, he makes God speak
thus to CAINE, Thou have not feared ABEL living, now then fear him dead; thou
had no fear to kill him, be now in continual fear, after thou have killed
him; living he feared thee, and thou would not endure him; endure hurs now
dead, as a terrible Lord. So shows he that the condition of Abel was better
then that of Caine, and that it is much more desirable to suffer injury, Plato.
Seneta, and others.
then to do it; much more great unhappiness to commit ill, then to suffer it.

4. ABEL AN IMAGE OF THE JUST, AND CAINE of the wicked.
ABEL was the Image of the head Jesus Christ, so was he the Image of the
children of God, members of this Head; and Caine contrariwise of the wicked:
Abel simple, meek, serving God in sincerity of heart, sighing upon the earth,
without house, without possession, and altogether despising the vanity of this
vain life; called therefore ABEL, which is to say, a Breath. But Caine, a
Lover of the earth, and of this present world; forward to build a City,
calling it Enoch, from the name of his son, and not caring for any thing, but
for the earth. Abel then was an Image of the Just, which inhabit the earth as
strangers, meditating, and seeking after their heavenly Country. After this
manner Abraham walked as a Pilgrim upon earth, not purchasing any thing
therein, but only a Tomb for him and his; Matthew. 8.20. Luc. 9.15.
and the Son of God goes yet more forward, for he had not in his life any
place where to rest his head, and was feign to borrow his Sepulcher when he
died. Courage then Christian souls, redeemed from earth to inherit heaven,
know your condition to be the same with that of your Ancestors, and of our
Savior himself: with holy sighs lament your miseries in this veil of
tears, patiently bearing your afflictions; your first brother so lived, and so
died; your Redeemer and Head so travailed, and so left you his life; lift up
your eyes to heaven, which is your own City, this earth is not for you,
neither her honors nor delights for you; she with her delights and honors, is
all for her own children. Children of the earth, Inhabitants of the earth, and
Burgesses of the City of Caine; bear not envy to their prosperity, which is a
smoke that passes in a moment, and like unto smoke will vanish into nothing:
but give immortal thanks to God, who has called you to the fruition of his
immortal riches; and whilst that you are in the region of death, think on
the true perdurable life; and living as children of God, fix your hearts upon
God, and place your hopes upon the treasure and honor of his eternity.

THE THIRD PICTVRE. THE SACRIFICE OF MELCHISEDECH.
The Description.
MELCHISEDECH, King of Salem, Genes. 14.^.
and great Priest of the most high God, being advertised that Abraham had
gained a marvelous victory over four victorious kings, and that he came
marching toward him with his troops; he goes forth of the City, accompanied
with his Clergy and Nobility, the vulger people following, to meet him, and
to entertain him with a Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and to bestow upon him his
solemn blessing. Behold, he is arrived at the place, where he encounters
Abraham himself, adorned with the attire of a great King and chief Priest,
full of Majesty in his Person, and in his gesture. Behold his reverend carriage,
the sweetness of his countenance, and the gravity of his visage; some have
thought that he was Sern, Noabs son; but the Scripture makes not any mention of
his beginning, no nor of his nativity, and death, being otherwise accustomed to
note very diligently the Genealogies, Houses, and Pedegrees of Illustrious
persons; which makes us conjecture, that some high secret is hidden within the
shadow of this mystical silence, concerning his descent.

The ornament which he wears on his head, is a Miter of twisted Cypers, wouen
of diverse colors; high and round like a Coife, lined with cloth of gold;
fastened with a Sapphire in the form of an Akorne, in which is tied a ribon of
azure-Cypers, moving in the air behind. Upon his forehead he has a thin
plate of fine gold, bound with a band of Iacint, which is in stead of a Royal
Diadem; and upon the plate is engraven the great name of God. His first Roabe,
next to his body, reaching down to his feet, is an Albe of fine linen
cloth; the Tunicle which is next above it, shorter by a foot, is all of
curled Hyacinth, embrodered round about with a border of n^edle-worke, and girt
to his reins with a golden girdle all embrodered. Of which stuff and fashion
also is made the garment, which couers his shoulders, after the fashion of a
gorget, fastened before his breast with three Carbuncles, cut into the fashion
of buttons, and set in gold. The Altar erected, and the bread and wine being
set vponit, the Sacrifice begun. Abraham is lighted off his horse, as also
the most part of his people; his upper garment is of Buffe-leather, gilt and
enriched with diverse figures; from which kind of garment is come the fashion
of our Corcelets, of iron; the pieces that cover his arms, thighs, and
legs, as you see well fashioned in the joints, with figured bosses, are all
of the same stuff. He wears on his head an admirable Helmet, artificially
graven, enriched with gold, and adorned with a plume of many rare feathers. His
Courtle-axe hangs on his left side, fastened to a belt, after the manner of a
skarfe. He kisseth his right hand in sign of Honor; with his left hand he
holds his Leadingstaffe: one of his Squires carries his Target; another holds
his horse by the bridle in the wing of the first Squadron: this Horse, as you
see, is of a bright bay color, bearing himself upon that foot, which is to
the side of the Mounter, and lifting up the other; and shows by the fair
fashion of all his body, that he is well broken, and well managed, as worthy
to be ridden by so great a Captain. Behold a while his little head, his Rats
ears pricking up, his forehead lean and large, marked with a star right in
the midst, his neck of a reasonable length, slender at the setting on of the
head, big toward the breast, and sweetly bowing in the middle: the breast round
and large, and the crouper in proportion: the tail and the main long; behold
how in champing proudly the bridle, he casts a white foame, opening his
swelling nosthrells, and showing the vermillion within them: see how he beats
the earth with his right foot, holding it in the air, as if he meant to make
a little leg: and observe, I pray you, how excellently the Painter has
drawn his smooth hoofes, well rounded and large, with the garlands fine and
hairie: his pasternes short, and some what upright; his tufted joints big and
strong, and well set together: upon his back he has nothing, but a cushen,
fastened with little girthes, and a crouper; without stirrops, for they were
not yet in use, no more then saddles of war.

The people, of whom this first Squadron was composed, are the three hundred
and eighteen men of arms, servants borne in the house of Abraham, they are
diversely armed, some with Corslets, like their Captain, howbeit they are not
so richly wrought, others with Coats of made, having sleeves and gorgets;
others with Coate-armour of iron, cut or lashed; the pieces for the face, legs,
and shoes are made of plated steel; and all have their Fawchions hanging at
their necks in skarfes, and Gauntlets on their hands. With these he
miraculously defeated thearmy of the four Assyrian Kings, who a little before
had overcome in battle five other Kings, to wit, the King of Sodom, of
Gomor, of Adama, of Seboim, Genes. 14.8.
and of Bail, allied to Abraham, and they returned into their Country with
their Soldiers, enriched with the spoils of the vanquished, and chiefly of
the two most wealthy Cities, Sodom and Gomorrah, which they had sacked, leading
away thousands of prisoners with them; among whom was Lot, nephew to Abraham,
with all his Family. Thus being proud of their success, they went disbanded
without order of war, thinking of nothing but of drink and sleeping. Abraham
pierced to the heart with the misfortune of his Nephew, and his other Allies,
resolving to take revenge, went with such speed after them, that having
overtaken the enemy the same night, he charged them so hotly upon the sudden,
that he easily discomfited them, recovered the prisoners, and brought back
many others with a glorious victory, and with these, rich spoils of cattle,
apparel, and all sorts of wealth, which the Painter has diversely expressed in
the tail of the forenamed Squadron. For there you see Camels and Horses, some
showing a piece of the head only, others all the head, and others a piece of
the body: likewise, there you see also Coats, Aimours, Chestes, and such like
things. But you ought not to wonder, that the Soldiers have their arms and
garments bloody, for they come fresh from the combat. These first Lords next
Abraham, wearing great plumes in their gilded Helmets, environed with a Diadem,
Genesis 14.17.
are the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah, who having gathered certain troops, are
come to encounter him with congratulation. Abraham using them with all
courtesy, and rendering to them not only their people, that were prisoners,
but also their goods, which they found as they were a little before, when they
were taken from them; they return Well satisfied and contented. Melchisedcch
is attentive to the Sacrifice, and makes his Offerings of Bread, and of Wine to
God, praying to him most affectually, Genesis 14.
hear what he says; Blessed be (Thou) ABRAHAM by God the highest, which
created heaven and earth; and blessed be God the highest, by whose protection
thy enemies are in thy hands. This laid, he blessed Abraham, and gave to him
part of the Sacrifice, as also to his people, and invited them all, most
earnestly, to his house, to refresh them, every one thanking God with the
High Priest, and Abraham giving him as his due, the tenth part of all the
spoils. O how many mysteries are hidden in the shadow of this Picture.

1. MELCHISEDECH FIGVRE OF our Savior.
MEn cannot paint forth that, which is to come, not being able to have the
corporal sight thereof; but God, who sees all as present, has made the
portraiture of the future Priesthood of his Son, in the person of
Melchisedech, and of the Eucharist in his Offering. Saint Paul writes thus,
Melchisedech, (says he) King of Salem, Hebr. 7.
Priest of the mest high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of
the Kings, and blessed him; to whom also Abraham gane Tithes of all: First
indeed by interpretation the King of Justice, and then also King of Salem,
which is to say, King of Peace; without Father, without Mother, without
Genealogy, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but likened to
the Son of God, continues a Priest for ener. He says then expressly, that
Melchisedech was the Figure of our Savior, and sets down many resemblances
between them. Melchisedech was in Figure King of Justice: Jesus Christ is the
true King of Justice, constituted Judge of the quick and the dead; Melchisedech
bearing the name, and Jesus Christ being the thing. Melchisedech King of Peace,
our Savior the true Salomou, Prince of Peace. For it is he only, that has
made peace between God and man. Melchisedech, King, and Priest of the
Chanancons, and of Abraham; Jesus Christ, King of Gentiles, and of Hebrews,
descending from Abraham: having made of both people the building of his Church,
whereof himself is the corner stone. Melchisedech, anointed of God, not with
a corporal Unction, as Aaron, and the other It wish Priests, but with
spiritual; Jesus Christ the anointed of his Father, the Holy of Holies, and
the Saint of Saints. Melchisedech without Father, and without Mother, and
without Genealogy, that is to say, named in the Scripture without any mention
of Father or Mother, or of his lineage; not that he had no Father, nor mother,
but for a mystery. The generation also of the Son of God is vndiscouerable,
not only the eternal, but even the temporal; for what spirit can comprehend,
how he has been begotten, and that from all eternity, of his Father? and how
in time without cohabitation of man, he was borne of a perpetual Virgin before
his birth, in his birth, and after his birth. Thus then, Melchisedech, the
High Priest, was the Figure of Jesus Christ.

2. THE PRIESTHOOD OF THE SON of God, figured in that of Melchisedech.
But the most lively part of this resemblance, and most concerning our mystery,
is that, which the Apostle puts the last, as the most perfect, saying, That the
Priesthood of the Son of God, according to the order of MELCHISEDECH,
remains eternally: Psalm. 119.
which was also the Prophecy of DAVID, Our Lord has sw^rne, and it shall not
repent him; Thou art a Priest for ever, according to the order of MELCHISEDECH.
This parcel then contains the mystery of the Sacrament, and Sacrifice of the
Eucharist, instituted by Jesus Christ in his Church, under the forms of bread
and wine, to continue even to the end of the world. There had been amongst men
two kinds of Priesthood before the coming of our Savior, the one in a
Sacrifice, not bloody, which offered to God gifts without effusion of blood;
such was the Offering of Melchisedechs bread and wine; the other in bloody
Sacrifices, which were of three sorts of beasts, Oxen, Weathers, or Goats; and
so many kinds of Birds, Doves, Turtles, and Sparrowes; such were the Sacrifices
of Aaron. The truth whereof, was accomplished and fulfilled in the Sacrifice of
the Cross, where Jesus Christ was offered once for all, in a bloody manner,
and that with death, after the resemblance of the sacrificing, and Sacrifices
of Aaron: and such a Sacrifice could not be iterated, for Jesus Christ could
die but once. But the truth of the Priesthood and Sacrifice of Melchisedech
began in the evening of the institution of the Eucharist, when our Savior
ordained the Sacrament and Sacrifice (not bloody) of his sacred body, under the
forms of bread and wine; this has he continued ever since, by the mystery and
service of our Priests, his Vicars, and shall continue so long, as the Church
shall travail upon the earth, he being eternally Priest, according to the
order of Melchisedech, that is to say, offering continually the true bread and
true wine of his body and blood, as Melchisedech offered the Figure. But
wherefore is it, that this Sovereign wisdom has instituted the Sacrifice,
and Sacrament of his body, under the forms of bread, and of wine? If we may be
able to find out the reason, it will very much enlighten us to see, and admire
his greatness.

3. WHEREFORE OUR SAVIOVR HAS instituted the Sacrament, and Sacrifice of his
body, under the forms of bread and wine.
THe supreme wisdom of Christ, has instituted the Sacrament and Sacrifice of
his body, under the forms of bread and wine, for many reasons, of which the
most principal seem to me to be these. First, because the bread and wine,
sensibly and very properly set forth the nature, the profitablenesse, and the
excellency of this Sacrifice, and Sacrament. There is nothing more common, nor
better known to us, then bread and wine; which as they are the two most noble
and proper sustenances of man's life; even so the Sacrifice and Sacrament of the
body of our Savior, is the most divine food and strength of our souls and
bodies. Bread and wine is very prositable and necessary in the beginning,
midst, and end of repast; and the Hebrews, under the word, Bread, comprehend
all meat, as being the chief, and a companion of all other meats; and the
ancient Sages have of old called wine, the King of the banquet. (...). 6.46.
(...). 25. (...). 4.
Our Savior then has instituted the Eucharist with these two Symboles, or
signs, to teach us by them, that in the Law of Grace, the Sacrifice, and
Sacrament of his body, holds the first rank amongst all the presents of meat,
that can be set upon the table of his Altar, for to honor his Majesty, and
feed our souls withal.

4. THE BREAD AND WINE, SIGNS of the Passion of our Savior in his Sacrament.
THe second cause, wherefore our Savior has instituted the mystery of his
body in these elements, is to set before our eyes, that, which he has endured
for us, making himself bread and drink unto us. The corn is cast into the
earth to come up in ears, and to increase; it dies to come forth, it endures
wind, hail, frost, heat and cold in the field; it is threshed in the
barne-floore, ground in the Mill, wrought in the kneading, and baked with fire
in the Oven. The Grape carries the marks of the same torments; for after it
escapes the injuries of the air, as the Corn does; it is trodden and trampled
under feet, it is wrung in the Press, it endures to be shut up in the Tun
and enclosed in the cave, for to become good wine. These actions and passions
are the draughts, that paint forth to us, the travails which our Savior has
endured, that he might be to us the celestial bread and wine, which he
gives us in the Sacrifice and Sacrament of his body.

5. THE BREAD AND WINE IN THE Eucharist, signs of the Mystical body of our
Savior.
THe third cause of this institution, made in these elements, is to represent
the mystical body of the Church of Jesus Christ: for as the bread and wine is
made of many corns, and wrought into one paste: so the Church also is composed
of many members, united under one head: therefore it is, that the Greeks call
this Sacrament Sinoxis, that is to say, collection; S. Chrysostom, hom. 24. in 1.
Cor. 10. S. Aug. 26. in Joan.
and the Latins Communion, as much to say as a common union. For these
reasons, and likenesses, our Savior has instituted this mystery in bread and
wine, in such sort, that the bare elements speaking without words, do teach us
these three godly lessons; the charity of our Savior in nourishing us with
himself; his patience, in suffering for us; and our union with him. Such was
his divine wisdom in this institution, that it learneth also for Doctrine.

6. THE BODY OF OUR SAVIOVR CALled Bread, and his Blood Wine.
FOr the same cause aforesaid, the Scripture calls the body of our Savior
Bread, Ierem. 1.
and his blood Wine. Jeremy says in the person of the Jews, Let us cast wood
upon his bread, that is to say, Let us put his body on the Cross, as the
ancient Fathers have interpreted it. Again, He shall wash his stole in wine,
Genesis 49.11.
and his garments in the blood of the grape; that is to say, he shall shed his
blood in abundance, figuring his blood by the wine. 1. Cor. 10.16.
Saint Paul also, calling the Sacrament bread and wine, explaines it to be the
body and blood of our Savior. 1. Cor. 11.27.
He that shall eat (says he) this bread, and shall drink this Chalice
unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord. Joan. 6,
Our Savior himself calls himself Bread, and his blood Drink, because he
offered himself to his Father in Sacrifice, and gives himself to men in this
Sacrament, under the forms of bread and wine.

7. WHAT THIS SACRAMENT IS.
THe Eucharist is a Sacrifice, as was the Oblation of Abel, and both a
Sacrifice and Sacrament, as was the Paschall Lamb, and many other ancient
mysteries: for the body of our Savior, as it is offered to God in the Mass,
is sacrificed; and the self-same body, as it is given for food to Christians,
is a Sacrament. And heere-hence some sigures represent it only, as it is a
Sacrament, so did the Tree of Life: others, as a Sacrifice only, so did the
Oblation of Abel: others, as both a Sacrifice and a Sacrament together; and so
did the Oblation of Melchisedech, the Paschall Lamb, and such like. Well then,
a Sacrament is a sign and an instrument of a holy thing; so Baptism signifies
the internal and holy washing of the soul, and as an instrument effects it,
if he, which receives it do not hinder the same. In like manner the Eucharist
contains the body and blood of our Lord inuisibly, which feed the soul, and
is also a sign thereof, by the outward material visible forms of bread and
wine, and in this respect is a perfect Sacrament.

8. WHAT A SACRIFICE IS, AND HOW it is offered in the Mass.
THe Sacrifice taken in his proper signification, is an outward action of
religion, and sovereign honor, done to God in acknowledgement of his supreme
Majesty, by a proper officer, in offering some present, and in making some
change thereof. In this manner, the offerings of beasts, and other bodies in
the Law of Nature, and of Moses, were Sacrifices. And in this sense, the
Eucharist also is a Sacrifice in the Law of Grace; and that of so much more
excellency above the former, as the body of the Son of God, offered in it,
surpasses all the other bodies, which could be presented to the divine
Majesty. This Sacrifice is made (as hereafter we shall show more at large) by
the words of Consecration. This is my body: this is my blood, by which Jesus
Christ transubstantiates the bread and the wine, into his body and blood, and
by the same action, he offers it to his Father for his Church, though he use
not any formal words of oblation, as by saying, I offer thee my body; for it
is enough, that he make it present upon the Altar with that intention; for he
did no more in offering the Sacrifice of the Cross, as neither did the ancient
Sacrificers in their Sacrifices. God understands sufficiently the language of
the heart. The Church having this body from the liberality of God, offers it
with Jesus Christ, and by it does honor him with homage of divine and
sovereign whorship: she also prays to him by the merits which were
purchased in this body, and afterward takes it for her food and refection. And
as in old times God gave beasts to the Jews, which the Jews offered to him
again, honoring him in them, and did eat of the flesh, to participate of the
Sacrifice: so has he given us the body of his Son, and we honor him with it,
and pray unto him, endeavoring by it, as by a rich present, to pacify him, and
to make him favorable toward us, and afterward we take it for our refection;
but yet without ever consuming the same, as the bodies of beasts were consumed,
which could serve but once, and therefore to every Sacrifice was required a new
beast. But the body of our Savior is immortal, and alone sufficient to honor
God, and to be the food of immortality to all the members of his Church, S.
Aug. lib. 10. de Ciuit. cap. 6.
at all times, and in all places. We have said before, that good works, done
for God, are sometimes called Sacrifices, as Prayers, Fastings, Alms, and
other actions of piety; but these are called Sacrifices, only by way of
resemblance; and this kind of Sacrifice every one may, and ought to offer:
whereas the proper and true Sacrifice cannot be offered, but by him, who is a
proper and true Priest by office, such as was Melchisedech, and the Jewish
Priests of old, and now are the Priests of Christ.

9. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A Sacrament and a Sacrifice.
FIrst, a Sacrament is instituted of God for the sanctification of his
creature, but a Sacrifice is ordained to ho^ior the Creator; the one regards
man, the other respects God: for albeit, that the sanctification, given by
the Sacrament, redounds to the honor of God; and the action of Sacrifice to the
sanctification of his creature: the proper end, notwithstanding, which a
Sacrament aims at, is to sanctify man; and that of the Sacrifice, to do
homage unto God; neither more nor less, then in a Civil Monarchy;
Alleagiance is for the King, and the administration of lustice for the People,
though administration of Justice honor also the King, and Allegiance be
profitable to the Subject. Even so then in the Church, a spiritual Monarchy;
the Sacrament is ordained to help man, and the Sacrifice to honor God: What
more is done in the one or the other, it is rather by consequence, then of the
first intention; and therefore as a Sacrament is properly the sign, and
instrument of the grace of God: so a Sacrifice especially sets forth the
greatness and Majesty of God.

Secondly, a Sacrament profits only him, which receives it, being well
disposed and prepared, as Baptism sanctifies only the baptized: the Sacrifice
may profit all the world, absent, present, just, iniust, disposed, indisposed,
living, and departed, if they be not in deadly sin; for though it be not
directly instituted for the Sanctification of man, as has been said, yet
notwithstanding, it opens the do ore to the sanctification of all men, for as
much as it pleases God by honor and prayer, and by this office of piety it
obtaines of him mercy and grace, and new blessings of repentance, and remission
of sins to all those, for whom it is offered. And so therefore the Sacrifice
of the Mass is profitable for all those, which hear it, and for whom it is
offered.

10. NO RELIGION WITHOUT Sacrifice.
AS the Church has always had Sacraments, for a means to sanctify the
children of God; so it has never been, nor ever shall be upon the earth
without a Sacrifice. And sure great reason there is it should be so: for since
that al true religion is instituted for the sovereign acknowledgement and
service of God; it is necessary that in his Church, which is his Kingdom and
Monarchy, there should be a public worship of supreme honor, by which men
assembled in one body, and society, might profess their faith and duty
toward him. This worship is the Sacrifice, by which God is known and adored
publicly, as our sovereign Lord, Master of life and death: and Author of all
our good, the most high honor, that can be given, proper to God, and
uncommunicable to any creature, as only due to divine Majesty. Wherefore a
Religion without a Sacrifice, is a body without a soul, and a Monarchy
without homage, or public acknowlegement of authority; that is to say,
without a sign of Monarchy. The Church then only keeper of true Religion,
has ever had proper Sacrifice, and Priests appropriated by their office, to
administer the same. The most famous Sacrifice in the Law of Nature, was that
of bread and wine, offered by the High Priest, Melchisedech; in the Law of
Moses, there were many; in the Law of Grace, our Savior has established this
of his body; one alone in the place of all the Ancient, adumbrated by them all;
and alone the most sufficient of all; as well by reason of the thing offered,
which is of infinite price, as of the dignity of the Offerer, who is the Son
of God: for the Priest is nothing but his Vicar; so as this only Sacrifice is
in estimaon above all those of old, as the Sun is above all the Stars. A
Sacrifice most perfect, and most worthy of our Savior, who has instituted it
in the Law of Grace, the most perfect Monarchy that ever was, or which ever
shall be, and instituted it after so noble a manner, as it is full of mystery,
to wit, after the resemblance of the Sacrifice of the most noble King, and
High Priest, Melchisedech, under the forms of bread and wine, which he shall
offer, even until the end of the world by his Priests and Vicars, he himself
remaining High Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech.

11. TESTIMONIES OF THE HEBREW Doctors upon the same subject, that is, of the
Sacrifice of MELCHISEDECH.
RAbby Samuel, renowned amongst the Hebrews, Rabby Samme^ in Genesis
speaking of this, that Melchisedech offered, says, He did an act of
Priesthood, for he sacrificed bread and wine to God holy, and blessed.

Rabby Phines also, a great Hebrew Doctor: Sabby Phinee, See Gal. 1.10.
In the time of the Messiah all the Sacrifices shall cease, but the Sacrifice
of bread and wine shall remain always, as it is written in Genesis: And
Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine. Melchisedech, that is to say, the
King Messiah, shall except out of this cessation of Sacrifices, the Sacrifice
of bread and wine, as it is said in the Psalms. Psalm. 109.
Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech. His meaning is,
that Melchisedech was the figure of Jesus Christ, who is the true Messiah, and
that Jesus Christ is an High Priest for ever, according to the order of
Melchisedech, instituting in his Church an eternal Sacrifice of his body and
blood, under the forms of bread and wine, making all the other Sacrifices to
cease, they being but shadows and figures of this here. And so we see it to
be fulfilled, since the death of our Savior, wherein all the bloody
Sacrifices, Figures of his death, were finished, whereas contrariwise the
institution of the Eucharist, which is our Mass, the Sacrifice sigured by that
of Melchisedech, then took its first beginning.

12. TESTIMONIES OF THE ANCIENT Greek Fathers, upon the Figure of MELCHISEDECH.
SAint Clement. S. Clem. lib. 4. Stre.
MELCHISEDECH, King of Salem, Priest of the most high God, gave the bread and
wine sanctified, in figure of the Eucharist.

Saint Chrysostom, S. Chrysostom, hom. 35.36. in Genesis
speaking of the same Sacrifice of MELCHISEDECH. Beholding the Figure, think,
I pray you, upon the truth, that is to say, if thou make account of the
Offering of Melchisedech, how much more of the Sacrament and Sacrifice of the
body of our Savior, which is the truth, signified of old by the ancient
Figure? And again: Idem,
After that MELCHISEDECH, King of Salem, had offered bread and wine (for he
was the Priest of the most high) ABRAHAM took from his hand part of that which
had been offered, that is to say, he did eat and drink of the sacrificed
bread, and wine.

Theodoret, (...) Pas. 109. Idem in Genesis 4.63.
having declared how our Savior had begun his Priesthood after the order of
Melchisedech, in the institution of the Sacrament of his body, adds, We have
found Melchisedech, Priest and King, affirming to God not Sacrifices of beasts,
deprined of reason, but of bread and wine; as if he should say, that the
Priesthood and offering of our Savior, is not with effusion of blood of
beasts, as that of Aarons, but without killing; and that his body is given in
Sacrifice, under the forms of bread and wine, according to the order of
Melchisedech.

Saint JOHN DAMASCENE, S. Joan. Dam^^ lib. 4. de Fid. cap 24.
The Table of Melchisedech figured out our mystical Table; even as
Melchisedech carried the Figure, and the Image of the true Prelate, Jesus
Christ.

TMEOPHILACT, upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, Theophil. in (...) 5. ad Heb.
Psalm. 109.
explaning the words of the Psalmist, Thou art a Priest for ever, according to
the order of Melchisedech. It is most cortaine (says he) that this Prophecy
is to be understood of Jesus Christ; for it is he only, that has sacrificed
bread and wine according to the order of Melchisedech. And a little after, He
says eternally, as well for that Jesus Christ makes intercession for us
incessantly to his Father, as for that he is offered every day: this Oblation
is made without ceasing, by the Officers and Seruitors of God, having for
Priest and for Sacrifice, Christ the Savior; it is he that breaks and
distributeth himself.

13. TESTIMONIES OF THE ANCIENT Latin Fathers.
SAint CYPRIAN, S. Cyprian. l. 2. ep. 3. ad Cecil.
Who has been more Priest of the highest, then our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
offered Sacrifice to God the Father, and offers the same, that Melchisedeth
did, Joan. 6.
bread and wine, to wit, his body and his blood, for his body is the true
bread, and his blood is the true wine, and the true drink.

Saint Hierom, S. Hieron. epist. 126. ad Euagr. S. Hieron. in ep. ad Marcel.
nomine Paula, and Eustoch. scripta.
giving a reason to Euagrius, wherefore Melchisedech was compared to our
Savior. It is (says he) because he sacrificed not victimes of flesh and blood
of beasts, but dedicated the Sacrament of Christ with bread and wine, a simple
and pure sacrifice. And elsewhere, Read Genesis, Thou shall find the King of
Salem Prince of the City, who then offered in Figure of Christ, bread and
wine, and dedicated the mystery of Christians in the body and blood of our
Saniour. Again, Our mystery (the Mass) is signified by the word Order; not in
imolating victimes of beasts, according to the order of Aaron; but in offering
bread and wine, that is to say, the body and blood of our Savior.

Saint Ambrose speaking of the Eucharist, S. Ambrel. l 5. de Sacra. cap. 1.
We know (says he) that the Figure of this Sacrament has gone before in
Abraham's time then, when Melchisedech offered Sacrifice.

Saint Augustine speaking of this Sacrifice of MELCHISEDECH: S. Aug. lib. 16.
de Ciuitate Dei. cap. 22.
Then first was showed in Figure the Sacrifice, which now is offered by
Christians throughout the universal world. S. Aug lib. 1. Cont. Aa^^^s. ^^.
cap. 20.
And elsewhere, Those, that read, know what Melchisedech brought forth, when
he blessed Abraham, and are made partakers thereof; they see that through all
the world such a Sacrifice is offered: And he means the Sacrifice of the
Mass, which is offered over all the world.

14. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE Sacrifice of the Cross, and that of the
Eucharist.
THe Sacrifice of the Cross was bloody, Of this Oblation speaks Saint Paul,
Hebr. 7.27,
offered but once, in Jerusalem only: this of the Eucharist not bloody, it
is offered, and shall be, throughout all the world, where the Church is
dispersed, and that even to the end of the world. That of the Cross is the
chief cause of our good, the treasure and the general exchequer of our
redemption, and the fountain of our sanctification: for by this death our
Savior has purchased us all the good unless we hinder or neglect it: the
Sacrifice of the Mass, is the instrument to apply the fruit of all these
purchased goods unto us; it is the key, which opens this treasure; it is the
means to have part of this substance, and the bucket to draw up from the
spring of this fountain, where with to cleanse us: and as when some one is
washed in Baptisine, or absolved in Penance, the merit of the Cross flows
into him or her, that is baptized or absolved from sin, by means of these
Sacraments: even so the fruit of the Cross is distributed by the Sacrifice of
the Eucharist, to all those, which offer it, and for whom it is offered; and it
is the same body, that was offered upon the Altar of the Cross; and that which
is offered on the Altar in the Church, and given for food of immortality to
all those, which will receive it. The Mass then, celebrating this Mystery,
makes the Sacrament and Sacrifice of the body of our Saniour, and in them both
is (as of old, the ancient Sacraments and Sacrifices were) an instrument to
make us participate the merit of the Passion of our Savior; but so much more
efficatious and precious, as Jesus Christ, who is in it the Priest, and the
offering (for the man is but the Vicar) surpasses in dignity the ancient
Priests, and their earthly victimes. This is the difference between the
Sacrifice of the Cross and that of the Mass, and the glory of God is
manifested diversely thereby, in two diverse mysteries.

15. THE DIFFERENCE OF THE SACRIfice of Melchisedech, and of this of the Mass.
THe Sacrifice of Melchisedech, was but the shadow and the Figure; this of the
Mass, the body, and the truth. In that there was nothing but bread and wine,
terrestrial, material, and insensitiue, nourishing nothing but the body, and
that for a little time; in this there is offered the body and blood of our
Savior, the true bread, and the true drink, bread of heaven, bread of life,
immortal and glorious divine bread, and divine flesh, without the substance of
any material bread, both meat and drink together, giving the nourishment of
grace to the soul, and the sprout of immortality to the body, and to both of
them the fruit of all blessedness. In that God showed his divine wisdom,
figuring with his provident pensill the future Priesthood of his Son, in the
person of Melchisedech: and the Sacrifice of the body of his Son, in the
Sacrifice of Melchisedech. But in this here he has left marks infinitely
more clear of his omnipotency, wisdom, and boundy; changing the hidden
substance of bread into that of his body, without changing the form of the
outward accidents, offering himself by himself, being at one instant
together, the Sacrificer, and the thing Sacrificed. Could he show himself more
great, more skillful, and more liberal? Could he establish a Sacrifice either
more honorable for the acknowledging of his divine Majesty, then this, in
which he offered not the body and blood of beasts, but his own body and blood,
or more profitable to man, then in which he gives us his own body? This
mystery then, so agreeable to the honor of God, and so beneficial to his
friends, does it not merit to be eternally continued in the Church, according
to that, which David has so divinely prophesied, Thou art a Priest for ever
according to the order of Melchisedech? Not according to the order of Aaron,
who was the Sacrificer of the bodies of beasts, less honorable, and less
profitable, and therefore worthy to be changed; but according to the order of
Melchisedech, offering without blood the body of the Son of God, under the
forms of bread and wine; Sacrifice and Priesthood most honorable, and most
worthy to endure even to the end of the world, neither can the world be
furnished with a better, either for the houor of God, or for the good of his
children.

16. THE GOOD SPIRITVAL SOVLDIERS are worthy of the food, and blessing of the
body of our Lord.
But who are the children worthy to feed upon this Sacrifice, and to have the
blessing of the true Melchisedech? truly they are Abraham and his soldiers,
which have noble souls, and are armed in all parts with virtue: which hotly
pursue the enemies of their salvation, fighting valiantly against the forces of
the Assyrians pride, Covetousness, Leachery, Envy, Gluttony, Hate, Idleness,
Iniquity, Impiety and other vices, signified by the Assyrians. These then are
they that give the tenth of their victories, and of their spoils to God; which
give him thanks for his benefits, and acknowledge his assistance, as chief
cause of all their good actions; for which they glory in nothing but in him,
and confess that all their good comes from him. These are they that are true
children of Abraham, and like valient warriers, know readily how to manage
their bodies in all sorts of combats, and exercises of spiritual battle.

This brave Horse of Abraham's, so well made, and so well taught to the bitt,
and to the spur, to trotte, to gallop, to run, and to be decently ordered,
resembles those bodies, that are well tamed and well taught to follow the
commands and directions of a warlike soul. Such was he, 1. Cor. 9.27.
which said, I chastise my body, and make it a servant; such have been a
thousand champions of our Savior, which have victoriously combated against the
greatest forces and armies of their enemies, the world, the flesh and the
devil. Such soldiers are worthy of the bread of God; worthy which, whom the
great Melchisedech should comply in the end of their victories, coming forth
to honor them, to congratulate with them, to inuit them to receive the holy
Repast of his sacred body, and to sanctify them with his great blessing,
wherewith they return into their country, which is heaven, rich with reward,
and enobled with immortal glory.

THE FOVRTH PICTVRE. ISAAK ON THE ALTAR.
The Description.
THese two young men, servants of Abraham, attend at the foot of the mountain
with this saddled Ass; Abraham himself, with young Isaak, is ascended to the
top of the mountain, having commanded them to tarry beneath, until he had
there worshipped, and offered Sacrifice: this is the third day, since they came
from home with him, having never used to depart from him: their face shows,
that they are sorrowful, and astonished; and it is by all true likelihood for
not knowing the cause, why he should leave them; and for having seen and heard
of things they misliked: they had seen, how their Master all sad, had put the
wood (which the Ass carried) upon the shoulders of Isaak, taking himself fire
in the one hand, and a sword in the other; Joseph. lib. 1. Antiq. cap. 13.
and certainly the tears ran down in great abundance from their eyes, because
they see their young Master laden with this heavy burden, to go with no
little pain, for he is tender and delicate, and but five and twenty years
old. They could not also imagine, what should be the Sacrifice Abraham would
offer, seeing it was his custom to Sacrifice before his domesticals, without
ever having used such like ceremony. But this, which puts them yet in more
great wonder, is, that they perceived not any beast he had to sacrifice,
whereof Isaak himself being sollactous, asked of his Father in the way, where
the Lamb was for the Burntoffering, to whom Abraham answered, that God would
provide it. The good child knew not, that himself was the Lamb, appointed
for the Sacrifice; less knew he what this holy old man thought within
himself; for he felt a maruailous combat in his soul, pressed on the one
side with the assaults of Nature, which moved him to fatherly compassion; and
on the otherside with the Word of God, which made him steadfast in the execution
of his Commandment. Nature said to him; O Father, what do thou? Have thou
begotten a son, to be his murderer? Have thou given him life in the world,
to put him, with thine own hand, to death? Have thou given being to this
creature, and will thou deprive him of it, in a moment, as soon as it
begins? Will thou bury in one moment, the comfort of thy age, and all the
hopes of thy future race, within the tomb of thy only son? Thy only son,
given thee of God, after so many fair and goodly promises of thy prosperity?
Thy only son, so tenderly nourished, so carefully brought up, so beautiful,
so gracious, so obedient and perfect in all kind of graces? And who ever saw
such a Father, as thou art? And what will thy household, thy neighbors, and thy
kindred say? And above all the rest, what will his poor Mother say, (who
sitting at home, little thinke^^ of any such matter) when she shall see thee
return all alone, and that she shall hear the pitiful news of her dear,
and only child slain, not by force of sickness, nor by the hand of the
enemy, nor by the teeth of any furious beast, but by the sword of his own
Father, imbrued in the blood of his son? O Father, what do thou? And into
what rigor is thy old age fallen, toward the end of thy days? O happy had
thou been, if thou had never been a Father? Happy, if in thy young and barren
veers, thou had bin plucked down hastily into thy grave? This said Nature to
him.

But faith and charity toward God, used another Language, and of a far
higher nature. ABRAHAM, thou art to obey the voice of God; thy son is neither
thine, nor his mothers, but borrowed; it is God, who has lent him thee,
without giving any certain term of life; he will have him now, it is his
right; he is Master of life and of death, he can be unjust in nothing that he
commands, though it be, that he command the father to kill his son. He is
Almighty to multiply thy race without Isaak, S. Aug. lib. 1. de Ciuit. cap. 21.
having a thousand means within the treasure of his divine secrets to
accomplish this, which he has promised thee. If thy son be fair, wise and
virtuous, so much more is he worthy to be presented before the eyes of his
Majesty. No person will blame thee to have obeyed God; and if men blame thee,
wh^ (...) to do with the words, and judgment of (...) ^orld, where the voice
of the high God resound (...) And thy wife, if she be wise, will take it (...)
^uing place to necessity, and to the divine will (...) she be not wise, thou
must not regard her. On (...) and care not for any other thing; our Lord Alm
(...) nath so commanded it, and his commandment can be for nothing, but for
thy good, nor the execution of it, but for thy merit and praise. So Nature
combated with Faith, and Reason with Grace, but in the end, the victory
remained to Faith and Grace.

Wherefore, being come to the top of the Mountain, and having laid in order
the wood upon the Altar, and made ready every thing for the Holocaust, Abraham
does declare his intention to his son, and then dearly embracing him, says
to him; O my dear son, even now thou askedst of me where the Lamb was, that
is to be sacrificed? It is thou, my beloved, which must be that Lamb; It is
thou, that the great God has chosen; thou art no more mine; I am no more thy
Father; thou art the Holocaust, consecrated at this time to the honor of God;
Adieu my son; and with these words, losing his voice, sobbing, and weeping, he
kissed him. But Isaak said to him, O my most honorable Father, the will of God
and yours be fulfilled; my life is his and yours; and my death cannot have a
more honorable grave, then the Altar of his Majesty. Farewell, my most
honorable Father accomplish his good pleasure: Adieu my most honorable Mother,
without farewell; I bewail your sorrow, bewail not my death, since it is so
divinely ordained; you shall see me in the Land of the Living. Abraham now has
bound him, and set him upon the wood, and bathing him with tears, kisseth him
again, and the more that he saw him courageous and obedient, the more was his
heart wounded with fatherly love toward him. Then Isaak, like a little Lamb,
consenting to all from his heart, as has been said, and putting himself, as
he could, on his knees, after the manner as you see, recommends himself to
God, offering himself as a lively Holocaust to his holy will, and his neck
peaceably to his Fathers hand, so to become a perfect Sacrifice: Abraham his
arm is lifted up, and is ready to strike; O God be merciful to this poor
Father, and his pious son; be thou contented, if it please thee^ with the good
will, and lively faith of them both; they are already Sacrificed to thee in
their hearts. Fear you not, O meek and tender souls. Behold the Angel which
hinders the blow, and cries with a high voice: ABRAHAM, AERAHAM, stay thy hand,
strike not thy child. ABRAHAM stays, and falls on his knees, ravished with
pleasure and admiration. The Angel shows him a Ram, caught in the bush by
the horns, to burn in the Holocaust instead of Isaak, Abraham goes, and puts
it on the Altar with thanksgiving: and so are they both delivered, and both
gave thanks to God: for this divine favor. O great God, thy name be blessed,
as well in this thy command, as in thy countermand thereof! O thou art wise in
both, and good in both! O how well thou know to make trial of the faith,
and love of those, that thou love? and mightily to deliver them from pain,
and to set them in repose.

1. ISAAK, AND THE RAM SACRIFIced, a Figure of the death of our Savior, and
of the Sacrifice, and Sacrament of his body.
NO person doubts, that the Sacrifice, made in the person of Isaak, and the
Ram, contains the Figure of the death of our Savior, the resemblance
consists in these points; which Saint Augustine in one of his Sermons, no less
piously, then eloquently observes. S. Aug. Sermon. 7. de Temp.
Abraham gives his son in Sacrifice, and his son Isaak also gives
himself. God the Father gave his Son for our redemption; and Jesus Christ
for the same cause gave himself to his Father. Isaak carries his wood to the
Mountain; Jesus Christ carries his Cross to Mount Caluary, which is the very
same Mountain whereon Isaak was offered, says the same Doctor, having learned
it of Saint Hierom, S. Aug. Sermon. 71. de Temp. Joseph. lib 1. Antiq. cap. 13.
whom he cites. And it imports not, that Josephus writes, that Isaak was
offered in the Mountain Moria, where Solomon builded his Temple; for the place
of the Temple and Mount Caluary, were in one and the same Mountain, though
distant in place; and the selfsame Mount Caluary was also the Sepulcher of
Adam. As for the killing, and the burning of the sheep or Ram upon the
Altar, in stead of Isaak, it contains another mystery, accomplished on the
Cross, as declares Saint AUGUSTINE: S. Aug. Sermon. 71. de Temp.
Abraham (says he) represented God the Father, giving his only Son: ISAAK
represents Jesus Christ, obedient to his Father and offering himself upon the
Altar of the Cross; but the Divinity represented by ISAAK, endures not any
hurt but only the humanity, signified by the Ram: he is tied by his horns,
as Jesus Christ was tied in power, signified by horns, and by his own power;
for no other power could master, hold, or bind him. Caught in a bush, as our
Savior was: S. Aug. Sermon. 71 de Temp.
Fastened (says the same Doctor) to the bush, when he hung between the horns
of the Cross, his hands and feet nailed, and his head crowned with thorns.
These are the resemblances of the Cross, to the Sacrifice of Abraham. No man
also doubts, but this selfsame Sacrifice was a Figure of the Sacrifice and
Sacrament of the Mass, seeing that this has always been the faith of the
Catholic Church, S. Ambrol. l. 4. de Sacra. cap. 6. S. Thom. in Prosa lauda
S^^. S. Ambros. lib. 4. de Sacra. cap. 9. S. Thom in Prosa lauda Sion.
as it appears by the Canon of the Mass, where like mention is made of this
Sacrifice, and that of Abel, and of Abraham: which is also confirmed by the
testimony of Saint Ambrose, who has recorded the same Prayer in his writings;
and by Saint Thomas of Aquine, in his Prose, Lauda Sion; and will be easily
perceived by the reference of the one to the other, as of the Figure to the
Truth it self. In this Oblation, Abraham offered the Sacrifice, which he had
made, that is to say, his son, whom he had begotten; in the Eucharist the
Son of God offers his body, which he himself formed in the womb of the
Virgin, and which he makes present upon the Altar by his omnipotent word.
Abraham, the Sacrificer, offers the Victime, and Isaak also a lively and
reasonable Victime, offers himself; in the Eucharist, Jesus Christ offers
himself, who is both Priest and Sacrifice; Sacrificer and Victime, and that
both living and reasonable. Isaak being offered, endured nothing in the
Sacrifice, but only the Ram in his ^^ome; the body of the Son of God
endures no hurt in the Eucharist. perseuering always whole, but only the
substance of bread and wine, which cease to be after the words of Consecration,
and the visible species and accidents thereof, which are subject to alteration.

Isaak was not to be offered in any place indifferently, neither was that left
to the choice of Abraham, but in a chosen place, and appointed expressly by God
himself, who spoke thus to Abraham, Genesis 22.2.
Thon shall offer thy son unto me for an Holocaust in one of the Mountains
that I shall show thee. Jesus Christ also is offered only in the Mountain of
the Church, the Mountain of Sion, where he reigns, and he is offered in
such a place, and on such an Altar, as his Church, taught by the holy Chost,
Psalm. 2.6.
appoints. Thus have we seen some draughts of the Figure, which signifies
our truth; let us now see some others.

2. THE HEIGHT OF THE MYSTERY OF the Eucharist, signified by the Mountain, and
by Abraham; and how we are to approach unto it.
THere are yet some circumstances in the Figure, which teach us other qualities
of our Sacrament, and Sacrifice. The Mountain teaches us, how high a mystery
it is: for it is a familiar mark in the holy Scripture, to show thereby some
divine thing, which is elevated above the baseness of common judgment. Exodus
20.
So Moses received the Majesty of the Law, and the secrets of God in the
Mountain. And so the Prophet, exhorting the Preacher, to lead a holy and
contemplative life, says unto him, ascend up to the Mountain, Thou, that
Euangelizest to Sion, Esaias 40.9.
that is to say, eleuate thy soul above earthly things, and ascend the
Mountain of contemplation, the better to declare the high Mountain of Gods
greatness. Matthew. 17.
So our Savior transfigured himself on the Mount Thnbor; so both himself and
his Church is called a Mountain. And high, Dan. 2.35.
and spiritual things, are signified by this circumstance of high places on
earth. As then the Sacrifice of Abraham was high and eminent in corporal
situation: so the greatness of our mystery is advanced in spiritual
highness, and elevated far above earthly sense, or humane judgment, and
truly set in the top of Mount Sion, being the most supreme, and the most
admirable of all the other Sacraments in the Church of God. And in the same
signification, the two servants of Abraham, which represent our humane reason
and understanding, remain at the foot of the Mountain, sorrowful and sad,
as incapable of this Mystery. And so likewise the Ass, by the which is meant
our corporal sense, yet more unapt to ascend the Mount of this divine Mystery.
It is only Abraham, and Isaak, that is to say, spirits, illuminated with a
firm and lively faith, that have their wings so strong, as are able to fly so
high pitch, and to contemplate the eminency, greatness, and majesty of the
Sacrament and Sacrifice of the body of the Son of God, on the top of holy
Sion. But in mounting they must persevere, and walk on from home three days
together, carrying with them the Wood, the Sword, and the Fire, to burn as
Abraham and Isaak did before them. These three days are the preparation of
good works, which we ought to do in the faith of the Trinity, before we
present our selves to the Altar, and Table of this divine Sacrifice. The wood
signifies to us the matter of good purposes and holy desires, wherewith we
ought to kindle the fire upon the holy Altar. The Sword is the Word of God,
with which we ought to be armed, for it is that, which says, This is my body;
and can do all that it says. If Nature make difficult to believe it; if she
oppose against it sense or reason, we ought to defend our selves with this
divine Word, and fight manfully, as Abraham did, who believed that, which
Nature strongly dissuaded, and executed that, which it abhorred. The Fire of
Abraham is the Charity wherewith our heart ought to burn here more then in
any other act of Religion; for this is a nuptial feast, a ban^^^ et of Love
addressed for the children of Abraham; clothed with the wedding garment: and
prepared only for you, O faithful souls, Math. 22.12,
which sigh holily, and fight valiantly against the assaults of infidelity,
and the counsel of the flesh. Persevere courageously even to the third day,
when God will lift you up from this base earth, to make you see his glory in
the top of the high and celestial Sion, our true and assured dwelling.

THE FIFTH PICTVRE. THE PASCHALL LAMB.
The Description.
ALL is in darkness now in Egypt, Sap. 18.1^.
and all things rest quietly in silence of a peaceable repose. The Sun
whirling about under the earth, is well-neare come to the Meridian Antipode,
and the night is now in the midst of his course in the Egyptian Climate: the
Hebrews have taken some four hours since their mystical refection of the
Paschall Lamb, in every Family, according as they were appointed, and shall
continue so to do every year, from henceforth, upon the same day and hour,
that is to say, in the evening of the fourteenth day of the first month of
their holy year, beginning in March; for their Civil year began in September.
The Ceremony is very strange, Joseph. l. Anti^. c. 4. Exodus 12.11.
for having sprinkled the blood of the beast on the thresholds and poastes of
all their doors, they have eaten with unleavened bread, and wild Lettice, the
Lamb roasted, Exodus 12.8.
disseuering the bones from his flesh, without breaking any; and made
maruailous haste in eating; every one holding a staff in his hand, having
their garments girt to their loins, Exodus 12.49.
and their shoes on their feet, as if they were ready out of hand to take a
journey. Having thus finished the holy banquet, according to this Ceremony,
Exodus 13.
thy cast the remainder into the sier. No person durst after go forth into
the street, they having had an express commandment to keep within; and not
without cause; for there shall be presented a terrible massacre, and it is
begun already: hear you the lamentations, and howlings of the Egyptians in
this next Village, S. Hieron. in Esaias 19. Psalm. 77. Exodus 9.22.24. Exodus 10.21.
called Tamis, Where the Pharoes made their common residences; now is the
fatal night wherein this supreme Puissance does execute his rigorous justice
against thee, Pharoe, and against thy subjects, instruments of thy malice:
thine and their hardened hearts, have been beaten with nine great plagues,
beaten with the fury of the four elements, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth,
beaten with little animals, Exodus 7.27. Exodus 8.3. Exodus 8.17.24.
armed with the arm of the Almighty, to constrain thee to let the Hebrews
go, whom thou detainest with unjust oppression, thou have notwithstanding
remained always hardened. But at this time thou art overcome, enforced to
yield, to open the dungeon of thy steeled heart, and to obey necessity, having
refused the voice of the God of Hoasts, of whom now thou feclest the arm more
heavy then ever. O heaven, what astonishment, and what horrible slaughter is
wrought by this destroying Angel? He has already slain thousands of the
first borne, as well of men, as of beasts, and will do the like to all the
rest, Exodus 12.29.
without sparing the first borne even of the King, which sits gloriously in
the throne of his Majesty. This horrible executioner of justice scoureth all
places, and spares none, saving only the Hebrews. He has indeed visited
their houses, holding the sword in his hand, but seeing the threshold and
poastes of their doors red with the blood of the Lamb, he passes on, without
doing any hurt unto them. Exodus 12.
He exercised all his fury upon the Egyptians alone, and namely, upon this
miserable City, where every place is full of dead bodies, the houses, the
stables, and the streets. The earth is fearful, being oppressed with so many
corses, and the air is dreadful, being wholly possessed, not only with
darkness, but also with the cries of Citizens, lamenting their present harms,
and fearing worse. For they persuade themselves, and have good cause to think
and fear, that this night would make a general tomb of all Egypt. Pharoe
has sent some of the Gentlemen of his Chamber, to call Moses and Aaron, which
are already come, Exodus 12.31.32.
he prays them to give him their blessing, and to depart in peace and in
haste, with all that appertains unto them; the Egyptian people being
fearful, urge them to be gone by all means possible. The Jews will depart
upon the breaking of the day, but not without carrying away rich booties, of
gold, of silver, of apparel, precious stones, and such like treasures, that
they had borrowed of the Egyptians upon good condition, never to restore them
again; Exodus 12.36.
but to pay themselves for their day labors in Egypt many hundred years
together, without receiving any reward for their travail and pains. It is a
borrowing in name, but in effect a restitution of Justice, justly ordained of
God himself. Exodus 5.14.
If ye will attend a little, you shall have the pleasure to behold this
departure; you shall see a world of people, for there went forth on foot six
hundred thousand men of the Jews, Exodus 12.37.
over and above the number of women and little children, and many Egyptians
beside, that followed them, to be put in the Roll of the children of God with
them: they began long since to go forth.

1. OF THE TIME OF IMMOLATION OF the Paschall Lamb, and of the Holy and Civil
year of the Hebrews, and of their Neomenia, or new Moon.
FOr to see well the verity of our Sacrament in the shadow of this Figure, in
the first place is to be noted the ceremony of the time, and the end of it.
God commands the Jews to take the Lamb, the tenth day of the first Moon of
the Springtime, Exodus 12.
where began the Holy year, and to immolate it, that is to say, to kill and
offer it to God, in the evening of the fourteenth day; wasting it presently
after, and eating it, with the ceremony represented in the picture. The first
Moon of holy year was the new Moon, the next to the Aequinoctiall in the
Spring, which Aequinoctiall fell then in the fourteenth of March; and since the
correction of the Callender of Pope Grego^ie the thirteenth, it falls upon
the twentieth. And all this Moon, taking part of March and part of April,
makes the first month of the year, the second Moon makes the second month,
and so of others; and so many new Moons, so many beginnings of new months;
and the first day of the Moon, was the first of the month; and the fourteenth
of the Moon, was the fourteenth of the month: So as the year of the Jews,
was twelve Moons, or twelve months of the Moon, every one having nine and
twenty days and a half, which is the who'e space of the course of the Moon;
true it is, that to keep the number of days whole, they make, that one month
has thirty days, and the other nine and twenty; and the monthly year
contains but three hundred fifty and four days, less by eleven days, then
the year of the Sun, which has three hundred, threescore and five days.
For this cause, the Jews from two years to two, and from three to three, did
enterlace one month; to the end to make by such addition, their moonely year,
equal to that of the Sun, which other people use, as we do now, and then
their year consisted of thirteen months. Now the year, which begun in this
month of March, was the year commanded of God, and called holy or sacred, for
in it he set his people at liberty. The ordinance is set down in these words:
Exodus 12.1.
This month shall be to you the beginning of months, and the first month in the
year.

They have another common vulgar year, equal to this here, used in secular
intercourses and traffiques, beginning in the Moon next to the Aequinectium in
Autumn, which comes commonly in September, as that of the Springtime in
March, and the course of this first Moon, was the first month of this Civil
year, containing part of September, and part of October, as the first month of
the sacred year, had one part of March and another of April; as has been
said. Joseph. lib. 1. Antiq. cap. 4.
Josephus has noted this difference of years, amongst many Authors, and the
Christians use the same distinction, but grounded upon another cause: for they
have a Sacred year, and a Civil; their Holy year begins either at Christmas,
or at the Circumcision, or in March. Before the time of K. Charles the ninth in
France, men began it at Easter, and since at the Circumcision; and according to
this year we count at this present, 1600. since the Nativity of our Savior,
coming into the world to repair our ages, and to give us eternity for time.

Our Civil year is variable, and according to the diversity of the Country,
or condition of persons; good husbands and Scholars begin at Saint Rhemigius,
many at Saint Martin, some at Saint John Baptist, and others at other seasons:
but the Holy year has his uniform limits, as it ought, and there is little
difference through all the Catholic Church. Well then, God commanded the
Hebrews to keep their yearly Sacrifice of the Paschall Lamb, in this first
month, and in the fourteenth day of it, because this was the nearest time to
their going forth, and deliverance; for they went forth the next morning, after
the firstborn of the Egyptians were slain at midnight, the night before: So
as the Ceremony was iustituted at that time precisely, to put them in mind of
the benefit, as also the day and hour of it; which was always religiously
observed, until the truth of this Figure at the same time, many years after
was accomplished by our Savior, delivering us out of a greater servitude, and
substituting the true Lamb in memory thereof, as after we shall see. The same
Hebrews had commandment to offer Sacrifice every new Moon, that is to say,
Number. 10. and 28. Joseph. lib. 3. Antiq. cap. 10.
upon the Calends or first days of every month; which solemnity the Hebrews
called Hodesch, as who would say, beginning: the Septuagint have translated it
Neomenia, a Greek word, which signifies a new month, or a new Moon. This
Feast was not instituted to serve as a Sacrifice to the new Moon, as the
Pagans made it, but for a thanksgiving to God for the benefits of his bounty
and wisdom, in the government of the world; and for to instruct us, that we
ought to make our entry into all the seasons; and to begin every action with
the praise of God, and invocation of his holy name. And hereby they were
invited to honor the Creator of the Moon, Genes. 1.14.
and of all the world, serving themselves of the course of that Planet for
sign of times, for the which end it was created.

2. WHEREFORE THE YEAR OF THE Hebrews was Lunary, and how the Synagogue was
compared to the Moon.
THe causes, wherefore God would, that the Hebrews should take their years from
the course of the Moon, rather then from the Sun, as now the Church does,
are worthy to be known, if they were also easy to be found out. For it ought
not to be doubted, but that this ordinance was founded in great reason, coming
from so wise a Lawmakers. Amongst many others, I find three. The first is
taken from the rudeness of this people, to which God having regard, commanded
them to reckon their years and months by the Moon, as more facill and easy,
then if they accounted by the twelve celestial signs, devised by the
Chaldeans, and other Heathenish people. For every one sees the new Moon, and
all his quarters; and the most simple can observe, that she ends her whole
course within one month; whereas none knows the signs of the Zodiaque, but
Astronomers. S. Greg. Naz. Or. 2. de Pasch.
The second is more important, touched by Saint Gregory Nazianzen, that it was,
to keep in order by this ceremony the Jews from following the superstition of
the Pagans, who were extremely given to the worship of the Moon; for they
adored it in heaven, as a Queen: in the earth, and under earth, as a Goddess,
under the name of Luna, Diana, Proserpina; whose example might give occasion to
that people, vainly given, and of themselves inclined to imitate the foolish
Pagans, to suffer themselves to be headlong carried to Idolatry, so much in
practice in those days, if they had not some true and lawful use of the
Moon, thereby to be held from the abuse thereof, against the Law of God.

Therefore God commanded them, to order their months and years, Feasts and
Ceremonies, according to the course of the Moon; adored the true God in his
Law, and serving themselves of the creature, to the honor of their Creator.
Exodus 25.
And with like wisdom he ordained the Arc of Covenant, to the end they
should have some visible thing, before which to honor God, without running to
Idols. The third cause is full of mystery, and it was to give a secret and
mystical signification of the condition of the Synagogue, by the qualities of
the Moon, very significant of it. The Moon is the lowest Planet of all,
terrestrial and gross, and yet celestial notwithstanding: the Judicial Law
also was earthly and carnal, the Ceremonies, Sacrifices, Promises, and the
rest, no better, and yet given of God notwithstanding; and therefore celestial
in this respect; the Moon is a cold and mutable Planet: the Synagogue a Law of
fear, which is a cold passion, a temporal Law, and mutable, which was to be
changed into the Law of Grace. The Moon by her light does not ripen any fruit;
though she give by her influence increase to Plants, Trees, and living
creatures: The Synagogue gives not any perfection by his ceremonies. Hebr.
7.19.
The Law (says Saint PAVL) brings nothing to perfection; and nevertheless
under her direction and light, the children of God did receive from his
Majesty, grace and increase of virtue; not by force of Judicial Sacraments, as
now by the Christian, but only by the faith and obedience, that they brought
with them to those Sacraments. For these reasons amongst others, the Lunary
year was the year, and the time of the Synagogue. Such as are more
spiritual, will draw better reasons hereof, from the treasures of the Book of
God, whose wisdom is infinite in all things. The Christians rule themselves by
the Solary year, because the foresaid causes, neither touch them nor their
religion. We shall now decypher the sense of the Picture, and shall see, how
the Paschall Lamb figureth the Sacrament, and Sacrifice of the body of our
Savior.

3. THE PASCHALL LAMB, A FIGVRE of the Sacrifice of the Cross, and of the
Eucharist.
THE Paschall Lamb did Figure Jesus Christ, true Lamb without spot, descended
from heaven to be killed, and by his blood to deliver us from the death and
servitude of the Egyptians, to wit, from ignominy, and eternal damnation.
This Ceremony in certain circumstances carried the sign of the Sacrifice of
the Cross, in the real slaughter in the bloody effusion, in the roasting of
the Lamb, and such like. Saint John also, in the Sacrifice of the Cross, Tem.
19.36. Exodus ^2.46.
applies the prohibition of not breaking the bones of the Lamb, to that fact
of the Jews, when they break not one bone of our Savior crucified.

Saint Justin singularly remarketh, S. justin. Dialo. cont. Trypho.
that the Lamb was so disposed of, when they roasted it, that it made the Figure
of a Cross.

The selfsame Lamb, in other ceremonies, was one of the most rare Figures of
the Eucharist; as our Savior declares in general, when after the eating of
the Lamb, he instituted incontinently the Sacrifice of his body. For he joined
not with any other intention these two ceremonies, S. Cyprian. sermon. de Can.
Denun.
but to show, that he accomplished this Figure past in this present verity, and
that upon a Picture of most noble, and most illustrious antiquity, he made, as
it were, a bed or table for the Sacrifice of the Law of Grace; which will
appear, if we observe the very lineaments of the Iudaical shadow expressed in
the light of our faith. First, the Law commands to offer the Lamb in the
evening of the fourteenth day of the first Moon, that is to say, of the first
month of the year, as has been said, and afterward to eat it: for it could
not be eaten, without it were first immolated, as Saint Gregory of Nisse,
notes. S. Greg. Niss. Or. 1. de Resur.
In the next place; the selfsame Law says, that they ought to eat it every
one privately in his own family. These circumstances, as the others, of which
we will speak hereafter, have infallibly been accomplished in some Sacrifices
of the new Law; Matt. 5.17.18.
for otherwise Jesus Christ should not have fulfilled the old Law, from point
to point, according as he promised, and should have given a Figure or shadow,
without exhibiting the truth and substance.

Now this accomplishment has not been made in the Sacrifice of the Cross; for
this Sacrifice fell not out in the fourteenth, but in the fifteenth day of the
Moon, which was the Friday following, neither in the evening of the day, but
at midday, when our Savior, mounting on the Cross, hung thereon three hourses
after, before he died; neither was there then any mystical refection; for none
did eat at that time, neither was this Sacrifice made privately in every
Family, but publicly, and in the sight of the world. These Ceremonies then
touch not the Cross; whereas all of them agree very well to the Eucharist. For
our Savior offered himself therein, Matthew. 26. Marc. 24. Luc. 22.
the true Lamb; at the going down of the Sun, on Thursday the fourteenth day
of the Moon; and gave himself to be catenpresently after, and this in
private, only in the presence of his Family, which were his twelve Apostles,
representing then his dear Spouse, the Church, to whom he left for his last
farewell out of this mortal life, his body, as a pledge of his infinite love,
and an immortal memory of the good, that he was to do, to us, and for us.
This ancient Figure then of the Paschall Lamb, according to the circumstances
thereof, has beed accomplished in the Eucharist, and not elsewhere.

4. HOW JESUS CHRIST IS IMITATED in the Eucharist.
But if the Lamb was imitated, and immolation imports occasion, how is it,
that our Savior has accomplished the verity of the immolation, in the
institution of the Eucharist, seeing that he was not slain at that time? How
can it be, that he should now be immolated, seeing that he is immortal. The
Catholic Doctors answer to this question, that if one take the word of
immolation strictly, and in rigor, signifying real occasion, it was not
properly done, but on the Cross, and here is no immolation of that nature,
for so much as the body of our Savior is now removed infinitely from the
gripes of death, and from all hurt, not only on the Altar, but wheresoever
else he is. Romans 6.
Jesus Christ (says the Scripture) being risen, dies no more; death has no
more power over him. The same Doctors notwithstanding, following the Scripture,
teach all with one accord, that he is mmolated in the Eucharist, howbeit they
be different in the explication of this immolation: some have said, that there
is no other thing, but the bare representation of the death of our Savior,
which is not sufficient, because so it should be but a Picture of immolation,
not true immolation, nor such as the Catholic Doctrine teaches us. Wherefore
the exposition of others is better and more agreeable to the Scriptures, and to
the testimony of antiquity, who hold, that this immolation consists in this,
that our Savior gave himself, as he yet gives himself for meat and drink
under the form of dead things, which are the accidents of bread and wine,
taking in them a dead being; to wit, of things that we eat, which is a being,
that has neither life nor feeling. So that as he became mortal, by taking
upon him our mortal nature, in the which he was immolated in his own person,
on the Altar of the Cross, albeit his Divinity remained still immortal: Even
so taking here an exterior being of a thing dead, and giving himself, under
such a being, he exhibits himself as dead; and after this manner he is truly
immolated in regard of the forms, though he remain still in himself
altogether impassible. And although the humanity alone, of the Son of God,
endured the strokes of death, yet notwithstanding, we say that God is truly
dead, because the Humanity and the Divinity made then but one, to wit, one
person, God and man, 1. Cor. 2.8.
Jesus Christ: In like manner we say, that the body of our Savior is truly
immolated, albeit nothing but the species earieth the marks of death, not
because the forms make not one person, but one Sacrament, with the body of our
Savior; and this body is truly immolated, and truly broken, by reason of the
species of bread, which endures this breaking; and likewise his blood is truly
shed, not as the blood which is drawn from the veins, but after the manner as
the substance of wine, might a little before have bin powered out in his own
kind, to which succeeded the substance of blood, immolated without occasion, as
the first Council of Nice explaines it; Council. 1. Nicen. Cap. 5.
and shed without bloody effusion; and truly immolated, according to the order
of Melchisedech, under the dead forms of bread and wine, Council. Trident.
Sess. 22. cap. 1.
as speaks the Council of Trent, immolated not in Figure, as of old in the
Hebrew Sacrifices, where his body was not present, and immolated, not in him,
himself, and in his proper form, as it was on the Cross, but as it is said,
under the forms of bread and wine, under which his body is present; and it is
in this sense, that the holy Scripture and the Doctors teach, that our Savior
is offered or immolated in the Eucharist, as shall be evident by the
testimonies following.

5. THE IMMOLATION OF THE BODY of our Savior in the Mass, confirmed by the
testimonies of the Scripture, and ancient Fathers.
SAint Paul says: 1. Cor. 5.7.
Christ our Paschall Lamb has been immolated, wherefore let us feast with
bread without leaven, bread of sincerity. It is certain, that the Apostle
meant the immolation of our Savior, made in the Eucharist with refection, and
not that of the Cross, which was a Paschal Feast, accompanied with torments,
of ignominies, of distresses and wants, and of other circumstances repugnant to
a holy refection.

Saint AMBROST, S. Ambros. in cap. 1 Luc.
When we Sacrifice, Christ is present, Christ is immolated; for Christ, our
Passcouer, has been offered.

Saint Hierom after Origin gives the same exposition, Orig. and S. Hier. in 26.
Mat. Council. 1. Nic. can. 5.
that Saint Ambrose of the words of Saint Paul, and the first Council of Nice
says, that our Savior is immolated without effusion of blood, as we said even
now.

Saint Cyril of Jerusalem tells us, speaking of the Eucharist; S. Cyril.
Hieres. Catech. Mist. 5.
Christ is offered to God the Father, for our sins.

Saint Gregory Nisse proves it by the Figure of the Paschall Lamb; saying, S.
Greg. Niss. Or. 1. de Resur.
Every man knows that man could not eat the Lamb, but first it was
immolated, wherefore Jesus Christ gining his body to be eaten, shows
manifestly, that there was before a true and entire immolation.

Saint AUGUSTINE: Jesus Christ, S. Aug ep. 23. ad Bonis.
having been once immolated in himself, is he not neuerthe less immolated for
the people every day?

After the same language speak the other Doctors of the Church of God, whom it
is not needful to cite; we ought rather to admire here the infinite power,
wisdom, and bounty of our Redeemer, in that he will vouchsafe to give himself
in such a fashion, for the benefit of his members; and that so much the more,
because the gift surpasses, not only our merits, but even our thoughts. For
who could ever dare to hope; who would ever think, that he would so much abase
himself after his triumphant Ascension, that he would become meat for us? To
apparel himself with mortality, to make us immortal? To take a mortal Robe
upon him, for to give us an immortal garment? Is he not truly all puissant
in this effect? all wise in this ordinance, and al good in this charity? As
who, for example, would ever have expected those other things, which now we
see are come to pass, if they were not done already? Who would have thought
that this selfsame Son of God, equal in all things to his Father,
immortal, impossible, most rich, Creator, and nourishers of all creatures;
could have had the power and will, to make himself Man; a mortal man, a needy
little Insant sucking the breast of a Virgin, to give himself afterward on
the Cross, remaining always what he was before? Who, without particular
revelation, would ever have thought this? We know, that he would do it, and
that he has done it, and we admire it in our attentive silence. Admire then
likewise the same God, for that he gives, and continues to give his glorious
body, hidden under such base elements, impassible under corruptible garments,
immortal, under the robe of immortality; and a great Creator under the cottage
of a little creature; a great God, under the form of a little Lamb.

6.
HOW THE PASCHALL LAMB shows the use, and end of the Eucharist.
THere is yet one noble consideration more in the Paschall Lamb, which shows
the use and the end, for which our Sacrifice was ordained. The Paschall Lamb
was instituted in sign of the delivery of the Jews, Exodus 8.12.12.
and in memory of it: For they immolated it about the evening, at the going
down of the Sun, and did eat it a little after toward night; Deuteronomy. 16.
and at midnight following was the Pasque, or the Fast, that is to say, the
passage of our Lord, when passing through Egypt, he slew by the hand of his
revenging Angel, all the first borne, which was the great blow he gave for the
deliverance of the Jews, that was to follow the next day; and Moses by the
ordinance of God, advertised the Jews to teach their posterity, that this
Sacrifice of the Lamb was commanded in memory of this deliverance. Exodus
12.14.26.
Wherefore this was a sign of the benefit to be received, and a memorial
thereof, after it was received. The resemblance of this Figure has been
perfectly accomplished in the verity. For our Savior ordained the Sacrament
and Sacrifice of his body upon the evening, of that night, in which he was
taken, to be crucified the next morning, and pass from this world into
another; to stisle by his death the true firstborn of Egypt, to wit, the
sins of mankind, and to bury afterward in his precious blood, as within the
depth of a Red Sea of his infinite merits, the powers of hell for the true
deliverance of his Elect.

This Sacrifice then was a sign of the victory, which was to be gotten, and a
memorial of the same, after it was gained; this our Savior signified, when
instituting the same, he foretold the Apostles of his death, and commanded them
to do what he had done, in remembrance of him, Do this in remembrance of me,
that is to say, Luc. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
celebrate this Sacrifice, in remembrance of that I shall have done for your
redemption. For as the night which followed the institution of the Paschall
Lamb, was the great Vigil, and immediate sign of the deliverance of the
Hebrews; so also the midnight of our Savior, which followed the institution
of this Sacrifice, was the great brunt, and the immediate ensign of our
redemption. The time of this midnight was at full midday, when he mounted on the
Cross to encounter the enemy, and to overthrow our sins with outstretched
arms; this was a profound midnight indeed, of spiritual darkness, in which
they were buried, which procured his death; a midnight also of corporal
darkness; for the Sun and the Moon, enraged with the indignity of such a
crime, committed against the person of their Creator, were suddenly colypsed,
and caused a profound darkness extraordinary, and a dreadful night in the
midst of the day. And as the Ceremony of the Paschall Lamb, continued in
memory of the good, received in Egypt, so long as the Synagogue endured. So in
like manner the Sacrifice of the Mass was instituted, to continue in memory of
the victorious Passion of our Lord, so long as the Church shall be militant
here on earth: and this is it which Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.26.
writing to the Christians of Gorinth. As often as you shall eat of this
Bread, and drink of this Chalice, you show the death of the Lord, until he
come; that is to say, even until the great day.

7. OF THE CEREMONIES USED IN eating the Paschall Lamb.
THere were a great number of Mystical Ceremonies, used in eating of the Jews
Paschall Lamb, which in their shadows Figure to us the truth of ours, and
together instruct us how we ought to eat it, for to draw substance of life
from it. The Jews Lamb was offered in the evening: Jesus Christ gave himself
in the Eucharist, and on the Cross, in the evening of the world, and at the
last hour of the day, Joan. 2.18.
as speaks the Apostle Saint John. The Lamb was to be roasted, thereby to
show the burning charity of our Savior, in giving his body in this Sacrament,
seasoned and colored with the flame of his burning charity; teaching us
withal, that we must bring with us fervent love, when we come to eat it; for
this is the preparation, and the appetite, with which spiritual meats ought
to be taken, for the good nourishment of our souls. Exodus 12.
Those, which did eat it, ought to be Jews by blood, or by Religion; no
person may eat our Lamb, that is not a Christian, borne of Christians, or made
Christian by Baptism. They did eat it in the night, to show that our
Eucharist is a hidden mystery, and invisible to sense and humane judgment, and
known only to faith. The Father of every Family was to eat it; every Pastor
in his Parish, as in his Family; and every Church as a Family under her Pastor,
eats the Lamb of God; but with this difference, that the Jews did eat
diverse Lambs in diverse houses, and in diverse times, their Lamb being
corruptible: the Christians eat all one selfsame Lamb, in all times, Jesus
Christ incorruptible Lamb and immortal, and only sufficient for all, and
always. They did not break the bones, to Figure the impassibility of the
Divinity of our Lamb Jesus Christ, hid under the Humanity, as the bones are
hidden under the flesh: and further, to represent the impassibilitie of his
body, hid under the forms of bread and wine. And therefore the Figure is
perfectly accomplished in our Banquet; for we eat our Lamb, not only without
breaking his bones, but without hurting whatsoever of his flesh, all whole, all
united, all immortal, without ever consuming of it.

The Figure gives but a little touch concerning the bone only, the verity goes
further, and accomplisheth it also in the body. They were to eat it hastily,
to show that this mystery ought to be devoured with a lively and blessed faith,
without the narrow sifting curiosity of reason, and humane sense. Of the
selfsame signification was the Ceremony which commanded to burn what
remained; to teach us, what we cannot comprehend in our mystery, that we ought
to burn in the fire of Charity. The bread without leaven, signifies the
sincerity of conscience, that men ought to bring to this Table, 1. Cor. 5.8.
as S. Paul interprets it: the bitter Lettice signifies Penance; and herehence
it is, that the children of the Church of God, before they present themselves
to receive the blessed Sacrament; put their souls in good estate, bewailing
their sins, confessing themselves, and doing penance for them. The Jews were
gyrt eating their Lamb; in sign that we ought above all things to be chaste,
when we eat of this virginal flesh of the Lamb without spor. For Luxury
proceeds from the Reins; and to girde the Reins, is to take away the first
causes of the sin of the flesh, and make whoredom to dye in its spring; and
therefore Saint Gregory says, S. Greg hom. 13.
We then put the girdle to our reins, when we repress the lasciviousness of
the flesh, by the bridle of continency. The staff in their hands, and shoes
of dead skin on their feet, after the fashion of people, which are to take a
journey, teach us, that we should live in this mortal flesh, as pilgrims dead
to this world, having for the sovereign strength of our Pilgrimage, the staff
of the Cross; and for our shoes of our feet, the meditation of death; and
this at every pace and moment of our life, as indeed in every step we
approach to the grave. There are then in all these fair lineaments and
mysteries figured and accomplished, sufficient marks whereby to acknowledge,
as well the truth, which is the Sacrament of our Lamb, the Redeemer, as also
the bounty and supreme wisdom, of him who has figured it by his servant
Moses, and by his own proper hand fulfilled the same.

But who shall give us eyes to penetrate sufficiently these works? words to
praise them highly? affection to love them holily? except thou, O sovereign
Master, who art the worker of them? Who shall make us touch the fruit of thy
flesh, and of thy blood, except thou, which give them us to use? Who shall
deliver us from Pharoe, and from Egypt, except thou, that have certainly
delivered us? But we unthankful and forgetful wretches, have taken again the
iron chain of servitude, by our sins, upon us.

O sweet Lamb, that did come into this world, to wipe away the sins of the
world, in the purple color of this noble blood, employed to dye red the poasts
of the Cross, and to turn from us the violence of the destroying Angel.
Defend us against our enemies in this blood, wash us from our sins in this
blood, refresh us with this blood, and in this blood powered into our breasts,
stifle the firstborn of spiritual Egypt, which are seldom from us, and
which too often we carry with us; the love of this world, fleshly pleasures,
follies and smoakes of vanities: stifle the high desires of our obdurate
souls, which as the firstborn of Man, push us forward to the vanity of
worldly honors. Smother the concupiscenses and fires of our flesh, which as
the firstborn of our brutish and unreasonable appetites, which seek after
nothing but the hay of the earth, and the baits of sense. Enkindle in our
hearts this celestial fire, with which thou art seasoned, to be our Paschall
Lamb, and the delicious dainty of our Feast, to the end that we may receive it
with gain of incorruption, seasoning our souls by this receiving, to become
an Holocaust of delicious smell, and of good taste to thy Majesty. Make us
wise, well to acknowledge thy gifts: make us good, to the end we may be worthy
of them; and strengthen us in virtue, that we may persevere in the way of thy
holy Laws, to be received at last to thy Mariagefeast, where thou shall be the
Spouse and the Lamb, the Giver, and the meat of eternal felicity.

THE SIXTH PICTVRE. MANNA IN THE DESERT.
The Description.
YOU see here the Desert of Arabia, Exodus 16.
in the confines of Egypt, and Moses conducting the multitude of the Hebrews,
in number more then six hundred thousand, lately delivered from the bondage of
the Egyptians, Exodus 12.37.38.
and from the hands of Pharoe, who came to be swallowed up, with all his army;
in the depthes of the waves of the Sea. So soon as the meat, and the bread,
which they brought with them from Egypt, began to sail, then they fell a
crying for hunger; for the belly has neither patience, nor ears; especially
in so rude a people, and inclined to murmr as these are. God of his
liberality, and benignity toward them, makes this day, upon the evening, to
fly great flocks of Quails upon the Camp, wherewith they were fed; and you
see some of them yet remaining: and this morning, the first day of the week,
he has made rain to them Manna, which served them, and shall serve them for
food, until they be arrived in the Land of Promise, which are these round
white grains, of the bigness and form of Corianders, Exodus 16.
which falling thick and small from heaven, have made white the Land, all
covered therewith; and so have ceased to fall. Wherefore all the world runs
greedily to gather it up: some carry panniers full upon their backs; some
their baskets in their hands; some their wallets; the householders send their
servants, who thereof make their provision with all diligence. But above all, it
is a pleasure to see the little children half naked, who, having tasted of
these white sweet things, run to it, as to an hail of sugared comfits; and
thrusting one another away, strive who shall put most in their pockets. They
fall on eating greedily, remembering no more the Quails, that fell the night
past. The elder sort contemplate this small bread, and admire it, and every one
said in the beholding it, Man-hu, that is to say, What is this? and not without
reason; for it was meat never seen before, neither had the heavens ever
rained down any such; especially in this Desert, barren of all good fruit.
They also saw it fall from the sky, when it was clear, without knowing any
original, or natural cause thereof; they see it laid between two snowes,
Exodus 16.14.
or dewes, as betwixt two white sheets. For a little before that it descended,
a little dew was spread over the earth to receive it, Rab. Salom. and Lyra.
ibid.
and being already descended, another covered it. These meruailes astonished
the Hebrews, and made them say Man-hu, Man-hu? But they shall be yet more
amazed, when they shall see that it shall not fall on the Sabbath day, as it
were, to keep the Feast; that he, which shall gather all the morning, more
then the measure of a Gomer for his provision, Exodus 16.26.
shall not have more then the other, which shall have gathered less: Exodus
16.18.
and that this Gomer, shall be the measure of food, that every one shall eat,
great or little; that it shall melt, and desolue into water with the beams of
the Sun, and it shall harden being put to the fire, Exodus 16.21.
to be prepared and baked into bread; that it shall convert it self to that,
which every one would have it; and he, which would have the taste of the flesh
of Chickens, Exodus 16.23.
of Veale, of Partridge, or of other things to eat, he shall have it taste
according to his own desire; that it shall putrify, if they keep it till the
next day, if it were not the Sabbath day. For these maruailes, they said
always Man-hu? as nor being able to comprehend what it is; and that name
remained always to the thing, in witness of the admiration. Moses
contemplates this present Sacrament, and casts the eyes of his clear sighted
understanding, upon the greatness of the future mystery; and highly praising
the gifts of the divine boundy, instructs this gross people, how they ought
to carry themselves in the gathering, and use of this bread. He also commanded
his brother Aaron, Exodus 16.33.34.
to retain one vessel thereof, to put in the Tabernacle, there to be
reserved, when it shall be framed, Hebr. 9.4.
in eternal memory of the gifts received from the divine hand; every one
already has gotten his provision, and the Manna fallen begins to melt, the
Sun being high risen above the Horison, and drawing near the South.

1. MANNA, A FIGVRE OF THE SAcrament of the Altar.
Our Savior has evidently declared, that Manna was a manifest Figure of the
Sacrament of his body, when instructing the Jews, vanting of their Ancestors,
Joan. 6. Exodus 16.14. Number. 11.7. Psalm. 77.24.
whom they said, to have eaten Manna in the Desert, as it is written: Thou have
given them bread from heaven: and taking occasion thereby to speak to them of
the eating of his flesh, true Manna from heaven; he answers them, saying:
Verily, verily I say unto you, Joan. 6.31.32.44.
that it is not Moses which gave you the true bread from heaven; but it is my
Father, which gives you the true bread from heaven. And a little after: Your
fathers have eaten Manna in the Desert, and are dead; who eats this bread,
shall live for ever. Teaching by this allusion and comparison, that Manna was
but the shadow and Figure of his flesh; and that Moses had given but the
figurative bread of that bread, which he was to leave to his Church, true bread
descended from heaven; to wit, his precious body, exhibited under the forms of
bread. Saint Paul, according to the Spirit of his Master, compares Manna to the
Eucharist, S. Chrys^st. S. Cyril. Alex. The^ph. S. Aug. in cap. 6. Joan. G.
Ambros. lib. de im^tat. c. 8. and 9. and lib. de Sac. cap. 1.
and the Red Sea to Baptism, as shadows to the body. The holy Fathers of like
faith and doctrine, speak of Manna, as of a fair Picture, made in the School
of Moses, and extol the holy Sacrament of the Altar, as the truth, exhibited
in the Law of grace: well then, for the better conceiving thereof, let us
contemplate the semblance of the one to the other, and compare the Manna of the
Jews, with the Manna of the Christians.

2. THE CORRESPONDENCE OF MANna, to the Sacrament of the Altar.
MANNA was called bread from heaven, Psalm. 77.24.
because it came from the air, called heaven in the holy Scripture; as when it
says, Matthew. 13.4.
The birds of heaven, that is to say, of the air, which is their element: our
Sacrament is truly bread from heaven, for it contains him, which is truly
descended, not from the air, but from heaven it self. And this is that, which
our Savior said to the Jews, as above we have heard. Joan. 9.31.32.
It is not Moses, which gives you true bread from heaven, but it is my Father,
which gives you the true bread from heaven. Secondly, Manna was a food,
extracted from an extraordinary cause, and made by the ministry of Angels, and
not a work of Nature; and this is the cause, Glossa in 16. Exodus
why it is called the bread of Angels. For to say, that it was because they did
eat it, were an impertinent exposition; seeing that the meat of such Spirits
is spiritual, and proportioned to their nature, according to that, which
Raphael said to Tobias. To^. 12.19.
It seemed indeed that I did eat and drink with you, but I use a meat and a
drink invisible, and which none can see. For the selfsame reason it is
called by Saint Paul, Spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10.
not that it was not visible, and palpable, but because it was prepared by an
invisible hand, and after a divine manner. Plin. lib. 11. c. 14 and lib. 12. c.
4. Gal. l. 3. de aliment.
The natural Philosophers have well acknowledged a kind of natural Manna,
which is a certain dew of honny, which the laborers of Syria gather from the
trees of the mount Lybanus, and whereof the Apothecaries make use; but this
here was far otherwise in his effects and causes, as has bin said; it was
produced miraculously in the Desert and fell every day but the Sabbath, in
Winter, and in all times; and it was a miracle that it fell not on the Sabbath.
It continued in this manner forty years and no more; and this was one of the
miracles, that this people saw there continually in the Desert; this was then a
celestial food supernatural and divine. This quality agrees very well to our
Sacrament; For, first, Luke 1.
but by virtue of the holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin, which are two
extraordinary causes. Secondly, this body is made present, Gomer, be it that
he had gathered more or less, and this measure was equally sufficient to every
one, nourishing a man grown, and not ouer-charging the stomach of a young
child. A thing in truth most admirable; that in a multitude of more then six
hundred thousand of people, and so great inequality of complexions, and of
stemackes, the selfsame quantity was equal and proportionable to the
condition of every one. This also is more admirably seen in the Eucharist; for
it is not greater in a little Host, then in a great one, in a piece, then in
all; and the body of our Savior is all in all the Host, and all in every part
of it; and is given equally to all, under unequal pieces; how be it, that in
regard of the effect, it profits more to those that are prepared. Fifthly, Exodus
16.
for so much as having Manna, they had whereof to eat and drink; neither more
nor loss, then long time after them the five thousand, which did cate in the
Desert the bread and fishes multiplied, had both meat and drink by that
miraculous food, in Figure of our Eucharist. Even so the Eucharist it self
gives the body and the blood of our Savior, true bread and true drink
together, though it be but under one kind. Glossa ex Rab. Salan Exodus 16.
the body and blood of our Savior is covered and hid from our sense and
judgment, under the outward accidents of bread and wine. Are not here
resemblances enough to make us see the very face, and Figure of our Sacraments.
And if God has bin admirable figuring long since the pattern of the truth, is
he nor yet much more admirable, in making perfect from point to point the truth
it self, according to the pattern, and in laying so fair, and so measurable
a resemblance of the lively colors of a new Mystery, upon the lineaments of
the ancient Figure? But let us see yet some other draughts.

3. WHAT SIGNIFIED THE LIKENESS of Manna to Coriander.
PHILO, a great Doctor, writes, Philo. l. 2. Alleg. post. med.
That the pieces of the grain of Coriander, burst and cast in the earth, grow
as well as the whole grain; even as the grafts of a tree, set, or planted,
will live, and grow. An admirable property of this grain, and which is not
found in any other seed, that I have read of, not in Wheat, which is a grain
that has the sprout most full of life. The Scripture, which puts not one
tittle to paper without reason, compares Manna to Coriander, to the end (no
doubt) we should mark a wonder, hidden in the Judicial shadows, to be
discovered in the light of our faith; the which wonder consists in this, that
one part alone of our Sacrament has life, as well as the the whole; and that
every piece of an Host broken, contains as much as the whole Host. This
wonder was signified (as I said before) in the quantity of Manna, which was so
equal in the provision, although it were gathered in unequal measure. Then
the Scripture saying that Manna, the old Figure, was like to the grain of
Coriander, gave an outward Picture to the Jews, and signified to us the inward
life of our Manna, in all his parts, having the likeness of Coriander; albeit
this be in one respect infinitely more perfect, for none of the parts of
Coriander, is all the Coriander; but all the parts of the Sacrament, are all
the Sacrament, and all contain the body of our Lord, and all are the whole:
yet if we respect the forms, the parts of the Host are not the whole Host,
but only a part thereof.

4. THE HOLY SACRAMENT KEPT IN the Tabernacle, as Manna in the Arc.
WE have heard, how Moses commanded his brother Aaron to take of Manna, to
be reserved within the Tabernacle, for a memorial of the benefits received
from God, which was put in execution so soon as the Arc was prepared, Exodus
16.33.
within the which Aaron put a golden pot full of Manna, and the Arc, and the
pot in it was seated in the most holy place; Heb. 9.4.
as Saint Paul witnesses, writing to the Hebrews. So as Manna not only
served for meat, and all manner of sustenance, but also for a memorial. The
truth of these shadows continue from age to age in the Church of God; in which
the body of our Savior, as celestial Manna, is given for food, and a
viaticum, and withal is kept and rescrued, for a memorial of benefits
received from God. For wheresoever the blessed Sacrament is found, every where
it is a memorial of the bounty of our Savior toward us, it is also kept,
and it shall be kept in Churches even to the end of the world, to be carried to
the sick, and others, who have need of it, and cannot come to the Church, S.
Just. ep. 2. and S. Iren. epist. ad vict. Pap. quae est apud Erseb. lib. 5.
hist. c. 24. Eusebius. l. 6, c. 36.
or be present at Mass to receive it. Such was the practice in the time of the
Apostles, and in the ages following, until this day, as it appears by the
writings of Saint Justin, and other Doctors of holy antiquity.

5. THE BREAD OF THE JEWS BEARS the name of wonder, in Figure of our
wonderful Sacrament of the Altar.
AS Manna was wonderful in his causes, in his nature, and in his effects; so
it carried a name, signifying nothing but wonder and admiration; for Manna
comes from the word Man-bu, which is, as we have said before, nothing, but What
is this? a word, which imports admiration, and desire to know in him, that
speaks it; who, because he is ignorant of the nature of the thing, admires it,
and asks, What is this? Our Manna, and our Sacrament is so admirable, that no
name c^n declare it; and after that one has well considered it, he shall
find it much more easy to admire it, then to express it by a name,
correspondent to the excellency; by which means, of all the names that it
bears, there is none which is more agreeable to it, then Manna, the name of
admiration; which David declared by Periphrasis, when he called the Eucharist,
Psalm. 110.
The memorial of the wonders of God; which is not so much a name, as a mark
of wonder; and to this of David it is likely our Savior had regard, when
instituting the Sacrament of his body, he said to his Apostles, Luke 22.29.
Do this in remembrance of me; as if he had said, use this, as a memorial of
my wonders. Well then, in this very name of Manna, we shall observe another
resemblance of admiration between the old Manna, and the institution of the
new. Exodus 16.
For when the Hebrews, having taken theirs in their hand, said wondering,
Man-hu, what is this? Moses answered only in general to their demand; this
is the bread, that our Lord has given you to eat: but our Savior taking the
bread, and instituting the Sacrament, answers in particular saying. This is my
body, Matthew. Mark. Luke.
and taking the Cup, This is my blood, as if he had said, Your Fathers long
since asked, What is this? holding in their hand the food, that I made rain
down unto them, and you still pronouncing Manna, ask what is this? I answer
both to you, and your Fathers, This is my body, this is my blood; their Manna
and their wonder, was this my body, in Figure; but the Manna, which I make, and
the memorial, that I institute, is my body, not in Figure, but in truth.
Behold then the wonder of our Sacrament, figured in the name of the ancient
Manna, and the admirable resemblance between the old Manna, in the Law of
Moses, and our new Manna in the Law of Grace. And since that all here is
admirable, and that the admiration hereof is profitable to us, and honorable to
God in this great Mystery; let us further contemplate the springs and causes of
this admiration, arising out of his omnipotency, wisdom, and bounty, and let
us see wherefore the holy Fathers have so extraordinarily admired it.

6. THE WONDERFVLL POWER OF GOD in the Sacrament of the Altar.
GOd shows himself admirable three ways; by his Power, by his Wisdom, and
by his Bounty: to the which end he has graven the works of these three
virtues in every work of his, be it never so little. The natural virtues of
Stones or Plants, and the armor of beasts, set forth the power of their
Creator; the ordering of the parts of every creature, the industry of the great
and little beasts, and their agilitie, make us to see his wisdom: the essence
and property of all things given us, do witness his bounty unto us: all
that he did long since in the Law of Nature, and of Moses, and all that he has
done, or shall do hereafter in the Law of Grace, is marked with these three
marks, and there is nothing wherein he becomes not admirable by means of
these three, to all those that exercise the eyes of their souls, in
contemplation of the greatness of his works. But above all, he has showed
himself maruailous in this divine Sacrament, as the last and principal work
of his hands, and the admirable new Schedule or Codicill of his Testament. And
first, he has made appear in it his wonderful Power by so many sundry waves,
as there be diversities in the nature of things; we must explain them after a
stammering manner. For how can we do otherwise (O Lord) speaking of so high an
effect of thy infinite power? We find in all visible nature the Substance, the
Quality, the Relation, the Action, the Passion, the Place, the Time, the
State, the Habit, and nothing more. Man, for example, has a reasonable soul
and a body, which make his substance: He has his quantity, which are his
length, breadth, and thickness: He has his qualities, which are his color,
his beauty, his bounty, and such like: He has his relations compared to
another, which is less great, less good, or as great and as good as himself;
and is thereby surnamed greater, better or equal: He has also his actions,
for he speaks, he writes, or does other things: He has his passions, for
he receives in his body, or in his soul, some impression of cold, of heat, of
joy, of knowledge, of sorrow, and such like: He is in some place, as in the
City, in the fields; and that at sometime, either in the morning, or in the
evening, in Summer, or in Winter: He has his situation, for he is sitting, or
standing, or lying. Finally, he has his vesture or clothing, his cloak, his
shoes, etc. And all whatsoever, which is found in Man, or in any other
corporal creature, is referred to one of these heads, which are the ten
orders, by the Philosophers assigned to Nature, Arist. in Meta. and Logic.
comprehending all the parcells of every creature. According to all which, our
Savior shows himself omnipotent in this Sacrament; let us see it first
insubstance.

7. OF THE OMNIPOTENCY OF GOD in Transubstantiation.
AS for Substance, Categoria sub. (...).
our Savior shows his supreme power in this Sacrament, in that he changes
by his Word the substance of bread into his body, and the substance of wine
into his blood; a kind of miracle, very like unto creation, and more noble in
this Mystery, then creation it self; and most fit to make us know, and
acknowledge him an omnipotent workman. In the creation, Dexit and facia (...).
Psalm. 32.9.
God did speak, and it was done, he commanded, and it was created, as David
sings. Here he says, This is my body, and his body is found there, This is
my blood, and his blood is there present. Then his omnipotent Word made that to
be, which was not before at all: now it makes present his body in a place,
where it was not a little before. There it changed nothing into the creature:
here it changes one creature into another, and in a certain manner into the
Creator himself; so as the Priests working in the Consecration by virtue of
this omnipotent words, are in this respect Creators of their Creator. For
changing the bread into the body of our Savior, and making this body present,
they make also by necessary concomitance, that his Soul and his Divinity,
which never abandons the body, be also present; and by such operation they
produce after a certain manner the divine Person, and their Creator, neither
more nor less, then the glorious Virgin brought forth Jesus Christ, God and
Man; and is truly called the Creatrix, and Mother of her Creator, although
she bred neither the Soul nor the Divinity of him, but only the body
conjoined to a reasonable Soul, and hypostatically united to the Divine
Person, which accompanies it unseparably. Therefore the mystery of the
Incarnation, as also of Transubstantiation, is greater and nobler, then that of
Creation. For the effect of the Creation, was a creature, to wit, the World;
but the effect of the Incarnation, as also of Transubstantiation, is the
Creator, by reason of this consequence and concomitance. And if one should
consider the body of our Savior alone, the effect is always more precious,
seeing that this body surpasses the price of a thousand worlds. God then
shows himself greater in this change, then he did in the Creation. And
therefore after the Creation, and before the Mystery of Transubstantiation,
when he would give proof of his power, it was first by the change of one
creature into another, because such an operation did most properly testify the
sovereign Master of Nature; but therewithal to facilitate the faith of
Transubstantiation, which he was to make in the Law of Grace, of bread and wine
into the body and blood of his Son. So for the first proof of his
omnipotency, he changed the Rod of Moses into a Serpent; and before Pharoe and
the Egyptians, Exodus 3. and 4.
he converted the waters of Egypt into blood. So likewise the first miracle by
which Jesus Christ made man, showed himself God, was by changing the water
into wine; and the last remarkable miracle, that he wrought in his mortal
life, Joan. 2.
was in changing the bread into his body, and the wine into his blood; which he
continues every day, and shall continue, in witness of his omnipotency, so
long as his Church shall walk in the Desert of this world; as he continued the
Figure of Manna in the Desert of Arabia, during the peregrination of the
Hebrews; in which Manna, this admirable mutation was figured; for as it is
said in the book of Wisdom, Sap. 16.21.
it was turned into that every man would have it.

8. THIS CHANGE IS A MIRACLE FOR the Faithful.
NOw this changing of substance into substance, appears not to the bodily
sense, but to the eyes of faith only; and therefore it is made for the
faithful, which believe without seeing; and not for unfaithful and carnal
people, S. Aug. in sermon. de Temp. 147.
Whose rule is to understand nothing, except that which they touch, says Saint
Augustine. The mutations and changes that Moses made to fight against the
infidelity of Pharoe and the Egyptians, and to give manifest proof of Gods
omnipotency, struck their senses with admiration; as also the miracles of our
Savior did, and those of his Saints, which were done to plant the faith. The
miracle that he works in this change, as also in the accidents, is not for
the planting of faith, but for the exercise and increase thereof: he that
requires to see it with sense, shows that he has no more faith then an
Infidel; and that he more believes his sense, then the words of God, which
denounces to him this change, saying. This is my body, this is my blood: he
shows also that he understands not reason; for there are diverse natural
changes which are made in secret, without the senses perceiving when they are
made, as when the water changes it self into the juice of wine in the Vine,
and into the juyoe of a Cherry in a Cherrytree; when the corn changes it
self into the substance of an ear, and when an Egg is turned into a Chicken,
the shell remaining whole, and without any exterior mutation.

9. OF THE SAME POWER OF GOD, showed in the accidents of bread and wine.
AS our Savior shows himself in this Sacrament, Lord and Master of Nature,
by changing the substance, as it has been said: so he makes it appear, that
he is omnipotent in the accidents of the same substance, distributed into those
nine Orders, which we have set down before. First in general, because he
gives to them all a manner of being supernatural, which is to support
themselves without subject; an effect so far above the power of common
nature, as it is for a man to hold himself in the air without stay. And in
particular, he gives force to the quantity of bread, not only to be without
subject, but also to do the office of substance, and to serve for foundation
to the quality, to the savor, Genesis 21.
and to other accidents, and produces with them a substance, in giving
nourishment by them. 2. Reg. Luke 1. Luke 1.
And as by commanding the barrenness of Sara, of Anna, and of Elizabeth, and
the Virginity of his blessed Mother to conceive and bring forth, he made
proof of his omnipotency: Even so he shows himself here omnipotent, when
he commands the barren accidents themselves, and without all sap of
substance, to bring forth; and which is more, to bring forth an effect far
above their rank, to wit, a substance, which is a nature without comparison
more noble, then the accident, and of whom the accidents altogether depend, as
simple officers and vassalls, having nothing of their own, but what they have
from the power of substance. These are then so many marks of an omnipotent
Lord in this Mystery.

10. THE SELFSAME POWER, VERIFIED in the accidents of the body of our
Savior, and first in respect of the quantity.
THe divine Power is yet more evident in the managing of the accidents of the
body of our Savior, 2
for it there holds his quantity all entire with his dimensions, without
possessing place; all in all the Host, and all in every part, how little
soever it be; which is to give to his body that manner of being, that naturally
belongs to a spirit, thereby to show himself God omnipotent. So God is all,
through all, and all in every part of the world, and our soul through all the
body, and all in every part. The body of our Savior is not every where, that
being a prerogative reserved to the Divinity alone; but it is in many places
in one selfsame time, and in all parts of the Host; which is natural to
spirits, and a privilege given to this body, united to the Divinity. And
since God gives the power to Angels, which are spirits, to take a corporal
being, and to cloth themselves with some human, or other visible form, and
to possess a place after the manner of a body, it is not to be doubted, but he
can give contrariwise to a body, especially his deified body, the prerogative
to be in this Sacrament, after the manner of a spirit, without possessing any
place; and it repugnes no more to the nature of a body, not to possess a
place, then to the fire not to burn; wherefore, as the fire ceased not to be
fire within the furnace, Van. 3.
though it burnt not the Hebrew children: so the body of our Lord cease not
at all to remain a body in this Sacrament, though it occupy no place; and if
God has made, that the virginity remained entire with the conception and
bringing forth of a child, an effect most repugnant to virginity, wherefore
shall it be hard to him to make, that a body remain a body without possessing
place? seeing that virginity and facundity are more disagreeing from accord,
then to be a body, and not to occupy any place? The Scripture makes to us
easy the faith of this miracle, teaching that our Savior went forth of the
Sepulcher, it being shut; and that he entered into the chamber of the Apostles,
the doors being shut, his body then possessed no place at that time, or two
bodies were in one selfsame place with penetration of dimensions, which is an
effect as difficult, and hard to Nature, and only depending of the
omnipotency of God.

11. THE MARVAILOVS POWER OF GOD about the qualities of the body of our Savior
in the blessed Sacrament.
THe brightness, color, 3
and such like qualities of the body of our Savior, are also here by
prerogative of his omnipoteucie, invisible to the eye, and unknown to all the
other senses. The eye sees well a whiteness, the tongue tastes a relish,
the hand touches a quantity; but these are the qualities of bread and wine,
and not of the body of our Savior, which our mouth takes, without any feeling
of the proper qualities of it. When he conuersed with men, the Divinity
appeared not, but by the body of his Humanity: here the body is hidden, not
appearing but by the accidents of bread and wine: he has his body invisible
under the visible accidents, disposing his body at his pleasure. So he made it
invisible by miracle, before his resurrection; so he walked without heaviness
upon the waves: so after his resurrection, he hid the splendour of his body,
and vanished from the sight of his Apostles: so he mounted up to heaven, not
hindered by any heaviness of his body.

12. THE WONDERFVLL RELATIONS OF the body of our Savior in the same Sacrament.
When a body is in a natural place, 4
every member has diverse relations to the diverse parts of the place: The head
to one, the feet to another, the hands to a third, and so of the rest. For
there it is extended: but here the parts of our Saviors body, have every of
them relation, not to the parts of place, but to one or other. The head is not
where the rest of the members are, and all is here distinct and apart, and yet
all notwithstanding in a little Host, and sometimes in so little a quantity
of the Sacrament, that it seems to be impossible, that all should not be in
confusion: And indeed it is impossible to Nature to make such an experiment, or
but to comprehend it; much less yet to explain it. It is thy Power, O Jesus
omnipotent, and sovereign Master of Nature; thy knowledge and thy word can do
it.

There is yet another divine relation of this Sacrament, figured in Manna. For
as Manna, gathered in unequal quantity, was always found in equal measure:
even so here a little Host applied, and compared to a great one, is found
equal, for that in both, the body of our Savior is as great in the one, as in
the other; and which is more admirable, it is one and the same body. So as the
equality is not only by reason of equal taking, but of the selfsame thing
in number, to wit, the body of our Savior all whole, received of every one. We
also admire, Exodus 13.21.
as a marvelous relation in another kind, that the Cloud, the Pillar, and the
fiery Tongues, representing the holy Ghost, Joan. 3.22. Act. 2.3.
were all one thing. Let us admire that the visible forms, distinct in
themselves, referred to the body of our Savior, make one Sacrament. Let us
admire, that according to diverse relations, Eve was a sprout of Adam, and in a
manner as his daughter, being extracted from his body, and notwithstanding in
another respect his wife; and that our Savior was Son of the Virgin, by
reason of his Humanity, and Father of the selfsame Virgin, in regard of his
Divinity. If we admire these things, certainly understanding the relations,
which are in this Sacrament, of a great body to one so little: of the members
one to another, in so little a space: and of them all to the visible accidents,
we have whereat to wonder, and in our wonder, to magnify the power of almighty
God.

13. ADMIRABLE ACTIONS OF THE body of our Savior.
THe actions of the body of our Savior, 5
is here divinely admirable, for it nourishes without being disgested; it
nourishes, not as corruptible meats, for a little space of time, but for ever
to immortality. For it sows in the body the seed, by which it shall be one
day enabled merise gloriously, and the presence of this body gives virtue of
nourishing to the accidents, which they cannot do naturally, without substance.
This deified body mounts yet more high, for it nourishes the Spirit, and
works in the Spirit a prerogative, denied to all other bodies; so that as it
is here present after the manner of a Spirit, it has the operation of a
Spirit, and penetrates the Soul by his action, beautifieth it, illuminateth
it, makes it chaste, and ingraues in it other spiritual ornaments. If the tree
of Life, renewing the body, and Manna, changing the taste, were admirable in
their actions; how much more the body of our Savior, in respect of the action
it has in this Sacrament? For they worked not, but upon the body; but this
body works upon body and soul, and that not only to immortality, but also
to eternal felicity, as we have said.

14. THE BODY OF OUR SAVIOVR impassible.
THe body of our Savior in this Sacrament endures not any hurt, Sap. 16.17.
and the not cortupting thereof on the Sabbath, which putrified on other days;
Exodus 3.3.
the impassibility of the Bush, not consuming, though it was all compassed with
the flame; the impassibilitie of the garments of the Hebrews, which endured
whole the space of forty years in the Deserts, D^ut. 29.5.
without being wasted, or ever mended; all these impassibilities were
admirable; but that of the body of our Savior was most wontierfull of all. For
all these things at the last ended in corruption, was none at all, but in this
nothing happens, or can happen to the body of our Savior, but only to the
visible sign; for howsoever the Host be divided into many parts, the body for
all that still remains undivided, and whole in every part, as the face, for
example, is seen^ whole in every piece of a broken glass. The stomach
disgesteth the forms, but disgesteth not the body; if the forms vanish away
in one place, the body cease to be there, but it is found in other places,
wheresoever the eternal Sacrament remains. The forms may be burnt in the
fire, gnawne of beasts, trodden underfoot; but the body is always impassible,
free from hurt and corruption, and retaining always its own glory and
immortality.

15. THE SACRAMENT IS IN MANY places at one, and the same time.
THe place of earthly Paradise was most beautiful, as has bin said, and it
cannot be denied, Adam was delightful, and both the one and the other
admirable, and especially in respect of the Tree of Life. Here the second Adam
is in this Sacrament, as hid in the shadow of his Paradise, he alone being both
the Tree of life, and the Paradise of souls, whose Spouse he also is; and
every thing is here more admirable. Our Savior is here, and he is also in
heaven. He is in heaven, as in his Kingdom, occupying place as other bodies
do, after a natural manner; he is here after a supernatural manner, lodged
in a little room, answerable to the quantity of the forms, under which he is,
conforming thereby his greatness to our littleness, his power to our
weakness. Howbeit his body is nothing lessened by the littleness of the
place, but remains as great as it was on the Cross. Who can see this without
the eyes of faith? who can also comprehend, how in one selfsame instant, he
is found on diverse Altars, in diverse Countries, and both in earth, and in
heaven? Truly no body but every faithful Christian believes it, though he
cannot comprehend it; because the Scripture teaches it, it is the Scripture,
which says, Our Savior gave his body to his Apostles, saying, Ma^^. 2^. Mark.
14. (...) 22.
This is my body, from which antecedent it solloweth, that it was in diverse
places in one and the self same instant; it was in his natural place
naturally, and sacramentally in as many other places, as there were Apostles,
that received it; it ought then to be believed, though humane judgment cannot
understand it. (...). Co^. ^2.2.
Saint Paul assures us as knowing it, that he was ravished into the third
heaven; and notwithstanding he confesses, he could not comprehend in what
manner, whether it were in body and in soul, or only in soul; and we believe
that, which he says, though it seem difficult to us. Our Savior says to
many, Take, this is my body, and by consequence he says, that it is in diverse
places; shall we then not believe it, because our capacity cannot comprehend
it? Shall we measure the work of God by the reach of our understanding, and
take the Scepter out of his powerful hand, to give the more credit to the
infirmity of our judgment? Saint Paul could not understand, how he had been
ravished; Was he not therefore ravished at all? And we less know, how he was
ravished; Do we therefore not believe it? And it we know, that one selfsame
voice, in one selfsame moment enters whole and entire into ten thousand
ears, and that our soul is eutirely all, in diverse parts of our bodies; that
Abacuck was in one selfsame hour in Babylon, Abacut. ^an. 14 36.
and in Judea, places distant one from another more then an hundred leagues;
wherefore should we make difficulty to believe here, what the Word of God
assirmeth? We see daily, that the Stars which are in the midst of heaven, are
in four and twenty hours in all places of heaven, which is more then if a
bird flying round about the earth, should twenty or thirty times in one half
quarter of an hour, be both in the East, and in the West, and in all the
places, which are between these two spaces; should we think, that the power
of God is abridged, so as it cannot make his body to be in diverse places?
Believe then (Christian souls) the Word of your omnipotent God, and with faith
admire in this act his admirable power.

16. THE BODY OF OUR SAVIOVR above the Laws of Time.
TIme passes by succession, Dent. 29.5.
the space of forty years, in despite of devouring Time: The little pot of
Meal, and the vessel of Oil of the Widow, 3. Kings 17.14.
who nourished Helias, endured many months, which could have sufficed but one
day: Manna corrupted in four and twenty hours, and held good eight and forty
hours, when the next day was the Sabbath, and endured for many ages, being
kept within the Arc in a golden pot. Hebr. 9.4.
These works were admirable; but our Savior shows himself in his Sacrament,
much more admirable, then in those works; his body is present in the Host so
soon as the words of Consecration are ended; and that in a moment, without
requiring any precedent time, even as the world was made without any precedence
of Time. The presence of this body coutinueth by verrue of this Word, as in
virtue of the same, the production of creatures continued, and shall continue
even to the end of Time: Does not our Redeemer then show himself herein the
Master of Nature?

17. THE ADMIRABLE SITVATION OF the body of our Savior in the blessed
Sacrament.
WE have here above touched the admirable situation of the body of our
Savior in this Sacrament; and the more we think thereof, Antipodes Land, to
be under our feet: even so by resemblance, albeit the parts of the quantity of
the Host be changed, nevertheless the parts of the body of our Savior
remain in their seat of Majesty. Humane reason there admireth God in the
natural seat, and moving of that great Celestial body: here Faith extols
the greatness of God, in the admirable situation of the deified body of his
Son.

18. THE CLOTHING OF THE BODY of our Savior.
ADAM in his innocence was richly clothed, and nevertheless naked; and after
that he had offended, Adam was clothed and naked; naked and clothed, by diverse
considerations. The Antithesis is most divine, and most marvelous without
comparison; for the body of our Savior has not any garments, and
notwithstanding is always most richly clothed, but it is with divine gists of
immortal glory: It is shining by brightness, more then the Sun; more
pleasing by its beauty, then all the Stars; admirable in this, and admirable
also, for that he covers this robe of glory, and takes that of bread and
wine, hiding the Majesty of his presence under the visible forms, to become
the more familiar to our capacity; even as he hid his Divinity under the
mantle of our humane nature, appearing but Man, and being nevertheless God and
Man together, to make us enjoy his sweet conversation. So Manna, Figure of
this Mystery, even in this point, was covered with two dewes, the one falling
before the Manna, and serving it, as it were, for a bed, and the other after,
in stead, as it were, of a couerlet, as has been said. Behold how God shows
himself in this Sacrament, Sovereign Lord of all Nature universally.

19. HOW THE EVCHARIST IS AN Abridgment of all the wonders of God.
IS not then this divine Mystery an abridgment of Gods wonders? And God, has
he not made himself seen admirably admirable in this wonderful abridgment,
more then in any other work of his? He has made appear his greatness two
ways, the one in making of wonders apart, the other, which is the more divine,
in assembling them together. As a Musition, that not only knows to set for
single voices, but also has the art, and the grace of setting many parts
together, and to delight the ear with a sweet harmony, composed of diverse
voices well accorded. After that he had showed himself wonderful in the
production of a thousand creatures, he made man, as an abridgement of them all.
He has made since the Creation of the world, a thousand and a thousand
admirable works, in the common course of nature; sometime in the substance of
things, sometime in the accidents; he has changed, as we have said, the wood
into a Serpent, changing the substance and the accidents, Exodus 3. and 4.9.
Insu. 10.12.
and after the same miraculous manner, the waters into blood: He has stayed
the course of the Sun against the force of his extreme swistnesse; 4 Reg.
1.10. 4. Reg. 6.6. Exodus 10.21. Number. 16.31.32.
he has made fire to defcend from heaven, contrary to its lightness; Iron to
swim above the water, contrary to the weightinesse thereof; obscured the
brightness of the air, by extraordinary darkness; Number. 17.8.
made the Sea passable within her very depths; opened the bosom of the earth,
contrary to the solidnesse thereof; made in one night, to sprout, to flourish,
and to bear fruit, a dry wood, contrary to it barrenness; made a Beast
speak, Number. 22.36.
whereof naturally it was incapable. In conclusion, he has showed, that he is
God of Nature, making supernatural works in ever parcel, and part of it; but
being come in proper Person into the world, and being himself to depart out of
the world, he has left a miracle, equal in greatness to the world, and a
chief work, worthy of his hand, and for which he deserves to be remembered,
containing alone the abridgement of all the wonders, that he ever made, be it
in creating the world by his omnipotent Word, be it in governing it by his
dinine Wisdom, be it in the preserving of it by his infinite bounty. A
miracle, containing his precious body, and thereby surpassing the price of a
thousand worlds. A miracle, where he made himself to be admired, as
sovereign Master of all creatures, commanding the substance of things, and
their accidents; commanding the ten Categories, that is, the ten Orders of
things in the universal world. Dnuid considering the diversity, and beauty of
creatures, cries out, saying, O Lord, how thy name is admirable through all the
earth; Psalm. 8.1.
but considering this future Mystery, he sings another tune, saying, Our Lord
has made a memorial of all his wonders; Psalm. 110.
and declaring what it is, He has given to eat to them that fear him: It is
his body, which he gives to his children; for the common meats of the world,
he gives to beasts, and to men, good and evil; this body he has given to
his dear Spouse, prepared in this Sacrament, and apparelled with all his
wonders. True mark and sign of his greatness; true Manna, bearing the name
of wonder; true bread, descended from heaven; true gift, drawn from the
greatest treasure of his almighty Wisdom, and from his all-wise goodness.

20. HOW FAITH IS FORTIFIED BY this Sacrament.
THe first article of our Faith is to believe in God Almighty; for which this
article begins our Creed, and upon this foundation are built all other
points of our Religion. Now the says of this article is admirably exercised,
aided, and augmented in the practice of this divine Mystery. For so often as
we communicate, as we have Mass, as we participate or meditate upon this
holy banquet, so often we believe, that God is ommpotent, making and renewing
every day, by his omnipotent Word, the wonder of his precious body, to the
astonishment of Angels, of men, and of Nature universally: So often as we make
bow to the obedience of Faith, the humility of our sense and judgment, which
in this Mystery is altogether blind; so often we purchase new strength, and
new grace, to believe the omnipotency of our God. And herehence it is, that
the holy Fathers, S. Justin, S. Ireneus, S. Chrysostoms, S. Justin. Apol. 2. S.
Iren. l. 4. c. 34. S. Chrysostom. bom. 16. ad. Pap. Ann^. and bom. 83. in Ma^^h.
S. Ambros. lib. 4. ^^it. mist. c ^9.9. S. Cyprian. lib. (...) Corn. Dom. S.
August. in Psalm. 33.
S. Ambrose, S. Cyprian, S. Agustine, and other Doctors, so often as they
either speak, or write of the Eucharist, always inculcate with us the
Almighty power of God, and object it to Heretics, as a certain Mark of his
powerfulness. And as the Patriarchs and Prophets, when they would show, that
God is Almighty, call him Creator of heaven, and of earth: Even so the holy
Doctors, when they will extol the almightinesse of our Savior, allege ever
this his chief work; and as the Devil of old persuaded certain misinformed
Philosophers to write, that the world was not created, but that it was eternal
without beginning, to weaken so much our faith in the omnipotency of the
Creator: So in our age has he raised certain heretical spirits, which deny
the presence of the body of our Savior in this Sacrament, by their heresy to
take away, and to deface this most noble mark, or sign of his omnipotency,
and to overthrow a most strong pillar of our Faith, and the most beautiful
ornament of Christian Religion.

21. OF THE GOODNESS OF OUR Savior in this Sacrament.
THe contemplation of the omnipotency, and goodness of God, makes us admire and
love him. We have given some documents of his omnipotency in this Sacrament,
let us say one word of his goodness in the fame. It is an argument of our
love, to give our goods to his behoof and profit, upon whom we bestow them. So
God has showed himself to love man, by giving him a being, and creating the
world for him. It is an argument of greater love to give his own substance;
for he that gives of his proper blood out of his body, shows himself more
loving, then he which makes never so great a present out of his purse. Almighty
God has given his only Son, Joan. 3.16.
substance of his substance; and the Son also has given himself unto us,
joining in alliance his Divinity to the Family of our Father Adam, and making
himself our brother, so to work our Salvation: could he have tied himself to
us by any more strait bond, and given himself more amorously, then in giving
himself wholly to us, and making himself one with us, to deifie us with
himself, and make us heirs of his glory? Well then, as in the Incarnation he
has made a gift of his Divinity to man, so in this Sacrament he has bestowed
upon us his Humanity; (...) has given it once to death, in a bloody
Sacrifice, and from time to time he cease not to give it for meat, to apply
unto us the fruit of his redemption; he married his Di^^nity to our Humanity,
when he made himself man; he ^^arieth his humanity to ours, when he gives it
to us in this Sacrament: For the flesh of our Savior here, is holily united
to ours, to make it both chaste and fruitful in bringing forth good works: and
the same flesh is also a most divine dish of his nuptial feast, to feed and
fat our souls with celestial virtues, and to give immortality to our bodies.
O sweet Jesus, what goodness is this, and what an effect of inflamed love?
that thou vouchsafest to join thy self by two so strait knots of Marriage,
and of Meat, to so base and so miserable persons, as we are? the Lord to his
scruants, the King to his vassals, the Creator to his creatures, God to
wretched poor sinners? O what love is this of thine, in this divine Marriage,
and Food? What King would ever take for his Spouse, a poor vassal of his? And
what father would feed his children with his own body? We see, that mothers
nourish their children with their milk, which is a white blood; but what
mother ever nourished her children with her proper flesh? O divine marriage, O
divine banquet! O wicked abuser, and immortal enemy of Man, which have
troubled this marriage, and this banquet, substituting in the place of this
true Bridegroom, 1. Reg. 19.13.
and this true David, and this deified flesh, an Idol of Bakers bread! But
this thou have done in the Church, which thou have falsely entitled Resormed,
and not in the Church of God. Thou have done it, I say, in a Synagogue of such
misbeleeuers, as have chosen rather to lend their ears to the lies of thy
vanity, then to believe the sacred and holy words of verity; not in that
Church, 1. Tim. 3.15.
pillar of truth; Spouse which cannot err, assisted with the true Spirit. She
knows full well her Spouses voice and manner of proceedings; she knows the
goodness of his Table, and will beware how she forgo it; she knows the
Son omnipotent, made for us Emanuell, Esaias. ^.14.
that is to say, God with us, when he was made Man; living with us, and
speaking with us in his proper person; but especially when he gives himself
unto us in this nuptial banquet here, wherein, more then ever, or any where
else, he is indeed Emanuell. For when he conuersed with us mortal and visible,
it was but for a littla time, the union was less, with fewer people, and that
in Jury only: but by this Sacrament he is ever most straitely united; as
Spouse and Food, with all them, that will marry themselves with him, and feed
upon him; and this not in one only Land, but in so many places, as this
Catholic and Universal Church adores her Spouse, even from the East to the
West, from the South to the North, and through all the earth. An husband, when
he departs from his wife, a father from his children, a friend from his
friends, signifies his love more then ever, makes a feast, leaves a precious
remembrance, and shows that departing, he would leave himself still present,
if he could possibly be in many places at once. Jesus Christ has accomplished
all this after a divine manner; for upon the end of his passion, and of his
departure from this world, he showed his fervent love to his children, Having
loved his own, which were in the world, Joan. 13.1.
(says Saint JOHN) he loved them to the end; that is to say, he showed them
his love more then ever before. He likewise made his banquet, with singular
signification of love, saying, I have greatly desired to eat this Pasque with
you, not the Moysaicall, but the truth of the Moysaicall, wherein he himself
was the Lamb. Finally, for a Ring of remembrance, he has left his proper
body, and his own self, to be always present with his friends, in the manner
aforesaid, and to be for ever their Emanuell.

22. CHARITY TOWARD GOD, AND toward our neighbor, increased by this
Sacrament.
IF liberality draws hearts, if the table makes friends, and if love begets
love; what person will show himself so rusticall, and frozen, as not to be
allured by this infinite goodness, not to be gained by this feast, not to be
inslamed with this fire, in the frequentation of this divine Sacrament? What
soul, I say, will not be wholly inflamed with the love of her Redeemer,
feeling her self so delitiously feasted by him, so tenderly embraced of him,
and so straitely united with him? Whom will she love, if she love not this
goodness? With whom wilshee make amity, if she make it not with so liberal
a Spouse? And of whom shall she be amorous, if she be not enamored of so
fervent a friend, and lover.

And then, if she love faithfully this her Spouse, and attentively consider
the nature of this Marriage and Feast, it cannot be, but she must also love
forthwith her neighbors, and her Christian brethren, for the love of her
Spouse; when she shall see, how they are likewise beloved of him; and called
to the same Feast, and made members of one and the selfsame body with her.
For to signify this mutual amity, he himself is ginen in meat and drink,
under the likeness of bread and wine, which are made of many grains, and of
many grapes; as we have said elsewhere. And truly the Apostle, to exhort the
married holily to love their wives, ^^bes. 5.25.
draws his most forcible argument from this mystery, as being the example of a
perfect marriage, and of a perfect love. From the marriage, (I say) of Jesus
Christ with his Church, to whom he liberally gives himself, and with whom he
is united, by these two most strait bonds of a Spouse, and of Meat. For which
reason also the Eucharist has always been an Emblem of union, peace, and
charity. And for signification whereof, it was an ancient custom to give the
kiss of peace in the Mass; from whence came afterward the ceremony of kissing
the Pax, which is still in use. Behold then how this sovereign goodness
draws us by this Sacrament, as well to his own love, as also to the love of
our neighbor.

23. OF THE WISDOM OF GOD IN this same Mystery.
LEt us now see some works of the divine Wisdom in this his Sacrament; for it
is so well ordered, as it is easy to perceive, that it is she which is the
Mistress, and chiese doer therein. According whereunto, the Scripture also
says, Wisdom has built her a House, Prou. 9.1.
she has cut out seven Pillars, she has immolated her victime, mingled her
wine, and set forth her table. This House is the Church; these seven Pillars,
are the seven Sacraments; the wine mingled, is the precious blood of our
Savior; and the meat of this table, the sacred Manna of his flesh; and so have
the ancient Fathers explained it, and namely, S. Cyprian. S. Cyprian. cpist,
63. ad. Cecil. d^ Sacer. Calicis, and lib. 2. aducrs. Iudeos, ^. 2.
Now as humane wisdom shows it self in well ordaining, well comprising, and
well instructing, (for these are the true effects of a wise understanding;) so
the divine Wisdom makes her self appear in this Sacrament, by the same
means. A wise Orator shows himself in the orderly method of his discourse: A
wise Captain in well ranking an army; a wise Architect in well joining the
parts of the building; and so of other wise work men. A wise Musition in
setting many parts of M^^ick, and uniting them together with a sweet and well
a greeing harmony; Mirmerides was admired for his and a^trious wisdom, when he
made that so much renowned Chariot of four wheels, (...) l. 35 c. 10.
which the wing of a Fly did cover; and that wonderful ship stored with Masts,
Pun. 16.
with Sails, with Roaps, with Ankors, with Rudder, and with all other
tacklings, which the wing of a Be might also cover.

But above all, Wisdom shows her self, in the good and effectual teaching
of every Science or Virtue; and this is her most high title. In all these
kinds, the divine Wisdom shines forth most brightly in this Sacrament. Her
ordinance here is admirable: For what goodlier order can one desire, then to
have drawn so many fair Figures from time to time? and to have at the last
inspired, and breathed, as it were, the life of Truth into those ancient
lineaments? giving in a Law most perfect, a Sacrament full of all perfection; a
Sacrament of charity in a Law of love; and preparing for the nuptials of our
humane nature, with the Son of God, a nuptial feast of the flesh of God.

His Wisdom is here yet more admirable in combining, for this combination
surpasses all wonder, for God and Nature are here combined; Here is the body
of the Son of God, by virtue of his omnipotent Word; his soul as inseparable
from the body, his Divinity, as united unto them both, and by consequence, the
Father and the holy Ghost, and all the holy Senate it self of this blessed
Trinity are here assembled: All the wonders of Nature are here comprised, as
has been said: All the souls and bodies of the faithful are here conjoined
in one, as many corns in one loaf, Maub. 24.28. S. Chr^ost. bom. 4. in 1.
Cor. 10.
and many grapes in one cup of wine; gathered together like unto so many divine
Eagles about the body of their King, says Chrysostom. But what divine wisdom
was it, to have prepared this divine morsel, so conformable to the infirmity
and capacity of our weak nature, under the taste and feeling of bread and
wine, meat and drink of all other the most familiar to us.

24. GODS DIVINE WISDOM IN teaching of this high Mystery.
THe last, and most lively tract of Wisdom, is to teach effectually: And what
greater wisdom can be showed therein, then to have given here the means to
learn, to increase and fortify both faith and charity? the one the
foundation, and the other the crown of Christian virtue? For eating this
morsel, we receive an Earnest of immortality, and as the Church sings, A
pledge of future glory. And it cannot be but that by the presence of so brave
a Captain, whom we believe firmly to be here present, though invisible to
our sight; our courage and heart should much increase, if we be faithful
soldiers. For as the wicked spirits fright us, if we believe them to be
present, though we see them not with on^ bodily eyes: So contrariwise, and with
more reason, we grow confident, and as it were, are lifted up to heaven by the
assured presence of our Savior. Here, moreover we learn Religion, the most
noble Pearl of Christian Justice; whereby we honor God, doing him the homage
of Sovereign worship due to his Majesty alone, which here is done with
sovereign preparation. For first here is offered a Sacrifice unto him, which
is a worship of supreme acknowledgement, incommunicable to all other, but to
God a Sacrifice, not of bodies of the beasts, as in the old Law; but of the
body of God, by which body he has been soueraignely honored, with which he
has bin fully appeased; in which he has overcome the power of his capital
enemy, and shall one day come to judge both the quick and the dead. So as the
worship is most sovereign, and the thing offered so great, that it cannot be
greater; which as it is an art of Religion most honorable to the Creator, so is
it most beneficial also to his creature; who receiving this precious body from
the liberality of God, offers it to him again, for an Holocaust, for a
thanksgiving, for a Propitiation or remission of sin, honoring him for his
gifts, with his proper gift, as in Figure thereof. In the Law of Nature and
M^yses, the holy Saints did honor him, in making offerings of those goods, that
they had received of him: Which is it that the great and devout King David
confesses, saying, All things are thine, 1. Paral. ^9.14.
and we have given thee that, which we have received from thy hands. In this
Sacrament we have likewise a lesson of humility, seeing our Savior to appear
amongst us in a poor familiar habit, without attendance, and in a meaner
manner then David, when he came to the Priest Achimelech; 1. (...) 2.
to appear, I say, not in his own garment, but under the forms of bread and
wine, hiding therewith his robe of glory, that we might with greater
confidence draw near unto him. We have here also a lesson of patience;
beholding our Redeemer to endure so constantly, and for so many ages the
injuries that the wicked do unto him, through their misbeleefe, their sinues,
their blasphemies, treading him under their feet, casting him into the fire,
and the like dishonors, though all this be done without any hurt of his
impassible body. Here we have also a lesson of obedience, in that he is
present without fail, at the voice of his Vicar, whosoever he be, pronouncing
the words of his omnipotency, over the bread and wine. Here therefore we have
a lesson of all the most high virtues, given by the example it self, of our
Redeemer, a manner of teaching most clear and pregnant, and recommended unto
us by himself, when he said, I have given you an example, to the end you
should do, as you have seeneme do. He ceased not to give us examples of well
doing, from time to time, while he lived and conuersed with us; but here he
gives us the patterns and examples of divine virtues from better imitation,
altogether. Behold the wonders of our Sacrament, without comparison greater,
then those of Manna, and far more worthy, for the which we should say, Man-hu?
What is this? for neither men nor Angels can sufficiently enough admire it.

A COLLOQVIVM OF PRAISES AND thanksgiving to God.
What remains here then (O Lord, Almighty, most good and most wise) but that
we eleuate our hearts to the contemplation of this thy divine Sacrament? And
Bauing admired the wonders of thy greatness, to render thee immortal thanks
for thy immortal benefits? But who can worthily contemplate the price, and the
excellency of this benefit, if thou give not eyes and light to see it? And
what tongue shall be able to speak of this thy great mercy? Moses,
considering thy goodness, and resounding thy praises, said; Deuteronomy. 32.
Let the Earth hear the words of my mouth, let my doctrine grow up together,
as rain, and my speech flow as the dew, as a shower upon the herb, and as
drops upon the grass, for I will invoke the name of our Lord. Give
magnificence to our God; the works of God be perfect, and all his ways
Judgments. It is here, where there is need of such an Orator, and of such a
language, to magnify and praise such a gift, as surpasses all those that the
Hebrews did ever receive, and to extol such a work, as carries with it
marks of divine perfection, engraven therein by the hand of God, all good, all
wise, and all mighty. Though Moses himself were here, and that his language
were eloquence it self, yet he would come short to speak of thy Matesty
herein, O Lord. The tongues of Angels stammer in uttering this Mystery; and we
Fecome dumb, the more we endeavor to speak thereof. Our highest praise is an
humble confession of our insufficiency, and our greatest endeavor, is to
contemplate here in silence thy great virtue, to ad^^re with respect, thy
admirable wisdom, to thank with love thy infinite goodness, which we desire
to dee, O sweet Jesus, all the time of our mortal life, to the end that
having well known the benefit of this Manna, and wonderful pasture of our
pilgrimage, we may come to enjoy the other, which thou hold hidden for the
life to come, (...)
in the treasures of thy felicity.

THE SEVENTH PICTVRE. THE BREADS OF PROPOSITION.
The Description.
THese twelve Loaves, set upon the Table, six at each end, piled one above
another, and the Violl of gold above them, full of most pure Incense; are those
which the Scripture calls the Loaves of Proposition, or Breads of faces; as
who would say, Bread exposed and set in a public and sacred place, before the
face of God. There lies hid under this name a double mystery, which the
Pensill knows not how to express; they are made by Priests only, of most
pure flower, weighing about eight pounds every one, all Loaves well prepared,
but neither puffed up, nor great in regard of their weight, because they are
without leaven. They offered them every week, and they were to be renewed
every Sabbath Day, and hot ones to be put in their place; the Loaves being
taken away, the Priests might eat them. They are twelve, because it is the
offering of all the Children of Israel, divided into twelve Tribes, by which
they make a Present in common of thanks to God, acknowledging their life and
conversation to come from his Majesty. The Table, where they are set, is made
of Setim, a precious and incorruptible wood. It is two cubits long, and one
broad, all gilded with fine gold, and enriched with a circle of gold also,
which goes all about; bordered with double crowns of four fingers large, the
one above, the other beneath, It is put upon two tressels, made of the same
wood, of a cubit and a half long, square, and set upon feet, cut and carved.
It is placed toward the North, upon the right side of the Sanctuary. And on
the left side, toward the South, there stands the golden Candlestick, with
seven Lamps; and between both the Altar of Incense. But who is this brave
Knight, David. 1. R^g. 21.
accompanied with certain Light-ho^semen, that speaks with Achimelech, the
High Priest, keeper of these Loaves, and as it seems all astonished to see
him? It is, without doubt, valiant David, who flying the fury of Saul, is come
to the City Nob in haste, being stolen away from the Court, and he asks
something to eat, for he is extreme hungry. Achimelech ignorant of the cause,
and wondering to see him so unprovided, with so little a train, being one of
the greatest Captains and Princes of the King; speaks as if he were
astonished, and tells him, that he has nothing but the Breads of Preposition,
dedicated to the only use of Priests; notwithstanding he and his people in
such necessity might eat of them, so that they were clean, and not defiled,
especially with womer. David answers, if there be no hinderance but that, we
are clean; for we have not had the company of our wives these many days. And
so he went, and took his refection, and will carry away with him the sword of
Golias, which before he had dedicated and left in the House of God, where it
hung wrapped in an holy linen cloth. He will serve himself of it in the
wars of God, and cut in pieces with it, the enemies of his name.

1. THE BODY OF OUR SAVIOVR, Conceived of a Virgin, by the operation of the
holy Ghost; signified by the Loaves of Proposition, kneaded of the purest
flower, without leaven.
THese Loaves, and these Offerings, did long since Figure footth our Eucharist,
which we have declared to have been the true Bread. But none saving those, S.
Cyril Hieros. Catech. mist. 4. S. Hier. in lib. 1. in cap. 1. epist. ad Tim.
that were spiritual men amongst the Jews, could penetrate the secret of this
hidden mystery; now it is easy for all Christians to see it, the shell being
broken, that the kernel may appear, and the curtain of the Figure drawn,
that the truth may be seen: we need but cast our eyes upon the ancient
Lineaments, to know the present truth. The most pure flower, and without
leaven, whereof the Loaves were kneaded, signifies the body of Jesus Christ,
conceived by the operation of the holy Ghost, of the most pure substance of the
Virgin, without leaven; that is to say, without original sin, or any
corruption. For leaven in the Scripture oftentimes signifies malice, and
infection: and in that sense our Savior said to his Apostles, Take heed of the
leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. Matthew. 16.6.11. Marc. 8.1^. Luke
12.1. Mark 8.15.1. Cor. 5.6.
And in another place; Beware of the leaven of HEROD. The like sayings he has
elsewhere. After the same manner spoke S. Paul, saying, Let us feast, not in
the old leaven, nor in leaven of Malice and wickedness, but in the a^in^es of
sincerity and verity. The ground of the similitude is in this, that as leaven
alters and makes sour the paste; so sin changes, puffs, and corrupts
the beauty and goodness of the soul. The Breads then without leaven, are a
Figure of our Saviors body, conceived without infection of sin. They were
called Loaves of faces, or of two faces; and therein lay two Mysteries, as the
ancient Hebrews have prophetically written, Rabbi Ionathas in cap 25. Exodus
Ca^. 10. c. 6.
and namely Rabbi Ionathas, who lived long time before the coming of our
Savior. The Mysteries are, that in the future Sacrifice of the body of the
Messiah, there should be a Change of one Substance into another, as of one Face
into another: and also that two Natures, and two Faces, the Divine and the
Humane, should be united in the Person of the Messiah, offered and sacrificed
under the form and face of bread, and in the substance of Flesh. And therefore
the holy Loaves of the Table of our Savior are truly Loaves of two Faces, and
of two Natures, containing the foresaid mysteries in truth, as these here did
contain then in name, and Figure. They were offered every day for the Children
of Israel, by the sacrifycing Priests of the Jews, as the body of our Lord in
the Mass, by Christian Priests, for all Christians. The Jewish Priests only,
did make them; and Christian Priests only make the Sacrament and Sacrifice of
this body; for to them only is given this power, and to no other servants in
the House of God, be they men or Angels.

2. HOW THE BODY OF OUR SAVIOVR is offered every day, and renewed every week.
THis body is offered every day in the Mass, and reserved, as were the Loaves
of Proposition, for the children of God, in memory of the death of our Savior,
and in thanksgiving for all his benefits bestowed upon us, for the sustenance
of soul and body. This is our true weekly and daily bread (says Saint
Cyprian, Matthew. 6.9. Luke 11.3. S. Cyprian. l. de or; domin. S. Ambros. l. 5.
de Sacra. c. 4. S. August. l. 2. de Sermon. Dom. in Monte, cap. 12.
and the other Doctors of the Church) which he himself has taught us to ask
of him. It is renewed once a week; for although it be offered every day, it
is principally offered upon the Sunday of rest to Christians, substituted in the
place of the Jews Sabbath, in which men are gathered together in the Church,
to renew the offering of that body with fervent and fresh devotion, in the
presence of all faithful souls. This is always one selfsame body,
immortal and glorious, but it is renewed and multiplied, because it is found
in many new forms of bread and wine.

3. THE BEGINNING, AND END OF THE Communion is Charity, Prayer, and
Contemplation.
THe Loanes of Proposition were placed upon the gilded Table; and upon the
vpper-most of them was set a Violl of gold, full of the purest Incense. Which
ceremony teaches us, that the body of our Lord, requires a soul clothed
with Charity, which is the gold of the Temple of God to rest in; and that the
end of the Communion of his body, ought to be inward prayer and contemplation,
signified also by the Violl of gold, and by the Incense set above the Loaves:
For the Violl and Incense in holy Scripture, does signify the prayers of
Saints; Psalm. 140.2. Apoc. 5.8.
and gold, the most precious mettle of all other, signifies love and heavenly
charity, the most noble affection of the soul, wherewith the celestial
Jerusalem is enriched; and of it all Christian works ought to be composed, or
at least gilded therewith, but especially the communion of this Sacrament,
which is the Sacrament of love and charity.

4. THE BODY OF OUR SAVIOVR SIGnified by the Table, upon which were set the
Loaves of Proposition.
THe Table made of the wood Setim, incorruptible, Gilded with fine gould,
crowned with a double crown, and framed with a wonderful art, even to the
feet of the tressels; signified the same body of our Savior, conceived, as
has been said, of the substance of the Vigin, clear from all corruption, and
endued with all sorts of perfectian, that may be in a humane body, after the
likeness of this Table, excellent in matter, and admirable in form. Jesus
Christ then, celestial bread, reposeth on Jesus Christ: as the Bread of
Proposition stood upon this Table, and as he himself is offered by himself,
as the ancient Loaves by the Priest Achimelech: So as he is together the
Offering offered, the Table carrying the Offering, and the Priest distributing
it, in this unbloody Sacrifice; as he was also in the bloody Sacrifice of the
Cross, the Victime, the Sacrificer, and the Altar: the Lamb offered, the
Priest offering, and the Altar-stone, whereon the Holocaust was burned, in the
holy fire of his infinite Charity.

5. THE SIGNIFICATION OF THE Gandlesticke.
THis Table is in the North-side of the Sanctuary, having a Candlestick of
gold, with seven lamps, on the left side toward the South, and the Altar of
perfumes hard by, being in the midst between the Candlestick and the Table.
All these things, and the manner of their placing, are full of mystery. The
Candlestick signifies the light, S. The. 1.2. A. 102. art. 1.
and the knowledge men ought to have of God in this world, where Jesus Christ
illuminateth his Church, by the seven gifts of the holy Ghost, as by seven
lamps, and seven Stars; and especially giving her light, by which the mystery
of the Sacrament of his body may be seen: Clemens Alex. Stro. lib. 5. S. Greg.
5. Ezec, hom. 6. Hesych. 5. Leuit. 24.
the excellency of which cannot be well understood, without light from on high,
and without great faith, and divine wisdom. The knowledge of God, and of this
mystery, was first communicated to the Jews, enlightened by the South of the
Law, and after given to the Christians before Idolaters, signified by the
North, where the Chieftain and Captain of Rebels had made his residence, and
placed the throne of his pride. Esa. 14.14.
And therefore the Table of the true Proposition Loaves, is in the North side
of the Church, composed of those which were Panyms before the Law of Grace. For
it is she, which has in verity the Table of the body of our Savior, true
Bread of heaven, erected only in figure amongst the Jews.

6. THE HEART OF THE JUST IS THE Altar of Incense.
THe Altar of Incense, which was between the Candlestick and the Table of
Loaves, and upon the which men burnt to God, evening and morning, most sweet
odours; signifying, Exodus 30.7. and 8. Gloss. ibid.
says Philo the Jew, the memory that we ought to have of Gods benefits,
bestowed upon us by his Diume bounty, and the thanksgiving, that men ought to
render unto him. This Altar was within the Temple, having before it the Arc of
Covenant, hidden more secretly in the Holy of Holies; and behind it was the
Altar of Holocausts, Philo Iudaeus quis cerum diuisit haereses. lib. de vita
Moysis.
whereon the beasts were sacrificed at the gate of the Temple. So that all
these things in their placing, made a Cross, or a man stretched out upon a
Cross; the Arc was in place of the head; the Altar of Holocausts, of legs
and feet; the Candlestick, the arm on the left side; the Table of Proposition
Loaves, the arm on the right side; and the Altar of Perfumes, the breast and
heart. The Altar of God (says Saint Gregory) is the heart of a just man, S.
Greg. l. 25. Moral. cap. 7. and lib. 3. Expos. in 1. Reg. cap. 5. S. Aug. Sermon.
de Temp. 255.
in which the divine fire ought to burn always, because from it the flame of
charity toward God ought to ascend without ceasing. And Saint Augustine
says, That in every true Christian there ought to be two Altars, the one in
the soul, answering to the Altar within the Temple; the other in the body,
answering to the Altar of the Holocausts without the Temple. That is to say,
whosouer will carry the name of a Christian, ought to be pure in his soul, and
chaste in his body. In this Altar then, beholding the Arc of Covenant, Figure
of Jesus Christ, and drawing near the Table of Proposition ^eaues, we ought to
render thanks to God. But wherewith and how?

7. WHEREWITH, AND HOW WE OUGHT to thank God.
Wherewith, and how we ought to thank God, we shall understand by the
composition of the Perfume which was burnt upon the material Altar: the
ingredients of this Perfume, were four mixtures of equal weight, to wit:
First, drops of Myrrh, that is to say, the most precious liquor that
distilleth from Myrthe. Secondly, Onix, a kind of little shell. Thirdly,
Odoriferous Galban, which drives away Snakes. Fourthly, and the purest
Frankencense. These four ingredients represented the four parts of this
visible world, as learned Philo teaches. Myrrh, which distills, signifies
the water: Philo l. quis baer. cer. diui.
the Onix terrestrial and dry, the earth: the odoriferous Galban, the air:
the transparant and mounting Incense, the fire. The Perfume, thus then
composed, reads us a lesson, and sets before our eyes the whole world, in
the Hieroglifique of the parts thereof; teaching a general acknowledgement of
the benefits that we receive from God. First, in our bodies, the noriture
whereof we receive by the created world, but chiefly in our souls, which are
nourished by the body of his Son, a food infinitely more worth then a
thousand worlds: a body given once on the Altar of the Cross in a bloody
Sacrifice, and on the Altar of his Church, until the end of the world, by an
unbloody Sacrifice, under the forms of bread and wine.

8. THE VERTVES, WHICH ARE NECESsary, worthily to gine thanks unto God, and to
make a just examen of our actions.
THe same Perfume teaches us, Gin Ti Ord. in Exodus 30.
with what preparation we ought to make this thanksgiving. For these four
aromaticall ingredients, mingled together to make powder of Perfume, teach us,
that we ought to acknowledge and thank his divine liberality with the union
and mixture of Faith, of Hope, of Prayer, of Chastity, of Charity, and of all
the other most holy and most Christian virtues. S. Gregory.
We make (says Saint Gregory) a Perfume of aromaticall composition, when from
the Altar of holy works, there ascends up to God a good odor of purity, by
the multitude of many virtues mixed together: for this sweet smelling incense
becomes more pure, when one virtue is joined with another. Now the
ingredients to be well mixed, ought to be stamped and brought to powder; the
which puluerization teaches the diligent examination, that we ought to make of
our actions and behauiours, to the end, that beholding them in gross, we be
not deceived in the knowledge of our selves. To puluerize the aromaticall drugs
(says the same Doctor) is to cersider and examine in particular, G. Gregny.
our virtues, words, and works; and to call them to a secret and strict
account; for so they shall be fit to be set before the Tabernacle of God, to be
a sweet odor to him.

9. A SOVEREIGN ACKNOWLEDGEment, due only to God, made in the Eucharist.
IT was forbidden to employ this Perfume, upon any other, but only upon God
himself, to signify, that the thanksgiving, which we owe to God, is supreme
and incommunicable to any creature; and that otherwise we thank God, and
otherwise the Saints, and other Benefactors. To God, with the adoration called
Latria, as a Soucraigue honor: to others, by a lesser worship, as to the
instruments of his Sovereign goodness. Now this signification of supreme
thanksgiving, is most agreeable to our Sacrament, and Sacrifice, signified by
the Loaves of Proposition; for in it is made sovereign memory, of the
Sovereign benefits of our Redemption, and thanks are rendered to God, with
sovereign magnificence; to wit, with the offering of the same body, which has
redeemed us, an offering infinitely agreeable to his divine Majesty. This is
the reason, why this action is called Eucharist; that is to say, Good grace, or
Thanksgiving; taking its title, and usual name, from the most worthy and
remarkable effect thereof.

10. THE BODY OF OUR SAVIOVR, meat for the Sanctified.
NOw these Loaves were not eaten, but by the Priests, and Levites: people
sanctified for the service and work of the Sanctuary. By which Ceremony the
holy Ghost does Figure forth unto us, that Christians ought to eat the bread
of Christ's Table with singular purity, if they will eat it profitably; and
that every one ought to have, in this action, his soul adorned with a Priestly
holiness, because he does herein, after some sort, the office of a Priest: for
he offers the body of Jesus Christ, with Jesus Christ; and with his Vicar, the
Priest Sacrificing, he eats the bread set and offered upon the holy Table.
And in this respect, Saint Peter calls all Christians, Priests, and Kings, 1.
Pet. 2.9.
holy people, and royal Sacrificers. For although the Lay People (to speak
properly) have not the character of Priests, no more then they are properly
Kings; yet are they nevertheless called by a general appellation, Priests,
and Kings, after the foresaid manner. In that, as such, they are Sanctified,
and have right to eat of the Sanctified bread.

11. WHAT SIGNIFIED THE TABLE OF Proposition Loaves, and the Candlestickes
multiplied by SOLOMON.
NOw it ought not to be passed over, Reg. 7.49. 2. Paral. 4.8.
that Solomon long time after builded the Temple, placed in it ten Tables for
Proposition Loaves, and ten golden Candlesticks, increasing ten times the
number; five Tables and five Candlesticks, on the left side the Altar of
Perfumes, toward the South, and five on the right side toward the North;
whereas Moses had put but one Table on the North side, and one Candlestick on
the South side the Altar of Perfumes, being in the midst, as has been
declared. This overplus, and misterious magnificence, signified that the light
of faith, and the spiritual nourishment of faithful souls, should be without
comparison in more great abundance, in the time of our true Solomon, Jesus
Christ, and in the Church built by him, then it was it the Law of Moses. And
that with great reason, for that he, the bright Sun, and the true celestial
Bread, should then descend to the earth, begetting a new Summer, bringing the
clear light of noonday unto the divine mysteries, making a plentiful
harvest through all the world, and causing the Loaves of Proposition to
multiply in abundance, S. Hier. in c. 40 Ezech. Apoc. 12.2,
from the only Bread of his body, as Saint Hierom speaks. Samt John in the
Apocalypse declared by another allegory the same brightness, which Solomon
figured by his Candlestickes, when he said, That he did see a Woman clothed
with the Sun; understanding the Church under the name of a Woman, and by the
Sun, signifying the greatness of the spiritual light, bestowed upon her in
the Law of Grace. Malachie also foretold, that throughout all the earth,
Malach. 1.
there should be offered a pure Oblation, that is to say, the body of the Son
of God: and that this heavenly Bread should be offered, and distributed in
abundance in the House of God. Which is the same, that Solomon had signified in
preparing ten Tables, a number of universality, and that in the Temple of God,
a Figure of the Church.

12. PVRITY OF BODY, NECESSARY IN such as come to receive the holy Communion.
But what meant Achimelech, 1. Reg. 21.
when offering to David and to his people, the holy Bread, he did it with this
condition, if they had kept themselves clean from the company of women? It
signified that, which our holy Doctors teach; to wit, that to present our
selves to the Table of our Proposition bread, we ought to have not only our
souls pure from sin, and adorned with all virtue, as it has been said, but
also our bodies clean from all impurity. Achimelech, says Saint Hieram, would
not give the Proposition bread to David's men, till first he understood, that
they had been continent from their wives three days before. What then ought to
be the chastity that Christians should use, coming to the Table of our
Savior, which is his proper body? a Virgin body, and conceived of a Virgin,
Spring and treasure of all purity, and infinitely more precious then the
Proposition Loaves? There is (says the same Doctor) as much difference
between the Loanes of Proposition, and the body of Christ, S. Hier. l. 1. e.
1. epist. ad Tit.
as between the shadow and the bady, the Image and the Verity, the Figures of
things to come, and the things themselves represented by passed Figures. For
this cause therefore, In Council Eliber. opud gratia: d^^. omnis, de ^^seer. and
Conril. Cabik. Genesis ^6.
the Apostles and their Successors have holily ordained, that the Lay People,
which will Communicate, should contain themselves from their wives at the
least three days before, and as many after Communion; and that the Priests,
which communicate daily, and handle this chaste and dinine Flesh, live without
wives, and be aften the manner of Angels, chaste all their life.

13. THEY WHICH HOLILY COMMVNIcate, receive strength, and are armed by the
Sacrament.
SVch then, as eat this true bread of Proposition, as David did, having their
souls and bodies clean, are not only strengthened against the temptation of
Satan, and enabled to resist concupiscence, but also take into their hands the
sword of Golias, and the weapons of their enemies, to fight valiantly in the
combats of our Lord, to cut in pieces the troops of Satan, the world, and the
flesh, and to attain the victory of a glorious conquest.

14. A BRIEF EXHORTATION TO PVritie, when we present our selves to the holy
Sacrament.
But alas, how few are the number of such valiant combatants? How few are
there, that present themselves to this divine Table, with that cleanness and
reverend respect, which the High Priest Achimelech required of David, and of
his people, before he would permit them to eat his Loaves of Proposition, the
shadow, and Figure of ours? how few, that imitate the holiness of David, and
of his Soldiers, in this celestial banquet? How few observe the purity which
our ancient Fathers, and our holy Mother the ancient Church commanded? What are
we become? What do we? of what think we? how have we left our ancient fervor
in Communicating frequently, and the ancient holiness of the first Christians,
in communicating devoutly? What is become of the chastity of the first
Christianity? Where do you see, as of old, the concourse of godly souls,
purely amorous of this their Spouse, and soberly hungry after this banquet? If
there be yet any, as it ought not to be doubted, but there are many thousands,
hidden within the Oratory of the Sanctuary of the House of God; the number
notwithstanding is exceeding little, in comparison of that, which has been,
and which ought, and might be, if we had the courage and devotion of our
Ancestors. Proue^bs 9.
Come hither then (O faithful souls) but come prepared; put on your nuptial
garments, the more worthily to present your selves before your Spouse, who is
the Sovereign and all-seeing Wisdom: whet and sharpen the appetites of your
hearts; approach to the Table, that he has prepared for you; eat the living
Bread, which he has so well seasoned; drink the celestial Wine, which he
has mingled for you; Bread, which gives eternal life; Wine, which makes
drunk with happiness and felicity; sill up the Feast, there are yet many empty
places, and increase your glory, by increasing the number of the invited.

THE EIGHT PICTVRE. THE OBLATION OF THE FIRST fruits at Pentecost.
The Description.
THE better to understand, how this Assembly celebrates the Sacrifice of the
First Fruits: you are to conceive the form of the Temple, in which it is made.
The Temple of the Jews, as it is commonly taken, Ezech, 40.41.
is this enclosure of walls, having five hundred cubits in square: but to
speak properly, it is that House built within the enclosure toward the West
end, magnificently covered; in height twenty cubits, and fixtie in length,
divided into two parts: the first of which is twenty cubits long, and is the
most holy part; for this is the Holy of holies, place for the Arc of Covenant,
where no person enters, saving only the High Priest, and that but once in the
year. The second is forty cubits in length, and in it is placed the Altar of
Perfumes, right against the door of the Sancta Sanctorum, having on every side
five Candlestickes of gold, and five Tables for Breads of Proposition, as
elsewhere we have said. On this Altar every Prince of the Priests, in the
circuit of his office, offers Incense to God, evening and morning; as Zachary
did, Zachary. Luke 1.
the father of Saint John Baptist. The rest of the enclosure is without roof,
divided into two great Yards or Courts, each one being an hundred cubits in
length and largeness. On the South side and North side, were certain houses,
called Gazophilaces, as much to say, as treasuries. They were for the
habitations of Priests and Levites, and to keep the holy treasures; having
near unto them certain walking-places, and little walls. The first Court,
separated from the second by a little wall, having a portall in the midst, is
the place, where the Priest, make their Sacrifices upon this great Alzar, which
is night against the Temple. Where you see five Cesterns on the right hand, and
five on the left, full of water, to wash the entrals and feet of the Victimes.
And on the left side of the wall of separation, near to the Portall, a molten
Cesterne, called a Sea, by reason of the exceeding great capacity thereof; for
it is ten cubits square, and five cubit; deep; and this is the sountaine
wherein the Priests washed their hands and feer, when they went to offer
Sacrifice. The second Court is the place for Lay People; and this little raised
up seat, in the form of a seaffold, in the midst of it, is a Throne of brass,
five cubits square, 2. Paral. 9.13.
and three cubits high, where Solomon, and the Kings of the Jews after him
were placed, during the time of the Sacrifice. Now this great multitude of men,
which are in the first Court, are the Priests and Levites; and the other in the
other Court, are the people, all there assembled for the solemnity of the new
Oblation of the first fruits in Harvest, called the Feast of Pentecost. In
which Oblation, after many bloody Sacrifices, to wit, of seven Lambs, two
sheep, one Ox, offered in Holocaust; and one Goat offered for sin; two
Wheat-loaues, with two Lambs, were offered to God as Peace Offerings, that is
to say, in action of thanks; every one having made an Oblation of his first
fruits, to the Priests, according to the Law. In the first partition are only
Priests: in the second, the women are in an Oratory, separated from the men;
and all, as well men as women, see all and every part of the Sacrifice, which
is done in the Court of Priests. For that the Altar was raised up ten cubits
high, and the walls, which separated the Court, 2. Paral. 41.
were but three cubits high; they easily hear the voices of the Priests, and
of the Musical Instruments, Joseph lib. 5. de ^^lls lad cap. 14.
and Trumpets, which sound while the Sacrifice burns, The seven Lambs, the
fat Calfe, the two sheep, are long since wholly consumed in the fire, without
any part reserved, save only their skins: for this is an Holocaust, that is to
say, a Sacrifice, wherein all must be burnt, to the honor of God, without
reserving any thing to Priests, or Lay People. The He Goat also is all
consumed to ashes, because it is offered in common for the sins of the
people: for if it were offered for one particular person, a part thereof had
been kept to the Priests, according to the Law of the Propitiatory Sacrifice,
which gineth them that prerogative. Herehence it is, that the Scripture says,
that they eat the sins of the people, that is to say, the Sacrifices offered
for the sins of the people. The two Loaves, which are, as it were, the body
and heart of this Sacrifice, are made of sine Wheat Flour, Oser. 4.8.
as the Proposition Loaves, but of leauened paste, whereas those of Proposition
are without leaven, which is a mysterious shadow: they are made in the form of
round cakes, the High Priest offers them now to God, lifting them up to heaven
by a remarkable ceremony, with the Lambs placed under them, and turning them
from the South into the North, and from the East to the West, prays to God
with these words; Look from thy Sanctuary, Deuteronomy. 26.15.
and thy highest habitation of heaven, and bless thy people of Israel, the
Land, which thou have given to us, as thou swarest to our forefathers, a Land
slowing with milk and honey: after this elevation, the Loaves, and the Lambs
remain to him, as his right. All the world is in prayers and devotion, adoring
the divine Majesty, imploring his mercy, and rendering thanks for his
goodness, not without demonstration of the inward elevation of their souls,
by the outward mouings and gestures of their bodies: One lifts up his eyes to
heaven, another strikes his breast, another ioynes his hands, many bow down
their heads, and bend their knees, some have their eyes fixed on the Altar,
sinoaking yet with the Sacrifice of the burnt Victimes; other on the Priests
gesture, eleuating so ceremoniously the Loaves, put over the Lambs; some also
are attentive to the Loaves and the Lambs themselves, but their looks cannot
be seen, nor the mouings of their hands and eyes, for as much as all of them
look toward the Altar, and are painted for the most part with their backs
turned toward us, so as little of their shape before appears, and much less
their visage. But by these few we see we may well conjecture, that the most
spiritual cast their thoughts on the mystery which was hidden under the rind
of the Ceremony: for they are taught that their Law was, as it were, a piece of
Tapestree, 1 Cor. 10.
teaching the truth of that, which should after be in the time of the Messiah;
by means whereof, they behold not so much the preparation of the Sacrifices of
the Beasts, and of new Loaves, as that, which is signified by them; and it is
not to be doubted, but God did make seen to many the future light of the Law
of Grace: surely by contemplating only the countenance of this old Priest,
portrayted on the right side of the Altar, lifting his eyes to heaven, and
holding his hands a cross, all ravished and all in an ecstasy, one may
collect, that he has had some secret revelation of the great good, that God
had promised for the ages to come, by the feast of this Sacrifice of new
Loaves; and that he in his soul glorified the divine Majesty; desirous, if
such were the good pleasure of God, to be living upon the earth in that
season; and like it is, that he said in his heart: O God of Israel, how great,
how magnificent, and admirable art thou in the works of thy hands? great to
do great things, magnificent to obliege men by thy great benefits, and
admirable to choose the times and seasons, wherein thou will bestow them. Thou
have by that commandment alone, of thy lively word, created heaven and earth,
and all that is between them, to make a present thereof to man, thy creature,
and ceasest not to oblige him with new benefits every moment: thou have in
particular assisted with a thousand blessings this thy people, the Hebrews,
breaking with a strong hand, the iron chains of their bondage, delivering them
out of Egypt, and from the tyranny of Pharoe, giving them for their portion, a
Land of Milk and Holy, true delicacies of the earth, and communicating to them
thy holy Laws and secrets; these are the true effects of thy great goodness:
but I see it will extend it self out of measure more then ever, to the future
people and ages, not containing it self in Palestine, but spreading it self
over the world, when the Messiah, and Redeemer, whom thou have promised, and we
expect, and whom these Sacrifices prefigure to us, and after a secret manner
foretell, shall come to Sacrifice himself, and to be an Oblation of new Bread,
and food of immortality.

O happy time, in which this Savior shall be borne! O happy people, which
shall be his people, conducted by his Laws, and fed at his Table! O that I
were a child of that age, and member of that Commonwealth! This Picture makes
us conjecture, that he speaks to this purpose.

1. THREE IVDAICALL PEASTS OF the First Fruits.
THe Jews received a Commandment in the Desert, Leuit. 23.
to offer unto God the first of the new fruits of the Land of Promise, when
they should be peaceable possessors thereof, and that upon three Feasts of the
year. The first was the day after the Pasque, in which they gave a sheafe of
the first ears in the beginning of Harvest; Leuit. 23. Joseph. l. 3. c. 10.
Ant. 9.
which after the Judicial account began in March, or in the entrance of
April, because the Land was very hot. The second they celebrared fifty days
after, which for that cause was called Pentecost, wherein not ears of Corn,
as in the first Feast, but two Loaves of new Wheat, with many bloody
Sacrifices going before, were offered up to God. The third was after the
fifteenth of September. in which the First Fruits of all the year were offered
together, as Wheat, Barley, Grapes, Olives, Pomgranats, Figs and Dates. The
most famous of all the three Feasts, was that of Pentecost; and for that reason
the Law called it simply, and without any addition, Rab. Solomon ^^ad ^^ra. in
c. 23. Leuit.
The feast of First Fruits, a most solemn, and most holy day. The Oblation
offered upon that day, was accompanied with all the three kinds of the Jewish
Sacrifices, which were the Holocaust, the Propitiatory, and the Peace Offering:
and they made them of the noblest kind of Hoasts and Victimes; to wit, of
seven Lambs, of one fat Calfe, of two sheep in Holocaust to the honor of God,
one Goat in Propitiatory Sacrifice for remission of sins, and two Lambs,
with the Loaves, in a Peace Offering for thanksgiving. This is the Feast, and
the Oblation of the First Fruits, represented in the former Picture.

2. THE MASS THE NEW OBLATION in the Pentecost of Christians.
THis Oblation, and this First Fruits of new Bread at Pentecost, was one of the
most illustrious Figures of the Sacrament, and Sacrifice of the Mass, a new
Oblation indeed, and the true First Fruits of the Wheat of the new Law, as the
ancient Fathers have observed. And amongst others, Saint Irenaeas very
elegantly in these words. Our Savior (says he) teaching his Disciples to
offer the First Fruits of his creatures to God, (...). l. 4. c. 32,
not for any need he had of them, but to the end they night not be unprofitable
and ungrateful servants; took the bread, which is the creature, and yielding
thanks, said, This is my body; likewise he confessed, that the Chalice, which
came of his creature, was his blood, teaching the new Oblation of the new
Testament, which the Church received from the Apostles, and offers all over the
world to God, our nourisher and feeder, for the First Fruits of the gifts, that
he has bestowed upon us in the Law of Grace, according as Malachy has
foretold, I have no will in you (says the Lord of Hosts) and gifts will not
receive at your hands: Malac. 1.
for from the rising of the Sun, even to the going down, great is my name
among the Gentiles, says the Lord of Hosts. By which words (adds this
Doctor) The Prophet manifestly signefieth, this, which is now come to pass;
for the former people cease offering to God, and Sacrifice is now offered to
God throughout all the universal world, and the name of God is glorified
amongst the Gentiles. Making then allusion to the old Figure, he says, that
our Savior saying, This is my body, and this is my blood, and
transubstantiating the bread into his body, and the wine into his blood, taught
his Apostles and Disciples to give to God the First Fruits of his creatures,
and to offer him a new Oblation of the new Testament, which is the truth of the
Sacrament, and Sacrifice of the Mass, figured by the Oblation of the
First Fruits, as we have showed: S. Just. in Tripho. S. Chrysostom, in Psalm. 95.
Tertul. l. 3. cont. Marc. c. 22. S. Aug. l. 18. de Ciuit. c. 35. S. Hieron. in
c. 1. Mal. and al^.
which Figure we are now to explicate, together with the Prophecy of the
Prophet Malachie, which Saint Irenaus cites for the same truth; and with him
Saint Justin, Saint Chrysostom, Saint Hierome, Saint Augustine, Tertullian,
and other great Doctors of the Church. But let us see the circumstances of the
old Oblation, answering in all respects to the body of the new.

3. OF MANY CIRCVMSTANCES OF THE ancient Oblation, answering to the truth of
the Sacrament, and Sacrifice of the Mass.
THe Loaves of the First Fruits, were made of the finest flower of Wheat, and
round, after the manner of a cake. We have here the matter and form of our
Hoasts: The Priest did lift it up before the people, in Figure of the elevation
of our Savior upon the Cross. The Priest also eleuates the consecrated Host,
that it may be adored, and makes over it many signs of the Cross. The
Sacrifice of Loaves were Min-ha, Malac. 1.
that is to say, not bloody; the Mass is a Sacrifice of the same kind,
without effusion of blood, and the true Oblation Minha, foretold by Malachy.
The Figure was called in the Law a new Sacrifice: which Moses names in the
Hebrew and Syriach tongue, Deuteronomy. 16.
Missa, that is to say, Oblation rich, and sufficient; which word is not found
in all the Bible to signify any other thing, but this new Oblation, as the
Hebrew Doctors teach. All this is lively agreeable to the Mass: for in regard
first of the name, it is agreeable to it in every point; seeing that this our
Sacrifice is singularly a new Sacrifice in all respects, in respect of the
thing offered, of the Priest, and of the manner of offering it. The thing
offered is singularly new; it is a new fruit, brought forth from a new earth,
to wit, the body of our Savior borne of the Virgin, a new bread, a living
bread, immortal and glorious. The Priest also new, to wit, the Son of God,
the anointed of God, King of men and Angels, and there was never the like, nor
never shall be hereafter. The manner wholly new, for the thing offered, and the
Priest is the selfsame thing, and both the one and the other, are hidden
under the forms of bread and wine, all in the one, and all in the other kind,
and all in every part of it, in his proper quantity, in his immortality, and in
his glory, though our sense and understanding see nothing, but the outward
signs. So is this Sacrifice altogether new, and not known either in the Law
of Nature, or in the Law of Moses.

4. OF THE NAME MASS.
AS for the word Missa, Mass, proper name of the old Oblation, it is left
wholly to ours; and it is so well assigned, and applied, that it signifies no
more, neither nominateth any other thing, then the Sacrifice of the Law of
Grace, as of old it signified only that of Moses. In so much as many great
Doctors doubted not, Missa apud S. Clem. epist. 3. Abdias lib. 7. S. Euarist.
l. 3. cap. 27. S. Alex ep. 1. Telesph. ep. 1. S. Ambros. l. 5. ep. 3. S. Aug.
sermon. 91. de Temp and 251 S. Leo ep. 81. and 88. Council. Romans de Coascr. d. 1.
nullms Council. 2. Carth. can. 3. Council. Agath. c. 47. de Conf. d. 1. Missas.
but that this was an Hebrew word, and the same, which denominated the ancient
Oblation of the First-fruit, and one of the first names, that the Apostles gave
to the Eucharist. The which is probable, because it is so called by many
ancient Fathers both Greek and Latin; as S. Clement, Successor of Saint
Peter; Abdias, who wrote the life of the Apostles, either in Greek or in
Hebrew. S. Euaristus Pope, who sat the year 97. S. Alexander, sitting in the
year 106. Telesphorus, sitting in the year 127. S. Ambrose, S. Augustine,
Saint Leo. Moreover, the first Roman Council, the second of Carthage, the
Council of Agath. and many other ancient Authors of the first four Ages, and
all these have often used it, as a name frequented among the Christians, which
is an argument that it was left by tradition from the Apostles, howsoever the
Church did use in the beginning many other names, especially the Greek Church.
Some Doctors have thought it to be a Latin word, for the likeness of the
syllables, and of the sound. But the argument concludes not that it is rather
Latin, then Hebrew, seeing that it has the like syllables, and sound in both
Languages; and if the Latin challenge it by that title, the Hebrew may
challenge it by the same. And after this manner every one may draw to his
Language a thousand strange words by similitude or likeness, and may put
themselves in danger to incur the crime of unlust usurpers, or ill
interpreters, as it happened to Optatus in the word Cephas, which he thought to
be Greek, by reason of the likeness of syllables of the word Cephale, Head.
By like misconstruing, the Latins may also say, that the Hebrew words Alma,
Massa, Cera, and such like, are only Latin, because they have a Latin sound,
and every Language may challenge the word Sac as her own, because it has the
same sound and signification in all tongues. It is then as likely, that the
word Missa, is an Hebrew word, as that it is a Latin. But if any shall
resolutely hold, that it comes rather from the Latin, then from the Hebrew I
shall more willingly agree thereunto. For this casual encounter of the Latin
with the Hebrew, is more marvelous, then if it had been derived from the
Hebrew. For it could not happen; but by divine providence, that one Latin word
should be so happily tied, and allied to the Hebrew, that it seems altogether
to be an Hebrew word, and that the Hebrew word should come so near to the
Latin, that it seems indeed to be a Latin word, and that this word has been
used to signify the like thing in diverse Languages, and Laws. The Hebrew word
in the Law of Moses, to signify the Figure of the Sacrifice of our Saviors
body: and the Latin word, to signify in Latin the truth of the same
Sacrifice in the Law of Grace. And that the most excellent Sacrifice of all
other, has been baptized with the like name in syllables, and in
signification, by the (...) most noble Languages of the world; in Figure by the
Hebrew, and in Verity by the Latin. The old Figure then resembled our
Sacrifice in the matter, in the form, in the ceremony, and most lively in the
name.

5.
TRANSVBSTANTIATION MADE IN the Sacrament, figured by the Leaven.
THere are yet more mystical draughts in the ancient Figure, which preach into
us the truth of our Eucharist; but principally three: The first the Leaven: the
second the Time: the third the Sacrifices, foregoing this Oblation. It has
been said, that these Loaves were made of Leauen-paste, and were elevated in
Oblation, by the High Priest, with the Lambs. Leuit. 23.20.
Then (says the Scripture) the Sacrificers shall-eleuate the Lambs, with the
Loaves of the First Fruits, turning them before the Lord. In such sort, as the
Loaves were put above the Lambs, and all was elevated together. This is a
divine draught of Gods Pensell, in the Table of the Figure; teaching us not
only the presence of the body of his Son, true Lamb, without blot in the
Sacrifice of the Mass; but also the manner of his being there, which is by
transubstantiation, that is to say, by changing of the substance of bread, into
the substance of the body of our Savior, hidden under the forms of bread. The
Leaven heretofore has been a sign unto us of some bad thing; but here, by a
contrary quality it is a sign of that, which is good: as often in Scripture
one selfsame thing has sundry and contrary significations, by reason of
contrary references and respects. So the Lion, Genesis 49 9. Apoc. 5.5. 1. Pet.
5.8.
if we consider him as a Royal and strong beast, is a sign of God; as he is
cruel and fierce, a sign of the Devil. For which cause our Savior himself
expresses Vice by Leaven in one place; Matthew. 16.6. Luke 13.21.
and in another he compares his Church to Leaven. The Leaven then in the Loaves
of the First Fruits, figureth to us, the transubstantiation, which is made in
our Eucharist, as already often has been said, and must be said hereafter,
behold the picture. The Leaven by a natural property changes the paste,
heates it, puffes it up, and gives it in a certain manner, soul and life, so
far forth as it is capable thereof. The word of God, supernatural Leaven,
changes also the bread, and because it is of more force, then nature, it
passes also further; for it cha^geth not the qualities, as the natural leaue^
in the paste, but the substance; it leaves the visible qualities, and cha^geth
the bread within; it animateth truly this bread, and makes it living bread,
changing the substance of it into the flesh of the Lamb of God, Jesus Christ,
signified by the Lambs, offered with the Loaves in this Sacrifice. The Loaves,
and the Lambs, elevated by the High Priest, were diverse things, and did make
one only oblation; here, where the truth is lively accomplished, diverse
elements also make one self-same Oblation; for the Lamb is under the forms of
bread and wine; and when those elements are multiplied, and offered in diverse
places, it is always one selfsame Lamb, and one selfsame Sacrifice. So as
this draught, drawn in the old Figure, tells us that the Sacrifice, figured by
the bread of First Fruits, should be one Sacrifice of flesh, under the shows
of bread and wine; to which draught our Savior gave lively colors, when he
instituted the Sacrament of his body under these elements. Neither is it
without mystery, that the Loaves and the Lambs were of two diverse natures, for
they signified two natures in one Jesus Christ, the Divinity, and the Humanity;
two things in one Sacrament, the earthly, which are the visible accidents, and
the heavenly, which is the body of the Son of God, and his Grace. Finally,
they signified two peoples, the Gentiles and Jews, united under one Head,
reduced into one, and made one by means of this Sacrament and Sacrifice. And
so his divine Wisdom not only teaches us, by this figurative Lineament, the
presence of his Flesh in the Eucharist, but also the quality of his Person, and
after what manner he makes us his flesh, and unites us therein. Let us see
what the Scripture, and the ancient Hebrew, and Christian Doctors say hereof,
enriching the Figure with the embroderies of their learned Expositions.

6. THE SACRAMENT, AND SACRIFICE of the body of our Savior, under the forms
of bread, foretold in the Scripture, and taught by the Hebrew Doctors.
DAVID by these elevated Loaves foretold our Sacrament and Sacrifice: Psalm.
71.72.
There shall be (says he) a firmament in the earth, in the tops of
wountaines, the fruit thereof shall be extolled far above Libanus. Or
according to the Hebrew phrase, There shall be a little wheat in the earth upon
the top of the mountains, and the fruit thereof shall be lifted above Lybanus.
These words cannot signify other wheat, or any other thing more lively, then
our consecrated Hosts, containing the body of our Savior, true wheat on earth,
true bread and solid stabilitie of our souls and bodies; fruit truly lifted
up, not only upon the top of Libanus, but above the highest of the
celestial powers. Wherefore the Hebrew Doctors conformably hereunto, Rab.
Solomon in Psalm. 72.16. vol
say that David here did sing of a certain kind of little Cakes, or thin
delitious wafers, that should be offered in Sacrifice in the time of the
Messiah: Psalm. 71.16.
Our Masters (says he, of happy memory) understood by this word, a certain
kind of Cakes, which shall be made in the time of the Messiah, of the which
also all the Psalm is written. And all their Hebrew Commentaries extol,
extol, even to heaven, the eating and mystery of this Bread and of these
Cakes, which, say they, shall be of the bigness of the palm of a man's hand.
And one amongst them, Rab. Derachias ^^ ^eans. illad ^. Eccles. quid est quod
fuit? id quod crit. Eccles. 9.
named Barachias, explaining these words of Ecclesiastices; What is that which
was? the same that shall be: adds further, As their first deliverer, to wit,
Moses had given them bread of wonder, which was Manna; so the second Redeemer
(the Messiah) should give them a more wonderful bread, to wit, these Cakes.
And hereunto the same Redeemer alludeth, Joan. 6.
saying, It is not Moses, which gave you the bread from heaven: understanding
his body, as it has been declared in the Figure of Manna. Rab. Ionathas in
suo: ^aigum. Gal. l. 10. c. 4. Psalm. 71.17.
And the Rabbis Paraphrastically interpret in the same sense the words of the
Psalm before alleged; There shall be (says one of them) a parcel of bread
in the earth, on the top of the mountains; that is to say (says he) there
shall be a Sacrifice of bread on the head of the mountains of the Church, or
on the head of the Priests, which shall be in the Church. For the Mountains
of the Church are the Prelates and Priests of it, if they be such, as are worthy
of that name; for so much as they are lifted up above the vulgar, as spiritual
Mountains above the earth, by holiness in manners, and sublimity of Doctrine.
This Figure then, is every day literally fulfilled in the Church, when the
Priests say Mass, eleuating the holy Host above their head; and when the
faithful Christians eat these divine and delitious Cakes, at the mystical
Table of our Savior. The ancient Jews could not write more clearly of the
Figure of our Truth amongst the shadows of their Law: and he, that sees not
this Truth, brightly shining in the Sacrifice of the Law of Grace, is blind at
noonday, and worse then a Jew.

7. THE TESTIMONIES OF HEBREW Doctors for Transubstantiation, and the manner,
how the body of our Savior is present in the Eucharist.
THe manner, how the body of our Lord is really present in the Eucharist, has
been no less plainly set down in the writings of the Hebrews, then is the
Real presence it self. This Manner has two respects; the one to the
beginning of the Presence, and teaches how the body of our Lord is first made
present in the Sacrament of the Altar; the other, to the manner of this
Presence, and declares how he remains there present. Of both we have spoken
in the Figure of Manna, discoursing there of the Almighty power of our Savior.
Here we shall only allege the testimonies of Hebrew and Christian Doctors,
to declare this Presence more fully, and to show the soundness of the
Catholic faith, concerning Transubstantiation. And as for the first, Con^.
Trident. sess. 19. c. 4. can. 2.
the Catholic Faith and doctrine holds, that the body of our Savior is made
present upon the Altar by Transubstantiation, that is to say, not by descent
from heaven to earth, neither by new production, but by changing the substance
of bread into the substance of the body of our Savior, borne of the Virgin.
The same faith and doctrine says, that it remains there with a divine
Presence spiritual, and supernatural, in its quantity, without possessing any
place, and in its Majesty, without any show thereof, being there immortal and
glorious, but invisible to sense, and incomprehensible to reason and humane
judgment, as has been said elsewhere. And this in sum, is that, which the
Doctors, as well Jews, as Christians, have written. The Hebrews (as we have
said before in the Table of Proposition Loaves) have taught, that these Loaves
were called Breads of faces, because they did Figure forth a Sacrifice, in the
which there should be bread in the beginning, and flesh in the end; for the
substance of bread was there to be changed into the substance of the body of
the Messiah, the outward accidents remaining whole; and that it should be a
Sacrifice of two faces; one outward of bread, which the sense might see; and
the other inward, of the substance of flesh, which Faith only could perceive.
And to this may have reference, that the Hebrew word, Lehen, bread and flesh.
Rab. Kimhi. 1. Seras^im. Gal. 10. and 7. 1. Cor. 11.27.
Lehen, set in this place, has a double signification; for sometimes it
signifies bread, sometimes flesh. So as where our Translation has: He offered
him the breads of Proposition: other translations have; He offered the flesh of
thy God. And Saint Paul long time after, using the same manner of speech, what
he calls Bread, he also names the body of our Savior. The same Hebrew Doctors,
Osee 14.8.
explaining the words of Osee: They shall be converted, that sit under his
shadow, they shall live with Wheat. Our Masters (say they) writ upon these
words, that at the coming of the Redeemer, there shall be change of nature in
Wheat. And Rabby Moses upon the words of the Psalm: Rab. Moses Hadarsania
Psalm. 135. Gal. l. 10. c. 6. Rab. Judas in Exodus cap. 25. Gal. l. 10. c. 6.
Who gives food to all flesh, a for (says he) the bread, which be will give,
is his flesh, and this shall be a great wonder. The Oblation then is bread in
the beginning, but after the words of Consecration, it is flesh, the substance
of bread being turned into the substance of the body of our Savior, by the
virtue of his Omnipotent word, the which being able to make all the world of
nothing, can change one substance into another. This changing is called
Transubstantiation in the Catholic Church; a word brought into use five
hundred years ago, Rab. Kimbi. Gal. l. 10. c. 4.
to stop the mouths of the Heretics, which rose up against the true Faith;
the thing it self being as ancient, as the Eucharist: for in the same instant,
that the Sacrament was instituted by our Savior, Transubstantiation was in
use, though the name was not to be borne until long time after. As for the
Manner according to which the Messiah body was to remain in the Sacrament,
after it is made present by Transubstantiation: the same Hebrew Doctors have
told, that it was to be there invisible, and impalpable, and in many places
together, which they believed also of the body of the Prophet Elias, being in
many places at the same time without being seen, or touched, as the Rabbis
testify in these their Expositions.

8. THE TESTIMONIES OF THE CHRIstian Doctors concerning Transubstantiation, and
the manner, how our Saviors body is in the Eucharist.
THe Christians have been so much more resolute, and clear in setting down
the Faith and Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and the manner of the presence of
our Saviors body in this Sacrament, by how much they have had better Masters,
then the ancient Hebrews. Their Masters were our Savior himself, the Son of
Truth, the Reuealer of heavenly secrets, and his Apostles filled with the new
light of the Holy Ghost: whereas the Hebrews had none, but Moses and the
Prophets, which taught by shadows and Figures. Behold then what they have said
of this admirable change, which we call Transubstantiation, and of the manner
how the body of our Savior remains in the Sacrament.

Saint IVSTINE, We are taught, S. Justin. Apol. 2.
that the meat (the bread and wine) wherewith our flesh and blood are
nourished, by change thereof into our substance, being Consecrated by the
prayer and word of God, is the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ incarnate, that
is to say, the substance of bread and wine, is changed into the body and blood
of our Savior.

Saint IRENEVS, S. ^r^^. l. 4. c. 3^.
disputing against the Heretics, which denied that Christ was Omnipotent: H^w
(says he) will they bele^ue, that the consecrated bread is the body of Jesus
Christ? As if he should say, if they believe not, that he is Omnipotent; they
cannot believe, that in the Eucharist, the bread is changed into his body, by
his Word, seeing there can be made no such change by any other word, but his,
who can do all by his Word, as he made the world by his Word.

Saint CYRIL of Jerusalem: S. cyril. ^ierosol. ^^tech. mis^ag. 4.
He long since in Cana turned water into wine, the which has some resemblance
to blood; shall we esteem him less worthy to be believed, saying, that he
has changed the wine into his blood.

Saint CHRYSOSTOM: S. Chrysostom. hom. 6. ad Pap. An^ioch.
Because the Word says, This is my body, let us obey, and believe, beholding
it with the eyes of our faith: As if he would have said, these words, This is
my body, are words of the Omnipotent, and effect that which they signify; we
ought then, to obey and believe that, Idem hom. 23. in Ma^^h.
which they say. The same Doctor upon the same subject of Transubstantiation:
The things, that we propose you, are not works of humane virtue, it is God
that sanctifies them, and changes them; we are but the instruments.

Saint. GREGORY NISSE, S. Greg. Niss. in orat. mag. catech. c. ^7. I^^^n de S.
^ap^^sme.
We believe that the bread duly sanctified by the word of the Word of God, is
changed into the body of the Word of God. And again, The bread of the Aliar in
the beginning is common, but after that it is sacrificed in the Mass, it is
called the body of Christ, and it is so indeed.

Saint JOHN DAMASCEN, S. Ioh. Damas. l. 4. de Fide, c. 14.
The bread and the wine, mingled with water, is supernaturally changed into the
body of Christ, by the invocation and coming of the holy Ghost, and they are
not two, but one selfsame thing.

THEOPHILACT, Theoph. i^ (...).
This bread is transformed into the flesh of our Lord, by the mystical
blessing of secret words, and by the coming of the holy Ghost. Behold, you
have heard some Greek Fathers; with the same spirit and like style, speak
also the Latin Fathers.

TERTVLLIAN, Our Savior took the bread, Tertvl. l. 4. cont. Mar. c. 40.
and made it his body, saying, This is my body.

Saint CYPRIAN, This bread, S. Cyp. de. C^n. Dom.
which our Lord presented to his Disciples, was made flesh by the all
powerfulness of his Word, changed not in appearance, but in substance: As if
he would have said, the outward forms of the clements, the quantity, color
and savor remain, but the inward substance is changed into the substance of
the body and blood of our Savior.

Saint AMBROSE. This bread, S. Amb. l. 4. de Sacer, c. 4.
before the words of the Sacrament, is bread, but after Consecration the bread
is made flesh; and having showed, that this consecration and changing, is made
by the word of God; he confirms his conclusion, saying, If the word of Christ
has been so powerful, as to give a being to that, which was not; how much
more is it credible, that it can make the things, which were before, to be now
changed into another? But hear David, saying, He has spoken, and the things
were done; he has commanded, and they were created: I answer thee then, Thas
before consecration the bread was not the body of Christ, but after the same it
is the body of Christ: he said it, and he bath effected it.

Saint AUGUSTINE, almost in the same terms; S. Avg. sermon. 2^. de Verb. Dom.
I have told you, that before the words of Christ, the bread is called bread,
but after they are pronounced, it is no more called bread, but the body of
Christ.

Saint RHEMIGIVS of Rhemes, The flesh, S. Remig. in^. (...) ep. 2. Cor.
which the word of God, the Father, has taken in the Virginal womb, and
united unto his Person; and the bread, which is consecrated upon the Altar, is
one bodiy of Christ; For even as that flesh is the body of Christ, so this
bread is changed into the body of Christ, and are not two, but one body. He
meant that Transubstantiation produces not a new body of Jesus Christ, but
that it makes the same body, which he took in the womb of the Virgin, present
in this Sacrament after consecration; nothing remaining of those elements, but
the accidents.

PASCHASIVS, Paschasius Corbiens^^ l. de Corp. and sang. (...). c. 1.
Though the form of bread and wine, be found in this Sacrament, we ought to
believe notwithstanding, that after the consecration, there is no other thing,
but the flesh and blood of Christ. From all these testimonies we collect the
explication of two points, which do concern the manner of our Saviors being
in the Sacrament of the Altar. For first we understand hereby, that the body of
our Savior is made present in the Sacrament by Transubstantiation, that is to
say, by change of substance, the substance of bread giving place to the
substance of his body, which succeeds by virtue of his Omnipotent word. And
because the Soul, and the Divinity never leave this body, whole Jesus Christ
is in the Sacrament, his body by virtue of his Word; his Soul and his
Divinity, as necessarily following, and accompanying the same. Secondly, we
learn, that so long as the species be there uncorrupted, the same body
remains under them with its quantity, beauty, immortality, and glory, but
supernaturally and in a spiritual and divine manner, without being perceived,
unless by the eyes of faith, as we have before declared, so far forth, as a
thing ineffable can be declared. By means whereof, the Fathers often advertise
us, not to consult here with the Laws of Nature, nor to regard, what sense
and humane judgment tells us, but simply to believe the word of him, who can
do all, and cannot lie.

9. WHEREFORE OUR SAVIOVR WOULD have his body hid, and not visible in the
Sacrament.
Here it shall be good to note, wherefore our Savior gave his body, veiled
under the shows of bread and wine, and not visible, and in proper form. For
hereby we shall come to know, that he was nolesse wise, then he is good; not
only giving us an inestimable gift, but also giving it after the manner he
did. The principal reasons noted by the Fathers, are these; The first is taken
from the nature of the Sacrament: for since that every Sacrament is a visible
sign of an invisible thing; it follows, that he giving his body in this
Sacrament, was to cover it under some visible signs, as the accidents are, the
color, the whiteness, the savor, and such like things, which objected to our
sense, might put our soul in mind of some secret thing; whereas if he had
given it openly, it had not been a Sacrament, full of mystery, but a simple
gift of his body.

The second reason given by S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Cyril. ep. ad
Co^osirium. S. Amb. l. 4. d. sacr. c. 6. l. 6. c. 1 S. August. apu^^ great. de
cons d. 2. verum. See S. John Damas. l. 4. c. 14. de fid. and S. Tho. p. 3. q.
75. c. 5. c.
and Saint Cyril, is this, to wit, because this sweet manner is most
convenient, and principally to our infirmity, most natural and easy: for we
take this divine morsel under the form of common bread, familiar to our
taste, to wit, under the accidents of bread and wine. Whereas, if we should
have eaten them with the feeling of the natural qualities thereof, it had been
an eating, that could not have been endured, for two reasons. For first, it
could not be done, but sense would naturally conceive horror to swallow down
humane flesh in proper form, especially being raw; Secondly, we could not have
endured the brightness of so ghstering a body, nor the presence of so glorious
a Majesty, if he had sn^wed himself in it. Saint Paul was become blind, for
having seen the brightness of this body; (...) Co^. 3.23.
and if it behooued Morses speaking to the Hebrews, to veil his shining face,
which they could not otherwise have beheld; how much more sit was it, that
Jesus Christ should veyle his body, without comparison more resplendent, then
the face of Moses, to come near unto us, and to be eaten of us?

A third reason may be added, that this inuisibility gives us a singular mean;
to exercise our faith, and to marit happiness in believing, and not seeing;
according to the Maxim of our Savior, Ioh. 20.29.
who called them happy, which believed without seeing, that is to say, which
did give faith and credit to the Word of God, although sense, and humane
reason, penetrate not the thing believed, nay rather find in it a repugnance
to their Laws: as it comes to pass here, where we believe the body of our
Savior to be; though sense sees only the outward accidents of bread and
wine, under which it is present, and humane judgment cannot comprehend the
possibility of this presence. But if the body of our Savior by this conversion
were made visible, and the accidents of bread changed, as it was done in the
miracle at the marriage in Cana, in which the water, ^^ax. 2^
with the qualities, was changed into the substance and qualities of wine,
there should be no exercise of faith, it not being an object of faith, or
hidden secret: but an effect, Hebr. 11.
not only evident to reason, but also to sense. There should also have been no
merit: For look, where either sense or reason gives any proof, faith has no
reward, says one of our Doctors. S. Greg. bow. 26. Joan. 2.
In the Miracle of Cana, and in other such like, there is not any need of
faith, but of good sense for to make trial: as the Master of the banquet did,
who witnessed, that the wine was excellent, having had no more but a taste
thereof; for he could not have faith, not knowing any thing then of that, which
our Savior had done, howsoever he saw the effect: And that which the Apostles
did believe therein, was not the conversion of water into wine, for that they
saw with their own eyes and vision is not faith: but the Divinity of the Soane
of God, secret worker of that apparent miracle, and the merit also of their
faith, was not in seeing the conversion of the water into the wine, but in
believing with the eyes of faith the Divinity of Jesus Christ, which they did
not see with their corporal eyes.

A so^rth reason, wherefore God gives us his body, hid under these signs, was
secretly to hid the mystery of this divine meat, from the view and sight of
Infidels, and to take from them al occasion of calumniating the Christians. For
if they called them Androp^phages, Tertal. in Apol. cap. 7. Minutius Feli^ in
Ocla ^io. Eusch. l. 5. hist. cap. 1. Orig. cont. Cells. lib. 6. Athenag^orat.
pro Christ^^^.
and eaters of humane flesh, as witness Tertullian, Euse bius, Minutius, and
other ancient Fathers, because they heard say, that they fed upon the body of
Jesus Christ in a certain banquet, where notwithstanding they see nothing but
bread and wine; what might they have said, and what crimes might they have laid
to their charge, if they had either understood or seen, that they did eat
that body in the natural form?

Finally, hereby our Savior has preserved the Majesty of his body from many
inconveniences, of beasts and of men, to which it had been exposed, and in
danger to be often injured in his proper form, whereas by hiding the same, all the indignities are received in a garment, which is not his own, that is to
say, in the show of bread and wine; albeit, such as are guilty of those crimes,
must expect just condemnation from God, for the injury which they have done to
this Sacrament.

10. AS THE OLD OBLATION OF FIRST fruits began in Pentecost, so our new.
THe two last draughts, figuring the Mass, consist partly in the circumstance
of time, in which the old Oblation was instituted, and put in practice: partly
in the Sacrifices, which were to be offered before. These two Lineaments have
been divinely accomplished. The time of this Sacrifice was the fiftith day,
Leuit. 25 10.11. Number. 4.
a number importing remission of sins, and of liberty and freedom. In sign
whereof, every fiftith year, each one entered into the possession of the
goods, which they had formerly sold, without repaying any money back. In the
same year, the Land was neither tilled nor sown. And the Levites were freed
from the service of the Temple, after they were come to the fiftith year of
their age. As then the ancient offering was ordained in the Desert, and
practiced only in the Land of Promise in the prefixed time of Pentecost, that
is to say, Harvest being gathered in fifty days after Easter; number of
remission. In like manner the Sacrifice of the Eucharist was instituted by our
Savior, being yet a traveler in the Desert of this world, and put in practice
by the Apostles, after the descent of the holy Ghost upon the day of Pentecost,
fiftith day, day of pardon and remission, putting the children of God in
possession of the promised Kingdom, which they had lost, before; a day of
general Harvest, in which were to be reaped all sorts of celestial fruits.
And as the three sorts of bloody Sacrifices, Holocausts, Propitiatories, and
Pacifiques, did go before the old Oblation of First fruits: in the same
manner, the bloody Sacrifice of the Cross, figured here by them, we^thefore
the practice of our new Oblation. At this time then, and according to the
Figure, the Apostles did begin to celebrate the Mass, and to offer to God the
First Fruits, and the admirable and immortal wheat of the body of the Son of
God, cast on the Cross to die, springing out of the Sepulcher for to revive;
mounting to the right hand of his Father, and gathered into his celestial
barnes, there to reign for ever.

The Oblation of First Fruits, which until then had bin made in Figure, either
in the Law of Nature, or of Moses, was but Barley, as it were, the beginning of
Harvest: but this here was the great Harvest, the great solemnity of
First-fruites, and the great Oblation of celestial Wheat, and of the Bread
that lives and gives life: the true Pentecost, and the true Iubily of the
holy Ghost, chief worker of this Sacrament and Sacrifice. Of which our Savior
speaking, said, The words, Joan. 6^.
which I say unto you are Spirit and Life: as if he had said, The words I
speak unto you, concerning the eating of my flesh, are not to be understood
carnally, after the manner of the Capharnaits, who dreamed of dead flesh to be
cut in pieces; but spiritually of a lively flesh, which my Spirit will make
present, to be given in a spiritual manner without death, or detriment, as he
wrought the conception of this same body in the womb of the Virgin, without
carnal operation, and without any hurt to her Virginity.

11. THE MASS BEGAN TO BE CELEbrated by the Apostles at Pentecost.
IT was then at Pentecost, that the Apostles, new Sacrificers, did give
beginning to the practice of a new Sacrifice, in the new Law, offering a full
and sufficient Oblation, and celebrating the Mess with a pacifying Hoist of
the bread from heaven, and of the immortal Lamb. Saint James was one of the
first that offered in Jerusalem, as all Antiquity witnesses, and after him
the other Apostles, both in Jerusalem, and elsewhere. Then began this divine
and first troop, as the first fruits of the Spirit of Grace, to eat these
delitious Cakes, promised at the coming of the Messiah, and to communicate, not
once a year only, or once a month, or once a week, but every day, for it was
a food they had never eaten of before, exceeding delight full to the taste; and
these good fowls had a continual appetite. A^^ 2.
They were perseuerant (says the Scripture) in the doctr^ne of the Apostles,
in the communion of the breaking of bread, and in prayer. They went to it every
day; but this was, after that the holy Ghost was descended. For before it was
said only, that they did persevere in prayer; they communicated every day,
after the descent of the holy Ghost, Great worker of this mystery: Spirit,
which brought celestial fire into their stomachs, quickness to their
tongues, charity to their hearts: and did let forth the pure water, foretold by
the ancient Lauarites of Salomons Temple. Fountain of David. Fzech 36.25.
Joel. 3.2^. Zach. 13.1.
water of Grace, and of the Sacrament of Baptism, of Penance and the rest,
appropriated to cleanse the entrals and the feet of the Hoasts to be offered,
and of the Offerers themselves, that is to say, to purify the hearts, the
actions, intentions, and affections of them which offered the Son of God,
their good works and themselves, as whole burnt Sacrifices upon the Altar of
his Majesty. O if Moses had been at this Pentecost, at this new Oblation and
Sacrament of truth, whereof so long before he had drawn the Picture. With what
reverence would he have adored it? O if David could have had a place at the
table of this pacifique Bread, and of this immortal Wine, as he had in the
ancient Sacrifices; with what appetite would he have fed upon this celestial
flesh? and with how earnest desire would he have said of this divine drink.
Psalm. 115.
I will take the cup of salnation and call upon the name of the most high. If
Solomon, after having finished his magnificent Temple, had had this body for to
have offered it to God, after the manner of Melchisedech, without effusion of
blood, and without death; how much more rich, and honorable, would he have
thought the dedicating of that Temple, in respect of this Sacrifice alone, then
in regard of thousands of Oxen, sheep, and Bulls, burnt upon the Altar of
Holocausts. O Christian souls, lifted up by contemplation, acknowledge the
gift of your Lord, often celebrate this Pentecost, offer this oblation, take
the first fruits of this deified Wheat, and offer him yours; to the end that
one day you may have place at the Table of felicity, where this same Lord
shall be both the meat and the drink of that banquet.

THE NINTH PICTVRE. THE BREAD OF ELIAS.
The Description.
HAVE you not compassion of this good Elias, 1. Reg. 19.^.
who sleeps under the shadow of this Juniper tree, more resembling one dead,
then a man sleeping? Behold his face pale and wanne, and bathed with a cold
sweat: his head carelessely bending toward the earth, upon the left side; his
eyes half open; his arms cast here and there, and no sign of breath in his
mouth, and all his body stretched out, as if he were yielding up the ghost.
Surely, a little before, being, as it were, beside himself with fear, and
overcome with weariness; he asked of God, if it were his good pleasure, to
take him out of this world, that he might be delivered once for all, from the
griefs, that his soul felt, by reason of the persecution of this cruel
Tygresse, Iezabel, who had sworn by her gods, that she would put him to
death, within four and twenty hours, and in the fervor of his Prayer, he is
fallen a sleep under this shrubbe, where he is but evil accommodated, either
for shadow, or any rest or repose; for it is little, and the leaves are like so
many thorns, which do not keep off the Sun, but prick and pierce the
flesh; and the earth is sowed round about him. Whereby I conjecture, that the
holy man, without election, or choice, cast himself down, where he was,
(finding himself in a manner, out of breath) and where the feebleness of his
body had placed him: But God, who has always his eyes open, to behold the
pains of his servants, and his arms stretched out for their deliverance, has
sent for his comfort and succor this heavenly youth, who stands hard by him
with bread baked upon the cinders, ^. ^^g. 19.5.6.
and a pot of water. It is an Angel, in figure and shape of a man, for so the
Spirits commonly appear unto men. The Painter has made his visage bright, in
form of lightning, representing by this sudden flash, his spiritual and
subtle nature: his locks flying back behind, are of a golden color: he
has also wings set on his back, (according as the Scripture it self does
paint them forth) to signify the Swistnesse of their motion. You see them
unequally spread forth in the air, the one of them showing the inside, the
other the outside, wonderfully fair, and artificially drawn. The two great
feathers, guides of the rest, are of a bright green color, as the wing of a
Peacock: the other next to them are intermingled with yellow, oring-tawnie,
red, and blew, after the fashion of a Rainbow: the little feathers, which
cloth the quills of both these, and of the others, that follow in diverse
ranks, are of diverse colors, as the former: the down which couers the back
of the wing, is like a heap of little small scales, of diverse colors set
upon cotton. His garment is a stole of fine linen, embrodered with a curious
work all about. The refection which he brought for this good Prophet, seems
not great at the first show, consisting only of bread and water, which are the
two most common and vulgar parts of the food of man; but experience will show,
that it is a divine meat and drink: for Elias shall by it be sustained and
fortified, to walk the space of forty days and forty nights, until that he
come to the wonderful Mountain, where of old God gave the Tables of his Law.
Whilst I speak, the good old man sleeps still, and thinks neither of eating
nor drinking, nor of any means to free him from danger. Wherefore the Angel
shakes him the second time, ^. ^eg. 15.7.
and waking him, aduises him to take some refection, and be packing. If you
please to expect until he rise, you shall see him gift with a great leather
girdle, and in a dusty Cassock, reaching to the mid-legge, covered also with a
little mantle flying in the air; and when he is up, he will not fail with
all speed, to obey the words of the Angel, and to get him as far as he can
from the fury and reach of the Queen. Behold he is now risen, and walks on a
pace toward the Mountain of Horeb.

1. THE BREAD OF ELIAS, FIGVRE OF the Sacrament of the Altar.
THe Bread of Elias, was for certain a Figure of our Sacrament, and of many
mysteries hidden in it. We have said elsewhere, that in the Scripture, as well
in the old, as in the new. Bread signifies generally the body of our Savior;
for so much as it is given in meat for the sustenance of our souls, and the
immortality of our bodies. So Jeremy, speaking of the body of our Savior,
Ier. 11.
says in the person of the Jews, resolved in their Council to crucify him;
Lay the w^^d on his bread, that is to say, give the torments of the Cross to
his body, Tertul. l. 4. cont. Mar^.
as the ancient Fathers have explained it: and the Son of God said of
himself, I am the Bread of heaven. In this general sense then, John 6.
the Bread of Elias did Figure this body, and this meat. But more partiularly,
in that it was wonderful in all its causes, effects and circumstances, which
are so many Lineaments, drawn upon the old Figure, for a lively representation
of the truth, which should follow after. First then, this Bread was sent from
God by the service of an Angel; this ^ accomplished in the Sacrament, for it is
given us from God, specially by the ministry of the Priest, Malach. 1.2.7. S.
D^anil. l. (...) 12.
who is called the Angel of God in Scripture, because that after the manner of
Angel, he teaches others, says S. Dionise of Areopagita: for as the
superior Angels enlighten the inferiors by their knowledge; so the Priests
communicate their doctrine to the inferior members of the Church of God. S.
(...). i^id.
Angel, also according unto Saint Hierom, because he is a Mediator between
God and man, and declares to the people the will of God. Finally, Angel of
God, says Saint Chrysostom, S. Chry2ost. hom. ^. in 2. Tim. 1.
because he speaks not of himself, but as sent from God. It is then this
Angel, that consecrateth our bread by the Word of God, that makes it flesh by
his power, and distributeth it by his commission. Secondly, this Bread of
Elias, was bread of Wheat; for if it had been of other matter, the Scripture
would have specified it. And it was Bread, fashioned into a cake, after the
form of loaves, baked on the cinders. This is also accomplished in our
Sacrament, for this is the matter, and that the form of our Hoasts, which are
of Wheat, the Sacrament and the admirable Cakes of the Messiah, of which
mention was made a little before; but what does the Scripture signify by
saying, that this Bread was baked under the imbers.

2. WHAT MEANS THE SCRIPTVRE in signifying, that the Bread of Elias was baked
under the imbers.
THough we know not, how this Bread was baked under the imbers by the Angel;
we believe notwithstanding, that it was so baked; for the Scripture says it,
and because it says nothing without cause, there is no doubt, but under the
hollow of these imbers, there lie hidden some mysteries, appertaining to our
Sacrament. These mysteries are three, amongst many others, which, such as are
more spiritual, may observe. The one is, that it puts us in mind of our
Saviors charity. The imbers are the remainder of fire, and heat past; this
Bread then baked under the hot imbers, mingled with live coals, did Figure our
Sacrament, true memorial instituted by Jesus Christ, and commanded to be
celebrated in his memory, Luke 22.19.
and in a recordation of his love, and death. And therefore it is the true
Bread, baked under the imbers, that is to say, prepared with the burning coals
of his Charity, of which it is a memorial, as also of that, which he endured
for us. The second mystery, taught in this baking, is the great humility of the
Son of God in this Sacrament; the imbers being a thing of small value, or
none at all, and therefore Hieroglyfick of baseness and of humiliation; as the
natural Ceremony of all Nations teaches us, using them in this signification.
So Abraham, out of humility, Genes. 18.
calls himself dust and ^shes, and abaseth himself under the name of these
things. Also the Hebrews of Bethulia, Judith. 7.4.
beseeching the divine Majesty to succor them, in humility cast ashes upon
their heads. So the Pagan King of Niniuy humbled himself, rising from his
throne, John 3.6.
and sitting upon ashes. The Bread then baked under the ashes, is Jesus Christ,
true Bread of heaven, humbled and abased; humbled, not only in making himself
man, in marrying his Majesty with the infirmity of our nature, and in enduring
the torments and reproaches of the Cross, but also in giving himself, as
meat to his creatures, under the Figure and habit of these weak and mean
elements of bread and wine; in giving himself after the manner of a thing dead
and insensible; in giving himself to be eaten and swallowed down of poor
sinners. All these degrees of humility represented in ashes, are here
persormed, and practiced in this Sacrament. With good reason then was it
figured by such a notable sign of great humility, as were the imbers, on which
was baked the Bread of Elias.

The third mystery is, that hereby are signified the many mysteries of this
Sacrament, hidden under the forms of bread and wine, as under imbers.
mysteries of the love and greatness of God, and of the admin^b^^ effects of
this meat, which devout souls may more easily se^^e then I can express. And
as the great Ma^es^y of our Savior, walking visibly upon the earth, was
c^uered under the cloak of our humanity, his almighty power, w^sdome and
bounty, effecting the work of our ^^cemption by the s^eblenesse, folly, and
ignominy of the (...): Fu^^ so in this Sacrifice, he covers the glory of his
body under the veyle of these signs and cinders of (...) and makes the hand of
supreme virtue wo^^e i^^sbly, for the support and health of our souls and
bodies.

3. WHAT SIGNIFIES THE SLEEP of Elias under the shadow of the luniper tree.
THe divine hand of God has by other Lineaments, and colors, no less
admirably painted forth the three former mysteries, and many others in another
corner of this table, where you see Elias sleeping in the shade of the Juniper
tree, for herein we see our Savior sleeping on the Cross; and acknowledge the
memory of his passion, the greatest sign of his love and humility, and the
most high secret of this Sacrament of his precious body. Plin. l. 16. c. 24.
P^in. l. 16. c. 25.
The Juniper commonly is a little shrubbe, growing in sandy and barren places,
void of all exterior beauty; having for slowers and leaves nothing, but sharp
prickles. Elias sleeps, tired and weary, in the shade of this shrub. Is not
this a lively representation of our Savior, vexed with torments, crowned with
thorns sleeping a dead sleep upon the Cross? Tree of humility, shadowing his
greatness; punishment of (...). co^ering his innocence? ^^ce of thorns, pain
and poverty? Are not these the marks of the course of the painful life of
our good King, and of his doleful sleep. Moreover, the selfsame
circumstances set forth to us the qualities of our Sacrament, being a memorial
of his life and death; for if we consider it exteorly, it shows nothing, but
what is little, easy, without fruit, without flowers, and without beauty to
the sense, and all full of thorns to humane judgment, which is backward to
believe the things which it sindes to be repagnant to our capacity, and as it
were, pricked and offended therewith: as long since it happened to the
Capharna^ts, John 6.
and other children of darkness; which since that time ^^^ef ^lowed after
them. On the otherside, the same tree is ^^^r green, and his thorns are his
leaves and beauty, the wood being burnt, drives away Serpents, Pli^. l. 24. c.
^.
and the coal, thereof, have such a lively and burning heat, that they will
end^^e a whole year under the ashes: For which reason, Da^^id calls them
Coals of desolation, Psalm. 119.4.
because they b^^ne scorchingly, and consume forcibly. These qualities do
secretly paint unto us the inward virtue, and beauty of the Cross of our
Savior, and of his Sacrament. For all that which appears there repugnant to
sensuality, is verdure and beauty to the faithful soul, as also a proof of
the omnipotency and love of Jesus Christ toward us. The wood of this Cross,
and of this Sacrament, which is it, that appears hardest in the one, and in
the other, being burned in meditation with the heavenly fire; of which David
said, The fire shall burn in my meditation; being, Psalm. 8.3.
I say, set a sier by this meditation, chaseth away Sernents, that is to say,
the wicked thoughts, which the old Serpent hisseth into our soul, to poison
and sting us to death. It eagendereth also in us coals of charity, which being
hidden under the imbers of humility never die. Thus you (...) the Juniper
decyphered. But under the shadow of this Juniper Elias slept; that is, the
Christian soul takes his rest in meditating upon the Sacrament of the Altar,
which is the shadow, that is to say, the memorial of the death of our Savior,
as has been said; for as the shadow represents the body, so the Sacrament
represents the Passion: and as the body is present with the shadow, so is our
Saviors body with the holy Sacrament.

4. ELIAS HIS WALK, AFTER THE SHAdow of the Juniper tree, to the Mountain
Horeb, and of the water, that was given him with the bread.
Under this shadow, truly, we ought to repose our selves, in the
wearisomnesse of our persecutions, as Elias slept under the figuring shadow of
this tree, when he fled from the rage of Iezabel. For there is not any where a
more sweet and sound rest amidst the travails of this painful life, then in
receiving his body, to meditate upon his death. Which David, by the Spirit of
Prophecy, taught us of old, saying to God in the person of every afflicted
Christian; Psalm. 22.5.
Thou have preyared in my sight a Table against them that trouble me. And
therefore the Angel, as it were, interpreting the Figure, awaketh Elias, and
exhorts him to eat the Bread, figuring this Table: the which he does, and
there with is so well refreshed, that he takes strength and courage to walk
forty days and forty nights, enen to the Mountain of God, freeing himself
from the persecution of the Queen. Where we have yet two other mysteries in
the Figure, appertaining to the truth. For this space of forty days,
signifies the painfulness of our mortal pilgrimage, divided into four
ages, as into four tens; into Infancy, Young age, Man's age, and Old age;
consisting of days and nights, of good and evil, of consolation and
persecution. The walk of Elias continued even to Horeb, signifies the
progress, which is convenient for us to make, ascending by holy desires, and
aspirations, and by good works, even to the top of Christian perfection,
according to the measure of the grace of God, communicated to every one; and
from this top, to zoare up with a victorious flight, above death and the
world, to the high Mountain of our celestial felicity. But now in this
pilgrimage our true Bread, and sustenance, is the body of our Savior, given by
his Angel, to wit, by his Priest, as has been said.

5. THE SIGNIFICATION OF THE pot of Water.
BUT what signifies the pot of Water, given with this bread? surely nothing
else, but the grace of God, given with this Sacrament: for so it was figured by
the Creator himself, when he promised it, by his Prophet Ezechiel, saying, I
will power out upon you clean water, to wit, his Grace; and our Savior cries
in the Temple, Ezech. 36 25. John 7.37.
If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink; speaking of the same Grace.
It is this water which is given us to refresh our weariness; which gives us
force, and makes us able to ascend with ease the Mountain of God, that we may
so obtain the possession of heaven. Who would have thought at the first show,
that in the shadow of this Figure, these excellent mysteries were hidden? And
how many more be there, that a contemplative soul might here observe? But are
not these sufficient to make us admire the infinite wisdom of God, in the
delineation of his secrets? His Sovereign powerfulness in the greatness of
his works? His surpassing bounty in the largeness of his benefits? Truly,
this was an evident testunony of his most wise prescience, to draw so long
before such a lively Picture of the Sacrament of his body: a goodly mark of
his virtue, to have given to Elias Bread of such force, that it could maintain
life, and furnish with strength for forty whole days travel, an
ouer-trauelled body: an evident sign of his great mercy, with so fatherly care
to defend one of his own mortal creatures, and to send him an immortal
Spirit; and one of his own Court, to serve him as his Pantler, and Cup Bearer,
in his necessity. But what is this in respect of that he has done, leaving
this Sacrament to his militant Church; this precious pledge, which is both
armor and food; bestowing upon her his Humanity and Divinity, giving
himself, and all that he is; and that in a manner so divine, and so agreeable
to our infirmity? That, which he did for Elias, was it any more then a Picture,
a representation, and a shadow, compared to the lively Image, to the truth, and
to the Body? Who shall then, O Lord, be able to utter, yea or to conceive thy
wisdom in this Bread, thy omnipotent greatness in this mystery, thy infinite
mercy in this Feast? And what can seeble mortal creatures do, but fumble in
speaking, and admire in silence the height of thy Counsels, and the sweetness
of thy Graces, and thank thee from the bottom of their hearts in humbly
confessing their own insufficiency?

THE TENTH PICTVRE. THE PROPITIATORY SACRIFICE.
The Description.
THE Jewish Priest comes to offer the yearly Propitiatory Sacrifice, Leuit.
4.6.7.
there with to appease God, and obtain of him grace, and pardon for his own
sins, and for the sins of the people. One of them has carried the blood of
the Victime, to the Altar of Perfumes, placed before the door of the
Sanctuary, called Holy of Holies, where the Ark of God is; and the flesh of
that Victime, together with the head and skin, was consumed with fire, out of
the City of Jerusalem, no body eating thereof. They, that burnt it, wash
themselves without the gates of the Town, for that, according to the Law, they
were reputed unclean by this service, and could not enter again into the
company of their brethren, until they were purified by the water of Expiation.
There is also in this Picture represented another Sacrifice for sin, but in
ceremonies much differing from the former. For this is iterated daily, and the
blood of the Victime is not carried into the Sanctuary, but is offered upon the
Altar of Holocausts, in a basen of gold, as you see. The men of the Priestly
lineage do eat in this room, apart, the flesh of the Host, and are
sanctified; whereas in the other Sacrifice, all was consumed by fire, and they
were unclean, which burnt it, as has been said. There is not any woman,
neither any unclean man, admitted to this banquet; for the Law received none
but men, and those sanctified.

1. THREE KINDS OF SACRIFICES.
WE have said elsewhere, that there were three kinds of Sacrifices,
obscurely practiced in the Law of Nature, and expressly ordained in that of
Moses. The first was the Sacrifice of Holocaust: the second, of thanksgiving:
the third, Propitiatory, for the appeasing of God. In this last Sacrifice three
kinds of beasts might lawfully be offered, Bulls, sheep or Goats; and three
kinds of birds, Pigeons, Sparowes or Turtles. All of them figured either the
Sacrifice of the Cross, or that of the Mass, or both together. The first
then, of which mention is made in the present Picture, signified manifestly the
Sacrifie of the Cross; and the second, that of the Eucharist. Let us see the
resemblance between them.

2. OF THE PROPITIATORY SACRIFICE, which Properly signifies that of the Cross.
IF we attentively consider the Figure, we shall easily see the resemblance it
has with the truth. The first Propitiatory Sacrifice was offered but once a
year, and no more; painting forth thereby, the one only Sacrifice of the
Cross, Leuit. 25.10.11. Luke 4.19.
which was offered but once in the year of our Savior, that is to say, during
his life, which was the year and time of the true Iubily of our Lord; and so
offered, as it might never be reiterated. This is Saint Paul's discourse,
writing to the Hebrews; In this will (says he) we are justified by the
Oblation of the body of Jesus Christ once made: And afterward having showed,
that the Jewish Priests, could not take away sin with their bloody Sacrifices,
he adds; Hebr. 10, 10,
But Jesus Christ having offered one Host for sins, s^teth now for ever at the
right hand of God. This Sacrifice then could not be reiterated, our Savior
having so triumphed over death, as he could die no more, neither was it
necessary. The second circumstance was, that in this yearly Sacrifice, the
blood of the Victime of Propitiation, was carried and set upon the Altar of
Incense, seated before the Sanctuary, a Figure of heaven, as Saint Paul
allegoriseth.

The blood of our Savior also, that is to say, the price of his blood, was
carried up to heaven, and set before the eyes of God. Who in consideration of
that blood, shed for men to his honor, gives them pardon of their sins, if it
be not long of themselves. Thirdly, the flesh of the Victime was all consumed
in the sier, with the head and skin, without the Camp, whilst they were in
the Desert, or without Jerusalem, after it was chosen for the place of
Sacrifice. Our Savior was crucified on Mount Caluary, out of Jerusalem, his
body burnt by three fires, and consumed even to death, by the fire of his
infinite love, which made him a voluntary Victime to his Father, for our sins;
by the fire of our sins themselves, which caused him to die; by the fire of
those reproaches, blaspemies and torments, which he endured in his Passion.
And it was easy to see, how his skin felt this fire, when it was cruelly
torn with whips, as also his head, crowned with thorns, and his sacred
visage, defiled with spittle. Finally, none of those, which sacrificed, did
eat of this Propitiatory Sacrifice, no man also did eat of this: And they,
that did burn the flesh of the ancient Victime, were unclean, and were to
purify themselves in the water of Expiation, before they came again into the
City: They also, which did put our Savior to death, became thereby abominable
in the sight of God; and if they would enter into the City of Jerusalem, which
is his Church, they were first to be purified by the water of Baptism. Behold
from point to point, and tittle to tittle, the Figure accomplished in the
Sacrifice of the Cross, which has truly wiped away our sins, and gives
abeundant grace of peace and Propitiation, so it be applied, as God has
ordained, that is, by the Sacraments; but above all, by the Sacrament and
Sacrifice of the Eucharist.

3. THE SECOND KIND OF PROPITIAtory Sacrifice, a Figure of the Eucharist.
NO doubt, but as the first kind of Propitiatory Sacrifice, was accomplished
in the Oblation of the Cross: so the second was fulfilled in some other. For
if nothing passed in the old Law, were it never so little, which our Savior
was not to fulfill in the Law of Grace; and if he himself has so often
protested, that he would accomplish all the Law even to the least tittle, and
that heaven and earth should pass, Matthew. 5.18. Luke 16.17.
before one tittle thereof should be left unperfected: who dare think, that so
remarkable a Sacrifice, as this, has not been fulfilled, according to all the
circumstances thereof. And surely the accomplishment of it is manifestly seen
in the Eucharist, which is iterated every day, as the ancient Figure was; for
Mass is said every day. The blood is set upon the Altar, and offered to God in
the Mass. The flesh of the body of our Savior likewise is there eaten, both
by Priests and Lay people; who in quality of Christians, and faithful people,
are all, in some sort, accounted Priests, and Kings, as Saint Peter calls them:
1. Pet. 2.9.
And for so much as they prepare themselves duly, before they communicate, by
Penance, and other works of Piety, they are male children of the Priestly
Line, as having manly, and not effeminate souls, though they be women and young
Virgins. This flesh is eaten in a holy place, that is to say, in the house of
God, which is the Catholic Church, and ordinarily in the place of Sacrifice
and Prayer; and if the sick eat it in their private houses, it is always in
the circuit of the house of God. And this flesh sanctifies those, who eat it
purely, and without being defiled with any mortal sin.

4. WHAT DIFFERENCE THERE IS Between the Judicial Propitiatory Sacrifices,
and Sacraments, and those of Christians.
THe Sacrifices of the Jews, offered for sins, were Propitiatory, and
obtained pardon, not by any virtue, that wasin them: for as Saint Paul says,
Heb. 10.
It is impossible, that sins should be taken away by the blood of Bulls, and
of Goats; but by the Religion and piety of those which offered them, protesting
by them the faith and hope, that they had in the Messiah to come, Jesus Christ.
After this manner God promised them grace; saying of the devout man, Heuit. ^.
He shall offer Sacrifice, and the Priest shall pray for him, and his sin
shall be forgiven him: They were then available, and obtained pardon, by the
faith and virtue of the Offerers, who were acceptable to God, but not of
themselves, saving only in Figure; whereas the Sacrifice of the Eucharist,
which is the truth of them all, contains and gi^^^h grace, as do all the
Sacraments of the Law of Grace. (...) having been instituted by the Author of
Grace, (...) Christ; and by the M^ster himself in person, and (...) the
mediation of Moses his servant, and the price of our redemption, being paid in
his precious blood; it was but reason, that they should have in them the
virtue, which the former figured: and that seeing the money was now paid in,
they should give truly and indeed remission of sins. Wherefore the
Christians Sacraments do give grace of themselves, and by their proper
operation, in virtue of the prerogative given to them by our Savior; and he
which receives them with good disposition, receives profit by two ways; to
wit, by the Sacrament, which he receives, and by his own devotion, which he
brings with him; whereas the Hebrews had none, but only by the second way.
Their Sacraments were beneficial, as was the brazen Serpent in the Desert;
(...). 21.
for it was not by its own proper virtue, that it did heal the biting of
Serpents, but from the faith of those, which did behold it, according as God
had commanded, it serving only for a sign to behold with their eyes, and for
an object of their faith in God, by whom they were to be cured. But ours are
healthful in the nature of a precious Triacle against poison, which has in it
self the efficacy and strength of a sovereign medicine, and so entering into a
prepared stomach, works a sovereign effect for the health of the body. In
like manner, the Sacraments of the Law of Jesus Christ, have in themselves
virtue to save; as Baptism, Penance, and other Sacraments, instituted for the
remission of sins, wash sins out of the soul, and bring grace by their very
action it self. And principally the Eucharist, containing the Creator of
Grace, Jesus Christ: The other Sacraments having only the fruit; this is both
the Tree, and the Apples: The others giving flowing streams; but this the
Fountain it self. The Eucharist also, in as much as it is a Sacrifice,
obtaines pardon of the Divine bounty for him, for whom it is offered. For the
body of Christ is so precious in Gods sight, and God has been so much
glorified by it, that it cannot be presented to him upon the Altar, but it
will procure favor and grace; especially the chief presenter being the proper
person of his Son himself, in whom he is well pleased, and to whom he can
deny nothing; the Priests are but the visible Vicars, and Mediators of the
action: The Gift and the Giver, the Offering, and the Offerer, is one and the
same, infinitely agreeable to the eyes of the divine Majesty. The Eucharist
then is a Propitiatory Sacrifice, figured by that of the Jews, in the manner,
as has been said.

5. TESTIMONIES OF THE ANCIENT FAthers, both Latin and Greek, teaching the
Sacrifice of the Mass, to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice.
SAint AUGUSTINE, By many ancient Sacrifices, S. Aug. ep. 57.
which were offered for sin, this Sacrifice was signified, which gives
indeed true remission of sins: The blood of which Sacrifice, not only is not
forbidden, (as in those of the Law) but presented to all the world, and all are
invited to drink it. And in his book of the City of God, he writes, S. Aug.
l. 20. de Ciuit. Deic. 25.
That in the Church, Sacrifices are offered for sin, and shall be until the
day of Judgment; but not after, because then there shall be none, to whom
sins can be remitted. And in a Sermon, which he has made of the Innocents,
speaking of the Altar, where Priests say Mass: Idem Sermon. de Innocent.
There (says he) is powered forth the blood of Jesus Christ for sinners.

Saint AMBROSE, speaking of the Eucharist: Jesus Christ offers himself, as
Priest, for the remission of our sins. S. Ambros. lib. 1. Offic. cap. 48.
And in his Exhortations to Virgins, he calls that, which is offered on the
Altar, An healthful Host, Idem in Exhort. ad V^g.
by the which the sins of the world are taken away.

Saint CYPRIAN, S. Cyprian. de Coe^^ Them.
in a Scrmon says, That the Eucharist is an Holocaust for the purging of our
iniquities.

Saint HIEROME, S. Hiero^an c. 1. ^pist. ad ^it.
If men command the Lay people to abstain from the company of their wives,
that they may pray the better; what ought men to think of the Bishop, which
offers to God every day the Victims without spot, for his own sins, and the
sins of the people?

Saint CHRYSOSTOM, S. Chrysostom. lib 6. (...).
The Priest, as Ambassador and Orator, makes intercession to God for all; to
the end to make him merciful, not only to the sins of the living, but also
of the departed. And in his Lyturgie, or form of saying Mass, Idem in Lyturg.
H. st^a (...). 3. in ep. ad ^p^^.
he prays to God thus, Make us fit to present to thee gifts and Sacrifices,
for our sins, and for the ignorances of the people; and oftentimes calls
the Eucharist an healthful Host.

And Saint BASIL also in his Mass, S. Basil. in Ly^^rg. initio.
Make us worthy (says he, praying to God) to present our selves before thee
with a clean heart, and to serve thee, and offer this venerable Sacrifice, for
the blotting out of our sins, and the malice of the people.

Saint JAMES in his: S. Iam. in Ly^^rg.
We offer this unbloody Sacrifice to thee for our sins, and the ignorances
of the people.

Saint IVSTIN MARTYR, S. Justin. ^ial. Cont. T^^pho.
writes, That the Sacrifice of the Dove, which men did offer for the Leaprous,
in the Law of Moses, was the Figure of the Eucharist, offered for the
purgation of sins.

Saint CYRIL of Jerusalem, S. Cyril. Hier os. ^atech, Mi^l^^. 5.
We offer Jesus Christ, slain for our sins, to the end to make him
merciful to us, and to others, who is most benign and grations.

In conclusion, all the Catholic Doctors, Latin and Greek, are of the same
faith, and speak the same Language, and call the Sacrifice of the Mass, the
true and only Sacrifice of Christians, instituted by Jesus Christ, for the
obtaining from God remission of sins; the Sacrifice of the Cross, is not the
Sacrifice of Christians, though it be the foundation of Christian Religion: for
the Christians neither can offer it, our Savior being now immortal, nor
desire to offer it, for so much as they should be like to the Jews, which
crucified him. It is the Eucharist, which is the sole and proper sacrifice of
Christians, ordained for a memorial of that of the Cross; and to apply the
merit thereof. And as Baptism, Confirmation, and the other Sacraments, as
Sacraments, remit sin, in the virtue of the Sacrifice of the Cross: so the
Eucharist, as a Sacrifice, applies to us remission of sins, gained upon the
Cross, and after this manner is a propitiatory Sacrifice. This Doctrine is
according to God, and according to reason: For since Jesus Christ is Priest
eternally, Psalm. 109.
according to the order of ^^^lchisedech, the Sacrifice instituted by him
according to that order, which is that of the Mass, and no other, must needs
be Propitiatory; because it is the essential office of a Priest to offer for
sin, as Saint Paul writes. (...).
For every High Priest taken from among men, is appointed for men in those
things, that pertain to God, that he may offer gifts, and sacrifice for
sins. Jesus Christ then, as Priest, offers h^nselfe in this Sacrifice for
our sins, and he does it by the ministry of Priests his Vicars, even as by
them he teaches, baptiseth, confirms, and exercises the other offices, and
holy functions of our Doctor and Redeemer.

I^ stands with reason also, seeing that Prayer, Alms, Fasting, Penance, and
other actions of Piety be honorable and pleasing to God, appease his wrath,
and obtain of him remission of faults committed; that this Sacrifice, which is
the greatest honor, that the Church can present to God, and the most divine of
all other holy actions, should have force to appease him, and gain his Grace.
Moses. Exodus 3^.3^. Dan. 4.2^.
Moses obtained pardon for many thousand of sinners: Daniel did counsel the
King of Babylon to redeem his sins by Alms. These works then were
Propitiatory, and how should not then the Sacrifice of the body of the Son of
God, offered by the same his Son, and by his members, in supreme worship of
his Majesty, be so? The enemy of mankind, has he not been extremely envious
and malicious, that would take away this beleese from the souls of the
children of God? and such as have believed his deceits, against the honor of
God, and against the Doctrine of his Church,; Are they not miserably bewitched,
and altogether unworthy to have remission of their faults?

6. AFTER WHAT MANNER THE SACRIfice of the Mass, and the Sacraments remit
sin, since that of the Cross is our whole redemption.
BUT if the Sacrifice of the Cross be our whole redemption, and the infinite
price, paid for all our sins, and of a thousand sinful worlds, if there had
been so many; how say we, that the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Sacraments, and
good works are propitiatory? I answer, that the Sacrifice of the Cross is
the Fountain head of our salvation; the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Sacraments
are the Rivers by which the merits of the Cross flow into our souls, and
without which, this merit should be unfruitful to us. Baptism is one of these
Rivers, so is Consirmation, and the other Sacraments. The Sacrifice of the
Mass is one of them also; and by them the Cross imparteth salvation, but to
no other, saving only to Christians: For Turks and Pagans do not receive any
fruit, because they have not any Sacrament, nor Sacrifice, by which they may
open the door to come to this Merit, and make flow into them the waters of
Redemption, and of health. The Cross to them is a Fountain stopped, an
Orchard enclosed, a Treasure locked up; because they neither have the
Conduit-pipe, nor the entry, nor the Key, by which they may be partakers
thereof. The Mass therefore is no more a new redemption, then the Sacraments,
as that of the Cross was; but an excellent means to apply the redemption,
which was made on the Cross. The Sacraments are means in their kind. The
Eucharist has the Pr^uiledge to do it, both as a Sacrifice, and as a
Sacrament.

Good works are good and Propitiatory, not of themselves, but because they are
founded upon the Cross; and without this stay, they are unprofitable to
eternal life. Wherefore, the Sacraments, the Sacrifice of the Mass, good
works, godly actions, and all Christian Religion, take life, force and virtue
from the Cross. The Sacraments are the Conduit-pipes; the good works, the
fruits; the Eucharist is the great Key. The Sacraments profit, and are
Propitiatory only to those, which receive them in good disposition; Baptism
remits sin only, to him, that is baptized; Penance to him, which does it;
and so of the rest. The Eucharist, as a Sacrament, gives grace only to him,
which communicates, but as a Sacrifice it profits all those, for whom it is
offered: as well for that it is a most noble action, made with a general and
most effectual Prayer; as also by reason of the present it makes to God; and
is therefore a general means to appease him, by offering him the body of his
Son, who has paid all, and for all, and therefore is able to obtain all.
Wherefore, if Mass be said for the Just, it procures them increase of grace,
and virtue to persevere therein; if for repentant sinners, it obtaines them
pardon; if for the impenitent, it obtaines them repentance; if for Infidels, it
obtains their conversion; and so it profits all the living. If it be applied
to the Saints departed, it honors them; if for those which are in Purgatory it
diminishes their pains. But what if you object? Mass is offered for many,
which notwithstanding remain obstinate in their wickedness? I grant they do,
but it is by their own fault, who deprive themselves of this fruit; for it
profits others. The Cross is a ways then the foundation of our whole
redemption; the Sacraments are the means for to apply them in particular to
every living Christian well disposed; the Sacrifice of the Mass, to all, as
has been said; and in them all, the blood shed on the Cross, is the price and
payment of our redemption.

7. THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS, and the Sacraments, rather give, then take any
honor from the Cross.
AS the Sacrifice of the Mass, and all the Sacraments of the Church, do take
their virtue from the infinite merit of the Cross; so they honor it, by
applying the virtue thereof. For so many times as they give grace, so often
they give occasion to praise the first cause of that grace. Neither more nor
less, then naturally an Eagle, a Lion, a Dolphin, an Emeraud, and every other
noble creature, bringing by his goodness and beauty, some profit or pleasure to
man, stir him up to praise the Creator, who gave that goodness and beauty to
the creature. So the Sacraments giving grace, by that action of theirs,
testify to us the merit of the Passion of Christ, meritorious spring of this
grace. But above all Christian Mysteries, the Sacrisice of the Mass excels;
and that for two reasons. The first, because it contains in it present the
same body, which redeemed us upon the Cross, and presents in this body, the
fountain of our redemption. Whereas other Sacraments communicate nothing, but
the Rivers flowing from that Fountain. The second, because it lively
represents the action of this our redemption, to wit, the Passion of our
Savior, and the Sacrifice of the Cross; for the same body, which was offered
on the Cross, is offered here; on the Cross, by bloody Sacrifice; here, by
unbloody Sacrifice: on the Cross it was immolated; it is immolated also here;
but there with slaughter, and violent effusion of blood; here it is immolated
after the manner, we have said; to wit, the forms of bread and wine, and by
them represented as a dead and insensible thing, such as are bread and wine,
and his blood seeming to be after the manner of wine shed, under which it is;
whereas it is always in his body, and both body and blood remain impassible,
immortal and glorious. Upon the Cross, his power seemed weakness and
infirmity; his goodness malice, and his wisdom folly; for the wicked beheld
him poor, believed him impotent, blasphemed him as a malefactor, and derided
him as a fool; though he was in himself all powerful, all good, all wise:
all this is represented in the Sacrifice of the Mass. For in outward show
nothing appears, but infirmity, to the eyes of Infidels, neither will they
believe, that our Savior can make his body there present; it also seems to
them impiety, and therefore they call it Idolatry; it appears to them nothing
but folly, and therefore they mock at it, as if it were a Com^edy; whereas,
notwithstanding, it is an action of the Son of God, and the most godly work
of Piety and Religion, that is in the Church. For these reasons then, it
honoreth, it preaches, it communicates, it represents the virtue of the
Cross, above all other Christian mysteries: and no meruell for it was ordained
by the hand of him, which has of old drawn forth, in the old Sacrifices, all
the Figures of the Cross; and who knew well, how to prepare a Sacrifice in the
Law of his Grace, which might lively, 1. Cor. 11.26.
and effectually represent the same Passion in every point. And as he has
wisely ordained it, so has he chosen it for a most honorable memory of his
Cross. Wherefore the Adversary affirming, that the Mass euacuats the honor of
the Cross, is a not orious liar, a wicked deceiuer, and an impudent
calumniator, and goes about himself to euacuat the honor of the Cross, and
deprive men of the fruit of it, obscuring the truth by his lies, deceiving
souls by his impostures, and blemishing the actions of piety by his slanders.

8. THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS, Profitable to obtain from God all kind of
good, and it extends it self to all persons, except the damned.
Seeing that the Sacrifice of the Mass, is so good a means to obtain remission
of sins; it is easy to conceive, that it is able to help us to obtain,
whatsoever else is profitable for us. For it is more hard to appease the wrath
of God, and to incline him to be merciful unto us, when by sin we are his
enemies; then to obtain all other gifts from him, when he is become our
friend. We know likewise that the ancient Sacrifices were offered, nor only
for sin, but for many other temporal ends also. It follows then, that the
Sacrifice of the Eucharist, which succeeded to all the ancient Sacrifices (as
Saint Chrysostom, S. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 95. S. Aug. cont. Ad^ers. leg. l. 1.
c. 20 S. Leoserm. 8. de Pass. Dom.
Saint Augustine, Saint Lee, and the other Doctors of the Church affirm) may
be offered for the same ends; otherwise the truth should come short of the
Figure, which were absurd. That the ancient Sacrifices were employed for the
obtaining of other gifts, besides remission of sin, is evident by the holy
Scripture, which tells us, that the Hebrews offered Victims for the life of King
Darius, Darius 1. Esd. 6. Heliodor. 2. Match. ib. 3.32
and his children. As also that Onias, High Priest, offered for the health of
Heliodore. The Mass then is much more able to obtain all that, which the
Judicial Oblations obtained; for they contained only the Figure of the body
of our Savior, but the Eucharist exhibits the real body it self. And this
has been the practice of the Church even from her Cradle. 1. Tim. 2.
Saint Paul commanded that public prayer should be made in the Church for
Kings, and other persons in authority, to the end we might live peaceably under
them; these Prayers the holy Fathers, Saint Chrysostom, S. Chrysostom. in 1. ad
Tim, 2. S. Amb. l. 6. de Sacer. c. vlt. S. Aug. ep. 59. ad Paul. Th^oph. and
Occum in 1. Tim. 2. Tertul. ad Sea. pull. S. Aug. l. 22. c. 8. S. Prosper.
Aquitan. de predictio D^i. c. 6. S. Chrysostom. in h^^. 1^. and 21. in Act.
Apost. S. Hier^s. Catech. 5. Mis^ag.
Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine and others, expound to be those, which are made
in the Sacrifice of the Mass. Tertullian confirms this custom; We
Sacrifice (says he) for the health of the Emperor. Saint Augustine writes,
That in his time certain Priests said Mass, and offered Sacrifice in a
house, for to drive away the Devils, which infested it, and made it
inhabitable. Saint Prosper witnesses, that the Sacrifice of the Mass, was
offered for a woman possessed, that she might be delivered; and after that
she was dispossessed, the same was offered again in the way of thanksgiving.
Saint Chrysostom, in many places, makes mention of the custom of the Church,
to say Mass for the fruits of the earth; and the testimony of Saint Cyril of
Jerusalem is clear in this matter, who in one of his Lessons, speaking of the
Mass, says, After that the spiritual Sacrifice and unbloody worship is done,
over the same Heast of Propitiation, we pray to God, for the common peace of
all the Churches, for the tranquillity of the world, for Kings, for Soldiers,
for the sick, for the afflicted; In conclusion for all those which have need
of succor.

9. THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS profitable to the Faithful departed, which are
in Purgatory, and honorable to those, which reign in heaven.
THe faith, and custom of the Church, has ever been to offer also to God, the
Sacrifice of the Mass, for the souls of the faithful departed, not to
procure pardon for their sins, but to obtain of God release of the pain,
due to their sins, who are in Purgatory. For they which are in hell, are cut
off eternally from the body of Jesus Christ, and incapable of succor from his
precious blood. Saint Chrysostom, S. Chrysostom. hom. ^9. ad. Pap. An^ie. and
^^m. 3. (...). ad Philip.
speaking of this custom: Not without cause (says he) it was or da^^ed by the
Aposiles that commemoration should be made of the faith full departed, in the
dreadful mysteries (for so he calls the Sacrifice of the Mass) for they
well knew, it would bring them great benefit and profit. According to which
faith, S. Aug. l. 9. ^^^sess. c. 11.12.13.
S. Augustine was entreated by his Mother, to pray to God for her after her
death in the Mass, She (says he) charged me, not to prepare for her^
sumptuous to^be; but only signified, that sheed s^r^d, that remembrance should
be made of her at the Altar, at which emery day she religiously served God;
knowing that from it, was the Victime distributed, (...) 2.14.15.
which w^ped out the hand writing of decree that was against us, and led the
enemy in triumph. Which he performed like a faithful child, causing the
office for the dead, and Mass to be said for her at her burial, helping her
rather after this manner, then bewailing her with tears, as himself
witnesses, saying to God; We wept not. O Lord, in the prayers, which we made,
when the Sacrifice of our price was offered up to the^, Whereby he shows, what
was the faith and religion of all the Church in his days. S. Epiphan^, also
puts this custom amongst the Articles of Catholic Doctrine; and witnesses,
Epiph. here is. 57. and in A^acephale^^, and S. Aug. de (...). cap. ^3.
(as after him did also S. Augustine) that Aerius was Anathematized, as an
Heretic, for having held, that the Sacrifice of the Mass was not to be
offered for the dead.

The same Church has also at all times, offered Sacrifice of thanksgiving,
for the Victime of the blessed Saints, which are reigning in heaven. And
here-hence it is, that men say Mass upon their Feasts, in which they are
called upon and remembered, not that men offer Sacrifice to them, for that was
the slander of the old Heretics and Pagans: but to give thanks to God, who
made them victorious, and to show, that we rejoice in their glory. And this is
it Saint Augustine declares, S. Aug. l. 8. de Ciuit. cap. 27.
answering to the calumnies of Heretics, Who is he amongst the Infidels (says
he) that ever heard the Priest, being at the Altar, say in his Prayer, I offer
Sacrifice to thee, O Peter, O Paul. O Cyprian? for it is to God, and not to
them, that that Sacrifice is offered, within the Churches dedicated to their
memory. And elsewhere, Ide^ co^^^^ Fa^st. l. 20. c. 21.
almost in the same terms: We erect not Altars to Martyrs, but only to God,
in remembrance and memory of them: For who did ever hear any Prelate, doing
his office at the Altar, where Saints bodies lie, say, We offer Sacrifice to
the O Peter, O Paul, O Cyprian? but what is offered, is offered to God, who
crowned the Martyrs, though it be done in places dedicated to their memory. By
which Doctrine it appears, how the Sacrifice of the Mass, is not only
Propitiatory for sins, but profitable to obtain of God all kind of benefits.
And that it extends it self to all sorts of persons, except the damned. And
that as the Sacrifice of the Cross, is a general, and fundamental treasure,
for all the members of the Church of God, living and dead, present and to come;
so the Sacrifice of the Mass is an instrument, and universal means to apply
the merit of this treasure to every one.

THE ELEVENTH PICTVRE. THE FIVE LOAVES AND TWO FISHES.
The Description.
HE, which is in company of Jesus, John 6. Matthew. 14.21. Marc. 6.40.
can want nothing. Do you behold this great number of people, set by hundreds
and fifties, upon these beds and Tapestries of herbs and flowers of the
Spring, taking their refection in the midst of the Desert? they are about five
thousand men, besides women and little children: Matthew. 14.21.
who following our Savior many days, heard his Word with such fervor and
delight, that before they were a ware, all their provision was spent, and were
utterly destitute of necessary food, in these high mountains and barren
places, fruitful only of grass and flowers. Yet notwithstanding, they
banquet to their fill, having marvelous abundance of food, though all their
provision was but five Barly-loaues and two fishes, which a young Boy of the
troop had by chance brought with him. O this Boy shall one day, under the name
of Marshall, be a great feeder and nourisher of Christian souls, in the
Country of Aquitan. This provision was only casual, and very insufficient
for so great a number of people: but the Divine providence was neither casual,
nor nigardly, which knows well how to provide for want, and to make abundance
of new Manna spring up in the midst of the Desert, and to feed them after with
material food, whom he had fed before with the bread of his holy Doctrine. For
he multiplied the Loaves and the Fishes, by his blessing, in such abundance,
as they did suffice to fill all this people, set at so many tables, who brought
with them as good appetites to eat, as they had strong stomachs to digest.
All cat as much as they will of these Loaves, and these Fishes. And the
Apostles are the diuiders and deliuerers, no less wondering then joyful to
see, that the bread and fishes increased in their hands, as fast as they
distributed them to their guests. But Philip and Andrew above all other were
astonished; for they also above therest apprehended the greatness of the
multitude, and the little quantity of food, which was to be had in that place.
The good Philip said, Two hundred pentworth of bread will not suffice that
every ont may have a little bet, (as the custom is to distribute holy-bread.)
Whereas these five Loaves, brought by this child, were not to be valued at
three pence. And Andrew giving notice to our Savior, Cohn. 6.7.
of the before named Loaves and Fishes, says, But what are these amongst so
many? As indeed, they might seem to be nothing, for so great a number,
according to the rule of humane judgment, meaning the food with the eaters,
and not conndering, what the divine hand of God can do. Whilst they serve and
admire the miracle, the gues's bestirre themse lues lustily, without sparing
either their pains in eating, or the meat set before them. They, who have
long since filled their stomachs begin to fill their bockets; and there is not
one here, that does not keep some piece of this bread; some for necessary
provision, others as relics of devotion. And after all this, the Apestles
filled twelve baskets full with the fragments. All of them are transported with
joy and astonishment, preferring our Savior before Moses, as having found a
means, by his omniporent hand to furnish a table in the Desert; whereas Moses
procured only Manna to fall from heaven, made to his hands, by the hands of
Angels, and not produced by any blessing of his. Whereupon they resolve to take
our Savior their head, and to make him their King. But he, who was created
King by his Father, Apec. 19.16.
and carries written in his thigh, and in his garment this style, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, and is descended on earth to endure dishonors, and
not for to joy in the glory of the world, will not have to do with such
electors, nor with such a Kingdom. Wherefore, he goes further into the
desert, stealing away, both from their fight, and election.

1.
THE MIRACLE OF THE FIVE LOAVES, a Figure of the Eucharist.
THis wonderful banquet, prepared in this Desert, was a Picture of our
Sacrament, as the Figures were, which even now have been declared: not so
ancient for time, but wrought by the hand of a more cunning workman. For the
former Figures were anciently pictured indeed, according to the direction of
God, but by the hand and Pensell of Moses: this was the invention of our
Savior himself, and freshly drawn by his own hand. Wherefore, those former
did signify a far off, and in diverse subjects, the Eucharist, and the Author
thereof; this is an entrance unto it, and shows it to be near at hand,
because it is done by the Author himself, in proper person. The others set
forth our divine mystory, as the old Prophets foretold the Messiah to come
many years after; this here did show him in a manner present; as Saint John
Baptist did point at our Savior with his finger. And therefore, as our Doctors
note, the Evangelist Saint John great Secretary, and most privy to his Masters
intentions, before he would set down the Sermon, which our Savior made of
the eating of his flesh, sets in the for efront the declaration of this
miracle, as a piece of the same subject, necessary for the understanding of
that Sermon, and for the stranthening of our faith, concerning the Feast, which
our Savior was to prepare shortly after. By this method the supreme wisdom
has wisely taught us, tracing out by little and little, both by deeds and
words, the way to the faith of this mystery of his precious body, working a
miracle upon the sustenance, which was to be a sign thereof, and declaring to
us, the design of the future banquet of his flesh, to be after exhibited under
the forms of bread. Behold now proportions and colors of the Picture.

2. IN WHAT THE MIRACLE OF THE five Loaves did Figure the Eucharist.
THis miracle was a Figure of the Eucharist in general, because it was a
wonderful refection, as that is of the Eucharist: wonderful in that it was
clean contrary to other common repasts, which in the beginning are greatest in
quantity, and the longer the banquet continues, the less meat remains, till
at last all be consumed. Whereas here contrariwise, in the beginning there was
but a little meat, to wit, five Loaves and two Fishes; and the same enereased
more and more, the more it was distributed and eaten; and in the end of the
Feast, there remained great abundance. This wonder appears far greater in
the Eucharist, in which one only body of our Savior, has sufficed for all
the Church, now more then sixteen hundred years; which multiplieth without
being many, and is eaten without being consumed. For if there be an hundred
thousand Hoasts consecrated, it is in them all, and yet it is but one. And if
it be received of an hundred thousand mouths, it is taken whole and entire of
all, and neithere is, nor can be consumed of any. This is the first draught of
the likeness that is between the miracle of the five earthly loaves, and our
celestial bread, which is but one. The other smaller draughts are these: That
miracle was made of bread, by the blessing of our Savior, it was done in the
Desert, it was prepared without labor, pain, or difficulty; it was
distributed by the Apostles, and was a refection given both to the souls and
bodies; there is no doubt but faith, hope, and charity, reverence, religion,
and other virtues, were planted in the hearts of many of them, when they beheld
this admirable work, done by our Savior for their good: herehence it was,
that they would needs create him King. These designs are expressed with lively
colors in the Eucharist; for it is made of bread by the benediction of our
Savior, who works secretly by his Almighty word, as a Master workman in
this Sacrament. It is made in the Desert of this life, for in the other there
shall be no more Sacraments. It is made after a simple manner, only of bread
and wine, and the words of Consecration: whereas the ancient Sacrifices of the
Jews were made with pain and travel, much killing, much washing and burning
of the Victimes. And if some other ceremonies be used in the Mass; they are
easy, and appertain rather to the decency, then to the essence of the
Sacrament and Sacrifice. In conclusion, this Sacrifice and Feast, is made by
the ministry of the Apostles, and of Priests, succeeding them; and it serves
to plant and increase in the soul (as elsewhere we have declared) Faith, Hope,
Charity, Religion, and other divine virtues, true food of our souls, and to
give vigor to our bodies, that they may rise gloriously upon the great day of
the general resurrection.

3. THE TWO FISHES, A FIGVRE OF the same Sacrament.
THe Fishes, by another similitude, do signify to us the same Sacrament. S.
Aug. l. 1 S. de Qiuit. cap. 23.
Our Fish is Jesus Christ (says Saint Augustine) because he alone was without
sin in the depth of this mortality, as in the profundity of waters. The same
have said Tertullian, Tertul. de Rap. c. 1. Opt. Mil. l. 3. The Sibills. S.
August. ibid. Iethus.
Optatus Mileuitan, cited by the same Saint Augustine, and many other Fathers.
And before them, the Sibills in their writings, called our Savior a Fish: but
the Greek word, Iethus, which they used, contains a remarkable Anagram,
which is not found in the Latin, nor in any other Language; for the five
letters whereof it is composed, make, Resus Christos Theon Vies Seter
Jesus Christ Son of God Savior. He is then our Fish, and the Fish given for
food to the Church, is no other, but Jesus Christ, given in the table of the
Eucharist. And it skilleth not, that in this miracle there are two Fishes; for
both did signify one self-same Jesus Christ, God and man, as does also the
five Loaves; and it is not necessary that a Figure should be like in all
things to that which is signified. Moreover, Christians, in respect of their
Head, are also called Fishes: We are bred in the water (says Tertullian,
Tertul. l. Bap. c. 1.
as little fishes, to the likeness of our Fish Jesus Christ. For it is the
water of Baptism, which regenerateth us in Jesus Christ, to his Spouse the
Church; and whosoever are not Fishes of this water, perish in the sea of this
world.

4. WHEREFORE NO MENTION IS MADE of any drink in this miracle, and other
circumstances of it.
THe Evangelist makes no mention of any drink in this miracle; it being
probable, that as Manna was both meat and drink, even so were these Loaves
and Fishes multiplied, which is also agreeable to the mystery: for seeing, they
that follow Jesus Christ, are fishes, which naturally never drink; these also
need no drink, being already become the Fishes of our Savior, believing in
him: albeit, the mystery is yet greater, in that hereby is noted a rare
fingularity of the holy Sacrament. For even as Manna alone, the Loaves and the
Fishes, did serve both for meat and drink: So the Sacrament in one kind is
both meat and drink, the body of our Savior serving for both together, as
did Manna, and those Loaves and Fishes, Figures of it.

Now for other circumstances of this miracle, we observe, first, that it was
done in the Springtime, upon the evening, in the Desert, before them which had
heard, and followed our Savior, they being bidden to sit upon the grass.
These circumstances teach us, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist, was
instituted in the spiritual Spring of the world, Psalm. 103.32.
when Jesus Christ shortly after was to send his holy Spirit, to renew the face
of the earth, to make a new Testament, amending the old, to wit, a new Law, a
Law of Grace; upon the evening, that is to say, in the last hour of the world:
and in the Desert, that is, during this mortal life. And that for those, which
should believe in his Word, and which constantly follow him, even unto the
breaking of bread, taming of their flesh, despising of worldly vanities, and
the doing of that, which they there did corporally, eating also upon the grass
in the Desert: For all flesh is grass, Esaias. de 6.
and all his glory is as the flower of the field, says Esaias: and he, who
subdueth his flesh, and makes no reckoning of the flourishing beauty of the
world; is set upon the grass, worthy to be fed with the blessing of our
Savior, by the service of his Apostles; that is to say, to receive the food of
immortality in the Church of God, by the hands of his Vicars, which are the
Pastors, and Priests thereof.

5. WHY THE PEOPLE WOULD CREATE our Savior King, and why he fled them.
THese people thus satisfied, were about to create our Savior King; not
entreating him, but compelling him to accept the Royalty; which he foreseeing,
stayed not until they came to him, but quickly withdrew himself from them,
and fled into the Mountain to pray. But from whence comes this desire in these
men, and wherefore did Jesus Christ refuse this honor, fithence that he was
Prince of heaven and earth, and absolute King, without dependence of any other?
If for the miracle, they would have made him King; wherefore had they not the
same will, when they saw him cast forth devils out of the bodies they
possessed, and make those mighty, wicked and rebellious spirits obedient to his
Commandments? Why had they not the same will, when he commanded all diseases
and maladies, and was obeyed? Making the blind to see, and the lame to go,
etc. These wonderful miracles, did not they also merit the same Diadem, which
this refection in the Desert did? In truth, if men consider them in their
greatness, they merited a divine respect and acknowledgement; but this miracle
had some particular thing, which moved these men to this desire and design.
First, it was a kind of miracle never heard of, before Moses had made Manna
descend from heaven, Elias had made the flower and oil to increase in favor
of the Widow; but Moses made not the Manna with his own hands, Exodus 16. 3.
King. 17.14.16.
as our Savior wrought this miracle; and that which Elias did, he did not by
his own power, but received power of God to doeit. Our Savior multiplied
these Loaves in his own hands, and with his own proper blessing; this made
them believe that he could be no less then the Messiah, and King promised to
Israel; and for this cause they sought for to declare him King. Secondly, the
other miracles of our Savior were particular, principally effected for their
good which were delivered, and healed. This here was a public benefit done in
the sight of all the multitude, and to the profit of every one of them in
particular, which caused in them a general desire to acknowledge the same by
conferring a public honor upon our Savior, and by making him their head, to
whom they were so much obliged. Thirdly, they did acknowledge, that this
refection was a benefit, worthy of a King. For the principal office of a King,
is to guide and feed his subjects; for which cause they are compared to
Feeders, and called Pastors of the people. They would then have proclaimed him
King, Esaias 44.28. Homer. Iliad 2. Philo Iudaus, l. de Agricult.
as the Roman Soldiers made their Emperors, and the other Nations of the
world, their first Kings. But our Savior was not come to take unto himself
any earthly Kingdom, but to establish a spiritual Kingdom of his elect, who
are the inheritance of his Church; in the which he is King of the Jews, and
reigns likewise in the hearts of all his faithful subjects. The earth is too
base, and too little for such a King; it is heaven, which is the true throne of
such a Majesty, (...). 109.2.
the earth is but his sootstoole? Wisely therefore did he to contemn this
royalty, reading us a Iesson by his example, to despise and slye the honors of
this world, as transitory and deceitful, and not to make esteem, but of such
presents, as come from heaven, which are firm and permanent, and only worthy
to be given by an Almighty King, and to be sought after by reasonable
creatures capable of immortality.

6. GOD, NOVRISHER OF EVERY CREAture, true nutriment of his Children?
IF this good people, seeing that Jesus Christ had so I magnificently and so
miraculously filled them, would have made him King, and honored him with an
honor, which they held to be the greatest of all greatness here upon earth,
as we have heard; what would they have thought, and what would they houe done,
if they had a little understood, that this Lord was he, which of old had
freed their Fathers in the Desert? and which nourishes the Angels in heaven,
and the blessed Spirits with food of his felicity? who gives to eat to every
creature? who keeps open table; in the spacious air, upon the face of the
earth, within the depthes of the waters, providing for the fowls in the air,
the beasts of the earth, for the fishes of the sea, and for all living
creatures their proper food, in their own dwellings? What would they have
said, if the eyes of their soul had been opened, to behold the grearnesse,
highness, and profoundnesse of that miracle, without comparison saire more
admirable, then the they did so much admire, and esteemed worthy to be
rewarded with a Kingdom. It is a far greater miracle, (says Saint
Augustine) to provide for the whole world; S. Aug. Tract. in Joan. 24.
then to feed five thousand men with five Leaves and two Fisves. And sithence
this miracle is the greater, wheresore did these men perceive only the lesser?
Was it not for so much as the most part of them had not the entire faith, they
should have had of the Messiah, whom they did esteem indeed a great man, but
not great God, as they ought? But what would they heue said, had they known
that this Savior would give his slesh to men to eat, and feed them to
immortality? And that with so many miracles, as Nature it self stands
wondering at them? Would they not forthwith have proclaimed him, not only the
King of men, but of Angels also, and of all the world? Nay would they not have
inferred by good discourse, that he was God both of heaven and earth? For it
is God alone, who has power to give himself in meat, without diminution and
detriment; he alone in heaven gives his Divinity for food of the blessed, and
he alone gives on earth the body of his Humanity to his servants, for food to
salvation remaining no less entire then before; a work worthy of God,
infinite as well in power, as in goodness. Mortal Kings may well prepare
magnificent feasts, such as were made by Holofernes, Solomon, Cleopatra, and
many Roman Emperors; 3. Reg. 4. Plutarch. in Anton.
but they made them not of their own substance, it was not of their own
bodies, that they were liberal, it was but of the bodies of beasts, and of
other provision, which they had taken from the storehouse of Nature. God alone
can give himself to be eaten, he alone is almighty, not to be exhausted,
incapable of diminution. If then these things be so great; and if we believe
and see here that, which they neither saw nor believed; If we see the
providence of our Savior to govern and nourish all the world; his charity to
us, in norishing us with his flesh from the Table of his Church; his truth in
promising moreover the food of felicity. Why do we not admire his benefits?
Why do we not magnify them? Why do we not give him immortal thanks for
them? The multitude of his wonders, do they dazell our eyes, as a bright
lightning, or as the light of the Sun? The continual multiplying of his
presents, does it make his great liberality less admirable to us? But if, as
mortal men, we take no heed to the works, which God does in Nature every day,
as being ordinary and common; let us at least regard the rare excellency of
this Table, furnished with a meat more worth, then all that Nature can
afford. The Jews filled with five Loaves and two Fishes, thought not of the
miracle, which God does in nourishing the whole world, because that was a
miracle frequent and common; And yet they adwored that of the five Loaves, S.
Aug. Tract. in Joan. 24.
not because it was greater (says S. Augustine) but because it was more rare,
and less usual. Wherefore admire not we then the rareness of our Sacrament,
sithence it is the miracle of miracles, having no like, and which by no
continuance of time can become vulgar, as the miracles of Nature? Wherefore cry
we not in our hearts, Live the King of Kings, Reign the King of Kings,
Immortal glory to the King of Kings, which has given a refection of so great
a wonder; filling with one loaf and with one fish, that is, with his sacred
body, not five thousand men for one time, but millions of men and of women,
that have wandered in the Desert of this world these sixteen hundred years, and
will fill yet as many millions more of Christian souls, as shall feed upon it,
to the end of the world; who will fill them, not as he has filled those, with
the material food of the body, for the maintenance of this mortal life. But
with spiritual food of the soul, for to be nourishment of immortality and
mernall felicity. Live then, O King of Kings, true Life of our souls and
bodies. Reign, O King of Kings, truly worthy to reign. Immortal glory to
thee, O King of Kings most wise to guide, most mighty to defend, most blessed,
tenderly to nourish the sheep, which follow thee, in the mountains and barren
deserts of this mortal life. O when shall this be, that we shall arrive to
the high mountain of thy eternity, there to take without end the food, that
thou thy self art, true felicity of such as shall have followed thee in the
paths of thy holy Commandments.

THE TWELFTH PICTVRE. OUR SAVIOVR, PREACHING OF THE SAcrament of his body.
The Description.
THE Savior of the world speaks, the Divine Word preaches, John 6.59.
the supreme Wisdom discourses of the Sacrament of his body, in the
Synagogue of Capharnaum, where he had done many great miracles. The
pre-eminence of the Orator, and the dignity of the subject, deserves an
attentive ear, never man spoke so, and of such a matter: He sees that the
people follow him, enticed by the miracle of the five Loaves and two Fishes,
and takes occasion from their earthly desire, to inuit them to a celestial
banquet of his flesh, which he is about to prepare for those, that shall
believe in him, and have the appetite of their souls in good disposition.
Hear what he says: I am the bread of life, John 6.48.
your Fathers have eaten Manna, and are dead: this is the bread which descended
from heaven, that if any man eat of it, he may not die. I am the living bread,
descended from heaven; he that eats this bread, shall live eternally; and the
bread, which I will give, is my flesh, for the life of the world. John 6.52.
The Jews (says the Evangelist) contend amongst themselves, saying, How can
this man give us his flesh to eat? Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily I say
unto you, if you eat not the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink not his
blood, you shall not have life in you. Who so eats my flesh, and drink my
blood, he has life eternal, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood it drink indeed; who so eats my flesh
and drinks my blood, he dwells in me, and I in him. As the living Father
has sent me, and I live by the Father: He that eats me, he also shall
live by me. This is the bread, that came down from heaven, not as your
Fathers did eat Manna, and died: he, that eats this bread shall live for
ever. I hese are the words of our Savior. The Apostles, and they which did
believe in him, are ranished; but there are others that have deaf ears, and
gross conceits, judging amiss of his words, rashly taking scandal at the
mystery which they understood not, ^on 6.60
and murmuring said, This is a hard saying, who can abide to hear it? But
Jesus Piercing their thoughts, and secret murmurings corrected them, and said
unto them; Does this scandalize you? if then you shall see the Son of Man
ascend, where he was before, it is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh
profileth nothing; the words, that I have pinken to you be Spirit and Life. So
he endeavors to make them capable; but they notwithstanding remain still
blind and obstinate in their misbeleefe, and got themselves out of his company.
Behold you, how they wrinkle their fore heads in going away, and look behind
them? These are carnal and ouerweyning people; believing nothing, which comes
not under the comprehension of their sense. These are the Patriarchs of all
those, which make war against the Sacrament of the body of our Savior.

1. WHEREFORE OUR SAVIOVR MADE a Sermon of the Eucharist, before he anstituted
it.
THe Painter, who knows how to dispose well of his work he has in hand,
endeauours, amongst other things, to join dexteriously the beginnings to their
ends, and so to smooth the knots of parts disagreeing, that nothing appear
hard, or constreined in the connection, but all to be aptly guided and brought
to an end, with due proportion of draught and color. The supreme Wisdom,
Master of Sciences and Arts, observed this law in all his creatures. And it is
usual with him, Sap. S. 1. and 11.12.
to reach in his strength from end to end, and to govern all things sweetly,
and to dispose them in measure, in number, and in weight. According to this
rule, he continues the course of this mouable world, coupling extremities with
their extremities, by convenient means. So he made the day to succeed the
night, by interposing of the morning, and the night to the day, by the evening,
neighbor to both; the Summer to Winter, by the Spring, coming between; and
the Winter to Summer, by interposing of Autumn; and so in all his other works
of this world. When the Son of God, Sovereign Wisdom, had decreed in the
Council of his Father, and of the holy Ghost, to marry one day the greatness
of his Divinity, to the littleness of our Nature; and resolved at the same
time, to bestow also upon us, as well for food, as ransom the body, which he
had taken of Adams Posterity; he began even then, by little and little, to
ordain these Figures, which we have hitherto run over, and other such like,
which are in his book; making, as it were, the first preparations for this
Feast, which was to follow. And being at length made Man, and the time being
come, when he was to fulfill the verity of them, and to cover the holy table
with the food of his precious flesh; he made a wonderful proof upon the
bread, Matthew. 14.21. John 5.10.
as we have seen; and incontinently after, he preached this excellent Sermon,
which was as it were, a general proclamation of the banquet coloring by the
brightness of a famous miracle, and by his lively voice, those Characters of
the old Figures, and joining the Images past, to the Verity present, by the
interposition thereof, before the full accomplishment of his work. The
selfsame method used he for preparation to the faith of other mysteries of
his death, of his Resurrection, of his Ascension, of the coming of the holy
Ghost, of Baptism, and of other Sacraments. For besides the ancient Figures of
them, which he ordained long before; he made many discourses a little before
they were effected, and the Sacraments themselves were instituted. Wherefore,
this Sermon was, as it were, the connection of things passed, to things present,
of the shadow to the body, and as a speaking morning, declaring the coming of
the Sacrament of the Altar, which is the sum of all the other mysteries in
the Church of God.

2. THE FIRST CAUSE, WHY OUR Savior would give his flesh to eat, and his
blood to drink, which was to show his goodness.
THe first cause, why our Savior would give his flesh to eat, and his blood
to drink, is for as much as he is admirably good, and exceedingly liberal
toward us, as has been often already declared. He took his body of us, and
because he did that for us, he will in ploy it upon us, and give it us again,
like a magnificent Lord, as many ways as a body might profitably be ginen and
employed; to wit, for a price, for food, for union and sign of amity. He,
which gives a pearl of great value to redeem his friend from captivity, gives
it as a price: he, that sets some delicate fruit upon the table, does it, that
it may be eaten: and the husband, which gives himself in marriage, gives his
body, that by union he may become one flesh with his wise; and the ring, which
he leaves, departing from her, is a pledge of his love. Our Savior gave his
body on the Cross for our redemption, and thereby paid the tribute, due to the
divine Justice, for the Ransom of mankind: he gives the same body in the
Table of his Sacrament, as a nuptial Feast for meat, unto us, for to make a
divine union with us, and for a pledge of his love. Then the master and chief
cause, why he gave us his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink, is his boundy,
his liberality, and his infinite love.

3. THE SECOND CAUSE, TO GIVE A remedy to our misery.
THe second cause, why our Savior did give us his body to eat, is our
miserable condition; which out of his exceeding love to us, he was desirous to
repair, as he has in ample manner by the gift of his body. For by
communicating unto us his divine flesh, and deified blood; he has both
performed the part of a true Father, and of a natural Mother toward his
children; and withal, he has wisely and effectually repaired all the
breaches of our spiritual ruin, and procured the restoration, and health of
our souls and bodies, by remedies directly opposite to our diseases. The
Father gives all, that he can, to his child, engendered of his seed. The
mother nourishes and brings her child up with her own milk, which is also a
part of the substance of her body, and both meat and drink to the child. Our
Savior, who regenerated us in his blood by Baptism, is wholly bestowed upon
us, in giving us his body; for by concomitance we have together with it, his
soul, and his Divinity, to the which it is inseparably united: And of this
dainty food he gives us, not a part only, but his whole body, and his whole
blood, each of which is both true meat, and true drink unto us. By meat he
lost us, by meat he repaired us. The first meat was forbidden under pain of
death: Matthew. ^^.^6. John (...)
Thou shall not eat of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, for look what
day thou shall eat of it thou shall die. The second meat is commanded with
promise of life: Take, eat, who eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, he
has life eternal. The first was really eaten by disobedience, and killed us.
The second is really eaten by obedience, and quickens us. The poison was truly
swallowed down; the Antidote or counter-poyson also is truly taken, and not
by Figure. The flesh of the first Adam, by geueration, drew us to death and
confusion; the flesh of our Savior, second Adam received by manducation,
brings us to life, and nourishes us to immortality, and eternal glory.

4. TWO BAD UNIONS, OF THE FLESH of Adam, with our soul, repaired by the flesh
of our Savior.
BUT behold the maine point of opposition between the flesh of our Savior,
and that of Adam. The flesh of Adam is the spring of all our miseries, by
reason of two unions, wherewith it ioynes it self to our soul; the one is
natural, and made in the womb of our mother by necessity; the other moral,
and made my our own free will, when the soul follows the appetites of this
corrupted flesh of Adam.

The first union, is the blow, that first wounded us to death. (...)
For by it we are begotten in iniquity, and conceived in sin, according to the
saying of King David, and become defiled, in the first instant of our
conception: branded with the mark of original malediction: enennes of our
Creator separated from him, and at war within our seiues: for we bring with us
the Schedule of rebellion, and the fource of cruel war, which this mass of
corruption incessantly stirs up against our souls; casting darkness of
ignorance into our understanding; fire of concupiscence into our will; and
forgetfulness of heaven, and of other future things, into our memory. The same
union is also cause, that the spirits of men are multiplied, and at division
amongst themselves: for look how many bodies are begotten of the flesh, and
seed of Adam, so many souls are created, to be united to those bodies, and to
give them life: and as the children of Adam disser in bodies, so by means of
this generation, they are also of different spirits.

The second union of this flesh with the soul, increases and makes worse,
the evils, which came from the first: For the soul by love, being united to
her flesh, and following the sensual appetites thereof, forgetting heaven, and
living in the vanities and voluptuousness of the earth, is so much more made
enemy of God, and banished from his friendship, as she yields her self
perverse; and so much more also divided in her self, enduring a continual
tyranny of our flesh, to whom she is made slave by this voluntary union, and
of whom she is arrogantly vexed, and pricked forward to commit new sins,
which are to her soul so many executioners, which give her torment at every
moment. This union also divides men amongst themselves; for every one seeking
the commodities of his own flesh, and giving himself to vice; loves none but
himself, his proper commodities, his honors, riches and voluptuous pleasures,
hating and persecuting at those that do hinder him in them, whether they be
good or bad. And from thence do spring dissentions, wars, and all excess of
envy, whoredom, covetousness, and such like sins, which are committed in
the world. Behold then, how the first union of the flesh of Adam with our
souls, is the spring: And the second, the fullness of all our evils, dividing
us from God, from our selves, in our felues, and amongst our selves, for an
Antidote and counterpoyson of this flesh, and those pernicious effects thereof:
the second Adam, Jesus Christ, affoords us his own flesh, endued with contrary
qualities, and worker of contrary operations. For the flesh of the first Adam
is foul, infected, and pestilent: that of the second Adam, pure holy, Virgin
like, and in one word, flesh of God. The flesh of Adam produced from a filthy
seed, and joined with our soul, makes us the children of Adam: the flesh of
our Savior, begotten of a Virgin, by the work of the holy Ghost, and given
us, for to be united with us, and to unite us to God, makes us the children of
God, not by necessity of generation, but by acts of devotion, ordained by
means of this union, not only to cherish, to nourish, and beautify our
souls, but also to repair the defects of our bodies, to correct their wicked
inclinations, to extinguish their concupiscences, to purge and refine them to
the likeness of his own, and to sow in them the seed of glorious immortalicy.
And albeit this union be not natural, as the union of body and soul; yet is
it, notwithstanding, real, true, and most intrinsecall, after the manner of
meat and drink, and of a holy and divine marriage, by the which we are made
one Spirit with God. By the mediation of this flesh of his Son united to
ours; we are also united in our selves, our sanctified flesh obeying thereby
the Law of the Spirit; and finally, we are voited even one with another, and
made one Spirit, and one body under our chief Sovereign, Jesus Christ, by the
vertuall knot of his precious flesh, which every one receives in this
Sacrament. Behold you the opposite effects? By the flesh of Adam we are made
sinners; separated from God, both in spirit and in body: our bodies are
multiplied, and likewise our spirits in the same proportion with the bodies:
men are divided amongst themselves by enmities, arising from the love of the
flesh; and every man is divided in himself, his flesh rebelling to the spirit.
By the flesh of our Savior, all these inconveniences are repaired, as with
admirable wisdom, so with abundant grace. Of this meat then, given as a
counter-poyson against the first meat, and of this sacred union, in remedy of
that, which divided us. Did our Savior here Preach? This is the sense, and
the end of his divine Sermon; John 6.48.
for calling it the brend of life; the lining bread that came down from
heaven; and saying, That this bread is his flesh, which he will give for the
life of the world: He declares, that he will give his body for our food and
redemption: And adding after, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
has life ever lasting, and I will rasse him up at the last day, for my flesh
is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed: He signified the effects of
this meat, contrary to the effects of the meat of Adam. The meat of Adam,
cause of death, a deadly morsel, an carthly food, a food of anguish: The meat
of our Savior, spring of life, bread of life, bread from heaven, flesh of
ioyfulnesse, and of resurrection. When he said, He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood abides in me, and I in him. He shows that he gives his
flesh for this union, for a bond of amity, and perpetual pledge of his love
toward us. He has then given his body in this life, for our good, as many
ways as it could be given; for our redemption, for our meat, for our remedy,
for a pledge unto us, to deliver us, to nourish us. to heal us, and to comfort
us, and will give it in heaven to glory for us. Has he given sufficiently? is
he sufficiently liberal, to give himself so liberally, and at so many time;
and by so many ways on earth, and to promise himself unto us yet another way
in heaven? And are not we exceedingly ungrateful, in not acknowledging his
goodness? no less unjust in not giving our selves to him, that have nothing
but from him? And most ungrateful in making no better use of his gifts,
ordained to unite our selves unto him, and amongst our selves, for the
attaining of life everlasting? What has this divine Spouse done? What has he
invented? What does he not? What has he not devised, to gain the love of a
faithful soul? And what do we? In what do we employ our selves to gain his
love? And who is it, of whom this Prince, so infinitely rich, mighty and
beautiful, is so much inamored; but of a poor caytiffe and deformed creature,
whom he would enrich, nobilitate and beautify, to make him worthy of his
Kingdom? And how would he seek to purchase, by so many means, the love of
such a creature, if he were not goodness it self? O infinite Goodness,
infinite Wisdom, infinite Power fullness! Make our souls holily inamored of
thy beauty, enlighten them with the divine beams of thy celestial knowledge,
and make them worthy of thy sacred love.

5. PRIDE, AND LICENTIOVSNES, ENEmies of Faith, and the first adversaries of
the holy Sacrament.
PRide, and sensuality, are incapable to understand the wonders of God, and
unworthy to receive his benefits. We have heard the divine promises of our
Savior, speaking of the eating of his flesh; and of the everlasting fruits
thereof; here was cause to wonder at the height of the mystery, and liberality
of the Giver, and good occasion to say, as Saint Peter a little after,
wondering, said: Thou bast the words of eternal life. John 6.63.
They were here, nevertheless, who in stead of being lifted up in admiration,
were struck down to death by the words of life; because pride and sense had
made them bad hearers of the truth, enemies of the light, and unable to behold
further, then humane judgment could reach. In so much as though truth it self
did speak unto them, they murdered themselves by the voice of truth, thinking
that either he could not do as he promised, and give his flesh to eat; or
that if he could do it, it should be a very inhumane, and barbarous act. They
understood of flesh (says S. Augustine) as if one should dismember a dead
body, or as men sell it in the market; S. August. Trust. 27. in Joan. and in
Psalm. 98.
and flesh understood not, what it was he called flesh. They thought that our
Savior would cut his body into little bits, and serve it to the table boiled,
and dressed, as the body of a beast; and standing upon the bulwark of their
carnal imaginations, and pushed forward by the spirit, which blindes the
soul; in stead of being edified, they were scandalized, and became perfidious
in their heart, rude in their thought, and blasphemers in their language, and
did say: How can this man give us his flesh to cate? Behold, John 6.52.60.
a hard saying, and who can endure it. By the first question, they did show
their incredulity, not persuading themselves, that our Savior could accomplish
that, which he did promise: by the second, they made their pride appear,
condemning our Savior, as if he intended to commit an horrible crime, by
killing himself, and giving man's flesh to ear, if he should be able to do
that, which he said: People extremely blinded with pride and sensuality; for
they had seen a little before, a thousand of miracles done by the hand of our
Savior, and believed them without asking, How? And in stead of learning by
those so many rare works, to believe more easily, they here ask, How? more
incredulous then ever. But why are they now so little obedient to the voice of
our Savior? Why were they not before more scrupulous and wary? Wherefore did
they not as well ask, how he made the blind to see, the lame to walk, the
devils to fly; and of the fresh miracle, how he satisfied five thousand men
with five Loaves and two Fishes? Here their (How) had been much more to
purpose, and more pertinent: for they might have understood thereby, that he
did these things in the authority and power of a Master, Al-wise and Al-mighty:
and this knowledge would have persuaded them, that he could powerfully, and
wisely accomplish this, which he so manifestly did promise of his flesh,
although it seemed impossible, and absurd to their sense and judgment. But
what will you? They were proud, and their pride had made them to lose the
memory of what was past, and bound their eyes not to see the truth present, nor
to foresee the truth to come; and in one word, did make them obstinately
erroneous, that is to say, Heretics. Behold the first controulers, the first
persecutors, and first Herenkes, stirred up against the truth of this holy
Sacrament; behold the first authors of Quomodo? (How?) out of which mould the
Devil has shaped all the rest, which sithence have conspired against God; for
to assault the mysteries of his Church, by Quomodo? and by (How?) and namely to
shake this here, as the most high, and most repugnant to their senfuality. It
was pride and the flesh, that made them mutiners, and rebels, against the
doctrine of Jesus Christ, and presumptuous to comdemne that, which they
understood not. So the Arrians mocked at the Catholic faith, concerning the
generation of the Son of God, whilst they would understand that, which they
could not, and would not believe that, which they should; to wit, that God had
begotten a Son; Psalm. 3.7. Psalm. 109.1.
and in stead of saying Christianlike, I believe, they asked, as Philosophers.
How? Albeit the Scripture did clearly set down the truth of this generation,
and told them on the otherside, that they could not comprehend it; and that
they ought to believe, and not to question about it. ^say 53.8.
So the Panym^ and the Heretics did laugh at the says of the death of Jesus
Christ; neither could they be persuaded, that he being the Son of God, and
God himself, would or could have endured death, and did say; How can it be
that he could dye? At this very day in like manner, such, as believe not,
imitating their Ancestors, beat their horns against the same Rock, and do
say. How can the body of our Savior be present in the Eucharist? How can it be
in many places, without possessing a place! Be eaten without being seen?
Exposed to the injuries of the wicked, without hurt? And because they are
proud, they believe nothing, but what they understand, and so lose their faith,
and their understanding, like unto their Fathers, and namely, the Capharnaits;
how be it in another extremity of heresy: For of them, says Saint Augustine,
They did not understand, S. Aug. Tract. 27. in Joan.
because they beleened not, and the Prophet says, If you believe not, you
shall not understand. By says we are united to God, and by understanding we
are quickened. Let us first adhere to the truth by faith, to the and that we
may afterward be quickened by understanding; for he that adhereth not,
vesisteth, and who resists, belecueth not. He excludes the beam of light,
which should penetrate into him; be turns not away his eyes, but shuts up his
understanding. In like manner, these here would know in Philosophy, and not
believe in Christianity, and so became bad Philosophers, and lose the name of
Christians. The Church of God, and the children of God do not so: They do
believe the voice of truth, which said, The bread, which I will give, is my
flesh; and after they come to understand, as much as divine mysteries can be
understood in the shadow of this mortality, expecting to see them in heaven
unmasked and discovered, when they shall see all things in God.

6. EXPOSITION OF THE WORDS OF our Savior.
IT is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing; the words,
which I speak to you, are Spirit and life. It was the custom of our Savior,
to speak covertly in this manner, of the highest mysteries, to the end he might
be heard with better attention: For the secret of God (says S. Augustine)
ought to engender in the hearers attention, S. Aug. 27. in Joan.
and not to breed au^rsion: But what he spoke darkly, he after explained
sufficiently; to take away occasion of error. So we see, that having said to
N^codemus, John 3.4.
That to be saved, he ought to be borne anew: He expounded himself, saying,
That he ought to be Baptized of water, and the holy Ghost, and that he meant
not a corporal, but a spiritual generation. In like manner, John 2.19.
when he said, I will destroy this Temple, and I will build it again in the
third day; the Evangelist added, for explination thereof, that he spoke this of
the Temple of his body. Our Savior seeing then, how the Capharnaits took
offense at his words, giving them an absurd sense, and such as their gross
fantasies did forge; he corrects their carnal sense, and explaines his
own, and tells them; Does this scandalize you? John ^.
If then you shall see the Son of Man ascend, where he was before. As if he
should say, you are sensual people, and will not believe that I am able to do
more, then you are able to comprehend; you think that this is an impossible
thing for me, to give you my flesh to eat, and that it can suffice for you
all, or give you eternal life; what then will you think? what will you say?
when you shall see, that I shall carry this flesh to heaven, from whence I
descended to take it here on earth? when you shall understand, that I am God
and Man together? certainly, when you shall see that done, which is of more
difficulty, you will have occasion to believe this, which is more easy; for
it is of it self more difficult, to carry flesh into heaven, which none ever
did, then to give it to eat on earth, the which many have done, though not
after the manner, that I will give it. Wherefore either you ought to believe,
that I can give my flesh to be eaten, seeing that I can do a more difficult
thing; or not beleening, you are to enter into a greater incredulity and
condemnation, when men shall tell you, that I in flesh am ascended into heaven.
Our Savior does not deny the giving of his flesh to be eaten; but he told
them, that he is God Almighty, for otherwise he should not have descended from
heaven; and that being God, he could do more then that, and that if they did
not believe him, their pride and sensuality was the cause, which are the true
bars and bolts, that exclude and hinder the entrance of faith. He adds, The
flesh profuteth nothing, ^l is the Spirit that quickens; the words that I
speak unto you, are Spirit and life. Whereby he sweetly takes away the
cause; which scandalized them, and said; The flesh, as you understand it, and
the eating, which you imagine, is carnal, and profits nothing: but that
flesh, whereof I speak, is spiritual, and gives life eternal: The words,
which I say unto you, are Spirit and life: and your thoughts savor of nothing
but of flesh, and corruption. My flesh shall indeed be given, and truly united
to the members of my Church; yet not alone, or without soul and life, as the
flesh of beasts, which is only for the body: but as being quickened with my
Spirit, and with my Divinity, by reason whereof, it shall give life, and unite
them to life, which shall eat thereof, as it is united to the life of my
soul, and of my Divinity. And shall be given, not in a carnal manner, in
pieces and in gobbets, as dead flesh, but spiritually as lively flesh,
immortal and incapable of division. And as this flesh was truly taken from
the substance of the Virgin, my Mother, but in a spiritual manner, by the
virtue of the holy Ghost, and not by conjunction with man; even so shall it be
truly given, not in a carnal, but after a divine and spiritual manner. Flesh
and humane judgment shall perceive nothing, except some outward accidents, of
the color, Figure, and taste; but the eyes of faith will penetrate the mystery
hidden therein. This is it, which our Savior would signify, to appease the
murmuring of the Caphamaits, and to raise them up, from the blockishnesse of
their flesh, unto the spiritual sense of his holy word.

7. HERESY ALWAYS CARNAL, AND in love with extremities.
AS the enemy of man raised carnal men to oppose themselves to the word of
life, and to hinder the Sacrament of the flesh of our Savior, in the first
preparation of this Feast; so he has also raised up others to disturb and
stop the proceedings and fruit thereof, already prepared. These are they,
which in this last age, do impugn the honor and magnificence of this Feast;
taking from it the substance and truth, saying; that the flesh of our Savior
is not here, but only a Figure thereof: and that there is here no real
eating of the flesh of our Savior present, which they call carnal, but only
spiritual, by the means of says alone, which makes the body of our Savior
spiritually present, and eats it spiritually. These people are carnal, as
well as the Capharnaits, and puffed up with the same blast of pride,
o^erthrowing the truth; but by a contrary battery. The Capharnaits did
interpret the words of our Savior, altogether fleshly, and these men
altogether spiritually; those were in one extremity, believing nothing but
flesh; these are in another extremity, admitting nothing but spirit; and both
the one and the other not willing to acknowledge, but what their fancies tells
them, and therefore are carnal, faithless and proud, though after a different
manner: The sensuality of the later in particular does show it self, in that
they think it a carnal thing, that the flesh of our Savior should be present
in the Sacrament: their incredulity is in this, that they will not believe the
word of God, who said, that he would truly give his flesh to eat: their
pride, in that they preferred the judgment of their sense before his Word, and
condemn the ordinance of our Savior, albeit they make fair shows of
defending the same. They err then in three things: First, in thinking the
presence of the flesh of our Savior in this Sacrament to be carnal, for the
presence of a thing makes not the carnality, but the manner; his flesh was
trutly, and by real presence conceived in the womb of the Virgin: Yet was not
that presence carnal, because the manner of the conception was from the holy
Ghost.

When he ascended into beauen, his body was present, in as many places of the
beauens, as he did penetrate, the presence was real, but nevertheless
spiritual; because it depended of a cause spiritual and divine, and not
natural. When he made himself seen to Saint Paul, he was present, and his
presence was true and real; yet spiritual, that is to say, not after an
ordinary and natural manner. Even so the flesh of our Savior is really
present in the Eucharist; yet not carnally, as common flesh, is present upon
the table; but by transubstantiation, by a way about nature, by the all
powerful word of our Savior. It is there invisible, impalpable immorrall, and
inconsumptible, and so spiritually, and so divinely that nothing but the eyes
of faith can perceive it; and because these here have not, but the eyes of
their flesh, and carnal judgment, therefore they deny this presence, and same
another according to the blindness of their flesh against the truth, and leave
the true faith, by an imaginary, no faith, and are blockish, and infidels in
their sensual faith.

8. CONTRADICTIONS OF HERETICS in their false, and imaginary faith.
THe same Heretics inwrap themselves in contradiction; denying on the one side
the flesh of our Savior to be really present in the Eucharist; and saying on
the other side, that it is there by Spirit and faith. For if it be not really
there, it cannot be present by Spirit, and by faith; for as much as no
strength, neither of the Spirit, nor of Faith; does make a thing present, that
is absent. Neither faith, nor the Spirit makes, that the Hebrews at this
present do pass the red sea, or eat Manna in the Desert; or that Joshua now
does stay the Sun, or that our Savior is now conceived in the womb of the
Virgin, or that he now rises from death, or ascends into heaven, or that he
comes now to judge the living and the dead, though it believe all this; if
these men answer, that faith imagines these things as present, albeit they
be absent; they confess, that as the presence of these things, is but
imagination; so the faith, which they have of the presence of the flesh of our
Savior in the Sacrament, is imaginary, and that they cate it not, but by
imagination. Like unto them, who sleeping dream, that they make good cheer,
and yet make no good cheer, but in their fancy. Such faith is not the faith,
that makes a faithful man in this point; neither is such sustenance truly
sustenance, neither such meat, truly meat; it is a faith, a refection, a
meat of fancy. Now our Savior said, John 6.
that his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed; then the faith, or
rather no faith of these men, is a carnal infidelity, and a froward
imagination, contrary to the faith of God. They are the children of the
Catholic Church, which by faith do eat indeed the body of our Savior; that
is to say, in a spiritual manner, as it has been said, and with the faith
required thereunto, by the which they do believe the word of God; believing
that his body is there present, as his word says; believing that they take it
really, and eat it really, as he has promised; believing that he could do
that, which he said, and that he does nothing, which is contrary to his
goodness and wisdom. And as their faith is farthfull, so their eating is
true: and contrariwise, the eating practiced by these Heretics in their
Supper, is altogether carnal: for they take nothing here more excellent, then
bread, and neither do they eath but bread; nor believe any thing, but what the
faith of a Turk, of a Jew, and of a Pagan, all carnal, could not believe. For
what difficulty had there been, to believe the presence of a morsel of bread,
that they see, taste, and perceive by their sense to be so?

9. THE LITERAL SENSE, Foundation of others, against the same Heretics.
THese good people, therefore, lose themselves in the by-ways of their
spirituality: for willing to interpret the flesh of our Savior, and his blood;
and all this eating spiritually, according to their own sense, saying, that
men cate not this flesh, but by Spirit, and by faith alone: they leave the
proper and fundamental understanding of the words of our Savior, and take
only a metaphorical one against the law of all good Divinity: which first
ought to understand and establish the literal and proper sense of the
Scripture, and after upon that foundation to ground the spiritual. For
example, the Scripture says, Genesis 2. Exodus 14. Iud. 15. 1. Reg. 17.
that God planted an carthly Paradise; that the Hebrews did pass the red Sea,
that Sampson tied Foxes by the tails, that David did sight in single combat
with Goliath, and such like things; if every one would so spiritualize these
histories, that they would deny the literal truth, and say, that earthly
Paradise is no other thing, but the Church; the red Sea, Baptism; Sampsons
Foxes, the Heretics; Golish, the enemy of mankind; Danid, Jesus Christ; and
that there is no other thing meant thereby; he should make a spiritual fense
indeed, but should overthrow the ground of the history, and commit Sacrilege
against the Scripture, which writes the foresaid things, as truly performed:
they should do in this, as the Priscillianists did long since, who did
allegorize according to their fantasy, all the passages and literal senses of
the Scripture, which were against their Herefie, S. August. lib. de Hares. 70.
as writes S. Augustine. In like, manner, these here allegorize, and say,
that there is nothing here, but a spiritual and mystical eating of the flesh
of our Saulour. John 6.
For since that our Savior has said, that his flesh is meat indeed, and his
blood drink indeed, and that who so eats his slesh shall have eternal life;
we must necessarily suppose a real eating of a real thing, and add the
spiritual and allegorical afterward. We sinde indeed in the Scriptures, the
word (Lion) put for the Devil, 1. (...). 18. Matthew. 7.15.
and the word (Woulse) for a faise prophet. These are metaphorical, and
spiritual significations; but the same words are placed elsewhere in their
proper usage, and do signify beasts, and out of a resemblance of these words,
in their proper signification, they are translated to signify the Devil and
false Prophets. Wherefore, if there be here an eating of the flesh of our
Savior, all spiritual, that is to say, which is done only by the Spirit,
without any real taking of that flesh; it is necessary to find a proper and
real ground and foundation thereof, the which real eating cannot be but in
the Eucharist, containing really the flesh and blood of our Savior, true and
proper meat, true and proper drink. But is it not a carnal understanding to
admit a real eating of the flesh of our Savior? Yes doubtless, if we should
understand, as did the Capharnai^s, an humane and sensual eating: but the
manducation which the Catholic Church teaches, and which we have declared, is
real indeed, but spiritual, but divine, and full of wondrous effects, and
testimonies of the powerfulness, goodness, and wisdom of the Creator. And
when the ancient Fathers refute the carnal eating, they never mean this
here, but only that, which the Capharnalts did forge to themselves, and which
our Savior does correct by the words, we have expounded, as they sufficiently
testify of themselves. For as often as the Fathers speak of this carnal
eating, they propose the Capharnaits, as authors of that fond imagination, and
do also p^^nely show, that the eating, of which our Savior did preach, is of
the real flesh of him, though the manner of taking be spiritual. Let us cite
one or two for all. Saint HILLARY, S. Mill. (...). 8. de Trin.
It is our Savior that said, my flesh is m^^te indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed. Who shall (...) my flesh, and drink my blood, dwells in me, and I
in him. Here is no occasion to doubt of the truth of the flesh and blood of
our Savior; for according to his word, and according to our faith, it is flesh
indeed, (...) blood indeed; and those things taken and drunk by us, make, that
we are in Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ in us. Is not this the ^^th? to them
let it not be true, which do not beleene, that Jesus Christ is true God. He
would say, that the words of our Savior ought to be taken in their lively, and
literal signification. The same faith Saint AVGVSTIN^, We have heard, says
he, the true Master, the di^ine Rod^^^^r, and the Savior of mankind,
recommending unto us his blood, our price. He has spoken to us of his body,
and of his (...), he (...) said, that his ^^dy is (...), and his blood deinke,
when recommending to us such meat and such drink, he said, If you eat not my
flesh, and drink not my blood, you shall (...) have life (...) you. And who
could say this of life, but Life himself? Ph^^ then shall be de^^ to him, and
not life, who shall think Life to be a liar. That is to say, whosoever shall
think, that our Savior cannot, or will not, gine his flesh and his blood, as
his words did fignifie, he is an Insidell, (...) shall ^^e, and be damned for
(...). The other Doctors speak after the same manner, that those two beer do.

10. TWO KINDS OF COMMUNION, THE one Spiritual, the other Sacramental.
THe ancient Fathers have clearly acknowledged an eating, altogether
spiritual, of the flesh of our Savior, which is done in hearing the Mass, in
meditating upon the greatness of this banquot, in taking the flesh of our
Savior only by sight, by desire, and by d^uotion. But they have delivered
th^^ doctrine; without prejudice to that other, which you have heard: for they
have ever believed and esteemed this real eating; which by proper name, they
have called Sacramental, and have preser^ed it before the other, when it is
holily done; as also they have preferted the Spiritual alone, before the
Sacramental, if it be not done with due preparation. Rightly judging, that it
is better to heat Mass devoutly, and contemplate the mysteries of this meat,
and communicate in ^b is spiritual manner, then to communicate with a
conscious^ defiled with mor^^ll finno, and by fi^^ to p^ophane the table of our
Lord. And this Sacramental eating, though it be real, cease notto be
spiritual, because the (...), is supernatural and diui^e, as has been (...)
is called Sacramental for distinctions sake, because here men take the
Sacrament. The other simply bears the name of Spiritual, because it is only
done by Spirit, without receiving really the flesh of our Savior. This
Spiritual communion properly, is but devotion toward the Sacrament, as the
Sacramental is the real receiving of the Sacrament; the which ought, for an
inseperable companion, always to have the Spiritual; for otherwise it
profits nothing, and hurts exceedingly much, whereas the Spiritual may be
profitable without the Sacramental. The children of God use both sorts; for
they communicate both Sacramentally. and Spiritually but the mis-beleeuers are
deprived of both. For denying the presence of the body of our Savior, they
take away the heart of the Sacrament, and deprive themselves of the
Sacramental communion; and not having the true faith of the Sacrament, they
cannot communicate spiritually, For without faith, no holy Spirit quickens,
no Sacrament profitath; so that still they remain carnal in their fancy, as
the Capharnaits did in theirs.

11. OF THE DIVINE WISDOM AND goodness of God in this Sacrament: and of the
folly, and ingratitude of men.
But before we turn away our face from beholding this Picture, let us a
little fix the eyes of our understanding, upon the contemplation of this
divine Widome, preaching to us of the communion of his flesh: and upon our own
baseness, not knowing how to acknowledge the sweetness of his diuino
benefits. On the one side, let us consider the liberality of the Redeemer; and
on the otherside, the ingratitude of men; the wisdom of the Master, and the
folly of the Disciples. Our Savior having sed the people with terrestrial
bread, intends to give them the celestial, and to substitute the bread of
life in place of the bread which was dead; bread of the soul, for bread of the
body. And behold these very men, who having received and eaten the first bread,
esteemed the Giver worthy the honor of a Scepter in recompense; will not
understand our Savior preaching of the excellenty of the second; although his
words were very clear, yet they in their ignorance murmr against the bounty
and wisdom of their Master; for that be promised to give them bread of
headen, a deified bread, which was his body, not a strange body, but his own
proper body, not the flesh of beasts, but the flesh of God incarnate. They are
scandalized, because he intended to unite them to himself by his flesh, to
deifie them by his flesh, and to nourish them thereby, not for sour and twenty
hours only, but to all eternity. They mistrusted his power, were offended at
his goodness, and condemned the wisdom of his words, before they understood
them. ^^hn 6.52.
How o^n this man (say they) give us his flesh to eat? O senseless disciples,
and too obliuious! And how a little before fed he more, then five thousand of
you, with five Loaves and two Fishes, making abundance in want, and
fruitfulness in the Desert? If you believe, Marth. 14.16. John ^.
he has done this work, by power of his almightinesse; wherefore ask you,
how he can give you his flesh? wherefore esteem you, that he cannot
accomplish this, that he says, albeit, it seems impossible to you? You say,
Behold a hard speech, and who can endure it? And what word find you so hard?
What hard speech could proceed out of the mouth of this good Master? O delicate
and dainty disciples, what has he said, that so violently piereed your hearts?
What sentences has he uttered, that seem so hard for you to swallow? He has
said, That he is the bread come down from heane; (...)
that, who so c^teth this bread, shall line eternally; that the bread which be
will gine, is his flesh, for the life of the world, that his flesh is meat
indeed, and his blood drink indeed. These words of Iron, or of stone, as are
your breasts? Are they not words of life, and of eternal life? words of
salvation and consolation? Does life displease you? Does Salvation scandalize
you, and Consolation grieve you to the heart? Are you not malicious scholars,
to strive against so loving a Lesson? and desperately discased, to enter into
madness at the hearing of such a voice? and that of such a Physician? and that
of such a promise of eternal life? And if these words, so lovingly uttered by
this sweet Lamb, seem to you intolerable; how hard to you shall those words
be, which he shall utter against you in his great day, and against all them
who shall be incredulous, as you are; when he will say, when he will
pronounce, when he will thunder out his last and irreuocable decree, Go you
^ursed, from me, into eternal fire. prepared for the D^^ll and his angels? If
the sweetness of the Lamb, and Savior of the world, be now intolerable to
you, what will be the rigor of the Judge of Angels and men, then condemning
your want of faith? But if you find difficult to your understanding the words
of the Master, wherefore, as good disciples, ask you not, to the end to be
instructed? If you have conceived some opinion of this Master, by reason of the
wonders, that he has done before you; wherefore think you, that he cannot do
this, that he promises? that he cannot declare to you this, which to you is
difficult? Why condemn you his doctrine, before you understand it? Why depart
you from the company of the truth, which would instruct you?

12. TO THE STRAYED SHEEP OF our age.
But, O you wandering souls of this last age, why go you backward, in having
abandoned the company of this Master? imitating these your old predecessors,
the Capharnaits, who going out of the house of God, have forsaken the Table,
and the Feast of the flesh of the Son of God, to go take a bit of bread out of
the throat of Wolves? Why imitate you the Capharnaits, which condemn you?
Wherefore, like unto them, murmr you at the almightinesse of the wisdom of
him, that said, The bread, John 6.51.
that I shall gine you, is my flesh? Why believe you not this, that he says,
since that it is the mouth of Truth that speaks it, which cannot lie? Why give
you Law, and measure to his arm; saying, That he cannot make a body be,
without possessing place, and that it cannot be at the same time in diverse
places, in heaven and earth, in many Churches, and on many Altars? Can he do
nothing, that is above the capacity of your brains? But what faith is yours,
to believe nothing, except that, which sense witnesses to you, or which your
spirit comprehends? is it not the faith of a faithless Philosopher, which
follows the course of the creature, altogether ignorant of the power of the
Creator? And what judgment is yours, to reject the Catholic faith about this
great mystery, for not having the capacity to understand it? Seeing there have
been a thousand things in Nature it self, that the Philosophers understood
not? and for not understanding them, did they reject them? But can you
understand, how our Savior took humane flesh, without the seed of man? how our
bodies, reduced into ashes, shall rise again? How the bodies of the damned
shall burn, without being consumed, in eternal flames, and other mysteries of
our faith? And if you believe these things, without understanding them, why
believe you not this here? If this seem more difficult to you; so much the
more have you, wherein to admire the omnipotency of God; and so much the more
merit in believing? If you believe, that God is Almighty, why do you not
believe, he can do this, that he says, who has made the whole world by his
only word? If you believe him all wise, why believe you not, what he has
ordained, is decreed with great wisdom, albeit your judgment cannot attain
to the secret of it? If you believe, that he is most good; why do you not
simply use the gift of his Majesty? Wherefore say you, that it is a carnal
thing to have his flesh to eat, seeing he has so disposed of it, as it may be
really, and yet spiritually eaten? Are you not proud in your baseness; rather
believing the infirmity of your judgment, then the greatness of his
Almightinesse? Intolerable in your folly, condemning this, which his wisdom
ordained? Ungrateful in your unbelieving, refusing the meat, that he offers
you for your health? O good Jesus! O good Master! O good Pastor! illuminate,
teach, bring home these poor wanderers, these wicked disciples, these
straggling sheep, and preserve us in the sollidity of thy holy faith, in the
lap of our good Mother, thy royal Spouse, to receive there always the
refection of thy holy flesh. We believe thou give it us real, and not in
Figure; for thou have said in plain terms, The bread which I will give, is
my flesh for the life of the world. John 6.
We acknowledge that thou have the words of life, in the administration of thy
holy body, and of thy holy blood: We know, that thou art life eternal, and
that thou give in thy slesh, and in thy blood, nothing, S. August. Tra^^. 27.
in Joan.
but that which thou thy self art: thus speaks one of thy Saints. In the
confession of our infirmity, incapacity and misery; we adore the height of the
almightinesse, wisdom and goodness, in this divine and mystical Sermon, and
in the mystery, that it teaches; and acknowledge hoere with the words of life,
the Fountain of life. For which we yield thee immortal thanks, and humbly
entreat thy Mai^sty, to make us so holily to use this Sacrament, of thy
precious body; that thereby we may be united with thee for ever, and made
worthy to be for ever also in heaven, at thy blessed Table, in the life
eternal.

THE THIRTEENTH PICTVRE. THE WASHING OF THE FEET, GOING BEfore the institution
of the Eucharist.
The Description.
THIS day, being the fourteenth of the first Moon of the Spring, the Sun is
set; but a greater Sun shines. The Savior of the world has celebrated the
Legal Pasque, and goes to prepare the great and admirable Feast of the
Sacrament and Sacrifice of his body, ordaining the same in stead of the
Hebrews Paschall Lamb. He is risen from the Table, and has put off his
feasting roabe, to the end to wash his Apostles feet, for a remarkable
ceremony. See you, how this sweet Lamb, girt with a white towel, Joan. 13.4^.
does the office of a mean servant, washing his servants feet, and wiping
them with the same towell? He has washed them all, except good Peter, who
seeing his Master to come, Joan. ^.6.
and cast himself at his feet, to do him the same service, that he had done
to the eleven of his companions; withheld, and protested to him, that he would
never endure, that he should wash his feet: But hearing ou^ Savior threaten,
that if he refused, he should be deprived of his part with him: He yeeldes
readily, and with alacrity presents to be washed; not only his feere, but his
hands and his head also; remaining nevertheless much astonished and
confounded. And truly not without reason; for the brightness of this thy
marvelous humility, O good Jesus, amazed the dim sense of this poor man;
and by admiration, ravished the soul out of his body. This brightness is so
great, that it is able to ^^^onish all men, as the light of thy Divinity
rauisheth into adminiration and fear, the Powers of heaven. Who will not be
abashed to see the Master prostrate before his servant? Such a Master, before
such a Disciple? To see the Majesty of such a Master, to bow himself to the
baseness of such a service? And how could this good old man, but fear, but be
astonished, and dismayed at this profound, and extraordinary humility of his
King? How could he but refuse to have his feet washed by the hand of God, as
being ashamed to see himself so humbly served by the Greatness which he
adored? But what may this humble Apostle say, seeing his King, and his God,
kneeling before him to wash his feet? Seeing these almighty arms tucked up,
and his divine hands, workers of the Stars of heaven, and of a thousand
wonders upon earth, to cleanse the silthinesse of his feet? These fingers, so
pure, and so neat, to touch the foul toes, and the soles of his frail
mortality? This gesture, these hands, these eyes, these behauiours, that the
Picture gives him; seem they not to you to speak, O Christian souls? And to
tell you by silence, that this good Apostle said in his heart, O my sweet
Master, what is this? Washest thou my feet? Do thou, I say, thus kneel
before me? Thou thy self bow down to my feet! And how? was it not
sufficient lowhnesse in thee, to have taken, Philip. ^.
being infinite God, the shape of a man, and to be married to the most meanest
family of thy reasonable creatures? To be made a little Infant, Citizen of
Nazareth, and Pilgrim on the earth, Philip. 2.
and to have thy infinite Greatness, lapped within the clothes of our
littleness? Can thou more humble thy self, then in abasing thy self, by
taking the condition of a mean servant? Choosing the crauels, the poorness,
the contempt of this world; but that thou most cast thy self notwithstanding at
my feet? Thou, my Lord, wash my feet? thou my King of me, thy vassal? thou my
God, of me, thy creature? thou, supreme purity, of me most filthy? thou my
worthy Savior, of me, most unworthy sinner? And what may the Angels say, and
the Planets themselves, of thee and of me, O Lord? beholding a spectacle of
such consusion, seeing the varlet to be served by the Master, the King to be
made servant to the varlet, and the Creator to be on his knees before his
creature? Thou wash my feet, O Lord, and I (...) thee, and the Angels and the
Planets, which see me, do they not now detest my pride, for that I permit
thee? and the creatures of the earth, would they not ^^nne presently upon me,
if thy Almightinesse hindered them not? Save me, if thou please, O Lord,
from their indignation; if I am proud, thy humility has constrained me, it is
that, which has commanded me. I protest that I protested, that thou should
never wash my feet, but thy humility will be, the Mistres; I have obeyed it, and
am become proud in my humiliation, and in obeying; content your self, O Lord,
with that which you have already done, and suffer me to take your place, and
to be a little proud in washing your feet; since that I already have
sufficiently been proud, in enduring you to wash mine. Ah, sinful creature,
that I am! such might be the discourse, O divine Apostle, which thou made in
thy thought, upon the humility of thy Lord. But stay a while, and thou shall
well see other proofs, and other exercises of this divine virtue. Expect,
until he shall give himself to thee for meat and drink, clothed with a
roabe of exceeding humility; with a thin whiteness, with a waterish redness,
with the littleness of frail accidents; when he shall enter within thy
entralls, and abase himself, not only before thee; but moreover within thee.
Expect this night, when he shall be taken as an offender, bound as a these,
mocked as a fool, beaten like any base fellow, spit upon, as a blasphemer.
Expect until the morning, when he shall be evil entreated of Kings, of
Priests, of people, and whipped after by all the worldly powers; when he shall be
condemned, crowned, and crucified, as a thief, as a tyrant, as a notable
offender convicted. Expect, but till these things come to pass, and then thou will see, that this humility, which now seems infinite to thee, is but a small
parcel of the humility of thy Savior; thou will see that his humility is a
bottom without end, and without any bounds. O divine Humility, how great art
thou become, in the littleness of the Son of God; how beautiful in his base
services and ignominies; rich and abundant in his poverty? O Jesus, thou art a
great Master, and teach well a godly Lesson; teaching humility in thy
humiliation; teaching, not in saying only, but in doing, teaching by work, and
by example, and not only by word and by council. And who ever dare, amongst
the sons of men, lift up themselves by pride, having seen the Son of God
bow down himself to this little Boteswayne and poor fisher? and to abase
himself before the worthlessenesse of vile and wretched sinners, and that with
so great humiliation? And who will not for ever make account of humility, since
that Wisdom himself has taken it to himself? who will not learn it with
love and respect, since that the Son of God teaches it on his knees? Who
will not entertain the greatness of this little virtue, and the littleness
of this great Dame; since the eldest borne of so great a Lord, descended from
heaven, and made man, loves her, embraces her, praises her and made himself
little, to make her great, and to procure her authority amongst the sons of
men? O holy Hu^niilty, foundation of true Christian virtue, and ladder to the
glory of heaven. O well-beloved Christians! Let us love hereafter the example of
our Redeemer; let us humble our selves upon earth with him, to be exalted with
him above the celestiali Arches.

1. OUR SAVIOVR CELEBRATES THE Jewish Passover, before he institutes the
Sacrament of his body.
OUR Savior celebrates the Jews Pasche, when he would institute the
Sacrament, and Sacrifice of his body, according to the order of Melchisedech;
laying, with a divine skill, the lively colors of the truth, upon the dim
Picture of the ancient portraiture. The manner then, which he uses in
celebrating this Pasch, was the same, which the Jews did then observe;
different from the old Pasch, celebrated in Egypt, in some ceremonies, Exodus
12.
added or changed since that time, which nevertheless were kept by our
Savior. In the number of these ceremonies, one was, to be clothed in eating
with a feasting Roabe, named from a Greek word Synthesis, Sueton. in Nere.
cap. 51.
and in the Gospel, A wedding garment, and in Latin words, Pallium, lana,
vest is coenatoria, accubitoria, which in English, is a Sleeuelesse garment,
Cloak, or Roabe, in which one sits at the table. It was decent, and of good
stuff, and often of a purple color, or of skarlet, or of a crimson violet.
The Jews custom was also to eat the Pasch, not standing, but as at other
ordinary refections, after the manner of Persians, leaning on the one side, upon
their beds, and having the table before them; and for this reason, they had no
shoes on their feet: of which manner of eating, the Scriptures (as well the
new, as the old) make mention in sundry places. The History of Hester,
describing to us the magnificent banquet of King Assuerus, says, That they had
little beds, upon the which men did repose themselves in taking their repast.
Tobi^. 2.3.
We learn the same out of Tobias book: Luke 38.
and in the Evangelists we have many signs thereof; namely, in Saint Luke, when
he resites, how Magdalen coming to the banquet, remained behind our Savior,
washing his feet with her tears, and wiping them with her hair; which gives
us to understand, that he was upon a bed raised up, holding his naked feet
from the ground behind him, otherwise she standing behind, could not have
washed him and done him this service. The Romans did keep the same custom, as
well in their apparel, as in their fitting at table; and as they were careful
to keep it, they also thought it unseemly, publicly to be seen in one of
these garments, which they did eat in? This Suet^nius notes in Nero; Neron.
Sueton. in Nor. cap. 5.
saying, That he one day went out into the street, clothed with his
Synthesis, or mantle for the table, without a girdle, and without sh^^es, with
a hand-kercher about his neck. From this truth we gather, that the Hebrews,
as well as the Romans, did in this fashion imitate the people of the East. At
this day it is no more in use; nevertheless there be diverse manners of eating.
In all Europe, almost all men eat sitting, as we see in Spain, in Italy, and
elsewhere; which is the honestest and comliest manner. The Iaponians eat
fitting upon the ground, after the manner of Tailors, sowing upon a table; and
so do the Turks in many places. The Jews then took their repast, and did eat
their Lamb lying half a long, upon one side, in their beds. We also learn out
of their rituall, that in eating the Paschall Lamb, a pottage made of wild
lettice and endines, was served in according to the Law, Exodus 12.
into which the Father of the family did first dip his sweet bread (that is to
say) unleavened, and then the rest after him. So as that which the Evangelist
does recite, Matthew. 6.26.21. Mark 14.20. Luke 22.21.
our Savior to have said in supping, He, which puts his hand into the dish,
to eat with me, it is he that will betray me; does show that the Jewish
ceremony was kept by him. And further teaches, wherefore Judas was not
discovered, by these words, and why every one was in trouble to know of whom
our Savior meant them; for every one did dippe his sop together with our Lord;
so as the true betrayer could not be discerned amongst the rest; and so every
one was afraid to be noted, because every one did put his hand into the dish
with Jesus Christ. The same father of the family did take a great cake, kept
under the table-cloath, and divided it into as many pieces, as he had there
people at the table, and did give to every one his share, saying these words;
This is the bread of Auguish, which our Fathers have eaten in the Land of
Egypt; whosoever is hungry, let him come near, and make his Pasche. This done
he took the cup, saying, Thou art blessed, O Lord, who (...) created the fruit
of the Vuse. And having drink (...) gave it to the next, and he to his
neighbor, and (...) ^om hand to hand, even to the last. This ceremony had been
also added by the Jews, and our Savior condemned it not, but mended it;
serving himself of it as a shadow, and laying upon it one part of the
preparation of his Sacrament; for he blesses the bread and wine, and changing
them into his body and into his blood, offers them to his Father in an unbloody
Sacrifice, under the form of these elements, after the order of Melchisedech,
Psalm. 109.
and distributes them to his Disciples, as Father of the Family. No more as
bread of Angush, but of Joy; no more as earthly bread of death, but heavenly
bread of life, and true food indeed. And wine he gave, not common and
material, John 6.
but excellent and deified, which was his proper blood, as it were, powered out
into the Chalice, true drink of men. Joan. 6.
But before he came to this act, the crown of his precedent actions, and
accomplishment of the Jews Law, being now come unto this part of the Legal
ceremony, he rises from the table, puts off his garment, and having taken a
linen towell, girdeth himself with it; powers out water into a basin,
wosherh his Disciples feet, and wipeth them with the towell, wherewith he was
girt. It was also another ceremony added to the ancient Pasche, to sing an
Hymn after the Mystical Repast; for there is not any mention of it in the old
Testament; Matthew. 26.30. Mark 1^.26.
which is a sign, that this was an ancient tradition, the which our Savior
observed, as he did the former: for so the Evangelists do note, that having
said the Hymn, he, and his Apostles with him, went out of the room.

2. WHAT IS SIGNIFIED BY THE washing of feet.
BUT what means this washing of feet, after the Judicial Supper, and before
the mysterious refection of the body of our Savior? When men sit down at
table, and when they rise, they wash their hands, and not their feet; and
surely what reference has our feet to our mouths, and the washing of them to
eating: for if the washing of feet was to avoid the defiling of the bed,
whereupon they were accustomed to receive their food, they should have bin
washed at the beginning, and before they sat down to the table for to eat
the Lamb; after the eating whereof, they were to suppe. But now the beds are
fouled already, and the feet of the Apostles are not become fouler, then they
were, when they sat down to the table. What then signifies this
extraordinary washing? It shows, that he, that will have part and fruit, in
the refection of our Saviors body, ought not only to be clean in mouth, and
hand, as in common feeding, but moreover in his feet; that is to say, he ought
to be wholly cleansed; he ought to be pure and clean, not only in his
actions and words, but also in his affections. The hand may well signify
works; for it is the Instrument of instruments, and the Factotum both of
spirit and body. The mouth is the mould of the word, and signifies it. The
feet note to us the affections of the soul; for as the corporal feet carry
the body, so the affections carry the soul, and are her feet. So the hand and
mouth clean, and the feet washed, are signs unto us of a man just in his
actions, discreet in his words, and pure in his affections; signs of a clean
man in every point, and worthy of the refection of the body of our Savior. But
who can attain to the perfection of this purity, amidst the pollusions of this
mortal life? He, whose feet our Savior will wash: that, which to man is
impossible, to the grace of God is most easy. If the question be of our own
force, God tells us by IBREMY, Ierem. 2.22,
If thou shall wash thy self with Niter, and multiply to thy self the herb
Borith, thou art spotted in thine iniquity before me? But when the question is
of the divine virtue, the same God speaks thus: Esaias 1.1^.
If your sins shall be as skarlet, they shall be made as white as snow? and
if they be red, as vermilion, they shall be white as wool. With the same
spirit spoke Job to God, Job 14.^.
Who can make him clean, that is conceived of unclean seed? Is it not thou
which only art? DAVID considering his sin, and his infirmity, said; Behold
I was conceived in iniquities, and my mother brought me forth in sin: Psalm.
50,
considering the omnipotent mercy of our Creator, he said, Thou shall wash
use, and I shall be made whiter then snow. All the waters of the Ocean, cannot
make the skin of an Ethiopian white; one drop of this water of Grace, shed
upon a sinful soul, made by sin blacker then an Ethiopian; will make it whiter
then Alabaster, and more fair then the day. Of this water God did speak by
his Prophet, saying: I will power out upon you clean water, Ezech. 36.^5.
and you shall be cleansed from all your contaminations: not material waters,
and earthly, but spiritual and heavenly; which the same Lord calls his
Spirit. Act. 8.17.
I will power my Spirit upon all Nations. Whosoever then has his soul
cleansed with this water, his understanding illuminated with this Spirit, his
desires washed in this liquor, that man is wholly clean even unto his feet,
and may confidently present himself to the table of the Lamb without blemish.
This is the signification of our Saviors washing his Disciples feet.

THE FOVRTEENTH PICTVRE. THE INSTITVTION OF THE EVCHARIST.
The Description.
O Divine Evening, O admirable Feast (Christian beholders) which this mystical
Table represents unto us! An Evening, expected four thousand years. A
Feast, figured fourfold, and prophesied by a thousand Sacrifices and
Sacraments. The Son of God is the Feast-maker; the King, the Preparer; the
Meat and the Drink together. It is he, which prepares himself, the true
Lamb of God, to give himself in the last course, to twelve of his household;
Joan. 1.29.
and will for ever continue his liberality to his Church, as long as she shall
travel in the desert of this mortal life. Lamb, which by and by shall be
environed by the Wolves, which to morrow shall be slain by them; which with
his blood shall drown the sins of the world, and with tears; the weapons of
his humility, shall astonish the mightiness of the proud Tyrants, of the
Pharoes, of the Princes of hell, and of the world. Who, finally, having stifled
by his death the firstborn of Egypt, will swallow within the Ocean of his
merits, the iniquities of the captive world, setting the same at freedom. He
comes from washing the feet of his Apostles, and having taken the Symhose, or
festival Roabe again, according to the Jews ceremonious custom, sets
himself down at the table, and they with him; disposed after the fashion of
the Persians, Sueton. in Ne^^. cap. 51.
and Eastern people, whom the Hebrews did imitate, to wit, upon beds, in
stead of chaires and stools, where they are leaning and lying on the one side
of their body, casting their feet behind them, and taking their meat with the
right hand, as you see. Saint John is in the place of the best beloved child;
Supra pectus. Joan. 13.26.21.20.
for he lays his head on the bosom of the Father of the family, Jesus
Christ; who held the upper end of this first bed. Saint Peter is next Saint
John; the other are five and five on two other beds. They are a little
astonished, and sorrowful, every one examining his conscience, upon that which
our Savior has said even now in eating the Lamb, that there was one amongst
them, which would betray him: Saint John, the nearest to him, and the boldest,
asked him, who it should be; but neither he, nor the rest of his companions,
could know any thing, except Judas, who in his heart was twisting the cord of
treason against his Master, to his own condemnation. Every one is afraid to
fall into this foul crime, except the offender. And all attend the issue of
some great mystery; not only by reason of the ceremony of washing, which our
Savior had never used, in keeping the Passover with them the years before;
but also because of his countenance, behavior, and words: for men read in his
eyes, in his mouth, and in all his visage, the graces of a divine love, and the
gravity of Majesty, more then humane; and his words, full of affection, and of
wisdom, did witness that he did meditate some worthy proof of an Almighty
power. (...) 22.15.
He told them, that he greatly destred to eat this Passover with them,
before he suffered; not the Jews Passover, which he had long since eaten,
drawing the last line of the Figure; but the Passover of his body. These are
significatiue words of great affection, and the affection of so powerful a
Lord, cannot fail to effect some great thing. He has taken the bread, has
blessed and broken it, as before he blessed the five Loaves and two fishes.
Matthew. 14.
They moreover persuade themselves, that this ceremony is a preamble of some
miracle never heard of before. Being then thus attentive, he gave to them all
that, which he had taken, saying, (...) 6.
This is my body, take and eat. He gives now the Cup, saying, This is the
Chalice of my (...) of the new Testament, drinks you all of it, and do this in
remembrance of me. They did drink, and as they found themselves wholly
transported and ranished with love, when they took the Sacrament of his body,
under the form of bread. So now they feel their souls set a sire with a
divine flame, by drinking of the mysterious and beauenly liquor of his precious
blood. Judas alone, by his fault made no benefit of it, for he has not taken
this holy flesh, and divine drink, with a requisite preparation. The Devil had
seized on his heart long since, and had porswaded him to betray his Master; he
had his feet cleansed, but (...) soul laden with filthiness; wherefore,
taking unworthily a meat so worthy, he has swallowed death and damnation, in
place whereof, the others received life and sanctification.

Behold the chief work of our Savior, effected and perfected in five words,
behold the signification, and prot^^se of a thousand Prophesies, and Figures
past, fulfilled in one truth. Behold the offered Lamb, in an unbloody
Sacrifice, commemorating that of the Cross, which to morrow he ought to
accomplish. Behold the Mass, and the magnificent ^^^ation of Christians, which
shall endure even to the end of the world, to honor the Creator of the world;
to celebrate the death of his Son, and to nourish his children, with his
Flesh to eternal life. Matthew. 26.30. Mark 14. (...).
Our Savior rising from the Table, goes his way, and having, like a true
Father, given many documents, parsing from his children; and saying un Hymn,
in action, of thanks, goes forth unto the Garden of Olives. He went long
since, and is walking there: O sweet Lamb, whither go thou in the snary
darkness of this dangerous night? thou know well, that this is the place,
noted by the Trdytor, which has sold thee for ready money; thou well know,
that the wolves are already trouped, and armed with crast and rage, to take
thee, and lead thee bound to the butchery: than (...), O drink W^^lome, for
nothing can escape the eyes of thy divine providence: thou know, that there
for our salvation, an agony of horror shall fall upon thee, Luke 22.44.
and a bloody sweat shall flow from thy passioned body, with extreme fear of
thy grieved soul, even to the death: thou know, thou shall be taken there,
and be bound like a Lamb, and be led from thence, like a thief to
Execution; and notwithstanding all this, thou go thither; nay, thou go
thither, because thou do know it. And what compels thee to these voluntary
torments (O Redeemer of my soul)? but the force of thy love and mercy, which
make thee go with ioyfulnesse of heart, to present thy self to the combat,
for to pull forth the children of Adam out of the oppression of sin, and from
danger of eternal damnation, by the price of thy blood? O great God, by what
offices, services, and Sacrifices, shall we be able to acknowledge this thy
unlimited bounty? O my soul, what will thou do for such a Redeemer? with
what love can thou sufficiently love him? by what words can thou duly
thank him? and with what honor will thou adore him.

1. THE ENTRANCE, THAT SAINT JOHN makes, by which he declares the greatness
of the mystery of the Eucharist, which our Savior was to institute.
THis Picture represents unto us, the Institution of the Sacrament, and
Sacrifice of our Lords body; the noblest actio^ the diuinest Institution that
ever he did after he was made Man; the richest present, that he did ever give
to God, and to men, while he lived mortal upon the earth; and the highest
mystery that he was to leave in the treasures of his dear Spouse, the Church.
We have formerly discoursed hereof in many precedent Figures, and namely, in
that of Manna; it will be sufficient here, to note the circumstances of the
present history, which especially set forth the greatness of it. Saint John
beginning his narration of the washing of feet upon the Eve of the Pasche,
writes thus, Jesus knowing that his hour was come, that he should pass out
of this world to his Father: whereas he had loved his, that were in the world,
unto the end he loved them. And when Supper was done, whereas the Devil now
had put into the heart of Judas Iscariot to betray him: knowing that the Father
had given all things into his hands, and that he came from God, and returned
to God; he rises from Supper, and lays aside his garments. And that which
follows of the washing of feet: by which words Saint John taught us, that
our Savior was now in the vigill of his Passion; that he had loved, and did
constantly love his own; that he was the Son of God, having all things in
his power. And by these preamples he signified unto us, that in this Evening,
so near to his departure, he was to make the conclusion of all his course by
some notable act, to the honor of his Father, and their good, whom he had
loved so much. An action worthy of such a Father, and of such a Son, and of
such a Lover, all powerful, all good, and all wise. A Son spares nothing to
honor his Father; how liberal then will such a Son be to such a Father. A
father reserueth nothing from his children, that may tend to make them happy;
and departing from them, he leaves them all the best that he has. What then
will such a Father do, for the advancement and happiness of his children?
Wherefore our Saviors desire was to accomplish this his chief work in a
little time, but with such magnificence, as was agreeable to his greatness,
gave with the ornament of those wonders, which we have mentioned before his
own body, in Sacrifice to his Father, and in food to his Church; commanding
her to continue this sovereign honor, and this table of immort^^^ (...), (...)
as she shall be a traveler in the desert of this mortallty. And so he
fulfilled that, which Saint John would signify by those words, that he has
set in the beginning of his Dircourse: for giving his body to his Father in
Sacrifice, he made him a present most worthy of his Majesty, and giving it in
food to his Church, he leaves her a most precious gage of his love. And by the
changing of the bread into his body, and of the wine into his blood, which he
does in this mystery; he does a proper act of an infinite power, and more
noble, then the creation of the world. Wherefore, as the manner of the work is
worthy of God; so the Present is mest magnificent, and of greater value then
ten thousand worlds: for it is the bady of a Prince, the body of a King, the
body of God: and the Sacrifice made thereof, is indeed a Sacrifice of Sovereign
honor, especially being ostered by such a Priest, who is the Son of God
himself; and the food of this precious body, and the manor of giving and
taking it under the forms of bread and wine, is most agreeable to the wisdom
of the Giver, and to the profit of the receivers. The unwonted ceremony of
washing of feet, did signify no less, then the former words, the Majesty of
the future mystery. And whereas the other Evangelists note, that our Savior,
before he Instituted this holy banquet, said, I have greatly desred to ea^ this
Pasche with you. Luke 22.151. Manto. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22.
And again, That he took bread, and blessed it with thanksgiving, the Cup
also, and blessed it. All these words tended to the same end, to declare that
our Savior was going to do some admirable work upon the bread, and the wine,
in the end of his days, before he died. Let us now search into the words of
the Institution,

2. THE EXPOSITION OF OUR Saviors words, THIS IS MY BODY.
OUR Savior being set again at the Table, with his Apostles, in such manner,
as has been said; took bread, and having blessed it, brake it, and said,
Matthew. 2^. Mark 14. Luke 22.
This is my body, and in so saying, the creature obeyed, one substance gave
place to the other; and the bread was transubstantiated into the body of our
Savior, that is to say, the substance of bread departed, and the substance of
our Saviors body taked the place thereof. Howbeit, the color, the taste, and
the other accidents of bread do still remain, to serve for the outward robe,
to cover our Saviors body, and to make an entire Sacrament, which is ever
composed of two things, even as a man is made of soul and of body; the one
invisible for the soul, and the other visible for the sense: so to speak, and
so to do, appertained to an omnipotent Lord: man's word only signifies, but
the word of God both signifies and works. The Kings, and the Potentates of
the world command indeed their subjects, and their subjects obey them; but if
they command their trees, their rivers, their mountains, and other insensible
creatures; their commandments are in vain to the ears of such vassals; for
that, which has neither sense, nor soul, cannot understand the voice of any,
but the Creator. King Xerxes threatened the mountains, Plut. de Ira.
and made to be heaten the waves of the Sea; but the mountains were dease to
his threatenings, and the Sea contemned his whip. It is God alone, that can make
himself to be understood and felt of all that is. S. Hieron. in c. 8. Matthew.
All creatures (says Saint HIEROM) have feeling of the Creator, for they
understand him when he threatens them, or commands them: not that all things
have understanding, as the Heretics dream, but by reason of the Majesty of
him, that has made every thing of nothing. He commands all, and not only
things deprived of sense, but even that, which yet has neither nature nor
being. Romans 4.17. Matthew. 8.27 Mark 4.41.
He calls (says the Apostle) the things, which are not, as if they were. So
the Son of God, by his Word, puts the bridle in the mouth of the winds and
waves, and calmes the raging of the Sea. Even so he commanded the sick, Death
it self, and the Sepulcher; and his commandment was fulfilled. Genesis 1.
So he commanded Nothing, when he created the world of Nothing; and that
nothing was obedient, and became a world, by the commandment of his voice. The
word of man is significatiue; Gods word is also operative: If a man say in the
night, O that it were day, he signifies that he has a desire, that the Sun
should rise from his Horizon, to make it day; but the Sun for his saying
hasteneth never the more the course of his Chariot, to make day approach. But
God saying, Genesis 1.
Let there be light, the light appeared presently, and his word was not
significatiue only, but moreover the effectrix of his will: saying then, This
is my body, that which a little before was bread, is truly his body; and his
word does outwardly signify to the ear, and makes inwardly that, which it
did signify. It said, that it was the body of the Savior, and saying so, it
made it so; for otherwise, he had not said so of it; Joan. 14.
for so much as a lie cannot proceed from the mouth, and heart of Truth it
self, which assures nothing, that is not true.

3. OF THE CLEARENES OF THE SENSE of these words: THIS IS MY BODY, by
Scripture, and by reason.
THese words: This is my body, are most clear; if there be any in the whole
volume of the book of God; and good reason they should be clear, For they
contain the Law, and Institution of thy greatest Sacrament and mystery of our
Faith, in ordaining whereof, it was fit to speak clearly, and intelligibly,
to the end to take away all occasion of error in a matter of such importance.
They contain also the principal clause of the testament or Pact, which the
Son of God did then make with his Church, wherein the Language which is used,
ought to be proper, clear and evident, and without doubtfulnesse, ambiguitie,
or incertainty, that the Will of the Testator may be understood without
difficulty, and without contention. Matthew. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22.
This is the cause, why three Evangelists, the Registers of this Institution,
and Notaries of this Testament, have used the selfsame words, and S. Paul
after them, without varying. 1. Cor. 11.
To the end to hold constant the light of this evidence, and strongly to
maintain the ground of that faith, which we ought to have of this mystery:
and to declare by a firm and sollide accord of four divine witnesses, that
the sense of the words is that, which they literally signify; and that being
the words of an Almighty worker, to whom nothing can be impossible; and the
words of a supreme truth, who can say nothing, which is not true; they must
needs make that, which they signify. By which means, if any one refusing the
literal sense of the Scripture, will gloss it from his own head, saying, This
is my body, that is to say, this is the Figure of my body; This is my blood,
that is, the Figure of my blood; he should herein be opposite to the holy
deposition of these four witnesses, not daring so to speak, which
notwithstanding they would have done, if such had been the sense of the words;
and should also too boldly change the truth of Gods word; giving a sense clean
contrary to the signification of the words, and putting the Figure for the
Body, against the authority of the forenamed witnesses, who have never presumed
to give such a gloss. Yea, he should do contrary to all law of Speech and
Grammar, which commands to take the words of the text, according to the
ground of their proper meaning, without having recourse to any metaphorical
and improper signification; when they do not give any absurd or contradictory
sense, which happens not here. For here the proper sense is most cominent
and agreeable to the truth; and the words do signify no other thing, but the
presence of the body of Jesus Christ in this Sacrament, which is not only not
contradictory, nor absurd, but full of wonders, most worthy of the power,
wisdom, and goodness of our Savior. When the Scripture calls the King a
Lion, the word ought to be taken by similitude, that a King is like a Lion, by
reason of his royal magnanimity; for taking the word according to the sense of
the letter, the meaning should be, that he were a beast, which would be false
and absurd. But these words, taken in their natural signification, contain
nothing, but that which is most agreeable to the Majesty of the Creator, and
most heneficiall to his creature; wherefore, there is not any reason here to
run to Figures: and therefore also it is impiety to say, that these clauses,
This is my body, This is my blood, are improper speeches, importing no more,
then that they are Figures of his body and blood. For such deprauation
destroys the truth of a most noble Sacrament, and shows that such
Enterpreters are not only void of faith, but also deprived of understanding;
hastily opening the gate to themselves, and to all other senseless people, to
reject all sense of Scripture, be it never so evident, if it displease them;
and to frame the manner of it, according to the unsteadiness of their own
brains, and to the exorbitant passion of unbridled flesh.

4. TESTIMONIES OF THE FATHERS, upon the Exposition of the same words.
AS the Scripture is evident in these divine words; so is the Exposition of
holy Fathers, constant to maintain the sense, they give in proper
signification, as has bin said.

Saint CYRIL of Jerusalem, Since that Jesus Christ, S. Cyril. Hieres. Catech.
mist. 4,
having taken the bread, says, This is my body; Who is he, which for ever dare
to doubt? and he affirming the same, and saying, This is my blood; Who will
refuse to believe it? He changed water into wine, a creature, neighbor to
blood by his only will; John 2.
and shall not we believe, that he has changed the wine to his blood? Believe
then most constantly, that we receive the body and blood of Christ; for under
the form of bread, the body is given thee; and the blood under the form of
wine.

Saint BASIL, having asked with what fear, faith, S. Basil. in Regul. breu
interrog. 172.
and affection of the soul, men ought to take the body and blood of our
Savior, answers himself, saying; How great the fear is, S. Paul instructs
us, Who so eats this bread, and drinks this Chalice unworthily, he eats
and drinks his own damnation. What we are to believe, is taught by the words
of Christ, who said, This is my body given for you. And there this Doctor
consequently shows, how we ought to believe these words, This is my body,
which the same faith, with which we believe these words of Saint John, when he
says, The Word was made flesh; John 1.
and those of Saint Paul, Philip. 2.
when he extolled the great humility of the same Word in his Incarnation, his
great obedience in his Passion, and his infinite charity in the one and the
other: as then we believe that God was really and truly made flesh, and
suffered death, according as the words of the Scripture tell us. In the same
manner Saint Basil will, that we believe the Real Presence of the body of our
Savior, according as these words, This is my body, teach us; and concludes,
that by faith, and consideration of these things, we are inflamed with a great
love to Jesus Christ, which is the affection of the soul, that we ought to
bring with us to the Communion of his body and blood, accompanied with fear
and belief, as has been said.

Saint CHRYSOSTOM, S. Chrysos. hom. 83. in Matthew and 60 ad Pap. Antioch. Hom.
de prodit Judah. Genesis 1.22. and 8.17.
Let us believe God without doubt; for it is he, which said, This is my body.
And elsewhere, It is not man, which makes the body and blood of Christ in
offered things; but Christ himself, crucified for us: He said, This is my
body; by this word the offering is consecrated. And even as these words, once
uttered, Increase and multiply, and fill the earth; always work their effect
in Nature, for generation: even so these words uttered, This is my body, give
certainty to the Sacrifice through all the Tables of the Church, even unto this
day, and will give it, until the coming of the Son of God.

Saint JOHN DAMASCENE, S. Joan. Damas. l. 4. c. 14.
The bread and the wine, mingled with water, supernaturally are changed into
the body, and blood of Christ, by the innocation of the holy Ghost, and are not
two, but one, and the same: this hallowed bread, it not the Figure of the body,
neither the wine the Figure of the blood; but the true deified body of our
Lord, and his true blood.

THEOPHILACT, Theophil. in Matthew. 26.
a grave and ancient Doctor, Jesus Christ saying, This is my body, shows that
the bread, sanctified upon the Altar, is his body, and not the Figure of it,
seeing that he says not, this is the Figure of my body, but, This is my body;
for it is thansformed in an explicable manner, though outwardly it seems
bread.

Saint AMBROSE, S. Ambros. de Sacr. l. 5. c. 4. and 5.
It is the word of Christ, which made this Sacrament; by which Word all has
been made. Our Lord commanded, and the earth was made: see thou then how
working his Word is? If then his Word has been so mighty, as it made that to
be, which was nothing before; how much more easy will it be unto him, to change
one thing into another? the bread before consecration, is bread; but after the
uttering of these words, This is my body, it is the body of Christ. Hear him,
saying, This is my body, take you all and eat of this. It is Jesus our Lord,
which testifies that we receive his body and his blood; shall we doubt of his
fidelity, or testimony?

Saint CYPRIAN, This (says our Lord) is my body. S. Cyp. de cun. Dom.
They had, according to the visible form, eaten of the same bread, and drunk
of the same wine. But before these words, that food was only for the
nourishment of the body, and to give strength to the corporal life; but after
that Jesus Christ had said, Do ye this in remembrance of me, This is my
flesh, The form of Consecration are these words THIS IS MY BODY.
This is my blood; as often times as the same words are pronounced with the
same faith, this substantial bread, and this consecrated Chalice, with solemn
benedicton, has been profitable for the health of the whole man. He teaches
then, that the words of our Savior are understood according, as they do
signify, and that they are the form, by which the bread and the wine are
consecrated into the body and blood of our Savior.

Saint AUGUSTINE writing the ancient enstome of Christians, who did answer
Amen, S. August. l. 22. cont. Faust. c. 10. and in Psalm. 33. Council. 1.
after that the Priest had uttered the words of Consecration, This is my body,
this is my blood, says thus, The blood of Christ, gives a clear voice on
earth then, when as the Christians having received, answered, Amen. It is the
clear voice of blood, that the blood it self pronounces by the mouth of the
faithful, received by that blood. The same Author elsewhere, Jesus (says he)
carried himself in his hands, when recommending his body, he said, This is my
body. It was then according to the literal sense of the Word, the body of our
Savior.

Saint ANSELME, S. Anselm. in. 1. Cor. 11.
expounding the selfsame clauses, makes Jesus Christ to speak thus; Eat
this that I give you, because it is my body. It plainly appears bread to the
outward senses, but acknowledge by the sense of faith, that this is my body;
the same in substance, that shall be given for you to death. This is the
Exposition of the ancient Fathers, and there has never been any Doctor of the
Catholic Church, which gave to these words, This is my body, other sense, then
these here do give. And this is the meaning of Jesus Christ; and whosoever
follows any other, he is gone out of the School of Christ Jesus, taking a
lie for truth, and damnation for food of eternal life.

5. MYSTICAL REFERENCES OF OUR Saviors words, THIS IS MY BODY, to the ancient
Figures, and to all other bodies.
THis is my body, says our Savior: We have said something upon these words,
but it is nothing in comparison of that, which may yet be said; they are
clear, but yet they are full of hidden meanings. They alone contain the old
and new Testament; and fly in signification far above the height of heaven;
more profound, then the depthes of the Ocean, and more in wideness, then is
the compass of the world: in sweetness they surmount all the honey, and milk
of the Land of Promise: in virtue, the power of all men and Angels; and in
greatness, the Majesty of all Kings, that ever were upon the earth. The words,
which made the world out of nothing, were great in effect: in heaven they made
the Stars; the Fishes in the sea, Genesis 1,
in the air the Fowls, under earth the stones, and mettells; and upon earth
the Plants, the Trees, the Lions, the Elephants, and other creatures, in number
infinite, and in beauty admitable; but that which our Savior says, and in
saying, effects by these words, This is my body, is more infinite, then all
that together; this body is more, then a thousand worlds, if so many had been
produced. The most excellent name of God is the Tetragram, expressed under the
voice Idoney, composed of four letters, not to be uttered by the Jews. This
clause, This is my body, it the clause Tetragram, wouen of four words, evident
to the ears of faith, but vnexplanable by the tongue either of man or Angel.
What shall we say then, to express the virtue of it? And who can or shall
express it, but he, who is the Author of these words and mysteries? It is he
must do it, that is, the all-knowing Word, and all powerful, able to know, to
say, and to do, whatsoever he will. What said then this great God by these
words, This is my body? He said, that it is his body; and saying this, he said
all, that is, precious, admirable, and divine amongst bodies. He
distinguishes all the bodies, that he had ever (made) or created, from his
own, and prefetreth it before them all. He said, I have made the Sun, and
the Moon, the Stars, and all those immortal bodies, which on high make the
wainscot of my Fathers Palace; but these are not my body, neither substances
allied to my person, these to me are strange bodies; This is my body, which I
have formed by an extraordinary way, in the womb of an holy Virgin; which I
have divinely appropriated to my greatness, and which I have made the
habitation of my dignity. The other bodies are parts of my possession, this
here is the body of my particular person, surpassing the excellency of all the
bodies, long since consecrated to God, and were prophetical Figures thereof.
The Tree of Life planted in the earthly Paradise; the Lamb of innocent Abel
offered in Sacrifice; the bread of Melchi adech, given in blessing the
Sacrifice of Abraham, accomplished by rare faith and obedience; the Hebrews
Paschall Lamb; the Manna from heaven, the Loaves of Proposition, the
First-fruit offerings, the bread of Eliah, the Sheep, the Lamb, the Ewes, the
Heifers, the Beefes, the Oxen, the Doves, the Sparrowes, the Turtles, and all
the bodies of beasts, which the Law of Moses set upon the Altar in Holocaust,
in action of thanks, in Propitiation; all the bodies, that men have offered to
the Majesty of my Father, have been sacred bodies, the Figures of this my body,
this is, not the Figure, but my body it self, which only pleases my Father,
which only can worthily thank him, which only can effectually appease him;
the others were not pleasing to him; but so far forth as they had relation to
this here, in as much as they did Figure it, and foretold its coming; this is
the subject of all these bodies, and of all these old Sacrifices: this is the
body, in which God shall be truly honored, in which he shall be fully
satisfied, in which he shall receive with infinite measure, the tax of man's
Redemption, and in which he shall judge the quick and the dead. By these words
then, our Savior shows the body, which is the honor of all his Church, both
in earth, and in heaven: for that which is most precious in a Kingdom, is not
treasure, munition, gould and silver mines, the storehouses of merchandises,
the opulent Cities, the stately houses and Palaces, the Orchyards, the
Gardens, and other such like pleasant places. But it is the body of the King;
it is for him and by him, that the Nobles command, that the soldiers fight,
that the Magistrates exercise Justice, that the Guard watch and keep
Sentinel, that the Merchants trade: He, that has the body of the King, has
all. Wherefore the words of our Savior, This is my body, declare, that this is
the holiest, and diuinest thing within the enclosure of the kingdom of heaven,
and Monarchy of his most dear Spouse, which is his Church. What can thou
then, O sweet Jesus, choose, more rich and more divine, for to honor thy
Father, to testify thy love, to make happy thy Spouse, then to leave this
body, in a perpetual Sacrifice to his Majesty, in daily Sacrament and food to
thy members? What can thou utter higher, then to say, This is my body? The
great Casar disguised in the habit of a slave, gave once both astonishment and
courage to his Pilot, dismayed with a storm; when making himself known, he
tells him; Have heart, my friend, Plut. in Casares.
it is Casar, thou carriest. With what heart, and with what admiration ought
we to hear these words, This is my body? With what respect and love ought we
to receive this body, although disguised in the habit of frail Elements,
since it is thou that speak clearly, and say, This is my body? And what
courage ought thou to have, O my soul, having with thee, and carrying in
thy mortal body with thee, this immortal body, this lively body, quickened
with a most noble soul, replenished with all perfection, both of Nature and
Grace, this Lord, God and Man, King of Kings? And what other thing can thou
do but contemplate in silence, (rather then to endeavor to express in words)
the greatness of thy Redeemer in this his own Word, which thou can not
comprehend? And with a deep humility, and burning affection, enjoy the
Presence, that he makes thee thereof so often, as for thy good and salvation,
he shall say to thee that, which he then said of his body to his Church: This
is my body, take and eat?

6. HOW OUR SAVIOVR OFFERS Himself to God in Sacrifice, saying, This it my
body.
WHen our Savior made dis body Present in uttering these words, This is my
body, in the same instant he offered it to his Father in an unbloody Sacrifice,
after the form of Melchisedech, and forth with he gave it to his Apostles in
Sacrament, under the same form. This is the cause, why having said, This is my
body, he adds, given for you, that is to say, offered for you in Sacrifice;
broken for you, now given and broken, and which shall be hereafter given and
broken in the same fashion, even till the end of the world, in remembrance of
that bloody Sacrifice, which to morrow I will offer for you, once for all, upon
the Cross. So as our Savior made not his body only Present, but present
under the forms of bread, giving it a being of food, a dead being, albeit that
in it self it was ever living, even as in making himself man, his Divinity
took a body, and a mortal being, and endured death in that body, albeit the
Divinity was always immortal, and endured nothing, as we have declared before.
He made himself by reason of the dead species, present as dead, and
represented himself as a Victime, and as an offered Lamb, for to be
afterward the refection of the Father of the Family, (...). 12.
and of his household, according to the Figure of the Jews Lamb, the which
could not be eaten before it was first dead, immolated, offered, and made a
Victim, as the Scripture has told us; S. Greg. Niss. or. 1. de Resur.
and Saint Gregory of Nisse after the Scripture. And it imports not, as has
been said heretofore, that our Savior uttered no words of Oblation expressly,
saying; My Father, I offer thee this body; the manner after which he makes
himself Present, as a Victime expressed sufficiently, that he offered
himself. It was also sufficient, that he made it Present, with intention to
offer it to God, who sees the heart, though the tongue say nothing. And so the
Jewish Priests did offer their Sacrifices, immolating the the beasts only, and
saying no other thing, whereby to signify that it was a Sacrifice. And so our
Savior likewise offers himself upon the Cross, without using any words,
fignifying Oblation. Matthew. 26.28.
The same immolation was made in the Censecration of the Chalice, when our
Savior said, This is my blood of the new Testament; Luke 22.20.
shed for many for the r^^ission of si^ner: Also, This Cup is the new Tastament
in my blood, the which is shed for you. For by this consecration, the blood of
our Savior is represented apart, which also does evidently declare, that his
body was made a Sacrifice, according to the likeness of those of the Jews,
who coming to immolat the beast, did kill it, separating the blood from the
body with a sword; Heb. 4.12.
as our Savior with his omnipotent Word, in stead of a piercing Sword, made
his blood Present in the Cup, as separated from his body, and so represents
the immolation thereof: and albeit the body and the blood were not actually
separated, and that the body was in the Cup, and the blood was with the body
under the accidents of bread, yet notwithstanding, by reason of the form of
wine, separated and set apart, they appeared separated, to represent this
immolation; and the blood was truly shed, not after the manner of Aarons bloody
Sacrifices, in which the blood was drawn from the veins in proper form, but
after the manner of wine. Our Savior used also the Present tense, saying, This
is my blood, shed; this is the Chalice of my blood, shed for remission of sins;
Matthew. 26. Luke 22.
to signify, that this, which was in the Chalice, to wit, his blood; (for the
wine could not be shed for remission of sins) was already powered into the
Chalice, by an unbloody effusion, as it was the next day by bloody a effusion
on the Cross. And when the holy Fathers did sometimes turn the words of
Consecration into the Future tense, saying, This is my blood, which shall be
shed, in stead of that is said, which is shed; they contraried not the sense,
which we now give; for they all did affirm the Real Presence of our Saviors
blood in the Chalice: but they referred the words of our Savior, not only to
that present pouring forth, which was then made, but also to that, which was
to be made, as well on the Cross, by bloody Sacrifice once, as in the
Eucharist, by unbloody Sacrifice, even until the end of the world. Behold, how
our Savior Sacrificed, and offered his body to his Father by these words, This
is my body, given for you; This is my blood, shed for you. And this is the new
Sacrifice, and offering in the Law of Grace, which the holy Fathers say, was
instituted in this mystical Supper, as we shall learn by the ensuing
witnesses.

7. THE SACRIFICE, AND SACRAMENT of our Lords body, to have been instituted in
the mystical Supper, declared by the testimony of Fathers.
SAint Gregory of Nisse, speaking of the institution of the Sacrifice of the
Eucharist, S. Greg. Niss. or. 1. de Resur.
made in the Supper of the Paschall Lamb. Our Savior (says he) by his
ordinance preuenteth the violence of his enemies, with a secret manner of
Sacrifice, ineffable and invisible to the eyes of mortal men. He himself
offers himself for us, Oblation and Victime. Priest and Lamb of God together.
And when was this? this was then, when he gave to his familiars his body to
eat, and his blood to drink.

Saint CHRYSOSTOM, S. Chrysostom. hom. 2. in. 2. Tim.
Be it Peter, be it Paul, be it another Priest of like merits, which offers
the holy Oblation: this is ever the selfsame, which Jesus Christ in person
gave to his Disciples, and that which the Priests yet make daily: this here is
no less, then that there. Wherefore? Because they are not the men, that
sanctify it, but it is the same Christ, who hallowed it before.

Saint AMBROSE, S. Ambros. in Psalm., 8.
We have seen the High Priest, coming to us, and have heard him, offering his
blood for us; Let us follow him, according to our power, since that we are
Priests, to the end to offer Sacrifice for the people; we are certainly
unequal in merit, but honored by the Sacrifice. For albeit that Christ now
seems not to offer, he is nevertheless offered on the earth then, when his
body is offered here.

Saint AUGUSTINE, S. Aug. in Psalm. 33. cont. 2. Psalm. 109.
Jesus Christ has instituted of his body and blood, a Sacrifice according to
the order of Melchisedech.

AESICHIVS of the same time with Saint Augustine, Aesich. lib. 2. in Leuit. c.
8.
Our Lord God, supping with his Apostles, did first offer the Lamb, which made
the Figure; and after his own Sacrifice.

RVPERT, Rupert. lib. 2. in Exodus c. 6.
Our Saniour extremely perplexed in the beginning of his Passion, first
immolated himself to his Father, with his own proper hands.

These passages, and the rest, that have been cited in the Types of
Melchisedech, and of the Paschall Lamb, teach how our Savior instituted the
Sacrifice, and Sacrament of his body, after the old ceremony of the Paschall
Lamb was accomplished; which is the Faith, that the Church has ever held, and
will hold for ever.

8. OUR SAVIOVRS TESTAMENT, MADE in the Institution of the Sacrifice, and Sacra
meant of his body.
IT was in this admirable actio^, that our Savior made his new Testament, of
the new Covenant with his Church, amending the old; and drawing near to his
death, it was a time fit and agreeable for him to bequeath, and leave an
eternal testimony of his last Will, and affection toward his children. The
words of the Testament, Gal. 4.24. Heb. 8.7. and vlt. Exodus 24. Matthew. 26.28.
Mark 14.24. Luke 22 20. Exodus 24.7.8. Heb 9.16.17.18.19.20.
and of the Testator are clear, as also the Ceremony, according to S. Matthew,
and S. Mark, our Savior said, This is my blood of the new Testament, that
shall be shed for many, unto the remission of sins. And according to S. Luke,
This is the Chalice, the new Testament in my blood, which shall be shed for
you: in the same sense he says, new Testament of his blood, making allusion to
the old, which he long since had written by the means of his servant Moses,
and marked with the blood of beasts, to Figure forth this here, that there was
made in the Desert, at the foot of the Mount Sinay, where Moses, as a royal
Notary, read the Law, and the cenure of the written Testament, and gave the
aduertisements of the Father of the Family, before seventy of the Ancients,
assembled by name, and before the people, that were to inherit. In it the goods
also were be queathed, to wit, the Land of Promise, a Figure of Paradise. And
in Figure, the death of the Testator also was interposed: for there was
Sacrifice offered, whereby the death of the future Testator, Jesus Christ, made
Man, was represented, and promised, for confirmation of the Testament; to which
Ceremony, that has reference which David said; Psalm. 49. Iosue 8.31. Leuit. 23.
Gather ye together his Saints unto him: which ordain (...) Testament, and
alliance with Sacrifice. The same Ceremony was practiced by Jesus, when he
renewed the Covenant of this Testament, observed also by the Jews, every
year, in the Feast of Pentecost; and by Solomon, 3. Reg. 9.25.
three times in one year. These Victims then, after they were offered to God,
were taken by the Priest, and by the people, in ordinary refection, and the
Altar, Exodus 24. Heb. 9.
and the Book of the Law, was sprinkled with the blood of them. According to
the trace of all these Ceremonies. Our Savior made this Testament in this last
evening in the desert of this world; in Mount Sinay, where the old was made,
but in another part thereof, to wit, in Sion and Jerusalem, part of Sina, and
adjoining to it, as Saint Paul said: In Sion, more noble then the other part of
Sina, Gal. 4.24.
and in Jerusalem, a more lively Figure of his Church, then was the Desert;
whereof Esaias has written, The Law shall go forth of Syon, Psay 2.3.
and the word of God from Jerusalem. In it then our Savior published in two
words his Law, and gave his Aduertisements, saying in this same Supper; Joan.
13.34.
I give you a new Commandment, that you love one another. A Law of Love, and
not of Fear, as the Law of the old Testament. Matthew. 26.28. Mark 14.24. Luke
22.20. 1. Cor. 11.24.
He made the Recital of his Testament in these words; This is my blood of the
new Testament. He made his Legacies and promises to his inheritors, not of a
Land of Canaan, as of old to the Hebrews, but of the remission of sins, and
of the Kingdom of heaven. Of remission saying, This blood, shed for you, and
for many, Luke 22.29.
unto remission of sins. And of the Heritage, he says, I dispose to you, as
my Father disposed to me, a Kingdom, that you may eat, and drink upon my
table in my Kingdom, and may sit upon thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. Behold a wonderful sauourable conclusion. David, making his Will,
enjoined King Solomon, his son, his son, 3. Keg. 2.7.
that he should make the children of Berrellay, to eat at his table, in token
of great honor and friendship, but he made them not inheritors of his Kingdom,
nor sharers of his Royal honors. Here our Savior communicates his Table, his
Kingdom, and his Throne, to his friends; his Table, in which is served for
meat, and for drink, his proper flesh and blood; it could not be more royal,
nor more exquisite; neither the Heritage greater, nobler, nor worthyer of such
a Testator. The Testament was written also with the Law, not in Tables of
stone, as the old, but in the hearts of the Apostles, and of all those, which
shall be called to this inheritance after them. And this is that, which was
foretold by Jeremy: Hier. 31.32.33.
I will give my Law within their ontrals, and will write it in their hearts.
According to which manner of speech, Saint Paul said to the Corinthians; You
are the Epistle of Christ, 2. Cor. 3.3.
ministered by us, and written, not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living
God; not in tables of stone, but in tables of the heart, consisting of flesh.

It was signed by the hand and blood of the Testator, when holding the Chalice,
and changing the wine to his blood, he said, This is my blood of the new
Testament. Matthew. 26.28. Mark 14.24.
The Altar, which was our Savior himself, was besprinkled, when he took it;
the people, Inheritor, and the Book, was also sprinkled; when the Apostles did
drink, and did wet their breasts, which were the tables, wherein the Law and
the Testament were written. The refection of the Victim sacrificed, was made
between the Priest and the people; when our Savior having offered his body to
his Father, took it himself, and gave it to his Apostles to eat, concluding
his eternal Covenant with the refection of his body, and with the drink of
his blood. He left a pledge of love by his Testament, and a precious Jewel of
his remembrance, when he left this self-same body, and this self-same blood,
for an eternal memory of his charity toward us his heirs, Luke 12.18.
saying, Do this in remembrance of me. So our Savior, having written and
accomplished his Testament, according to the draughts of the old Figure; died
the next day, and his Testament shall remain, eternally confirmed by his
death. O divine and powerful workman! O sweet Jesus! O great God! What shall
we here amidst so many wonders first admire, thy Powerfulness! thy Wisdom!
thy Goodness! thy Greatness! thy Providence! thy sweetness! thy Liberality
altogether, or all apart! where all is great and admirable together, all great
and admirable apart! What a workman art thou, O Redeemer of the world, to have
so long ago, so divinely drawn the Figure of thy Testament, and to accomplish
the truth upon that Figure, with so divine tracts of improuement? What a Master
art thou, to have left so heavenly instructions, and so fair laws of amity,
graven in such living tables, as are the hearts of thy Disciples? What a King,
to have made so amiable and honorable a combination with thy poor subjects?
What a Father of a Family, to have written so favorable a Testament unto men,
and of thy enemies, to have made them thy children, and thy heirs of so great
a Kingdom? O Redeemer, what were we without this Testament? we were eaytifes
and vagabonds; unworthy to be supported upon the earth, and worthy of eternal
confusion; but by it we have gotten a right to heaven, and to immortal glory;
and nothing remains, but to take possession, and there to rejoice in peace
for ever, so soon as we shall have fought the good fight, as thy Apostle
speaks, 2. Tim. 4.7.
kept the faith, and consummated the course of our years, in the good works
of thy love and charity, according to thy Commandment. For thy victorious
death, having made this Testament of force, and irreuocable, has done us this
favor above thy ancient friends and children, which departed before it; who
albeit they did leave this world with the hope of heaven, yet they enjoyed not
heaven immediately in recompense of the works, they had done in thy Grace and
service, as true children: noe, this was a Grace referned to the time of thy
new Testament, which was to be eternal by thy death, and to put in full
possession, without delay, those thy children, which like true heirs, shall
have executed the will of their Father: and what thanksgiving shall be able or
sufficient for to acknowledge worthily the least part of these so great favors?

9. IN WHAT MANNER OUR SAVIOVR, having made his Testament, left his body to his
Heirs.
OTher fathers, having disposed of their goods, and signed their testament; dye
and leave their bodies to be put in the earth, where they rot, and their souls
go to their places; so as their heirs have no other better pawn of the
presence and person of their father, then their ashes and bones. Our Savior
has observed the substance of this Ceremony, but after a different manner; for
he gave his body to his Apostles, in an impassible manner, albeit mortal also
then, and from that time he left it to his Church, clothed indeed with the
first mortal robe, made of the accidents of bread and wine, but united with
his Soul, and his Divinity, now a living body, immortal and glorious. For his
tomb also, he has the bodies and souls of his heirs; a living tomb, and
ennobled with a reasonable soul, which if it be well prepared with requisite
qualities, does from his harboring, receive a wonderful reward: for whereas
other tombs reap from the bodies buried in them, nothing but spoils of death
and horror, and are by them defiled; the bodies of Christians do receive life,
immortality, sanctification, and celestial joy from the body of our Savior:
whereby it appears, that we ought to use exceeding great diligence, in well
preparing our selves, to lodge worthily in us this precious body. The
principal apparel is Love and Chastity, and then after these, all the other
virtues of the soul, which accompany the former. We read that Artemissia,
C^^^. Tuscal. Herod. Liu. 8. Plut. l. 36. c. 5. V^^. lib. ^.
Queen of Carya, after she had consumed her treasures, in a magnificall and
admirable Sepulcher, that she had prepared for the dead body of the King her
husband; in the end made them to pound his bones, and took them in a drink,
for to be her self the living Sepulcher of his dead body, whom she had so
extremely loved in his life, and without whom she could not live. This was an
Humane love, more worthy of compassion, then of praise; which nevertheless may
serve us for an example, to make us do better: for how much more convenient,
and just is it, that we should employ all our spiritual means, our love, our
devotion, our fastings, our alms, our prayers, that we may become a living
Cabinet of the body of this divine Spouse of our souls, whom we shall receive,
not senseless nor dead, nor reduced into powder; but alive, immortal, all
whole with his soul, and with his glory, and with all the Majesty of his
Divinity, for to be one day eternally united with him.

10. TWO GREAT WONDERS HAPPENED in the institution of this Sacrament.
SAint Augustine, S. August. in Psalm. 33. 2. Keg. 21.13.
expounding what the History of the Kings says of David, that counterseiting
to be out of his wits before King Achis? He carried himself in his own hands;
took occasion to admire another wonder far exceeding that, which came to
pass in the institution of this Sacrament. And it is, that our Savior carried
himself in his proper hands. A thing, which he esteemed most admirable, and
impossible to have been practiced by David, according to the sense of the
letter: But that our Savior only did it, when holding his body in his hand,
and saying, This is my body, he cetried it to his mouth, and gave it to his
Apostles. For though it might be that David, playing the fool, carried
himself in his hands, by going on all four, after the manner of little
children; or bearing himself up upon his arms, and using them in stead of feet
and of legs, after the fashion of those, who by actluity, cast their body
upward in the air, with their head downward, like a tree, and walk upon their
hands. S. Augustine, nevertheless, had reason to say, that to carry himself of
himself in his own hands, belongs only to our Savior; for it is he, which
truly earieth himself David carried not himself on his hands, but rather on
his hands and feet together, if it be to be understood of the first manner; or
only on his arms, if of the second; but our Savior carries himself properly
in his hands, neither more nor less, then he carried in his band the meat,
which he put in his mouth, or into the mouths of others.

There is here yet another thing, admirable in this Institution, which is,
that our Savior took himself for food; a thing not heard of, neither happened
to any man since the Creation of the world. Iose^h. lib. 7. de ^el. Iuda^c.
Histories tell us, that some mothers had fed upon their own children, as Mary
the Jew; and that some person have eaten a certain part of their body,
compelled by the violence of some extraordinary sickness; but it was never read,
that a man either did, or could eat himself all whole, still remaining
without hurt; and such an act never came into the thought of man. The Son of
God alone can do it, and has done it, and has given herein an illustrious
testimony, that he is God, doing a work which only God could do, by virtue
uncommunicable to any other: for it is God alone, that lives of himself, and
is his own proper food; the creatures do live of other creatures, and their
food is from without their body, and none live of themselves; the blessed
Spirits in heaven, do live of the vision of God; but God alone is his own
life, and his own meat from all eternity; and needs no other thing but
himself, to sustain himself eternally. So that our Savior, taking himself
for food, signeth himself with the sign of his own greatness, and shows,
as by an experiment proper to God, that he was God, he being able to make food
of himself, even according to the body, after the likeness of his Divinity,
which is the food and nourishment of himself, and belongs to no other thing,
but to God alone. And this is that which he signified by these words; I^^^.
5.26.24. S. Chrysostom. hom. (...). in Joan.
For as the Father has lofe in himself, so be has given to the Son also
to have life in himsele: for proof then, and declaration of his speech, he
rooke himsele in food corporally, as spiritually he himself is his life and
his food, and his felicity; and likewise the life, food, and felicity of his
Elect.

11. SAINT IONN FIRST RECEIVES OF all the Apostles. The Eucharist, the true
refection, and the Present at the refection.
OUR Savior then does offer his body, and his blood to God his Father in
Sacrifice, and having received them first himself, he gives them to his
Apostles for spiritual refection, beginning at Saint John; and not only
because he was nearest him at the table, but because he was endued with
singular charity and chastity, virtues altogether proper to make us sit
worthily at the table of this feast of love and purity. It is here, where the
refection began, which alone is true and holy; and now it began to be continued
afterward, so long as the world should endure. All the other which had of old
been instituted in the House of God, were but Figures of this; their meats,
were meats of corruption, and of death, serving only to maintain this
mortal life; the Victims, the Offerings, and all that, which was set upon the
Altar, or upon the table in the Law of Nature, and of Moses, were but dead
bodies, and mortal food to nourish mortal bodies; the body of our Savior, is
the body of life, and food of immortality. In this refection, the ceremony of
Alliance made between God, and Man, was celebrated by the mediation of the
flesh, and blood of God, signs both signifying, and withal effecting, a most
straight, and most divine union of the head with his members, and of the
members amongst themselves. And the Symbols, which were the meat of the table,
and the connection of such, as assisted, the selfsame were the Presents of the
Feast. It was a famous custom among the Nations of the world, to give Presenis
after a great Feast; the which were called of the Greek word, Apophoreta, as
who should say, things to be carried from the Feast: of which S. Ambrose
speaking, S. Ambros. in exhort. ad Virg.
writ in these terms, in his Exhortation to Virgins: Such as are invited to a
great Feast, have a custom to bring away some conuiuiall presents. Isid.
Some bring vesieis of gold; some of sillier, some gold and siluer^ some money;
Sueton. Coligul. Lam^^d, in Helioga^oto.
some Jewels; some beasts; some men; the Son of God gave his body and his
blood, for the Present of his Feast or the meat of his Feast, and for the Feast
it self, surpassing the price of all other Presents, as also the splendor and
deliciousness of all other banquets.

12. OF THE WORDS OF OUR SAVIOVR; Do this in my remembrance.
NOw this divine refection was not inssituted to be celebrated once alone,
Hest. 1.
as that of Assuerus was, but for to be continued even until the end of the
world, as the Paschal Lamb continued until the end of the Synagogue, Exodus 12.
as has been declared. Wherefore our Savior having communicated his Apostles,
and established the Institution of his banquet in this first refection;
commands the continuation thereof, and declares the end, why he would it
should be continued saying, Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
Do this for a commemoration of me. In y self will always be the Sacrifice,
and the principal Sacrificer, but invisible. I ordain you Priests, to be my
Vicars, and visible Sacrificers in my Church, even as I have given you the
authority of Doctors, and Pastors, to keep my place in the Chair of truth,
and to feed and rule my slocke. Do this then, do this action, the noblest that
shall be done in my Family, and continue therein a memory of the Sacrifice,
which shall be offered by me to morrow on the Cross, for you and all mankind.
Do it in memory of the Passion, that I shall have suffered for you, in memory
of the infinite price of my blood, which I shall shed for you, in memory of the
victory, that I shall obtain^ for you, over the enemies of your souls health,
over the infernal powers, over the tyrants of your spiries, over the Prince of
darkness, over the flesh and the world; in memory of the immortal glory, that
I shall have purchased for you, and for those, which will be my members, giving
my flesh in Sacrifice upon the Altar of the Cross. Do this Feast, and
celebrate this Sacrifice, in memory of these exploits, continuing it without
limit of time; and when my Passion shall be once past, let it be always
living, and p^^serued by your service, in the memory, and in the face of my
Church; and as the benefit is of infinite merit, so let the acknowledgement
also be eternal? This is the sense of these words. Luke 23.19^
Do this for a commemoration of (...) As well Divine as Humane Justice
requiteth, that men give praise to great exployts of virtue; and that they be
mindful of a benefit, and that the remembrance be so much more lively and
honorable, as the benefit is great. Exodus 20.8.
This is it why our Lord commanded the Sabbath day, in remembrance of the
Creation of the world; the Feast of new Moons, in memory of the conservation
thereof; the Paschall Lamb, 2. Par. 2.4. Exodus 12.
in memory of the delivery of the Hebrews, captives in Egypt. The same
Hebrews did celebrate the victory of Mordecheus, gained over their enemies; 2.
M^^b. vlt. Iudis. 16.
and that of the valiant Judith, obtained over Holofernes. Was it not then
reason and justice, that there should be a memorial of the Passion of the
Son of God, it being the most admirable work that ever was, and the true
work of an Almighty and all merciful Lord his highest prowess, his noblest
victory, his greatest benefit toward men, and for which alone he descended
from heaven, taking the garment of our mortality? Especially considering that
this Redemption could not have saved, unless it had been applied, and made
proper to every one, by this memory, reiterated with faith, love, devotion,
contemplation, fasting, watching, and other works of piety, which are the
doors, by which this infinite merit of his Passion-entereth into our souls,
even as the windows of an house are the means, by which they that are within,
do partake of the Sunbeams, and enjoy them, as if it shined only for them.

13. THE MASS A MOST PROPER Memorial of our Saviors Passion.
AS it were very reasonable, and very important, that the memory of our
redemption were always fresh and living in our souls: so the divine Wisdom
has chosen a most agreeable means, to represent it most honorably, and with
fingular efficacy; to that end, instituting a Sacrifice in his house, and a
solemn refection amongst his children: for these are the two principal acts
among men, whereby God is Soueraignely honored, and the memory of any thing
most effectually preserved. The Sacrifice acknowledges God, reuerenceth him,
and does him homage, rendering him thanks for his benefits; and the refection
assembles and unites men together, and makes their meetings more famous, and
more capable to retain the remembrance of things P^st, and more powerful to
ingraue, and send their memory forward to the future ages of posterity. And so
we see as well in holy Histories, as profane, that the greatest actions of
men, of Kings, of Captains, and Princes and Commonwealths in the world, for
Peace, for War, for Victory, for Triumphs, for Funerals, and other works of
great importance, have been begun and ended with Sacrifices, and Feasts.
Solomon celebrated the Dedication of his magnificent Temple, 3. Reg. 2.63. 2.
Por. 7.8.
which he built for God, with innumerable Sacrifices and Feasts; the Persians,
the Egyptians, the Grecians, the Romans, and all the Nations of the world,
used the same means, to honor their Acts, and make the memory of them
immortal. Thus to do, is an imprinted Law of Nature, and holily practiced in
the House of God. It is no wonder then, that Jesus Christ, Author of all good
Laws, has established an Altar, and a Table; a Sacrifice, and a Feast, to
ingraue his Honor, and make the memory of his triumphant Death to live for
ever. But that, which in this preparation is more efficatious to represent this
death, and more to be considered then all the rest in this preparation, is,
that same body, which suffered, which died, and which suffering and dying had
triumphed, is actually present in this Sacrifice and refection, as the matter
both of the one, and of the other. He has not ordained, that it should be
celebrated, as it was of old, by words and mysteries, and by the bodies of
beasts, but he himself would be present in the action. Neither more nor less,
then as a King, who desirous to celebrate some great Victory of his own; not
only would make it to be recounted and sung, and represented by Orators,
Poets, and Painters, but he himself in person would be present, acting the
principal personage in the representation thereof. For so our Savior has
represented his own victorious death, being therein himself the chief Actor,
the Sacrifice, and the Sacrificer, giving his body immolated, and his blood
shed; his body as dead, and yet living; his blood as drawn forth of his body,
and yet still united with his body: and in conclusion, exhibiting himself in
Sacrifice, and refection, after a most effectual and pregnant manner, to set
forth clearly, lively, and profitably, the resemblance and memory of his
sacred Passion to the honor of his Father, and the salvation of his well-beloved.
And therefore has also commanded this Sacrifice and Feast, to be celebrated
from year to year, Exodus 12.
not in one place only, as that of the Jews Lamb, but every day, and many
times a day; and this in all places, wheresoever the faith of his name, and the
name of his Majesty, should have showed it self; and in all parts of the
earth, wheresoever the tree of his glorious Cross should have taken root.

14. THE MASS, THE FEAST OF GOD, wherein he is singularly called upon in the
Law of Grace, and the Christians are perfectly heard.
THE Mass, the singular Sacrifice and Royal Feast, by which God is highly
honored, and his creature is exceedingly helped; for in it his Majesty denies
nothing be it never so great, that any man asks, either for the health of his
own soul, or for the salvation of his neighbor, and so his creature is there
enriched by his gifts. The Persian Kings celebrated in their Court a certain
kind of Feast, dedicated either to the day of their birth, or of their
coronation, which they in their Persian language did call Ticta, (...). Lin. 8.
as who should say, perfect Supper. This Feast was honored with such a
prerogative, as the King at that time denied no demand, which was made unto
him. A custom, no less wisely, then happily observed by Queen Hester; for
her History tells us, that having spied the season, she feasted with royal
provision Assuerus, her husband, the King of Medes and Persians, to obtain of
him vengeance against her enemies, and deliverance for her people; and
therefore, after they had taken their refection, the King, according to his
custom, said: What is thy petition that it may be given thee? (...).
and what will thou have done? although thou shall ask the half of my
Kingdom, thou shall obtain it: She asked boldly, and as easily obtained
that, which she asked. The Son of God is more magnificent in his continual
Feast devoted unto the days of his remembrance, for he gives not earthly
goods, but himself, for a saving Sacrifice and food of salvation, and puts a
present in our hand, wherewith we may be sure to obtain of the Majesty of his
Father, all that concerns our peace, repose and safety; and promises us, not
the half of an earthly kingdom, like an earthly King; but as an heavenly King,
the whole Kingdom of heaven. So that the promise, God made of old to the
captive Hebrews in Babylon, You shall call upon me, and I will be are you,
Ierem. 29.
is divinely fulfilled in the Law of Grace, by means of this noble and perfect
Feast indeed: for albeit in the Law of Nature, and of Moses, God well liked
the Sacrifices of his servants, and heard their prayers; yet was it with far
less liberality, and always in contemplation of the Messiah to come, who one
day was to satisfy the divine Majesty, by the Sacrifice of his body. Whereas
Christians in the Law of Grace, offer him a Sacrifice most acceptable in the
highest degree, that is, the body and blood of the Messiah himself, paying, as
it were, in his hand a full satisfaction, taken from that body and blood, the
fairest payment that can be made; and praying the Father by the Son, which is
the most urgent prayer that can be imagined. The Histories tell us, that the
Molessians desirous to obtain some favor from their King, Plutarch. in
Themist.
did take one of his sons, and holding him in their arms, cast themselves on
their knees before him, near to the domestical Altar and doing this, they
were never denied. Which manner of supplication Themistocles used then, when
being banished from Athens, he came into that Country, and preserved himself
by this ceremony, from the anger of Admetus, King of Molessians, who long
before had been his great enemy, and would have put him to death, being then
in his power, had he not served himself of this desence. To receive a prayer
for love of a son, is natural; and it ought not to be doubted, but since God
is Author of Nature, and has given this inclination to fathers, he has it
also in himself; and that so much more perfectly, as he is a Father of infinite
perfection and love, and that his own Son is the lively Image of his Fathers
perfection, and therefore infinitely beloved of him. And for this cause our
Savior exhorts his Disciples, Heb. 1.3.
to ask boldly of his Father, what they would, in his name, and by his merit;
as having right to obtain by this title whatsoever they demanded. The Church
also following the direction of her Redeemer, concludes her prayers in his
name, saying. Hear us almighty God by Jesus Christ thy Son. Matthew 21. Mark
11. Joan. 16.24.
And albeit every Christian has at all times, and in all places, access to
God, by the merits of his Son; yet then his prayers are most acceptable, when
he says or hears Mass, and with due preparation receives this Sacrament;
For the King himself is then present at this perfect and complete Feast, at
the which he denies nothing, that is asked; and the prayer being made in his
Royal presence, carries with it credit and prerogative, to be heard of the
Divine Majesty. Behold the banquet, the Sacrifice, and Sacrament of the Law of
Grace, figured by all those of old that went before it, and substituted in
their places: the Oblation and Sacrifice of Christians, and the noblest
instrument they have, whereby to call upon God and to have the grant of their
requests; behold our Eucharist, and our Mass. The Prayers, the Scriptures, the
Garments, and the Ceremonies, which have been since ordained by the Apostles,
and their Successors, and which are in use at this day, are not the Sacrifice
of the Mass, they are only the ornaments thereof; the essence of the Mass,
and of all this Royal Feast, is the body and blood of the Son of God,
offered in a Sacrifice commemoratiue of his death. This is the Sacrifice, and
the Sacrament, which makes the substance of this banquet; the rest serves only
to honor this honorable and divine action. In this evening then of the
fourteenth day of the Moon, the true Lamb was offered, the Figure of the old
was accomplished, the right of legal Sacrifices was finished, the continuance
of the Synagogue was ended, and the foundation was laid of the Law of Grace.
All which our Savior signifies divinely, by the circumstance of the time,
wherein he ordained the Jews Pasche, and in which he established the
Sacrifice, and Sacrament of his body, which remains to be declared for a
final end to this Treatise.

15. THE REDEMPTION OF MANKIND, and the end of the Synagogue, signified by the
Institution of the Eucharist in the full of the Moon.
EXplaining the type of the Paschall Lamb, we said, that the Ceremony began
upon the fourteenth day of the first month, of the Hebrews holy year upon the
evening; because in that night the first borne of Egypt were killed, and the
gates opened to the freedom of the children of God. Our Savior then to put an
end to the old Figure, and lively to express the truth thereof, instituted the
Sacrament of his body at that time of the year, a time, wherein the true
deliverance was near at hand; as the Jews Pasche was a sign of their
liberty, which was then to follow: for the next day, Exodus 12.
our Savior was to break the yoke of sin, and to deliver mankind from
Satan's tyranny, figured by that of Pharo. But here is yet another mystery,
hidden under the number of the days, and state of the Moon, which our Savior
by the same wisdom has also brought to perfection. It was said, that the Lamb
was to be taken into the house, Exodus 12.13.
the tenth day of the first month, and to be offered the fourteeth. Our Savior
accomplished the first, Exodus 12.6. Matthew. 21.
when he made his entry into Jerusalem, riding upon a she Ass, and upon a
young untamed Ass. Joan. 12.1.12.
For S. John writes, that six days before the Pasche he came to Bethania,
and the next day, which was five days before the Pasche, he entered into
Hierusam. It was then upon the tenth day, that he was received into Jerusalem
with great joy, as the Paschall Lamb, there to be offered upon the fourteenth,
in this Sacrament, without effusion of blood, and on the next day upon the
Cross, by real slaughter: for as the sixth before the Pasche, that is to say,
before the fourteenth, was the ninth of the month, so the fifth before the same
was the tenth of the month.

The second part, which was the state of the Moon, was no less wisely
fulfilled. The Moon had fourteen days old upon the evening of the Lamb; for
the fourteenth of the month, was the fourteenth of the Moon, as the beginning
of the month, was the beginning of the Moon, which has been elsewhere
declared. The Moon was then in her full. We said before, that the Moon
signified the Synagogue; wherefore the full Moon signified that the Synnagogue
was not come to her perfection. When our Savior therefore instituted the
Sacrament, and Sacrifice of his body, in that day, and in that hour, he
fulfilled the figured truth, and withal signified by the ceremony of the time,
that the Synagogue was then in her fullness, ready to depart; as being now
accomplished in the Institution of the Christian Pasche, shadowed in the
Judicial. S. Ambres. epist. 13. Matthew. 5.
And this is that, which Saint Ambrese, amongst other Doctors, notes, saying:
Our Lord celebrated in the fullness of the Law, which he came to fulfill: And
there remained nothing for the entire and perfect consummation but only the
last draught, which was his death on the Cross. Wherefore from that time, the
Judicial Sacrifices, figured of ours, were abolished before God, and the
Sacrifice of the body of his Son substituted in the place of them all. The
Law of Grace to that of Moses, and the Christian Church to that of the Jews
Synagogue, being as the truth to the picture, and the body to the shadow; which
was also declared by the Eclypse of the Moon and of the Sun in the next day
of the Pasch, as we shall make it appear in the exposition following.

16. THE END OF THE SINAGOGVE, AND the beginning of the Law of Grace, Signified
by the Eclypse of the Moon, and Sun, which fell out the next day of the
Pasche, and after the Eucharist ordained.
THe Moon was eclypsed, and caused an eclypse of the Sun, on the morrow of
the Pasch, and of the Institution of the Eucharist. This was a double eclypse,
no less wonderful, then unknown to Nature. Who has ever seen, that the
Moon should come under the Sun, when she was diametrically distinct from
it? or that the Sun should be eclypsed, being so far off from the Moon, as
the half of her circle; which is all the distance, that can be, to dispart one
Star from another? Now the Moon on thursday evening, which was the hour of
the Pasche, being found in the East, and the Sun in the West; the next day at
mid-noone, she was joined face to face to the Sun, in the same point of the
Zodiak with him; and as she ceased to shine upon the earth, so by her
interposition, she made the Sun to lose his light, in such sort, as there
were two admirable echpses of the two great lights of heaven; and by them was
signified the departure of God from the Jews, and the end of their Synagogue.
For as the Sun by his eclypse left to lighten the earth; and the Moon by
hers, losing the sensible light, that she took from the Sun, and
communicated here below to the world. Even so the Son of heaven, Creator of
this visible Sun, from that day forward, retired the beams of his favors
from these ungrateful people, and the Synagogue eclypsed in her fourteenth
day, that is, in her fullness, was deprived of the spiritual light, which she
received from him, and was before communicated unto her in the practice of her
Ceremonies. Then was she at full in the accomplishment of all her Figures, and
from thenceforth eclypsed with an eternal eclypse, being ended for ever; and a
new Moon began, that is to say, the Church of Jesus Christ, which he
purchased to himself the next day in the time of this eclypse, by his precious
blood in the terrible battle of the Cross, where all the Furies of hell, and
their confederates of this world, joined together to assault him; and those two
Torches, as it were, offended and angry at the injury, done to their Creator,
played their parts, and showed their indignation on the Theater of heaven,
speaking by the language of their effects, a language known to all, and making
in a strange manner the streams of their light run upward, withdrawing them
from the eyes of men beneath, with sighs and groans of the astonished world.

17. THE CHVRCH, SIGNIFIED BY THE Moon: and of the Pasche, and Christian
renouation.
THe Pasche then of our Savior, being instituted, containing the Altar and
Table of the Sacrifice, and Sacrament of his body: and the combat of the
Cross being ended, the Synagogue received a deadly blow, with all her
Sacrifices and Sacraments; and a new Moon appeared, to signify that the
Church was now no more in the Synagogue, but in the Law of Grace. The Moon
has a general resemblance to the Church of God: for as the Moon takes all
her light from the Sun, and sometimes goes before it, sometimes comes after
it, and sometimes ioynes with it: so the Church shows by the beams of the
Son of God, going before him, according to his Humanity, until the time of
his Nativity: being present with him while he remained upon the earth;
following him afterward, and sometime joining her self to him by the
Sacrament, and Real Presence of his body. Again, as the Moon lighteneth the
night, and gives direction amidst the darkness: Even so the Church has ever
enlightened the night of this world, and showed the way to heaven, amidst the
darkness of Heathenish Idolatry. Moreover, the Moon particularly marketh out
the several states of the Church in her first increasings: She shows the
Church under the Law of Nature, at the Change, in the weakness of her beams;
and on the fourteenth day, when she is at the Full, she has a resemblance of
the Church in the Synagogue, as we have said: but in that she became a new
Moon, after a new manner, in her fifteenth day, she signified the Church in
the Law of Grace. The newness, and new manner, consists in this, that she
drew near to the Sun by an extraordinary means; for being on Thursday so
far from it, as the East from the West, the next day she was even against
it; which approachment she should not make, according to her natural course,
but in the space of fourteen days, supernaturally also and with no less
wonder, she returned to the East on Friday evening at Sunset, where she had
been the night before. And so in six hours she put on the several roabes of
all her states; for she was new; she was in he first quarter; she was in her
fullness, and in the beginning of her third seventh, to wit, in her fifteenth
day. In these circumstances, and in these wonders, happening never before, nor
since, she marketh out the Church in the state of Grace, a state of singular
renouation, of a third seventh, of a third time in the new Pasch, in the new
and great Sacrifice and Feast, instituted by the Son of God in his body. To
which purpose Saint Augustine writes in these words, Because we are in the
third time of all the worlds continuance; (...) Aug. (...). 119. ad lan^er. c.
3.
herehence it is that our Savior rose upon the third day. The first time was
before the Law; the second in the Law; the third under Grace; in the which is
manifested the Sacrament, which was hid in the folds of the Prophetical
books. This it is, that, which was signified by the number of the Moons; and
for that (...) the Scripture, the number of seven has a mystical
signification of perfection, the Pasche was celebrated in the third week of
the Moon, which is between the fourteenth and the ^^e and twentieth day.
Behold how God reads us a lesson by his Stars, teaching us Paradise by the
sky, and communicating to us the beams of his intellectual light, by the
condition and course of the corporal.

18. OUR SAVIOVR HAVING INSTITVted the Sacrifice, and Sacrament of his body,
goes forth of his ledging to go to the Garden of Oliuet.
THe sweet Lamb being offered this evening, and given in refection to his
Apostles, and having abolished the old Pasche, and instituted the new, as has
been said, sung an Hymn, with his Apostles, after the tradition of the Jews,
and went forth to go to the garden of Oliuet, where he was to be delivered by
Judas to the wicked, who had already the watchword to apprehend him. This only
remained to accomplish all the proofs of his infinite love toward mankind.
He was first offered to his Father by an unbloody Sacrifice, without death and
passion; he went forth to be taken afterward as a Lamb, and to be made a
victime on the Cross, there shedding his blood, and giving his life. He had
given his body to his friends, he goes now to offer it to his enemies. He had
refectioned the souls of the humble, he went soon after to be fed with gall,
to drink viniger, to surfeit with the torments and reproaches of the proud. He
long since planted a Garden of delights, of rest, and of honor; he is now gone
to a garden of sorrows, of combat, and of disgrace: He planted the Tree of
Life in that delightful Garden; he comes to plant another in the Orchard of
his Church, more exquisit, and more excellent without comparison. And himself
walks in this solitary Garden, to repair the fault committed in the first
Garden. In that the debt was made by disobedience; in this it began to be paid
by humility. In planting the first Garden, and the first tree of life, he only
employed his word, who commanded, and all was made; but in this it is not so;
one hours stay in this will cost thee thy blood, O my sweet Redeemer, and with
the drops of that precious purple, the beds of this garden must be watered:
And the Tree of Life, which thou have planted in the Paradise of thy Church, is
not any mean effect, as that was, of thy holy word, but thy precious body and
blood it self, accompanied with the array of thy holy Divinity. O my Lord,
what can I say to praise thy magnificency? I say, that thou art magnificent
every way; in taking and giving, in feeding and in suffering every way; good,
and every liberal of thy goods, and of thy self; every way rich in mercy; and
every way abundant in propitiation: herehence it is, that for thy last
retraite thou go to the Garden of Oliuet, to make for us, and to give unto
us the oil of thy mercies; Olives for us, but Apples of anguish for thee. O my
soul, thy Redeemer goes in the night, and goes to subject himself, for
thee, to pains in this Garden; do something for him; accompany him amidst
this darkness; have compassion on him; admire his love toward thee; loath thy
sins, that have cast him into these vexations; weep and pray with him; offer
him thy heart and service in this perplexed highway of his Agony. And fince
thou art written in his Will, called to his Heritage, and placed at the Table
of his Kingdom, to eat of his fruit of life; give some sign of a grateful
soul, and mindful of so many benefits; make him some present of thy gifts,
that he has given thee; and give him something of that, which he has made
thine; albeit thou art nothing, yet give him thy self; in giving thy self,
thou shall become something; give thy self to him, since he has given
himself to thee; and when I say himself, what say I? an infinite depth of
goodness, given many ways unto thee; in his birth, in his conversation, in
thy meat, in his death, and in all the kinds, that a thing can be given.
After thou have contemplated, thanked, followed, and served him in the Garden
of Olives, at the Judgment Bar of Pilate, in the Mount Caluary, at the
Cross, with tears and sighs of love, of compunction, and compassion; make
him often thy Host, by means of this divine Table, which he has prepared for
thee, of his immortal and glorious body, to give himself to thee, and to
lodge with thee, so often as thou will; and taking the healthful refection of
his dish: contemplate moreover in this Table the delicates of Paradise, and of
eternal life, which shall follow after. For as the Altars of the Hebrews were
Figures of this Feast: so this Feast is the Image of the celestial Table.
Here thou eatest the bread of Angels; in heaven thou shall also live of the
bread of Angels. Here thy meat is God himself, the self-same God will be thy
food at that Table there: the food is here immortal; thy food there will be
immortal. He, which has of his own free cost and charges, prepared this
Feast on earth, for the food of his Pilgrims, the selfsame will prepare,
according to his magnificency the Feast of felicity in heaven, for a glorious
triumph of those, who shall have run courageously in the paths of his divine
Laws. Yet there is a difference. For in this Feast, nothing but faith soberly
perceiues the savor of the meat, and the sweetness of the drink; humane
sense and judgment sees nothing here but covered dishes, without power to
touch them: In that there, the meat shall be exposed to the appetite of the
soul to the full; in a magnificent and open table, and the senses shall have
also their good part. In this here we are mortal, growing in the Land of the
dying, in that we shall be immortal, without fear of death or disquiet, set
in the possession of the Land of the Living, and of the eternal kingdom; but
who can utter by word, or imagine by thought, the magnificency of that royal
Feast? The great Apostle, rapt up even into the third heaven, to learn the
lessons of those divine mysteries, 1. Cor 2.9. Esaias 6.4.4.
knew not how to do it, and showed himself learned in the confession of his
ignorance in the mysteries of God. This is a Feast unknown to any, that is not
set at the Table to eat and drink there. Well then, O faithful souls, and
travelers in this Desert; redeemed by this Lord, beloved of this Spouse,
invited to those nuptial banquets; purely use the meat, that he has prepared,
and that he offers you in pawn of his love in this mortal life; live
holily, (...).
attend patiently, keep your lamps replenished with the oil of your good
works, and kindled with the light of your conversation, to the end, that when
the time of the celestial marriage shall come, the door may be opened to you,
that you may enter to the Feast. And thou, O sweet Lamb, which shall be the
great King, and the great food of this immortal table, effect, if it please
thee, by the infinite merit of thy Cross, that we may sit down there,
according to the promise of thy Testament, and that we there may live
eternally, there to praise thee everlastingly. Amen.

FINIS.
Laus Deo beataeque Virgini Maria^ and omnibus sanctis.
A TABLE OF THE PICTVRES, DESCRIPTIONS, AND EXPOSITIONS OF THEM.
PICTVRE I. Paradise and the Tree of Life. THe Description. Page 13 1 The
Church of God lively set forth in earchly Paradise. Page 16 2 Of the benefits
and excellent qualities of the Church, described in the pattern of earthly
Paradise. Page 18 3 The holy Sacrament of the Altar figured by the tree of
life. Page 19 4 Resemblances of the tree of life to the holy Sacrament of the
Altar. Page 20 5 Of the excellency of the holy Sacrament of the Altar far
above the tree of life. Page 23 6 The body of the Savior, nourishment of the
soul, and cause of the glorious resurrection of the body. Page 24 7 The
Sacrament of the body of the Son of God, tree of all the earth. Page 25 8
Certain spiritual aspirations of the soul, desiring the clear vision of the
body of our Savior, and a giving thanks for the same. Page 26

PICTVRE II. The Sacrifice of Abel. THe Description. Page 29 1 The Sacrifice of
Abel, a Figure of the Cross, and of the Eucharist. Page 31 2 The accord of the
Figure of the Sacrifice of Abel, with that of the Mass. Page 32 Of two sorts
of Sacrifices. Page 34 3 God permits evil, to draw good forth of it for his
glory, and the profit of his children. Page 35 4 Abel an Image of the Just, and
Cain of the wicked. Page 38

PICTVRE III. The Sacrifice of Melchisedech. THe Description. Page 42 1
Melchisedech the Figure of our Savior. Page 45 2 The Priesthood of the Son of
God, figured in that of Melchisedech. Page 46 3 Wherefore our Savior has
Iustituted the Sacrament and Sacrifice of his body, under the forms of bread
and wine. Page 47 4 The bread and wine, signs of the Passion of our Savior in
his Sacrament. Page 48 5 The bread and wine in the Eucharist, signs of the
mystical body of our Savior Page 49 6 The body of our Savior called bread,
and his blood wine. Page 50 7 What this Sacrament is. ibid. 8 What a Sacrifice
is, and how it is offered in the Mass. Page 51 9 The difference between a
Sacrament and a Sacrifice. Page 53 10 No Religion without Sacrifice. Page 54 11
Testimonies of the Hebrew Doctors upon the same subject, that is, of the
Sacrifice of Melchisedech. Page 55 12 Testimonies of the ancient Greek
Fathers, upon the Figure of Melchisedech. Page 56 13 Testimonies of the ancient
Latin Fathers. Page 58 14 The difference between the Sacrifice of the Cross,
and that of the Eucharist. Page 59 15 The difference of the Sacrifice of
Melchisedech, and of this of the Mass. Page 60 16 The good spiritual
soldiers are worthy of the food, and blessing of the body of our Lord. Page 61

PICTVRE IV. Isaak on the Altar. THe Description. Page 63 1 Isaak, and the
Ram sacrificed, a Figure of the death of our Savior, and of the Sacrifice,
and Sacrament of his body. Page 67 2 The height of the mystery of the
Eucharist, signified by the Mountain, and by Abraham; and how we are to
appreach to it. Page 69

PICTVRE V. The Paschall Lamb. THe Description. Page 73 1 Of the time of
Immolation of the Paschall Lamb, and of the Holy and Civil year of the
Hebrews, and of their Neomenia, or new Moon. Page 75 2 Wherefore the year of
the Hebrews was Lunary, and how the Synagogue was compared to the Moon. Page
78 3 The Paschall Lamb, a Figure of the Sacrifice of the Cross, and of the
Eucharist. Page 80 4 How Jesus Christ is imitated in the Eucharist. Page 82 5
The Immolation of the body of our Savior in the Mass, confirmed by the
testimonies of the Scripture, and ancient Fathers. Page 84 6 Hom the Paschall
Lamb shows the use, and end of the Enc^arist. Page 86 7 Of the ceremonies
used in eating the Paschall Lamb. Page 88

PICTVRE VI. Manna in the Desert. THe Description. Page 93 1 Manna, a Figure of
the Sacrament of the Altar. Page 95 2 The correspondence of Manna, to the
Sacrament of the Altar. Page 96 3 What signified the likeness of Manna to
Coriander. Page 99 4 The holy Sacrament kept in the Tabernacle, as Manna in the
Arc. Page 100 5 The Bread of the Jews bears the name of wonder, in Figure of
our wonderful Sacrament of the Altar. Page 101 6 The wonderful power of God
in the Sacrament of the Altar. Page 102 7 Of the omnipotemcie of God in
Transubstantiation. Page 104 8 This Change is a miracle for the faithful. Page
106 9 Of the same power of God showed in the accidents of bread and wine. Page
107 10 The selfsame power, verified in the aceidents of the body of our
Savior, and first in respect of the quantity. Page 108 11 The marvelous
power of God about the qualities of the body of our Savior in the blessed
Sacrament. Page 109 12 The wonderful relations of the body of our Savior in
the same Sacrament. Page 110 13 Admirable actions of the body of our Savior.
Page 111 14 The body of our Savior imp^ssible. Page 112 15 The Sacrament is in
many places at one, and the self-same time. Page 113 16 The body of our Savior
about the Laws of time. Page 115 17 The admirable situation of the body of our
Savior in the blessed Sacrament. Page 116 18 The clothing of the body of our
Savior. Page 117 19 How the Eucharist is an abridgement of all the wonders of
God. Page 118 20 How Faith is fortified by this Sacrament. Page 120 21 Of the
goodness of our Savior in this Sacrament. Page 121 22 Charity toward God,
and toward our neighbor, increased by this Sacrament. Page 124 23 Of the
Wisdom of God in this same mystery. Page 125 24 Gods divine wisdom in
teaching of this mystery. Page 127 A Colloquium of praises and thanksgiving to
God. Page 129

PICTVRE VII. The Bread of Proposition. THe Description. Page 131 1 The body of
our Savior conceined of a Virgin, by the operation of the holy Ghost,
signified by the Loaves of Proposition, kneaded of the purest flower, without
leaven. Page 133 2 How the body of our Savior is offered every day, and
renewed every week. Page 134 3 The beginning, and end of the Communion is
Charity, Prayer, and Contemplation. Page 135 4 The body of our Savior
signified by the Table, upon which were set the Loanes of Proposition Page 136
5 The signifieation of the Candlestick. Page 137 6 The heart of the Just, is
the Altar of Incense. Page 138 7 Wherewith and how we ought to serve God. Page
139 8 The virtues, which are necessary, worthily to give thanks unto God, and
to make a just examen of our actions. Page 140 9 A Sovereign acknowledgement,
due only to God, made in the Eucharist. Page 141 10 The body of our Savior,
meat for the Sanctified. Page 142 11 What signified the Table of Proposition
Loanes, and the Candlestickes multiplied by Solomon. Ibid. 12 Purity of body,
necessary in such as come to receive the holy Communion. Page 144 13 They which
holily communicate, receive strength, and are armed my the Sacrament. Page 14^
14 A brief exhortation to purity, when we present our selue^ to the holy
Sacrament. ibid.

PICTVRE VIII. The Oblation of the First Fruits at Pentecost. THe Description.
Page 147 1 Three Judicial Feasts of the First Fruits. Page 151 2 The Mass,
the new Oblation in the Pentecost of Christians. Page 152 3 Of many
circumstances of the ancient Oblation, answering to the truth of the Sacrament,
and Sacrifice of the Mass. Page 154 4 Of the name Mass. Page 155 5
Transubstantiation made in the Sacrament, figured by the Leaven. Page 157 6 The
Sacrament, and Sacrifice of the body of our Savior, under the forms of bread,
foretold in the Scripture, and (...) by the Hebrew Doctors. Page 159 7 The
testimonies of Hebrew Doctors for Transubstantiation, and the manner, how the
body of our Savior is present in the Euchari^^. Page 161 8 The testimontes of
the Christian Doctors, concerning Transubstantiation, and the manner, how our
Saviors body is in the Eucharist. Page 163 9 Wherefore our Savior would have
his body hid, and not visible in the Sacrament. Page 167 10 As the old Oblation
of First Fruits began in Pentecost, so ours new. Page 170 11 The Mass began to
be celebrated by the Apostles at Pentecost. Page 171

PICTVRE IX. The Bread of Elias. THe Description. Page 17^ 1 The Bread of
Elias, Figure of the Sacrament of the Altar. Page 177 2 What means the
Scripture in signifying, that the Bread of Elias was baked under the imbers.
Page 178 3 What signifies the sleep of Elias under the shadow of the Juniper
tree. Page 180 4 Elias his walk, after the shadow of the Juniper tree, to the
Mountain Horeb, and of the water, that was given him with the bread. Page 182
5 The signification of the pot of Water. Page 183

PICTVRE X. The Propitiatory Sacrifice. THe Description. Page 185 1 Three
kinds of Sacrifices. Page 186 2 Of the Propitiatory Sacrifice, which properly
signifies that of the Cross. ibid. 3 The second kind of the Propitiatory
Sacrifice, a Figure of the Eucharist. Page 188 4 What difference there is
between the Judicial Propitiatory Sacrifices, and Sacraments, and those of
Christians. Page 189 5 Testimonies of the ancient Fathers, both Latin and
Greek, teaching the Sacrifice of the Mass, to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice.
Page 191 6 After what manner the Sacrifice of the Mass, an^ the Sacraments
remit sin since that of the Cross is our whole redemption. Page 194 7 The
Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Sacraments, rather g^^^, then take any honor
from the Cross. Page 196 8 The Sacrifice of the Mass, profitable to obtain
from God all kind of good, and it extends it self to all persons, except the
damned. Page 198 9 The Sacrifice of the Mass, profitable to the faithful
departed, which are in Purgatory, and honorable to those, which reign in
heaven. Page 200

PICTVRE XI. The five Loaves and two Fishes. THe Description. Page 203 1 The
miracle of the five Loaves, a Figure of the Eucharist. Page 205 2 In what the
miracle of the five Loaves did Figure the Eucharist. Page 206 3 The two Fishes,
a Figure of the same Sacrament. Page 208 4 Wherefore no mention is made of any
drink in this miracle, and other circumstances of it. Page 209 5 Why the
people would create our Savior King, and why he fled them. Page 210 6 God,
nourisher of every creature, true nutriment of his Children. Page 212

PICTVRE XII. Our Savior, Preaching of the Sacrament of his body. THe
Description. Page 217 1 Wherefore our Savior made a Sermon of the Eucharist,
before he instituted it. Page 218 2 The first cause, why our Savior would give
his (...) to eat, and his blend to drink, which was to show his goodness.
Page 220 3 The Second cause, to give a remedy to our misery. Page 221 4 Two bad
vnious of the flesh of Adam, with our soul, repaired by the flesh of our
Savior. Page 222 5 Pride and licentiousness, enemies of Faith, and the first
adversaries of the holy Sacrament. Page 226 6 Exposition of the words of our
Savior. Page 230 7 Heresy always carnal, and in love with extremities. Page
232 8 Contradictions of Heretics in their false and imaginary faith. Page 234
9 The literal sense, foundation of others, against the same Heretics. Page
235 10 Two kinds of Communion, the one Spiritual, the other Sacramental. Page
238 11 Of the divine wisdom, and goodness of God in this Sacrament: and of
the folly, and ingratitude of men. Page 239 12 To the strayed s^^epe of our
age. Page 242

PICTVRE XIII. The washing of the feet, going before the Institution of the
Eucharist. THe Description. Page 245 1 Our Savior celebrates the Jews
Passover, before he institutes the Sacrament of his body. Page 249 2 What is
signified by the washing of feet. Page 252

PICTVRE XIV. The Institution of the Eucharist. THe Description. Page 255 1 The
entrance that Saint John makes, by which has declares the greatness of the
mystery of the Eucharist, which our Savior was to institute. Page 258 2 The
Exposition of our Saviors words, This is my body: Page 261 3 Of the
clearenesse of the sense of these words: This is my body, by Scripture, and by
reason. Page 263 4 Testimonies of the Fathers, upon the Exposition of the same
words. Page 265 5 Mystical references of our Saviors words, This is my body,
to the ancient Figures, and to all other bodies. Page 268 6 How our Savior
offers himself to God in Sacrifice, saying, This is my body. Page 271 7 The
Sacrifice, and Sacrament of our Lords body, to have been instituted in the
mystical Supper, declared by the testimony of Fathers. Page 274 8 Our Saviors
Testament, made in the Institution of the Sacrifice and Sacrament of his body.
Page 275 9 In what manner our Savior having made his Testament, left his body
to his heirs. Page 279 10 Two great wonders happened in the Institution of
this Sacrament. Page 281 11 S. John first receives of all the Apostles. The
Eucharist, the true refection, and the Present at the refection. Page 283 12 Of
the words of our Savior; Do this in my remembrance. Page 284 13 The Mass, a
most proper memorial of our Saviors Passion. Page 286 14 The Mass, the Feast
of God, wherein he is singularly called upon in the Law of Grace, and the
Christians are perfectly heard. Page 288 15 The redemption of mankind, and the
end of the Synagogue, signified by the Institution of the Eucharist in the full
of the Mo^ne. Page 291 16 The end of the Synagogue, and the beginning of the
Law of Grace, signified by the eclypse of the Moon, and Sun, which fell out
the next day of the Pasche, and after the Eucharist ordained. Page 293 17 The
Church, signified by the Moon: and of the Pasche, and Christian renouation.
Page 294 18 Our Savior having instituted the Sacrifice, and Sacrament of his
body, goes forth of his lodging, to go to the Garden of Oliuet. Page 297

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
PAge 14. line 21. pegising read picreing. p. 15. l. 23. cause r. sorts. p.
18. l. 25. like quallities r. like heavenly quallities. P. 25. l. 13. tree of
all r. tree for all. p. 27. l. 9. practice r. praise. P. 32. l. 12. works r.
marks. p. 38. l. 10. he feared the r. ser^^ed thee. p. 47. l. 15. mystery r.
ministry. p. 57. l. 7. affirming r. offering. p. 63. l. 33. salactous r.
solicitous. p. 64. l. 16. prosperity r. posterity. p. 76. l. 1. wasting r.
rosting p. 120. l. 14. we have r. we hear. p. 125. l. 20. works r. marks.
p. 131. l. 27. conversation r. conservation. p. 151. l. 43. holy r. honny. p.
172. l. 22. Lauarites r. Lauatories. p. 183. l. 11. celestial r. eternal. p.
212. l. 27. freed r. fed. p. 221 l. 7. boundy r. bounty. p. 225. l. 29. glory
for us r. glorify us. p. 230. l. 23. explanation r. ^^plication. p. 236. l.
15. writes r. recites. p. 264. l. 16. cominent r. connenient. p. 267. l. 26.
S. Augustine writing r. S. Augustine reciting. p. 269. l. 7. Idonay r. Adonay.
p. 276. l. 17. Jesus r. Joshua. p. 292. l. 2. fourteeth r. fourteenth, and l. 7.
Hierusam r. Jerusalem. p. 292. l. 23. was not com: r. was now com: p. 295. l.
9. the Church shows r. the Church shin^: and l. 31. she should not make r.
she could not make. p. 229. l. 29. in that we shall be r. in that there we
shall be.


