THE HEROINAE: OR The lives OF ARRIA, PAULINA, LUCRECIA, DIDO, THEUTILLA,
CYPRIANA, ARETAPHILA.


LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop, for John Colby, and are to be sold at his Shop
under the Kings head Tavern, at Chancery Lane end in Fleet Street. 1639.

TO The true Heroine Lady, the Lady DOROTHY SYDNEY, The HEROINAE are humbly
p^^sented by G. RIVERS, To receive Fame from her Favor.
Madam,
THat I approach so fair a Shrine with so course an Offering; accuse not my
unworthiness, but your own worth; which like a Load-star is pleased to
attract the coursest mettle, to make known her power. Were it not a
profanation to sunder that symmetrie of Virtue and Beauty, (pieces, of which
you are the whole, and which worthily beget wonder and love* I might aspire to
level praises to some few particulars: but since such a disunion cannot be
made by a weak pen without cracking or disordering the goodliest frame of
Nature; Madam you must give me leave only to admire you in great, as the
great Subject of all admiration. If in writing You, I fall short of sense; it
is Love: if I overreach it; it is Wonder: so is sense and language oppressed*
or heightened by the subject that admits no mean. Madam, if this Pamphlet of
You rise in the opinion of the World, it is You; if it fall, it is I; I, that
have battered my brains against as great a miracle as the Philosophers stone.
If you please to receive it with a favor answerable to the ambition it is
offered, I shall account it the greatest honor that can be done to him, in
whose esteem (Madam) You are the first and last of these Stories; the
unparalled Lady DOROTHY SYDNEY, the incomparable ARETAPHILA.

ARRIA.
Whilst the Roman State was governed, or rather mangled between the Fencer,
the Fiddler, the Jugler, and the Player, lived Cecinna Paetus, sometimes
Consul, a man every way worthy that high title, of a Spirit molded for great
designs, that would break through all interruptions to advance his Honor:
He, a faithful friend to Scribonianus, in whose faction he had engaged his
life and fortunes; after his overthrow was taken prisoner by the Soldiers of
Claudius Nero. When he was taking Ship, (a Triumph for Rome) he desired the
Officers that Arria his Wife might accompany him; holding it a grand
discourtesie, since she had shared his prosperous fortunes, to deny her his
miseries: but the Soldiers, of men the best studied in cruelty, were more
ambitious to tyrannize over his mind (the greater Triumph) than his body; and
well advised how sorrows are subtracted by being divided, denied his most
passionate prayers, and hoised sail. Many of them were flies engendered from
his heat, who now fled him as an inhospitable clyme, too cold to nourish
flattery. They beheld him as one whose misfortunes were infectious, not to be
sympathiz'd; or as a Rock that stands the shock of the impetuous Wind, to ruin
those that touch it. Adversity is the true touchstone of Virtue and Friendship;
Friendship follows the good fortune, but Virtue the bad. That calmness of
mind which attends some high fortunes, is grounded rather upon Policy than
Virtue: he that swells when he is full, intends to break himself; who then
will be proud when he is prosperous? As it is an argument of baseness to be
elated; so it is true magnanimity, not to be dejected. Friendly offices, like
Rivulets to the Ocean, are tributes reflecting to the fortunes, not the men:
let these once decline, the other like Fry will swim against the sinking
stream: or like Mice, shelter themselves from the approaching storm. So
Paetus out lived his happiness, and his friends: only his dear Arria, having
hired a Fish-boat, followed along by the Shore of Sclavonia; so noble was her
piety; as if she did congratulate those extremities, as the trial of that
unshaken faith, that well-knit affection, not to be ravel'd from her Paetus by
the strongest battery of fortune. With so mean advantage as one small Bark, so
small attendance as one mean Fisherman, no Sail but Resolution, no Pilot but
that high Spirit that threatened destiny, and dared the utmost power of Fate,
she imbarqu'd her self into the dangers of the Seas. When she was arrived at
Rome, and in the Emperors presence, Iunia the Widow of Scribonianus, chief
partner in her captivity, did familiarly accost her: to whom with words made
for disdain, she made reply; do thou live, (said she) shame of our sex,
and monument of our shame! Thou, in whose arms Scribonianus thy Husband was
slain! What stands between thee and death, now he is removed that hindered thy
prospect? Unworthy woman, that prizest loathed life above thine honor, and
love thy self above thy Lord! Arria, thy courage (said Iunia) is ill placed:
the Gods that sent us hither, gave us life as their greatest blessing, not to
be appropriated to our selves, but communicated to our friends and Country; if
we should live only to our selves, we should live only to undo all; since
this great All subsists by each particular: is then the whole of us our own,
when the least part of us is not only ours? Grant our lives were entirely ours;
yet are they not of that small consequence, that like our clothes we may
divest us of them when our mis-guided fancies tell us they are out of fashion.
Then if Scribonianus (to whose departed soul thou slanderest my affection) had
held an end like this, an end of misery, or a way to happiness and honor; he
had counseled me to die, and had not lived himself to have been slain. Fond
Woman (replied Arria) how thine own arguments condemn thee! If the Gods give
us life as their greatest blessing, then surely blessedness is the quality and
virtue of life: when they withdraw this, they call us (if our faint souls
could hear them) nay, even nature her self whispers to us to be gone to some
better place. If our Friends and Country have part, or all of us, to whom do
we belong, if they discard us? must we live wretched till the decay of nature
does remove us? So patiently the poor silly Cottager awaites the good hour his
house shall fall upon his head. If Scribonianus thy Husband had not dyed
honorably in the Camp, (so great an opinion have I of his Virtue) he had dyed
as honorably in his Tent: but when thou leave the World, the World shall not
leave to say of thee, that Iunia outlived her Virtue, and her Love died sooner
then her self.

The Emperor by these passages perceived whereto she tended, that she would
live no longer then till she had a power to die; commanded her to be
straightly guarded: but this restraint was rather a spur then a bridle to her
actions traveling to fame: for she enraged that her death was denied her,
flung out of the Chair where she sat, and violently ran her head against
the Wall, with which blow, she much wounded, fell into a deadly swoone: but as
soon as her keepers had recalled the unwelcom'd life to her, the life that
grieved her, not that it was gone, but returned; she thus bespake them: You see
how vainly you employ your care to keep a prisoner that will be free; you may
make me die with more pain, and less honor; but not to die at all, this is
beyond your power: whilst I wear a hand commanded by a heart that knows no
fear, I shall not despair of death, nor shall I long protract a loathed
breath in such wretched times that make life but the nursery of sorrows, and
seminary of misfortunes. Some few days she wasted in comforting, and condoling
with her friends the general calamities wherein the most virtuous were
involved, under that monster of men, Nero, then tyrannizing. Then she retired
into Paetus lodging, and there thus spoke her last: The soul imprisoned in a
necessity of being miserable, must break through all fence of nature into an
honorable end. This very precept nature her self imprinteth in us; she
denies not the iron-bound Slave a death to free him from the toylsome Oar;
does she deny the Sun-scorch'd Pilgrim his nights sleep? no, nor the
world-beaten man his eternal rest. Surely then, she allows us to shake off
her interest, when we are sunk below her succor. Paetus, thy life is not
linked to nature, but to fame: fall then by thine own sword, and thy spirit
wound up in thine honor, mounts to the Palaces of the immortal Gods: If thou
faintest under so brave a resolution, or enviest thy self the glory of thy
end; know, that ere two days expire, thou thy self expirest: but how? by
whose hands? beheaded by a base hangman, offered up a tame sacrifice to insated
tyranny. Awake the Roman in thee; shall high Paetus (whom when the World
unworthy of his Virtue, ingratefully flung off) claspe broken hopes and
fortunes, to save himself with the shipwreck of his fame? shall he, to whom
thousand servile necks did bow, stoop to the baseness to beg life, while his
death is in his hands? Cato and Scipio (whom this age is more prone to adore
then admire) held it not honorable to beg life, though they might expect more
from Caesar's Virtue. But what can thou hope for from a Tyrant abjured by all
the Virtues, one that approves nothing in Soveraigntie but Power, and that
guided by Passion to insatiate revenge? Then (as if she had distrusted her
Husbands spirit) she drew out the poyniard from his side: Paetus, (said she)
how I have not entertained life, nor death but for thy sake, this last act of
honor be my witness. Do this Paetus: then she plunged the dagger into her
heart, and having drawn it out, she delivered it to him again; trust my
departing breath, Paetus, (said she) not the wound it gives me, but thee,
afflicts me. There died the noble Arria, there did that soul fly to
eternity; that soul that was too great to owe her liberty to any power but to
her own. Paetus blushing to be indebted to a president for his death,
especially his Wife; took to him the dagger that was so lately gilded in his
Arria's blood, and with these words hastened to his end. Had fortune answered my
resolution, and crowned my enterprise with happiness; I had entered Rome,
envied by the most noble, not pitied by the basest. I now see how the success
of humane affairs depends not upon valor, but uncertain fates; and our
actions elevated by the height of spirit, do but entrench us deeper into
misery. But though I am bereft of all the advantages of fortune, and of honor:
yet am I Master of a mind unconquered; over which nor Tyranny nor Fate shall
triumph. Then embracing her dead, he sighed, and said; Pardon, blessed spirit,
my too long absence from thee; I have borrowed this little leave of life but to
admire thy Virtue, which being above my wonder, I must soar unto that height
where it is ascended, to search out her true perfection: Pardon my soul that
she ascends not to thee in an ecstasy; feign would she: but this dagger
claims her liberty that gave thee thine. Then he thrust it into his heart, and
there the dagger acted his last and most faithful service; slew his Master.

Pro Arria.
THE first Being tied the first two into one, and formed two different sexes
into one body, and one soul; the bodies by alternate use so proprietated, not
to one, but both: the souls so sympathizing in affections and in passions, as
both became one to both. They that keep this mystery inviolable, know no
outward respects of power to divide them into two: If Paetus be unhappy, Arria
is unfortunate: Paetus is doomed to die; and shall Arria live to see him
slain? Has he outlived his hopes, and can she hope to outlive him? But why
would she die? was the fear of the Emperors cruelty mingled in her cause?
What fears she that fears not death? what Emperor is cruel to her that
dares die? what cruelty is to be paralleled to that which bereft her of her
life? It was Paetus slew her; Paetus? had Arria lived, Paetus had not slain
himself; therefore Arria died: died because Paetus should die: Oh unheard of
cruelty! oh unparalled affection! Arria died because Paetus could not live.
Paetus by death redeemed himself from what was worse than death; from torture:
Arria redeemed her honor, and her Paetus from torture, and dishonor. Fortune
made her miserable, that Virtue might make her happy: her faith so firmly tied
her love, that death could not undo it with her life. Her fortunes were so
ingrafted in her Paetus, that with his they did bud, flourish and wither* Her
life was fastened to his strings of life: with him she lived, with him she died.

Contra Arriam.
THrough what forbidden paths does passion hurrie us, when once our reason is
unseated! Arria would die rather then be led in triumph: did death redeem her?
No; death was but fortunes headsman to execute her she had condemned. The
Emperors power extended no faerther then to afflict her withred body: not able
to endure this weak revenge, she yielded up her mind a triumph to her fortune,
and her self unto her sorrow. If fear did not surprise her, then engaged in
Paetus treason, she was her own wrack and torture, scorning all Executioners
but her self Who then condemns her death, when it was due to justice? But what
law exacts of her this justice? The Gods forbid her to kill another, much more
her self, being nearer to her self than any other. Nature by her law claims
life, as her due debt, payable when she demands it. If she died because Paetus
should die; she did but invite him to her rage, not to her virtue. But I think
fear, the common defect of Nature in women, deprived her of her life: for death
appeard so accoutred in the terrors of wrack and hangman; that she died for
fear of death.

PAVLINA.
LVcius Annaeus Seneca the Philosopher, and Tutor to Nero the Emperor, was
Lord of great Revenues, to which his virtue, not his fortune was his title; his
mind was richly embroydered with all the studied ornaments of learning; a good
part of his life he exercised in the Court, where while the Princes ears were
open to Philosophy, his heart and hand were both unbent to him; his favor and
his nobleness, like rivalls, strived which should with most devotion serve
their Sovereign: but when debauchery usurped upon the Emperor, the Tutor was
devanced and disgraced. In all these extremities Seneca in himself was so well
poised, that neither the greatness of fortune could bribe him into riot, the
height of knowledge into pride, nor the Courtier into flattery: nor did he know
any man great enough to make him less; nor could his mind, which Philosophy
had placed above the World, decline with fortune. In his old age he married
Pompea Paulina a young, fair, and nobly descended Roman Lady, a Lady of that
worth, that no Roman but he that did enjoy her, did deserve her. Nero having
let loose the reins of reason, and himself to all licenciousnesse, so
tyrannized, as if he did persuade himself that an Emperor was above the Law,
and must also be without it: what his will prescribed, his tyranny did
execute, and so, as if his actions were accountable to no power but his own.
Among his chief and most remarked cruelties, it is not the least he expressed
against his Tutor Seneca; to him he sends his Satellites to denounce his
death: the fashion of those times was, when a person of quality was condemned
to die; he was allowed the liberty to choose his death, and a time proportioned
according to the Emperors rage, to dispose of his affairs: but if his revenge
flowed so high, that it would brook no delay: then he enjoyd no time to do
any thing but die: if the condemned resisted his decrees; then he commonly
appointed, that by some slave he should be barbarously murdered: but the
nobler Romans held it nearer way to honor with their own hands to anticipate
their fates, and in unhappiness staid not the enforcement of tyranny or
nature. Seneca, with an undaunted look receiving the sentence of his death,
called for ink and paper to write his last Will and Testament; which the
Captain denying him, he turned about, and then bespake his friends: You see,
my loving friends, (said he) I cannot gratify your affections with my
fortunes: I must therefore leave you my life, and my Philosophy, to enrich your
minds with the invaluable and nere-to-be-depriv'd-of treasure of precept and
example. I shall desire you by all the ties of friendship, and by the glory you
shall purchase by it, to endeare my life and death (which shall not stain the
honor of my life) unto your memory: then gently reproving them who seemed too
sorrowful, he said; to what other purpose have I furnished you with precepts
of Philosophy, then to arm your minds against the assaults of Fortune? Is
Nero's tyranny unknown to you? What man is Master of his own life under him
that massacred his Brother, that used upon his Mother that cruelty which never
yet knew name? Then he turned him to Paulina, in whom sorrow had sweld it
self so high, that rather then break out, it threatened to break her heart: My
Dear, (said he) I am now going to act what I have long taught; my hour is
come, and nothing so welcome to me as my death; now I am unloaded of this flesh
that clogs my soul, I shall with more ease ascend unto eternity, to enjoy a
condition without a change, an happiness without a period: wherefore, my
dearest Paulina, forbear thy too immoderate passion, lest thy grief disgrace
my end, and thou seem to value my death above mine honor: enjoy thy youth, but
still retain those seeds of virtue, ^herewith thy mind is ^^chly stored: I
confess, for thy sake I could be content to live, when I consider that in my
breast lives a young Lady, to whom my life may be advantage. Paulina's love
now raising up her courage, and her courage her dejected spirit; Think not
Seneca, (said she) that like your Physician, I will leave you when the hope of
life forsakes you; but I will follow like your Wife, your fortune. This resolve
shall tell you how much your life and doctrine has availed your Paulina. When
can I die well, but then when I cannot live well? When I am bereft of thee, in
whom all my joys are so wealthily summed up, that thy loss will make my life
my greatest curse; then will I die in honor, and think it fitter for my fame,
then linger out my life in sorrow. Trust me, my Paulina (said Seneca) I cannot
but admire thy love, knowing from what height of virtue it proceeds: as I will
not envy thee thy death; so I wish a glory may await thy end, great as the
constancy that advanced thee to it. Then he commanded his Surgeon to cut the
veins of both their arms, that they might bleed to death: but Seneca's veins,
shrunk up through age and abstinence, denied his blood a speedy course;
therefore his thighs were also launced: but lest his pains might insinuate too
far into Paulina's torments, and a new addition of sorrow meeting with her
loss of blood, might make her faint, he sought to mitigate her fears by the
discourse of death.

Why should (said he) this monster nothing so affright us? while we are living,
we are dying, for life is but a dying being; when we are dead, we are after
death: where then, or what is death? It is that inconsiderable atome of time
that divides the body from the soul: what is it then in this afflicts us? Not
the rarity, for all the world that is not gone before, will follow us: is it
the separation, and tied to that the jealousy how we shall be dealt with?
upon this hinge, I confess, turns the wickeds fear: but the Stoic, whom
Philosophy has taught the art of living well, death frees from misery, and
wafts him to the haven of his happiness. For this necessity of death, we are
bound to thank the Gods; for it redeems from a worse of being eternally
miserable. The separation, as it is natural, so it is the only means
conducing to our better being. The body being the corruptible and ponderous
part, falls naturally to the earth whence it was first elemented: the soul
etheriall gains by this loss; for being purged from the dross of weight, and
of corruption, is made heavens richest ore; so refined, that the great Gods
image may be stamped upon it, and ascends unto the skies from whence it first
descended. Nor do I hold this dis-junction to be eternal; for when the world
by the revolution of times and ages, whirls about into her first Chaos, then
shall they meet again never to be sundred. The soul shall be so purified by the
immortal Gods: that it shall neither hope, nor fear, nor grieve; that it
shall be freed from all those discording passions, and affections, that here
transport it from it self. The body so spirited that it shall know no
necessity of nourishment, and therefore no weight, alteration, or mortality. Of
great consequence then is death to our wel-being; since before it we can
account none happy; we see it end all miseries; we see it make none miserable;
why then should we fear it, or condemn it? What have the wisest thought it,
but the Port we all must touch? He that scarce arrives at half a man has as
little to quarrel at his fate, as he that in a week reaches his haven,
whereas by the troubled winds he might be bound up in the more troubled seas a
year. Nor is he that is his own death, being condemned to die, shipwrack'd
even at the very shore: for honor and the Emperor allow the liberty, and to
die by the most abject of men, an hangman, is to die dishonorable. For this
boon I gratulate the Gods: but more that they are pleased to call the perfect
Seneca unto their joys, the Seneca that has not yet outlived himself, nor
returned into his infancy. There Paulina, not through fear (knowing none but
what proceeded from her love) but through decaying nature fainted; therefore
Seneca taking his leave caused her to be removed into the next chamber. In
Seneca all these incisions were not of force to force out life; he therefore
commanded his Physician to poison him; but wanting natural heat to convey it
to his heart, the poison was rather a nourishment then a destruction to his
nature: then he was laid in warm bathes, by this forced heat the poison in his
full source, and violence raged in his witherd body. While he had life he
discoursed freely of life and death; his end approaching, all bloody in his
bath he bathed his head, and said, I vow this to Jupiter the Deliverer; Nature
at the last conquered by those strong assaults, yielded up her Fort (which
weakness had so song fortified) to death her common enemy. So lived the famous
Seneca, and so he died that with the Gods his soul's immortalized, with the
world his fame.

Nero informed of Paulina for whom he seemed much troubled: for though pity
had no entrance at his iron breast: yet fear the Tyrants tyrant ^old him that
her death (being one of the most nobly allied in Rome) would make his tyranny
and hate the greater: he therefore sent with all possible speed to recall her
life now posting to her stage, and entering the dark confines of death. Her
servants receiving the command unbound her, and closed up her incisions, she
more than half dead, devoyd of sense, thus against her will returned unto her
life, and very honorably: for that of life she lost, did witness to the
world, that nothing but want of power restrained her from her death.

Pro Paulina.
PAulina, when Seneca was condemned to die, would die her self. was ever
constancy raisd higher in a woman's breast? She did not die, there she expressed
the true valor that derives it self from virtue, and that spirit that issues
from the truest honor. That she would, but could not die, are both Nero's
act; that she could live, or die, her own. That she was Mistress of her
fortune, witness that she did live; how she valued her Husbands death, that
she would die. Fame and virtue did both attend her in the progress of her
actions: had she died, it had been thought the wretched times had interest in
her end: but in her life she conquered the extremities of life and death. The
rule of virtue ties us to live so long as we ought, not as we list: then is the
fittest time to die, when we can live no longer. To die, is at the height but
like a Roman: but to dare to live when life is tedious, this is as much above
the Roman, as the true substance of virtue, that false shade of honor. Had
she then died, she had acted but the Roman: but she lived to exceed the
noblest of all Romans, but her self.

Contra Paulinam.
WHY revolted she from her resolve, when Seneca himself allowed it? Did he
teach her so to live that she durst not die? or did she distrust his
happiness that she would not follow him? She had too much of death to have
more, and those pangs so much endeared her to her life, that she would live at
any rate, rather then break through fleeting torments into honor. While Seneca
was yet alive, she was dying; he dead, she returned to life: Was her life vowed
to him, when his death revived her? Nero called her back; the greater was her
shame to take Sanctuary in her Husbands murderer. Sure death was far more
terrible then Seneca did speak it: she fled to a most inhumane Tyrant for
protection. Seneca did not force her to die, nor Nero to live; one day gave her
her liberty: she had as much strength, as life; and that little power she could
use, was able to force out that little life she did detain. She would die, in
the extremity of sorrow for her husbands fate: but she did live to repent her
both of her sorrow, and her death.

LVCRECIA.
WHen Rome, in the glory of her active Spirits, had pressed out her youth more
ambitious of honor then life; for the common exployt, the siege of Ardea:
Sextus Tarquinius entertained the night with the Roman Nobility in the pride of
luxury and riot: The ruins of Kingdoms were sacrificed to Bacchus, the sea
and land plowed up to appease ingenuous gluttony. They, as frolic as youth,
and wine that made them so; unlock the treasures of their hearts, their Wives,
and their beauties, to the admiration of unsound ears: But Collatine the most
justly prodigal of his Wives fame, tells them; nor Italy, nor the World holds
her, that stands in parallel of wonder with the fair and virtuous Lucrecia.
Tarquin divided between astonishment and rage, that Collatine his servant,
should be his Sovereign in happiness: mounted upon the wings of lust and
fury, flies to Rome, where his eyes having encountered the Idol of his heart,
and he the noone of night to enjoy it; with his sword and taper breaks into her
chamber, into her presence: she affrighted at the sword, and blasted by the
light that lust gave life to, trembling like a prey with more horror then
attention, hears him thus bespeak her. Madam, wonder not at my unlookt for
arrival at Collatium, or at this visit so unseasonable: but applaud the wonder
of your beauty; the silent night will speak my purpose, when in my restless
bed a flame kindled from your fair eyes burned through my soul, consumed my
Countries service, my hopes of honor, then which nothing but your fair self
is so near unto my thoughts. Let not the slave Fear intrude upon your princely
breast, nor this steel divorce those Roses from the Lilies, drawn to hew out
a way through all obstacles, to encounter Paradise. The same love that armed
those eyes with Lightning, arms these hands with Thunder; bids them grapple
with great Jove, were he rival in my affection. This night I must enjoy thee
Lucrecia, or on thy name engrave an infamy, that Time, nor Times heir,
Eternity, shall never devour: If thou move or hand, or voice for aid; thy
groom I Will slay with thee; then fling his loathed trunk on thine, and swear I
found him fast manacled in thy embraces: cease then to be fair, or to be
cruel, and return me the Prince ravished from me, by the all commanding
beauties that attend thee. The sin unknown is unacted, nor shall the sowrest
virtue mis-read those blushes the liveliest pieces of innocence. Accuse not
Nature of tyranny, she made not so delicate an object to tempt, but satisfy
the appetite: yield then; or this sword must enter that adamant, from whence
all pity is barakado'd. She conjured with this tyranny of complement, with as
undistracted words as could be pumped from the deepest confusion of thoughts,
makes her reply.

Renowned Sir, let true pity as really enter your ears, as false is banished
mine. In Tarquines shape I entertained you; wrong not the Prince so far, as
to prostrate his fame to so inglorious an action; he that has the eyes of all
Rome fixed on his virtues, and must hereafter look like a Prince in Story,
shall he have all his glories sullied by the conquest of a woman? Shall he be
read King of all the Romans but himself? wanting this Sovereignty, all his
honors shall be buried in his infamy: Then punish Great Sir, the Traitor to
your virtue, this face; tear it to a loathing; so shall you appease the lewd
rebellion of your blood, and make your victories, still ending in your self,
discourse for all posterity. But if you are conquered by your lust, you shall
revenge your worth in her dishonor, who shall not be unpitied of men, or
unrevenged of the Gods. This said, she wept the rest. But he not daunted at
that majesty of sorrow that sat enthroned in cry* stall, nor at her words that
would charm the most inhumane: but rather whet, then refined in passion,
unloads his lust, and with the night posts undiscovered to Ardea. No sooner had
the Morn unchain'd the prisoners of the Night, and spread his light (welcome
both to miserable and happy) through the vast regions of the Skies; that light
that was so lovely to her, because it came to light her to her end: but she
sends to Ardea for Collatine and Brutus, her Husband and Uncle. Long before the
day was fled into the other world, they at Collatium did arrive. First they saw
her face stand in that amazed silence, that they could read, not hear the full
contents of sorrow; they in that expected some great cruelty had been used upon
her, which had deprived her of the tongue to rell it. But this silence was but
a pause in her great soul, whether she might stoop to that wretched body, as
to borrow those organs which commonly conveigh our friends calamities into our
ears: but lest she should detain them too long locked up in wonder, hasting
to her ease, she unbent her soul, and gave vent unto her sorrow.

Fortune, (said she) have thou now hit the mark thou have long aimed at, my
poor heart; take to thee now thy triumph, and leave me to my injured virtue.
Brutus and Collatine, you are come from Ardea to hear the story that will
break my heart ere I am delivered of it; should I truly tell you how low I am
ramm^d in misery, If should be far too low for you to pity me, unless
your love should lead you to dishonor. In what Court shall I appeal to
justice? The grand Gods act, and license what I suffer: the household Powers are
not of power to keep their Laws inviolate. Shall I address, me to the King?
his own Son has dishonourd me: to him I would appeal, would he revenge
his guilt, as I mine innocence; then would I speak him a true Prince; when to
advance his justice higher then his sin; he made her way through patricide
and treason to her power. But he loves his lust too well to loath his life; of
him I cannot expect justice who has injured me, nor of you mercy whom I have
injured: I have tainted your blood with mine own. Tarquin has conquered this
body, Lucrecia this mind. You true Romans Brutus and Collatine, in whom my life
was truly happy, I conjure you by all the ties of blood, love, and religion,
be as cruel to Tarquin, as he to Lucrece, she to her self, who with bold
steel carves on her breast the Tragedy that shall stagger the piety, or awake
the pity of all posterity. Her life and language had both this period; for
having tied their vows to her revenge, her soul too pure for her body,
disclogg'd it self of clay, and broke the vault of mortality. So rises day
disrobed of night: so did her soul ascend to immortality. It is beyond the art
of words to express what valiant sorrow, what noble rage, this cruelty of hers
had stamped upon these two princely breasts. Silence at the instant had
tonguetied all language, wonder had pent up all tears, immensitie of fury had
transcended all bounds of passion: so much had they to speak, they could not
speak; so great was their sorrow they could not sorrow; so were all the powers
of the soul knit and contracted into the project of revenge, that till they
were scattered into their offices, passion was not discernable; then the object
lessened, wonder descended to passion, passion to expression; then discoloring
the crimson flood, and with their tears washing her body white as her
innocence, they took it on their shoulders, set it in the Forum, where
Collatine, when the Auditory was ripe for his Oratorie, bespake the Roman
cofluxe. Romans, and Countrymen, this day presents to your wonder a fact of
that height of impiety, so degenerating from all humanity; that in it hell
has plotted the dishonor of this whole nation, this whole age. Were not your
affection stronger tied to the Orator, then the Oratory: I should not hope to
persuade you that the breast of man could travel in such a prodigy of exact
villainy. You see a monument of that misery that vindicates the pity of
Tigers, or Tyrants: much more of minds ennobled with virtuous actions. The
Tragedy (not long to wrack your expectation) I will briefly declare. Sextus
Tarquinius (I know not with what colorable excuses he painted his designs)
left Ardea for Rome; honor could not bridle his false fury of affection, nor
the public interest in the State overpoize his private passion; I say, he
posted to Rome. Rome! where the Gods have their Temples, the Virtues their
Sanctuaries, that thou should breed a Monster to profane thee! No sooner had
he entered Rome, but he entered my house; where like a Prince, a kinsman, like
the happy messenger of Collatines happiness, (oh, that vice should be so
bravely disguised!) he was received by Lucrecia, received in a bravery of
affection too high for the apostate from virtue; his face did not discover the
false heart that lay in ambush to surprise her honor, nor his virtue show it
self, as it was, the staulking horse to his covert. The ceremonies of
hospitality finished, he retires to his lodging, though not to himself; now
when the brother of death had summoned to still music all but foul ravishers,
thieves, and cares; with his drawn sword he leaps from his own, enters
Lucrecia's bed, her he ravisheth. She having possessed us with a full
relation of her misfortunes: She Empress of a mind unconquered of sin or
sorrow, with this poniard let out the life Tarquin had made loathed; And now O
Countrymen awake your Roman virtue, flesh your swords and valors upon the
revenge of the proud usurper of public liberty, the cruel murderer of private
innocence: you cannot offer to the Gods a more grateful sacrifice; nor will
they ever in requital, forsake that State that forsakes not the defense of
virtue.

Such impression strikes Thunder upon Oaks, Earthquakes on Mountains, as
Collatine on the Roman hearts. Their thoughts were torn, and divided from
themselves, anger boiled into malice the policy of passion, both flowed into
resolution: then like an unpent torrent from some high precipice, the multitude
violently ran to precipitate him made high for a precipice; which in the
perpetual exile of the Tarquins was accomplished.

Pro Lucrecia.
THE Roman Story big with variety of wonder, writes Lucrecia the female glory:
she forcibly abused by Tarquin, declares her innocence to the world, and
confirms it by her death. There were two in the act, one in the sin; one
adulterer, and one chaste; her body conquered, her mind truly heroical, not
stooping to the lure of false pleasure; that remained as untainted, as
unforced. Why dyed she being innocent? to be innocent. Why received she her
death from her own hands? happily to prevent it from another; then had she
subscribed to guilt, and not left life without stain. For a Roman to outlive
honor was dishonorable, for her to survive her infamy, was to act it.
Curtius spurred on by honor, did ride into the Gulf. Regulus, rather then his
faith, would prostitute himself to the witty cruelty of the Carthaginians. To
honor did the three hundred Fabii sacrifice their lives. Honor chased the
Tarquins out of Rome; but Lucrece out of life. To wipe off all thought of guilt
which malign censure might imprint upon the act, she slew her self. He that
condemns her for the murder, accuses her of the adultery; life had been her
guilt, whereas death was her innocence; through her life she made way to her
fame, to which life and fortune are slaves, not to be entertained farther then
they tend to her advancement. I confess, torn hair and face, and eyes
bankrupt of tears, and her own virtue was of force to possess the world she
had been ravished without the witness of her death: why then died she? Her
shame was too great to be supported by her life; nor any thing but her death
revenged her and all Rome, of the insulting Tarquins. Then Lucrece in the hight
of glory sacrificed her self, as well to the State, as to her innocence.

Contra Lucreciam.
WHy dyed she if she were innocent? why if an adulteress? is death due to
innocence, or to adultery? was it that her crime was greater then Tarquins,
that she was slain and he banished? The Roman Law puts not to death the
adulteress: but what law screwd to tyranny destroys the innocent? The body
might be purged by the adultery: not soul of the adultery by murder. This
revenge may argue chastity before and after: but not in the nick of the act,
which yielding to some secret enticement, might stain her thought; then
loathing her self for the act, held death a more satisfactory revenge then
repentance. But, it was Tarquins lust staind her: no, it was Lucrece; if
Tarquins lust slained her, it was not Tarquins, but her own. The will left free
by divine providence, is not constraind by humane power. If her will was
ravished, why do we extol her for murder who died for adultery? had she
slain Tarquin, her act had been no way to be justified; but how is this
aggravated? Lucrece is her chaste and innocent self; Tarquin her foul ravisher,
and greatest enemy. She then did sacrifice her life to her honor: could not
her insatiate thirst of glory be slak'd but by her blood? Was it not unworthy
Tarquin to be her conqueror against her will? and was it not more unworthy
Lucrece, not to endure the conqueror against her honor? Her virtue was more
debased by being enslaved to common praise, then her self to carnal delight.
Had she kept her mind unconquered she had lived the mirror of women: but her
weakness pressed her down to die in her despair, rather then live after she
was dishonored.

DIDO.
BElus King of Tire left Pigmalion and Dido heirs to his Kingdom: but the
Tyrians as impatient of of a Duarchie, as Pigmalion of a Rival: yielded
allegiance solely to him not of years to write man. Dido was married to her
Uncle Sichaeus, Hercules Priest: this Sichaeus the sponge of Fortune, filled
only to be squeesed; was slain by his Nephew and Brother Pigmalion. He a man
of treasure vast enough to betray his life, jealous of the security of his
greatness, trusted it to the earth: but Fame (the most injurious Hyperbole)
drew it up (perhaps greater then it was) the many fathomes of earth, where it
lay ramm'd from the eye, not the envy of the Prince. Unkind Fortune, that
deal'st with us as the Persian with their slaves, crownest us for a Sacrifice!
Dido a Dowager by her Brothers tyranny, begins to feel a tyranny of sorrow;
that (had not nature resolved to keep perfect as much of her as was hers) had
made her a Widow also to her beauty; her fair face clouded with discontent:
but her fairer soul with no more passion, then betrayed mortality; she betakes
her to the male contented of the Tyrian Lords. Since Brothers (said she) are
enemies, let us seek to our enemies for Brothers; since pity is fled humane
breasts, let us seek it (for such a creature there is, nature tells me) among
salvages. Though we cannot expect it from his nature; yet his youth might
enfeeble him to it: but his very infancy is a monster; what then will his riper
years produce but the exile of all humanity? What distant respects will he
know that wades through his own blood to his ends? if an innocent Uncle and
Brother be slain; if a Sister be not, where is a Subject secure? Miserable
Strato, thou were a Prince by thy slave, to beget a Prince to make slaves of
Princes! Miserable Tire, now more oppressed by one Tyrant, then before by a
thousand slaves! Wretched wealth, to thee quiet poverty is a Prince; thou have
divorced me from my Sichaeus, thou have made me the football of a Tyrant
Brother, tossed from his Kingdom, into what unhappy shore is not yet known
unto my thoughts. My Lords, I speak to minds too noble to be stifled in the
narrow confines of fear: follow your Princess, whose virtue the spite of
Fortune shall not wrack into despair. Her words proceeding from the height and
sweetness of her mind, were as great a spur as the hope of liberty to advance
them into action: then as in a thoughtfull mind refreshed with wine, Care it
self keeps her revels: so were their thoughts (before dejected) now lifted to
that pitch, that valiantly affronts the hard affronts of Fortune; then with all
speed they rig'd a fleet, and Dido with her treasure, and the Tyrian Lords in
the advantage of night hoised sail. The Cyprian was the first shore they
touched; where (as the fashion of the Country was) their Virgins were
assembled, to sacrifice for their chastities to Venus, before their marriage.
Fourscore of these untouched Dido ravisheth from the barbarous sacrifice, and
sails with them into Africa; where when she was arrived, she purchased as
much land of the Inhabitants as might be covered by an Oxes hide, which cut in
thin pieces, made a great extent of ground: but scarce to contain a City two
and twenty miles in compass. There was the famous Carthage built by Dido,
which after times dilated into a great Empire. By the consent of all there was
a yearly rent paid for the land on which the City was founded. The concourse of
Affricans (which hope of gain brought thither) was great as their gain they
received by traffic, which invited them to settle themselves there. The many
conspiring hands in no great space of time wrought it to a perfect City: but
in the interim, their wealth that flowed thither in high tide, made Carthage
the envy of Hiarbus King of the Mauritanians. He summons ten of the
Carthaginian Princes, and with them treats of marriage with their Queen; which
if fairly may not be obtained, he resolves to try the force of arms. Dido
hearing this unwelcome message, desires respite of resolution till the City was
finished: which accomplished, she in no wise would yield unto Hiarbus, whom
lust linkt to rage and avarice, had armed against her and his honor. Dido now
the creature which melancholy divorceth from society; desires three months
absence from her friends, whom she tells she must go whither her own and the
Cities fate did drive her: in which time a little remote from the City, she
erected a stately Pyre, which having kindled, and invoked Sichaeus ghost; she
a little eased her self against her fortune. What a monster of misery (said
she) received life with Dido? The World has dealt with me, as Love with
those it has distracted; allowed me happiness but by some short intervals.
First I was borne Princess of Tire, then by my Brothers tyranny I was exiled;
after long conflicts with the Winds and Seas, I arrived here in Africa; here I
built this great Carthage, of which I am entitled Queen; then I thought me
placed above my envy, or my fate: but as those wretched creatures that are
drawn higher, the more to be strapado'd: so was I made great, great for
Hiarbus envy; so was I wound up to the height of happiness and honor, only
to fall never to rise again. Prosperity and adversity might be termed the
fever of life, did not our best days aflict us more then our worst. In our
happiness, the fears that do attend it make us miserable; the hopes that
await our unhappiness, make us happy in our lowest unhappiness; which estate
would a wise man choose, that which will be better, or that which will be
worse? then to be happy, is to be miserable. As the pain of the soul
transcends the pain of sense: so is misery to be valued above happiness. For
as what shall be is the greatest wrack of thought; so what is, is the clearest
relief, the clearest satisfaction. In our height of happiness we know we
shall be, in our lowest misery we know we cannot be worse; then to be
miserable is to be happy. If I desire felicity, I desire misery; for I rise
only to fall. If misery, then happiness; this makes me Fortune's, that makes
Fortune my triumph. Where is then content, since banished the height of State?
If in the low estate, then must I seek it in the Wilderness, and in some
un-sun-seen Cave waste out the remnant of my days; there Pigmalion and Hiarbus
follow me; there reigns as great a confusion of thoughts as at the Court:
then welcome Death, thou did divorce me, thou shall unite me to my Love.
Purged from earth, to the Skies I fly, and intwine my soul forever to my
loved Sichaeus. Then she leaped into the Pyre, and there consumed.

The meeting of Dido and Aeneas (in which Virgils Muse has sweat to the
dishonor of them both; her for love, him for ingratitude) is so merely
fabulous, that it is scarce worth the expense of paper to disprove it, only I
am bound to vindicate her honor. Rome (as Eutropius writes) was built three
hundred ninety four years after the destruction of Troy, none computes the
time less. Carthage was built seventie two years before Rome, so Iustine
writes. So there must be of necessity two hundred years between the Trojan
Prince and the Carthaginian Queen. Seven hundred years this City stood
unconquered; so long they sacrificed to Dido as their tutelar Goddess; at last
by Scipio, thence called Affricanus, it was burnt, there their devotion ended
with their fortune, and themselves.

Pro Dido.
WAS it the Queen of Carthage, or the Queen of beauty that Hiarbus coveted? If
Carthage was his end, money was his matrimony; if beauty, he sought a woman,
not a wife; if a wife, to make his lust warrantable. Dido in Sichaeus buried
all husband, in Hiarbus all man. Love is the good which by being diffused, is
corrupted; she that loves one, another, and a third, takes men in at the
coile, and loves only for her pleasure. The object of true love is but one;
from the infancy of time to her decrepitude the love between two has been held
most honorable. He that took from the first man his wife, did not make every
rib a wife; not only to show us how out of the least of numbers he could draw
infinites upon infinites: but especially that our desires might move within the
narrow compass of love, not expatiate themselves to lust; that as the first
man was all the men in the world to his wife: so now the husband should be the
wives Horizon, that where ere she is placed, he may be all she sees. The
objects of lust are as various as numerous: as there are lovely beauties, and
to attend them, fond desires. The wanton woman darts forth her unruly heats
more freely then the lesse-offending Sun his beams; he with the day, in
courtesy to nature, withdrawes his fires: she day and night carries the rage
of dog-dayes in her breast, and never sets but then when she can rise no more.
Dido would not wed Hiarbus, because she thought all nuptial rites had not
their period in Sichaeus. Death is the divorce of man and woman, not of husband
and wife; that contract flesh ties and unties: but this is that of souls,
which eternity cannot undo; it is as immortal as themselves, not deaded in
being singled from earth, but revived to a greater perfection: if then her
soul did entirely love, the soul of her soul must be her only love. But
Hiarbus sought lawful marriage. Why did he force it? Dido refused marriage,
she could not love. Marriage to her had been a rape, another had enjoyed her
against her will: if a rape must be avoided with the loss of life; through
how many death must she fly a loathed bed, where every night she shall be
ravished? Did her virtue attract Hiarbus? why did he not covet her virtue in
her prosperity, as in her misery? He that has lost the effect and quality of
virtue in himself, will not value it in another, and with reason; for her
virtue was his greatest enemy; forced her chastity so to whom she had been
married, that like the Phoenix she would marry to nothing but her ashes.

Contra Dido.
WHy refused she marriage? because it was lawful, it was not incestuous; was
it a crime because it was no sin? Religion and honor allow her to marry
Hiarbus; neither Sichaeus: he was a King, a stranger; this a Subject, an
Uncle. Marriage is the tie of strange bloods, not of the same. Nature bids us
affect, not love our kindred; in this, affection screwd to love, is unnatural:
could she then marry Sichaeus, and not Hiarbus? did she think the Priest in
Sichaeus a warrant for her incest, and not the King in Hiarbus for a lawful
contract? Has the King the liberty to make the Law, and the Priest to
transgress it? Hiarbus desires the establishment of the law of Nations; but
Sichaeus violates the law which Nature wrote within him. The Gods suffer her to
outlive her incest: she will murder her self rather then entertain a virtuous
Love. Hiarbus used force. Why should she refuse it? The safety of Carthage
depended on the marriage: she liv^d to build it, and would die to ruin it. Had
she burnt a Martyr to her Country, her act had been too great for Chronicle:
but she would die to satisfy her passion, rather then live to preserve the
City. Her love to Sichaeus was that she valued above Hiarbus. She would vex
a living King to appease a livelesse Trunk, and rather obey a Block then a
Storke. But Sichaeus stands in competition with Carthage. Oh unequal balance!
a womanish fancy poised against a public good. What other reason then had she
to burn, but because she would not marry?

THEVTILLA.
FRance the richest embroydery of beauties, bred a maid from heaven inspired
with all those excellencies which first made the virtues of her sex. History
writes her birth ignoble: but as it is the greatest Sol^cisme in honor for
high bloods not to flow into high attempts: so it is a real ennobling of
meannesse of birth to be guilty of more then noble actions. Nobility and
beauty are a fair varnish of virtue, the lively shadows of that unseen
substance, which were it visible, nothing so lovely: but being the true Idaea
of the mind, cannot be discerned with the eyes of the body. Without this (so
much of nothing has the unworthy honorable) they are but the complements of
man, serve only to fill up this vast vacuum of honor. She basely noble, not
nobly base, born under a smoakdried roof; which though of it self it received
no more of heavens influence then through the loopeholes made by the rage
thereof; yet her presence made perpetual day. But let her birth be strangled
in the womb of History. She was Natures fairest paper, not compounded of the
rags of common mortality: but so searsed and refined, that it could receive no
impression but that of spotless innocence. How unfortunate had her beauty
been, had she had no other championess then her self, the sequel of
Theutilla will declare.

Amalius, Dynasta of France, rich in treasure, magnificent in retinue, Lord of
all the world admires, but himself, which he most admires; there was no deity
to whom he should owe his fortune, but his unworthiness: for he was more
hospitable to himself then to others, and freelyer feasted his senses then
strangers. In sum, he was what a virtuous man is not, what a voluptuous man
should be. It happened one time, the time pointed at in Chronicle; when his soul
(the slave of his sense) dancing and floating like a toast in his wine, was
seized on by sleep; the wine it self had paid the drawer of his wine his
appetite. Then was he quiet, when he was dead drunk. How fruitlesly were spent
those thousand lamps of oil? those thousand pen-plowed reams of paper about the
immortality of the soul? Who has a soul that will not here question it? what
is become of it? is it only for this interim metamorphized into a beast? or
does it die? if into a beast, since the prince of man, let it be transmigrated
into the prince of beasts, the Prince's beast. Who so sottish, so gross of
conceit, to think the Lion, a creature of that invincible valor, and now
commanded by reason; having rescued so fair a Lady from so foul tyranny, will
transgress the laws of honor, let her loose to her loss of liberty, her
loath some dungeon? Or does she die? or will you mince it into an intervallum
of life, a three hours death? it then follows, the soul thus dying will dye
eternally. But to return to Theutilla. Amalius servants have made the
neighboring Villages their rendevouz; where having discovered Theutilla, and
in her as much as the world could boast of; they ra vish'd her from the weak
resistance of her parents, and laden with the rich triumph of nature, return
unto their Lord, and lock her up in his lodging, whose sense and fancy was so
strongly locked up in yron-sleep, he had not power to dream of what he would
have acted. She thus forfeited to dishonor, and night the friend of dishonor,
enjoying no more of light then the courteous candle, which betrayed to her eye
and hand a sword, which she taking to her, revolves her present condition.

If the soul straightned (said she) in a necessity of ill-doing, must try
all her power to gain her liberty: surely she must not refuse any opportunity
conduceable to the preservation of her purity. Death is then an honorable
freedom, when it takes us from the danger of living ill. As we came into the
world with nature; so we must go out with honor; we must not rest on nature
for our ends, since before her summons, thousands of extremities do beset our
lives. There she paused. Welcome (said she) my dear, dear Preserver; to
thee I owe this last, this most glorious act of my well-spent life; to thee
posterity shall be as much beholding as Theutilla; thou shall redeem the
errors of after times in women. Then she, borne for what she did, drew the
sword, anvil'd and filed for her sexes glory: no sooner (said she) have I
unsheathed thee, but I must sheath thee again, Where? In this guiltless
breast of mine. Call up thy too degenerous spirit. Of what bravery can it
accuse the act? Thou murdrest a poor innocent maid. Shall posterity brand me
with that weakness? Shall it say, that not able to stand under the miseries of
life, I was pressed down by the hard extremity of fortune to despair to death?
No, my tide of fury flows into another channel; here is a revenge fit for
thy spirit, fit for thine arm; thine honor shall be proud to riot in his
blood, whose blood would riot in thine honor. Thus then I shake off woman, and
her frailty; thus do I strangle the monster lust that revels in thy veins;
and to complete my vengeance, send thy sin-surfetted soul into the land of
endless night, where it has already taken sure footing, With that, her spirit
restless in the revenge of words, eager of action, directed her arm, which
gave Amalius so fatal a wound, that it seemed her hot-metled fury was bridled
with exactest discretion, and nothing wanted the attempt but passion. Bravest
Theutilla, sooner shall the Fathers bowels be silent at the sight of his long
unseen Son, then posterity forget thy name. Amalius now miserably groaning,
now miserably opening his eyes to shut them again more miserably, had little
more of life then what could give her life, in appeasing the fury of his
servants that rushed in to her destruction. What means (said he) is Chaos of
confounding noise; this unwelcome Train, to the more unwelcome Pomp of death?
Whither rush ye, ye betrayers of innocence, ye servants of nothing but my
lust? Oh may mine infamy find a grave as soon as life; and you sooner: that
the world may want a witness of it. I conjure you by the relation that ties
you to my commands, and this last; spare her life, whose chastity the Gods are
pleased to spare. Then, to make a minute of his life famous, he contemplated
on mortality.

Nature (said he) that first digested this All into an exact method of parts,
preserves it likewise by a constant concordance of the same, without the which
it would soon resolve into the first nothing: only man, ungoverned man,
Natures Masterpiece, revolting from her allegiance, deposes her Lieutenant
Reason, lets in the Usurper, Passion, to untune the harmony that preserves the
soul. Hence is it that death, the privation of being, in this disorder seizes
the Fort, hurries the Governesse captive to an eternal, a never redeemed
imprisonment. The Sun, the Sea, have both their bounds, and man his stage
from life to death, of equal length to all, though one runs faster then
another. The world whirles about continually till it be dissolved; and man's
brain not satisfied in the bare necessaries of life, moves in an unbounded
motion, till styled by the period of action, the undoer of Nature, Death. There
is but one door at which we enter this Labyrinth of life: but infinite are
the ways we turn and wind out of it. The infant no sooner with much
difficulty raked out of the womb, (punishing the Mothers guilt of his
short-lived misery) enters the Tomb, flashing through the world, being but a
lightning of life. Pleasure or business wears out the riper man's vitals, and
forces out life, let Nature block it up never so strongly. The aged man,
because a burden to himself, sinks under his own weight. These are ordinary
ways out of this world into the next: but to be hurld out by violence of
Fate, this is the doom of strictest Justice that makes eternity our curse. This
is the hard fate my just merit has encountered, to be punished by the sex I
have so much abused. This was his last: for Nature, though she could not tell
him he had lived long enough; told him he had been long enough dying. There
she withdrew her self from him, and sealed up his eyes to the eternal sleep
of eternal night.

Pro Theutilla.
REason is the only, and noble difference between the free and servile
creature, and they whose actions are not moderated and well poyzed by her
power, deviate from themselves into the slavery of Sense. Theutilla, if she
could obtain of her self to yield to sense, why should not Amalius obtain
it? If to reason; why should she not kill Amalius? or why should she be
ravished? Her self then was Victor of her sense, and to conquer reason she
conquered Amalius. Never had her virtue a fairer trial, then when her honor
was a martyr staked to unlawful flames; never could her honor be more
honorably releived, then by her virtue; nor both, then by this act. Though
Virtue being within her, Honor being above her, was not to be really violated
without the Theutilla that was below her: yet must Amalius be sacrificed, as
well to deprive her of the interest he might have in her dishonor, as to make
opinion clear as her actions. It was that mind that stooped not to her body,
that made her of consequence; not her beauty: the other sullied, who but
Amalius would value this? or one whose sense is so scattered in the admiration
of the outward form, that he discernes not even those deformities of soul
which are detected? It was necessary for her fame not only to resolve not to
yield: but to prevent occasions that might prejudice her virtue, or her honor.
But why was Amalius slain, not master of the opportunity he knew not? why was
she forced thither? Because she would not yield; because she should be
ravished. But happily her handsome prayers had wrought him to an handsome
repentance. Is beauty, the loadstar that attracts hearts of steel to it, the
Orator that pleads against it self? Amalius, had his eyes been open, had not
read contradictions in her face, nor made so obscure a Comment upon so clear a
Text. He had seen her but as he had seen her; her eyes inviting all eyes,
her lips all lips, her face Loves banquet, where she ryots in the most
luxuriant feast of sense: not as she was the model of Divine Perfection, so
innocent she knew not the meaning of a Mistress. Theutilla, had she had no
other Sword but her innocence, might satisfy her self in that defense: but
Conscience is but one witness to one, and her actions must endure the trial
of another touchstone beside her own. Amalius would easily confront her
meandness. Then allow her this great revenge of little innocence.

Contra Theutillam.
A Mind well habited to virtue, enjoyes all true content within it self,
knowing nothing without it to transport it from it self. Why should she then
strain her virtue to a vice; in the too nice satisfaction of others, unsatisfie
her self? Why should she, to prevent unlawful love, act a more unlawful
revenge? Why should she revenge an unacted injury; commit a certain murder, to
avoid an uncertain rape? Had she been absolutely tied either to die, kill, or
be ravished; she had showed a greater height of spirit in enduring, then
revenging her dishonor. For the passive valor is more laudable then the
active: this being often the fruit of a desperate, dejected; that ever of a
well-settled mind. Her valor was her crime, her cowardice: for as she had the
false spirit of a man, unjustly to kill a man: so had she the true false
spirit of a woman, to act a greater, lest she should sink under a lesser
evil. Perhaps glory transported her to an attempt (as she flattered her
self) above a man: did she not also descend into the cruel weakness of her
sex, slay a man that had already paid earnest to a sleep never to awake, that
had already pawned himself to Death? Did she not go lower, sacrifice his
soul to the fury of furies, her self? Whither did her blind rage lead her,
to punish innocence, to salve her honor that was not wounded? This act carries
little Valor in it, less Virtue.

CYPRIANA.
THE Island Cyprus, Natures choycest storehouse, where she had reposed the
chiefest blessings of the earth, flowing in wealth, the wantonizer of the mind,
and by it once dedicated to the Queen of Love, courted and feared of the
neighboring Nations: while secure in her own height; the Othomannick Army,
infinite in number, invincible in valor, unappeas'd by cruelty, breaks in like
a sea, that threatens to eat her into another Island, if not devour her.
Christianity was their crime, a wrong proud enough to unsheath a Turkish blade;
life was their greatest guilt, which must be wiped off by cruel death. That
which to nature was preposterous, the soldier made methodicall; the infant
torn from the mothers breast, was mangled into as many atoms as it had lived
minutes, and hewed out into more Sacrifices then it had sins: if sorrow was too
weak to conquer the surviving distressed mother; the sword (therein courteous)
supplied it, and entombed both in the womb from whence they did unfortunately
spring. Wives and Maids were first ravished, then slain for adultery. Father
and Daughter, Mother and Son, Brother and Sister were all incestuously piled
up; there was nothing wanting but new lives to satisfy the guilt of death. The
Island was an heap of carcasses in despair of being repeopled but by Cannibals
or Crows. Was ever cruelty so barbarously expressed? Was ever steel refined for
such cruelty? Mustapha having almost dislimb'd the Island, bends his fury to the
head; besieges Salamina, renowned for rich Citizens, brave Buildings, and
stately Temples; erected by the Telamonian Teucer, during the Trojan sieige.
Dandalus the Governor, forced to submit himself to the Turkish yoke, after
exquisite tortures, is beheaded; and to strike a greater terror in the
survivors, his head is carried upon the point of a sword through the razed
City. Nero had here seen his cruel wish accomplished, the head of thousands
of heads struck off at one blow. The highest rate the Citizen could amount to,
was too cheap for the security of life, where innocence was punished in stead
of treason. Mustapha, his sword now surfetted in humane blood, spurs on his
sacrilegious fury to revenge him of the Gods: he razeth the Temples, whither
the wretched Salaminians were fled for refuge; the Altars are profaned; Hymen's
holy Tapers are lighted to rapes and adulteries at the very Altars. Murders are
their Sacrifices; innocent lives drop like beads from their bloody hands,
their more bloody devotions. Good Heaven! where is your thunder? awake your
sleeping armory: is not your whole Host blasphemed? Good Earth! where is thy
Earthquake? cannot these monsters move thee? The consecrated vessels are
profaned to servile uses. The shrines of Saints that called the adoration of
farthest Pilgrims, are demolished; all, holy, and profane, a e miscellaniously
sacrificed to fire and sword. Mustapha, his rage and avarice appeased, bethinks
him of a present to appease Selimus his Masters lusts; he sends captive the
choicest beauties of both sexes (doomed to another destiny) to the distained
Carpathian Sea, where his fleet lay at anchor. The captives shipped, and ready
to be wafted in their own blood to Byzantium; when the divinely inspired
Cypriana wrought the miracle, worthy the memory of all time. She, servilly
employed in the powder-office, with a countenance that gave a majesty to her
misery, and scorned the subjection of sorrow; resolves a powder treason: a
candle she had flaming in her hand; but a purer flame shot from heaven into
her breast: from no other place could so generous a mind be fired. This fire
(said she) purer then the element of fire, shall both burn and cure, shall
extinguish the lurking inflammations of lust. Nothing of Cyprus shall be
transported to Byzantium but my fame, powerful to perfume the contagion of
their sin. O Heaven! to thee, the Sanctuary of innocence, flies my untainted
soul: if my spirit enlightened by thine, act thy vengeance, thy mercy reward
me; if I transgress thy Commission, if I let out my life before thou
requirest it: pardon the weakness of my virtue, pardon her that sacrifices
her self a spotless creature to thy most sacred throne. If thy justice exclude
me thy pity, oh pity these innocents; rain all thy revenge on me, bury my
name from the discovery of posterity; let not them, because they feel my fate,
feel thy vengeance. Then gave she fire to the Powder, that knew as little
mercy as the Turk. The Masts and Sails were hoysed nearer the Skies, then
when the boisterous element conspires a shipwreck; the ribs torn from the body,
flew like murdering shot through the next ship; where the unquench'd pitch
seized the powder, so that both were swallowed by the same fate. Into these two
ships were congested the Prime of the Turkish Soldiery, the Cyprian captivity
dispatched by Mustapha to Selimus at Byzantium. The miserable Salaminians now
upon the shore, paying the last office of affection, to see the last of their
wives and children, were more delighted then terrified at the spectacle; they
looked on death not as a punishment; but as the most honorable divorce, and
last refuge of honor. Death had in it more courtesy then horror: for as it
was the last, so it was the least of their evils. Did they weep at their
misfortunes? so did the Sea: with a general acclamation they thanked the Gods
that had heard their prayers, desiring their friends should be rather a prey
to the merciless waves, then Selimus lusts, for which, by the misfortune of
beauty, they were reserved untouched. Mustapha now again whets his sword, which
before revenge had dulled; there was not a life that was not his prey, till he
had left the Island breathless; then, like a Tiger besmeard in the blood of
tamer beasts, he returns to his Fleet; and laden with the spoils of the
Country, but most with infamy, hoyseth Sails to Bzyantium. Now is he in the
Carpathian sea; where may he see nothing but monsters ugly as himself; may
wind and water roar to him the name of blood. If sleep -- charming-care steal
on his restless mind; may the Cyprian Ghosts awake him: may every minute be
fear of endless death, and may his sin fright away his repentance: then in
view of the Byzantium Towers, the great Seraglio, and his own Palace; may he
be betrayed by his nearest friend to a rock that splits him; from thence let
him sink into the lowest dungeon of Avernus.

Pro Cypriana.
THE Country is wasted and spoiled of her riches: but honor is shipped up a
prisoner to Byzantium. Is there no refuge; no redemption? sword and fire can
preserve this, as well as sword and fire consume the other. Policy allows not
captivity a sword: but cruelty allows her a candle, the clearer to see her
slavery. Ignorance is the happiness of misery which is not felt before it be
understood. Had Cypriana a slavish mind in a slavish body, she had owed her
attempt to fortune, not to virtue; and merited more scorn then praise: but
Nature that gave her a soul above her sex, studied a discretion
proportionable to manage it. Had she well weighed, always to redeem her
honor with honor; she could not better inform, or in a more ingenuous way
relieve her self, then to make the emblem of her slavery the instrument of
her freedom; her justice was witty, to punish the Turk by the same means he
had punished them. Was it their misery, or their cruelty to which she owed her
life? She was halde from a glorious death, to an ignominious life, to an
inglorious death. She was captivated by her own beauty, and felt the greatest
tyranny of it her self, why then also should her greatest offender be
unpunished? she did not kill her self for fear of the Turk: for her breast
was armed to meet death in any shape of horror, she had before beheld him
unaffrighted in all his ghastly forms. Life was below her honor; her honor
not above her friends, which nor life, nor death shall divorce from her
affection. As they had accompanied her to her slavery: so it was equal to her
liberty. Unworthy is she of life, that lives by unworthiness; unworthy is she
of an handsome death, that seeks it by an ignominious life: but she soared to
the height of glory: for she would not go a voluntary slave to her dishonor,
when death might releeve her: but she died, and in her self bequeathed three
wonders to the World; a free Slave, a virtuous Prostitute, and an innocent
Murderesse.

Contra Cyprianam.
Whether was the Turk or she more cruel? he slew his enemies, and strangers:
she, her friends, kindred, and her self. Had she life to revenge it with
self-murder? or were she wronged by another, must she therefore be revenged on
her self? Was a life freely given bought at too dear a rate? or because she
might feel their power, must she use her own? What was it that looked on her
more terrible then death, or that she looked on through a multiplying glass?
was it slavery? that is the common fate of virtue, that stands unmoved by
misery, unshaken by despair. Had the Turk slain her, he had not deprived the
world of the opinion of her virtue: but the very substance is shipwrack'd by
her self. The Turks cruelty was her courtesy: for though he triumphed over
her; yet he gave her the opportunity to triumph over misery, and show that
height of spirit that scorns any thing without her should afflict her: but
she disdained to be beholding to their courtesy, or her own virtue. Was
dishonor the thing beyond death or captivity? had she as much of woman as not
to fear a death from her self, and not as much, as not to fear a dishonor
from another? Could she hate her virtue, and her sin? could she better revenge
her of her virtue, then by her dishonor? Why should she fear what might
befall her in life, who was regardlesse what might befall her after death. Then
was slavery the terrible, joined with dishonor her twin sister. Had she been
transported to a Nunnery, where virtue is necessitated, had not that been a
slavery? would not her will break into a thousand sins, who broke through life
into a false liberty? But less then death, slavery, or dishonor, only sense
of her dishonor deprived her of her sense; why should she be affrighted by a
shadow, when her sense could be wronged by none but her self?

ARETAPHILA.
ARetaphila, a Cyrenaean, the last ranked in these Stories, but first in my
thoughts, which by the order of birth may claim the privilege to do wonders.
As some things are less curiously performed which are ordained for common use,
not for the ornament or wonder of the world: so have I, like a French Volunteir
on a Lute, all this while scattered slight aires, which may perchance surprise
an indifferent eye: but now like the glass that twists the Sunbeams to
steal fire from heaven, I must in writing her, so lessen and contract so much
of her as may sink into our narrow faith, or narrower reason. If our Poets
profanely rake heaven for comparisons, for each part of a rotten Mistress that
shall nere be part of it; one whom sin, to prevent age, has carcass'd in
her cradle: to what heights must I ascend to reach a Subject fit for all fancy
to work, not play upon; one that is above all heights? Sometimes she is pleased
to stoop to be admired, adored; not that she falls lower to rebound higher:
but that we are admired for admiring her, and we her prisoners feast our
selves with the fragmentarie offalls of her Fame. Thus do I admire her, till I
admire my self out of breath; then she beckens to my soul (the reason I
cannot reach; but I obey) to come, whither I will not tell you: but now I am
returned a re-transmigrated-mountebank-Pedler, I will open to your Optics that
which shall purblind the whole art; at your two nostrils you shall snuff in
both the Indies; for your pallats, (because the cleanest feeders are the
cleanest meat) you shall have the whole sect of Epicures; if their opinions
stick in your stomachs, you shall take all the sumes of Arabia in a
Tobacco-pipe to concoct them: Here is that will chain your care to the
perpetual sound of Aretaphila: For your touch, are you a Midas? here is a
Diamond set in gold, within two days it will be a Rhodian Colosse; then will
it magnify to an Escuriall; then to a World; then to ten Worlds; then to
Aretaphila: thus Fortune blows dust up to a Lady, then to a Countess, then to
a Queen: thus Gold and Diamonds at length come to be Aretaphila, in whose name
they have been valued. Please you to look into this inward Drawer, you shall
see all the secrets of nature, that have befooled the grand Clarks of all the
World. Here shall you see reason for the ebb and flow of Seas, and of an Ague
that resembles it; here shall you see the wrack of your bodies wracks, how he
is the only Physician of himself. The wounded Roman State, like a broken
Tobacco-pipe, was cured by blood. War cures the Turkish Lethargy. The
Egyptian Dropsy is cured by drinking; one month in a year the whole Country
is drunk. The Plague cures Grand-Cairo of her diseases of repletion: but the
Ague only an Ague. It is an opinion of some, that every particular person has
two Angels, one waits at his right hand, the other at his left; this
left handed Devil is the thing we speak of; if we be fairly dispossessed of
him, we may say, the better Angel has got the victory: but if by the
holiogopheron hotontiperistaton, one Devil drives out another. Here you see
this little little Pepper-corn; Princes are captives, Emperors are subjects to
this Pymee-tyrant, this is Love. Let him be pitied, he swells higher then
Atlas; heaven and earth is not a load for his little finger. Let him be
scorned, then (like a Prince's casheir'd Favorite) he is frowned from a Duke
to a male contented Gentleman; then he crosses his crossed arms, and looks
upon his fate with that regreet a younger Brother in the Low Countries does his
followers, who make his misery their food, and are the only flatterers of low
fortunes; the little wink rereares the other; four stivers in hot water
defends this from the world, and which is worse, himself. Love has been a
tenant to this heart for many years, and has now left it like a Farm in the
eighteenth year, plowed up and harrowed out of heart; under three years sleep
it will not again be tenantable. Here you may see the brain working like a
Powdermill, let the brass be overwrought, he is blown up; and the rest of man
is as confused as a beleagured Town: screw him not up like a treble
Lute-string, in a storm, to a French tune, and he will show you the wonders of
heaven so distinctly, that you shall confute a whole kennell of Almanacks. But
oh! whilst I am quacking, my Aretaphila is fled; fled like the last age; or
faster, like yesterday; and my soul, like a skie-climbing Falcon, sprited as
the air she flies in, has gotten height, and wind, and thinks to seize her:
but oh! she is heightened into the incomprehensible; she is lessened into the
invisible; she is greatned to the un-by-any -- fancy -- fathomable. Shall we
ask Sense what she is? Sense will tell us; her face is the unclouded Welkin in
the infancy of day: her eyes the Sun and Moon that sleep by turns, lest
they should leave the World in darkness: her tongue the harmony of Spears and
Nature: her breasts Heavens milkie way, spangled with azure Stars: her arms
Castor and Pollux: her other parts, because of lower function, are but the
Symmetry of all the beauties of her sex: she is too much first to have any
second; from the third, fourth, and fifth form of women, from a million, or
all of them you may take some piece of her, not all, for she herself is the
All. Ask Reason what she is; Reason will tell you, she is her Directresse,
that she keeps the elements at peace within us: our fire she confines to
religious zeal, and suffers it not to inflame either to lust or superstition:
our watery element she has designed to quench unlawful flames: our sighs to
dry our blubbred eyes, when tears have tired them: our earth like the earth
to tread upon, or make no other account of it then of a skin-purse that holds
ten thousand pound: the money outed, the purse is laid aside till it be
refill'd by the same treasure. Ask Faith what she is: Faith that ties us
morally to riddles, religiouslly to mysteries; and Faith will tell you, she
has yours, and mine, and an hundred other souls in one soul: nor does her
soul receive extension: for a soul fills no room, though she be all over
the body, and she all over ours; yet none knows where, nor how. If with some
Philosophers we will give them but such dimensions, that twenty of them cannot
stand upon the point of a needle; then may it follow that two or three thousand
of them may be circumscribed (in which compass I think so many misers souls
may) in a local inch: if they have any dimensions, they may be circumscribed;
if circumscribed, then follows the unheard of absurdity' that they are bodies.
We are circumscriptive; other Angels definitive: but her, immortal fame has
made ubiquitive, and repletive. There are orders of Angels, the first of higher
knowledge, because of nobler function; the knowledge of the second but derived
from the first: yet those and these Angels know no more of each other then they
are pleased to reveal to one another: but she, first of the first rank,
knows all of them and us, and we weakly enlightened, have so much of her, as
the watery elements of the Sun, but bare reflection. Some Angels protect Cities,
others Countries; but the noblest are Guardians to us frail and mortal men;
all these offices were by her undergone on earth; to what high flights of
exercise is she now soared? But I must stoop, and draw near her into her low
estate. Faith tells us she stands one contrary without another: were there, or
were there no night: yet were she an everlasting day. Were there none bad: yet
were she unparalleldly good. Were there any or none to be compared to her: yet
were she superlative. All of her is an even proportion of extremes. Faith tells
us, now she is beyond our apprehension, that she is nothing, yet all of every
thing. But now since she is, let us see what made her this all; she was Wife to
Phedimus, a Cyrenaean Citizen. As when we see the Eastern Morn shoot his
fiery-pointed darts, we say they are the Tipstaves to usher into the World the
approaching Snnne; presently we see himself attended by his Page, the Day;
anon he goes to bed, then it is night: So shall you see the Aretaphila in her
glimmering, Wife to Phedimus; then in the bright of day, Queen and protectresse
of the Cyrenaeans; after that her return to the solitary distaffe: then like a
man that has lost the other eye, I Will bid good night to all the World.
Nicocrates the Tyrant having made the sword his Orator to plead his Title,
usurped dominion over the Cyrenaeans; among other his bloody butcheries, he
put to death the innocent Phedimus; and then forced the incomparable Aretaphila
to be his Queen. She resenting the public calamities more then her private
injuries, meditates a remedy for both, and by advise of her nearest friends,
attempts the poisoning of the King. The Tyrant had an old woman to his mother,
named Calbia; this carcass, a better name I can hardly afford her outside, was
the inside of a Sepulcher; her head was unthatch'd as an old Parsonage; her
eyes (like lights at the last snuff, when the extinguisher is ready to make
their Epitaphs) sunk low into their candlesticks; her ears now deaf, now happy
(such was her tongue) they have lost their sense; her nose worm'd like a piece
of Homer of the first bind, offended with her breath, bowed to her chinne to
damme it up; her cheeks hol'd as the earth in dog-dayes drouth; her lips fit to
be kissed by none but by themselves; her teeth rotten as her soul, hollow as
her heart, loose as the shingles of an old silenced steeple, scragged as a
disparked pale, stood at that distance one could not bite another; her tongue
so weakly guarded, scolds like the alarm of a clock; her chin was down'd with a
China beard of twenty hairs; her breast lanke as a quicksand, wasted as an
hour-glasse at the eleventh use; one arm, one leg, one foot she doff'd with
day, and as a resurrection, dond with the morrow; her bones (pithlesse as a
Stallion for seven Posterities) the slightest fears might now make rattle in
her skin; her body (wasted to no waste, blasted with lust as an Oak with
lightning) was as familiar with diseases, as a Physician: to conclude; she is
odious beyond all comparison: one sight of her would make the heat of youth
recoile into an infant continence. Yet she maintains two Painters and three
Apothecaries to maintain this old-old ugliness, as the rare thing she has
been these fourscore years in getting. But I have too long, like a Sexton,
conversed with rottenness. She was Calbia, and in that, her soul was a well
acquainted with sin as a Confessor: she was Nicocrates Mother, and in that
name she carried to the fair and virtuous Aretaphila, the envy of age, the
wormwood of a mother-in-law; a word that is the original that signifies all
that is ill in the sex: yet for the relief of some few particulars, read it
like Hebrew, and it yields something that is good. This Calbia discovers the
poison-plot. Then, as eagerly as my young Master in the Country fastens on the
red-Deere-pie (tougher then Drakes biskets that went round the world, hoary as
Methusalem) entaild by his Grandsire to the house for ever; she seizes the
fair Aretaphila into her tallons, more griping then poverty it self; nails
that scratch like the law, and are as good a cure for the itch as the Goal for
thieves; her she brings to the rack, there intending, after confession, with
most subtle tortures to let out her life. Oh, that Love in his Olympiads should
be drowned in those fair eyes! those eyes, more eloquent then all Rhetoric,
that would raise an Anchoret from his grave, and turn the Fiend Fury into the
Cherubin Pity, that those eyes should be of no other use then to vent sorrow to
inexorable ears! that those white and red roses (which no rain but what fell
from those heavenly eyes) could color or sweeten, should wither in their
prime! those lips that stain the rubies, and make the roses blush! those lips
that command the scarlet-colored morn into a cloud to hide his shame, should
kiss a merciless and sinew-sundring rack! that breath which makes us all
Chamaelions should be wasted into unregarded sighs! that those breasts
eternally chaste, and white as the Alps; those legs, columns of the fairest
Parian marble, columns that support this monument of all pens, should be
stretched into anatomies! that her body that would call a soul from heaven
into it, should be mangled like one that has hanged in chains these three
years! that her skin, smooth as the face of youth, soft as a bed of violets,
white as the queen of innocence, sweet as the bean-blossomes after rain; that
that skin, the casket of that body, the karkanet of that soul, should be jag'd
and torn with that remorselesse pity we commonly bestow upon a scarecrow!
After long racking, when Calbia saw she could rack no confession; then when
more torment would have been a relief; she was taken down from the rack, and
her body was pinned, as an unwelcome courtesy, upon her soul. Thus noble and
pious guilt is twin-brother, and carries the same face with innocence: so was
she spirited, that those tortures could scarce try her patience, less her
truth; and though Calbia was not fully possessed of any course to put her to
death; yet had she cruelty enough to do worse then kill her to make a cause.
But, Aretaphila, though her Countries liberty, and her own honor lifted
higher then the flatteries of life, or fear of death; resolved in spite of
cruelty or fate, to live whilst she had offered Nicocrates and Calbia to her
oppressed Countries rage: therefore the second time she was brought to the
rack, when fearing she should be sacrificed to Calbia, not Calbia to Cyrenaea,
to calm Nicocrates, she thus bespake him:

Great Sir, when you were pleased to lift my humble fortunes up to those
glories that willingly engage a woman's pride; when by kind fate, and kinder
Nicocrates, I was snatched from base private arms, to the embraces of a Prince:
were these cheeks died into ingratitude and cruelty to make them lovely? can
your breast harbor such a thought; that this breast which you were pleased to
think worthy to harbor yours, can swell with those two monsters abandoned by
the most infamous of our sex? But since (such is my hard fortune) I am reduced
to that misery as to defend mine innocence; hear me Nicocrates; not that I beg
life; for I scorn to stoop (now I am suspected) so low as to take it
honorably. This potion (which the comments of envy interpreted a poison) is a
confection, not of Cantharides for thy lust: but of all those ingredients that
may strengthen virtuous love. This ture innocence had no design upon thy life,
which (oh thou all-seeing Sky witness) I value as much above mine own, as
mine honor above mine enemy: but fearing lest like a needle between two
loadstarres, the stronger might attract thee; and my unworthiness (how happy
am I in it since it pleads mine innocence!) might betray me to a worthyer Love;
I devised this potion to make thy love lasting as mine, which else would soon
consume, fed with such withred fuel as this poor declining face; this face
that can boast nothing but her sorrow, which (since derived from you) is most
welcome to these eyes, and is received as your Ambassador, into this
heartlesse heart. Oh let these tears for ever drown these eyes! oh let this
sorrow sacrifice this innocent heart in all her glory to the great Nicocrates!
oh let Aretaphila, the Aretaphila that is (since she) --

There (though no tongue could praise her but her own) the Tyrant impatient
(such oratory have tears in a fair face) to hear more, tearing his hair,
his rage too hasty to be silent; he expressed as much spleen to Calbia, as
she to Aretaphila. What furies (said he) fled from their black region have
possessed thy blacker soul (fir to lend rage to all the horrid haggs of
Tartarie) to act a deed, which, oh you Heavens! can you behold without rain
and thunder, your combined sorrow and rage? can you rend the clouds which are
but the sucked up vapors of the earth; and not her that takes in all the
poisonous sin of hell to fortify her wickedness? Accursed fury! cursed from
the cradle to the tomb, cursed above all that ever Heaven and Earth yet
cursed! May all the sins of me, my Name, and House return into thy venomed
soul, till they have pressed it into the low despair of nere-below-repenting
sinners. Then in his fury, too great for more words; he had racked his Mother
Calbia; had not the virtuous Aretaphila stepped in between him and his
revenge. Nicocrates now gladly possessed of her innocence, endeavors by studied
favors to raze out all the injuries imprinted on her body and her soul: but
she like an Anvile, too much heated by the last blows to cool suddenly;
meditates upon another, and more safe way for the Tyrants death. She had a
Daughter, every way exactly perfect, for she was Daughter to Aretaphila. The
Tyrant had a brother called Leander; you have already all that commends him;
he was an haire-braind, wild-headed, unrein'd young man; one whom lust or
ambition might flatter into the most desperate attempts. Aretaphila wrought so
far with the King, that a match between her Hero-Daughter and the young Leander
was by his consent concluded; her she counsels to insinuate into her Husbands
rashness, and persuade him (and oh what will not this pestiferous night-geare
do!) to besiege his brothers Crown. Leander not contented with the Kingdom
he enjoyd in her; thought now nothing less then to raise himself as high as
his ambition, bribed his Swiz -- servant Diapheries, who in the first nick of
opportunity murthred Nicocrates. Whither do these crowns and scepters, the
worlds magnalia, but indeed the balls of Fortune, hurrie thee, fond Leander?
thou have not killed the Tyrant for the Country: but slain thy brother for
the Crown. Through how many restless nights, and less restless thoughts do
we encounter these sweet-bitter joys: and as the more we graspe the water into
our hands, the less we hold: so is content the farther from us, the more we
seek it in these fading glories of the World; which like an ignis fatuus,
first lights us through wild untrodden paths unto themselves; then through
vaste ayrie thoughts they lead us up to that precipice, from whence we fall,
and there they leave us. Aretaphila could not appease her revenge till she had
plucked up the Tyrant by the roots. First she incenc'd the Citizens against
Leander, the Traitor to his Prince, the parricide of his Country, the
fratricide, and lastly the muderer of her Husband. They with one consent
adjudged him to be sowed up into a sack, and cast into the sea. Then judgment
proceeded to Calbia, whom they condemned to the fire, and she was burnt alive.
Diapheries not worth naming, and therefore I think not worth hanging, the
Story mentions not his punishment. The Cyrenaeans now prostrate their lives
and fortunes to the devotion of Aretaphila, that was owner of them both; they
offer her divine honors, and beseech her to take further protection of the
Country. But she who to do her Country service, could subdue her thoughts to
be a Queen; can fall from that height, to rise above all Crowns, into her own
content; she shaking off those glorious loades of State, retired from all the
crowding tumults of the Court, into a solitary and truly happy
countrey-condition; there to spinne out her thread of life at her homely
distaffe: where we will leave her a veryer wonder then the Phoenix in the
Desert, the alone Paragon of all peerlesse perfections. Her actions (so above
the criticisme of my purblind judgment) I am not able to comprehend, much
less contradict, or controvert. I am silent, lest you should pass that
censure upon me for her; which Famianus Strada did upon Horace for Plautus;
that my judgment is judicium sine judicio.

FINIS.
THe Heroina has nothing of woman in her but her sex, nothing of sex but her
body, and that disposed to serve, not rule her better part. It is as Nature
left it, neglectfull, not negligent; neat, not stretched upon the tenter-hookes
of quaintness of dress or garb; with Nature it decaies, with Mechanic art
the ruins are not repaired. Her soul is her heaven in which she enjoyes
aeternall harmony: her conscience is her Sanctuary, whither, when she is
wounded she flies for refuge. Her affections and passions, in constant calm,
neither flow nor ebb with Fortune; her hope is not screwd up to ambition, nor
her fear dejected to despair. Her joy is confined to smiles, her sorrow to
tears. Prosperity is the type of what she shall be; Adversity, her rolling
iron that smoothes her way to Paradise. Outward happiness she owes not ^o her
Stars, but her Virtue that rules her Stars. If she be lashed by Fortune, it
is but like a Top, not to be set up, but kept upright. Religion, not Pride
or weakness makes her chaste. She understands not the common conceit of love,
nor entertaines that familiarity with man that he may hope it. Flattery, the
inseparable companion of Love, she scorns, though she cannot flatter her self.
If Love enter her breast, it is in the most noble way directed to the beauty,
nearest the most perfect beauty. If she marry, it is only to propagate; the
very act tending thereto she singles from the thought of sin. Virtue is the
reward of her Virtue; her soul is not so servile, as to be tied by the hope of
happiness, or fear of misery to be what she is: but is clearly satisfied for
doing well, that she does well. She is temperate, that her soul may still be
Sovereign of her sense. She entertains pity as an attribute of the
Divinity, not of her sex. She is wise, because virtuous. She is valiant: for
her conscience is ungall'd, and can endure the sharpest touch of tongue. If
she be inwrapped in the straight that she may sin, she relies upon the
highest Providence, which forbids her to use a remedy worse then the evil.

FINIS.

