THE IRISH HVBBVB OR, THE ENGLISH HVE AND CRY. BREIFELY PVRSVING the base
conditions, and most notorious offenses of this vile, vain, and wicked AGE. No
less smarting then tickling. A merriment whereby to make the wise to laugh,
and fools to be angry.

By BARNABY RICH Gentleman, and Servant to the Kings most excellent Majesty.

Mounted aloft upon the worlds great stage.
I stand to note the follies of this Age.
Malui me diuitem esse, quam vocari. LONDON, Printed for John Marriot, and are
to be sold at his shop at the white Flower-de-luce near Fetter-lane end in
Fleet Street. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR OLIVER SAINT JOHN Knight, Lord Deputy of IRELAND.
Right Honorable,
FOr want of a better cloak, whereby to shelter these endeauours of my
vntutored pen, I have borrowed an Irish mantle.

I might have clad them in a more glorious garment, I confess that would have
made them more acceptable to the world, which graceth men now adays more for
their outward show, then for their inward virtue: but this habit wherein I have
now suited them, carries no show of pride, and is fittest for them to travel
in, that having first in all reverent and dutiful manner presented themselves
to your honorable view, and with like humbleness again besought your
Lordships favorable pasport, and then to wander through the world, where they
shall meet with men of diverse dispositions, who seeing them come out of Ireland
in this disguised manner, hoping to hear some strange news, may entertain
them for a time, and howsoever their expectation be answered, may suffer them
to pass, some in respect of policy some in respect of pity, and some in
respect of piety.

The lines I send, are like flowers that be of sundry smells pleasing and
displeasing, according to the diversity of men's complexions: if they offend
any, I am sure they be such as do know themselves to be faulty: perhaps
they may displease some that are accounted to be worldly wise, but not any one
at all that is truly reputed to be godly wise: and in this cause I would not
stick with Marcus Cato, to stand to the censure of my most deprauer Titus
Gracchus. I have grasped at abuse, yet under generalities, and have adventured
at many matters, whereof some not altogether unnecessary: Amongst some others
that be more serious, I have mixed measurable mirth. I have been somewhat
curious with the Painter, to give every shape his perfect shadow: I have
presented all together to your honorable view, to the end that at your leisure
they might serve you to laugh at; for others, if they find themselves
agreeued, let them lump and lowre. they shall but show themselves to have
guilty consciences.

If my ability were answerable to my good will, my service to your Honor would
streatch far: In the mean time, pleases it your Lordship to accept of his
good intent, that lives to do you what service he may, and so will rest
while he draws breath.

Dublin the 24. of June 1618. Your Lordships in all humble and dutiful
affection, BARNABY RICH.

TO THE READER.
Gentlemen, my custom is rather to lay me down to sleep, then to sit idle:
yet now to avoid both, I have betaken my self to my pen. And therefore if the
matters that I write of, fall out to be but of a drowsy disposition, the
wonder is not great. But he that should keep a reckoning how he spends his
time, and would set down an Item for thus many weeks, for thus many days
spent in idleness; and Item again, for thus many hours, for thus many minutes
consumed in sleep; the Arethmetician that should cast up the account, should
find the total sum amount to just nothing. If these lines therefore prove
to be any thing, they are better then either sleep or idleness.

I have meant them well; and I hope I shall not need with the Painter, that
taking upon him to picture forth the forms of sundry beasts, so imperfectly
performed them, that he was driven to write over their heads, This is a Lion,
this is an Elephant, this is an Unicorn: but what I have aimed at, I have gone
so near the mark, that although not leuelling at any man's private person, yet
so directly expressing the condition of the time, that there is none (I think)
to contradict it.

But we are grown so wise and sharp-sighted in reading other men's writings;
that those passages that are but meant and set down in a general manner, they
will draw to such particular constructions, as the Author himself never so
much as dreamt on.

They can poison every man's labors with their looks, and of every line they
can make a libell. But thou that art not partial in judgment, nor do, not
bear a guilty conscience, judge of these but as thou find them true. And so
farewell.

To the discreet Reader.
THese harmless lines, that have none ill intent,
I hope shall pass in mirth as they were meant:
I bring no strained stuff, that might induce
A cloaked shift, or forge a coined excuse.
What I intend, is but to make you sport,
By telling truth, to please the wiser sort:
Truth is the mark that I have aimed at here;
And I have hit the white, and shot so near,
That no deprauing tongue, nor wrangling sprite
Can wrest awry, what I have forged so right.
For gald-backt Iades that stand in doubt and dread
Of being rubbed, let them forbear to read.
I wish these lines to their approved wits,
Where reason rules, and wit with judgment sits:
Where virtue guides, and wisdom swayes the mind,
Let these read on, and censure as they find.
And what it is that I have aimed at now,
The wise may judge; for fools I care not how.
B. R.

THE IRISH HVBBVB; OR, The English Hue and Cry.
THAT which in England we do call the Hue and Cry, in Ireland, they do call
the Hubbub.

The intent of it was at the first, that when any Rebels or Thieves came to do
any robbery in the Country, they should then raise the Cry (which they call
the Hubbub) thereby to give notice to the Inhabitants round about, that they
might combine and gather themselves together in a maine strength, either to
rerouer any prey that the thieves or Rebels had taken, The reason of the
Hubbub.
or at the least to make resistance in their own defense, and as much as in
them did lie, to save the Country from any further spoil.

This was the first institution of it, but they will now raise the Hubbub upon
other slight occasions. If a couple of drunkards do chance to fall together
by the ears. If a man being drunk, or howsoever otherwise distempered, does
fortune to strike his wife. If a Master or Mistress do but beat a servant that
has well deserved it, they will raise the Hubbub.

Of these Alarmes and Outcries, we have sometimes three or four in a week,
and that in Dublin it self, among the base and rascal sort of people, and as
these Hubbubs are thus raised in cases of anger and discontent, so they use to
give the Hubbubs again in matters of sport and merriment. And there is not a
people under the face of heaven, that will sooner deride and mock at any thing
that is not in use and custom among themselves, then the Irish will do.

And as the Irish are thus pleasantly conceited, to jest and to scoff when
they find occasion, so they have as great facility in weeping, as Stanhurst a
famous man amongst them, for his excellent learning; for first he was a
Chonicler, then a Poet, and after that he professed Alchymie, and now he is
become a massing Priest. This Stanhurst in his history of Ireland, makes this
report of his Contrymen: They follow the dead corpse to the ground, with
howling and barbarous outcries, The proverb of weeping Irish.
pitiful in appearance, whereof (as he supposes) grew this Proverb, To weep
Irish.

My self am partly of his opinion, that (indeed) to weep Irish, is to weep
at pleasure, without either cause or grief, when it is an usual matter
amongst them, upon the burial of their dead, to hire a company of women, that
for some small recompense given them, they will follow the corpse, and furnish
out the cry (as Master Stanhurst has said) with such howling and barbarous
outcries, that he that should but hear them, and did not know the ceremony,
would rather think they did sing then weep. Such a brutish kind of
lamentation, as in the judgment of any man that should but hear, and did not
know their custom, would think it to be some prodigious presagement,
prognosticating some unlucky or ill success, as they use to attribute to the
howling of dogs, to the croaking of Ravens, and the shrieking of Owls, fitter
for Infidels and Barbarians, then to be in use and custom among Christians.

And yet in Dublin it self, there is not a corpse carried to the burial, which
is not followed with this kind of mourners, which you shall hear by their
howling and their hollowing, but never see them to shed any tears. And from
hence I think indeed arises the proverb, to weep Irish. So that it appears,
how the Irish have wit and discretion, both to weep when they list, and to
laugh at their pleasure. And I am glad of it: for I will make a little bold to
borrow some of their agilitie; yet not to weep without a cause, for that were
right to weep Irish; but to laugh, and to give the Hubbub, when I see a cause,
and neither to forbear Irish nor English. For we daily see the pride, the
drunkenness, the swearing, the bawdery, the bribery, the popery, all the most
lewd and idle vices: the beastly and devilish fashions the one does use, the
other does imitate; wherefore then should I not let them see themselves, and
their abominations, that so they may amend. If not, yet to let the honest
plain men view their follies, that so he may laugh at their fooleries. Does
not this deserve the Hubbub to see ugly vice does bear the name of seemly
virtue, and drunkenness reputed good fellowship, murder called manhood,
lechery named honest love, impudency good audacitie, pride they call decency,
and wretched misery they call good husbandry, hypocrisy they call sincerity,
and flattery does bear the name of eloquence, truth and verity, and that
which in former ages was called flat knavery, passes by the name of wit and
policy. If I should weep for any thing, it should be for some mad
conceited grief: Like the woman, that when her Husband was hanged on the
fore-noone, she fell a weeping in the afternoon, and did lament with such
vehement shows of sorrow, that her neighbors coming about her, began to
exhort her to patience, telling her that she was not the first woman that had
had Husband hanged, and although the manner of his death was somewhat
disgraceful to the world, yet they wished her to play a wise woman's part, and
not to take such grief whereby to hurt her self for that which could not now
be helped: True, true indeed, answered this sorrowful woman, it cannot now be
helped, and I would be loath to hurt my self by playing too much the fool;
neither do I take this grief The old Proverb. Its no more pity to see a
woman weep, tha^ to se^ a Goose go barefoot.
for that my Husband was hanged, but for that he was not hanged in a clean
shirt: if his linen had bin cleanly about him, his hanging would never have
grieved me.

But me thinks if our women in this age were but half so kind to their
husbands as this poor woman showed her self to be, that woman might weep
with great grief and anguish, that had not her husband hanged, and not only
in a clean shirt on his back, but likewise with a yellow starcht band about
his neck. For yellow bands are become so common, to every young giddy-headed
Gallant, and light heeld Mistress, that me thinks a man should not hardly be
hanged without a yellow band, a fashion so much in use with the vain
fantastic fools of this age, for I never see, or heard a wise man that did
use this base and lewd fashion.

The lamentable tears of Heraclitus, bemoaning the vanities of his time, were
now out of season, who would regard them? I think it therefore better to laugh
with Democritus; for a little mirth (they say) is worth a great deal of sorrow.
But I think there be some will be angry if they be laughed at; and howsoever
they incline themselves to follow the fools fashion, yet they will not be
mocked. But I will come over these fellows with a proverb that many years
ago I brought out of France, and thus follows the text: He that will make
himself a sheep, it is no matter though the Wolves do eat him: and why
should it not likewise follow, He that will make himself a fool, it is no
matter who laughs at him.

I cannot think that since the first creation the world ever afforded so many
monsters of men, nor so few modest women, as at this present age. And he that
writes with an upright conscience, must not flatter: and he that does behold
the deformed vanities that are every day hatched up, and brought to be in
fashion, both in the Court, City, and Country, as well in England as Ireland,
cannot choose but laugh. Now if any one be angry at my plain speeches, I know
he wants either wit or honesty, and then it shall but augment my sport, and
make me to laugh the faster: for I am sure there is no man that is not an
enemy to his own discretion, but will think I have spoken truth; and there is
no good man but will approve what is lust: for fools I care not.

Now for women, I know there be a number as well of old as young, that are both
wise and virtuous, that knowing themselves to be free from all detection, will
never be offended with my honest meaning: and as I love and honor those that
be good, so I never meant to please those that be proud and lewdly given.

If I be offensive to any queazie stomach, it rather proceeds from some
distempered humors in the party so offended, in that he knows himself to be
guilty of these crimes, and so may think I point him out for a fool, then of
any fault of mine.

May we not a little scoff at those, that do nothing else themselves but make
a scoff at virtue? Is not the world come to that pass, that men do rather
glory in their sins, then either seek to reform, or to show any signs of
sorrow or amendment?

Name me but the Drunkard, Drunkards are the Devils sops.
that over night has bin carried like a beast to his bed, that is ashamed of
it the next morning, but is rather ready to laughed at it, and to fall to his
draffe again afresh.

Is it not so with the Adulterer, Adulterers are wicked thieves.
that does take greater pleasure in the vaunting of his adulteries, then he did
in the acting? Look amongst all sorts of sinners: do they not rejoice in
their abominations, and make themselves merry with their own iniquities?

Is not the man that fears God become a laughing stock to those vassals of
vice and villainy? These and diverse others are the common sins of the time that
heap Gods judgments on this land.


The proud peacocke, he looks asquint at him that does not shine in silk, and
glister all in gold.

The drunken swad, he makes a wry mouth at him that will not be once a week
drunk for good fellowship.

The blasphemous wretch accounts him for a Mecocke that cannot swear
voluntary, and lash out for every word an oath.

The vicious lecher will call him Puritan, that will not bear him company to a
Bawdy house.

The known harlot, that lives in daily adultery, will not stick to shoulder
the honest woman, that was never detected, and will strive with her for place
and precedence. Vice does so guard it self by tyranny, that no body dares
open his lips to reprehend it.

Mark but the vicious Courtier, how he flatters, swears, and forsweares, and
damnes himself to the Devil, to please the eye of greatness, tells false
lies, and tales, to act any villainy, when murder shall accompany lust even to
poison innocents. But God is just, and does reward them with shame here, and in
death Hell does attend them.

The great-ill-man has discharged honesty for coming on his ground, and hopes
to be Lord of as much ground as a Kite can fly over in a day. O Raven, for he
dips his bill in poor men's blood.

The unmerciful usurer and his broker fasten their long talents upon the
decayed borrower; tell them of honesty, they term you pragmaticall, and talk
of nothing but thousands, as though they meant to spit shillings in the face of
any that oppose them.

The subtle Lawyer that pleads in ill cases, sells silence, takes fees with
both hands, and like an ill Surgeon keeps the wound of his clyent green, till
he has emptied his purse.

The deceitful Tradesman that keeps a good and a bad weight, because he has a
heart and a heart, holds honesty an enemy to this thrift; because he means
to be unreasonable rich, he can be content to be unmeasurable sinful.

The bold faced stage player that trades in poisoning all sorts and ages with
verses reesed in the smoke of lust, and blasphemous scripture jests; these and
the like stink in the presence of God, and one day God will send them all to
him, whom in this life they served.

It is our sins then that have raised the Hubbub: the cry is up, and it is
become so loud and shrill, that it has pierced the clouds, it has aspired the
heavens, and it has approached the presence chamber of God.

What is man that he should be thus prone? He is vain, fickle, weak, and
wondrous arrogant: Then to fret him, he is ever swaied with love, lust,
ambition, enmity, compassion, joy, jealousy, fear, hope, despair, sadness,
with hate, revenge, avarice, choler, and cruelty.

But I thank God for it, I am not so mad, to think that I am able to
terrify those with my words, that the threatenings pronounced by Gods own mouth
cannot make afraid; when our Preachers may cry out till their throats be sore,
denouncing Gods vengeance against sin and wickedness, are rather derided
than believed.

What folly were it in me then, to presume to induce those to the fear of
God, that I think have no regard neither to God, nor the Devil; that do live
as though there were neither reward in heaven for the just, nor punishment in
hell for the wicked; that do demean themselves, not as though they were
ignorant of God, but as though they did do their uttermost to despite him?

The world is now too far spent, to look for either grace or goodness upon
the earth; and the sins of this age are grown so proud, that they are past
all reformation.

Were it not better for me then to laugh than to weep, and for companies sake
to be merry, and to sport at their follies, that I think are privileged by
Letters Patents from hell, to follow their own lusts and pleasures, and to
feed themselves fat for the Devils own tooth?

What is become of our ancient bounty in housekeeping? Those whose ancestors
lived in stately Palaces, like Princes in their Country, bravely attended by
a number of proper men, now come and live in the City, where they are but
inmates, rogues by statute: and my young master and his boy spend that which
was wont to maintain so many. What is the reason of this? An ancient Father of
the Church says, Mutant oues pro auibus, boues pro piscibus: They give as much
for a bird as their fathers for a fat Weather; and more for a fresh Salmon,
then they for a fat ox: and how scant a portion of these dainties comes to the
alms basket, all men may judge. Nay we may say they put all their fat Beeues
into their imbroydered and perfumed doublets, their fat sheep into their
skarlet slops, the eggs and flower that should make the good pies and pasties,
into starch for their yellow bands; all the smoke that should come forth of
their chimneyes, is blown out at their noses: Finally, they make but a puff
of all their fathers left them.

And now to begin my sport, I cannot choose but give the Hubbub, when I meet so
many of my young Masters passing through the streets, attired so like strumpets,
trickt up in the harlots trim, for all the world like a Seamsters maid new
come out of the Royal Exchange. Me thinks they should not swear an oath but
by Gods dainty: they are not worthy to carry the name of men, that are so
far in love with their own deformities, as I think of my conscience, if the
souls of the deceased might look down from the heavens to behold the things
that are done here upon the earth, there be a number of parents that would be
ashamed to see the vanities of their own children, how far they are
estranged, both in form, fashion, and condition, from the discipline of
virtue, and the precepts which they themselves had bin educated and trained up
in. Our minds are effeminated, our martial exercises and disciplines of war
are turned into womanish pleasures and delights: our Gallants think it better
spend their lands and livings in a whores lap, then their lives in a martial
field for the honor of their Country. We have converted the collar of steel
to a yellow-starched band, the lance to a tobacco-pipe, the arming-sword and
gantlet to a pair of perfumed gloves; we are fitter for a Coach then for a
camp, and our young Gallants are now become so wise in their own conceits,
that they will take upon them to know all things, that do not yet know
themselves; and that which in former ages would have been accounted for a
noisome and a malapert kind of sauciness, that they ascribe to proceed from
the viuacitie and quickness of wit: but he that should behold their courting
complements when they be in company amongst women, could not choose but laugh
and give the Hubbub.

They are so vain to see to, so foolish in their words, and they have so many
distracted engines of action, as would sooner turn a wise woman's stomach,
then win her love.

Parents do well in being careful to leave their Heirs large revenues, for
the most in number amongst them would never be able to live by their wits;
their greatest study is but to follow pride and pleasure; and this is it that
fills the world so full of fools.

Gentlemen were wont to bring up their Heirs in the knowledge of Arts and
literature, it now suffices if he can but write his own name in a Mercers
book, put his hand to an Obligation, or to a bill of bargain and sale, this
is learning enough for a Gentleman in these days.

Nor I cannot see but that he that would seem to have most knowledge, does
show (indeed) to have least grace, nor they let not (so far as I can
perceive) for being the more learned, to be any whit the less foolish: the
time has been a man would have been ashamed to have begged a recompense, but
for some special service performed for his Prince or Country: but now, for
the drinking of an Health, for the lighting of a Tobacco-pipe, or for their
laying of a Scene, to act a piece of villainy.

We buy Titles of honor with gold, Offices are gotten by flattery, and begged
for no desert at all that our Predecessors purchased with virtue, and wherefore but to defile a
Dignity, to maintain pride, and to seek precedence? the time has been, that
the Honors and Dignities were given not to the rich, but to the honest; and
they were well punished, that would seek by money to oppress virtue, Honesty
stands at the gate and knockes, and bribery enters in.
that would first seek by oppression, by extortion, and by the ruins of the
Commonwealth, to gather riches, and then (distrusting their own virtues) have
no other means, whereby to advance themselves, and to take place of those that
were their betters borne, but by corruption and giving rewards.

It has ever been a thing detested amongst the multitude, to see an unworthy
person, that either inclined to pride, to covetousness, to oppression, or to
such other like, to be advanced, either to Honor or Dignity.

Their high titles may sometimes augment their reputatations, sildome times
either to mend their manners, or to benefit the Commonwealth; yea, we must
needs confess them to be honestly come by, that are so dearly and truly paid
for, but yet all things well considered, it is but money ill laid out to
purchase a Dignity, whereby to run the Buyer into infamy, and endless misery.

I will not meddle with the Nobility of this age, that are well known to be
nobly descended, as well from ancient as from honorable families, yet there
have been some others, that would feign have run current for six shillings
eight pence sterling, that if they had been brought to the Balance, would
have been found too light by a great deal more then the common allowance of
two grains; but if they had been tried by the Touch, or brought to the Test,
we might have sworn, that all was not gold that did glister.

To be virtuous in this madd age were vain, when vice is altogether graced; I
will raise the cry against the Courtiers, but if I speak all that is true
against the Courts of Princes, I shall be too tedious in my short suruay of
abuses. Only this, Courtiers have delight, not in virtue, but most of them in
vice: what are they better for high blood, high titles of honor, stately
buildings, costly fare, rich raiment? all their pleasures and dignities are but
vanity, unless endued with the rich robe of virtue: by the steps of flattery,
most Courtiers learn to climb; the Courts of Princes are given to fornication,
adultery and rauishments, which are counted young Courtiers sports: in Court
they oppress virtue, honesty scorned, innocent men persecuted, Ribalds
preferred, presumptuous men favored, flattery advanced: Princes courts are
like gardens, where one gathers virtue, the other plucks vice, one suckes
honey, another draws poison.

We do read that in former ages, this insatiate desire of Honor was so
bridled and curbed, that these oppressing practices were well enough prevented,
and so circumspectly looked into, that no ambitious person (contrary to the
rules of honesty) should either by briberie, or any other manner of
corruption, aspire either to Office or Dignity.

I could now laugh till my belly did ache, but for angring of my Lady, to see so
many Madona's percht up, that we are not able to know a Lady from a Landresse,
we cannot distinguish between those women that be of honor, from those that
are but base in parentage, whose best bringing up has been in washing, in
starching, in scraping of trenchers, in filling the pot, yet not cross the
streets but in a coach.

She that treads upon the ground, or walks on foot but the length of a pair
of Butts, she must have a supporter, They will ride in a coach, though it be
to a bawdy house and the footman keeps sentinel at the door.
some lusty young Stallion must lead her by the arm, or she cannot go.

Now of mine honesty (fool that I am to swear) when I my self was young,
and should have been seen in such sort, to pass through the streets leading
a young woman, they would have thought I had been conducting of her to some
Bawdy House.

But should I speak of women in general (I will not meddle with Ladies of
Honor) and I know amongst the rest, there be a number as well of old as
young, that are both wise and virtuous, who (knowing themselves to be free from
all detection) will never be offended with me for speaking the truth, and as
many vilde and vicious, both in court and country; and as I love and honor
those women that be good, so I never care to please those other that be ill. I
know again there be a number, that (of my conscience) are more honest then
they themselves do make show to be, that a man would think by their outward
appearance, they had made port sale both of virtue and honesty, or what virtue
or honesty they have, they do conceal; but for their vices, they are set
open to show.

And does not this deserve the Hubbub, to see one of these old antiquities, I
mean a Lady that is so far spent in years, that she is ready for the
grave, and more wisdom for her to provide her self a winding sheet, then to
suit her self in colored silks, in gaudy attires, to cover her hoarie scalp,
with a curll'd-perewig, and to look out every day for new fashions.

Wheh I see such a Beldame (that is past child bearing) to be thus youthfully
disposed, it puts me in mind of the Proverb, That our old horse would have a
new saddle. And what is become of that modesty that was wont to be amongst
young women, when maidens do now grow faster into impudency and audacious
boldness, then they do into years or virtuous endeauours; when she, that as
well in her apparel as in her behavior, does show her self to be now
masculine, does then think her self to be most in fashion.

Are not our young women, in this age, trained up from their very infancy, to
be as bold, as insolent, and as shameless, as either Ruffian or Roaring boy?
If they be once past fifteen years of age, if their parents will not give
them husbands, they will provide themselves of paramours.

Give me leave a little to tell you of the first Institution of roaring,
because there is such a number of that brave rabble-rowt in every city, and
almost in every countrey-towne. The first roaring was at the Tower by
Roaring-Meg the great ordnance, for they sluft her breech with venomous powder,
and set fire to her touch hole, and she roared. And then the Lions being so
near, they roared. And then the Bears of Parish garden hearing the Lions,
they began to roar. And the Boys coming to see the Bears, they learned. And
ever since their has been a company of Roaring-boyes.

They were wont to be brougt up in honest and virtuous exercises, now in
wanton idleness, in impudent and immodest boldness.

These be fit for the Italian fines, not for any honest man's wife.
She that is tongued like a Lawyer in the Tearme-time, that never speaks but
for profit, she that can dance a synque-paace above ground, so lofty that a man
may see her silken garter: she that can both laugh and weep Irish: she that can
sing come tit me, come tat me: she that can play Ladies love lusty Lads, on the
Voyall de Gambo: she that has been brought up in the knowledge of tongues,
and can speak good Ram Alley: she that can learn fastest to forget shame,
Why, this is a Minion for a man's tooth; she is fit to be made a
childe-bearing woman: there is nothing so much endeavored amongst women, as to
blaze and set forth their beauties, and to this purpose they have devised many
artificial helps to set it forth. And because to have many Lovers to be still
hanging about them, which they suppose to be a testimony of this their
borrowed beauty (the rather to entice and draw them in) they run into
behauiours of little modesty. What a number of Knights, and Gentlemen's sons in
this age, are drawn in by these base and vile strumpets, to spend both body and
goods, lands and lives, to please and satisfy his honest whore, that must have
her face painted, her hair powdered, her locks curled, her silk petticoat
embrodered with gold, her gowns of cloth of silver, cloth of gold, and the
yellow band and feather, with diverse other dainty devices: so strangely
deformed, the Devil can hardly invent the like: so demeaning themselves with
such wanton countenances and shameless gestures, that they do manifestly make
offer (and sometimes do give themselves for a prey) to those men that are of a
base and vicious disposition, Crack Chamber-mayds the Masters whore the
Seruing-mans wife.
that will accept and join issue with them, till they begin to long for
green plummes, and then they will as quickly abhor them, as they made show
suddenly to love them, and then he leaves her fit to serve a brothell-house,
unless some base-minded groom (as I know some such there be) will take her
for a wife, and can be contented to live by his wives bringings in; and these
be they that do help to replenish the world with Harlots and common Tweakes.

She that has born a bastard to a man of note, It is holden a credit, to be a
bastard to a great man of fame and note, as this example shows.
she thinks it to be no blemish at all to her reputation; nay, she thinks the
better of her self. I remember I have read in a French history of a Duke of
Guyse, that was well known to keep Monsieur Granduyles wife, who was a
Gentleman of great estate, and likewise descended from an honorable Family,
who after he was dead, there grew some question of his wives children, whether
they were legitimate and begotten by her husband, or bastards to the Duke of
Guise, for so the most of them were supposed; the eldest son protested with a
vehement oath, that he had rather be accounted the noble Duke of Guyses
bastard, then to be reputed cuckold Granduyles son, and in this humor he
forsook his inheritance, and left it to his younger brother.

Now (of my conscience) a number of our gallant girls in these days be of the
same disposition, they had rather be accounted an harlot to some great
personage, then an honest man's wife. And all things considered, they are partly
to be excused, when such harlots shall be better graced, then the woman that
is honest, and my Laydy will take her into her own coach, when Chastity shall
trudge on foot, and be scoffed at.

Beauty that is joined with honesty is out of request, who does regard it? and
a man were better to slander an honest woman, then to speak truth of an harlot.

We may call a scold, a scold, and it may pass without any great peril: but
we cannot call a whore, a whore, but with danger; for if she be able to put
on a silken outside, and to fee a Proctor in the Commissaries Court, though
she be a known strumpet by the report of all her neighbors, yet we must not
call her whore, unless we be able to bring two other eyewitnesses: and she
that is so open in her business, that she will have two or three pair of
eyes to look upon her, is fitter for a cart, then she is for a coach.

Well, blessing of his heart yet, that would say, Thought was free: and when I
see a woman have a painted face, with a powdered periwig, her breasts laid open,
her stomach naked, almost down to her navel, to speak truly, I know not
what to think; but let her be as honest as she list, these are but like
Tavern signs, that are hanged out but to call in customers, and they are
indeed the Forerunners of adultery, vice, and villainy. And if she be honest
that thus sets her self to the show, yet it has been questioned, whether
chastity joined with vanity, does merit any commendations or nay: but this
is without all question, that this overmuch affected folly does live with no
less suspected honesty: she is but an ill huswise therefore of her own
credit, that will bring it into a vulgar construction: but as the mouth of
Wisdom has auowed, that A wise married wife is her husbands glory, so it were
much better for a man's own credit, to marry a wise harlot, then a foolish
honest woman: A wise harlot, that can shelter her escapes with such discretion,
that the world shall neither see nor wonder at it; then a foolish honest woman,
who although she be honest of her body, yet in her attire and outward show,
every man does think her to be an harlot. Nature has not ordained all women
to be wise, there must be some vain, if it be but to fit the humors of
those men that are no less fond then foolish. And as there be in women sundry
kinds of allurements, so there be in men as many several desires: for as some
do fancy those women that be gaudy and garish in their apparel, and
therewithal so lavish of their eyes, words, and gestures, that they do
promise easily to be won, and do give a lustful hope to the beholders: so
another lusts after her that can season her beauty with a sharpness of wit,
and has Art and skill to hide a thousand crafts and subtleties, under a smooth
tongue.

Some are seen to dote upon those women, that can accompany their beauties
with coy countenances, and scornful words, that hides not her thoughts, but
carelessly speaks what she thinks.

But the man that is wise, entirely loves her that is honest, sober, modest,
that so tempereth her self in all her demeanors, that virtue has seemed to
settle her self in her looks and countenances, and that the graces are there
heaped together like a pleasant posie, compact and made of many flowers, and
that of the most fair and excellent in the garden: but where in Gods name
should a man go seek for such a wife? I think in Moors Eutopia or in Terra
incognita, an Island never found.

Or what is become of that age, when simple beauty without any help of
Painters Art, was best beseeming an honest woman? when bashful modesty
enclosed in a woman's breast, was the best lure whereby to induce honorable
reputation? The Devil has here set another snare to catch Ladies and
Gentlewomen, which besides their costly clothes, they must not content
themselves with good faces of Gods making, but dainty painted faces, fit for
painted Apes: now they do paint with Indian excrements, and besmeare themselves
with Jewish spittle, too base and vile to chaste honesty, that I do admire how
Ladies and Gentlewomen can affect such loathsome stuff. I think one were
better salute the backside of an honest woman, then the artificial face of one
of these painted Iezabels.

They were then beloved of the wise, of the virtuous, of the learned; but now
by the vain, by the lewd, and by those Hermaphrodites that are not worthy the
name of men, and therefore to speak truly, not worthy of honest wives.

Would you know who was the first inventers of this painting the face, and
breasts? It is said, an old Bawd, whose beastly youth procured her a hateful
age, and she resembling dame ugly, my Lady Hard-fauors chamber-maide, she was
ouer-ridden and surfeted, all the hair of her head fell off, her eyes were
sunk into her head, her nose dependant long and slender down to her chin,
she was mouthed like a Plaice from the one ear to the other, her teeth rotten
with sweet meats, and stinking yellow, her face and skin like the outside of
rustie old bacon, and she spits in her hands to make her moist, her body, and
legs swelld with the dropsy as bigg as a mill-poste: this neat and curious
piece of bawdry would needs be made new and fresh again, like the blossoms of
May; her doings and customers decayed failing, she called to counsel three
maine pillars of her house, which was Mistress Whore the younger, Mistress
Fructifier, and Mistress Tweake the elder, and when they had drunk each one a
quart of burnt sack, their wits were full ripe; and then she questioned with
them how her self the old May Pole of mischeife might be repaired, and they
invented the Art of woman painting for the face and breasts, which to this day
the women of that Trade do continually use, and I am persuaded not any other,
which how beastly, odious, and ugly it is, I leave to all honest women to judge.

What should a vain Fantastic do with a wise woman? No, she that has her
face painted with white and red, she that has her bands starched with blew
and yellow, she that in stead of a plume of feathers, can deck his Coxcombe
with a pair of horns, she that can sympathize with him in his own folly,
she is fit for him, there is neither pot broken, nor water spilt between
them, there will be a good accordance, it were pity the banes should be
forbidden.

We were wont to say, it was a wise child that did know the own father, but
now we may say, it is a wise father that does know his own child. I protest,
I do not know a dishonest woman in England, nor in Ireland, of mine own
experience, but if we may give credit to reports, or believe what they
themselves do make show to be by their outward appearance, there were never so
many, and the trade is become to be so universal, that they cannot thrive the
one by the other; their gettings do but serve to shift off the time, till they
become to be some four or five and thirty years of age, and then if they do
not turn Bawd, they must either be turned into some Hospital, or end the rest
of their life in a Spittle.

But this plenty of Harlots has done some good in the Commonwealth, it has
much abated the price of Bawdry; for now a whoremonger may have his pot of Ale,
his pipe of Tobacco, and his pocky whore, and all for his three pence, and that
almost in every by-Lane. A happy thing for poor Knights, that the market is
thus beaten down; for one of these high prizde Harlots, that must have her
silken gowns, her guarded petticoates, her embroydered smocks, her
needle-worke edgings, her powldred perywigs, and her costly Cates, she is able
to undo a whole half dozen of Knights, one after another.

She will make him to spend his Revenues, to sell his land, to disinherit his
posterity, and his whole estate to be evermore doubtful, and still in danger
of burning.

She will leave him so weak in his purse, so feeble of his body, and so rotten
in his bones, that the sovereignty of his Tobacco will never be able to cure
him.

I cannot tell how I should pass over these matters without giving the Hubbub:
but let us now look into the apparel that is used, and that as well by men,
as by women.

There is nothing whereby a man may more readily judge of the inward
disposition of the mind, then by the outward show of apparel. Our words, our
behauiours, and our outward attires, they are all tongues to proclaim the
inward disposition, either of men or women: for there is no doubt but that a
fantastical attire is a plain confirmation of a phantasticke mind.

But if I had as many mouths, as Argus had eyes, I should yet want words to
express the foolerie of new fashions, the only cloak whereby to patronize the
frantic humors of this madding age, is the multitude of mad men that does
use them, which now by custom are grown so familiar, being practiced by the
multitude, that if they were acted but by a few in number, I think that if
they themselves did but stand by to behold them, they would account them to be
worse then mad, that did so much affect them: but yet in this deformity of
fashions, it is commonly seen, that wisemen do sometimes follow fools.

But of all occupations, I will bless my self from being a Tailor, especially
to any of those of the decayed Order: for when the Tailor has spent his wits
to fit him in the new fashion, which he must fetch from France, Flanders,
Italy, Spain, and that he has shown his skill in cutting, pressing,
printing, racing, garding, and stitching, yet he swears he has spoild his
garment: And I cannot choose but laugh, to think how the poor Tailor must
endure to be called Rogue, Rascal, Fool, Ass, Prick-louse, Botcher,
Bungler, and to suffer the worshipful Knight Sir Giles Goosecap, to rage, to
rail, and to swear that his garment is marred, he has cut it too long, too
short, too wide, too straight, and he must be contented to endure all, and glad
to get him home with his bill in his pocket, not daring to ask his money for a
twelue-moneth after. For a woman's Tailor, the best way to please my Lady, is to
have some interest in her Chamber-maide.

It would be tedious to set down what means has bin used to draw in money
for the supply of wares, what great sums of money have bin raised from the
pride and excess that has bin used as well by men, as by women, in their
guarded garments, their colored silks, their gold and silver lace, and their
such other superfluities: If these exactions were now looked after, I think it
would draw deep, when Cloth of Gold is thought too simple, unless it be
ornified with some rich imbroydery, either of Gold or Pearl, for otherwise, he
that his fathers best coat was but of homespunne cloth, does disdain to wear
it.

Pride is now become the mother of devotion, for it drives a number to Church,
that go thither more to show their bravery, and to seek precedence, then they
do to serve God. The Sabbath day, which the Almighty himself has commanded
especially to be kept holy, that day above all the rest is most profaned, and
God is more dishonored with this monstrous sin of pride upon the Sabbath
day, then he was when Lucifer was first deprived from the joys of heaven.

If we keep our doors shut up during the time of the Sermon, we think we have
done enough. And there is a provident care had, (if it were as carefully
observed) that no Victualler in the time of Divine Service should retain in
his house any drinking or disordred company.

Do but now find me out the Tavern, the Inn, or the Alehouse, where God is
more dishonored on the Sabbath day, then he is in the Church it self, and
then at that very time whilst the Preacher is in the Pulpit.

Look but upon the abominable pride that is there to be seen, and thou will
say, O damned pride a maine step to hell.
it is fitter to profane the Temple, then to do God honor. The pride of this
Age is greater then ever it was, both in Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen, and as
well in those that should give good example, as teach precepts, in high and
low, rich and poor, all sorts, all degrees, are excessiuely proud: and as it
were in despite of Religion, to attire and pranke up our selves in that pomp
and excessive pride, as were fitter for a Brothell-house, then for the house of
God.

I would not be thought to be too general in my words, for God defend but
there should be many good and godly disposed persons that do frequent the
Church, that are no less zealously inclined then godly devoted: yet he that
should duly consider of the excess that is used in superfluous vanities,
would rather judge them to be the marks and monuments of a people that never
heard of God, then to be in use and custom amongst Christians when they be
serving of their God.

We go to Church indeed upon the Sabbath, and we say it is to seek Christ,
but it is to seek precedence, to dispute of dignities, to strive for places,
to contend who shall go before, and who shall follow after, and therefore to
mock Christ rather then to seek him.

Christ is to be sought in lowliness of heart and humbleness of mind: we
must seek him in fear and trembling, in mourning garments, lamenting and
bewayling our sins: and therefore let those counterfeit hypocrites choose whether
they will be angry or pleased, for I will laugh at them, and give them the
Hubbub too, that will say they go to seek Christ in pride and presumption.

We read in the holy Scriptures of three wisemen that came to seek Christ,
(the Papists would have them to be three Kings) but did they come in my pomp
or pride to seek him? It is written, they gave him gifts, Gold, Frankincense,
and Myrrh: and this (in the opinion of most learned Divines) was preordained by
God himself to relieve the necessity of Joseph and Mary, who were then
presently to fly into Egypt for the safety of the child JESUS, whom Herod
did seek to murder.

We do read of Zaccheus, that came to seek Christ, and he was driven to
climb a Fig tree, but to get a sight of him: the text says he was rich, but
his apparel could not be sumptuous, that was fit to climb a tree.

We read again of the Virgin Mary her self, that for three days together
had sought Christ, whom in the end she found amongst the Doctors in the
Temple: but do you think she rode all this while in a Coach, that she went
thus to seek him?

Christ himself came to seek us when we were lost, nay when we had lost
ourselves, and were sold under sin: but when he came to seek us, and to save
the world, did he shine in silk, or glister in gold?

How is this world changed? We cannot now go to seek Christ, but we must be
clad in silk, in satin, in velvet, in cloth of silver, in cloth of gold.
Every unworthy Madam, that her mother has trudged many a mile on foot to go
to market, she cannot now go to Church but in a Coach, if it be but the
length of a Bowling Alley.

The six days that God has left unto us to follow our worldly businesses, we
mis-spend them with many foul abuses; but the Sabbath day, that we reserve
only to show our pride.

Thus under pretense of going to Church to serve God, we go to Church to mock
God, and our coming home from the Sermon, does rather show us to be returned
from the celebration of those filthy ceremonies which in the old time were
solemnized in Rome to the honor of Flora, then to come like Christians with
any sign of repentance, or show in amendment of life. We go to Church as we
use to take Tobacco, more for custom and good companies sake, then for any
good it does us.

Could we but now mark what pass this age of ours is grown unto: this age of
ours, I say, that does make so great show to profess Christianity: we are all
now for pride and pleasure; but let us take heed, for pleasure is but the
forerunner of misery and pain, and pride that has deprived the Angels from
the joys of heaven, is now grown so stately, that she must have her swindge,
she will not be reproved.

Virtue cannot endure to be pent up in the minds either of men or women, that
do so far exceed and super abound in vanities.

Amongst those things that our Ancestors did ever observe as notes whereby to
know a harlot, there was none more special then the gaudy and garish garments.

Solomon again he sets down the bold audacious woman to be a bird of the
same wing; then what shall we say to her that carries all these marks about
her, that is both light and vain in her apparel, and that is both impudent
and shameless in her demeanor: this woman has lost her evidence, and she has
nothing to show for her honesty.

There is mention made of a Canon, whereby it was ordained, that if a woman had
passed through the streets attired like a harlot, howsoever she had bin
wronged by any man, or violently assailed, she should have had no advantage
against him by Law. But if that Canon were now in force, our streets would
never be without great quarrels; for their damnable new invented fashions do
show themselves to be no less then monsters. Me thinks it were good
therefore, and as well for men as for women, to determine with themselves how
they would be accounted, and so to suit themselves in their apparel
accordingly.

Let men show themselves to be like men, that do now show themselves like
women, to look like Maid-marrian in a Morris-dance, fitter for a Sempsters
shop, then to fight for a Country.

Our nicitie has brought into oblivion, the examples left unto us by our
ancestors, they used none of this tricking, and this trimming up of themselves,
this frizling of hair, this curling of locks, this starching with blew, with
yellow, and with all the colors in the Rainebow, their best painting stuff
was dust well tempered with sweat, the true monument of Travel, of Labor, of
Industry, and of Action.

Now for women, she that powders her Periwigs, she that paints her face, she
that lays open her breasts, she that bespots her self with patches, and lays
her self naked shameful to think on, she that disguiseth and deformeth her
self every day with new fashions, if this woman be honest, wherefore should
she do these things, unless of purpose, because she would be thought to be a
harlot, but if the woman that does thus disguise her self does not want a
little honesty, I am sure she wants a great deal of wit.

Their excuse is, if we should not follow the fashion, none would regard us: So
they go to hell for fashions sake they care not.
These vanities of vanities, what are they else but the traps and trains of
hell? and whilst the body is thus pranked up in pride, the poor soul goes
thread bare, and being made play-fellow with the bodies wantonness, she never
feels her own evil, but that evil only which the body indureth.

But alas how few are there now left to tell the upright and plain dealing of
our Ancestors, what care they had of the common good, how provident they were
to reform these ouer-exceeding vanities; but how few are there now that would
either harken or regard it, or would either president or follow their examples?

Or what shall become of after ages? What example of goodness shall we leave
to our posterity? The younger sort can but learn by tradition, what they
receive by example from their Elders: and what can they hear or see either at
home or abroad, that is not altogether vain and unlawful? And besides the
forwardness of their own natures which still are ready to all impiety: they
have within doors the examples of their Parents to encourage them, that do
think the readiest way to prefer their children (but especially their
daughters) is to bring them up in insolency and impudent boldness. We sildome
see grapes on thorns
And how is it possible that the daughter should be chaste, that is not able
to number her mothers fooleries, nor to cast a true account of all her
vanities, sometimes perhaps of her adulteries.

If men and women should but degenerate from the rules of virtue, as fast the
next age, as they have done but within the compass of our own memories, they
that should live to see it, may bid adieu to all virtue and honesty.

Democritus made himself merry with the follies of his time, but he could not
have half the sport to laugh at, that our Age now affords: the sins of
those times were but dull, dumpish, drowsy; they were not half so quick
spirited as now, that are become to be more capering, more active, more
nimble, and far exceeding in agilitie, over they were in former ages.

When Alexander killed his Clytus, A Drunkards life is most wretched, and his
end is commonly most fearful and damnable, as nine in one Shire have made a
lamentable example, the year 1617. He that first invented that use of drinking
healths, had his ^^aines beat out with a pottle pot: a most just end for
inuentors of such notorius abuses. And many in pledging of Healths have ended
their lives presently, as example lately in London.
drunkenness would rather have drawn tears from Heraclytus, then laughter
from Democrytus; but it is now become to be more familiar, more conversant,
more sociable, and drunkenness is now a continual company-keeper in every
Tavern, in every Inn, and in every Alehouse.

But the base bruits that do frequent these places, are not worthy the
laughing at, I will therefore go seek out better company.

There is no feastings, no banquettings, no merry meetings, but if it be not
solemnized with a company of drunken sots, that before they be ready to say
grace after meat, if some of them be not carried away drunk to their beds, the
cost is but cast away, it is not worthy to be called a feast. In former ages,
they had no conceits whereby to draw on drunkenness, their best was, I drink
to you, and I pledge ye; till at length some shallow witted drunkard found out
the Carowse, which shortly after was turned into an hearty draught: but now it
is enjoined to the drinking of an health, an invention of that worth and
worthiness, as it is pity, the first founder was not hanged, that we might
have found out his name in the ancient record of the hangmans register.

The institution in drinking of an Health, is full of ceremony, and observed by
Tradition, as the Papists do their praying to Saints.

He that begins the health, has his prescribed orders: first uncovering his
head, he takes a full cup in his hand, and settling his countenance with a
grave aspect, he craves for audience: silence being once obtained, he
begins to breath out the name, peradventure of some Honorable Personage,
that is worthy of a better regard, then to have his name polluted at so
unfitting a time, amongst a company of Drunkards: but his health is drunk to,
and he that pledgeth* The Ruffingly order of drinking healths, used by the
spendalls of this age.
must likewise off with his cap, kiss his fingers, and bowing himself in
sign of a reverent acceptance; when the Leader sees his Follower thus
prepared, he soups up his broth, turns the bottom of the cup upward, and in
ostentation of his dexterity, gives the cup a phillip, to make it cry Twango.
And thus the first Scene is acted.

The cup being newly replenished to the breadth of an hair, he that is the
pledger must now begin his part, and thus it goes round thoughout the whole
company, provided always by a canon set down by the Founder, there must be
three at the least still uncovered, till the health has had the full passage:
which is no sooner ended, but another begins again, and he drinks an Health
to his Lady of little worth, or peradventure to his lighe heell'd mistress.

By these drunken devices, God is dishonored, and that love which in those
drunken fits they pretend to any man to be detested and abhorred; yea, the
prayers that a drunkard makes unto God, are rather to be derided, then
believed; but the woman they would seem to honor by drinking her Health, is
thereby dishonored, disgraced and discredited; for Drunkards are sildome seen
to reverence any woman, either for her virtue, or for her honesty, but are more
apt to slander those that never deserved it.

Let us a little define Drunkenness. Drunkenness is a vice which stirs up
lust, grief, anger and madness, extinguisheth the memory, opinion and
understanding, makes a man the picture of a beast, and twice a child, because
he can neither stand nor speak. Drunkenness is the mother of outrages, the
matter of fables, the root of crimes, the fountain of vice, the intoxicator of
the head, the quelling of the senses, the tempest of the tongue, the storm of
the body, the shipwreck of chastity, loss of time, voluntary madness, the
filthiness of manners, the disgrace of life the corruption of the Soul; if
there were no more to be spoken against it, me thinks this should be enough
to deter any Christian heart from this beastly sin.

I would I had now a chair with a back and a soft cushion, that I might sit
me down to laugh at the whore-master: but especially at him that they call
Senex Fornicator, an old Fishmonger, that many years since ingrost the French
pox, the which although he sometimes used to vent in secret amongst his
friends; yet he will not so disfurnish himself, but that he will reserve
sufficient for his own store, and the rather to conceal his commodity in
private, and would not have it to be openly known, he shelters them under
strange devised titles; sometimes he calls them the Gowt, sometimes the
Sciatica, and thus disguising them under these false applied names, he
shamefully slandreth and belieth the pox.

There be some others yet of a better disposition, He shall not be accounted a
Gentleman, if that he does not carry this mark of the pox about him, and you
shall commonly know him, for he goes as though he trod on eggs, and he never
rides on a trotting horse.
that do detest this fraudulent manner of dealing, that when they have made
some pretty shift to get the pox, they do set them forth to open show, and
finding them to be sociable, familiar and conversant amongst Knights and
Gentlemen, will grace them with a wrought night cap, yet not in any deceitful
manner, whereby to cousen his Majesty's subjects, but will so lay them open to
every man's view, that you shall see their true pictures in diverse parts of the
face, but especially at the nose: he does not so hide them, but you shall
discern them by his complexion, by his snuffling in his speech, his nose is
commonly as flat as a bowling alley, by his very gate as he passes and
repasseth by you. If a Dog does chance to hit him over the shinns with his
tail, he cries Oh, and perhaps, raps out an oath or two.

You shall never see him play any match at the football, or to win any wagers
at running, or leaping; he may sometimes dance the measures, but these
Carrantoes and Scottish giggs are out of his element: here is plain dealing,
and it should seem these poxes are honestly come by, when they are not hidden,
but are thus laid open to every man's view.

But soft and fair, let me now pause a little, for it stands me upon to take
good heed how I raise the cry against the Blasphemer, he that will snarle
and swagger, as though he meant to kill the old one; he that will rumble out
oaths like thunder or canon-shot, and will sometimes burst into such a vain
of swearing, as if he meant to make the powers of Heaven to shake and to
tremble. They have such excuses for their swearing; first, it graceth their
speech, and is an ornament to their phrase. Secondly, it is a general custom,
the most part use it, and few or none refrain it. Thirdly, they do it from no
bad mind, no wicked intent. Lastly, if they do swear, they are but small
oaths, and therefore to be borne withal; but look unto it wicked
blasphemer, if God be not merciful, thou will find none so little but deep
enough, none so light but heavy enough, none so small but great enough to send
thee down into hell. Here you may see what these damned for sworn Devils of
hell pretend for their devilish act of swearing.

But I care not if I tell you a history, which was many years ago written in a
strange language, but now lately translated out of Essex into English, and thus
it follows.

^ strange story ^^d true.
There was sometimes a father that had three sons, who at the time of his
death, bequested by his will his whole estate, as well of lands, as likewise of
goods and chattells, to that one of the three, that by reasonable demonstration
could prove himself to be most degenerate and declining, as well from
humanity, as from honesty.

After the death of this well disposed parent, his three sons appointed a day
of meeting, to determine of their fathers bequest, when coming together, the
eldest brother in a short Exordium delivered his fathers determination, how he
had disposed his whole estate only to him that could prove himself the most
dishonest, the which (said he) I hope I shall neither need to spend many
words, nor to bring better testimony, then what your selves do know, and of
your own consciences will award in my behalf.

To speak then to the purpose: The first sons speech.
I am well known to you both, to be a common whore-master, that do wholly
incline my self to follow harlots, that do spend, squander and consume my
time (day by day, and night after night) my goods, my body, my life and my
lands, in Brothell-houses, amongst Bawds and Harlots, that are the very sincks
of sin; yea, all I have, or ever shall be wotth, so dearly do I love these
prostituted beastly queanes, that I cannot sleep quietly in my bed for thinking
of them; Whores are the Devils hacknies and let to none but his own servants.
that as Solomon has said, do carry death and damnation about them: These be
they that I have so dedicated my self unto, that neither the fear of God, the
shame of the world, nor the admonition of friends is able to restrain me; whom
neither the love of an honest wife, the natural care of dutiful children, nor
the sting of a guilty conscience, can any whit at all mollify. Tell me now,
where shall you find amongst men a villain more stained and polluted with
loathed filthiness, or more to be detested then is the whore-monger? If any of
you two can show your selves to be more degenerating from honesty or humanity,
I yield up my right, I make no further claim.

The second brother being now to speak for himself, began in this manner:

Brother, I acknowledge all that you have said to be true, The second brothers
speech.
and I confess the whoremonger to be a most vicious villain amongst men: but
you have yet shot short of the mark you aimed at; for you are not so much
inclined to follow that filthy appetite of whoredom and adultery, but I am as
much and more addicted to base and beastly drunkenness, base and beastly I may
well term it, A Drunkard is beast and no man.
for there is nothing whereby to distinguish a man from a beast, but the use of
reason: for as man has his being* so has a beast: man has sense and feeling,
beasts have both: man has life, beasts have the like: but man has the gift of
reason, the only evidence he has to show that he is a man and not a beast. Now
a drunkard has lost his evidence, for he has neither the use of reason, of
wit, nor of honesty; he is fit for no good company, nor godly exercise amongst
men; and amongst beasts, he is more loathsome and filthy then is a hog, that
amongst beasts that are filthy, is yet the most filthy. Yea, there is nothing
so pleasing unto me as the pot and tobacco-pipe, which makes me have a great
paunch, my face set with rich carbuncles, my nose pimpled like holly berries,
there is no news so welcome, so pleasing, as Come shall we go drink, for a
pot of old march-beere and a cup of sack, will make my nose the riper: and
this is my delight from day to week, and from weeks to years, and herein I
take my whole delight.

This (I hope) may then suffice, that although the whore-master be a creature
that is most to be detested and abhorred amongst men, yet the common drunkard,
being a beast, and no man, is most digressing, as well from the bounds of
humanity, as from the rules of honesty: and therefore as our provident father
has by his will determined, the inheritance must be mine.

The younger brother, that was now lastly to speak, began in this manner:

The third brothers speech.
Brother whoremaster, and brother drunkard, I have heard the allegations that
you have hitherto alleged for your selves, and I have had much ado to
forbear swearing: yet thus far I concur with you both, that the
whoremonger amongst men is the most vicious, and therefore the most to be
abhorred and detested: and the drunkard I do think indeed to be a filthy
beast, not worthy to bear the name of a man: but if your own positions be
good, the inheritance is mine. But brother whoremaster, you think to carry
away the prize, because you are the most loathed creature amongst men: And
brother drunkard, you think to defeat me, because you are the most filthy
amongst beasts; but I tell you in few words, and a little thing would make me
to swear, the right is mine, and I will have it, that am neither man nor
beast, but a damned Fiend of hell, a Devil incarnate, A Blasphemer is a limb
of the Devil.
accursed by Gods own mouth. Zownds, a common blasphemer is a creature more
pernicious, then either man or beast.

It is I that do set that tongue, which by the right of creation should be the
trumpet to sound forth the glory of God, I do make it the instrument to
profane and blaspheme his holy name; to swear by his wounds, and by his
blood, by his heart, by his guts, by his side, by his body, by his soul.

Can any Devil of hell show himself to be more adverse? Give over therefore
your further claims, for the inheritance belongs to me, it is I that am a
bondslaue to the Devil, a fire brand of hell, a wretch that is most accursed,
it is I that am all this, and therefore it is I that must inherit.

Thus far my History, and I think of my conscience this last of the three
brethren had the best right to that his father had bequested, for amongst the
sons of men, there is not a more accursed, then is the blasphemer.

But now it is accounted a Gentleman-like humor in him that can swear ex
tempore, for matters of no moment, and they say it is a sign of courage: but
to speak the truth, it is a sign that he is a reprobate wretch, forsaken of
God, that does use it: and as his life is detestable, so his death will be
damnable.

What swearing and forswearing again amongst Merchants, amongst Shopkeepers,
and amongst all manner of Tradesmen, in buying, in selling, in bargaining, in
promise-making, and yet what little regard in the keeping of an oath? We swear
by the living Lord, by the power of God, the eternity of God, the majesty of
God, the life, the death of God; then we divide our God, to rend him in sunder
with whole volleyes of oaths, as his heart, his blood, his flesh, his sides,
his wounds, his hands, his nails, his feet, his toes, and all the parts of his
precious body: a wicked impudent age, that any people under the face of heaven
should dare to presume thus to swear and forswear our selves, regarding not
our oaths, having store of Gods just judgments on such wicked blaspheming
wretches daily set before our eyes for examples unto us, and we regard them
not, neither amend our sinful lives.

The Turks and Infidells are more respective to observe an oath that they do
make in the name of their Mahomet, then we that be Christians, when we swear
by the name of the living God.

Our Gallants have devised strange oaths, most fearful to name, such as were
never invented, but by some damned forsworn fiend of hell; and when they are
at gaming, to hear them thunder forth these oaths, would make a Christians
heart to tremble. Nay, he is thought to be but an unthrift, that will not
forge, feign, flatter, swear and forswear for his own advantage.

The breaking of an oath that is made between party and party, is accounted to
be no perjury: nay, whole millions of oaths that are vowed in the performance
of promises, that are never kept, is accounted no dishonesty.

If men's words, and deeds, and thoughts, did concur in one, we should undo
the Lawyers, neither should we need so many Scriueners to write obligations.

I my self do know a great number of men in the world, that are called honest
men, yet I know but a very few (if it were upon a payment of money) but I had
rather take his bond, then his booke-oath.

An ungracious age of ours this same, that if we forbear from doing evil, it
is more for the fear of punishment, then for the love of virtue.

Men's honesties are now measured by the Subsidy-book; he that is rich is
honest, and the more a man does abound in wealth, so much the more he does
exceed, and that as well in honesty, as in wit.

He that has great friends, has no faults; but he that is poor (if he be
honest) I warrant him he will never be rich, for the time does not serve for
men to gather wealth by any honest precepts.

We do look ascew at virtue, when vice shall be saluted with cap and
courtesy; and Arts and Sciences must now dance attendance, and wait upon
ignorance: and he that cannot sometimes grease a fool with praises, may
(peradventure) die wise, but never wealthy.

We purchase lands, and we build up houses with the ruins of the Church, with
the sins of the people, with the sweat of other men's brows, with perjury,
with bribery, with oppression, with extortion: it makes no matter how we get,
nor how we live, when at the time of our death, we may have an Epitaph, or a
Funeral Sermon, when amongst a thousand sins that we have committed, even
shameful to be spoken, yet if we have done but one good deed be it never so
little, yet it shall be devulgated and extolde in a greater measure, then that
of Curtius, when he offered himself into the devouring gulf for the safety of
his Country: yet whilst we live, we do make show to have great regard to our
good names, that have no care at all to our consciences: We daily see the rich
Landlord does grind the faces of the poor Tenants by cruel oppression,
extortion, and miserable servitude: for the poor Tenant must be at command,
under his most tyrannous Landlord. This proud deformed wormes-meat, that
whores, drinks, plays, swears, and swaggers, that consumes body and soul,
lands and life, nay he will undo a whole hundred of honest poor men, to
maintain his detested and loathed appetite. But look unto it, thou whose
guilty conscience does tell thee thy faults are apparent, and God does hear
the cry of the poor, who daily heapeth curses upon thy vicious soul, for thy
cruelty too largely executed upon them.

But they are worthy to have the Hubbub, and to be well laughed at, that
cannot cut out their own consciences, either little or large, short or long, or
of what size or fashion they list: they may learn of the Wolf, that being
enjoined by his ghostly Father to fast, and for four and twenty hours to eat
no more flesh then in his conscience did exceed the value of three
halfe-pence; The wolfes conscience and the Usurers are much alike.
the Wolf departing homeward, meeting with a sheep and a lamb, valued the
sheep in his conscience to be worth a penny, and the lamb a halfe-penny, and
so with a safe conscience he devoured them both: And he that will live in this
world, and cannot learn of the Wolf to square out a large conscience, will
never grow fat.

It is but our own denying or misdenying, that makes or marres the matter. A
strong faith helps all: the lesson is not new, Creed quod habes and habes, the
Priest taught it long ago to a young scholar that came to borrow his horse.

But it is a pretty thing this conscience, I confess, and it is good for a man
to carry about him, when he goes to church; but he that does use it in Faires
or Markets, will die a beggar, says this wise world.

I am moved with commiseration toward the poor Countryman, that dwells too
near him that is rich, whom he shall find to be so sharpe-sighted, that he
shall reap no commodity, but he will have both an eye and a longing to it:
and then if he be denied, the poor man shall find himself ill neighboured.
Would you have a president? I will not be curious: There was sometimes a poor
Farmer, who dwelling near a Gentleman, But although the Countryman cannot
spare his Ox, yet the Justice often has the horn.
a Justice of peace, that would have bought a yoke of Oxen, which this Farmer
could not spare, and therefore upon necessity was driven to make denial;
whereupon Master Justice conceived such displeasure, that after this repulse,
the poor man found himself to be continually crossed and disturbed, and from
time to time, so many ways wronged, that he came to this Gentleman to seek
justice, Beware the Justice, Countreyman.
whom he found still to be rather supporting those that did oppress him, then
seeming any ways to render him right: but perceiving at the length the truth
from whence it grew, in a submissiue manner he came to Master Justice: Why
(said the Justice) do you think me to be your enemy? Alas (said the Farmer) I
do feel the smart of it, and am come in this humble manner to beseech your
good will: Why then (said the Justice) you see I can bite though I do not
bark. I do see and feel it (quoth the Farmer) but Sir, if I had a Dog of
that condition, I protest I would hang him as soon as I came home.

There be many such curs in the world now in these days, that can both bite
and whine, many of them more regarded for the authority they bear, then for
any goodness is in them: but I will now give the Hubbub to him that will buy
an office: and yet I think the buying of an office, and the buying of a
dignity are much alike, they are both attained unto by corruption. And virtue
between them is betrayed, and bought and sold for money; but since offices
has bin set to sale, to Quicunque vult, the Prince and Commonwealth has bin
the worse served.

The time has bin when he that would seek to buy an office, was thought
unworthy to bear an office, but the buying and selling of offices, and the
giving and taking of bribes, are two pernicious evils: and that Commonwealth
may be thought most blessed, where offices are given to the virtuous, but not
sold to the rich, that do seek by their money but to oppress virtue. There
is not a more dangerous thing then to put an office into his hand that is both
wise and wicked, or to arm him with power and authority that is of a covetous
disposition; the eye of wisdom, that in former ages would look into these
enormities, was very vigilant and careful to prevent them, and provided Laws,
whereby to bridle (not only these) but diverse other abuses, which from time to
time were hatched up.

Lycurgus made a Law against drunkenness, Augustus Caesar against pompous
buildings, the Lucanes against prodigality, the Lacedaemonians against excess
in apparel, the Egyptians against whoredom, the Thebanes against negligent
Parents, that brought up their children in idleness and insolency. And God be
thanked for it, we want no good Laws in England, whereby to restrain all
manner of abuses; but the examples of a godly life, The golden Law is the best.
in those that should minister the due execution of those Laws, would be more
effectual then the Laws themselves; but some of them are rather inclined to
their own private profit, then the public commodity, and can be contented to
tolerate in others, those vices that themselves are addicted to.

Justice is made blind by bribery: and authority daily abused.
In the old time they used to picture Justice blindfold, with a veil before
her eyes, signifying, that Justice should not see the parties between whom she
was to distribute, but should perform her office with equity and right,
without any respect of persons, but now they have put her eyes quite out, and
have likewise made her deaf, she can neither hear nor see. I think they have
peckt out her eyes with Capons, that were wont to be brought unto her by
couples, and sometimes by half dozens: I cannot say how she should be come to
be so deaf, unless by the neighing of Coach horses, or the rumbling of
Coaches: And Justice has her ears many times poisoned with ungracious tales
that be whispered unto her: or how it comes to pass I know not, but blind and
deaf they have made her, she can neither hear nor see the pride, the
adultery, the drunkenness, the bawdery, the bribery, the popery, the impiety,
she cannot see a Recusant, a Priest, a Papist, a Jesuit, our abominations
run current, without controulment, for alas Justice is bereaved the use of
her senses, she can neither hear nor see.

She can a little smell, and she can sometimes vent a horse, a hawke, a
hogshead of wine, sugar, spice, flesh, fish, foul, or any thing that comes
under the name or title of a present.

She cannot endure the name of a bribe, he that offers her a bribe, she thinks
him a fool, but for presents let them bring them till their backs do ache, she
will make them more weary in giving, then she will be in taking.

I would be glad to fortify my speeches with some example, although not of the
time present, yet of the time past, and I remember a matter that I think will
serve my turn, I cannot set you down the year of our Lord, the day of the
month, the certain place or country, nor the names of the parties by whom it
was acted, but true it is, and if reports may be believed, and for a truth it
has passed many years ago.

There was sometimes (in what Country I know not) but a Magistrate there was,
but amongst many controversies that were depending before him, there was one
had bin of that continuance, that the plaintiff (...) his better speed,
bestowed a hogshead of choice wine upon this Magistrate for a present, whereof
the defendant having gotten intelligence, to outwaigh his adversaries hogshead
of wine, he presented this Magistrate with a very fair horse, There be many
men in authority of the Welsh man's mind, they had rather have one eleven
shilling piece then all the Angels in heaven.
which was likewise accepted and received: the plaintiff understanding of this
horse thus given, began to despair of his own success, thinking his hogshead
of wine to be but lost, bethought himself yet to go drink some part of it,
before it were all spent, and with this determination had himself to dinner to
this Magistrate, where diverse other guests being at the Table, and tasting of
this wine, which they felt to be good, they began to praise and commend it one
to the other, only this Gentleman that had given it drunk apace amongst the
rest, without any word speaking either in praise or dispraise, which the
Magistrate himself noting and marking, with a smiling countenance began to
cheer up his guest, saying unto him, me thinks I hear every body praising my
wine, but you your self; you say nothing to it, I would hear you say it were
good. The Gentleman that had the horse still sticking in his stomach, answered
him in the best English he could speak, I sai^, ^^^d took to (...) was (...)
was make (...) a (...).

They all began to laugh at this Gentleman's to ad conceit, that did think a
horse had bin drowned in the wine, but the Magistrate that best understood his
English would move no further speeches, but let the matter pass. How the
Gentleman sped after in his suit, I cannot tell; for we see the world is come
to that pass, that amongst those that do follow suits in Law, he is commonly
thought to have most right, that is able to give most money.

For some Lawyers cannot speak till their tongues be ripped with gold, they had
rather have one eleven shilling piece then all the Angels in heaven. Then is
not this a miserable age, when money makes new law, not honest Lawyers. We have
so many P^^^dous in these days, that can alter the case, and for their own
(...), will rule: money to set men at strife and variance, and he is but a
foolish Lawyer, that cannot empty his Clyents purse, before he end his suit.

There is no Law, be it never so legitimate or truly begotten, which with
wrested glozes and subtle expositions they cannot bastardize.

They are pugnantia inter se, there is no agreement amongst them, but what one
confirms to day, to morrow another will frustrate. And we have as many
petty-foggers, tramplers of the Law, that do much wrong the Laws of the land,
that want both law, wit and honesty, that live only by setting their neighbors
together by the ears, and then they prey upon the poor ignorant people, they
are as bad in a Commonwealth, as moths in a garment.

There be some Lawyers more wise then honest, they come up to London with an
empty capcase, and the Clyent with a full capcase, but before the last Return
of the Term, the money is all in the Lawyers capcase, and in requital he
stuffes the Clyents capcase with rotten papers: HELL a Tavern near
Westminster Hall.
and this fellow is so conversant with the Devil, that every day he goes to
Hell to breakfast.

There be many miracles assigned to Saints, that (they say) are good for all
diseases, they can give sight to the blind, make the deaf to hear, they can
restore limbs that be cripled, and make the lame to go upright, they be good
for Horse, for Swine, and many other beasts. And women are not without their
she Saints, to whom they do implore when they would have children, and for a
quick deliverance when they be in labor.

They have Saints to pray to, when they be grieved with a third day ague, when
they be pained with the toothache, or when they would be revenged of their
angry husbands.

They have Saints, that be good amongst Poultry, for Chickins when they have
the pip, for Geese when they do fit, to have a happy success in Goslings. And
to be short, there is no disease, no sickness, no grief, either amongst men
or beasts, that has not his Physician among the Saints: And this is the cause
(as may be supposed) why Physicians have not so large commings in as Lawyers:
for there is no controversy or suit in Law, be it never so little, never so
just, never so honest, that has either Hee-Saint, or Shee-Saint to defend or
befrend it: Some will say, that it is a sign of a licentious Commonwealth,
where Lawyers and Physicians have too great employments; and I think indeed,
they are most happy, that have least to do with any of them both.

I will not meddle with our Ministry, that I think of my conscience, were
never more reverently to be regarded then at this present, and that as well for
their knowledge, as learning; yet notwithstanding the sincerity of Hely, his
proud sons deserved the Hubbub: and there is nothing wherein some of our
Divines may be so much detected, as in giving so much way to their childrens
pride.

I had thought here to have ended my discourse, and to have woond up my
merriment with this old perclose, And thus I bid you heartily farewell, the
winding up of every ordinary letter, but as I was dipping my pen to have taken
up ink, I heard a muttering of men's voices, as they were passing through the
streets, and looking out at a window, I saw four young Roaring Boys, that (I
think) were new come from some Ordinary, the one with a colored feather in
his hat; the other I marked well, had a long lousy lock hung dangling by his
ear, like a Derry Irish Glybei: the third was in a yellow starcht band, that
made him to look as if he had bin troubled with the yellow iaundis: the fourth
had a short sword, like that which we were wont to call an Alehouse Dagger,
and that was trussed close to his side with a scarf; they were all four in
white boots, and gilt spurs, and they were consulting as they went along,
how they might spend the afternoon: The one gave his verdict to go see a Play:
a second advised rather to go to Tables or Cards, two against two for a quart
or two of sack: the third thought it better, that they might go recreate
themselves a little in a bawdy house: but the fourth swear a great oath, that if
they would go with him, he would bring them to the best pipe of Tobacco, that
ever came out of the West Indies.

This was the man to whom they all assented, the very sound of A pipe of
Tobacco, made them all to run, as Swine to the draffe, when they hear the
Maid begin to knock upon the end of the Hogs trough. They say the Welchmen
came all running out of Heaven, when they heard one without the gate, crying,
Gasse bobby, Gasse bobby; but I think our Englishmen would run as fast into
Hell, if they did but hear a voice crying out, A pipe of Tobacco.

But away these Gentlemen went together, and I began to wonder how a filthy
stinking Antidote could so bewitch men to forget themselves.

In former ages, Gentlemen and Knights at their merry meetings were wont to
spend the time in honest recreation; sometimes in gaming, or other pleasant
sporting; sometimes in manly exercises, and endeavors of actiuitie; sometimes
in brave discoursings, in matters of wit and learning; but how there is no
music pleasing, but the pot, and the Tobacco pipe.

O base conditioned time, is wit so far spent amongst Knights and Gentlemen,
that they can employ it to no better endeavors, but to imitate that abuse,
which is so common with every Ostler, with every Tapster, with every Tinker,
with every Costermonger, with every Horse-boy: and to conclude, that is in such
use and custom with every rogue and rascal.

Me thinks the very community should make known the vanity: for virtue was
never known yet to be embraced by the multitude.

But they will say, there are both wise and learned, that do use to take
Tobacco; hey more, there are none will take it faster then some Physicians,
that be accounted most learned.

And there be as wise and learned, that could never be brought to meddle with
it, and there be many wise men, that of my knowledge (for the little good they
have found in it) have given it over: And for those Physicians that will take
Tobacco so fast, they have (as other men) many faults worse then that, vnffit
for wise men to imitate, I will therefore make them no president, and
Physicians are commonly accounted to be so much the more learned, that can best
flatter fools in their folly. But I have heard as wise, as learned, and as
honest Physicians as any be in England, that have said Tobacco has both killed
and shortened many men lives.

But let us go to experience, (...) of former ages, Tobacco has shortened many
a man's life, and brought many good man's heir to beggary.
as of this of ours at this present, that has taught us, and still does teach
us, that those that never meddled with Tobacco, have lived, and do live in more
sound and perfect health, then those that take it fastest, But they will say
there be men of greater regard, then either Physicians, Gentlemen, or Knights
that will take Tobacco, and therefore they are much to be blamed, that will
either write or speak against it.

The greater the person is, tanta maius crimen, his example is the more
hurtful, and he is rather to be pitied for his infirmity, then imitated for
his dignity.

But if the example of greatness may be a confirmation of matters to make them
true or false, then I dare confidently prouounce Tobacco to be the most vain
and idle toy, that ever was brought into use and custom amongst men, when we
have a president, of him that is not only most great, Sir, you are deceived,
for by Tobacco comes red noses, the only mark of good fellows.
but is likewise most wise, most learned, most worthy, most renowned; yea, and
most worthy thus to be accounted, that has evermore impugned, detested and
abhorred Tobacco.

Let them then give over to vaunt of their wise and learned men, and let them
take the folly to themselves, that like Spiders, can draw poison to hurt
themselves, that can bribe their own wits to flatter their own follies, that
are carried away with the tempestuous whirle-windes of their own affections.

Humors and affections have a great hand over us, and they do both place and
displace Reason at their pleasure, and where Affection does hold the Seat and
Scepter in the Castle of the Mind, they may ges^e at many things, as they are
led by opinion, but of very few according to truth: for where the heart is
possessed with any vehement affection, there Reason is exempt from his proper
office, and their judgment may easily be mistaken, and there is no contending
against them, amongst whom Opinion is of such force, as Reason is of no force.

Our sooty-mouthed Tobacconists can candie poison, and they do so hug their
own follies, that they are ready to turn all accidents into arguments, to fit
their purpose.

And this we do see by other experiments, that when men have once besotted
themselves upon a folly, there is neither example of shame, nor persuasion of
wit can make them to desist.

Would you have an instance, for your better confirmation, it is not yet so
long since this new-found-out foolery of yellow starcht bands were taken up,
but that it is within the compass of our own memories.

And I could here discover the names of two several persons that were noted
to be the first that were seen with those bables about their necks in the
Court of England, Pride has overthrown Kingdoms, and brought whole nations
to utter desolation.
the one of them being openly reprehended for his folly, was likewise
admonished to beware of Gods judgments, that does never fail to attend on
those new Inuenters of vanities, that does not only addict themselves unto
monstrous pride, but by their abominable example does induce others to do the
like.

And as it was presaged, so it came to pass; for this Gentleman, upon some
occasion very shortly after being in France, was there brought to an untimely
death, and that by an extraordinary accident.

The other remains at this hour a spectacle of Gods heavy displeasure.

Mistress Turners exclamations against yellow starcht bands.
Yet the open exclamation that was made by Turners wife at the hour of her
death, in the place where she was executed, cannot be hidden, when before the
whole multitude that were there present, she so bitterly protested against the
vanity of those yellow-starchtbands, that her outcryes (as it was thought) had
taken such impression in the hearts of her hearers, that yellow starcht bands
would have been ashamed (for ever after to have showed themselves about the
necks, either of men that were wise, or of women that were honest) but we see
our expectation has failed us, for they began even then to be more general
then they were before. I do exceedingly admire these idle-headed young
Gallants, or ruffianly Roaring-Boyes, how they can walk the streets with one
of these base, odious, ugly, beastly bands, this new devilish invented
fashion, looking as though they had escaped from the Devil in hell, and there
had scorched his band, where every one wonders to see this ape of fashion, and
points at him for a fool in this lewd example. Well honest Countrey-women, I
bring you good news: I wish you now to look unto your selves; if ever you
intend to be rich, now is the time: You know Tobacco is in great trading; but
you shall be Merchants, and only for eggs: Merchants for eggs.
for whereas one pipe of Tobacco will suffice three or four men at once, now
ten or twenty eggs will hardly suffice to starch one of these yellow bands: A
fashion that I think shortly will be as conversant amongst Tailors, Tapsters,
Those that do follow such idle ridiculous fashions, make their Tennants
Freeholders within one twelue-month after their lands comes into their hands.
and Tinkers, as now they have brought Tobacco. But a great Magistrate, to
disgrace it, enjoined the Haugman of London to become one of that Fraternity,
and to follow the fashion; and the better to enable him, he bestowed of him
some benevolence to pay for his laundry: And who was now so brisk with a
yellow feather in his hat, and a yellow starcht band about his neck, walking
in the streets of London, as was master Hangman? so that my young Masters, that
have but sithence fallen into that Trim, they do but imitate the Hangmans
president, the which how ridiculous a matter it is, I will leave to themselves
to think on. All that I have endeavored, is but to make good what I have
formerly auowed, That a Fool will not bee-brought to leave his Babble, neither
for the shame of the world, nor for the love of virtue; and of my conscience,
if there were yet some other Lobcoculus, that to show his dexterity of wit,
would leave his yellow, and betake himself into green, red, tawny, or to any
other colored manner of starching, he should have followers, that would bring
it into a fashion: this is a true proverb, A yellow band and a green wit. So
that as of these yellow starcht bands, I think the like of Tobacco, it was
first brought into England by some man of little virtue, and afterward brought
into custom by those of less wit.

But they say Tobacco is physical, it is medicinable, it is precious for all
manner of diseases, and they do attribute more virtue to their Tobacco, then
Bellarmine does to his Pope. They say it will make a fat man lean, a lean man
fat: he that has filled his paunch till it be ready to burst, they say a pipe
of Tobacco will make him to digest; he that wants meat to fill his hungry
belly, a pipe of Tobacco is as good a bait, as half a dozen of Horse bread for
a Carriers horse* it is like the Shoo-makers leather, that if your boots be too
strait, he tells you it will reatch; if too wide, he tells you, it will
shrink. So Tobacco, it is good for increase, it is good for decrease, it is
good to take before meat, it is good to take after meat, it is good to take
between meals, it is good in the morning, it is good in the evening, it is
good at midday, The world never found out so rare a weed, as these fools
would have of Tobacco.
it is good at midnight, it is good at all times, at all seasons, in the
summer, in the winter, in the heat, in the cold, in the spring, in the fallt it
is good for all complexions, for all constitutions, for old men, for young men,
for all diseases, proceeding either from hot causes, from cold causes, from
dry causes, from moist causes: A man may take it as often as he list, as much
as he list, as little as he list, at the change of the Moon, at the full of
the Moon, at the waine of the Moon; under every Sign, under every Planer,
under every Aspect, under every Climate. Now if the sovereignty of Tobacco be
such, as these men would persuade, either Physicians be Dolts, that do
prescribe us so many observations, or these be notable Fools that do thus
take it. But the conceit that is holden of Tobacco, how precious it is against
the French pox, may make some that do feel themselves to be distempered, to
be the more enclining to it.

Some other again that be old Fishmongers, and love to follow the game, do
use to fish those pooles where they know the pox are easily caught, do
therefore take Tobacco, to prevent perils. But how unwise art thou, that do
know thy self to be free from that loathed sickness, and wilt yet be sucking
at the Tobacco-pipe, that every pockie companion has be slauered before thee,
whom wisemen have ever shonned to drink withal in one cup? But let them be as
free from that disease as they list, he that is still sucking at the
Tobacco-pipe, must yet take the imputation upon him, that does seem with such
diligence to seek out the remedy that is used for the cure.

But I am not so mad to think that every man that does take Tobacco, does
therefore take it because he feels himself to be diseased; for then if his
Majesty had an employment but of a small company of men that were healthful
and sound, they would hardly be found out either in England or in Ireland. But
this I think, that the greatest number does take Tobacco more for matter of
custom, then for matter of malady. Yet one thing I have noted, (mark it he
that list) the Tobacconist that is obseruatiue, that prescribes himself set
times and hours to take his Tobacco, at those times and hours by himself
prefixed, will sooner omit his prayers to God, then not perform his own
prescribed ceremony in taking Tobacco: He that should bring one of these to
the Horse-market in Smithfield, and there offer him to sell, he could not
warrant him to be sound of wind and limb, but he must pass among the lades,
that men do use to put away for some hidden infirmity.

Shall I crave your patience now, and but to speak truly, there is not any man
that makes a custom in taking Tobacco, but he has some defect either in body
or in mind; for he that does not take it for the cure of some infirmity that
he feels in his body, he has both a defective and foolish mind, that is so
ready every day to choke himself with an Indian smoke, so chargeable to his
purse, and that without either constraint, cause, or necessity.

Here I would now crave the censure of Divinity, whether this idle vanity,
taken with such excess (whereby the blessings of God are daily abused) be not
as hateful a sin, and as much offending God, as either drunkenness or
gluttony? I dare boldly pronounce, this excessive taking of Tobacco, not only
to be foolish, but also to be ungodly, and therefore to be despised, detested,
and abhorred by men, that be either good or godly: and he that does use it,
unless upon necessity, as he shall be constrained for the curing of some
grief or malady, is to be laughed at, and deserves the Hubbub.

Tobacco is like a Popes Bull, that Papists do think to be a good discharge
of all the sins they can commit, from the meanest to the mainest, from the
eating of an egg, to the murdering of a King. The Tobacconist has the like
conceit of his Trinidado, that he thinks to be a good Supersedeas for all
diseases, from the aching of a tooth, to the French pox. The text that I have
taken in hand is but of smoke, and why should I use any forcible battery
against so vain a vapor? but especially to those that have dedicated
themselves to this idle vanity, that there is no sequestration, that either wit
or reason can afford, is able to separate.

Tobacco is the Heathens enriching, and Englands wilful undoing, and by the
smoke thereof has dried up the hand of Justice she will not do her duty.
I have formerly said, that the first transportation of Tobacco into England,
was not performed by any man, that was either of worth, or of any great
account: So again, it never grew into credit with any wise or temperate
spirits, but (as it were) by an inconsiderate and foolish affectation of
novelties, drawn from a people that are Infidells and Aliens to God, truly
reputed to be the very refuse of the world. Shall I now speak of the
inconveniences that are drawn in by this immoderate taking of Tobacco?

What reverent terms might I then use, whereby to express the uncivil
behauiours of old Tobacconists? whilst they are sucking at their Tobacco-pipe,
their slauering without regard of modesty, their spitting, their spawling, the
vncleanlinesse of the sight, the loathsomeness of the stincke.

First, it is drawn in at the mouth, then it is snuffled out at the nose,
whereby the air is infected with such a loathsome fume, that those that be
standers by cannot draw their breath, but they must suck down some of that
filthy vapor, that has been blown out, if not through a pockie nostrill,
yet (for the most part) through a snotty nose.

And were it not as good manners for such an uncivil chimny-nosed Tobacconist,
to spit in a man's face, as to puff out his filthy vapor where it flies into a
man's mouth? I might yet speak of the idleness, the drunkenness, the swearing, the
swaggering, the blasphemings, and of many other like enormities, that are all
drawn in by this insatiable taking of Tobacco.

Amongst the rest, I cannot forget to commiserate poor distressed Ladies and
Gentle-women, that among the creatures of Gods making, are of the most delicate
and pure constitution, that must subject themselves to the base and barbarous
customs of these rude and uncivil Tobacconists, that does so pollute and
perfume themselves with this loathsome and filthy stuff, that a woman were as
good to thrust her nose into a close stool, as to smell the unsavory sent of
her husbands stinking breath. If Nature had made me a woman, as she has done
a man, I cannot tell how I might have proved in honesty, but I would have
been one of the coyest female creatures, that ever knit a pair of brows in
anger, but especially to these Tobacco-Knights, I would have banished them my
company, they might sometimes (peradventure) have talked with me before folks,
but I would have blessed my self from their further acquaintance.

I have talked so long of this filthy Antidote, that it has made me almost
forget my good manners. The time has been, when if we did speak of such
loathsome stuff, we used to put a sir reverence before, but we forget our
good orders: and the best is, I speak but to such as are unmannerly in the
taking of it, as I am in the speaking of it. Let us therefore set the Hares
head against the Goose gyblets, if they will tax me for my vnreuerent words, I
will tax them for their uncivil deeds.

I remember a pretty jest of Tobacco. That was this. A certain Welch-man
coming newly to London, and beholding one to take tobacco, never seeing the
like before, and not knowing the manner of it, but perceiving him vent smoke
so fast, and supposing his inward parts to be on fire: cried out, O Ihesu,
Ihesu man, for the passion of Cod hold, for by Cods spludty snowts on fire, and
having a bowl of beer in his hand, threw it at the others face to quench his
smoking nose. If they grow angry, and will say I am a fool, I will laugh the
faster, and will say, there are not only but also: It is a good Decorum for a
man, to suit his words according to his subject. I have hitherto spent my
breath but to smoke (...) Tobacconists, I will now convert my speeches (...) be
of wisdom and judgment, to those that (...) away with their own affections,
but tha^ (...) distinguish between good and evil, truth and (...) and vice:
to them I say; There is no man that does use to take Tobacco, but he must take
upon him the imputation of some disease, or else he must acknowledge himself
to be a fool: for (besides the chargeable expenses, which draws deep in his
purse that plies it a pace) who would endure the unsavory taste, the loathsome
smell, the unseemly sight, whilst they are in taking of it, but for the cure of
some infirmity? And by the rules of Physic, there is no cure to be used, but
where there is cause: Now what hidden virtue a smoakie vapor may have for the
curing of all diseases is much to be doubted, or why should we not rather
suspect it to be more hurtful then helpful. There needs no other probation
but this: It is smoke, and I never heard that smoke was good for any thing,
unless to dry red herring. It is naught in the Kitchen, it is worse in the
Chamber, but for this smoke of Tobacco, the hatefulness of the smell does
argue the Antipathie it has against Nature: Now if the disease be but a Cough,
a Cold, a Rheum, a Distillation, or some such other like slight infimity (as
the Tobacconist will acknowledge none that be more loathsome) the medicine then
(in every wise consideration) is much more noisome then is the malady. I will
not say but that Tobacco may be medicinable for some diseases, and men that
have infirmities (if they find ease in it) may take and use it as an
Apothecaries Drugge: but if all be diseased that do use to take Tobacco, God
help England, it is wonderfully infected, and his Majesty has but a few
subjects that be healthful in his whole dominions.

But this excessive and immoderate taking of it without necessity, is not only
a sin before God, but a great shame in the sight of all good men, and there
is no sin that deserves more bitterly to be reprehended, nor no shame that
is more to be mocked and scorned. And now to speak truly what it is that
makes me so bitterly to inueigh against Tobacco. If it would please the
Reader advisedly to consider what a mass of money is yearly blown away in
the Tobacco pipe, It has been accounted the sum that may bie spent in England
in one year in Tobacco is sue hundredth and nineteen thousand three hundred
seventy five pounds, all spent in smoke, besides private spendings, besides
Gentlemen's (...), and Tauernes, Innes, and Alehouses He that gives to the
poor, lends to the Lord.
what huge sums of treasure are consumed in smoke within his Majesty's
dominions, it would be found a matter sufficient to give a yearly relief to
2000. thousand poor people that do now swarm in Cities, Towns, and
Countries, crying out but for a piece of bread to those that will spend pounds
in their stinking Tobacco, that will not give two pence to those poor
creatures that God himself has recommended unto us to be comforted,
cherished, and ^elecued.

But we have locked up our doors, and barred out mercy, and we have set open
the broad gate to let in ambitious pomp, excessive pride, and needless riot:
how sparing we be in that which God has commanded, to give unto the poor? how
prodigal again in the service of the Devil, to spend upon Tobacco? He that
gives to the poor, puts out for a large interest: God himself stands
bound as well for the use as for the principal. And he that thus lends, is
sure to be repayed, not with ten in the hundred, but with a hundred for ten.
How happy is he then that is open-handed to give to the poor? It is a small
substance, that cannot afford some pittance, if it be but a mite, and he that
can find out a penny for a pipe of Tobacco, might find out some modicum to
give unto the poor: and thrice accursed is that outward bravery, that is not
accompanied with some inward pity: and he which spends all in Tobacco shall
keep nothing but rottenness and smoke for his money.

I would be loath now to show my self ungrateful, to forget the place wherein
I have had so long residence, I mean the Realm of Ireland, from whence I
learned first to give the Hubbub, and where I hope I shall find some assistance
that will help to raise the cry, some upon cause of merriment, some upon cause
of grief, some that will laugh full merrily, some that will weep as bitterly,
some perhaps that may weep Irish, but some again that will weep good English.

Amongst many occasions whereby the Hubbub is raised in Ireland, there is not
any one more inducing at this present then that of Pride, Of Pride.
that within this sixteen or twenty years is crept into Ireland, and grown
into that excess, that the Hubbub thereby is arreared, and that as well in
mourning as in mirth. There is not a people under the face of Heaven, that be
of a more haughty and proud spirit then are the Irish: The Irish are naturally
proud.
proud minds they have ever had, but for any pride in their apparel, they
never knew what it meant, till they learnt it from the English. It was a great
dainties within these very few years, even amongst their greatest Nobility,
to see a cloak lined through with Velvet, they were not acquainted with any
great store of Satin suites, they did not glister in gold and silver lace,
they were not acquainted with a pair of silk stockings, they had no Velvet
Saddles, nor the greatest number of them so much as a pair of boots to draw
on when they were to ride. For their Ladies and Gentlewomen (even those that
were of the most great and honorable houses) they little knew what belonged to
this frizling, and this curling of hair: These be every Chambermaids attire,
and odicus in the sight of all modest and honest women.
and for this lousy commodity of perywigs, they were not known to the Ladies
of Ireland, they were not acquainted with these curling sticks, setting sticks,
smoothing yrons, they knew not what to make of a Picadilly, they neither used
pouldring nor painting stuff, they knew not what a Coach meant, nor scarce a
side saddle, till they learnt them from the English: The only pride of the
Irish was in hospitality and good-house-keeping, in spending amongst their
fellows, and giving entertainment. He that was a Countryman (even of the
meanest sort) would have been ashamed to sell either corn, cattle, or any
manner of victual, When Pride came up stairs, Hospitality ran out at window.
but to spend it in his house. Of all imputations, they could not endure to be
reputed for churles, they thought it a greater defamation to be called a
Churl, then to be called a Traitor.

But it is our English bravery, that has eaten up our Irelands hospitality;
for Pride and Hospitality could never yet dwell together under one roof. It is
Pride that has expelled Charity, it has converted our frugalitie into misery,
our plenty into penury: they have learned of the English, to break up
housekeeping, to rack their rents, to oppress their Tenants, and all to
maintain pride.

If I should speak of the enormitie in a particular manner, that within this
sixteen or twenty years has bin hatched up in Ireland together with this
pride, my wits would not serve me to set them down as they deserve; I will
therefore imitate the Painter, that was to figure forth the picture of the
sorrowful Agamemnon, who wanting skill to express the dolorous aspect of his
heavy countenance, drew a veil over his face, leaving it to the discretion of
the beholder, to conceive by imagination of that grief, which himself was not
able with his pensill to manifest.

We have for these many years, by a most gracious government, inioyed the
fruits of a most happy and quiet peace: but according to an old observation,
Peace brings plenty, Plenty brings pride, and Pride in the end is it that
brings in penury.

I will now a little accompany the Irish to give the Hubbub with them that do
merrily laugh, to see some women that are but lately dropped out of an Alehouse;
some that are but new crept out of a Laundry; and some that were scarce able to
pay for the hyre of a Carriers horse, to bring them from London to Chester,
that are now pranked up in that pomp, in that pride, in that bravery, and do
take that state upon them, that we are not able to know those Ladies and
Gentlewomen, neither English nor Irish that are of honorable estate, both by
birth and calling, from these proud and new vpstart changelings, that never
knew what Gentry meant, neither themselves, nor their mothers before them: we
cannot know the worthy from the unworthy, the woman of vndetected life, from
her that has bin tainted: the best mark is, she that by birth was most base,
will show her self to be most proud; and she that has greatest cause to
blush, will show her self be most bold and presumptuous; he that has but one
eye may see this, it is visible to every understanding.

They be these that have filled Ireland so full of new fashions, by their
strange alterations in their Ruffes, in their Cuffs, in their huffes, in their
puffes, in their muffes, and in many other vanities, that Ireland was never
acquainted withal, till these women brought them up.

He that should have come to a Lady in Ireland, but some five or six years
sithence, and have asked her if she would have had a Shaparowne, she would
have thought he had spoken bawdy, and would have wondered what he had meant.

They are now conversant to every Chamber-maide, and she that came but lately
out of a kitchen, if her Husband does bear an office (how mean soever) if she
be not suited in her Shaparowne, in her loose hanging gown, in her peticoates
of satin, yea and of velvet, that must be guarded with silver or gold lace,
from the knee down to the foot, her Husband may happen to hear of it, and
(peradventure) to fare the worse till she be provided: for at every meal she
will give him so many pout-pasties, and carpe pies, that she will make him
weary of his life.

The Peacocke when he marches in his majesty, setting up his glorious tail to
behold his own beauty, yet in his greatest pride and presumption, when he
beholds his black feet, he plucketh down his plumes with shame and
disgrace: but our Ladies and Gentlewomen have well enough provided that their
black feet shall never offend them, and therefore they do wear shoes of
all manner of colors: yet when they be in their greatest prime of pride, if
they would but look back into their own pedigree, they would come tumbling
down with Icarus, from the height of their presumption.

But his Majesty full little knows what harm he does to poor women, when he
makes them Ladies: Alas for pity, a woman is no sooner Ladified, but she has
lost the use of her legs for ever after; she is presently become so lame and
decrepit, that she cannot go to Church if she have not a Coach: And then the
good Knight her Sir Timothy Twirlepipe.
Husband (upon mere love and pity) either begges from the King, or proules
from the Country, to help to maintain his poor lame legged Lady. But I am
glad yet that I have some good news to impart amongst our Ladies and
Gentlewomen of Ireland, and they shall have them, as I heard them, be they true
or false, and thus they follow.

There was now lately, and now but very lately, amongst some other warlike
provisions that were sent out of England into Ireland for his Majesty's store,
there passed along the streets of Dublyn toward the Castle, three carts
together laden only with shouels and spades, which a young Gentleman espying,
called to another that was likewise standing fast by, and demanded of him, to
what use so many shouels and spades might be employed, which he thought were
enough, if they meant to dig an high way down to Hell: Nay (said the other)
there is another manner of employment for them then you speak of; for it is
intended there shall be a fair Coachway made to Heaven, that is now so
ouer-growne and choked up, that there has not a Coach passed that way, since
Eliah rode thither in his fiery Chariot, but now there is some hope the way
will be mended. I thought the jest somewhat profane, yet the news would be a
great ease for Ladies and Gentlewomen, that are grown so lame, that they
cannot travel on foot, that so they might go to Heaven as easily as they do
use to ride to Church.

I might speak of some other vices, the rather exceeding amongst the Irish, by
the ill example of the English: And although the Irish have vices enough of their
own, they need no encouragement to sin, yet Ireland for these many years has
bin the receptacle for our English ronnagates, that for their misled lives in
England, do come running over into Ireland, some for murder, some for theft,
some that have spent themselves in riot and excess, are driven over for debt,
some come running over with other men's goods, some with other men's wines, but a
great number now lately, that are more hurtful then all the rest, and those be
Recusants.

And for people that be of these dispositions, Ireland has little need to be
supplied from any place, that is so well replenished with it own store, that
it is better able to lend to others, then needful to borrow of any. But
amongst these graceless men, there have bin as ungracious and wicked women,
that when by their misled lives, they have infamed and made themselves so
notorious, that they were become odious to all honest company in England, have
then transported themselves into Ireland, where they have so insinuated
themselves amongst our Ladies and Gentlewomen, and not so much with the Irish,
but most especially with the English, and that amongst our gayest Ladies, by
whom they were so entertained, graced, and countenanced, that those women that
had lived before in good name and fame, and finding themselves to be but
slightly regarded, thought it more wisdom to forget their former modesty, and
for companies sake to follow the fashion.

If I should now speak of the perjury of Ireland, they would go near to give
me the Hubbub, and to laugh heartily at me, that would seem to find a fault at
that, which they do account to be neither sin nor shame. And to speak
truly, what account should they make of an oath, that have so many Massing
Priests at hand, that will dispense with more oaths in one hour, then a man
is able to swear in a whole afternoon.

Perjury, old Ale, and Aqua-vitae, are three commodities that be of great
antiquity in Ireland, but especially amongst the multitude of those that they
call Catholics: for Perjury and Popery are so linked and consorted together,
that they are as kind, and as near allied as Drunkenness and Lechery, the
one cannot stand without the assistance of the other, they be Coadiutors, not
to be separated. A damnable Religion this Popery, that still cries out, Swear,
forswear, hold no faith, What filthy forsworn Rascal will not be a Papist,
that what ever sin he does may be forgiven?
keep no promise, play the Traitor, eat up thy God, murder thy King, kill,
stab, poison, massacre, burn, torture, torment, saw in sunder, blow up with
Gunpowder: what act so villainous, so devilish, or so damnable, that a Papist
will not enterprise in the service of his Pope? But our poor Papists of
Ireland, have learned the Colliers Faith, that being examined of his belief,
answered still, That he believed as the Church believed, that could not say
truly that the Church was, nor knew not any one Article that is believed. So
they say they believe at their Fathers believed before them; now what belief
that is I will speak truly: They believe the whole story of the Bible, they
believe that Christ was the Son of God, that he was borne of the Virgin Mary,
they believe all the miracles whilst he was upon earth, they believe that he
was crucified upon the Cross, and they believe the whole story both of the old
and new Testaments; but they do not believe that all Christ did and suffered,
was enough for their salvation, but that they must merit that by their own
good works, by going on pilgrimage, by praying to Saints, and when they are
dead by suffering in Purgatory. They do not believe that Christ who came of
purpose to save the world, did perfect the work he came for, but that he left
it to a Massing Priest, to finish that which he himself had but begun.

So the Papists have a story Faith, but they have no saving Faith, nor no
belief to do them good: that which the Apostle has protested to be the
doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. that they embrace for the doctrine of Faith; we
maintain nothing, but what the Scriptures plainly approve, the Popes thread
bare assertion is enough for a Papist.

If we allege Scriptures, they quarrel as well with the Translation, as with
the Interpretation: if we allege Councels, they ask if the Pope have allowed
them: if we allege Fathers, if they speak against the Pope, they reject them:
but allege the Popes determinations (though never so much repugnant to the
truth) there they stick like resty Iades, they will not be drawn out of that
durty puddle: the sum of their Religion consists in the trash of unwritten
verities, and the whole dependencie of their Faith, in this only principle,
That the Pope cannot err.

Under the pretense of Peter's keys, the Pope brings in pick-locks, and leaving
to enter by Christ that is the door, he gives his Popelings scaling ladders,
Bulls of Scala Coeli, to scale the walls of Heaven, and like a company of
thieves, to break in at by-corners, and not to enter by the door. Our
Popelings of Ireland will needs protest themselves to be the Kings loving
Scyp-iacks (Subjects I should say) but to speak the truth, they are more liker
Scyp-iacks then Subjects, that do entertain and receive into their houses,
Priests, Friars, Jesuits, and such other of the Popes vermin, that are well
known to be the Kings vowed and protested enemies: do they not manifest
themselves to be reconciled to the Pope, that will obstinately impugn his
Majesty's Laws? that will not submit with Christ to give Caesar his due? they
may sometimes in public show pray for the King, but they are privily plotting
and working for their Pope.

Well Virtue, I would thou could now and then be a little choleric, and not
to suffer thy clemency to be wronged more then enough, and for these
dissembling hypocrites that do presume too far, if thou can not win their
hearts, it were good thou would rule their tongues.

Although I have thus spoken of Ireland in general, yet Ireland is as al other
Countries be, good people amongst the bad, and his Majesty has as loving and
as good Subjects of the Irish, as any he has in England, or elsewhere: Now
among these that be good, if there be a number that be hollow hearted, it is no
marvel: for never shall Christian Princes have loyal Subjects, where Massing
Priests are suffered to lurk in their Dominions: And in Ireland our Women
Catholics (for want of Apricocks) do preserve Priests, Friars, and Jesuits,
and keep them in their Closets.

The wives they for the Popes Cockerels are well enough known to be of an
excellent strain for breed, where they be well cherished, and much made of. A
massing Priest is such a medicine in a man's house that has a childbearing
woman to his wife, that where they be retained to lie lydgers, it is ten pound
to ten pence odds, that the good Wife, or Lady, or Gentlewoman (or whatsoere
she be) will prove fertile, her Husband shall want no heirs. I will conclude
with this caveat to my good friends: He that will eat eggs on Friday, he that
will go to Church on Sunday, he that will say his Paternoster in English, he
that will sing David's Psalms at a Sermon, he that will swear to the Kings
Supremacy, let him dwell where he will in any part of Ireland, he shall be
sure to be ill neighboured.

I have hitherto sported at the abuses of the time, and made my self merry
with the follies of this Age. I might yet speak of many other vanities that
deserve the Hubbub, and to be well laughed at; but I will here stop and lay a
straw, for I know all that I can either do or say is to no purpose: I do but
make the world mine enemy; for he that speaks against sin in this age,
either they mock at him, or they think him mad: Every Drunkard, every
Whoremaster, every Blasphemer, every Tobacconist, every Idolater, they are
angry with him that does reprove them. O damnable world! we dare not reprehend
sin, for offending of those that are but the very slaves of sin. We do
live as if there were no God, or at least, as if we had no souls to save, and
we are so lulled asleep in the cradle of security, that neither admonition or
threatening will serve to awaken us. We be like sick persons that are brought
so weak and feeble, that we can neither savor nor digest any thing that is
good.

Vice which now abounds in the greatest measure, we acknowledge in the
least; but the less it is thrust out, the more it eats and festereth within.
A gentle potion works but a weak effect in a strong body; and it is with
sin as it is with sores, some cannot be cured without corasiues. He is but an
vntidy Chyrurgian therefore, that will apply a gentle salve to a cankred sore.
We are grown to the very height of all kind of impiety, and sin is become to
be so supreme, that it thinks scorn to be reprehended.

But take this from me, thou that art so far spent, that thou live in
voluptuous idleness, and have no care of thy salvation, thou that cryest
peace, peace, and have God to be thine enemy, that is the Author of peace,
who has proclaimed open war against thy pride, against thy perjury, against
thy excess, against thy vanity, against thy briberie, against thy covetousness;
thou that art entered into a league with these and many other vices, and have
broken the truce that was between God and thee; thou that have no feeling of
thy sin, but that thou will still persevere in thine abominations, think thy
self to be deprived of grace, and take it for a sign that thy sins are
ripe, and thy confusion is not far off, but that Gods vengeance does wait and
attend thee with such plagues and punishments, as shall make thy hardened heart
to tremble. He that has not the feeling of his sins, must feel himself to
be a reprobate secluded from Grace and Mercy; for amongst the manifold mercies
of God, there is not a more singular mercy, then when he makes us to feel our
own faults, whereby we are drawn to repentance, and by repentance brought to
mercy. He that has not this feeling, shall feel the judgments of God: for
he that feels not his mercy, shall be sure to feel his justice.

And do not thou tremble to think of his vengeance? He that can wrap up
the heavens like a parchment scowle: he that can make the clouds rain down
plagues: he that can make us to refrain our meat, our drink, our sleep: he
that has the Heavens, the Earth, the Elements, and all to fight under his
Banner, is he not to be feared? has he not plagues in store (think thou)
and not only to afflict thee in this world, but in the world to come, to add
the increase of an endless and everlasting woe?

I think of my conscience, our Gallants of this age are grown into that
humor, they think it time enough to hearken unto God when their climactericall
year is past; but if neither the admonitions that are daily given us by godly
Preachers, the threatenings denounced against sin by the holy Scriptures, the
love of God, the fear the Devil, the joys of Heaven, the pains of Hell; if
none of these can move us to repentance, give the Devil his due, for he has
done his devour, he has brought the world to a good pass, he may now sit
down and rest him, and he may cry with the Angler: Hold hook and line, and
all is mine.

APHORISMS, With other witty sentences; the 24 of June. 1618.
A Tradesman lives all upon What lack you? for without Lack, he is a Beggar.

A Grocer is much subject to anger, for he oftentimes takes pepper in the nose.

A Lace-woman stands much upon her inches, for she measures her ware by the
yard.

A Butcher is the Farmer of death, for cutting of throats is his harvest.

A Cutler is a trade of terror, for he makes instruments of death.

A Miller must be cunning in his cogges, for his stones will not work without
them.

A Mercer is the maintainer of pride, for a silken coat makes a fool forget
himself.

A Tailor is the gain of measure, for he can purchase lands with his shreds.

A Dier is the figure of a Camelion, for he varieth so often in his Colors.

A Smith is the agent of fire, for his water will not temper his metal.

A Costermonger is a Merchant of wind, for his ware is a great breeder of the
chollicke.

A Fiddler is the honor of a cat, for he makes music with her guts.

A Fife is a wry-neckt Musician, for he always looks away from his Instrument.

A Drummer is the pride of noise, for he puts down all but thunder.

A Water-man goes backward with the world, and yet his living lies right before
him.

A Fletcher is a fool without a goose, for he cannot work without her feathers.

A Bow-maker is the care of the horn, for if he do not nocke well, his
string will not lie level.

A Tinker is a stopper of holes, but if his tools be naught, he cannot work
kindly.

A Cobbler deals always with All, for without All, he is nothing.

A Drunkard is a kind of Noune Adjective, for he cannot stand alone without
help.

A Brewer is the Chemist of malt, for he draws his spirit to a great height.

A Footman is the figure of Mercury, for he goes as if he had wings on his
heels.

A Coward is the shame of nature, for he will be afraid of a woman in the dark.

A Saylor is a sea-rider, but if his horse stumble on a rock, he may hap
never to run on land.

An Usurer is the Serpent with long teeth, for he will eat into a whole
Lordship.

A Purse-maker has the advantage of the Law, for he may cut a purse without
controlment.

A Broker is a money-hackney, for he will trot all day long for his hire.

A lester is the venom of wit, for he studies the knave, but to cozen the fool.

There is no creature so like a man, as an Ape, except a woman; for she will be
his counterfeit to a hair.

A Wife is the danger of if, for if she be not good, woe be to her husband.

A Maid is the blush of nature, because she wants the delight of reason.

A Widow is the consumption of love, for nothing will help her but a new
husband.

A wanton wench is of the nature of a Trowt, for it loves always to be tickled.

She that has the green sickness, if she will be well Recovered, she must
be well Couerde, for Cold is a nourisher of the disease.

A feminine factor is a kind of Flemish Merchant, for his ware lies most in
the Low Countries.

A Bowler is a kind of madman, for he speaks to a dead thing, that hears him
not.

A Lover is the maze of wit, for when he is in, he cannot get out.

A Parasite is the pick-purse of folly, for a wise man will shake him of like a
lowse.

A Fool is the grief of Time, for he knows not how to set him to work.

A Baker is a kind of dry Cook, for he rosts his meat without dripping.

A Lawndresse is the hope of sluttishnesse, and yet Cleanelinesse brings in her
commodity.

A Warrener is the watch of a Conie, for if he sleep the Tumbler will be at
his Burrow.

A Woodmonger is the Farmer of Cold, for a warm Winter brings him a bare
harvest.

A Wittoll is the shame of wit, for his patience is beyond his honesty.

A Carter is a Musician of the Air, for he makes tunes with his whistle.

A Prentise is the hope of Trade, for if his Master dye, his Mistress may make
him free of the Occupation.

A Widows Iourney-man is foreman of her shop, for commonly he has most charge
of her ware.

A Rich man commonly, is either proud or covetous, but if he be bountiful to
Virtue, he is the wonder of the world.

An honest man is the scorn of folly, but when thieves are hangde, true men
may go in peace.

A fair woman is a sweet object to the eye, but if she lay hold on the heart,
woe be to the whole body.

A foul woman is the subject of patience, for Reason must subscribe to
affection, to make a pleasure of necessity.

A poor man is the subject of Pity, but Charity is so cold, that Beggars are
seldom harbourd but in the stocks.

Hypocrisy is a cloak of Villainy, and he that wears it, is of the Devils
livery.

Better a little in the morning, then nothing all day after, and yet better be
fasting, then have an unwholesome breakefast.

It is written that there were nine Worthies in the World, and if the tenth be
a woman, it is pity she should be concealed.

Fat plough lands, and lean pastures make the great loaf, and the little
butter dish.

A faint friend is like a fearful enemy, for the one will do no good, and the
other dare no do hurt.

A hot promise and a cold performance, is like a fart, for it dies in the
breeding.

Adam was the first Man that was deceived by a Woman, but I fear Eve will not
be the last Woman, that will deceive a Man.

A house over a man's head is a good harbor in the rain, but, if it be on fire
about his ears, he were better be in the field.

If all faults were written upon foreheads, the world would be full of strange
faces.

If all the thoughts of sin should break out into an itch in the flesh, all
the nails in the world, would not be sufficient to scratch them.

A wise man will do Justice for virtues sake, but a fool like a feather is
carried away with the wind.

A Clarke of a Church is the Abridgement of a Minister, for he shuts up his
service in Amen.

A Sexton is a Musician of death, for he seldom towles the bell but to a
Funeral.

A Carrier is the post of Time, for he must make his return, if it be but for
letters.

A Schoolmaster is the terror of a Scholar, for if he can not say his lesson,
he must untruss.

The Gailor is the terror of the prisoner, for he tyrannizeth over the misery
of the distressed.

In shuffling of Cards a man may foist in a knave, but, if the fifth be away the
four will do no hurt.

An unthankful man is a villain in Nature, for the discharge of his duty is
without cost.

It is a wonder in wit, to see the force of will, how it subjects Reason, to
the command of Affection.

Love is too strong for any thing but it self, and yet, if Venus catch Cupids
head in her lapp, when she has lulled him asleep, she will blind him
before he wake.

When Vulcan will be tampring upon metal above his worth, the fault is not in
Venus, if Mars teach him better manners.

If Diana had not bin fained, she had bin an admirable woman; and yet, if she
had lived to this Age, she would have bin laughed at for her niceness.

If Acteon be too busy with Diana, let him look to his dogs, for if they
mistake his head they will feed upon his carcass.

If Cleopater had not killed her self for Anthony, a woman had never bin the
wonder of love.

FINIS.

