Here begins the life of the most myscheuoust Robert the devil which was
afterward called ye servant of god.
IT befell in time past there was a duke in nor mandye which was called ouberte
the which duke was passinge rich of goods and also virtuous of living and
loved and dred god above al thing and deed great almosse deeds and exceded
all other in ryghtwysnesse and justice / and most cheualrouse in deeds of
arms and noble acts doing. this duke held open house upon a cristmasse day
in a town which was called Nauerne upon the seyne To the which court came
all the lords and noble blood of Normandye. And because this noble duke was not
married his lords and nobles with one assente besought him to marye and take a
wife / to thentente that his lygnage might be multyplyed there by / and that
they might have a right heir to enheryte his lands after his dyscese. To
the which request this good duke answered and said. My lords what thing
that ye think best for me to do shall be done / upon a condition in that ye will
that I be married that ye puruey me a wife according to mine estate for and if I
should coueyte any heyer or noblyer of blood tha^ I am my self that might not
stand with right. and if I take one that is not of so noble an house as I am
that should be to me great shame and al my lygnage wherefore me think it were
better yt I kept me as I am than to do that thing that should not be mine
honest and afterward repent me. When thise words were spoken and well
considered by ye lords that stood there present then there rose up a wise
baron and said to the duke. My lord ye speak very wisely and like a noble
prince / but if it please your hyenesse to give audience and here me speak I
shall show you of a certain person / of whom ye shall enjoy your self to
here of her. and the which ye shall obtain I know well. Than answered the
duke and said. show me than who that person is / gracious lord said the
baron unto ye duke. the duke of bourgone has a daughter which excedeth all
other in beaulte curtesye and debonayre wisdom and good manners the which ye
may have if ye will desire her. for I know well there will no man say nay
thereto. To the which the good duke answered and said. that lady playsed him
right well and that the baron had given him good and wise counsel. And in
short time after that this lady was demanded of her fader the duke of
bourgone. Which gave him her wyllyngly. And then their bridale was kept
honorably which were to long to write.

How the duke of Normandy with great royalte brought his wife the daughter of
the duke of bourgon in to roan in Normandy after he had married her. woodcut
scenes from the life of royal couple
AFter yt the forsayde Duke had married the said lady he brought her with a
great company of barons knights and ladies with great triumph and glory in
to the land of normandye and in to the Cite of Roan / in which Cite she was
honorably received and with great melodye and there was great amyte between ye
bourgonyons and the normans which I let pass. for to come ye sooner to my
matter. ye foresaid duke and duchess lived to gyder the space of.xviii. year
without any child whether it were gods will it should be so. or it were
through their own defaulte I can not Judge it for it were better other while
that some people had no chylderne. and also it were better for the fader and
mother to get no chyldern then^e for lack of chastysynge / the chyldern and
fader and mother should al go to the devil. yet were these duke and duchess
devout people which loved and dread god and gave great alms and what time
this Duke would meddle with his lady he ever prayed to god to send him a
child to honor and serve god and to multyplye and fortefye his lygnage / but
another with prayer nor with alms deeds this good duke and duchess could get
no chyldern.

How upon a time this Duke and duchess walked allone sore complaining the one
to the other yt they could have no child together
Upon a time this duke and duchess walked and the duke began to show his
mind to his lady saying thus madame we be not fortunate in so much that we
can get no chylderne and they that made ye marriage between us both they did
great sin for I believe and ye had been given to an other man ye should have
had chyldern and I also if I had an other lady / this Lady understood hy^
saying she answered softly / saying thus good lord we must thank god of
that which he sends us and take it pacyently of what so ever it he.

How roberte the devil was conceived and how his mother gave him to the devil
in his co^cepcyon woodcut couple in bed
This duke upon a time rode out on hou^tynge in a great anger and pensifnes
for ough that he could have no child sore complaynage saying thus to himself
/ I see many wymmen have many fair children in which they enjoy greatly them
by which I see well that I am hated of god and marvel it is yt I fall not in
despair for it grieve the me so sore at my heart yt I can get no children hen
ye devil which is always ready to deceive man kind. tempted the good duke and
troubled his mind so that he wist not what to do nor say. thus moved he left
his hunting and went home to his palace were he found his lady also vexed and
moved as he come home he took her in his arms and kyssed her and did his will
with her saying his prayers to our lord. in this wise O lord jesus I beseech
the yt I may get a child at this hour by the which you may be honored
and served. but the lady being sore moved spoke thus folysshly and said in the
deuyls name be it in so much as god has not the power that I conceive and if
I be conceived with child in this hour I give it to the devil body and soul
and this same hour that this duke and duches were thus moved the said lady
was conceived with a man child which in his life wrought much mischefe as ye
shall here after here / but afterward he was converted and did great penance
and dyed a holy man as is showed here after.

How robert the devil was borne and what great pain his mother suffered in his
birth.
THis duchess as ye have herd before was conceived with the forsayde child
which she bare.ix. months as comunly women go with child / and ye may well
perceive yt this lady could not be delivered without great pain for she
traueylled more tha^ a month. and if good prayers had not ben and alms deeds
good works and great penance done for her / she had deyed of child for all
the ladies and gentylwome^ that were with her wened she would have perysshed
and deyed in trauayly^ge. wherefore they were greatly abashed and aferde with ye
merueylouse noise and tokens that they herd and se in the birth of the said
Robert the devil in that this child was borne / the sky waxed as derke as
though it had been night as it is showed in old chronicles that it tho^dred and
lyghtned so sore that men thought the firmament had been open and all the
world should have perysshed. And there blewe so much wind out of the.iiii.
quarters of the world and was such storm and tempest that all the house
trembled so sore yt it shoke a great piece of it to the earth i^ so much yt al
they that were in the house wened yt ye world had been at an end and yt they with
the house and al should have so^ken but in short time it pleased god that all
this trouble ceased and the weder clered up and ye child was brought to the
church to be crystned which was named Robert. This child was a large of
stature at his birth and he had been a year old whereof the people had great
wonder. and as this child was a bery^ge to the church to be crystened and
home ayene it never seaced cryenge and houlynge. and in short space he had
long teeth wherewith he bote ye norysshes pappes in such wise that there was
no woman durst give him souke for he bote of the head of their breasts.
Wherefore they were feyne to give him souke and to bring him up with an horn
and wha^ he was twelve month old he could speak and go allone better than
other chylderne that were three year old. and the elder that this child
roberte waxed ye more curster and wyckedder he waxed for as soon as he could
goo allone there was another man nor woman that could rule hy^ and wha^ he
found or could come by any chylderne he smote and bote and cast stones at
them and brake their arms and legs and necks and scratte out their eyes
out of their heddes and there in was all his pleasure and the lords and
gentylles that saw this had great delight there in wenynge to them it had
been but the youth and wantonness.

How all the chylderne with one assente named this child Roberte the devil.
THis child with in few years grow marueilously and more and more encresed
of al and boldness and shrewdnes / and set by no correccyon but was ever
smytinge and castinge and cursed deeds doing to all the^ that he might mete
in the streets in so much that there was another man ne woman nor child that
durst mete with hy^ but fled a way for fere and dread as the devil flees
from ye holy water. and some time there gadred to gyder all the boys of the
street to fight with him / but when they see him come they durst not abide
him / but cried one to an other here comes the wode Robert an other many cried
here comes the cursed mad robert and some cried here comes robert the devil
and thus cryenge and howly^ge they voyded all the streets for they durst not
abide and look hy^ in ye face / and forth with the chylderne yt knew hy^ with
one assent called him robert ye devil which name he kept duringe his life and
shall do as long as the world stondeth / wha^ this child was. seven. year
old or there about the duke his fader / seeing and considering his wicked
conditions called him and said unto hy^ thus my sone me think it necessary
and time / for me to get you a wise scole master and put you to scole / to
learn virtues and doctrine for ye be of age enough and when the duke had thus
said / he betoke his sone to a good discret and wise scole master to rule and
teache him al good conditions and manners

How robert killed his scole master.
IT fell upon a day yt his scole master should chastyse robert and would have
made him to have left his cursed condicio^s and mischeuous deeds but robert
gate a murderer or bodkin and thrast his master in the belly yt his guts fell
at his fete and so fell down deed to the earth. and robert threw his book
against the walls in despyte of his master saying thus now have I taught the
that never priest nor clerk shall correct me nor be my master and from thens
forth there could no scole master be found that was so bold to take in
hand to teache and correct this Robert but were glad to let him allone and
have his own ways / and he put himself to vice and myschef and curssidnes
and to no manner of virtue nor grace nor none would ne learn for no man living
/ but mocked with god and holy church and when he came in to the church and
found the prestes and clerks singy^ge gods service / he came preuely
behind them and cast ashes or dust in to their mouths in dispyte of god /
And when he saw any body in the church besy in their prayers he would to me
behind the^ and give the^ a sowse in the neck that their hedes kyssed the
ground in so much that every creature banned and cursed him for his wicked
deeds doing / And the noble Duke his fader seeing this myscheuous disposicyon
and cursed life of his sone he was so angry and sore vexed with him self that he
wysshed him self many times deed and out of the world. And the duchess in
like wise was greatly moved and much sorrowful / by cause of the mischeuous life
of her sone. saying to her lord in this wise my lord our sone is now of
sufficient age / and able to bear arms wherefore me think it were best that
ye made him knight if than he would remember thordre of knighthode whereby he
might change his condicyons and leave his wickedness. The Duke was here with
all content. And Roberte had at that time but eyghtene year of age.

How robert the devil was made knight by the Duke his fader.
THis duke assembled upon a hye feast of whit sontyde al his barons and nobles
of his land and the next of his kyn and friends in ye presence of whom he
called his sone to him saying thus. herke my sone robert and take heed what I
shall tell you. It is so that by thaduyse of my counsel and good fre^des I am
now aduysed to make you a knight to thentent that ye with other knights
should be conuersau^t occupye and haunte cheualrye and knights co^dicyon to
thentente that ye shall leave and foryete your vices and vylaynous works and
most hartful life Robert herynge this answered his fader the duke. I shall do
your commandment but as for the order of knyghthode I set no thing thereby.
for there is no degree shall cause me leave my condicio^s nor make me to change
my life nor to break my will For I am not in that mind to do any better than I
have done hitherto / nor alter mine old costume nor to amend for no man
living it was the costume of that land that on whitsonyght the church should
be watched and tended with much people. And theder ran this robert like a
mad man betinge and bonchy^ge and ouerthrowynge al them that came in his
way / feringe another god nor ye devil. and he was never still of all that
night and in the morning when it was day Roberte was made knight. Then
this duke commanded a tournayment or iustynge to be made in which tornaymente
the said robert wrought maystries and deed meruaylous deeds of arms in
kyllinge and berynge down horse and man no man refusinge nor ferynge / but
bare all to the ground that came in his way. of some he brake arms and some
legs some their necks or bare them through and killed them out of the hand.
from him went none unmarked in which iustynge ye said robert killed x.
horses / the duke heringe how his sone myscheued and murdered all yt came in to
his hondes he went himself in to the tournaymente and commanded upon a great
pain / yt every mansholde sease and run no more. then Robert rored for
anger as he had been wode and would not obey his fader commandment but abode
still in ye fylde smyty^ge and no thing sparinge much worse than he did
before. and had no pite another of horse nor man so that he killed of ye most
valiau^tes knights that thither were comen to tournaye. than every man cried
upon Robert to sese but it auailed not for he would not sese for no man nor
there was no man so bold to encou^tre him. for because yt he was so strong
this robert did so much mischefe that all the people were in a rore and
assembled all with one assent in a great anger and ran to the duke
co^playnynge say^ge thus lord ye be greatly to blame yt ye suffer your sone to
do as he does we beseech you for gods sake to find some remedy for hy^ to
cause him to sease or leave his misrule.

How Robert the devil rode about the country of normandy robbynge stelinge
morderynge and bre^nynge chyrches abbayes and other holy places of religion and
forsy^ge of women and rauisshy^ge of mayde^s.
Than when Robert se there was no man more left in ye fylde and that he could
do no more mischefe there. than he took his horse with the sporre to ye
country to seek aue^tures and began to do every day more harm than other.
for he forssed and rauysshed maidens and wives without nombre he killed
murdered so much people yt it was pity / also he robbed chyrches abbayes
hermitages and fermes. there was not an abbaye in all the country but he
robbed chyrches abbayes hermitages and fermes. there was not an abbaye in all
the country but he robbed and pylled the^. these wicked deeds of Robert came
to the eres of the good duke. and all they that were thus robbed and rebuked /
came to complain of the great woodcut monk and two gentlemen outrage and
suppression done by Robert and stylle was doing through out all ye country.
One said my lord your sone has forssed my wife. an other said he has
rauisshed my daughter. the other said he has stolen my goods and robbed my
house. and the other said he has wounded me to death with many semblable
offenses. Thus lay they grievously complaining before the good Duke that great
pity it was there for to se ye good duke hery^ge the grievous and lamentable
complayntes of the great murdre done. by roberte his sone thorough out all the
land of Normandye. Than his heart was subpressed with so great sorrow and
thought that the salt t^res breast out of his eyes. and wept tenderly and
said. O right wise god creatoure of heaven and earth. I have so many times
prayed the to send me a child and all my delight was to have a sone. to
thentente yt I might of him have great Joy and solace And now I have one. the
which does my heart so much pain sorrow and thought that I wot in no wise
what to begynn^ nor to do nor say thereto. but good lord only I cry upon the
for help and remedy to be a little released of my pain and sorrow.

How the Duke sent out men of arms for to take roberte his sone the which
robert took them all and put out their eyes in despite of his fader and sent
them so home again. woodcut battle scene
THere was a knight of the dukes house which perceived yt this good Duke was
very sorrowful and pensyfe and knew no remedy then^c this knight spoke and
said to him. My lord I would advise you to send for your sone robert and let
him be brought to your presence / and there before your nobles and next
friends to rebuke him. and than command hy^ to leave his cursed life. and if he
will not / ye to do justice upon him as on a strange man / here to the Duke
consented and thought the knight gave him good counsel. and incontinent he
sent out men to seek robert. and in any wise they to bring him to his
presence this robert herynge of the complayntes made of all the people upon
him unto his fader and that his fader had sent out men to take him wherefore
al them that he could get he put out their cyen / and so he took the men
that his fader send for him and put out their eyes in despite of his fader and
when he had thus blinded his faders servants he said to them in mocking
syrs now shall ye sleep the better go now home to my fader and tell him that
I set little by him and because he sends you to bring me to hy^ therefore to
his dispyte I have put out your eyes. and therefore was robert hated both of
god and of the world and his viceous and most cursed works were openly
known through out all crystendome. These poor servants which the Duke
had sent for robert his sone / came home with great pain and in great
heaviness saying thus o good lord see how your sone robert that ye deed send
us fore has arrayd us: and blinded us. the good Duke seeing his men in this
case / he wexed very angry and full of ire and began to compass in his mind
how and by what means he might come by to take ye said robert his sone

How the duke of normandye made a proclamacion thorugh out his land. how men
should take robert his sone with all his company and bring him euerychone to
prison.
THan spoke a wise lord of ye dukes counsel saying thus my lord take no more
thought nor be no more pensyfe. for ye shall never se the day yt robert your
sone will come in your presence in so much as he has done so great and
greuouse offenses to your commons and your own messengeres that ye send for
hy^ but it were of necessyte for you to correct and punysshe him for his great
offenses that he daily does and has done for we find it written yt the law
byndeth you there to. The duke willing to accomplysshe the council of his
lords send out messangers in all the haste / unto all ports good towns and
barons / thorugh out all his dukedom commau^dynge on his behalf all shryues
bayllifes or other officers to do their vttermoste dylygence to take robert his
sone prisoner and to hold and keep him surely in prison with all his company
and affinite. wha^ robert herd of this proclamacion he with all his company
were sore aferde of the Dukes malice. and when roberte see this was almooste
out of his wit for wode anger and whetted his teeth like a bore and swear a
great oath saying thus that he would have open war ayenste his fader and
subdewe and spyll all his lordshyppe

How robert made hy^ a strong house in a derke thycke wyldernes where he
wroughte myschefe without comparison and above al mesure or naturell reason
woodcut of home construction
THen when robert had herd and known of ye forsayde things he let make in
a thycke wild foreste a strong house where in he made his dwelly^ge place and
in this place it was wild and strong and more meter for wild beestes than
for any people to abide in / and there robert assembled and gadered for his
company all the most mischeuoste and falsest thieves yt he could find or here
of in his faders land to wete morderes thieves street robers rebels brenners
of chyrches and houses forsers of women robbers of chyrches and the most
wyckedeste and cursedeste theuis that were under ye son robert had gadered to
do him service whereof he was capteyn and in the forsayde wilderness Robert with
his company did so much mischefe yt no tu^ge can tell he mordred merchants
and al yt came by ye way no man durst look out nor come a broad for fere of
robert and his company of whom every man was a ferde. for they robbed all the
country in so much yt no man durst look out / but that they were killed of
robert or his men also poor pylgremes yt went on pylgremage were murdered by
robert and his company in so much yt every man fled from them like as ye
sheep fled from ye wolf for they were as wode as wolves warrynge sleinge al
yt they could come by. and thus robert and his company led an ungracious life.
also he was a great glotte^ of etynge and drinkinge and never fasty^ge though
it were never so great a fasty^ge day. In lent or on ymberdayes heete flesh
as well on fridayes as on so^dayes. but after he had done all this mischefe he
suffered great pain as here after ye shall here

How robert the devil killed.vii. heremytes.
IT befell upon a time yt robert which ever Imagened and studied in his mind
how and by what mean he might do most myschef and murdre as he had been ever
acustomed before he rode out of his house or theuisshe neste to seek his pray.
and in the myddel of the wode he saw.vii. holy heremytes to whom he rode as
fast as he could with his sword redydrawe^ like a man out of his mind and
there he slew this.vii. heremites ye which were bold and good men but they
were so virtuous and holy yt they suffered the marterdom for ye love of god and
wha^ he had thus slain these.vii. devout me^ he spoke i^ mockage and said I
have found here a neste of a many pope holy horsons whom I have shaven the^
crounes I trow they be dronke they were wont to knele upon their knees and
now they lie upon their backs there did robert a cursed deed and blood
shedynge in despyte of god and holy church. and after that he had done this
myscheuous deed he rode out of the wode like a devil out of hell semynge
worse thanne wode and his clothes were all dyed read with the blood of ye people
yt he had murdered and slain. and thus a rayed he rode over the feldes. and
clothes hondes face all were read of the blood of the holy heremytes. Which he
had so pyteously murdered in the wilderness

How robert the devil rode to his mother the Duchess of normandye being in ye
castle of darques where she was come to a feste
ROberte rode so far and so long that he came to the castle of darques /
but he met before with a shypherde which had told hy^ that his mother the
duchess should come to the said castle to dinner. and so he rode thither but
wha^ robert came there and the people se hy^ come they ran away from him like
the hare from the hou^des one ran and shet hy^ in his house / an other ran
in to the church for fere. Robert seeing this that all the people fled from him
for fere / he began to sygh in his heart and said to himself. O almighty god
how may this be ye every man thus flees from me Now I perceive that I am
the most myscheuouste and curssedeste wretch of this world / for I sent
better to be a Jew or a sarasyne / than a christian man and I see well that I am
worste of all ill. Alas said robert the devil I may well hate and curse mine
ungracious and cursed life. wherefore I am worthy to be hated of god and the
world in this mind heaviness came Robert to the castle gates and alyghte
down from his horse / But there was no man that durst abide about him nor
come nygh him to hold his horse and he had no servant to serve hy^ but let
his horse stand there at the gate / and drew out his sword which was all
blody. and incontinent took the way unto the halle where the duchess his
mother was wha^ ye duchess saw Roberte her sone come in this wise with a
blodysworde in his hand. she was sore a ferde and would have fled away
from him for she knew well his conditions. Robert seeing that every body did
flee from him and that his own mother would have fled in like wise. he called
unto her pyteously a far and said. sweet lady mother be not aferde of me / but
stand stylle till I have spoken with you and flee not from me in the worship
of crystes passion. than roberts heart being full of thought and repe^tau^ce
went nygher her. saying thus: d^re lady mother I pray and require you tell me
how and by what manner or by whereby comes it that I am so vicyous and curste
for I know well I have it other of you or of my fader / wherefore incontinent I
hertely desire and pray you that ye show me the troth here of.

How the Duchess desyrede / Robert her sone / to smite of her head. and than
she told him how she had given him to the devil in his concepcyon
THe Duchess had greatly maruaylinge wha^ she herd her sone speak these words
and pyteuously weeping. With a sorrowful heart saying thus to him. My dear sone
I require you hertely yt ye will smite of my head. this said the lady for very
great pity that she had upon him for because she had given hy^ to the devil in
his concepcyon robert answered his mother with an heavy and a pyteuous there
saying thus. O dear mother why should I do so that so much myschefe have done
and this should be the worste deed that ever I did. But I pray you to show
me that I desire to wete of you / then the Duchess herynge his hertely desire
told unto him the cause why he was so vicious and full of myschefe and how
she gave hy^ to the devil in his concepcion. herself myspraysynge / said thus
unto robert. O sone I am the most unfortunate woman living and I knowledge
that it is all my fault that ye be so cursed and wicked a lyeuer.

How robert the devil took leave of his mother.
ROberte herynge his moders saying he fell down to ye earth in a swoune for
very great sorrow and lay still a long while. than he remeued ayene and came
to himself and began bytterly to weep and complain saying thus. The fendes of
hell be with great diligence to apply them to get and have me body and soul.
but now from this time forth I forsake them and all their works and will never
do more harm but good. and amend my life and leave my sins and do penance
therefore tha^ after this Roberte spoke to his mother / the which was in great
sorrow and heaviness saying thus. O most reuerente lady mother. I hertly
beseech and require you that it will plese you to have me recommau^ded unto my
fader for I will take the way to Rome to be assoyled of my sins / which be
innumerable and to abhomynable to recounte. Therefore I will never sleep one
night there I sleep an other till I come at Rome and god will.

How robert departed from his mother and rode in to the wilderness where he
found his company.
RObert in great haste light upon his horse and rode to the wode where he had
left his company the which he found. The Duchess made great lamentacion
for her sone robert which had taken his leave of her. And said many times to
her self. Alas what shall I do for it is all my fault that robert my sone has
done so much myschefe and in the mean while yt the Duchess made this sorrow
and bewayllynge for her sone roberte in came ye duke in to the chamber and as soon as she saw him she began to tell hy^ of his sone robert piteuously
weeping / showing him what he had said and done. than the good Duke axed her /
whether robert were dysposed to leave his vicious life. and if he were sorry for
his great offenses / ye my lord said she he is sore repe^taunte. then
began the duke sore to sygh and said Alas it is all in vain yt roberte
thinks to do for I fere he shall never have power to make restytucyon / of
the hurtes and harms ye which he has done in his life. but I beseech
almighty god to prolonge his life and send him time and respyte that he may
amend his life and do penance for his sins

How robert told his company he would goo to Rome for to be assoyled of his
sins.
NOw is robert come ayene to his company which he found syttinge at dinner
and when they saw him they rose up and did hy^ reverence tha^ roberte began
to rebuke them for their vycyous living saying thus my well-beloved felawes. I
require you in the reverence of god / that ye will harken and take heed to this
that I shall show you / ye know well how yt we have led hitherto an
ungracious and most viciouse life. robbed and pylled chyrches / forced women
/ rauysshed maidens / robbed and killed merchants. We have robbed and killed
nonnes holy aunkers priests clerks / and many other people without nombre
have we murdered and robbed. Wherefore we be in the way of endless dampnacion
except that god have mercy upon us. Wherefore I require you euerychone for
gods sake yt ye will change your opinion and leave your abhomynable sins
and do penance therefore for I will go to rome to be shryuen and to have
penance for my sins. When Robert thus said one of the thieves rose and said
to his company in mockage. now syrs take heed the fox will be an aunker for
he begins to preche. Robert mocketh fast with us for he is our capiteyn and
does more harm allone than al we do how think ye will he be long thus holy.
yet said Robert gentyl felawes I pray you for gods sake leave your co^dicions
and thy^ke on your soul and do penance for your most fellest sty^ky^ge
sins and cry upon our lord for mercy and foryeuenesse and he will foryeue
you wha^ Robert had said thus than spoke to hy^ one of the thieves and said I
pray you master be in pease / for it avails not what ye say do but spend
your time in waste / for I nor my company will not amend our life for no man
living / And all his company commanded his saying and sayden all with one voice
he says true for and we should dye / we will not leave our old condy cyons
and cursed life. but and if we have done much hurt hither to we will do much
more here after.

How Robert the devil killed all his company.
RObert herynge the fast and wicked opynion and myscheuous purpose of his
company wexed angry and thought if they remain and abide stylle here they
will do great myschef and murdre but he went preuely unto the door and shet it
fast and gatte a great staff and laid one on the thieves on the head / that
he fell down deed to the earth. And so he served one after an other. till he
had killed them euerychone. then said he thus to them / syrs I have rewarded
you after your desert and by cause ye have done me good service I have given
you good wages. for who so ever serves a good master he is like to have good
wages when Roberte had thus done he would have burnt ye house. but he
considered the great good that was there in wherefore he let it stand and
shette fast the doors about and locked them and brought a way the key with
him to his fader.

How Robert the devil sent the key of his chief house or theuysshe lodginge to
his fader the Duke. of normandye and how he went to Rome.
Then when Robert had done all that said is he took up his hand and blessed
hy^ and rode through the forest the next way to Rome. Roberte rode that day
so long till that the night came on and was passing sore enho^gred for he had
eten no mete of all that day / and fortuned to come rydyng by an abbaye
which he had many times robbed. and the abbot was his kynnessman and Roberte
rode in to this abbaye and said never a word but when the monks se Robert
come they were sore a ferde and ran away. saying one the an other here
comes the ungracious Roberte. the devil has brought him hither. when Robert
herd this and se them al run away from him than his sorrow began to renew
and said in himself in sore syghinge and sorrowful heart. I may well hate my
cursed life for every man flees from me and I have spente my time vngracyously
and in evil and cursed works and there with all he rode streyghte to the
church door and alyghte down from his horse devoutly saying his prayers to
god in this wise. O lord Jesus christ I most sinful wretch and vessel of
all stinkinge sins / I pray the yt thou wylt have mercy on me and preserve
and keep me from all daungeres and peril / And then he went and spoke to
the abbot and monks so swetly and so pyteuously and amyably yt they began to
come toward hy^ to whom robert said pytously wepinge knelynge on his knees.
my lord I knowledge myself that I have grievously offended you. and have done
great harm and iniurye unto your abbay. Wherefore I require and pray you all
in the honor of crystes passion of forgyuenesse. and than he spoke to the
abbot in this wise my lord abbot I pray you hertely have me reco^maunded to
my lord my fader the duke of Normandye / and deliver him this keye of the
chief house where I have dwelled with my company ye which I have all slain.
to thentent that they should do no more harm. and in that house lies all the
goods and tresoure that I have stolen from you and other me^ wherefore I am
right sorry. and beseech you of forgyuenesse / and I pray you that this good
may be rendered ayene unto such people as they have been longinge to before.
robert abode ye night in ye abbay but in the morning erly he went thens. and
left behind him his horse and his sword where with all he had done great
myschefe. and so he went allone toward Rome. And on the same day rode ye
abbot to the duke of normandye and gave him the keye yt Robert had delivered
hy^ / and told the duke how he was gone to Rome. tha^ ye duke gave al ye poor
people their goods again yt they had lost before as far as it could be
found in the chief house. we will sease of ye duke and the abbot and speak of
robert which gooth to rome ward allone with great devotion.

How Roberte came to rome for remyssyon of his sins
RObert went so long over hills and dales allone till at last with great pain
and pouerte he came to rome in to ye cite upon a shere thursdaye at night and
on the friday after ye pope himself said ye deuyne service as the custom was
in saint peter's church / and Robert presed fast to have comen to ye pope /
but ye popes servants se yt robert presed so sore to come to ye pope they
smote hy^ and had hy^ go back but ye more they smote hy^ ye more he presed and
thro^ge to get nygh the pope and so at last he gate to hy^ and fell down on
his knees at ye feet of the pope crye^g with a loud voice say^ge thus o holy
fader have mercy on me and thus lay robert crye^ge long while the people yt
were by the pope were angry yt Roberte made such a noise and would have dryue^
hy^ thens but ye pope sey^ge roberts great desire had pite upon hy^ and said
to his people late him alone for in all yt I can se he has great deuocio^
wherefore ye pope conmau^ded them al to hold there pese yt he might ye betr
here and understand robert than said Robert to the pope in this manner / o holy
fader I am ye most and the greteste sinner of all this world / the pope took
Robert up by the hand and said to him good friend what is your desire and what
eleth you to make all this noise than said Roberte o holy fader I beseech you
to here my co^fessyon / for and I be not by you assoyled I am dampened world
wtouten end for it is marvel yt the devil bears me not away body and
soul seeing the foul innumerable and stynky^ge sin yt I am laden and
bounden wtall more than any man living / and in so much yt ye are he yt
gives remedy help and comfort to them yt have need / therefore I humbly
beseech you for ye passion of our lord Ihesu christ to here and purge me of my
most mortal and abhomynable sins whereby I am dereuered and departed fro all
ye Joys of heaven and am wors tha^ a Jew / ye pope hery^ge this demed and
thought in himself whether this were roberte ye devil / and axed hy^ / sone be
ye roberte ye which I have herd so much speaking of / the which is worst of
al men / tha^ roberte answered and said ye / than ye pope said I will assoyle
you but I co^iure you in ye name of god yt ye do no man harm. The pope and all
that were about hy^ were aferde to look upon roberte / roberte fell on his
knees with great devotion and repentance of his sy^nes saying holy fader nay
as long as I live I promise god and his blessed mother / will I never hurt
christian creature / than in contynent ye pope took roberte aparte and herd his
co^fessyon to whom roberte shroue him devoutly she wynge how his mother had
given hy^ to the devil in his concepcyon whereof the pope was sore aferde.

How the Pope sent Roberte three mile without Rome to an holy heremyte. woodcut
hermit and man
THe Pope this herynge was greatly abashed and blessed hy^ and said to roberte
/ my dear sone ye. must go three mile without the town and there ye shall find
an heremyte which is my goostly fader and to hy^ ye shall confess you and
say that I send you to hy^ and he shall asoyle you / roberte answered ye pope
I will go with a good will / and took his leave of the pope saying god give me
grace to do yt may be to the health of my soul / so yt night roberte abode in
rome for it was late / and in the morning erly robert went out of rome toward
the place where he should find the heremyte and so he went so long over
hills and dales with great desire to be shryue^ of his sins yt at last he
come where ye heremyte dwelled whereof he was glad / and came to the heremyte
and told hy^ how ye pope had sent him theder to be confessed of hy^ tha^ the
heremyte said he was hertly welcome. and with in a while robert began to
confess and show his sins and first he showed the heremyte how his mother
had given him to the devil in his concepcion and how he smote the chylderne in
his youth or he could goo allone and how he killed his scole master and how
many knights he killed at ye iusty^ge wha^ his fader made hy^ knight and he
rode through his faders lord robbyng and stelynge forsynge of women rauisshy^g
of mayde^s and how he chraste out ye eyes of his faders me^ in dispyte of hy^.
and how he had killed.vii. heremites and shortly showed him al ye offenses yt
ever he did sethe^ ye hour of his birth till yt time. Whereof ye heremyte had
maruayle. but he was glad yt Robert was repe^tau^t for his sins. wha^ robert
had thus confessed hy^ ye heremyte said to hy^ / sone this night ye shall a bide
here and to morrow I shall give you good counsel of yt ye have to do robert yt
was so cursed and furious mischeuous ferfull cruel and proud as a lion. is now
as ge^tyl and curteys and sweet of words and wise in his deeds as ever was any
duke or prince living the^ Robert was so weary and ouercomen with goy^ge yt he
could another ete nor drink. but went aparte and said his prayers to almighty
god prayenge hy^ through his endeles mercy / yt he would keep him from ye fe^des
te^ptacyon and deceyte. ye heremyte made roberte to lie yt night in a little
chapel yt stood nigh his celle and the heremyte prayed al yt night to our lord
for Robert which saw yt he had great repe^tau^ce for his sins and thus
prayenge the heremyte fell a sleep.

How god sent an au^gel to the heremyte to show him the penance that he
should give to Roberte for his sins.
THe heremyte bey^ge thus a sleep there came to him an angel saying to him in
this wise. holy fader here and take heed of ye message yt god commands. if
yt Robert will be shryuen of his sy^nes / he must keep and counterfete the
ways of a fool and be as he were dombe. and he may ete no manner of mete / but
that he can take it from ye dogs and in this wise without speaking and
co^terfetinge the fool and no thing etynge but what he can take from the
dogs must he be till time that it shall please god to show him that his
sin be foryeue^ and with this visyon the heremyte a woke out of his sleep
and began to remember himself of this that said is / and thanked our lord of
his gracious message done to hy^ and wha^ the day began to apere yt heremyte
called robert unto him. with fair and confortable words saying to him my friend
come hither to me. and incontinent robert came to him with great devotion him
co^fessynge. and when robert had shryue^ him the heremyte said thus unto him
sone I have thought and advised me of ye penance yt ye shall have to get
remyssyon of your sins / In which ye have grievously offended against god that
is to wete ye must cou^terfayte and play the fool / and ye may ete no mete
but that ye can take it from the dogs when men give them ought / also ye must
keep you as dumb without speech and lie among dogs for thus has god this
night commanded me by his angel to give you this for your penance and ye
may offend no man the while your penance be a doing / and this penance ye
must do for your sins in manner and form as I have told you till such time
as it shall please our lord to send you word that your sins be forgyuen /
roberte being merry and glad thanky^ge our lord Ihesu christ that he was
assoyled of his sins and had therefore so light penance as him thought that
it was. Now takes Roberte leave of the heremyte / and gooth to do his great
and sharp penance which he held but light remembrynge his great abhomynable
stynkynge sins that he has done all the days of his life this was a fair
miracle / for he that was so vycyous and so furyous a rebel and proud a
sinner / is now so full of virtues and fair condycyons and as tame as a lamb.

How Roberte the devil took his leave of the heremyte and went again to Rome
to do his penance that ^he heremyte had given him.
ROberte has taken leave of the heremyte and is gone toward Rome there for to
do his penance. And when he came in to the cite he began to lepe and run
about the streets making himself as though he had been a fool / and the
childeren in the streets se Roberte run in this wise and they after him
shoutynge and cryenge and casting with mire and derte and all such fylth as
they found in the streets and the Burgeyses of the cite lay in their wyndowes
and laughed and mocked with roberte Than when roberte had thus played the fool
in rome a certain season he came on a time to ye Emperors court and se that
the gate did stand open and he ran straight in to the hall / and there he
Ietted up and down from the one end to the other sometime he went fast and
sometime softely and than he hopped and ran and other while he stood even
stylle / but he stood not long in one place. The Emperor seeing Roberte thus
playenge the fool. He said to one of his servants / se yonder is a fair and
a well favored young man / me thy^keth he is out of his mind the which is
great damage / for he is fair and a well made man / go and give hy^ mete.
This Emperors servant did as he was commanded and called roberte to him and
would have given hy^ some mete / but roberte would another ete nor drink / and
while roberte sat thus at the table the emperor saw one of his hou^des which
was bytten with an other dog / wherefore the Emperor cast him a bone and the
dog caught the bone and began to gnawe there on and roberte sey^ge yt lepte
from the table and took it from him / but the dog fought with roberte for the
bone and held fast the one end and roberte ye other end / but roberte se it
would be no better / but set him down on the ground and gnewe on the one end
of the bone and the dog on ye other themperoure and they that looked here on /
laughed at robert and ye dog. but Robert did so much yt he gatte the bone
allone and lay and gnewe it for he was sore enhongred. themperoure seeing that
Robert was so sore enhongred he cast to an other dog an hoole lofe. but
robert took it from him and brake it in two pieces and gave the dog half for
by cause he gatte it for the dogs sake. the emperor seeing this lough there at
and said to his servants. We have here now the most folysshe fool and the
verayst nedy that ever I saw for he takes the dogs mete from the^ and eteth
it himself thereby a man may perfytely know that he is a naturell fool all that
were in the hal gave the dogs as much mete as they might ete to thentente yt
robert might fill his belie with the^ and when he had filled his belly while he
rose up and walked up and down in the hall with a staff in his hand /
smiting upon stoles and benches like as and if he had been a very innocente
fool. And thus walking he looked on every side and saw adore where men went
in to a fair gardyne in ye which gardyne there stood a fair fontayne or well
and theder went Robert to drink for he was evil churste and when night came
on / robert followed the forsayde dog where so ever he went the which was
acustomed to lie every night under a steyre and there he went and laid him
down and robert followed him under ye steyre and laid him down by the dog.
themperoure seeing this had compassyon on Robert and commanded that men should
bear him a bed / that he might lie there upon to sleep anon two servants
brought robert a bed to sleep there on but he pointed to bear it away ayene
for he had lever to lie upon the hard and cold earth than upon a soft bed
where of the emperor had great maruayle / and commanded that men should bear
him clean straw which they did than robert which was feynte and weary of
going leyde him down to sleep on ye straw. now have this in your minds ye
proud hertes and sinners thy^ke on robertes great penance and wylfull
pouerte and how he so great a gentylman borne forsook his fader and his mother
and al his friends and his country and land / and al his dylycate metes and
drinks and gaye raymentes and wordly pleasure with all that of such astate
aperteyneth how wyllyngly he has all forsaken for the salvation of his soul
and is gone out of a dukes bed to dogs canell. and with dogs he ete and
drunk and slepte and rose when they rose. and in this penance lived
roberte.vii. years or there about. and the dog yt he comunly slept with all
perceived that he four the better and had more mete for robertes sake than he
was wont to have before and that no man did beat him for his sake wherefore he
began to love robert passing well in so much men might as soon have killed
him as driven him from robert

How robert made a Jew to kiss his dogs arse at the Emperors table.
IT befell upon a time that the emperor held a great feste in his palace in the
cite of rome to which feste were assembled all the chief of ye lord among
whom there was a Jew which was receyuer of the most part of all
themperours lands. and when every man was set at the table robert walked up
and down in the hall hauy^ge his dog in his arms playenge ye fool as he was
wont to do. and thus came to the table behind yt foresaid Jew which was
set at themperours table and Robert come behind his back and knocked him on
the sholder the Jew felt him and turned his face shortly behind him and
robert had up his dogs arse ready and set it upon the Jews face.
Themperoure and his lords this scynge / laughed and had good game there at.
but the Jew was wroth and foul ashamed but he durst say no thing at yt
time. Than robert set down his dog and incontinent the dog lepte upon ye
table and did so much with his mouth and fete that he cast down all the mete
under the table. And in this manner Robert spente his time ever without
speky^ge. like as ye heremite had commanded hy^. and ever he did some mad or
merry co^ceyte to cause ye Emperor to laugh or to be merry.

How Roberte threw down a bryde on a foul donge hill and how he put a
living catte in to an hot seething pot with podred bese.
IT befell on a time yt there was a bryde should goo to church to be wedded.
Which was gayly aparelled as to a bryde aperteyned Roberte seeing this bryde
thus gayly arrayed. took her by the ho^de and led her thorough a passing foul
donge hill and there made her fall and fouled her gaye array and than he ran
lyghtely a way shoutynge and laughing and ran unto the brydes kytchen where
her dynner was apareyled and caughte a living catte and cast her in to the
pot of pouldred befe /

The which incontine^t was told to themperoure where at he and all his lords
laughed and had great game there at. and they loved Roberte passing well for
he made much mirth without harm.

How the senesshal had gadred a great army of men of war of sarasins and
laid syege to Rome be cause the Emperor would not give him his daughter in
marriage. woodcut battle
IN the mean season while Roberte was thus in Rome doing his penance as is
forsayde which dured seven years or there about in the Emperors court. the
which emperor had a fair daughter. but she was borne dombe and never
spoke / and themperous seneschall diverse times had desired this daughter in
marriage of the Emperor but he would never grant him her / wherefore the
seneschall was greatly moved and angry therewith themperoure. for he thought he
might have won of him his empire by forse and might in so much the seneschal
came upon a time with a great host of sarasyns and laid syege to ye cite of
Rome where of the emperor had great maruayle. and wondered tha^ the emperor gadred
and assembled al ye lords barons asking of the^ counsel saying thus my
lords give me good counsel yt we may withstonde this hethe^ dogs which
have laid syege here to our Cite wherefore I take great thought for they
keep all my land under their subieccyon and they will bry^ge us to confusion
if that god not of his endless mercy help us not. wherefore I pray you
eurychone to go fight with them with all our power and might and drive the^ away
than answered the lords and knights all with one assente say^ge sovereign
lord your cou^ceyll is good and wise. Wherefore we be all ready to go with you.
and give the^ battle and defend our right both land and cite themperoure
thanked the^ of this answer and was glad thereof and made proclamacion through
out all his lands and cytees that every man old and young that were able to
bear arms should make them ready to go fight against their most cruel enmyes
the sarasyns which were comen in to the land. and incontinent when this
proclamacyon was done among the comyns every man was willing and ready to go
with the emperor to fight and defend their right and so they went forth in a
fair ordinance with themperoure to fight upon their mortal enmyes the hethen
dogs / And for all ye the emperor had much mo people than the senshal yet the
seneshal had won the field / had not god of his great marcy sent theder
Robert to resyste and help the romans in their exstreme necessyte.

How our savior ihesu having compassion on the christian blod sent Robert by
his angel a white horse and harneys co^mau^dinge him to go resewe and help ye
romans against ye hethe^ dogs ye sarasy^s.
THe Emperor and the romans went to the battle as said is against the
sarasyns. and roberte was at home. Where he was accustomed to walk in the
gardyne to a fontayne or well to drink. and this was on the same day that the
emperor with his host should give battle ayenste the sarasyns. than there
came a voice out of heaven sent from our lord above saying in this manner.
Roberte god commands you by me that ye inco^tynent arm you with this
harneys and light upon this horse that god has sent you. and ride in all
haste possible and rescue the emperor and his people. Robert hery^ge the
commandment of god was abashed in his mind. and durst not do against gods
commau^de but in co^tynent he armed him and lepte on that horse without any
taryenge and rode his way / the Emperors daughter which I told you of
before stood at a wyndowe and saw Roberte thus armed on horse back than if she
could have spoken she would have told it but she could not speak for she was
dombe but she remembered and bare it surely in her my^de roberte thus horst and
harnayst rode in to themperours host which he saw was sore ouerpressed with
their enemies the Turks in so much yt had not god and roberte rescued the^ ye
christian men had been all slain / but wha^ roberte was come in to thoost he put
hy^ in ye most press of ye turks and faught and laid on each side on these
cursed hou^des / there a man might have seen / arms / legs / heedes tomble
on the ground / he smote to the ground both horse and man yt never rose after
/ it was a world to se the murdre yt roberte did among the dampened dogs
the sarasyns / so to make short tale roberte did so much yt the sarasyns were
cu^strayned to fly away and the emperor held the field and had the vyctorye
of them.

How Roberte turned again to ye foresaid fontayne and there unarmed hy^ / when
he had thus subdued and vaynquysshed ye sarasyns and put them to flight.
NOw has the Empererour gotten ye field and the honor thanked be god and
roberte is turned again to the said fontayne and there unarmed him and laid
the harnays on the horse which incontinent was vanysshed away yt no man could
know nor perceive where he become and Roberte bode still stondynge by ye
fontayne / themperours daughter seeing this had great meruayll of this and
would have told it forth but she was dombe and could not speak / roberte had
a race in his face which he got in ye battle / but he was none otherwise
hurt / the Emperor was glad and thanked god of his vyctory against ye false
dogs ye sarasyns and thus being merry he came home to his palace and when
they were al set to dinner roberte presented himself before the emperor as he
was wont to do play^ge ye fool and making hy^ do^be as a fore rehearsed is
the emperor reioysed in himself when he se roberte for he loved hy^ passing
well and tha^ he perceived roberts hurt in his face and thought yt some of his
servants had hurt him while he was out / wherefore he was angry and said /
here in this court be some enuyous men / for while we have been out at battle
they have beten and hurt this poor Innocente creature in his face which is
great sin for though he be a fool he does no man harm so the emperor
commanded them all upon a great pain yt no man should do hy^ harm / if they
did they should be punysshed yt all other should beware by them / than
the emperor began to axe his knights if there were any of the^ yt could tell of
ye knight with the white horse yt came preuely in to the field and so valyau^tly
rescued the^ the^perours daughter this herynge poynted the emperor her fader yt
it was roberte / but the emperor understood not what his daughter mente what she
poy^ted / for she could not speak / wherefore he called her maystres to him and
axed her what his daughter mente by her poyntynge / and her maystresse answered
and said your daughter menes by her pointynge that this day ye have gotten
the bataylle and victory through the help of your fool robert and the race
that is in his face he has gotten it in the battle. the Emperor
understanding the mind and intent of his daughter he was angry and said to
her masters. ye should teache and learn my daughter wisdom and no folly ne
peuyshnesse where with all I am mysco^tent the daughter seeing that her fader
was angry pointed no more not withstondynge she wist well that it was true
that she pointed and mente / for in as much as she had seen ye angel bring
hy^ the horse and harneis This remaynde in this wise a certain season and after
that the sarasyns were put to flyghte by the romans as said is yet came the
senesshal again with much more company and laid syege to Rome and the
romans should have lost the fylde again had not the knight on the white horse
been to whom god sent horse and harnays as he had done before to make short
tale this knight did so much that the sarasyns were put to flight and ye
romans won^e the field and victory as they did before. there were some of
the emperors meyny laid wait where this knight became. But as soon as the
battle was done he was gone no man could tell were he was become save oonly
the Emperors daughter which se hy^ at ye fontayne again vnarmynge hy^

How Robert gatte the third battle as he did before which she kept secret.
IN a short time after this the senesshal turned again with a much greter
power than he had before and laid syege to rome and yet yt themperoure rode
to the battle he commanded his knights and barons to take good head fro
whens that knight came with the white horse and what he was and where he became
for he had great desire to know what he was / The knights answered it
should be done the day came that they must ride forth to the battle and
serteyne of yt best knights rode pryuely into a wood that stood a little there
beside and there they waited which way the knight on the white horse should
come to the battle but they lost their labor for they could not tell whe^s
he come / But when they saw him in the battle they rode toward him to help
him and receive hy^ this same battle was sore foughten on both parties / but
the sarasyns lost there courage for robert laid on so great and mighty
strokes that no man might stand under his hand so that in conclusyo^ Robert
did so much and so valyantly that the sarasyns were put to the dyscomfyture
where of the Emperor was greatly enjoyed and the senesshall with ye sarasyns
were passing angry and sore moved therewith all.

How one of the emperoures knights hurt Robert in the thyghe with a spear.
THan wha^ this battle was done every man rode home and Roberte would have
turned again to ye fontayne to unarm hy^ as he was wont to do before / but
the foresaid knights were turned again in to the wode / to a wait for the
knight with the white horse and when they saw him come they rode all at ones
out of the wode and cried with a loud voice saying unto him. O noble knight
tarry and speak with us / and tell us who that ye be and whens and out of what
land ye come / to the intent that we may show it to the Emperor which
specially he desires for to know. Roberte this herynge was sore a shamed and
smote his white horse with his sporres flyngynge over hills and over valeyes
for because he would not be known but there followed him a bold knight / well
horsed with a spear wenynge to have killed his white horse but be myste and smote
roberte in the thyghe with his spear / and the spear heed brake of and stacke
still in his thyghe but yet for all this he could get no knowledge of the
knight with the white horse for he rode from them all euerychonc / whereof they
were passing sorry. Roberte rode so sore till at ye last he came to the
fontayne and unarmed him and laid the harnays on the horse as he had done
before which in co^tynent was vanysshed away and gone and he drew out the
spear heed out of his thyghe and hyd it between two great stones by the
fontayne than he laid greece and moss upon his wound for he durst let no man
look thereto / for fere he should have been known. And all this saw and marked
the Emperors daughter / forbycause she se yt Roberte was a fair and well
favored young knight she began to cast her love unto him. And when Roberte had
dressed his wound he came in to the halle / to get him some mete and he
halted as little as he could and kept it secretly yt almoost no man could
perceive it and suffered more pain a thousand times tha^ it seemed by hy^
Shortly after this came home ye knight yt had hurt Roberte. And began to
recou^te to the emperor how the knight with the white horse had out ryden hy^ and
how he had hurt hy^ sore against his will. And said to ye Emperor. I beseech
you my lord Emperor here what I shall tell you how / and in what manner ye
shall know who he is that has helped you it is best ye make a proclamacyon
and publysshe thrughe out your Empire / and if there be any knight in white
harnays and a white horse that he be brought to your presence and that he bring
with him the spear heed where with all he was hurt in his thyghe showing the
wound / and yt ye give him your daughter to wife and half your Empire with
her / the emperor this herynge was of his counseyll very glad and in contynent
in all haste proclaimed and puplyshed thrughe out all his Empire and thought
that the knight had given him good counsel.

How the Seneshall thruste a spear heed in to his thyghe wenynge to have
begyled the emperor and to have won his daughter thereby.
IT befell in short time after yt the Seneshal had knowledge and
understanding of the Emperoures proclamacyon and how he might win
themperoures daughter which he had many times been about he did great
dylygence and caused to be sought and gotten a white horse and white harnays and
thryste a spear heed in his thyghe wenynge thereby to deceive themperoure and to
get his daughter to wife / and when this was done he commanded all his men to
arm them and rode with him to the Emperor and he rode so sore till he came
to Rome with great royalte and solace and without any taryenge he rode straight
to the Emperor saying to him in this wise / my lord I am he that you so
valyau^tly many times received three times I have caused you to have honor and
vyctory against the cursed sarasyns / the emperor thy^kynge upon no treason nor
dysseyte said ye be a valyau^t and a wise knight but I had went the contrary
for we have taken you for a vylayne and a forsworn knight / the Seneshall was
very angry and sore moved here withal and answered the emperor shortly and
angerly / my lord Emperor meruayll you nothing here of for I am not such a
cowarde as ye wene that I be and thus saying he took out the spear heed and
showed it the Emperor and uncovered the wound the which he had made him
self in his thyghe the knight stood by which that hurt Roberte before and
began to compass in his mind for he se well yt it was not the heed of the
spear but he durst say nothing for fere leest the Seneshall would have killed
hy^ we will leave now of the Seneshall and speak of Roberte which is among
doggers sore wounded as ye have herd.

How god sent his angel to the heremyte yt he should go to rome and seek
Roberte for he had full done his penance.
THe heremyte which ye have herd of before that shroue and set Roberte his
penance lay on a night in his selle and slepte and thus slepynge there came
to him a voice / and badde him lightly a rise and go to Rome to the place where
Roberte was doing his penance / and the angel told the heremyte all the
doings of Roberte showing how that his penance was fuldone and that god
had forgyuen him his sins whereof the heremyte was very glad and in the
morning eerly he rose and went to Romewarde / and in like wise in the same
morning the Seneshal rose be time and went to Rome to the Emperor to desire
and have his daughter according to the publycacyon and cry / the which the
Emperor consented her to him without any long aduysement / But when the
daughter understood that she was given to the Seneshall she raylled and raged
as though she had been wood and mad she tare her here from her heed and all
to tore her clothes but it might nothing auayll her for she was constrained
and must be arrayed like a bryde and an Emperoures daughter which should be
married and the Emperor ladde her by the hand himself to the church royally
accompanied with lords and ladies and gentylwomen but the daughter made the
gretest sorrow of the world in so much that no man could content her mind.

How the Emperors daughter thrughe the grace of god began for to speak the
first that ever she spoke in her life.
THan as the Emperor with all his estate was come in to the church the
Emperures daughter which was dumb should marye the Seneshall there did our
lord a fair miracle for the love of the holy man Roberte to the entente he
should be exalted / whom every body held for a fool and with him mocked when
the priest should begin the service and to marye the Seneshall and this young
maid together / the daughter thoroughe the grace of god began to speak to the
Emperor her fader in this wise / fader I hold you not wise but fer over seen
in that ye believe / that this proud folysshe traitor tells you / for all
that he tells you it lies / but here in this town is a holy and devout
person / for whose sake god has given me my speech wherefore I love him in my
heart for I have all way seen and marked his valyaunce and holiness but no man
would believe me what poyntynge or signs that I made / than the Emperor this
hery^ge was almoost out of his my^de for Joy when he herd his daughter speak
which never spoke before / whereby he knew well enough the Seneshal this
herynge was wood angry and foul ashamed and light upon his horse and rode
away and all his company the pope there being present axed the maid who
the man was that she spoke of / than the maid ladde the pope and the Emperor
her fader to the fontayne where Roberte was wont to arm and unarm him and
there she took out the spear heed from between the two stones where Roberte had
hid it / and than she caused the spear to be brought forth where of this heed
was broken / which was lightly brought to her and that heed and the spear
Joined together in one as cloes as they had not be broken / than said the maid
to the pope we have had three times vyctorye by his noble valyaunce against the
myscreaunt Sarasyns / for I have three times seen his horse and harnays wherewith
he has three times armed and unarmed him / but I can not tell who brought him
that horse and harnays nor unto whom he delivered it / but I know well that
whanke had done he laid him self down by the dogs / and the maiden said
unto the Emperor her fader in this wise / this is he that has saved your
lands and your honor and gate you vyctorye of the hethen hou^des the
Sarasyns wherefore ye ought of deute to reward him / and if it please you we
will go all to him and speak with him / than went they for the pope the
Emperor and the daughter with all the Lords and Ladies unto Roberte whom
they found lyenge among dogs they followed him and did him reverence but
Roberte answered them not.

How the heremyte found Roberte and commanded him to speak saying to him that
his penance was full done and his sins forgyuen. woodcut hermit and man
THe Emperor spoke to Roberte and said I pray you sweet friend come to me
and show me your thyghe for I will needs se / when Roberte herd the emperor
say these words he wist well enough wherefore he was comen to hy^ / but he
let hy^ as though he had not vnderstonden him and Roberte did many mad
conceytes to make the pope and the emperor to laughe and forgate yt they spoke
of / but the pope spoke to Roberte and co^iured him in ye name of god yt on the
cross dyed for our redemcyon that if it be gods will yt thou have spoken yt
thou speak now unto us / and than Roberte rose up tyke a toie and gave the pope
his blessy^ge and here withal Roberte looked behind him and saw the heremyte
that set him his penance and as soon as the heremyte se Roberte which he had
long sought he cried to him with a loud voice yt every man might here hy^ that
were there my friend harken unto me I know well that ye be Roberte that men
call the devil but now ye be in grace and conceyte with almighty god and for
that foul and hydeous name ye shall have a fair name and be called the
servant of god ye be he that has saved this land from the Sarasyns /
wherefore I pray you that ye serve and worship god as ye have done hyder to /
for our lord sends me now to you co^maundynge you to speak and no more to
conterfeyte the fool / for it is gods will and commandment / for he has
forgyuen you all your sins for because ye have made satysfaccion and full done
your penance / when Roberte herd this he fell lightly on his knees and lift
up his hondes toward heaven saying thus. I give land and thanks to god
creature of heaven and earth yt it has pleased the to forgive me mine
abhomynable and great sins thrughe so little and light penance yt I have
done therefore / when the pope the Emperor and the daughter and all yt were
there present herd Roberte speak thus swetely they were all here of gretely
enjoyed and had great meruayll here of / the emperor seeing his noble valyaunce
virtue and curtesye that in him was and would have given him his daughter to
wife / but ye heremyte would not it should be so / wherefore every man departed
and went home.

How Roberte turned again to Rome for to marye the Emperors daughter by the
commandment and will of god.
NOw the storye tells as after that Roberte had remyssyon of his sins and
was gone toward his country / than out of Rome god commanded him three times
by an angel that he should turn again to Rome and to marye the Emperors
daughter which loved him passyngly well and he should have by her a sone
whereby the christian believe should be increased and forte fyed and defended
Roberte at the commandment of god turned again to Rome and married
themperours daughter with great tryumphe and solace / for the emperor and all
the Romans were thereof very glad / this brydale was royally kept and every
man that se Roberte loved and lyked him above all other / and the people said
one to an other that they were gretely beholdynge to Roberte that he had
redeemed them from their mortal enmyes the sarasyns this feast was great and
notable and deured.xiiii. days and when the feast and brydale was done Roberte
would depart with his lady in to Normandye to vysyte his fader and mother / and
took his leave of the emperor which gave him many royal and great gifts as
gold and silver and precious stones of diverse colors / also the emperor gave
him knights and squyers to ride and conduyte him in to his country.

How Roberte and his lady came to rowane in Normandye with great honor and
worship.
ROberte and his lady rode so far till they came in to Normandye in to the
noble Cite of rowane with great mirth and solace / where they were received
with great tryumphe for the comyntees of the country were sorye and in great
heaviness that their duke. Robertes fader was dyscesed forbycause yt he was a
wise and a renomed prince. A little beside Rowane dwelled a cursed knight
which had done the duchess great wrong and suppressed many knights after
her husbondes dyscease. But when Roberte was comen every man drad him and did
him great reverence and worship / than some said we wend he had been deed and
all the lords and burgeys of Rowane gadred them together and with great
honor and reverence they received Roberte and held him as their lord and
sovereign. And when they had received him honorably they showed him of this
before said knight / he had many times suppress and done wrong to his mother
sythen the death of his fader / than when roberte herd and understood this he
sent lightly men of arms to take the said knight / the which dyden so much
that they took him / and brought hy^ to Roberte which made him to be hanged
wherefore the duches was right glad / but she was much more gladder that
Roberte her sone was come home for she wend he had been deed / and when roberte
and his mother were thus together / he recounted unto her how the Emperor
had given him his daughter in marriage / and how he had done his penance /
the duchess herynge her sons words she began to weep very sore / for because
he had suffered so great pouerte and penance / thoroughe his defaute.

How the Emperor sent a messanger unto the duke Roberte that he should come
and rescue him against the Seneshall.
IN the mean season whiles Robert was thus at Rowane with his mother and his
lady in great Joy and solace / there came a messanger fro the Emperor unto
Roberte / which did him reverence and saying thus unto him / my lord duke
the Emperor has sent me hither to you and he prays you for to come and
rescue him against the false traytoure the Seneshall with the sarasyns which have
laid syege to Rome / when Roberte herd these words he was sorye in his mind
for the emperor / and shortly assembled as many men of arms as he could get in
his land of Normandy / and forth withal rode with them toward Rome to help
and socoure the Emperor / but before he could come thither the false traitor
the Seneshal had slain the Emperor / which was great pity / but Roberte
went straight in to Rome / and lightly with all his power and might went
against the Seneshall. And when Roberte aspyed the false traitor he descryed
hy^ saying thus / abide thou false traytoure / now thou shalt never escape my
hondes if thou abide me in the field / for thou art now nygh thy lives end /
thou dydest put ones a spear heed in thy thyghe for to have deceived ye Romans
/ defend now thy life against me for thou shalt never escape mine hondes / and
thou have also slain my lord the Emperor / wherefore thou shalt be well
rewarded after that thou haste deserved. And with these words Roberte with a
great desire / and mighty courage rode in contynent unto the Seneshall and
gave him such a stroke on the helmette that he cloue helmet and heed unto the
teeth / and in contynent the traitor fell down deed unto the earth / and
Roberte made him to be brought in to Rome to the entente that he should there
be slain to revenge the romans / the which was done in the presence of all
the people that were in Rome / and in this wise fynysshed that traytoure the
Seneshall his life and had a shamfull death / whereby men may make and take heed
that it is great folly to coueyte or desire things passing their degree / for
and the Seneshall had not desired the Emperors daughter the which passed and
exceded far above his degree / he had not dyed this shamful death / but might
have lived and the Emperor also / and have dyed good friends.

How yt the duke Roberte turned again to Rowane after he had made the
Seneshal to be slain.
ROberte the duke defended the cite of Rome from their enemies. And than he
turned again with all his company unto Rowane to his wife which was
passing sorrowful and pensyfe But when she herd yt the traytoure the
Seneshall had slain her fader / she was almoost out of her mind. But
Robertes mother comforted her in the best manner that she could or might. And for
to make shortly an end of our matre and so to fynysshe this book we will
let pass to write of the great dole and sorrow of the young duchess / and
speak of the duke Roberte which in his youth was abte to all myschefe and vice
and all vngracyousnes without any measure or reason for he was a more deuourer
and a more vengeable than any lion nothing sparynge / nor on no man hauy^ge
mercy nor pity. And after this he lived.vii. year in great penance like a
wild man without any speech and like a dumb be etynge and drinking with
dogs and there after was he exalted and honored of them which before did
hold hy^ for a fool or an innocente and mocked with him. This Roberte lived
long in virtue and honor with that noble lady his wife / and he was beloved
and dradde of high and low degree / for he did right and Justice / as well
over the rich as over the poor keeping his land in rest and in peace / and
he begotte a child with her / the which he called Richard / which did
afterward many noble acts and deeds of arms with great Charlemayne king of
france / for he did help him for to get and fortefye the christian faith and
he made always great war upon the Sarasyns. And he lived in his land in
rest and peace / and was beloved of poor and rich / and all his comente
loved him / in like wise as Roberte his fader was beloved / for they lived both
devoutly and in virtue / wherefore I pray god that we may so live in this life
/ that after this life we may obtain and come to everlasting life. To the
which bring us he / that bought us and all mankind / with his precious blood
and bitter passion. Amen.

Thus ends the life of Robert the devil.
That was the servant of our lord
And of his condycyons that was full evil.
Enprynted in London by Wynkyn the word.

Here ends the life of the most ferefullest / and vnmercyfullest / and
myscheuous Roberte the devil which was afterward called the servant of our
lord Ihesu christ.
Enprynted in fletestrete in the sign of the son by Wynkyn de word.

Wynkyn de Worde's device Wynkyn. de. Word.



