A Soldiers VVishe to Britons welfare: or a Discourse, fit to be read of all
Gentlemen and Soldiers.

Written by a Captain of experience.



Imprinted at London for Ieffrey Chorlton, and are to be sold at the great
North door of Saint Paul's. 1604.

TO THE MOST WORTHY, the most virtuous and godly Prince Henry, by the grace of
God, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwell, Earl of Chester, and heir apparent of
the Realms of England, Scotland, France and Ireland.
MOst worthy and most renowned Prince, there is nothing more pleasing to a
spirit endued with knowledge, then Truth when she is most bare and naked.

The pure Coral needs no coloring, and a good cause it self brings
credit, it needs not the help of Art.

The deceitful Physician gives pleasant Syriopes, to make his poison to go
down the smoother, and the sweet songs of Calipso, were but subtle snares to
Ulysses.

An oily mouth may have a gaulding mind, and it seems unto me, that these
professors of Eloquence are to be suspected, and their straining of words and
sentences (as it were to set them on the Teynter) does shewethe little plain
dealing that is within them.

Yet I would not seem to take the Pen out of his hand that does write of
Eloquence, for that were as if a man should labor to take the lightning from
Jupiter, or to seek to bereave the fire of his heat.

And Art (I know) is the Pilot in the sea of wit: Art is the sword to conquer
Ignorance: and Art is the sole directer when the world would err. But yet to
use superfluous Eoquence, in a matter of sufficient excellency, is a greater
show of a pregnant wit, then of a perfect wisdom.

Now since my ability serves to no better purpose, then to set forth in
this kind of writing those experiments which 40. years training in the wars
has taught me, I have not undertaken as a subtle Logitian, for I never
learned those places from whence arguments are drawn.

Those have need of artificial speeches, who with pleasing words do go about to
cover dishonest deeds.

The matters by me handled, I have set down plainly, I have neither flourished
them with Art, nor smoothed them with Flattery.

I have grasped at abuse: yet under generalities, not aiming at any one
particularly, that has not a guilty conscience to accuse himself, I have
winked at somewhat, least I might seem curious, and have pretermitted
necessities, in that they require matter passing my reach: neither do I seek
herein the praise of mine own wit, but to declare the love I bear to my
Country, and the dutiful zeal I tender, (and withal humblenes I here
present) to your excellent highness.

If my unlettered diligence be graciously accepted, I neither fear the
spightfull eye of Envy, neither yet the censure of any others in those things,
which I have only consecrated to your gracious vewe.

I acknowldge mine own unworthiness, and I confess my little skill and
ability to perform, but it is a gracious acceptance, that incourageth me, for
I assure my self, that a magnificent and princely mind cannot want in him
that is descended from so magnificent and princely regenie: Alexander disdained
not to be praised by a M^ll^r, and your grace (I hope) will accept the simple
gilt of a soul^lier.

The subject is not altogether unnecessary to be considered of, for it
concerns the affairs of war, a knowledge behouefull for the greatest
Monarch, when a King is not so much renowned for his crown, as for his courage
and skill in the knowledge of arms.

For although all the gifts of Fortune are to be despised in respect of
learning, yet in a Prince, there is nothing so glorious as to be called a great
Captain, or a worthy soldier.

Accept them (gracious Prince) as the earnest penny of a faithful heart,
accept them and protect them from the malicious interpretour, accept them (with
all humbleness I beseech it) for his sake, that with all love and duty will
daily pray, that as you are known to be descended from a most royal and
princely progeny, and to be the undoubtful heir of your worthy fathers
Crown and Scepter, so you may grow in renown and honor equal to your
ancestors, and may succeed your royal parents in their virtues.

Your Graces in all denoted duty and (...)

TO THE KIND AND courteous Reader.
CVrteous Reader (if thou be courteous indeed) it is so much the better for me,
for then I know my lines will pass without reproof: If thou be curious I care
not, for Nature has done much for me, she has gine^ me shoulders, though not
with Atlas able to bear the heavens yet with Marcus Cato, able to endure any
burden that ^itus Graechius is able to load me with.

To avoid Idleness, I have betaken me to write, and to make my self sociable
with the multitude, I have mingled matters of importance, with matters of small
regard: I know this is the humorous age, and although to read over few
things aduisedcy, prositeth, yet to run through many things (though slightly)
delights, and a man that can but tattle of this and that (though to little
purpose) shall have audience.

I know some will say, that he which will adventure to speak of many matters,
may rather be termed venturous then learned: but I answer with that great
Captain Marius, who speaking before the people of Rome, said, If my words be
not well set together, I care not: so long as I know my meaning to be good and
honest.

Then let Maenius find fault, and let Boldunus eauil, all is one to me, I will
but turn the Buckle of my girdell a little behind me, and then let any
Iestmonger of them all, run at me with his strongest invention, and he shall
never hit me, whre he shall be able to hurt me.

I will wade no farther in mine own praise, because I was never beholding to
mine own tongue: but as I know there are some that are too quick of sight, so
there be some others that will wink if they see a fault: I reverence him, and
do wish with all my heart, that this second encounter between Captain Skill
and Captain Pill, might be as pleasing unto him, as I hope it will be
profitable to some others, that shall peruse and over look it, with advised
judgment.

Barnabie Rich.

CAPTAIN PILL in his humorous fit. CAPTAIN SKILL in his temperate judgment.
Pill. Captain Skill, and although in a late conference had between us, I
undertook to speak of Robin Hood, when indeed I had never shot in his vow,
and presumed to dispute of martial matters, before I had seen an enemies
Tent: yet now having a little bottered my experience by some few years
trayning in the wars, and have had continuance in sauerall services, as well
offensive as defensive, being now thus happily encountered, and time with
opportunity so well be fitting the purpose, let me obtain that by a kind
entreaty, that I know I cannot merit by any desert, I come not to contend, nor
to maintain any eauiles, my desires is to learn, and although before I knew
how to buskle on an Armor, I presumed of as much skill as might have beseemed
the great Captain of Cartliage, yet now experience has taught me to know,
that indeed: I know nothing. And by this (...) continuance that I have had in
the Can^pe, I have noted those absurdisies in the Militia of these times, that
I think may be easily spoken of, but not so quickly amended: give me leave to
relate them as they shall hit into my memory, and let me entreat your opinion
what you allow, and what you mislike.


Skill. Captain Pill, the time that you tell me you have spent in the camp,
has not been ill employed, for that I perceius you have profited much: I see
it has enlightened your understanding to know your own imperfections, and
there cannot be a more learned ignorance, then for a man to confess his own
ignorance: now for the Militia of these times which you say is so confounded
with absurdities, I believe it to be true, but he that should think to amend
it by finding fault, might do as Apelles prentise, who drawing of a picture,
seeking to mende the nose, marred the cheek: you and I may talk of many
abuses, as it were by the way of communication, but I dare not attribut any
such singularity to my self as to give any censure, yet upon the request you
have made, of any thing it shall like you to demand, I am contented to
adventure my opinion, but not to set-downe precepts.


Pill. Why then Captain Skill I will proceed: but here now I should keep a
gods Decorum, especially in Method, but that is looked for from Scholars, and
not from Soldiers, and I have learned the further off from art, the more
Souldierlike: then mount you up my thoughts, yet raise your selves with
reverence, so as you neither do Minerua wrong, nor care what Momus can object.

Now before I speak of defects, I will first begin with war it self, that
I think cannot be managed but with disorder, whose best fruits are so
inormious, that it has been had inquestion, and many times disputed on,
whether war may be approved to be either good or lawful, before the seats
and Majesty of God?


Skill. I take those men that will move such doubts, to be utterly ignorant
as well in the history of the Scriptures, as in the state of a happy
Commonwealth, for he that taught David to sing, Blossed be the Lord my
strength, which teaches my hands to make war, and my fingers to fight, had
(...) willed Moses long before to make war upon the Medianites, and that by
an express commandment, and Abraham the father of the faithful, made no
scruple to enter into arms himself and his household to recover his brother
Lot.


Pill. But some will say the ruins and spoils committed in the wars are to
be lamented, and the cities that are sacked, spoyld, and left desolate, can best
witness the fruit.


Skill. See Saul, first anointed King, appointed to lead the children of
Israel, the spirit of God comes upon him, he Prophesies amongst the S^^ars,
and after all this, behold him again utterly forsaken of God, but for
reserving a part of the pray that he had taken from the Amalichites.


Pill. But what excuse for the great effusion of blood? or is it not a horror
to think of the murders and slaughters made by men upon men in the fury and
heat of war?


Skill. I will refer this to the noble Joshua, who being in the pursuit of
his enemies, and fearing that the day had been too short, commanded the Sun
to neglect his accustomed course, and to stay her self in the middle of the
heaven, till he had performed his slaughter to the full.


Pill. Why then to spoil and kill an enemy we see the warrant is good, but
there be some that will make difficulties, and then they will distinguish
between ambitious war, and war that is but defensive, and almost they will
admit of no war at all to be lawful.


Skill. War is to be undertaken but to the end to have peace, and for matters
in claim, in defense of liberty, and such other like, as well the laws of
nature as the laws of nations does admit it.

For these distinctions I will leave them to Divines, but war is evermore
attended on by Sword, Fire, Famine, and Murder: the sins of the people is it
that gives the first Allarum, and vnsheatheth the soldiers sword, and war
having once displayed his Banner, it is the justice of the cause that
approoueth it either to be good or bad.

But yet the obtaining of a victory is not a sure confirmation of this right
and equity, for when the children of Israel were gathered together in Silo, to
punish the shameful sodometry of the tribe of Benjamin, they lost in two
several battles 40000. men: notwithstanding they had a just cause, and fought
both the times by the appointment and commandment of God.

By war to subdue a foreign foe, the conquest is glorious, but in civil
war there is nothing more miserable then victory.

The practice and knowledge of Arms, has ever been carefully endeavored in
all ages, and in every well governed Commonwealth, when by it Empires have
been attained, Kingdoms enlarged, the straights of Pontus has been opened,
and the enclosures of the Alps broken up.

By it Princes are protected, Justice is maintained, good laws preserved, and
the Commonwealth defended.

Great is the knowledge of Arms therefore, and there is nothing more
necessary, immediately after the knowledge of God, then to know how to manage
our martial causes, and as in every action it is odious is err, so in wars
it is most dangerous of all other, because that one mistaking is enough to
overthrow a whole Army, whereon might depend the wrack of a Commonwealth,
and the loss of a Princes Crown.

War and the Soul communicates in this, that both of them are in their
simple natures hardly found out, but are duly defined by their effects.

Nothing waxes young in this world but war, neither has art ever sought
out a subject more ambiguous, for with the Camelion it changes according to
the object, and like an impossible infinite in nature, carries his events
beyond the reach of conjecture.

In the heavens it works harmony, on the earth peace, it is the hand of
desteny to enforce change, the scourge of God to punish sins, the true
adamant that draws courage unto it, and a Basilique to fear that dies to
behold it: It is oil in the stomach that has disgested poison, as a medecin
to a body that is choked up with corrupt humors, as a Fire to the metal
that wants refining, as exercise to the body grown pursie with idleness, it
is the Theater whereon Nobility was borne to show himself, a glass wherein
policy espieth his infirmities, the worst and best that ever Fortune could
promise her favorites.

The surfits of peace first quickened it, and tyrany that gave it suck,
perished in cherishing it.

It began in heaven, in the rebellion of Lucifer, it presumed upon Paradise,
between the first man, and the Angel, in Shinare ambition made Nymrod embrace
it: Near Sodom affection caused Abraham to entertain it: Since in the world
it has been the Key of alterations, the disposer and spoyler of Monarchies,
the founder of obscurities, the worker of miracles.

There is nothing so entire, that it has not separated, neither so dissolved
that it could not reconcile.

Peace unto it, is as Castor and Pollax in a storm, a hope of safety, war
unto peace, as a motion to rest, the means to produce it.

It favors not the multitude of men, but respects the value, and suffers
valor sometimes to perish in the arms of a fearful multitude: it is the
scourge of security, the plague of timerites, the end of hatreds, and the
beginning of discontents.

It favors injustice, and oppresses innocents, it strikes as God wills,
works as sin warpes it: briefly, a miserable necessity in nature, and a
necessary corrector of times infirmity.


Pill. Why, then by this description and by the rest, what I have noted, I
perceive that it is good to be a skillful warrior, but ill again to be a
great war lover. Well Menelanus, I may commend thy valor, but never thy wit,
that would make a continuance often years war, but to recover a strumpet.


Skill. Ten years war could not be continued but with ten years woe, yet this
blessedness of peace that is so much desired, does especially consist in the
knowledge of war.


Pill. Why, then the feats of war are not to be neglected, though in the
midst of the most happy peace.


Skill. When is the storm more rather to be provided for, but whylest the
weather is fair, neither is there a more dangerous thing then in the time of
peace to neglect the knowledge of Arms, for when that care is set aside, both
Prince and People are left as a pray for every oppressor, and is an inducement
for him to attempt, that otherwise would be glad to combine.


Pill. I can tell you Captain Skill, this doctrine will be reputed flat
heresy: what in the time of peace to provide for war, and to spend money
when they see no danger? I can tell you our peace-mongers cannot abide it, nay
they will not hear the name of war so much as spoken of, till they have
news that the Beacons be on fire about their ears.


Skill. I might spend a long time in delivering presidents, how many
inconveniences have been incurred where they have neglected this preparation,
and omitting all the rest, let Solomon give us light, who though he were
promised a peaceable government by God himself, and had this addition to be
called Rex pacificus, yet he furnished his Garrisons with more warlike
provisions then ever his father David had done before him, notwithstanding he
was still turmoyled and every day bu^^ed in the wars, for if preparation be
neglected till the wars begin, either it comes too late and out of season,
or it heapeth together such confusion with making haste, as it proves
unprofitable, and the proceedings will be but flow, the execution slender, and
the wants intolerable.


Pill. Preparation then is always to be in readiness, but does not this
readiness consist as well in training men, and making them skillful and ready in
Military knowledgs, as in preparing all other habiliments and necessaries
appertaining to the wars?


Skill. Young soldiers unprovided and slightly trained, are not to be drawn
into the field against an Army exercized and beaten with long practice, for
vnexperimented men are fitter to furnish a funeral then to sight a field: as
little safety is to be hoped for in small and unequal numbers, which do
rather seed then end the wars, and do rather increase charge then win Honor:
small companies are shut up without doing good to themselves or hurt to their
enemies, and as they are little feared of their enemies, so they are less
esteemed by their friends.

Where there is a mighty Army in the field, what City or Town, Country or
Province, will not be glad to curry favor, and willing to redeem their good
will?

To conclude, a feeble Army is ever despised as well by friends as fues, but an
able Army that is prepared and managed as it ought, will soon bring an enemy
to yield either by victory or composition.


Pill. Then they are a little mistaken that do think because they are able on
the sudden to furnish a Muster roll with infinite numbers of names, that
therefore they can as quickly supply the field with an able company of
Soldiers: and there must be a like preparation of money as of men, for money is
termed to be the sinews of war, and is of such importance in the Camp,
that though a man have plenty of Soldiers to follow him, and store of
Munition to serve him, yet waiting money to make pay, a man may say as
Flaminius did by Philopomines, that he had the hands and leg of war, but
he wanted the belly.

The Prince therefore that will levy an Army, must learn with Theseus not to
enter the Labyrinthe without a Clue, he must be provided with sufficient
Treasure, for the want whereof many Armies have been forced to dissolve.


Skill. And there is no preparation exactly to be set down what might suffice,
for wars have neither stint nor set bounds.


Pill. And the preparation is not so uncertain, but it is as hard to be
attained unto, for though Arithmetic can quickly cipher down a whole myllion
of Treasure, yet all the rest of the Liberal Sciences are not so prodigal to
bring it in together.


Skill. And yet I think there is more disorder in the issuing of the treasure
when it is prepared, then there is travel in the aftaining to it, and that if
there were a good order executed in the expending, neither the charge would be
so great, nor the expenses so burdensome, as I know they have been.


Pill. Captain Skill, I am not ignorant what reports have gone, how Princes
have been porloined by cheatting officers, but our discourse is now of
preparation, and by what means money might be prepared for the expense of
war.


Skill. It would be a tedious matter to set down the means that has bin
practiced more then ordinary) how to get money only for the supply of wars,
for besides Rents, Revenues, Impositions, Taxes, Subsidies, penalties, Lones,
Confl^cations and such other like, there has been great summe^ raised for the
pride and excess both of men and women, from their guarded garments, their
colored silks, their gold and silver lace, their Plate more then necessary,
their Jewels, their Coaches, and such other superfluities.

The fraudulent dealing of Officers has been sometimes examined and brought in
question, and infinite sums has been by that means gathered together, and
brought to the treasury.


Pill. He that should advise these presidents to be followed here in England,
perhaps might offend more the^ a good many, and yet me thinks there were some
reason to induce, that those that have robbed others of their money by
fra^^ulent and deceitful means, should be used like Sponges, that when they
have drunk their fill, are then fit to be pressed.

But now whilst I think of it, I will tell you what advise a plain country
fellow did sometimes give to Gentleman of good sort, and one that had a great
and a gainefull office freely given him by a gracious Prince, which gentleman
being appointed to borow money for his Sovereign upon privy seals, coming
into a part of the country where the men of best ability in the shire (by a
former appointment were repaired unto him, to whom this gentleman in a brief
discourse told them how many occasions their Sovereign had to employ money, and
was therefore driven so make bold amongst his good subjects to borow for a time
till it might be repayed again.

One amongst the rest (being no less plain then wealthy) answered again
after this sort, if not directly in the same manner, yet I am sure not far
from the matter.

I pray God bless our Sovereign (said he,) and seeing there is such need of
money as your maistership has spoken of: for my part I am not only willing to
lend this proportion that is demanded, but if his Majesty would follow my
further advice, I could teach him such a trick, that he should have money
coming in every day, little or much, and it would come trowling in such sort,
as I warrant there would not be so great need to borrowe of subjects, as now
of late time there has been.

If you have such a trick (answered the Gentleman) you might merit much; and
there is no doubt, but it would be very grariously taken by your Sovereign, in
making it known.

I can do it (said the other) and I will tell you what it is: and if his
Highness could but make shift to buy your Maisterships office, and three or
four others that I could name, and keep them in his own hands, your worship
knows he needed to want no money, but it would still be coming in, his cofers
I warrant would never be empty.

The conclusion was, I think this honest meaning man had but small thanks for
his counsel, for those were no times for men to jest with Officers.


Skill. Besides money, there are many other provisions to be cared for: as
Armor, Weapon, Munition, and infinite of other furnitures, that are all to be
provided before hand.

But the necessity of victual (in the time of service) are of no less
importance then the necessity of money, without the means of which, there is
neither mean to conquer, nor hope to live.

Ualiant minds, will oppose themselves against the Pike, will adventure upon
the Musket Shot, or run upon the Cannon, but I did never know any man so
hardy, that would yield himself to encounter with Famine.

Where victuals therefore are not conveniently provided for, the greatest
minds are terrified and overcome without stroke: and a hungry Army can neither
observe Discipline, nor perform any great enterprise.


Pill. I have known especial services neglected, yea, and overthrown, and
but only for this want of victual, but I will not speak of particulars,
because in finding a fault, I know not whom I should offend, whether those of
superior authority, that might have commanded, or those that were but
inferior Officers that should have provided: but this is to be considered, yt
for the expeditio^ of war, such Co^manders, and Officers should be made choice
of yt had judgment as well to consider of y^ pursuit of an enterprise, as to
look into the beginning.


Skill. For the expedition of war, it will never be accomplished with any
hope of good success, but by the use of two instruments, Election and
Discipline, the one in choosing, the other in framing when they are chosen.


Pill. But there is great error in Election, and it is committed in two manners,
either thinking that he which is noble should likewise be virtuous, or for
particular affection, perhaps in the behalf of some one from whom the party
would expect the like favor again: now if wars were to be waged against
enemies, which would not take advantage of errors and negligences, a Prince
might choose more for favor the^ for need.


Skill. And for Election that was w^^nt to be free, and of an byright
judgment, it is now become a slave to opinion, to that opinion that is both
blind, lame, particular, and self conceited, and yet has prevailed so far,
that we want but one other Erasmus to dyefie opinion, as one has already writ
in the praise of Folly.

Where opinion bears sway, she rules like a God, she makes fools to be
reputed wise, Cowardes to be calle^ courageous, and silly ignorant asses, to
be admired for the^^ martial skill.

She sends Captains to conduct, Officers to direct, that are fitter
themselves to be trained, then to have command.

Opinion sends men to the war corrupted with vices, where they oppose
themselves against all order and Discipline, they rob, they spoil, they
swear, they ^wagger, they quarrel, they eat, they drink, they fight, they
saint, they fly, they are courageous in spoil, and cowardes in fight, they
are curious in speech, and careless of reputation, there is neither glory in
their victory, nor dishonor in their flight.

Where opinion mannageth the affairs of war, without the assistance of
Judgment and Skill, the danger is great, but the expenses are intolerable.


Pill. This election which you do here speak of (as I perceive) does not so
much concern the ordinary Soldier, as it does respect the appointment of
Generals, Captains, Co^manders, and all other Offices that are to direct and
manage the war, in whole worth and virtue it consists either to make the
Soldier more or less profitable for service, and it belongs to their
providence and care to make him able or disable to serve.


Skill. This well choosing of Officers is the most especial thing to be observed
by those that are desirous to accomplish by war: Amongst the rest, the place
of the General having the first superiority, if in his election there be not
the like regard and circumspection had to his skill and worthiness, there may
be chosen an instrument of all disorder, when by his unskillfulness in martial
government, there may arise so many evils, so many mischiefs, destructions, and
confusions, as it may be called a much greater plague, then that which arises
by the most infected air.


Pill. The old proverb is, Such Carpenters, such chips, such Saints, such
Relikes: and I believe (indeed) where a General is chosen unskillful, he
lightly draws about him Captains and other Officers, as unskillful as
himself, and then where the blind leads the blind, if they should perform
any great enterprise, it might well be registered amongst other miracles of
wonder. But I will not take upon me in this place, to say how many abuses has
been committed in the election of Captains, and other Officers of the war,
I will leave them till another occasion, and will here first speak of the
choice of the General himself, on whose skill and worthiness (immediately after
the permission of God) the war may be said to be happy, or unfortunate.

Since then the hope of winning or loosing does so much depend in the General,
by doing, or not doing his duty, me thinks an Army would be much better
managed under the conduct of two or three Generals, and the Prince might hope
of better success in those services where he had several to command, and not
to trust overmuch to one.


Skill. I will always prefer the government of one, because it is a
government most agreeable to nature: and if without presumption we may compare
small marters with infinite, it is most agreeing to the example of the
Almighty himself, who being but one God alone, governs and rules
universally altogether: From hence it like wise seems meet, that the people
of one Nation, should be governed by one Prince.


Pill. But it happens many times, that in matters of doubt, there is not so
much safety in the opinion of one, as in the aduisement of many, because
affection, or passion, either through anger, or through spite, or through
lust, or by some other turbulent occasion, sooner enters into the mind of
one alone, then into a multitude.


Skill. But I say again it is an easier matter to find one alone to be good
and wise, then to find a great many: I could infer presidents, but by former
experience it has been found, that it is better for those that be good and
honest, to live under the government of one Prince, though he should be severe
and half a tyrant, then to live in those regiments where there are as many
Kings, as there be Officers in authority: where there is more danger in
displeasing of a great man, then there is safety in serving of a Sovereign.

Blessed say I, is that Regiment where the mighty oppressors are governed by
one virtuous Prince, and not where the virtuous Prince is ouerruled by many
great oppressors.

And as there is nothing more noisome so good subjects, then to have many Kings
in one dominion, so there is nothing more pernicious for a Prince, then to make
several Generals in one Army of equal principality: For where there are
several Commanders of equal power and authority, if there be not contention
for pre-eminence and superiority, yet be ^^re that the desire of glory will
break the neck of amity between the^: and where honor is to be achieved, the
valorous mind cannot endure to have any sharers that shall divide or
participate with him in that glorious booty.


Pill. But these contentions are evermore incident amongst the ambitious, and
ambition is commonly an attendant to those great persons that are descended of
Honorable linages: but Nobility in these days (for the most part) have laid
aside the practice of Arms, she endeavors not (as she has done) the deeds
of Chiualry, whereby she is grown utterly unable to serve her Country, as in
times past she has been: our ancestors made themselves noble by their Uertues,
but now Nobility is best known by her scu^^hins, she is become a servant to
pleasure, and has given her self to idleness. Nobility in times past has
been followed by Soldiers, but now she is haunted by flatterers: she has
countenaneed wise men, but now she suffers her self to be seduced by those
of little wit.


Skill. The wings of true Nobility to make her fly high, are the deeds of
Chiualry, and being enlightened by martial skill, makes her to shine more
clear and light.

I know not any thing so certain that carries with it a greater Majesty,
then for Nobility to make noble defense against such as compound the miseries
of Civil wars, and to be great leaders against foreign Inuaders.


Pill. True Nobilite loves glory, abject Nobility loves wealth: true
Nobility scorneth that fortune that is unaccompanied with Virtue, and seeks
out that danger which is attended by Honor: she desires not to seem but to
be Noble, and rather to be a Lion amongst Hearts, then to be a Heart amongst
Lions.

Nobility consists not in titles borrowed from our progenitors, but is
extinguished in him that only has wit to keep money, and no heart to win Honor:
it is a title to a good man of great excellency, but not to a wicked man of
great infamy.

To conclude, true Honor only leans to this, to deserve by noble deeds, to
endeavor for her Countries good, to cherish the well deserving of the Ualiant,
to banish Fools and Flatterers, to live an excellent life, and not to shame
nor shun an honorable death.


Skill. Then who so fit to command an Army, as he that is Noble? and the Art
military is the principal profession for Nobility: as for all other
qualities, they are but as ornaments to garnish the first: no not the study of
Sciences and learning it self, are but as complements to this glorious study of
arms: As one demanding of his friend whether he would rather wish to be
Achylles or Homer, was answered; Tell me thou thy self whether thou would
rather to be a Captain or a Trumpeter? but for him that is Noble, what title
so honorable as to be called a great Soldier, unless we care not to show
our selves like unto those that in learning will seem to be men of war
amongst the ignorant, but amongst Soldiers, can but show themselves to be
learned.


Pill. But where Nobility by her own contemning this honorable profession,
have thereby made her self unable to command, is not he then to be reputed
noble and honorable both, who for the good of his country refuses no danger,
but is contented to hazard himself to the death, only to attain experience?

What are we to look after birth or parentage, when we see many times, persons
that are but of a base degree, to be yet invested with most high and noble
gifts of Nature?


Skill. These are to be commended and so receive their reward, but unfitting
yet to bear this rule of an absolute Commander: for where Noblemen are
inflamed with the desire of glory and renown, those of meaner parentage do
more desire to exceed in wealth then in worship; for they have neither true
taste nor feeling of honor and renown, but are rather inclined to a covetous
humor (which is the root of all Impiety) and leads them many times to
neglect golden glory for gripple gain.

Then who is so dull of understanding, but would be enflamed with the love of
Virtue, and would think himself most happy and blessed, to be governed by the
wisdom and virtue of noble personages, whose desire is to have the rule and
government of others, only for this consideration, that they might in their
Office and government, show forth magnificent bountifulness, and impact such
virtues unto others, as with which their own minds are fraught and singularly
furnished.


Pill. But now it is to be understood, that every stock and lynage is set
forth and beautifled by Virtue, and Virtue not beautified and set forth by
lynage.


Skill. Yet Nobleness has ever been honored by all men, because it stands
with reason that good should spring of good, and Virtue is most often
succeeding in Noble blood: and the worthiness of honorable ancestors craves a
reverend regard to be had in their posterity, where he that is but of mean or
simple parentage, must endure much to advance his reputation, and cannot raise
his estimation but with that tediousness of time, which the Noble by birth
shall attain unto in a moment: and the innovle may be sometimes enticed to
Virtue, but not by the allurement of Virtue it self, but are rather provoked
unto it by dread, or by compulsion, or sometimes perhaps in hope of preferment:
and where Virtue is thus darkened with a wavering hope and a faint courage, it
is brought low, and but creeps by the ground, where the virtue of true
Nobleness (indeed) being pure and undefiled, does swiftly raise it self on
high, and does with confidence mount up to the highest heavens.


Pill. I acknowledge that Nobility which as on a chief pillar is stayed upon
Virtue: but where that pillar of Virtue is shaken and overthrown, there
Nobility it self must likewise fall to the ground: And I do further truly
confess, that he can do nothing gallantly, valiantly, or forceably, whose
mind is not kindeled and inflamed with honorable desire.

Thus giving Nobility her due, I prefer the Noble to be most worthy of this
great command, knowing that the bare title is more effectual to draw a
reverent regard, and to enforce a more dutiful obedience in an Army, then the
largest Commission. A Prince may devise to grant to him that is but newly
crept up from a mean reputation or a slender account: And because I have here
spoken of a Commission, here now arises a doubt, whether it be behouefull for
a Prince, for the benefit of his own service, to prescribe a Commission to his
Lieutenant or General, so tying him within certain limits, that he may not
pass the bounds of his commandment, whatsoever occasion might be taken for the
benefit of service.


Skill. For the answer of this doubt, it is first to be considered, that when
a Prince will bridle his General by such a-Commission, it is necessary that he
furnish him with all manner of provisions so abundantly that he shall not want:
for otherwise, what service is to be expected where they are first pinched in
their provisions, and after bound so fast by their Commissions, that they shall
not be able to help themselves?

Next, it is as behoouefull for that Prince that will tie his General to
straight limits, that he do likewise very circumspectly instruct and direct
him in those services he has to perform, which is almost impossible for him
to do: for how should men that are ignorant themselves in the affairs of
war, prescribe their Generals what they should do, or what they should not
do? or how should those that are absent, give prescriptions to him that is and
must be in present view, and not bereave him of those advantages that the
variety of times and occasions may offer?

Some Princes and States that have been suspicious of their Captains, have
brideled them by straight Commissions, other some again, that having had
respect to the dangers of times, yet foreseeing the inconveniences that might
ensue by overmuch pairing their Generals authority, have in their Commissions
left this (proviso) That they should proceed according to the variety of time
and occasions, notwithstanding any restraint in them contained.


Pill. But whether a General that is thus tied, may not sometime use his own
discretion upon occasion, as opportunity may offer?


Skill. The severity of Manlius Torquatus might suffice to discourage any man
to stand in this conceit, who spared not the life of his own son, but for
fighting with an enemy contrary to his commandment, notwithstanding he
obtained the victory.

But the Almighty himself prefers obedience to be better then sacrifice,
and it is more fit by executing the commandment of a Prince to show obedience,
then by exceeding their bounds to show contempt.

For this cause the Soldier was worthily commended, who having already
advanced his weapon to have taken the life of an enemy, that was under his
mercy, whilst his arm was yet lifted up to have given the deadly stroke, the
Trumpet sounded a retraite, wherewith the Soldier staying his blow, let his
enemy thus escape: this being espied, it was demanded of him, why he let slip
so great an advantage; he answered, I bold it far more honorable to obey my
Captain, then to kill mine enemy.


Pill. He that had a complete Army of such Soldiers, might work wonders: but
some will say, that when occasion is offered to a General for the benefit of
his Prince, he ought not so ^icely to stand upon the prescript of his
Commission, as to neglect the benefit and fortune presented unto him, when
there is no Prince so provident who is able to foresee every accident that may
happen: he is therefore to be reputed neither for wise nor valiant, that will
stand so much upon his Commission as to neglect any occasion that may bring
advancement to the honor and profit of his master.


Skill. It is a dangerous thing for him that shall swerve from the
Commandment of a Prince, trusting more to his own judgment, then in his
whom of reason he ought to obey, because if his imagination do fail him, and
his enterprise conclude but with ill success, he runs into the penalty of
disobedience, without any hope of excuse or pardon.

But admit that his purpose be well effected, and brought to a good pass
according to his desire, he may then thank his fortune more then his wit, and
this is all that he has to trust unto.

The Romans in the prime of their greatness, were not only strict in punishing
these offenses, but they were as severe to punish with shame and ignomy, their
Generals and principal Commanders (without any respect of their greatness)
that by shameful practices had sought to vanquish and by dishonorable means
had obtained victories upon their enemies: neither could I (...) Pius so escape
with his drunken conquest, but that in stead of a glorious tryumphe which he
required, he was repaied with a shameful death, and a flaunderous Epitaphe,
which he deserved.


Pill. But had they not in those days the practice of vile and villainous
deceit, as to bereave an enemy of his life by poison, or by some sodam stab or
stroke with a weapon, or to hire a murderer secretly so do some shameful
office or execution?

These have been the policies of late times, and these practices have been
especially approved.


Skill. By these means Fabritius would net win, he not only refused a conquest
offered unto him by that traitor Timocliares, but he likewise detected and
accused his treason to the King his master: neither would Camillus receive the
Schoole-maisters offer, though he might there by have subdued the Phylistiens:
no they thought it a matter of great Impiety, of an honest quarrel to make an
unjust conquest, neither would they admit of any practice wherein was found
either fraud or deceit, although it seemed never so profitable.


Pill. The Discipline of that age was much to be wondered at, yet more to be
honored: but was there the like respect used to those of ordinary account, I
mean to private Captains, and other Officers and Ministers of the waits?


Skill. There was no respect of persons; nor bearing with abuses, no not when
whole Colonies had transgressed their Military orders, but they were deci^ated,
and every tenth person executed as they tell out by lot.


Pill. And he that fears the effect, must seek to anoyd the cause: and they
that were so severe in punishing offenders, would not themselves be the
Instruments to draw on affence: I mean in the Election of Captains and
Officers in their wars: I think it was done with such care and
circumspection as they would not admit of the unworthy, or the unable.

A Captain in those days could not buy a company for money, nor be admitted to
charge by bryving, sometimes by making himself Pencionary, paying a yearly
slipend, which must be exacted either from the Prince or Soldier, or from has.

I think my Lord nor my Ladies Letter could not then have preferred a man
that was unworthy and of no experience; neither do I believe that a Uictualer
could then have crept into an Office though a whole hundred of Angels should
have made intercession for him: nor a Prouant Master, whose Office was to
provide apparel for Soldiers, could not have purchased an Office for money,
nor be suffered to powle and pill the poor Soldier even to his very shirt.


Skill. In those times such Captains and Officers were chosen as the places
had need of, not such as had more need of the places, they were not then
admitted to exact their own greatness by the ruins of the Prince, nor to
make their own gain by the spoil of the Soldier, the public treasure that
was to be employed for the payment of Soldiers, they would not suffer to be
purloyned by deceiving Officers, the victuallers, Prouant Masters, Officers of
the Musters, and other Accountants were not only looked unto, but they were
likewise looked into; if any of them had been sound unworthy, or had been taken
tardy in a trip, he was sure to be dismissed and punished according to the
quality of their crime, they never stood in doubt to displease my Lord his
master that had commended him; they then bent all their endeavors to serve
that Prince or State that gave them pay, and not that Lord or Master that
preferred them to their places.


Pill. One special mean that a shifting Captain has to deceive his prince,
is in his number, to take pay for a whole company when he has not balfe: if
his conscience will farther stretch to exact and cheat upon his poor
Soldiers, he has many base and ungodly shifts to perform it, but it were a
pitteous thing, that any man's greatnesss should boulster out such abuse, or
that because a scraping Captain should be known to be a Favorite to this or
that Noble man, therefore there should no man dare to cross him in the camp,
least his friends should cross them again in the Court.

For these Officers before spoken of, they may deceive both Prince and Soldier
by many more means, and of far greater sums then the Captains can do: and
it is like enough that in times past there has been some such Officers, and it
is as likely that some others that should have been Controwlers of the offense,
has been partakers and have had interest in the gain.


Skill But these were lamentable times when Soldiers by these means might
stand more in doubt to be ro^dly ^^^r Captains, then to be hurt by their
enemies, and miserable might that war be called, where more may perish by the
fraudelent demeanure of shifting Officers, then otherwise slain by the enemies
sword.

It is not enough therefore that Generals themselves should be elected and
chosen with great foresight and care, but it is as much be houefull that
private Captains and all other Officers put in authority either to rule or to
provide, should be chosen with the like regard and circumspection.


Pill. There is nothing of more importance then the choosing of good Officers,
whether in peace or war: but esp^cially where poor Honesty is so put to
silence that he dares not speak, as many times his mouth has been (...)
Brybery and Flattery, two shrewd enemies: (...) Hercules contra duos.


Skill. Corruptions has been from the beginning and will continue, but where
Bellona rings the Allarum Bell, abuses will there multiply: but Captain Pill
learn this of me, what is virtue in one is vice in an other, it is not for men
of our coat to find any faults, and although the world be rather inclined to
dispraise what is amiss, then to commend of that is well done, yet he lives
in better quiet that speaks but what he should, then he that blabbeth all
that is true: what should men of our profession have to do with Bribery and
Flattery? the time has bin you had bin better to have spoken against
preaching: do you not know, he that will sacrifice to Thraso, Gnato must be his
priest? and be there not many great personages, who although they can discern
of a Flatterer, and do know themselves to be palpably flattered, yet they love
him that flattereth fastest, and will hate him that should tell him the truth?


Pill. Augustus that good Emprrour of Rome, was never angry with accusers
because he thought it necessary, that where many abuses did flourish, that it
should be therefore behoo^efull for every man to speak his mind freely: But
the Politician, he that has but Mammon for his God, and Machiuill for his
ghostly Father, he cannot away with these findefaults: A gauld Jade will kick,
and a guilty conscience is afraid of rubbing, and these be they that do rather
seek to cover faults then to mend faults: these Politicians that be called the
sharpest and the quickest witted men, what be their policies, or whereunto do
they apply their quickness of wit, but to cover their naughtiness? If they
have a little good amongst a great deal of ill, they think that little good
to be utterly lost, that has not the eyes of the world to witness it, and to
give it applause, so that if they do any good, it is but to the end to be
seen, and to be praised by men, for in secret they will do nothing: if they
forbear to do evil, it is for fear the world should know it, and were that
fear taken away, they would stick at nothing.

I think there is not a more mischievous creature in the world, then is a man,
if he be both wise and wicked, for where the wit is bribed by a licentious will
there Honesty is forced to play banckrout, and it is but a rude kind of
honesty, that restrains men from doing ill, but for fear of a popular report.

But I cannot altogether blame the carelessness of the world, in that it is
become so sparing of good endeavors, when there is neither reward for well
doing, nor recompense for good desert: nor so much as a Memorandum for the most
honorable enterprises, bow worthily so ever performed, unless perhaps a
little commendations in a Bal adior if a man be favored by a Play maker, he may
sometimes be Canonized on a stage: But Virtue, thou art driven into a narrow
scantling, that haste no better recompense, then what thou can draw from vice
it self: It is no wonder though so few do look out after thee, for thou art
grown poor, and who would follow a beggar?


Skill. As the prompt and ready wit employed in bad purposes, is most hurtful;
so it is necessary that every capring wit, shadowed with a little pretended
care, should intermeddle with matters of state, nor should busy it self in
those affairs that should not publicly be brought in question.


Pill. As I am not ignorant that the State nor policy, are not to be meddled
withal by every man, so it is a pitious thing, that under this prescript, Quod
supra nos, nihil ad nos, and for that it is and has been a received opinion,
That all truths are not to be spoken, that therefore a man must not endeavor
his countries good, nor speak these truths that might concern the glory of
God, the service of a Prince, and the benefit of a Commonwealth, or whether
these prescriptions before spoken of, should so restrain a man from doing his
duty to his Sovereign, that he should not inform those abuses committed,
whether in the Camp, or in the Court: or because the corruptions of some great
personage, might thereby be detected, his good meaning therefore should not
only be ill construed, but his honest endeavors utterly disgraced, and
himself reputed a busy body, that is too forward in meddling with matters so
far above his reach.


Skill. The praise of well doing, consists chiefly in two points, whereof the
one is in choosing out an end, that our purpose is directed unto, that is good
indeed: the other she knowledge to find out apt and meet means, whereby to
bring it to this expected good end, thus appointed and intended.

Now he that pretends but to reveal those things that may be beneficial
for his Prince or Country, his purpose is honest, and is directed to a very
good end, and in such a case, he is not to neglect any thing that may tend to
so sovereign a good, but is rather to adventure himself for the safety of
either: yea, although it should fall out to his great reproach.


Pill. Then ten times happy may that Commonwealth be reputed, where the ears
of the Sovereign Prince are open to the informations of honest and dutiful
subjects, not only in hearing matters that might give light to his own
affairs, but with like gracious regard to hear and consider of she private
and particular complaints of poor oppressed suitors, where Innocence is
oppressed by Envy, where simplicity is intrapped by subtlety, where truth is
suppressed by authority: for a Prince that hears the complaints of his
wronged subjects, is like a Cristall stream, wherein all may drink that are
dry.


Skill. If the blessedness of a Commonwealth does consist in the clemency of
the Prince, under what Clymat might we seek for a more happy Regiment then
this of our own native soil? what age has ever affoorded a more princely
government, then that of our late deceased most gracious and godly Elizabeth?
whose magnificence filled the world with wonder, whose Maiesticall greatness
was sought unto by the Princes of foreign Nations, who thought themselves best
secured, when they had entered league and confederacy with her: whole greatest
enemies did yet admire her heroical virtues, whose royal person was from time
to time protected by the Almighty arm of God, from tho trains and traps of
Traitors, that daily pursued her, not for her stanes, but for her sincerity
and love to the pure worship of God: they hated her indeed, but not for any
faults or offenses of her own, but for her zeal to that glorious Gospel,
that gives light and life to those that does embrace it: they sought her
destruction, but not for her abominations, but because she detested theirs.

See here again the wonderful goodness of God, and his mercy toward this
Realm, at that very instant of her Majesty's death, when there was nothing
looked after but for confusion, no hope expected but effusion and shedding of
blood: See then, I say, his blessing redoubled, a gracious and a mighty Prince
established in peace, not a sword drawn, though the enemies of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, had then intended the execution of their fury.

If I should now take upon me to express the worthiness of this renowned
King, thus inthroned by the hand of the Almighty, I might imitate the Painters
of Greece, who taking upon them the portraiture of Jupiter, were every day
mending, but could never finish it: and being demanded why they had begun what
they could not end, they answered, in that we show him to be Jupiter, whom
every one may begin, but never any man be able to perfect.

If any man be yet desirous to make a more ample survey of his virtues, let him
but read those lines by himself, he has left to posterity, and he shall
find by the excellency of the fruits, how much England is made happy by so
glorious a free.

God bless the stock and branches altogether, and send them long to flourish,
from generation to generation, in the highest-tipe of honor, and Princely
Majesty.


Pill. Amen say I, and withal humbleness I beseech it: and that God that
rules the hearts of Princes, put in his royal heart the care and safety of
himself, for his own and Englands good.

God keep him still from the godless, and the God maker, the Atheist, and the
Papist; the one never loves but in policy, the other is still practicing for
his Pope: and it is a hard matter in these days to distinguish Humility from
Flattery, their words and smiles are the one so like the other.

But Captain Skill you have already taught me not to meddle with the affairs
of Princes, and I learnd it long ago, by the fable of the Fox and the Wolf:
and although it be but a fable, it is yet worth the repeating, because there is
contained in it good admonition.

The Fox and the Wolf passing by the Lions Den, were desirous to see what
he was doing: and the Fox very subtly but a little peeping in, told the
Wolf that the Lion was asleep: the Wolf taking courage to take a better
view, was no sooner entered, but the Lion immediately caught him in his claws,
and demanding of him what was his pretense, the Wolf fearfully made answer,
that understanding by the Fox his Majesty was asleep, he thought without
offense, he might surury both his person and his lodging: to whom the Lion
roughly replied.

Do thou think that a Lion thy Prince and Governor can sleep, though he
sometimes wink, or dare thou enquire whether he wink or wake? thou shall
know to thy grief, that neither the wiliness of the Fox, nor the soolish
pride of the Wolf, ought to enquire whether the Lion be asleep or awake, at
home or abroad dead or alive, this alone is sufficient for you to know, that he
is a Lion, but not where he is, nor what he is doing.


Skill. The like caveat was given by Apelles, when Alexander on a time coming
to his shop, would needs take upon him to paint. Apelles placing him at his
back, and tending his own work, would not so much as cast an eye to see what
Alexander did, which being perceived by Alexander, he demanded of Apelles why
he did not otherwhiles ouerlooke his handy-worke, to see wherein he had erred
and done amiss? to whom Apelles said, it is not for Apelles to inquire what
Alexander has done, and therefore did I set your Majesty at my back, that I
might not so much as glance with mine eye to see a Kings work, and yet that
you looking over my head, might see mine, for Apelles shadows are to be seen
by Alexander, but not Alexanders by Apelles.

So ought we to frame our selves in all our actions, as though the King were
still standing over to behold our doing, but not for us to look and enquire
what the King does behind us, or to take upon us to reform his errors, or
mistakings.


Pill. It is no wonder then, though Princes do but seldom times correct and
amend their errors, when there is no man so hardy that dare reprehend them, or
that dare let them understand when they ouerslip.

The counsel therefore of Demetrius is to be commended, who exhorted Ptolomy to
read many books pertaining to government, for that there he should find many
things which his subjects durst not tell him.


Skill. There is no man that willingly gives ear to him which does freely and
liberally tell him his faults or imperfections, but when a man has both means
and will, and a good occasion to do it to his Prince, let it be performed with
great reverence and modesty, that the Prince may perceive no less love
toward him, then a will to discover unto him the error which he commiteth: for
otherwise it is not lawful by reproachful speeches to publish the faults or
til dooinges of a Prince, neither is it possible for a man to behave himself
too reverently toward him, though it be reported that when Aristippus could
not be heard of Dionisius, he threw himself down at his feet, saying, the
fault is not mine though I commit Idolatrye, but the Kings who has his
ears in his feet: yet say I, every one is to reverence and obey his Prince
with all humbleness of duty, for that the honor is not given to him but to
God himself, whose Minister he is.


Pill. And yet all men's eyes are still attendant upon his demeaner, and his
dooinges are examined as well in the Country as in the Court, and the actions
of the most mightiest Monarchs are many symes censured in the meanest cottage.


Skill. The vigilancie of the people is so much the more, because the life of
the Prince is a ring leader to the multitude, upon whose example either of good
or ill, the people are still depending, for example is the readiest way to
instruct: and therefore it is truly said, Such Prince such subjects: if the
Prince be good himself, he will likewise make others good that are about
him, and there is not a greater testimony of the goodness of a Prince, then
to see the goodness of those that do attend his person.


Pill. But are there not many Presidents left in record of Princes, which of
their own dispositions have been most graciously and virtuously inclined, and
have yet been corrupted by those that were nyghest about them: sometime under
the pretense of policy and profit, they have been led into errors:
otherwhiles their ears have been abused by those that had no other means to
make themselves gracious in the eyes of their Prince, but by feeding him with
matters perhaps more profitable to the purse, then healthful to the soul.
Some other again by seeking to blindefolde the Princes eyes, that they should
not look into the affairs of the meaner sort of the subjects, nor so much
as to take knowledge or to receive any Complayntes of the oppressed, have
thereby kept the Prince in ignorance, and made themselves wise.

How many Princes again that have been of great Renown, of rare virtue, and
of excellent wit, has yet been led with lycentious liberty, drawn in by
these inticers of pleasure and delyght? these sullen slaves that can creep,
croutch, lie, fawn and flatter for a favor, that can watch, wright,
dissemble, and conspyre to please a Prince: these have been the plague soars
of many common wealths, that have often ruinated Kingdoms, and overthrown
Estates.


Skill. The favor of a Prince is highlye esteemed amongst men, and yet being
dulye considered of, it is but a poisoned bayte that induces many dangers:
for besides a wearisome life, and the miserable servitude that belongs to
Courting; so a man must be very respective in pleasing of his Prince, although
sometimes but with worldly vanities.

These servants of ambition, do many times thrust themselves into infinite
perrilles, especially when they become so familyar that their Princes will
imparte unto them their secrets: But he that knows the secrets of Princes,
he is chary of it, he shuts his mouth, and fears least it should escape
him: but is it disclosed, the indiscreet man does publishe it, and perhaps
the wise man is blamed for it, and the least suspicion is now enough to ruinate
him, that before might have slept in his Princes bosom.

I will therefore commend the Poet Philippides, who being demanded by King
Lisimachus, what favor he might do unto him for that ^^e loved him, made
this answer to the King, that your Majesty would never impart unto me any of
your secrets.

By this it might seem, that in the love or hatred of a Prince there is almost
a like danger: I therefore think it not (...) to follow the table of the
earthen vessel, which in no wise would hold any company with y^ brazen vessel,
for fear of knocks: and it may easily be thought, that in the company of a
Prince, a man cannot utter his mind freely, nor do any thing contrary to his
pleasure, but if he do, he shall be no friend of Caesar's.


Pill. Fire warmeth those that stand aloof, and burns him that creeps too
nigh: I love the Court, but (under correction be it spoken) I have thought it a
fitter place for Paris then for Hector.


Skill. Captain Pill, the Camp is better befitting a Soldier then the Court,
and I think your experience and mine does rather serve to speak of Soldiers,
then to judge of Courtiers: and I wonder how from our first matter of discourse
we are hit into this vein, that I wish we might let be, and return over to
some other sext. that our skill will better ferue to discourse on.


Pill. I hope our honest meaning will not be imputed to presumption, and I have
the rather adventured the matter upon this occasion, the mittigation of war
now hoped for, and a blessed peace expected, by a most gracious and happy
government, has given Soldiers a time of truce, that they may lay by their
Arms, and endeavor to what their wits in any other commendable exercise: And
we may a little take this advantage in our discourse, and not so to tie our
selves to martial matter, but that upon occasion we may a little digress, like
a cunning gamester when he is at Hazard, will sometimes leave the Maine to play
upon the Bye: And I would not be thought to be of so furious a humor as y^ fiery
spirited Gentleman Soldier, that hitting amongst pleasant company, was
requested by a Gentlewoman to dance, but he with a disdainful look, told her
that he took no pleasure in so vain delights: the Gentlewoman requested him
again, to say wherein his pleasure did especially consist, and he bending his
brows and looking with a st^rne countenance, told her his felicity was,
Armed in the field to encounter his enemies. The Gentlewoman smiling at the
folly of our vainglorious Martialist, made this answer. Now God be thanked
there is yet no need of your service, for our turritories and confines are
happily blessed with peace, and therefore I could wish that you were well
besmeared over with oil, and so hanged up in some fair Armory till we have
need of your help: for it were great pity that a man of your courage should
be cankered and eaten with rust now in this peaceable time.

I would be sorry to receive such a frump, neither will I stand so much upon my
martial points, as though I could do nothing but speak of fighting of fields.

I will therefore speak or do anything as occasion shall serve: in the time of
war, I can listen to the Drum, but in the time of Peace, a Tabret and a Pipe
are merry about a May Pole: and although I be ill made to dance, yet I will
rumble on amongst the rest, I had rather they should find fault with my
cunning, then to repute me to be disdainful.

And now we have taken this little breath, let us (in Gods name) martch back
again to the Camp from whence we came, where we have left our General not so
fully complete as is requisite: for it is not enough for him that shall command
an Army to be nobly borne, but he must be likewise fortified with those gifts
that are no less to be attained unto by education as by nature. And as I
remember, Cato prescribes three special virtues to be had in a General, that
is to say, Experience, Policy, and Valiance: and the Antiquity would never
admit of him for a Commander, that was either insufficient in skill, or openly
detected of vice.

Swearing breeds hatefulness to all honest ears, Covetousness extorteth
both of Prince and Soldier, Pride brings with it disdain: and Cato being
Censurer to make choice of a General in the Panonian wars, openly disgraced
and dismissed Publius, because he had seen him walk the streets of Rome
perfumed.


Skill. To this Experience, Policy and Valiance prescribed by Cato, we will
add two others, namely, Justice and Mercy.

Amongst the rest, Justice is the foremost and first to be preferred, for it is
the foundation of Eternal Fame, without the which there is nothing can deserve
to be praised or commended: and Justice in a General toward his Soldiers, is
the key of his Discipline, the entrance to confirm their love that serve him,
and a curb to restrain their misdemeanures that would offend him.

Again, the force of commanding is the consent of them that obey: and this
consent springs by estimation, she which by no one mean is more exactly
squared out then by the execution of Justice: for when the Soldier shall
perceive that he shall be suffered neither to do nor take wrong, it so
confirms him with such fear and love toward his Commander, that he will
refuse no enterprise though he should be willed (as Scipio said) to cast
himself headlong from the height of a Rock.


Pill. Justice has been reputed to be the Twin-sister of Mercy, and to use too
much severity, is not the readiest way to win, especially amongst Soldiers.


Skill. An vncontrowled Army, that is not curbed and managed by Justice, is
like a brain-sicke Jade without a bridle, more noisome and corrupt then is a
body without a soul: but yet to hold a mean, is the salt and soul of every
virtue: neither is there any thing more nigher to Injustice then is the
asperite and rygor of Justice.

The wars are therefore to be prosecuted with as great Justice as strength,
and as the Justice of the cause is first to be approved, so with like equity
and right, the wars must be maintained.

A righteous and a just cause adds increase of courage, it inciteth to
Valiance, and it does so concytate and strengthen the minds of men, that they
may adventure their lines with the greater boldness, when they know that
whether they live or dye, they may do both in the service and fear of God.


Pill. And is not this observation of Justice as well to be kept with enemies,
against whom we are Armed, and have entered hostility, as with adherents and
friends, whom we may command and ouerrule?


Skill. The example used by Camillus upon the Schoole-maister may suffice for
the matter, that was more effectual to subdue the Phalatians, then was the
might or force of the Roman Army, neither was there any thing that made the
Roman Commonwealth, so glorious and triumphant, as these virtues of Justice,
Clemency and Loyalty, which they always used to their very enemies.


Pill. The wars then were performed with as great honor as they are now with
treachery, and the Camp might then have been reputed for a School of honor,
justice, obedience, duty, and loyalty: but now it is become a den of
deceit, treachery, robbery, blasphemy, and all manner of other impiety.

And as this observation of Justice is of great excellency, and is a blessing
powered down from the heavens, so the effect of it, is but in maintaining of
right, and doing no wrong: A lesson of no great importance to be learned and
carried away, though not so easily kept. But now for this Military Experience,
that is behoouefull for a General or Captain, how is this to be attained
unto? for this is not to be learned by precepts, but it is to be taught by
time, not to be comprehended but by continual practice, it is bought with gray
hairs, grievous wounds, and great dangers: If I be not therefore deceived,
he that should command, should first learn to obey, and he ought to be a man
of tried and known Experience, that should have so many men's lives depending
on his skill.


Skill. There is no occupation, be it never so simple, neither is there any
profession, how slender so ever in account, but it craves both practice and
Experience, and at the least a full apprentyship of seven years, before a man
may be thought worthy to be employed in his Faculty. If then in these mean
and petty causes, the attainment of skill is not to be apprehended, but by
such continuance of time and practice, how many years were then behoouefull,
or what process of time might be thought sufficient, for him that should be
perfected in martial Experience in the knowledge whereof, there was never any
man yet so complete and exact, but he was still every day to learn: yea,
though he had served full out seven aprentizeships.

Only the knowledge of the Art Military, she older it is worn out with
years, the younger it waxes, and the farther off to be attained and
comprehended.

The want then of this Experience, breeds the want of courage, when the
suddenness of peril is more terrible then the danger it self, and by how
much it happens to a multitude, by so much the matter seems more desperate:
for when their minds are once possessed with fear, there is no place left for
confidence, but turning all their hopes into doubts, they surrender themselves
without consideration, not whither advise and counsel should direct them, but
whither their distracted fortunes will conduct them.

Thus Ignorance begets fear, fear engenders doubt, doubt leads to
desperation, and desperation brings to destruction.

But it is Experience that confirms men's minds in the virtue of Valiance,
makes them to be resolute, and truly magnanimious.

Occasions themselves do rather give counsalles to men, then men to occasions,
when occasions many times will afford more help in war, then Virtue, but it
is Experience that must take opportunity when occasion does offer.

And Reason it self must many times give place to necessity (especially in
matters of war) in that it seldom suffers a man to make choice of time:
Again, the fitness of place is to be considered, which many times yields
more advantage then the virtue of Force, but still it is Experience that must
discern of altogether.

So that we may well conclude Experience to be the first, the second, and the
third mean whereby to obtain in war.


Pill. O how many Turft-Taffita Captains have we in these days, that perhaps
have made a Caales Voyage, or have been a month or two in the low Countries,
or in Ireland, or have had the conducting of Soldiers to the waters side, or
has been a trainer or a Muster-maister (as they call him) in the shire: yet if
they had but learned to double their ranckes on the right hand, and sometimes
to run away on the left, and can speak a little of the new Discipline, they
will discourse of greater exploytes then ever was performed before Troy.

They will speak of conducting of Armies: how to imbattell them, when to
shake off skirmishe, how to fight with advantage, where to imploye horsemen,
when the shot shall give their vollyes, how to encounter with the push at
the pike, when it is time to charge, when to retire: you shall hear them fight
a field and give an ouer-throwe, and all by imagination.

You shall hear those sometimes that will ingrosse the actions of a whole
Army, and will attribute so much to their own value, that it were a hard
matter to believe them without a steadfast faith.

With these toys they have deceived men of reasonable wit, though of little
vnderstandng: and sometimes when they have hit into the presence of some
Nobleman that was ignorant of martial matters, they have so amazed his senses
with these errogating erplycations, that his super exceeding courage, shall not
only be admyred and wondered at, but his martial skill and Experience, shall
be ratified and commended by Nobility it self.

It is enough for him that can but rob a printed cloth of a history, a
book of a discourse, a fool of a fashion, if be can swear Sblood and
Sownes, take a pipe of Tobacco, and bring my Ladies letter to my Lord, it is
Experience enough, and he shall be prefererd before another that has served
twenty years in the Camp.


Skill. God bless me, my Country and friends, from his direction that has
no better Experience then what he has atteyned unto at the fetching home of a
Maye-pole, at a Midsomer sight, or from a trayning at Mi^ende-Greene: neither
is it a Ladies letter, nor a Noble man's favor, nor at the least, three or
four years trayning, that can make a man fit to command in a well governed
war.


Pill. How should we now distinwish of that honesty which is persect and
absolute (indeed) from that false and pretended color of honestic, that is but
counterfe it and falsely surmised, or of that policy, that should be an ornament
of honor to a Captain or General worthily renowned, from that craft and
subtlety that is now shrouded and cleaked under the titles of wit or policy,
which are no other then fraud and deceit? and then if Plutarche speaks true,
there is no fraud without injury.


Skill. I commend policy so it be legitimate, first begotten by wit, and
fostered up by honesty? and there is a certain honest sobtilty which passes
under the name of policy, as to make attempt against a common enemy, a robber,
a spoiler, a rebel, a traitor, in such a case it imports nothing in respect
of Justice, whether he be assailed openly or intrapped by ambush, or by any
other practice wherein faith and honor may be preferued, and Justice nothing
violated: this policy has been of great command amongst Soldiers, and
good reason too, when in the action of war, it is utter for the field then
Force.


Pill. Policy without sorce, is like a workman without sooles.


Skill. And sorce without conduct and still, may well charge an enemy, but
sridome win honor.

I know Force to be requisite, but where it bears more swie then
understanding, it runs to confusion, and to destruction in the end.

Force that is not assisted by advice, is like a horse withotout a rider, of it
osone self, it destroicih it self* and Force and fury, without Discipline
and Order, are cau^ly vanquished and overthrown by Policy.

The strength of understanding is therefore more availcable in the day of
battle, then is the strength of unskillful men, and more fields have been lose
for want of policy, then for want of strength: for where force strueth for
execution, policy is he that prepares the mean.

To daunte an enemy by Force is the Soldiers praise, but to entrap him by
policy is the Captains honor: and more glory for a Captain to be seared of
a wise enemy for his policy, then to be praifed by a foolish Citizen, rather
for the forces that follow him then for any wit in his head.


Skill. Besides Stragemus that are every dap inauated and devised as occasions
do arise, so there are many precepts politiquely prescribed, that me thinks
in this place wouldr partly be remembered, because they are behoueful for
cuerie Captain to observe: amongst the rest, whether it may stand with
policy, that those enterprises undertaken with indiscretion, or against
reason, should escape unreproved, though they conclude with some good or lucky
success.


Skill. Reason veholdeth some purposed end, whether it directs every
action, and he that undertakes with Judgment and discret on, if be bring
his affairs to a good and happy success, it will be imputed to his virtue:
but if to any ill issue, it will be attributed to the malice of his fortune:
and the antiquity punished nothing with more severity, then those enterprises
attempted against commandment, or undertaken against Reason: but as they
punished those victories that were attained by lewd and foolish hardiness, so
misfortune diminished not his reputation, that attempted with discretion,
neither attributing coboardlinesse to ill success, nor Maliance to good
fortune.


Pill. A Captain then ought warily to examine the end of his dristes, before
he gives them course, for he that enterpriseth rashly not considering of the
issue, shall repent him of his rollie when it is past remedy.


Skill. When a Captain has to deal with an enemy, whom he knows ^o be a
man of judgment and skill, so long as he shall find him to proceed in his
affairs with reason, so long it may be believed, there is nothing dene
extraordinarliy, otherwise then with a due course, according to Judgment and
martial skill, but when attempts are made as it were against the hair, and
enterprises put in practice, that are deuoid of Reason: A wise Commander in
those cases ought to be the more vigilent and wary, and to think that such
offers are never made, but upon some hidden purpose.


Pill. To be ouerlight of belief, argues a lightness of wit, and those that
are overmuch creailous, may be reputed to be men of the first Impression: to
make account of an enemy so far forth as is needful, is the part of a wise
Captain, but so to fear him, as to be afraid to encounter him, argues the
want of Courage, and there is no greater sign to loose, then when a man is
persuaded, not to be able to win.


Skill. To make small account of an enemy, is a dangerous matter, and many
honorable enterprises has been entercepted, where an enemy has been
thought so feeble and weak, that they have rather despised him, then made any
account of ought he could do: but a wise Captain will never so lightly regard
an enemy, for if he be old, his wisdom and Experience is to be feared, but
if he be rong, and therewithal either heady or rash beware of his fortune, for
according to the old proverb, Fortune does not only favor Fools, but is
likewise helping to those that be bold and hardy.

And in dangers where there be many eyes to behold, you shall see some whose
hearts are already almost dead, yet pricked with shame, or intised only by
company, they will go forwards (as it were) blindfold, and do their duty.


Pill. Machiuill thinks it no policy for a Prince to be advised in his
martial causes, by such a Council as are altogether addicted to war, or too
much inclined to peace, but miserable is that war, say I, where Covetousness
does either command or give counsel, or has any interest at all either with
Officer or Soldier.


Skill. There is nothing more rather to overthrow an Army, then where the
Captain or Soldier are more destrous ofspoyle, then careful of honor: And
covetousness is the cause of many great euilles, for as it hinders victory
before the fight, so again after the fight it plucketh the glory of an
overthrow out of the victors hands, making him of a Conqueror, to become
conquered.


Pill. There is not a more pernicious evil, then that of Covetousness: and a
covetous wretch, as well in the time of peace, as in the time of war, is
detested and abhorred, and by how much he is advanced to greatness, either by
his own wealth, or by authority, by so much the more he is cursed by the
people, and vengeance daily denounced against him, by as many as has to deal
with him.


Skill. Conetousnesse is the Curre that deuoureth his own Acteon, the Ball of
Hipomines, to hinder the course of Atlanta, the Charibdis that swalloweth up al
honest means whereby the multitude should maintain life: The Scraping Brier
that scratcheth the wool from the silly Sheep, when it comes but to seek
shelter, the Canker that fretteth the Commonwealth, eating and devouring the
gettings of the poor.

It is Covetousness that poisoneth the ears of Princes, and teaches them to
neglect and set aside all just and honorable dealing: It is Covetousness that
holds nothing unlawful that brings in gain: It is Covetousness that
makes no conscience in gathering of Gold, nor in spilling of blood.


Pill. It is Covetousness, that was never cherished by virtue, nor beloved of
God, and as Covetousness is a most hateful vice in him that should command
an Army, so I cannot admit of him, that from a bare and needy estate should be
advanced to that dignity of a General, because his poverty would be a spur
to prick him forwards to exact from those, that Nobility invested with
Honor, would otherwise cherish and maintain, though to his own expense.


Skill. Here is yet to be remembered, how much digressing from martial
Policy: for a Prince to affy^ himself on such confedcrates, as are dull and
flow in helping: or to seek assisttance from friends that are far off, who
by reason of the distance of place, cannot give such speedy succors as
necessity may require.

And no less dangerous again to be served by Soldiers, that are to
encounter with an enemy, who is like wise served with Soldiers of the same
Nation, considering how hard a matter it is to bring Soldiers of one Nation,
so any encounter, the one against the other.


Pill. We should not need to look out far for presidents, for he that has
been well acquainted with the services of Ireland, will quickly set down,
probatum est.


Skill. But that expertence is better in a medicine, then in a malady.


Pill. And it is strange to see how many water-casting Physicians has taken
upon them to look into the diseased estate of that Realm of Ireland, and how
they have pretendes not only to know the nature of the sickness it self,
that does oppress it but also from whence the cause has had proceeding, and
how it might be cured.

And be that has been in Ireland, and but of one months continuance in the
Country, would set down precepts of reformation, and prescribe plats and
means how the people might have been reduced to a dutiful and loving
obedience.

But plat what, and how they could, the Irish have from time to time continued
their rebellions: and within the compass of our own memories, that Country
has consumed many worthy and gallant Gentlemen, and spent cur late gracious
Queen, infinite sums of Ireasure: and notwithstanding that the base and
beggarly Irish (I mean those of the rebellious sort) had no means to
maintain a war against so mighty a Princess, no Artillery, no Provision,
no Storethouses with Munitions, no Shipping to transport, no Mint to make pay,
nor any manner of other help, either to leuy new forces, or to supply their
old with convenient necessaries (...) for an Army, yet they have borne out
their rebellion; from time to time, sometimes for seven or eight years
together, and but with a little One-meale and Butter: In the mean time there
were Politicians, that of my conscience) did not so much as think of God, nor
never meant to let him know, nor make him privy to their devises, and yet
would say, they durst undertake to have reformed Ireland with the very industry
of wit.


Skill. The policies of men are vain, and those policies that has not their
original from that divine and sovereign Policy, derived from the word of
God, is both vain, and foolish: and it is no less fond, to believe that a
people should be confirmed to the duty and obedience of their Prince, that are
not first reduced to the true knowledge and service of their God.

And what reformation may be expected in that Country, that does swarm with
Ie^uites, Semmaries, Massing-Priestes, and other like Ministers of Antichrist,
the protested enemies to all those Princes that do maintain and uphold the
pure word of God.

But this is more strange then all the rest, that there should be any hope at
all to reform a people, that from their very infancy have been trained up
under Schoole-maisters, who not only instructed and (...) them in the
disciplines of the Popes Church, and as they grow in years, caused them to vow
and protest obedience and subjection to his holiness: but also would persuade
and inioyne them by exhortations, from time to time, to hate, conteniue, and
delpise their Prince, that they would say, was but an Heriticke, accursed and
excommunicated from the Communion of the Catholic Church; and when they grew
of age to take an oath, they swear them upon the holy Mass Book, truly and
honestly to observe the promises.

This has been the use of Ireland in times past, and I am sure has been as
conversant and general throughout the whole Realm, as there were either
Schoolmasters to teach, or Scholars to be taught.


Pill. Is it possible that the lenity of so grations a Sovereign, as she that
swayed the sword so many years, with such mildness and mercy, should yet be
requited with such distoyaltie?


Skill. Her Majesty thought that in being gracious, she might thereby have
won their hearts to a more loving and willing obedience, and to this end to
draw them to a dutiful regard, what did she neglect that was either
befitting a Prince to grant, or behoouefull for subjects to receive, but that
she liberally bestowed amongst the^, what pardoning, what protecting, and what
mittigating of offenses that were committed against her, and how many Gentlemen
of that countries birth, were continually returned from her Majesty's Court,
back again into Ireland, laden with gifts and presermentes, who after they
had passed and possessed their grants, would not after come in place to say
Amen, where shey heard her Majesty prayed for.


Pill. Yet some will say there is not a readier mean whereby to draw subjects
to a sctled love, then this bountiful and gracious clemency used by the Prince.


Skill. He that handles the Nettle most tenderly, it stingeth most bitterly,
and although men be made all of one metal, yet they are not all cast in one
mould.

The nature of the Irish are to be considered, that for the greatest part are
inclined to cruelty, to theft, to robbery, to treason, to deceit, and such
other.

Now to encounter these with gentleness and courtesy, were to set a Sheep, to
encounter with the Wolse, the Lamb, with the Lion, the mild with the
merciless, and therefore to a people thus disposed, close cruelty is more apt
to reform, then open clemency.


Pill. But they complain of too much cruelty used by our Nation, especially
now in these late wars: they say they are exacted, robbed and spoiled, and
maimed no less by the soldier that should defend them, then by the rankest
rebel that is most ready to oppress them.


Skill. Seditious estates, with their own devises, false friends with their
own swords, and rebellious Commons by their own snates, draws on their own
overthrows.

Do the Irish complain of cruelty, and of the exactions of the Soldier? do
they not know that Soldiers in the time of war will spoil, and that it is
the fruits of war to waste and spoil? and I think ordained by the
Almighty himself, as a scourge upon the people, to make them to feel and
know their sins.

But it is good to see vice, to find fault with vice, to see sin, to reprove
sin, and to see imperfection, to bear witness of the same imperfection in
another.

Could they now but consider, that it is their own misdemeaners that draws
on these wars, by their entertaining of Jesuits, Seminaries, Friars, and
Massing-Priests, their receiving of them into their houses, relieuing and
maintaining of them against the proceedings of the Prince, and so think of
their own disloyalty and disobedience, in harboring those that are the very
fire-brandes of rebellions, the stirrers up of commotions, the very instruments
of sedition, to seduce and set subjects in Arms against their Sovereign: if
they could duly consider of this, some of them would rather blush, then
complain, and might rather look for a due deserved punishment for their
disloyalty and contempt, then hope to be relieved in that which cannot be
redressed, till they reform themselves to an untamed subjection, and a more
dutiful love and obedience to their Prince.


Pill. I have heard that in the beginning of Sir William Druries government of
that Country which was some 25. years since, or there abouts) the whole
Garrison of ye Realm was not above 400. foot, and 200. horse, (besides the
wards of some few Castles) the Country could not then be greatly oppressed
by Soldiers: and I have heard it further reported, that if one thousand of our
Nation had been drawn altogether into a strength, that all the rebels of
Ireland durst not to have incountered them in any indifferent ground.

The case is altered howsoever it happens, and it should seem that either
the Irish are become more hardy, or we have lost our wonted Courage, for now
of late we have been driven to imploye far greater numbers, and all little
enough so far as I can perceive, and sometimes with the least to perform
but what were requisite.


Skill. It would seem that our progenatours many years ago, stood in some
fear of that which is now come to pass, and knowing the inclination of the
Irish, how ready they were to run into rebellion, and how desirous to shake
off the English government, to prevent those means that might further their
rebellious pretenses, they established certain decrees, coming them by act of
Parliament, amongst many other that were instituted for that purpose, it was
ordained that no man of the Irish birth should have charge or custody of any
Castle or place fortefied belonging to the Prince: nor that any Captain
should retain above three Irish men at the most in his company of one hundred
and these to be admitted but as sptes or guides to pass through the country.

There were many other laws made, prohibiting the Irish from certain
principal offices, and in like manner prohibiting the English from marrying
festering and combining with the Irish.

Whilst these prohibitions were carefully observed in the country, they were
not able to raise any great rebellion, but that might have been suppressed
with a small number of men, and with no great charge to the Prince.

But after these good constitutions were neglected, and that every Captain
was at liberty to retain as he listed, and for his own gain to convert his
company that should have been all English into three parts and more of the
Irish, and when whole companies of the Irish were erected, I will not say the
mest of them sent from the rebels themselves, but of purpose to betray, but by
this means the whole rabble of rascals were armed, trained, disciplined, and
made apt and fit for any rebellion: and by these means the number of the
rebels daily increased, that were still armed and weaponed at the Princes
charge.

I will not speak of the several reasons and practices from time to time by
them performed, but this is not to be forgotten, that the Irish themselves
finding how slily they had deceived us in hoping of any assistance in their
service, would merrily demand, When it was ever heard on, that one Wolf would
pray upon another.


Pill. Will you give me leave Captain Skill, but to deliver a matter of my
knowledge?

There is an old Irish practice, that since I have known Ireland, has cost
our late gracious Queen more money then would well have served to have
conquered three Irelands: and this arises likewise by the overmuch trust and
confidence that is had in the Irish: and it is the shoot Anchor that they all
trust unto, for when all hopes do fail them, this they are sure will never
deceive.

The matter is, when they have played the fraitors, and have stood out in open
rebellion, and that they have been pursued with great expense of treasure, and
have been brought (as it were) to the last gasp, not longer able to endure,
then to take breath, and to supply themselves again with their further
practices they pretend humility, and they will make choice of some special
man sometimes perhaps of some great Councellor of that Realm, or of some other
great Commander of that part of the country, where themselves are abiding:
but such a one they will still make choice on, as they will be sure shall be
well be friended, as well at the Council Table of Ireland, as otherwise in the
Court of England: To him they will pretend great submission.

They will desire him to be a mean for a pardon, they will make great offers
and protestations of their future fidelity, they will say they will deserve,
and they will put in pledges for security: perhaps they will give their
Procurador, a score of Beeues, or a brace of fair Horse.

This Councellor, or Commander, or whosoever looking into his own lands, and
seeing them every day wasted (or at the least in danger to be spoiled) by this
traitor y^ now eraueth his assistance, is glad to embrace his friendship,
together with his suit, and howsoever he thinks the Rebel will hold promise
with the Prince, he is sure in the mean time his tenants and himself shall be
spared from spoil.

Here he calls to mind again how acceptable a piece of service it is
accounted to bring in a Traitor, how much it will redounde to his reputation,
when it shall be reported what a notable rebel he has brought in, how highly
it shall advance his credit, and how his friends in the Court of England shall
rejoice and glorify his service, con mending it to the ears of his Sovereign
Prince, whom they have made believe what a sparing it should be as well of
money as of many men's lives, that the Traitor should thus be received to give
the matter the better grace, they will tell what wonderful service by his means
might after be performed, and how many ill disposed persons will be dismayed
and terrifyed upon his coming in.

There is no opportunity left, nor no labor be spared till a pardon be
purchased, which being once attained, the Traitor is brought in, and where in
his action of rebellion, he was able to furnish the field, with four hundred,
six hundred, or a thousand traitors, he is not now able to serve his Prince
with six true men: but he serves his purpose, and watching his time, goes out
again, and will after be three times more chargeable then he was before.

These be no novelties, nor no rare and dainty matters to be found, when there
be an infinite number of presidents, that might be inferd; how our gracious
Queen by this means have been abused.


Skill. There is no need to conceal these things in secret, because they are
already too openly known, many other matters there be concerning the former
affairs in that Country, that are rather privately to be considered of, then
publicly discoursed, the which because they are not for me to look into, I
will therefore leave them to those that are quicker sighted.


Pill. By this I perceive, it is better for wayfaring men to to tread those
tracts already trodden out to their hands, then to seek unknown ways, that
may perhaps sometime lead them astray, or at the least, lead them the farthest
way about: for if those presidents by you rehearsed, left by predecessors, had
been as carefully observed, as they were wisely prescribed, the rebellious sort
of the Irish, had not been so well enabled to have maintained their rebellions:
and now I see how that which was attributed to the execeding wisdom, policy,
and valiance of the Irish, might rather be imputed to our oversight, when they
strengthened themselves rather by our ^^fferance, then by their own wit and
worthiness.


Skill. For the wisdom and policy that has been noted in the Irish I must not
speak of, and the best commendations that I can give is this: they have been
beholding to their English friends, it is not the Irish, but the English with
the Irish hearts that has undone Ireland: let the rest pass, and let us
render him his due that has merited more honor than my pen can express: the
noble Earl, the now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, whose wisdom joined with
magnanimity, has not only repulsed the Spaniard, and freed that estate from
Spanish practices, but has likewise so qualified and quieted the desperate
condition of that decayed Commonwealth (almost past hope of recovery, that he
has thereby advanced his honor to posterity, in far greater measure then I
am able to set down: I can therefore but wish all happiness to himself, and
good success to his honorable proceedings.

And now to speak a little of that Ualiance so imputed to the Irish, when do
they show it, or where do they perform it but in a Bogge: in a pace, or in
some other ground of advantage, where they are sure our horsemen shall neither
charge nor chase them, and where, if our footmen do press them with good
conduct, they can retire themselves by their fast footemanship without any
danger.

This is it that makes them hardy, but upon an equal ground that yields no
other advantage then the virtue and valiance of him that does command, and
where horsemen and footmen may do their endeavors and be brought to serve, the
Irish are as timorous as any other nation: neither is there a people in any
place where I have been, that will sooner trust to their heels then they.


Pill. It may be the Irish are the more ready to run, knowing their own
dexterity and ability to perform it: but let us leave Ireland, and speak of
Valiance truly what it is, as we have already done with Justice, Experience,
and Policy, and how it is or may be behouefull for a General or Captain.


Skill. Valiance is a virtue without the which our lives are of small value,
but the same being destitute of Justice, is hurtful to the good: If Temperance
do not moderate her, she will turn into rage, and being not guided by
Experience and Skill, will labor out of reason.


Pill. Some will not hold him to be Valiant, that is not too venterous, and
they will account of him to be but a dastard, that is not desperate.


Skill. True Valiance (indeed) is many times counterseited, sometimes for fear
of punishment, sometimes upon wrath, sometimes upon ignorance not foreseing
pertill, will run on as a blind man in a dangerous passage.

Aristotle would in no wise admit that Diomides should be accounted either
Valiant or wise, for that when the Crakes were put to flight, he remained
alone, and adventured himself against the Force of Hector, which he did rather
to sake the vain praise of the people, because he would not be accounted a
run away, then for the true and sovereign good, wherein consists the end
of virtue.

The like he judged of Hector himself, who many times beholding his wife and
other women upon the walls of Troy, would more boldly and courageously
adventure himself, rather fearing some brute those women might have raised
sounding to his dishonor, then otherwise he did respect the Justice of his
cause, or the general good of the City so distressed by the Greeks.

Here is now a matter worthy the noting, that Aristotle being but a Heathen,
would not admit of this vain oftentation, and as he had not the true
knowledge of God, so he could not look into the sovereignty of virtue with a
right respect: for those great Philosophers, that were accounted the wise men
of the world, who only but for the wind of the world, could despise and
contemn the vanities of the world, they that could weep when they were borne
laugh when they ti^d, and all that they might appear to be constant, but to
whom, even to this unconstant world.

Now for those that are better instructed in the knowledge of God, they are to
aim their actions at an other mark, they must look after the substance and
not after the shadow, they may well consider that true christian valiance never
opposes it self without the fear of God, it never fights for vain glory,
nor greedy desire, but for equity and justice, and for the common and general
good: it never aduentureth rashly or unadvisedly against reason, but with
judgment and deep foresight; for courage without conscience, is like the
Pharisees fast, and he that will fight desperately without Experience, may well be
called an angry fool, but never a valiant fool.


Pill. I never heard a fool reputed to be valiant, and yet I have known some
not greatly ouerburthened with wit, that were rash and hardy enough: but I
perceive ye every bold bayard is not valiant, and how that courage which is
forward to danger without judgment, may rather bear the name of lewd
hardines, then of manliness.


Skill. Plutarche makes the distinction, for he says, that all valiant men
are hardy, but all hardy men are not valiant, as those that will oppose
themselves into peril, sometimes without judgment.

To conclude, he cannot be said to be Valiant, that is not strengthened by the
goodness of this cause, and fortified again by his own skill and knowledge:
but he that is thus armed, he shows himself resolute, and without fear in
the midst of the greatest perriles: yea in the very danger of death it
self: and although he be at any time oppressed with an impossibility of bring
victorious, yet to shun and eschew desperation, he betaketh himself to
patience, which so mightily defends him, yt with great difficulty he may be
ouerco^e, but never conquered.


Pill. Patience is but a dry plaster, but it is a tried medicine, for it
armeth men to the proof against all the assaults of Fortune: and I think that
courage which at the point of death it self, shows no coffeehouse, nor
sign, nor show of grief, may well be imputed to constancy, and why not to
Valiance?


Skill. Those whom Fortune has thrown down, being spoiled and bereaved of
solace and contentment, if in extreme desperation they make light account of
death, there is in them yet a certain assurance of dastardly Cowardice,
because they hasten their dying day, not so much for showing their Constancy,
as for avoiding of misery, as may thus be expressed.

In Fortunes high disgrace, each wight may death disdain,
But he most valiant is, that can in wretched state remain.

Pill. By this now it does appear, that although Valiance be a special
ornament for a Captain, yet it marches but in the Rereward, preferring the
other two before him as more worthy, I mean Experience and Policy: and I see
it is not enough for the valiant man, to do what he can, but he must likewise
take heed, that he attempt nothing, but what he ought: and therefore without
Experience, he should run into many errors, and wanting Policy, he should
likewise want means to execute: but I wonder what Soldiers have to do with
Mercy, which you say is required in a General? I remember the Germans will
needs have it confirmed, that there are three notable fools in the world. The
first, an honest Dice-player: the second, a merciful Soldier: the third, I
think be a Vintner, that will sell wine without water. But for a Soldier that
must be tied to Experience, Policy, and Valiance, and all but to revenge, what
has he to do with Mercy? or how can Mercy and Revenge draw both in one yoke?


Skill. As Justice without temporance is reputed cruelty, so Magnanimity
without Mercy, is accounted Tyranny. This gods is mild, gentle, and
gracious, and there is nothing wherein mortal men may so nearly resemble the
divine nature, as in showing of mercy, and in giving of life and safety: to
show comyseration to the distressed, who in their sorrows have no other
recourse then to sighs and sobbes which ascend unto the presence of God,
where they are most favorably received: and what can men do to show
themselves more like Gods upon the earth, then in bestowing of this blessing,
to give pardon and life?


Pill. But this is fitter for Magistrates here at home, and to such as should
receive the petitions and complaints of the poor, but what is this to
soldiers when they are in the field in the presence of their enemies?


Skill. The encounter then must be pursued with courage, but the victory must
be used with mercy.

The Lacedaemonians used before they entered battle, to make solemn sacrifice
to the Muses, to the end they might by them attain, as well how to use victory
gentilly, as of Mars to become victors manfully: and Mercy carries not that
grace and comeliness in any other person, as it does in a mighty Conqueror,
or a great Commander, because they have more occasion to use and exercise it,
and it manifests it self most of all, where it has most matter to work
upon.


Pill. Pity without equity is plain partiality, and Mercy out of time and
season, or leaning overmuch to lenity, has more re^emblance to foolish Pity.

But Policy sometimes excludes both Mercy and Pity, as the Greeks who after
the destruction of Troy, slew Astianax the son of Hector, fearing if he had
lived he might have sought revenge.

It must therefore be a great virtue, and especially in a Captain to be both
merciful and wise together.


Skill. Mercy is then a special ornament if used in reason, and as the
pleasure of Revenge, does sudainlie pass and vanish away, so the contentment
of Mercy does for evermore endure.

Alexander was more famed for the clemency he used to his enemies, then by all
the victories he otherwise obtained: neither did he repent him of the pardon
he gave to Diomides (though a tyrant) nor Marcus Antonius of the favor he
showed to the great King Herod.

It is a common thing to pardon light and small offenses, but to remit faults
of great importance, belongs only to the magnificent mind: and as much
impossible for a noble heart to be cruel, as it is for a cruel heart to be
courageous.

A merciful and a mild authority, brings that to pass, which a violent
force is not able to ^o: and a gentle entreaty is many times of greater
efficacy, then an Imperious command.

Mercy does not only make men more honest, but more assured: and there is
neither Sentinel nor Corpse de Guard, planted in every quarter, may be so safe
a defense, as the good will and love, that is obtained by Mercy: for Squad roue
may be corrupted by force or fraud, but this Castle is vnpregnable, and
needs no other fortification: it carries with it such a sweetness and
content, and it draws after it men's affections in such sort, that a kingdom
is better preserved by it, then by an Army.


Pill. Then we may have the less need of Soldiers now at this present: but
yet as we have already spoken of the General himself, and of those things
appertaining to his place, so let us now speak something of the ordinary
Soldier, and of his reputation, what it is, or should be. Now if you please
Captain Skill, to make definition of a Soldier, and how he should be
accomplished, being in that prime and full perfection as he ought, I will
adventure my self to say what they are, and to what condition they are grown
unto now at this present.


Skill. Then to speak of a Soldier as I would have him, I will spend a great
deal of spirit, amongst the good spirits of these times, not of that spirit
that makes a winter billowe to break upon it self, but of that spirit which
like a Martyrs fire, burns up a body to quicken many spirits.

I make my tongue mine eyes Oracle, I challenge time to be my tongues instance;
I will speak of pure love in weak oratory: I will show, though not a
Philosopher to define, yet a Soldier to execute.

Then what infer I, but this: I will speak of a Soldier, shall I search him
as Diogenes did a man with a Candle at noone day? no, I will find him with
Scipio, with a sword at midnight: I will define him as I prove him* describe
him as I wish him, and wish him such in his life, as I would be in my death.

Execution craves hazard, and they that attempt much, expect resist: resist
attaines an opposite, an opposite ouer-throwe.

To make a Uictor triumph, is to infer a Conquered: to be conquered and not
dye, is to be disgraced and yet live: to conquer and not dye, is to buy
Eternity with little price.

Out of these conclusions chose I a Soldier, as the Stoics do their Wise men,
in that (as they vainly imagine) can no ways err.

I know him to be created to execute honorably, and to be prepared for death:
since he lives still marching forth to seek it: to hate subjection more then
he fears death, and so conjecture the honor of his calling, by the
consequence of that he undertakes.

For what is the effect of a Soldiers life? to undertake the defense of
Religion, to fight for his Prince, to withstand the hazards of his Country, to
repulie those that would depresse the same to protect his friend and family.

It follows then, that as none but the Uestall Uirgins were suffered to
kindle the sacret fire, neither any other admitted to sacrifice to Jupiter, but
such as were his Priests, and were honored for purity of life: so none should
be admitted to the honor or title of a Soldier, except his Conscience were
answerable to his cause, and his life as honest, as the quartell he undertakes
is weighty and good.

I account not him for a Soldier, that like a Nazaret wears long locks, that
can swear, swash and swagger, and is more noted for the brandings he brought
from the Sessions, then for the wounds he received in the wars.

The Soldier I define and seek, must accustom himself to enquire with the
Spratans, not how many the enemies be, but where they be.

His life must be devout, his behavior modest, his diet temperate, his most
hated enemy, shameful flight, his greatest study, to learn Agis, that he is
unworthy to govern many, that has not often and sundry times fought against
many.

Such in my judgment should Soldiers be, but such (as Ciceros Orator) are
easily defined, but seldom found.


Pill. And where would you seek for him? what in Newgate?


Skill. No, I am afraid of my purse.


Pill. Will you then fetch him from Bride well?


Skill. That were to buy a horse out of Smithfield.


Pill. How then, will you draw him out of an Alehouse?


Skill. Mine Hostess would chide for the reckoning.


Pill. Would you rake him up as he passes through the streeles?


Skill. That were just to make clean the Channel, and to carry out the filth.

In tunes past, he that had a Crab^tree look, a sewre countenance, and a hard
favored visage, they would say it was a good Soldiers face: But now, they do
not choose him so much for his il-fauoured look, as they do for his
il-fauoured conditions.

But for him, that from a Psalm of mercy, is made a maintainer of Justice, and
that is redeemed from the whip, to fight for his Prince, or that is but raked
up in the streets, to undertake for his Countries defense, what policy this
is, let some Philosopher decide, for my little wit is too slender to conjecture.


Pill. Let me now speak truly of Soldiers what they (...): I think of all
Occupations they be the men of the best conscience, for they never rise nor
fall with the Market, but let corn be cheap or dear, their pay is still
eight pence a day: let the days be short or long, fair or foul, hot or
cold, they keep their price, eight pence a day, no more then they had many
years ago, when they might have bought more for the eight pence, then they
can do now for their eighteen.

Again, the Soldiers in these days, do never put out their money for usury,
they never purchase lands nor livings out of their neighbors hands: you shall
not find him in the Merchants books for any great sums, and yet if it be
but for a matter of a thousand pounds, a Soldiers word is as good as his band.

This honest demeanure of theirs, does so privilege them, that after the
wars ended, when they return into their Country, it is in their own
choice, whether they will beg or steal: if he cannot procure to be one of
the Knights of Winsor, he may easily compass to be whipped about the streets at
Westminster.

Now of all Occupations, I would not wish my friends to bind their sons
Apprentises to the Soldiers trade in these days, and yet the profession has
been accounted honorable, and it may well retain the honor still, for any
thing that I know: but there is no gain, nor great commodity bolonging to the
Occupation.

Perhaps yet a man that has honestly served, at his return home, may get some
worshipful Gentleman's countenance, or a Noble man may now and then vouchsafe
him a nodde, or a favorable look: And it is a goodly matter that same, and
very acceptably received of many: but for my part I had rather have a Lambs
Purtinance, then such a Countenance: for the one may serve to fill the belly,
and for the other, it may well feed a fool, but I am sure it will never make
him fat.

I think in times past, it was as rich a booty to get some Noble man's
countenance, as it was for Scoggin to get the Bishops Blessing, that being once
attained, they were both scarce worth a couple of pence.


Skill. But yet Captain Pill I would not have you to blaspheme Soldiers, nor
to let slip such speeches as might seem in a sort to deprave Nobility.


Pill. I pity the Soldier, and I reverence and extol honorable Nobility:
you may say I speak plainly, but I protell I mean honestly, though my words
be not imbrodered with high morality: I care not, if my speeches be plain and
true, they so much the more resemble their Sire: and for children to be like
the parents, besides the Mid wise will give it a blessing, so it is a sign
they be legittimate: defects I know they cannot want, that in the procreation
were bred and borne before their time: for as I was conceived of them in an
instant, so I was delivered again in a moment: and these abortiue brats, that
are thus hastily brought into the world, though they seldom prove to have
any great vigor or strength, yet I hope being rightly considered of, these
will prove to be of as honest and plain dealing as their father.


Pill. Plain dealing is a Soldiers best method, but you have declaimed the
Soldiers profession: and what Knowledge, Art, or Science is it, that you
would now prefer before it?


Pill. Marry I say the Tailors, and of mine honesty fool that I am so
swear) it my censure were demanded who I thought to be the wisest men now in
these later times, I would say they were Tailors: if any man came in with his
Quare, my Qui^ should be, because they make us all fools, Id est, they bless
us tuerie day with a new bebbe, with a new stick, with a new cut, with a new
guard, and they can devise every day a new fashion for a fool.


Skill. Me thinks (Captain Pill) you have dealt in your discourse as the
woman, who going about to cure a blemish in one of her eyes, applied so many
plasters til she put them both out: and you seeming all this while but to
salve some infirmities that have lately crept in amongst soldier, have at an
instant so dashed them and their profession with such discretion as we have
hither to spent many words I think to little purpose.


Pill. Words are but a windy chaffer, that are still chopped and changed,
because they are good cheap, and I think if they were but of very little
worth, we should be as sparing of them as we be of our good deeds.

Words are like Scoggins sleeuelesse men, that he still employed about
sleeuelesse arrands: And we send words of many more messages, then we mean to
perform: words when they be spoken, are as they are taken, and my purpose has
not been to quarrel with Soldiers: neither do I think them to be more worthy
of blame, then a great many of others, that would be reputed faultieste: But
seeing I am entered into a speaking vain give me leave yet once again, a little
to digress from our martial matters, and let me spend a little breath but for
mine own exercise, to speak of something, it makes no matter what.


Skill. Speak what you list I will give you the hearing, and yet still to chop
from one matter to another, some will say is no good Decorum.


Pill. It makes no matter for that, let them say so still, for I mean not
(indeed) to follow any certain order or rule of appointed precepts, though I
know curious heads will stand upon Method: yet it is enough for soldiers if
they can prefer matter* Scholars will look after rethoricall discourse, we
content our selves with bare and naked truth.

I know there be many of so quick a wit, and so lively a spitit, that they
will do wrong unto nature, yea and to God himself, and they have found out so
many subtle subtilties, that are yet made more subtle, by the means of
subtle handeling, that but with a little mist of knowledge, they will pervert,
and deface knowledge it self: then they are so fortified and guarded with such
store of distinctions, def^nitions, conclusions, propositions, so many
paraphrases, so many circumlocutions, so many translations, so many figures,
and such a marie of other starting holes, as I think Vulcans Net that snarled
Mars himself, were not able to hold them.

then what am I, whose knowledge is but ignorance, whose wit is but dull, whose
mind is inwured in a durtie prison of a sensual body: how would I then take
upon me (amongst the frisking wits of these our days) to discourse of humors,
to speak of fancies, and to set down the dispositions of the foolish nultitude?

If Heraclitus were now living, and should take a survey of this straight of
times, I wonder with what countenance he would look upon us? I verily think
that where he wept but by fits to see the infirmity of those times wherein he
lived, de would now shead continual tears without stinting, to see the
unhappiness of the time now present.

And I doubt again, that if we had another Democrites amongst us in England,
to look upon the conversation of all sorts of people, I wonder whether he
would laugh for joy in contemplating our happiness, still squared out by the
providence of godly Princes, or laugh to scorn the practices of the ungodly,
that are still platting and practicing their own infelicitie?

Some will say the world runs on wheels, and it may be it has done so in
times past: but I say now it goes on crourhes, it is become Bis puer, it is
waxen old, decrepit and lame: A limping world God knows, and nothing but
halting between neighbor and neighbor, between friend and friend, between
brother, and brother, and sometimes halting downeright between? the father and
the child.

Our auncesteurs alas, they were but plain dealing men, they had not the
mineing complements now in use, they knew not a Fantastic from a fool, and
they were better acquainted with a Shooing-horne, then they were with a
Setting-stick.

But now I will not give a groate for his conceit that cannot make an Owl an
Hawke, a Jack Napes a Sheep, an old Mil-horse, a Palfrey for a man of honor,
if he cannot work wit like wax, form it into any impression: if he cannot
poulder it, perfume it, and season it to please fancies: if he cannot
Anothomize and Martyr it: and if need require, if he cannot draw wit into a
Quintessence.

Yet there be some others, so unapt and dull, that it might be believed that
Nature had brought them into the world but in a despite and mockery: yet, if
the Cowe-pasture be flored with milch kine, and that there be a Teeme or two of
Oxen to plow the land, some store of Hogs on the backside, and that the wit
will but serve to keep them out of the corn, and to know when it is a good
season to sow Barlie, you shall see such a Magnisico, when he causes to a
Market-Towne, will take more state upon him, then he that sold a groates-worth
of wit, in a (...) worth of paper.

Now he that should hear but one of these Hoglings at assemblies and meetings,
how they will calculate of dearth and plenty, and for Corn, Cattle, butter,
Cheese, and such other like, they will tell you this year, what price it will
bear the next: if a great frost or a snow does sometimes happen more then
ordinary, they will by and by prognosticate of dearth: or if it do but rain
one hour too much, or half an hour too little, the next market day they will
raise the price of corn by twelve pence in a bushel.

If these men did but know their own unworthiness, I think they would change
their simplicity to desperation, and would convert their pange of drowsy
ignorance, to a quotidian fit of frenzy.

I must yet confess they show great modesty, that leaving the study of
wisdom to their friends, do draw the whole contentment from a little dirt and
dross.

It would be tedious for me to deliver the diversity in the dispositions of
men: we see one ready to die for the love of a woman: another will set his
wife to sale: one would that every man should live of his own: some other are
so much inclined to Pitharoras sect, that they would have all things to be in
common amongst friends: one will boast with Thraso, another will flatter with
Gnato: another to make John his son a gentleman, will himself lie like a
mizer all the days of his life: but I think that be to verify the proverb,
Happy, is the child, whose father goes to the devil.

What a numberless company of hunts-men are there in the world, that do
follow this chase of hunting after wealth, assisted only by this hope, to make
their sons gentlemen, and how easy a matter is it to be a gentleman in these
days, when there be so many servile practices to draw in wealth, and every
rich man may stand upon his genterie.

We may now put a sir-reuerence, when we speak of honesty when Briberie,
Usury, Perjury, and every other iniquity are honest men's trades.

And I think if Hell were a place of return, and that there were any hope of
gold or gain there so be gotten, more tryple headed dogs then one would not
be able to defend the entry.

Our ancestors hunted after honor, but we after wealth: they left themselves
famed to posterity by vertueus indeuoer: and we desire to leave some
Memorandum to after ages of our being, but not for any good deeds: but as he
that fired the Temple of Diana, to be inrowled with perpetual infantie.

Some, to leave themselves renowned to future times, do build stately houses,
the tops elevated to the clouds, which they have set up as (...) of their
glory, ^ot are the ensigns of vanity, and the monuments of miserable
iniquity.

To this college do they also appertain, who by their life days do
seriously inact with what p^mpe and glory their funerals shall be performed,
and are more famed for a sumptions tomb erected after their death, then for
any good deed performed all the days of their life.

Same others, for leaving there Erecutors to give pennis ^ole atter they are
dead, do hope for that deed of charity, not only to be commended to
posterity, but also to obtain a Quietus est, for all his former extortions,
exactions, and opressions, whatsoever.


Skill. Captain Pill, were it not good for you now to take a little breath, and
to think it better for a man to reform his own faults, then to take
exceptions at other men's.


Pill. I know there is not a more dangerous enterprise, then for a man to
look into the sins of the mighty Giants of the world: and I say again, we
perish, if we search out their evil, that will wallow in wickedness, and yet
will not be controwled.

It is now forty years ago since I was twenty years old, in this mean
time, I have had some respect to observe which way the wind has blown, but I
could never learn where bare and naked Truth had clothed Honesly in a furd
gown, nor where Wit that had endeavored to reprove Folly could get so much as
a liuerie cloak for his better countenance.


Skill Honesty, that is of a reprehending humor, that will be snarring at the
ungodly, shall b^gge his bread, and he that cannot dissemble with wicked men,
alas, how can he live in the world? not by his honesty, nor by kis wi^: and as
for learning, he that has but the gift of flattery, he shall be able to
confound all other knowledge, and to run through the great affairs of the
world: it is more auailable then six of the seven liberal Sciences.


Pill. Why should the learned sort then adventure to give the world new eyes,
to see into those things beyond the common sense of men? or why should those
that be watchful, awaken the dull and blockish spirit, with sin so ^^lde
asleep, that it cannot discern the beauty of the soul? or why should they
that mooues the Spheres with wit, and purifies the suddie senses of the
sensual world, impart their pure to these regardlesse times?

You happy wights that have made the world drunken with the pleasant Nector
of your rare inventions, hoorde up your golden gain within your sacred
breasts, let worlds bearing ^sses breathe and feed on chafe, vntee^^ your
busy thoughts from farther soil, and rest your wearied Muse from this
prentiship of pains, why should you talk and tice yourselues to ^igge the
mine of wit, when abject bounty will not level out the labor of one happy
line?


Skill. The travel of wit finds out and lays open the very secrets of
nature, and where will and knowledge do meet, the Graces sit installed in the
breast, the Muses sleeps in the bosom, Art pencils out his secrets, and Wonder
buildes his monuments in the excellency of his skill.

The broiles of bloody war leaves nothing vndeuoured: yet must it leave
Knowledge, Art, and Science behind untouched: for War cannot take any spoil
from Virtue, and when all things are cut away with the Sickle of Time,
Knowledge florisheth so high, that Time cannot reach it.

The pens of the learned will pearce a Soldiers cor^^et, and by abasing or
concealing the most haughty exploites of the Magnanimious, they will eclips his
glory, or leave him to oblivion: and again, but with a drop or two of ink,
they can exalt and magnify their friends and fauourours (although sometimes
above the truth) that they will lead them famed and renowned to posterity.

And who is ignorant of the true glory that has been stored up by the
learned in the treasure-house of Letters?


Pill. It should then appear (Captain Skill) that Knowledge, Art, and
Science, are much more precious then profitable, if not, why lives the learned
in such perpetual want?


Skill. Because the world loves fools, and scorns the wise.


Pill. Indeed a fool may sometimes sit above the fault, where he that is wise
shall scant be permitted at the nether end of the table: but when shall Arts
prevail and flourish then?


Skill. When Kings become Philosophers again.


Pill. That time is come, and God be thanked that has sent it in time: and now
I perceive what it was, that Aristinus being asked why so few Princes in his
time, did extend their liberality in such sparing sort to the learned, made
answer, because their consciences did accuse them how unworthy they were, of
those praises which the learned were accustomed to give to Princes that were
trulis virtuous, neither could they discern of the excellency of Arts, that
were themselves so utterly ignorant.

But now if the goodness of a Prince may promise a gracious consideration to
the well deserving: England is made happy in him, whose name is already
consecrated to immortality, whose Magnificence equalled with Virtue, is able
with Caeser, with one hand to hold the Spear in the rest, and with the other
to hold the pen: whose Imperial seat is no less renowned by Mars, then
beautified by the Muses.

I could wade farther, but it were better for me to conceive in silence, then
not being able to utter, might seem indisreete.

I will therefore here stay my self, and will yet once again convert my
speeches to speak of Martial matter: but first Captain Skill, for as much as
you have already defined of a Soldier, what he should be in the prime of his
perfection, if we could now finds the cause from whence it springs, that they
are so far degenerated from this so honorable a condition, we might then
with the Physician, first by remoouing the cause, be able the more easily to
cure the sickness.


Skill. The propogation of Soldiers with us here in England (thus lately
grown to this basterdlie kind) are especially misbegotten in their very
first choice: for in times of imploiment, when Soldiers are to be levied and
prepared, the election is made of Rogues, Runnagates, Drunkards, and all sorts
of Uagabonds and disordered persons, such as are fitter to garnish a prison,
then to furnish a Camp: And the authority of these appointments are committed
to silly Constables, or perhaps sometimes, to some Justice of peace, as silly
and ignorant as he that is most simple: and these do thinks they have
performed a very wise piece of service, when they heue rid the country of
this scumme of idle loiterers.


Pill. It was my fortune not many years sithence to pass along the streets,
where I saw a company of towns men, that were weaponed with old rustie
bills, who were haling and pulling of a fellow by the head and the shoulders (I
had thought to some place of execution) and demanding of one of the company
what affence the fellow had committed: I was answered, shall it was an idle
Rogue that had been a (...) about the country, and they had pressed him for a
Soldier.

But I pray (said I) does your Commission warrant you to press Rogues, to
serve for Soldiers?

With this demand, the Constable of the Ward began to grow very hot and
angry, and he told me flatly, he was not ignorant how far his Commission did
extend: and as for these Rogues, Wagabonds, and other like excremen^s of the
Commonwealth, he thought it a happy riddance to purge the Country of that
infection and by sencing them to the wars, to keeps honester men at home in
their places.

I durst not render any rough reply to the Constable, least he should complain
that I went about to (...) to the execution of his Office: but in a courteous
owner I asked of him, that if the place where he dwelt were so (...), that an
enemy were ready to approach, to moke spoil and hau^ek^ of their lines and
goods, and to make a pray of the City or Town wherein he dwelt, whether would
he and the rest of the inhabitants his neighbors, retain such men as they had
pressed for the service of their Prince, to fight in their defense, and to
repose themselves in the trust of their service?

In says sir no (quoth Master Constable) for we would sooner commit them all
to pr^^h, then to put weapons into their hands, that would be more ready to
take the spoil of us, then to hurt our enemies.

Then I perceive Master Constable (said I) you can quickly conceive of the
good or ill that concerns your selves, but you cannot so easily discern of
the general good, that does as nearely concern your Prince and Country: but
God bless the place you dwell in from any such distress as we have spoken of,
and God defend, that either the souernigne dignity of our gracious Prince or
the honor of our Country, should ever depend in the fidelity or service of
that rascal rabble, thus raked up and sent to the wars.

The Constable presently chops me up this answer: Sir, I perceive by the sound
of your words, you are a fauo^rite to Captains, and I think you could be
contented, that to serve the expedition of these times, we should take up
honest householders, men that are of wealth and ability to live at home, such
as your Captains might chop and change, and make merchandise of, sometimes by
retaile, sometimes by the great, (as men use to buy Oxen in Smithfield) a whole
company bought and sold together, not to him that was of best experience, but
to him that would give most money? But sir, God defend that any man of honest
reputation should come in place to be extorted, where deside the exartions of
^^ctuallers, they shall be infected with unwholesome and unseasonable provisions,
oppressed by the Pro^ant Master, cheated and purloyned by so many scraping
Officers, as it would but breed anger to be spoken of.

Let me tell you therefore in secret, that we have learnd of Scoggin long ago,
to seek out sleeuelesse men, to send of sleeuelesse arra^os. When the wars
shall be reformed, and reduced to a more honorable course, we will endeavor
our selves to ^^^de out men of better worth, in the mean time, these may
serve, as best besitting the Discipline of this age.

This open mou^hed Constable put me to a Non plus, I would faiue have replied,
but I wist not what, and for want of better matter, I ^^me a little over him
with Blurt Master Constable.

I (...) not stand upon old principles, what observation has been used by
our ancestors, in the choice of Soldiers, what regard was had to the ability
of his body, to the honesty of his mind to the place of his birth, and to
what trade he had been (...) up in: these matters and perceive by the
Constable, are not now in request: for in those days Soldiers were chosen for
their virtue, but now for their vice: in that choice there was comfort, but in
this there is neither honor, pro^t, safety, nor hope of good success.


Skill. Unhappy may those wares be called where men are but sent as it were to
ye slaughter, too we^k in nu^^ec, unfurnished, unprovided, unpaid, and every way
wr^ged and discouraged: for this usage, and these services, rogues, ru^nagat^
and pesa^ts are ye first men to be sent: but where Princes do mean to have
their honors maintained, their Country defended, or their estates and persons
secured, they must look to another choice, for in the choice of the Soldier,
consists the strength of the war: and who is more fit to fight for his
Country, then the man of most approved honesty, that has care of his
reputation, and is ashamed of villainy?

But what success may be hoped for by those wars that are supplied by men
altogether Irreligious profane, wicked, ungracious, such as God has not
promised to bless, but has denounced against them his malediction and curse?
O wit neglecting times, that cannot look into this apparent ill, and cannot
discern before hand of the inconvenience that may succeed.

We first press Rogues, Drunkards, and such other ill disposed persons, which
being once pressed, must be kept with continual guard, perhaps in Bridewell,
or other like places, for running away: What a heavy burden then to the
Commonwealth to Arm and appoint them fit for the field? the^ being delivered
to their Captains and Conductors, they are transported to the place of Rende
vous, with as good a will, as a Bear is brought to the stake, and the time
that they should spend in the practice of their weapons, they practice nothing
but how to run away: so that before one month be fully ended, he that can
show fifty for his hundred, is worthy to pass the Musters for an able
company.

How Generals and great Commanders were by these means abused by their Muster
Rowles, where they might find for every thousand me^, at the least two
thousand names: the Commissaries, and other Officers of the Musters, (that were
not corrupted by the scraping Captain) can well enough report: But how Princes
and estates were deceived of their pay, I may slightly pass, because (as it
should appear) the matter was but slenderly regarded: and how the
Commonwealth likewise was continually charged with the leuying of supplies,
that ran away again as fast as they were sent: the matter deserves no great
consideration, when both citis and country did pay so dearly for it: as they
deserved no better, that would make no better choice.

Thus through the simplicity of a Constable, the Princes service was abused,
the manners and Disciplines of the ancient Militia corrupted, and the name and
estimation of the noble Soldier utterly despised.

But here is the maine mischief, if necessity should enforce to fight, what
hope to confirm those fellows with a settled resolution, to inco^^ter a
warlike enemy, when they are so ready to run away, before ever they durst
to look foe in the face?

Will you persuade them to fight for the honor of their Country? why they
never know what honesty meant: what then, to defend their lands and livings,
why they have nothing to loose, and less to care for: will you press them
with shame for being reputed Cowards? but they will never blush, that are not
only past shame, but also past grace; why then what law to enjoin them, what
love to induce them, or what gods to co^iurs them?

I will leave the rest to those that are (indeed) inducious and able to
discern: but forasmuch as the soldier is the arm and strength of the war,
it shall not be altogether inconvenient, briefly to touch and slip ever what
consideration former times have had in their election and choice.

The holy Scriptures themselves does furnish us with many examples tending to
this purpose, as when the whole Host of the children of Israel were utterly
dismayed, for the multitude of their enemies, the Lord commanded Gedeon, to
muster such to encounter them, as were most faithful, and doubted nothing of
his promises made unto them, which were but three hundred in number, and were
chosen by the lapping of water.

And who is so silly as not to think, but that the antiquity of Musters, is
no less ancient then the antiquity of Wars, neither has their been any
error more severely punished, then those abuses in the Training and Mustering
of Soldiers.

This chopping and changing is but a late practice, and she Musters in times
past, were evermore taken in the presence of men of judgment, gravity and
wit: and amongst the Romans, they were committed to prison, their goods
confiscats and sold, that would not personally appear and answer to their
names at any time of Musters when they were called: and to conclude, I think
he does but ill deserve so enjoy any benefit in his country, that will refuse to
fight for the liberty and safety of his country.


Pill. I may say Amen: but he that should preach this doctrine, perhaps might
offend the better sort of his parishoners: but now I perceive they be not all
Soldiers that runs up and down the country a begging under Soldiers
Pasports, but according to the proverb, Catte after kind: so these I perceive
will follow their former function, first from a Rogue to a Soldier, and from a
Soldier again to a Rogue, it must needs be a well formed Camp that is framed
of such stuff.

I wonder now what Discipline might be prescribed to contain these fellows in
order in the time of War, that could never be brought to observe order nor
^onestie in the time of Peace: yet there is nothing more necessary then order,
especially in War, without the which all runs to confusion: but for my self,
I think I were best to speak of order, as he that came from Church, who could
say, There was a very good sermon: and yet could neither remember the text,
nor any other word that the Preacher had spoken: so say I, order is good, (if
it be decent:) but many does use it, as they do use the new fashion, that do
never thinks themselves to be in fashion, till they be quite out of all fashion.


Skill. The ancient orders and manners left unto us by the great Captains of
former ages are omitted, sometimes by corruptions, sometimes by necessity, and
many times innouated by Captains, who to show themselves as wise as women's
Tailors, can devise every day a new fashion.

This order that we speak of, is to be observed in the field, in the Town, in
the Camp, in marching, in fighting, in charging, in refyring.

In like manner, whether to offend or defend, there is nothing of more
importance then order, when by the neglect thereof, great and mighty armies
have perished.

In the beginning, before they knew any manner of form, or order of array, the
victory was evermore carried away by the stronger part: but fithens they have
learned to order themselves into Ranks, and to fight in good array, the
conquest now is not so proper to the strength of men, as it is to this
experimented order: neither is there any multitude (being once broken and
disordered) that are able to abide a far inferior number, that shall assail
them with order and skill.

This order therefore is to be observed, first in distributing their whole
forces into Companies, into Regiments, into Squadrons: and it is a pleasing
thing, because an Army consisting of many parts, may with the more ease be
divided and martialled (...) for service, as occasion and need shall require.

Provided always, y^ the order that is to be observed in fight, has evermore
relation to the weapons then in use, for the alteration of weapons, does
necessarily enforce the alteration of order.


Pill. That must needs stand with reason: but yet there be some not knowing
this, that will figure forth such forms of Battles, as (I think) were used in
Alexanders time, and were fitter for the incounters of that age, then for the
service of the time present, and this antiquity they infer as a matter of
great importance whereby to privilege the^: but here by they do so much the
more be wray their ignorance, for those orders then in use, would be altogether
out of season, or to very little purpose.

But there is a second Parodox which is now lately crept out of a budget, that
does all to be pepper this opinion, and will in no wise endure that the
alteration of weapon should likewise enforce the alteration of order, and has
inferred no less then 30. imputations very wisely objected against the
moderns Captains of this age as he calls them, for digressing from the
disciplines and orders used by the ancient Captains (I think he means in the
time of King Arthur) amongst the Greeks and Romans.


Skill. Captain Pill, I know from out of what books those imputatio^s were first
drawn, and (...) upon what spleen y^ collectio^s were gathered, neither am I
ignorant what it was that made the Author to conceal his Paradoxes, and would
not suffer them to be published in print so long as he lived, and now he is
deceased, it were no humanity to cauil with men that are in their graves: he
is dead, and therefore let him rest, and God send us that be living a little
more wit, then to believe al which that second Paradox would seem to intimate.

But as from the beginning, the hatred and malice of men one toward another
has continually increased, so with this rage and fury, they have not failed
from time to time, to practice new inventions whereby to kill and murder, and
to this purpose they have till devised weapons, every one of more advantage
then other.

At the first before weapons were known, they avenged themselves with teeth
and nail, after they began to fight with staves and clubbes, then they found
out the forging both of weapons and armours, and from age to age, new
inventions of swords, Iauelins, bills, pikes, and other manual weayons were
found out and practiced by sundry men at several times, entertaining still
those weapons in use, which they sound to be of greatest force and most
advantage.

Thus by piece meals they likewise invented sundry parcels of armor, where
with they armed men: then they fell to arming of Chariots, Eliphants: And Horses
were likewise armed and barded till within these few years.

Continuance of time brought in Long bows, Crosbowes, Slings, Brakes, Darts,
and such other like, and now of late we have changed them all for the Caliuer
and Musket.

Those forms and proportions that were used when they had no other incounters
but with manual and short weapons (and that the hope of victory consisted in
the vigor and strength of men's arms, and in his skill that could bring most
hands to fight) would be now to little purpose, when the mightiest troops and
squadrons may be so discomfited with the fury of shot, that they shall never
be able to strike one stroke.

We have therefore left those forms and battles that were then used, and have
retained an order perfected by time, and bettered by Experience.

(...) For our ancient English weapon the Long-bow, I am sure there be many
that would gladly maintain the excellency of them: but for as much as in the
first discourse between us, we have sufficiently delated of their greatest
effects, we may therefore let the^ yas, yet for my part I could wish they were
but half so effectual as some ignorant men would willingly persuade.


Pill. I think there is nothing wherein Fortune is more variable then in the
actions of War, for as there is no settled form or Discipline which is not
chopped and changed in every age, so in field incounters, there is no hope nor
certainty, which is not quashed again in every moment: and therefore Princes
do in nothing more deceive themselves, then when they do refuse a reasonable
composition when it is offered, and rely in the hope and hazard of a Battle.


Skill. It were good that Princes (with justice and equity) could keep their
own, rather then by tyranny to incroach of others: but in the time of War
to neglect the prosecution of service by Parlies, by taking of Truces, and
delaying of time, it is cloaked under the plausible pretense of Policy, which
they call the winning of time, when in truth they do loose both time and
opportunity.

And who be these Politicians that does persuade it, but Ignorance,
Fearefulnes, Conetousnes, and many times it is induced by Treason it self.

Under the color of treaty of Peace, many practices of hostility has been
performed: and what greater error may be committed, then to suffer an enemy
to buie his own advantage but with a few flattering words, and then to laugh
us to scorn for our folly.

This old Canticle, Da pacem in diebus nostris, has sometimes been too much
embraced, and the bare motion and sound of Peace, is so sweet and pleasing to
the fearful and faint hearted, that to patch and piece it up, they neglect and
set as^^^ all occasions, giving an enemy those advantages, that many times are
not to be redeemed.

And what conditions so dishonorable and base, but the coueious minded man (for
sparing of money) will surrender unto, and all to conclude a Peace more deabtful
and dangerous then the bloodiest War.

I will not say but in the time of Parlies, persuasion may do much, but it is
best then to persuade, when there is force to command: for in the time of
Parlies and Treaties of peace, the Conqueror and he that is of greatest power,
does rather give then receive conditions.

I acknowledge, assured peace, is evermore to be embraced: but these colored
treaties and bad assurances, are both dangerous and unprofitable, and Princes
have incurred by them great loss, both of time and experience.

This dallying out the time of service with deluding Parlies, has been holden
by timorous people to be very politic, but if Misery be reputed for
Policy, and sparing out of season be called good husbandry, I say still they
are ill spared pence, that does afterward cost a great many of pounds.

I must not speak of the delays of our times, but if it be true, that the wit
is best that is dearest paid for, we might in this age be wise and wary both,
and learn to look better to the market, least after this, we buie our own
folly at as dear a rate, as we have already purchased wit.


Pill. I know not how to value wit, nor what price it has borne in times past:
but if it has been so dearly bought, me thinks they should have done well to
have spared some part of the charge to have paid poor Soldiers, that (God
knows) have many times wanted both pay and means whereby to maintain
themselves in any able sort to serve.


Skill. As the Wars cannot be performed without Soldiers, so Soldiers
cannot be contained without pay: for where there is want of pay, there must
needs be but a scambling war, many disorders committed, and as many
opportunities pretermitted.


Pill. For want of pay, the Soldier cannot be kept from scraping, as well from
friends as fees: it likewise breeds mutinies and all manner of disorders, and
Soldiers unpaid, will make but a slow march, maintain but a faint fight, and
it makes them so weak of body, and feeble of courage, that one thousand of
Soldiers that were duly paid, and well provided for, would be more profitable
in the day of battle, then flue thousand of such steruelings that are almost
samished aforehand, and for want of necessaries, are brought so low, that they
are neither able to endure fight, nor yet able to run away.


Skill. The want of money in the time of War, breeds in a General disgrace,
in a Soldier contempt, in the enemy occasion of treason, in the confederate,
a will to revolt.

The Romans (amongst others) maintained their Monarthies by these means, they
endeavored nothing more, then to reward good desert: nor sought any thing
less, then to defraude their soldiers of their pay: in peace they provided
them privileges, at home they allowed them colonies to dwell in; and in the
waine of the Empire, so careful were Monaches to requite them, that their
elections did hang in their choice, and their fortunes, on their swords: that
as one studied to be liberal, so the other strove to be loyal.


Pill) To maintain this pay, your opinion is (as I perceive by yeur former
spieches) that we have not so much need of money, as we have of good orders, to
see them first set down, and then well executed.


Skill. I say so still: and I add thus much farther, that if in times past,
the corruptions of all sorts of officers had been examined in time, great
sums of money might have been spared to pay soldiers, that was worse
employed, and more unprofitably spent.


Pill. I know not in this case what I should judge: but for these thirty or
forty years I have been a little acquainted with the wars of several
Countries, and I never knew but in every place they still complained for want
of pay: but to say the truth, our English nation, more then all she rest have
ever found themselves most agreeued, as (...) against the pinching and prowling
of Captains, as against the cheating and shifting of officers: but is it not
possible for Princes and Estates to find a remedy for these inconveniences?


Skill. Not possible, so long as their is brying and selling of companies, nor
so long as offices are to be bought and sold for money.

I dare not take upon me to advise Princes whom they should trust in these
causes, but with reverence and under correction, I will say a little whom they
should not trust, and of whom they ought to beware.

Then first let them take heed to the Irreligions, and again, of him that is
covetous: but if they do wish good success to their own affairs, let them
beware how they trust him that will buy his office, and will give money to attain
his place.

I protest I have not spoken any thing particularly, whereby to detect or
impeach any person in private, but only in commisseration of the poor
Soldiers, who by these disorders have been miserably wronged.

And as the pay that has been thus spent, might have been a great deal better
spared: so there is nothing more hurtful to the proceedings of War, then too
much misery and pinching, where the spending of money (and but in necessary
sort) shall be more respected, then either the loss of honor, or the hazard
of a Kingdom.


Pill. And it might be termed to be but a threed-bare War, where besides an
ordinary pay, there is not likewise an extraordinary recompense, whereby to
gratify desert.


Skill. Where well doing is not regarded, there duty is many times neglected:
and although the law do enforce some, and necessity prick forwards others to
the service of their country, yet Reward and Recompense are more effectual
to induce a noble courage, then any other mean: for men hardly entertain
hazard where there is no hope, and great minds that will aspire to great
adventures, must be recompensed with great rewards.

But would you have examples, how good desert has been adua^ced? look into
the holy scriptures, see the noble Caleb promised his reward by Gods own
mouth, for his great courage and constancy amongst the children of Israel, and
Caleb himself bestowed his fair daughter Achsah upon Othniell his brothers
son, for taking the City Cariath.

David in like manner received great riches of Saul, for killing Goliath: but
the Romans amongst the rest, to stir up men's minds to martial prowes,
besides bountiful and liberal rewards, they invented glorious triumphs,
whereby he that deserved Fame, might for ever after be eternized.

In those days honors and the highest places were rewards for valiant men,
and good desert was recompensed with great preferment: now there is no reward
but for villainy, for betraying of a Town, for poisoning of a Prince, for
practicing of treason, or for some other like conspiracy.

Now for him that lives within the compass of an honest life, they think his
wit will afforde him no better: and as there is no reward for the courageous, so
there is no punishment for ye coward.

In diebus illis, after victories obtained and troubles ouer-past, then began
the Soldiers glory, for then good deserts were ever recompensed: so that the
end of the war, was the beginning of the soldiers felicity, but now the end
of the war is the beginning of his beggary, and an alms is the best
recompense for the best desert.

When Glory was the reward of Virtue, men would then contend who should most
exceed in Virtue, but now sithence that hope has been quenched, they s^riue
who should be most insolent, for where Glory is taken from Virtue, there
Virtue is likewise taken from men.


Pill. There is yet a comfort left to those that have honestly served the
Country, when they may say that there best recompense is, the testimony of a
good conscience, and the contentment of an honest mind.


Skill. The testimony of a good conscience is better then a thousand
witnesses, and he that has a contented mind, has greater treasure then
Fortune is able to deprive: for what adversity can check him that is armed
with contentment?


Pill. Contentment is the mark we all shoot at, but who could ever hit it?
Solomon sought seriously after it, but he could not find it: the wise men of
the world, have hunted after it in the world, and although they have sometimes
had it in chase, baiting themselves with a present satisfaction for a time, yet
our affections are so variable, that more changeable then the Moon, we erect
every day a new choyee, loathing that to morrow, that we liked of to day.


Skill. Where then shall we seek for that sovereign contentment by us so much
desired? if not in this world, why then by a fract more excellent and divine
then Reason it self is able to reach unto.


Pill. There are yet many reasons whereby to maintain that sovereignty of
contentment, which to those that are earthly minded may seem unpleasant, but
to a soul once settled in contemplation, they are the ministers of mere
Divinity.


Skill. Who lives here in that content, lives happily, for he sequesters his
wandering thoughts from the vanity e^ the world, and so tampers all his
spirits, that he wholly resignes himself to meditation.

O precious freedom of the mind that thus funes his fancies on the Lydian
Harpe^ he may with Theseus take hold on the Clue, that leads from the
Baby^inth of worldly vanities, for he so frees himself from the sreakes of
fortune, that as the seaman with his Jacobs staff, does count the ascending
and descending of the Sun so he beholds all the choking chances of the
ambitious world, sometimes climing up, again declining down.

If his means will not serve to mount, so he cannot lightly fall, for
Flattery cannot blast him with his breath, nor Aspolike Envy flinges him not
asleep: here the Traitors armed hand affrightes him not, nor Sinon sugered
tears are able to deceive: but Magnitude with a perfect courage of a constant
mind attends and waits on him, and thus retirde from all his worldly cares,
he reapes the fruit of sweet and quiet rest.


Pill. O happy he that leuels out his life by this line, for a soul thus
armed with this coate-armour, is able to wade through all the strreames of
trouble, and firing his anchor hope in the inuiolate constancy of a mind thus
settled, what can dismay or affright him?

Death it self is here despised, and although the very name be bidrous and
terrible to fools, beating in the ears of the idle and slothful, ye here
it cannot hurt.

But what object I Death, or why should I speak of a burial, shall we doubt
of that which is natural, and for the which we were borne? O how unfortunate
might he be accou^sed that is loath to return to his country of rest.


Skill. Then to wind up our conclusion, and to make an end of our conference
at this time, I will speak a little of life and death as they should be
esteemed: for if we could duly consider of the good that comes unto us by
death it would appear that the whole Tragedy of the evils of this life is
there finished, and that the sting of Death, is but the beginning of life.


Pill. Your conclusion will be both apt, and to a very good purpose: but first I
will conclude with many thanks for this your undeserved courtesy: and because
I will not longer interrupt you, I will now rest attentive.


Skill. Since life is the race, wherein we strive to obtain honor, and death
is the term whereby our honors are crowned, I will speak of life as it
should be confirmed to virtue, and of death as the true gate of felicity.

Life says the Philosopher is but a borrowed dream of pleasure, wherein we
apprchend all things incertainly, by reason of the swist and irrecouerable
chaunges thereof.

It is a race wherein the wicked man seeks to overthrow the good, and the
good man that stands on his feet, will not help the good man that fieth on
the ground.

It is a vision of delight that vanishes in imagination, a warfare of
uncertainty, and a way to death.

In life there is no distinction either of greatness or abiectnes, for the
beggar in life, has as great interest as the King.

It is only the way wherein we walk crowned with honor to our grave, or buried
with infamies to seek out eternal death.

Wretched is that life, which has but a time to live, and that in death, a
life without the which death had not been.

Briefly to express how abject a thing life is, let that saying of Philip of
Macedon serve to confirm y^ same, who finding a fit place to incampe in, but
unfit to allow his beasts of burden any ^other: How miserable (says he) is
our life, who are enforced to bestow the best opportunities of the same to the
service of Asses?

It is like a Pageant or Stage, whereon all sorts show themselves, that
chalengeth nothing from eternity, but the fruits of good imploime^ts. The
hazard of life is determined by y^ justice of y^ cause, and it is never more
happy, the^ when lost worthily.

The shortness thereof is redeemed by the use, for Life well employed is a
prevention of Death.

As for Death, what is it but a blessed necessity to the good man, and a
fearful enemy to the evil?

There is nothing more certain to flesh and blood, the^ Death, and nothing
more fearful to fools, then to think they must die, when it is but a passage
to a better life: And how happy is that death, which leads to that life,
which is not subject to death?

It is a separation from an uncertain to an assured estate, a retrail wherein
Honor lives, and obscurity sleeps: A Harbinger, assigning rest without
payment, A Gate, to that felicity the soul longs for.

For which cause Aeschilus calls it the remedy of worldly sorrow, wherein we
escape that which life feared, and win that, which a quickening faith hops
for.

Since therefore, Life is but a sum of money put out to use, and our judgments
and honors are assigned us, as we employ the same, and death is but the fire
to try our deseris, whether they were born to obscurity, or reserved for
eternity, let Soldiers live so, as when the casualties of war shall allot
them death, they may be held good stewards of this betrusted and uncertain
treasure, that like good children being nourished in all duty, by their mother
the Commonwealth, they may dye with co^stancy in the defense thereof: that as
erst the Spartan women, so their mothers may say in their deaths, We bare them
for their country, and we have happily lost them for their country. Or rather
thus with Critias, He rather pleases me more that he died a death, both worthy
his friends and country, the^ that he should have lived a life unworthy both
his friends and country.



