depiction of ship

A

The lost Flock Triumphant.

With the happy Arrival of that famous and worthy Knight Sr. Thomas Gates: and
the well reputed and valiant Captain Mr. Christopher Newporte, and others,
into England.

With the manner of their distress in the Island of Devils (otherwise called
Bermoothawes) where they remained 42. weeks, and builded two Pynaces, in which
they returned into Virginia.

By R. Rich, Gent. one of the Voyage.

LONDON Printed by Edw: Allde, and are to be sold by John Wright at
Christ-Church door. 1610.

To the Reader.
REader,
how to style thee I know not, perhaps Learned, perhaps unlearned: happily
captious, happily envious: indeed what or how to term thee I know not, only
as I began I will proceed.

Reader, thou do peradventure imagine that I am mercenarie in this business,
and write for money (as your modern Poets use) hired by some of those ever to
be admired Adventurers, to flatter the world: No, I disclaim it, I have known
the Voyage, past the danger, seen that honorable work of Virginia, and I
thank God am arriud here to tell thee what I have seen, don, and past: if
thou will be lieue me so, if not so to: for I cannot force thee but to thy own
liking: I am a Soldier, blunt and plain, and so is the phrase of my news: and
I protest it is true. If thou ask why I put it in Verse? I prithee know, it
was only to feed mine own humor: I must confess, that had I not debard my
self of that large scope which to the writing of prose is allowed, I should
have much easd my self, and given thee better content. But I entreat thee to
take this as it is; and before many days expire, I will promise thee the same
work more at large.

I did fear prevention by some of your writers, if they should have gotten but
some part of the news by the tail, and therefore though it be rude, let it
pass with thy liking, and in so doing I shall like well of thee: but how ever,
I have not long to stay: if thou will be unnatural to thy countryman, thou
may, I must not loose my patrymonie; I am for Virginia again, and so I will
bid thee heartily farewell, with an honest verse:

As I came hither to see my native land,
to waft me back lend me thy gentle hand.
Thy loving Countryman. R R.

News from Virginia OF THE HAPPY Ariuall of that famous and worthy knight Sir
Thomas Gates and well reputed and valiant Captain Newport into England.
IT is no idle fabulous tale,
nor is it feigned news:
For Truth herself is here arrived,
because you should not muse.
With her, both Gates and Newport come,
to tell Report does lie:
Which did deuulge unto the world,
that they at Sea did dye.
It Is true that Eleauen months and more,
these gallant worthy wights:
Was in the Ship (Sea-venture named)
deprived Virginia's sight.
And bravely did they glyde the maine,
till Neptune began to frown:
As if a Courser prowdly backed,
would throw his ryder down.
The Seas did rage, the winds did blow,
distressed were they then:
Their Ship did leake, her tacklings break,
in danger were her men.
But heaven was Pylotte in this storm,
and to an Island nere:
Bermoothawes called, conducted then,
which did abate their fear.
But yet these Worthies forced were,
oppressed with weather again:
To run their Ship between two Rocks,
where she does still remain.
And then on shore the Island came,
Inhabited by Hogs:
Some Foul and Tortoyses there were
they only had one Dog
To kill these swyne, to yield them food
that little had to eat:
Their store was spent, and all things scant,
alas they wanted meat.
A thousand hogs that dog did kill,
their hunger to sustain:
And with such food, did in that I Will
two and forty weeks remain.
And there two gallant Pynases,
did build, of Seader-tree:
The brave Deliverance one was called,
of seauenty Tonne was she.
The other Patience had to name,
her burden thirty Tonne:
Two only of their men which there,
pale death did overcome.
And for the loss of those two souls,
which were accounted dear:
A Son and Daughter then was borne
and were Baptized there.
The two and forty weeks being past,
they hoyst Sail and away:
Their Ships with hogs well freighted were,
their hearts with mickle joy.
And so unto Virginia came,
where these brave Soldiers find
The Englishmen oppressed with grief
and discontent in mind.
They seemed distracted and forlorn,
for those two worthyes loss:
Yet at their home return they ioyd,
among'st them some were cross.
And in the midst of discontent,
came noble Delaware:
He heard the greifes on either part,
and set them free from care.
He comforts them and cheeres their hearts,
that they abound with joy:
He feeds them full and feeds their souls,
with Gods word every day.
A discreet counsel he creates,
of men of worthy fame:
That noble Gates leiftenant was
the Admiral had to name.
The worthy Sir George Summers knight,
and others of command:
Master Georg Pearcy which is brother,
unto Northumberland.
Sir Fardinando Wayneman knight
and others of good fame:
That noble Lord, his company,
which to Virginia came
And landed there: his number was
One hundred Seauenty: then
Ad to the rest and they make full,
four hundred able men.
Where they unto their labor fall,
as men that mean to thrive:
Let Us pray that heaven may bless them all
and keep them long alive.
Those men that Vagrants lived with us,
have there deserved well:
Their Governor writes in their praise,
as diverse Letters tell.
And to the Adventurers thus he writes,
be not dismayed at all:
For scandal cannot do us wrong
God will not let us fall.
Let England know our willingness,
for that our work is good,
We hope to plant a Nation,
where none before has stood.
To glorify the Lord it is done,
and to no other end:
He that would cross so good a work,
to God can be no friend.
There is no fear of hunger here,
for Corn much store here grows,
Much fish the gallant Rivers yield,
it is truth, without suppose.
Great store of Foul, of Venison,
of Grapes, and Mulberries,
Of Chestnuts, Walnuts, and such like,
of fruits and Strawberries,
There is indeed no want at all:
but some condiciond ill,
That wish the work should not go on,
with words do seem to kill.
And for an instance of their store,
the noble Delaware,
Has for a present hither sent,
to testific his care,
In mannaging so good a work,
two gallant ships: by name
The Blessing and the Hercules,
well fraught, and in the same
Two ships, are these commodities:
Furs, Sturgeon, Cauiare,
Blacke-walnut-tree, and some deale-boords,
with such they laden are:
Some Pearl, some Wainscot and clapbords,
with some Sassafras wood:
And Iron promised, for it is true,
their Mines are very good.
Then maugre scandal, false report,
or any opposition
The adventurers do thus deuulge:
to men of good condition:
That he that wants shall have relief,
be he ofhonest mind:
Apparel, coin, or any thing,
to such they will be kind.
To such as to Virginia,
do purpose to repair:
And when that they shall thither come,
each man shall have his share.
Day wages for the Laborer,
and for his more content,
A house and garden plot shall have,
besides, it is further meant
That every man shall have a part,
and not thereof denaid:
Of general profit, as if that he
twelve pounds ten shillings paid,
And he that in Virginia,
shall copper coin receive,
For hyer or commodities,
and will the country leave,
Upon delivery of such coin,
Unto the Governor:
Shall by exchange at his return,
be by their Treasurer
Paid him in London at first sight,
no man shall cause to grieve:
For it is their general will and wish
that every man should live.
The number of Adventurers,
that are for this Plantation:
Are full eight hundred worthy men,
some Noble, all offashion.
Good, discreet, their work is good,
and as they have begun:
May Heaven assist them in their work,
and thus our news is done.
FINIS.

