A MARTIAL Conference, Pleasantly discoursed between two Soldiers, the one
Captain Skill, trained up in the French and Low country services, the other
Captain Pill, only practiced in Finsburie fields in the modern wars of the
renowned Duke of Shordich, and the mighty Prince Arthur.

Newly translated out of Essex into English, by Barnabe Rich gentleman, Servant
to the Queens most excellent Majesty.

Malui me diuitem esse quam vocari. LAB^ ET CONSTANTIA

Printed at London for John Oxenbridge, dwelling in Paul's church yard at the
sign of the Parrot 1598.

To the most honorable and renowned Lord Sir George Carry, of the noble order
of the Garter knight, Baron of Hunsdon, Governor and Captain of the Isle of
Wight, Captain of her Majesty's Gentlemen Pensioners, Lord Chamberlain to her
Mai^stie, and of her Highness most honorable privy Counsel.
IT has pleased your Honor in favorable sort to accept of a first croppe of
my unsavory fruits: unsavory I may well call them that come from so barren a
soil, too cold and dry, to nourish dainties, or to afford a pleasing plant,
that may be sauourie to your Lordshippes taste: but the field is yours, your
Lordship has purchased it, and tied it by band; for ever bound unto you by so
many noble favors, it has pleased your Honor to vouchsafe unto me: the fruits
therefore both of my labors and of my leisures are due unto your Lordship, and
do appertain unto your Honor all by proper right, and every man is inclined
to accept of his own, and favorably to regard them, be they never so simple.
I have therefore presumed to present you with a second croppe, not so
seasonable as they should be, by reason of mine own ill husbandry, that can
not observe that Decorum looked after by Scholars and masters of Art and
method: yet I hope my errors shall pass for the easier payment, and be the
better borne withal, my self being a martial Professor; and continually
armed to the proof, with a serviceable and duetifull heart to your Honor, and
to that most noble and virtuous Lady, your Lordships bedfellow, of whose
favors I have tasted, and of whole worthiness the less I write, the less I
wrong her, and therefore as a subject too high for my conceit to reach unto, I
will leave her to the praise of more happy pens than mine own, and may
cease to write, but never to wish unto you both, all honor and happiness, that
is not prejudicial to true happiness, and thus will rest

Your L. in all humble and dutiful affection Barnabe Rich.

To the friendly Reader.
THere is nothing (friendly Reader) more necessary immediately after the
knowledge of God, than to know how to manage our Martial causes, when it is
most evident, that as well Prince, country, religion, law, justice, subjects,
and all together, are under the guard and protection of arms, and as the
establishing of all happy estates, especially consists, first in religion and
love of God, and then in the knowledge and practice of Arms, even so as there
is nothing amongst the religious, more perilous than Sects, so amongst
Soldiers there is nothing more dangerous than to be divided in opinions.

The greatest controversy amongst us here in England, is the diversity in
opinions concerning the long bow, for that being our ancient weapon, and
whereby we have many times prevailed to the attaining of sundry notable
victories, we are therefore still so naturally inclined toward it, that not
only the multitude and common sort, whose greatest arguments are fury and h^t,
but many others that under pretense of great experience and skill, will enforce
themselves to defend it, who ranging their passions to the tune of reason, will
many times render such reasons as are more out of tune than the very passions
themselves.

In this Martial conference I have laid down all the reasons that I have
heard aledged in the behalf of bows, the which I have done to this purpose,
that no blind assertions, colored under the pretense of great knowledge,
should make us to affie our selves in that which is not, nor yet to neglect
that, which only is to be attained unto by great practice. I have likewise
handled some other matters in a pleasurable sort, not of purpose to offend any
man: and the men that are most impatient are over contented to take words that
are merrily spoken, in sport, for fear lest other might think they would not
winch without a galld back: then how much rather is a dumb book to be borne
withal, being generally written, but especially where the title pretends
matter of pleasure, and without offense, if the Reader bring no offense with
him.

There be some that will admit of no books, that are not drawn from the very
marow and quintessence of wit, some other again are better pleased with
fantastical and humorous devises: but I utterly dislike that fantastical
humor, that writes only for his own private praise, and not for some
profit to others. If thou shall find me poor in Art and Science, thou must
understand the pen is no part of my profession. And thus not to pass the
bounds of an Epistle, I rest thine in all courtesy.

Barnabe Rich.

A Martial Conference, between Captain Skill and Captain Pill.
Skill. GEntleman, well overtaken, I hope you are riding toward London,
whither my self am likewise travailing, and would be glad of good company.


Pill I am traveling toward London indeed sir, and am glad I have met with
so good company as your self do seem to be, but I pray you sir, let me crave
your name.


Skill, Sir, you shall understand that I am by profession a soldier, and have
served in the French and Low country services diverse times, and in some other
expeditions I have had charge, and therefore by such as know me, I am called by
the name of Captain Skill.


Pill Truly sir, I do love you so much the better, for I my self am likewise
a professor of Arms, and am called by the name of Captain Pill: and therefore
I must love soldiers, nay more, I do reverence them, nay more yet, I do honor
them: and I believe, that on^ self same occasion has now drawn on our
acquaintance, and I think we go to London both of one arrand.


Skill And I pray you sir, what might that be as you do think?


Pill Mary I think that this mustering in every part of the realm, and this
preparation for the making ready of soldiers, is a sign of same great service
intended, and I think of you as I think of my self, that being a noble
captain as I am, you would be glad of employment, as I would be, and for that
purpose you are going up to London, to make suit for a company of men, and I
promise you so am I


Skill If that be your intent sir, God send you good speed, but in truth it is
no part of my business: I never yet made special suit for a charge, and I
will not begin now, and yet I have evermore been willing and ready to serve
my Prince and country, and so I will continue as long as it shall please God to
give me life and ability of body. But especially in these days, when so
worthy a Commander, so noble an Earl does endeavor himself in his own
person, and has so honored his country with his exploites, that all Europe
does sound out his praise: first, the magnanimity of his mind in undertaking,
his resolution and prowess in performing, his noble and valorous courage in
conquering, his mercy to the conquered, his incoragement to those that serve
and follow him, his comfort to the one, his courtesy to the other, his
affability to both, his liberality to all, and his magnificence, as it has
not bin common to Generalles till now of late years, so in any enterprise that
he shall undertake, who would neglect to follow him, that may not only be said
to be Englands Mars, but may also be termed to be Europes Honor?


Pill Captain Skill, you have inflamed me, nay you have mightily inflamed me
with an honorable desire, and although hitherto I never made trial of my
martial skill before any foreign foe, yet now by the faith of a Soldier I
protesh, that whosoever be the commander, or whither soener the journey, if I
can get charge, either of horse or of foot, I will approve my self, and will
not tarry behind.


Skill I know not Captain Pill how I might commend your courage, for me thinks
I hear you say you never yet have incountred with any foreign foe, I pray
you sir, where have you then had charge?


Pill Truly sir I never had charge, but once in Finsbury fields, in the
mighty incounters between the renowned Duke of Shordich, and the puissant
Prince Arthur, where I was a Wister in the field, and had the command of such a
gallant troop, that if a man had the leading of them either in France or
Flaunders, he might be thought a very unskillful Captain that could not pick
out a thousand pounds a year amongst them.


Skill You should do well to procure 150. of them for this expedition which you
think is now intended: but I pray you sir, have you never had any other
command then this that you have spoken of?


Pill Why do you ask that question?


Skill Because by your own words you should seem to carry the title and
reputation of a Captain, again you say, your journey now toward London, is
to seek for a charge, now both your title and your intent do argue a far
greater ability in you, then you have hitherto commended in your self, for he
is not worthy to be called Captain, nor fit to have a charge, that has had no
better training then Finsburie fields does afford.


Pill But now Captain Skill, me thinks you skip a little beyond your skill,
for if you have been of that continuance in service as your self does report
of, if you have not known, yet I am sure you have heard of Captains of less
practice then this that I have spoken of. Why man there be many of our
Regiment, that are not only reputed for Captains by name (as to be called
Master Captain when they walk up and down in Poules, but otherwise by
means of friends they have gotten charge indeed) when some of them know not
so much as their own place in the field: but I must tell you, you are too
precise if you will not admit of this: first he that has had but the
conducting of soldiers (be they more or less) to the water side, though he
never served in the field, yet he is a Captain, nay he will be a Captain,
he that has but seen an ensign three times spread in the field, though he
never saw ensign of the enemies, he must be a Captain: he that puts himself
into the arming doublet, with the points with the silver tagges, tied up in the
pitch of the shoulder, a scarf about his arm, and a feather in his cappe, he
shall be a Captain: and he that will gainesay any of these, let him take heed
to himself: but to dishonor a Captain deserves no less then a stabbe.


Skill I know (indeed) that some of them are as colericke as the Brewers horse,
but you shall see I will stand out of their way, and I would be loath to dishonor
them more then they dishonor themselves, but is not he to be registered amongst
your crew of Captains that will give money for his charge, and will buy a
company of men, because he would be a Captain?


Pill Marie sir I will stand to it he is worthy to be a Captain, for he that
has money in his purse, and will disburse it to purchase a company of
Soldiers, it argues great value and honesty tooin him that will do it.


Skill Valor as much as you list sir, but fie upon that honesty.


Pill Your reason why.


Skill Because, if he be an honest man that buyeth a company of Soldiers, he
shall never make his money again of them.


Pill And he is a fool that will lay out his money to loss in this age.


Skill Why then let us commend his wit, but not his honesty.


Pill It is no matter sir what you commend or discommend, I warrant you they
are at a point for that: but there are a number of Soldiers noweadayes, who
because they have had a little more training before an enemy, then we that
never saw an enemy, do therefore think themselves to be so priuileged, that
they would have none to be employed with charge but themselves, but they are
deceived, for perhaps we have better means for the matter then they, for we
have money to procure friends, and we have friends to procure us charge, when
sometime they shall go without.


Skill And the most of them when they have gotten charge, are as skillful both
to deceive the Prince, and to coosin the Soldiers, as the proudest Captain in
England, that has served longest.


Pill Fie Captain Skill I must needs condemn you now, your words do stretch
too far, how unseemly is it for Soldiers to inuey against Soldiers:
what speak you of deceiving the Prince, when every man does seek to live by
the Prince? he that has an office and cannot gain by it, is a fool, and why
should not Captains help themselves amongst the rest? And for the coosining
of the Soldier, what and if a Captain do now and then get a crown out of
his Soldiers months pay, alas it is nothing, it will scarce pay for an ounce
of gold lace: and he that is not gallantly gilded, he is but of the basest
sort of Captains, and therefore they must have helps.


Skill I have known Captains that have worn both gold and silver, without
any cosonage or other deceit, either to Prince or Soldier: and to say truly,
gold and silver is fittest for Captains, for those that may be said (indeed)
to be Captains of worth.


Pill There are not many of those, for I know very few Captains nowadayes
that are worth much, and therefore he that will be a Captain of worth, he must
learn to shift betimes, or it will not be.


Skill Captain Pill, your construction of a Captain of worth does so commend
your Martial skill, that I think a man of your experience were more worthy
to be made a great officer in the field, then to be so meanly employed in the
place of a private Captain, to have the command but of a hundred and fifty
poor Soldiers.


Pill I tell you Captain Skill my words are mystical, and not to be conceited
by every ordinary Soldier that is but of a dark and cloudy understanding,
and for this sufficiency that you find to be in me, I do as highly commend
your judgment, that can so readily discern it, and although that I have
hitherto hidden my talent, yet now seeing so many men of less training then my
self, are so ready to thrust themselves forward, and many times have obtained
what they thrust so fast for, I will therefore venture my stake amongst the
rest, for I see it is but fortune that rules all, virtue helps little, desert
much less: Captains are not so much appointed for the knowledge they have
gotten by service, as for the friends they are able to make, my Lord he speaks
for one, my lady she sues for another: my Lord commendes his man for his
stomach, my Lady she praises her man for his courage: men have skill to
persuade, women must not be denied when they sue, and he that has a good
stomach and is of a lusty courage, is fit to be a Captain.


Skill Indeed valiance is a special virtue for a Soldier, if these men may be
said to have it.


Pill Why who will deny it them, or make any doubt but that they have it? he
that has lived all the days of his life at home amongst his friends, and
never saw an enemy that might hurt him, and now will make a special suit to be
a Captain, and to appose himself into so many perils, as he knows not what
they are, nor what they mean: who will deny this man to be valiant?


Skill No man that is wise but will confess him to be as valiant a captain as
ever ran him self in to danger without judgment, or as he that will leap the
hedge before he has seen the ditch.


Pill Yet there he some that will say it is a desperate kind of holdnes, and
they will call it rashness, and foolish hardines, then they will make
destinctions what is true valiance indeed, but these distinguishers are fitter
for the school then for the field.


Sill And I think these Captains had need to go to school with them, to
learn a little wit how to demean themselves when they come to the field.


Pill Why should you think so, do you imagine that martial knowledge fit for
the field is to be learned at a school?


Skill And how should he come by that martial knowledge, that never came in
the field?


Pill And wherefore do men seek charge, but because they are willing to
learn?


Skill Let them first learn, to obey, before they take upon them to command.


Pill It is a base mind in a Gentleman to serve unless he may command.


Skill It is a vain presumptuous mind in any man to seek to command, before
he knows how to command.


Pill Do you call it presumption for a Gentleman t^ endeavor himself to serve
his Prince and country?


Skill I say it is the most honorable thing that any gentleman can endeavor,
but I call it presumption in him that will take upon him to command before he
have experience how.


Pill And how is experience sooner attained unto, then for a man to be in
place where he may command?


Skill But that experience is at too high a rate, for the unskillful Physician,
and the ignorant Captain do buy their experience with the price of men's lives,
and therefore in the old time there was great regard had in the choosing of
their Captains, and no man might command or have authority, that was under
thirty years of age, but Alexander amongst the rest admitted none to the
place of a Captain that was under threescore.


Pill But men were not so capable in those days as they are now, for now there
be some, if they have but seen Soldiers trained on Mile-end-greene, or have
borne office in a Midsummer sight, or have bin at the fetching home a Maiepole,
they will by and by put themselves into the Captains train, and they will
look as big as Haniball the great captain of Carthage, but he that should hear
their table-talk when they be at their ordinaries, or amongst such company as
knows them not, but by their own reports, would think that the nine
worthies were but fools in comparison of these men, they will shake off their
skermishes, they will martial their battles into squares, into triangles, into
sheares, into saws, into half moons, into snailes, into gees, into esses, and
into more proportions then either Langius Vygetius, or Machiuell himself did
ever know of, though he wrote the art of war.

Now for the winning of walled towns, the assailing of cittiedales, or the
scaling of castles, what fortification so strong, which they will not surprise,
but with discharging of two or three volies of oaths? And where was there ever
General, were he never so noble, that could perform any service, how
honorable so ever, which they will not censure and seem to control. In one
thing they will say, opportunity was neglected, in another they will say,
advantage was not taken, here they will say, discipline wanted, there again,
foresight was not had, this might have been prevented thus, and that might
have been done with better safety the other way. Now who can think but that
these men were crept into the very guts of martial skill, that are so
skilful to find all manner of faults, and so expert besides in all other
military practice?

For the new discipline, they have it as freshly at their fingers ends, as he
that first found it out, and they can command with as good a grace. And do
but imagine now that I were at a training somewhere about London, mark how I
could behave my self.

Soldiers rank your selves into five, draw forward shot, so, very well done:
now rank your selves into six, double your ranckes on the right hand, again
as you were, march on fair and easily, double your files on the left hand,
open your rancks, close your files.


Skill No more good Captain Pill, for here is no body to maintain the
skirmish but you and I, and it is pity you should appose your self to
peril, where there is no better rescues at hand.


Pill But how do you like of my command Captain Skill? you see now I could
do somewhat: but speak truly, how do you like of it?


Skill There is no man that can dislike of it, it may pass in dispite of all
the pages in the court, but you never learned this at Finsbury, I am sure of
that.


Pill Wheresoever I learned it, no matter for that, you see I have it, and
cunning is no burden, but do you not think my experience sufficient for the
conduct of an hundred and fifty soldiers?


Skill Yes, and enough to cousin them all of their pay: and now I perceive
indeed that young Captains are far more capable then they were in Alexanders
time, or else they would never make so great suit to get charge, but I see it
is skill that leads them unto it, and I have heard of some of those capable
Captains, in place where they have been employed, that if they have but once
mustered 100. men, within one month after they will not have 30. and yet I
durst depose for them, that if they were brought to a days service, they would
perform as great skill with that small number, as if they had five hundred to
command.


Pill I think so, and it is no great wonder, for take heed of any man that is
once grown so capable that he is apt to take any thing, but I will tell you of
a Captain of a special virtue, that was once employed, I will not tell you
the place whither, but it is no great matter though I name you the man, it was
Captain Flant, who was sent with a hundred Soldiers to a place of service,
where he had not stayed long, but he reduced his whole hundred of men into a
just proportion of fifteen, besides his officers, which was a Lieutenant, an
Ensign, a Sergeant, and a Drum. The 15 he reduced into three Squadrons, which
was four to every Squadron, besides the three Corporalles.

For his march, he would lightly rank them into three, and his fifteen men
made just five ranks, never a man to spare.

For an instant of service, upon any ground of advantage, he would bid them to
turn their faces on the right or left hand, and then they were imbatteled into
a broad square, ^ue in front, and three in flank. If upon the plain he were
enforced to a square battle, by thrusting in his Ensign, his number was just
sixteen, which being drawn into Maniples, of four made a perfect square,
every of like strength.

If at any time he were disposed to martial them into Batalions, he would
never make above three Batalions of his fifteen men, neither would he admit
any more then five men to a Batalion, because he would do all things by
proportion and art.

To show his skill in the new discipline, he would rank his fifteen men into
seven, which made two ranks, and one man to spare, then would he bid them to
double their ranks on the right hand, so then he had just fourteen in rank,
but where be the files? and this is called the wilegoose rank. Now if they had
but turned their faces to the left hand, then the file was fourteen, but
where be the ranks? and now they were drawn into an excellent proportion,
fit to have passed any straight that had not been wonderful narrow.

This is enough concerning his discipline, and now I will tell you how he
passed a muster.

It fell out, that the Lord Deputy, or General, or some body it was that had
the chief command in that place, would himself be present at a general
muster, where Captain Flant amongst the rest, bringing in his muster role, his
officers being first called, his Soldiers were now to answer to their names.

There was first called Thomas Tatter, that had never a whole ragge to put upon
his back, not almost so much as would hide his tail. Captain Flant (quoth my
Lord) if the rest of your company be in as good plight as this, me thinks
they should be able to maintein a great days march, because they are not
pestered with too much carriage at their backs.

I warrant you my Lord (answered the Captain) you shall find them all alike,
and I hope your Lordship shall see so serviceable a company, as would be glad
to get their pay in any place in Christendom: well pass you by Thomas Tatter,
who is next?


Slim Slatter, What Slim, bare legged and barefooted both? it is not yet a
quarter of a year ago sithence I gave you twelve pence to buy brooges, but I
see you have spent your money at the alehouse: I will tell your Lordshippe, if
this man would not sometimes take three pottes too many, he were as brave a
footeman as ever marched upon two bare feet, and I use him indeed for my
vauntcurrour, to discover Ambuscados when I march in Bodalia: well pass by
Slim Slatter, the next.


Nicholas Needy, come on Nicholas, a most dainty shot my Lord, and an
excellent mark man, I do value him to be worth four men for his readiness
and skill: he has but one fault, and that is, he will never carry any powder
in his slaske, I think he would sell his soul for good drink: pass by
Nicholas Needy to the next.


Gilbert Greedy, a very lusty fellow, and a special Soldier, for a ward,
or any place fortified: he loves not the field, but if he gettes into a town,
you shall never get him out again, till you pluck him out by the ears:
Gilbert follow your fellow, and to the next.


Tom Trudge, an excellent shot, I had rather have him on my side in the day of
service, then six of the best shot again in the field, that are not of mine
own company, he has lost the seere of his piece, but we will have it
amended against the next musters, pass on Tom Trudge, who is next?


Dauie Drudge, a man of a great spright, I have known when he has seen two
hundred enemies in view, and he has wished them all fast bound, both hand and
foot, and himself amongst the thickest of them all alone, and had but a
brown bill in his hand: well pass along Dauie, and to the next.


Thomas Tattell mine own countreyman, we were borne both in a parish, and for
seven years together, I was sure once in a month to find him in a pair of
stocks, or in a pillorie: but for an able Soldier, I would not leave him for
ten other in his place: go along Thomas, the next his Camirado.


Peter Pratle, an excellent skillful Soldier, more fit to lead others then to
be commanded by any, he is so careful in his conduct, that I dare undertake he
would never lead his company (with his own good will) where they should take
any harm: Peter follow your Camirado, I do value that man for his skill to be
worth 20 ordinary Soldiers: the next.


John Dory, an old Soldier you may see by all his furniture, it will scarce
hang together with very antiquity: follow your fellows John Dory, to the next.


Sim Sorry, stand forth man: What I think thou have bin dancing of Friskin
that sold for and has sold his hatband for good ale, but I think thou have
sold all the clothes from thy back for good ale: but there treades not a
better soldier upon this ground this day, and although he be not very
sumptuous in his apparel, yet I dare undertake he shall shoot as far out of a
musket, as he that is clad in satin and velvet: pass along Sim, who is next?


Laurence Lifter, a man if it were to fight a combat for a kingdom, and not
worth so little as twenty men's pay: but a P. take the Beadles of Bridewell,
they have made him lame of both his arms, but I warrant for his legs, if it
come once to running retrait, the proudest of them al cannot mend him: pass
along Laurence, to the next.


Simon Shifter, if I should speak of this man as I know he deserves, I might
crave patience to take half an hours breath. The several services that he
has seen, as well upon plains, hills, dales, streights woods, groves,
thickets and all other grounds of advantage, the dangers that he has escaped
from Constables, Headborrowes, and such other that are the common disturbers of
that society, that loves not to meddle with her Majesty's Officers, the
stratagems he has devised to pass watches, wards and other ambushme^ts that
hau bin laid to intercept him in his passages, if I should speak particuarly
of his peregrinations what he has seen and past, you would say that if a
hundred men should attempt the like, if one escaped scotfree, all the rest
would be hanged. But to speak briefly of his knowledge in the art Military,
I say he is able to martial an army of 20000 soldiers, to rank them into
any fit proportion of bataile, either for the encounter in the field, or for
the assault of a breach, to quarter them, to encampe the^, to bring them before
any fortification, to plant them, to entrench them, nay, what can he not do
that I my self can do? And what are an hundred ordinary soldiers to be
compared to a man of his service?

Here the Governor interrupting Captain Flant, demanded of him how many
there were yet in his roll behind to be called, the Captain answered there
were yet three, then said the Governor that makes just 15. men by the poule,
but as you have rated them, some one man to be worth four, some other six,
some ten, some twenty, and now this last you say at a hundred, by this
reckoning you have mustered already above an hundred and fifty, and you have
pay but for one hundred, me thinks you do hinder your self mightily to keep
fifty or threescore men more then you have pay for.

My good Lord (said the Captain) I would be loath to cosen my Prince, by
taking her pay for a hundred, but I would bring her six score to the hundred,
if I want of my number by poule, as it may seem now I want a few, yet if these
that I have be duly considered of according to their worthiness (that are all
of them especial choice men) I hope her Majesty may wish she had more such
Captains, that so regardefully does tender her service.

But said the Governor, your men do make no such show as you do commend in
them, for there is not any one amongst them that has a good garment about him,
nor almost a pair of shoes to his feet. O my Lord (answered the Captain)
that is but their own humility, they cannot abide any pride, fie upon it; and
fie upon these guarded garments, these feathers and scarffes, they cannot abide
them.

But how now Captain Skill? me thinks you are half asleep, while I have
been mustring of an hundred men, and yet have past but twelve by the powle.


Skill You are deceived Captain Pill, I am not asleep; nay I am not so much
as drowsy, for all this while that you have seen me thus silent, I have bin
learning of Captain Flant, first the martial skill that he used in his order
and discipline, then the gallant show of selected Soldiers that he brought to
the musters: but especially his fidelity to her Majesty, that would take pay
for an hundred and serve her with fifteen, a great argument of his dutiful
care.


Pill but you must consider of his soldiers, what choice men they were, what
special skill they had, and therefore how to be esteemed.


Skill That is a matter indeed of great consideration, a very choice company,
some chosen from the stocks, some from the pillory, some from Bridewel, some I
think from New gate, and all fit for Bedlem.


Pill And why should you think them to be fit for Bedlem?


Skill Who were he that should see them so betottered, and betorne, but would
rather think them to be mad men then soldiers? but how was Captain Flant
himself, I hope he was better suited for a Captain?


Pill You may be sure Captain Flant wanted no suits that was fit for a
Captain, and I will not give a penny for a captain nowadayes that is not al to
be gilded.


Skill And two pence apeece were a great deal more the^ some of them be worth,
when they have gilded themselves as well as they can.


Pill You would make low prizd captains, and I perceive we should have
captains dog cheap, if you might have the rating of them.


Skill I promise you I would value them by their experience, not by their
apparel, by their deeds, not by their words, for the Cornish diamond does
shine, yet but a counterfeit, and the bray of an Ass is no less hideous to
the simple than the roar of a Lion.


Pill These are foul comparisons, and great indignity to the reputation of
Captains to be made Counterfeites, or to be reputed for Asses.


Skill Captain Pil, you mistake your text, I would be loath to prejudice a
captains page by my speeches, much less therefore his master: and is the
perfect diamond the less to be esteemed of, because it is sometimes
counterfeited? or may not a man say, an ass is but an ass, though he be wrapped
in a lions skin, without any offense to the lion himself?


Pill But I speak of no cou^terfets, I speak of captains, such as have had
charge, and have had the leading of soldiers in the field.


Skill And I speak of no captains that can either lead or command with
skill, I speak but of counterfeits, that can do neither of both, and yet will
take upon them to be captains.


Pil I cannot tell what those differences be that you would seem to make
between captains and captains, but I call him a captain that has had
charge in the field, and I think him to be skillful enough, that has courage
enough to encounter with his enemy.


Skill Then Jack may be a Gentleman, because he has bestrid my lord Majors
mule, but set a soole on horse back, and he will either catch a fall, or ride
his horse out of breath: and for the courage that you speak of, who is so bold
as blind bayard? But because you say you do not understand what the
differences should be that I should make between captains and captains, I am
contented to acquaint you with thus much what it is that I mean.

There is no estate, be it empire, kingdom, or other common wealth whatsoever,
that may be said to be established or surely settled, either from foreign
invasion or intestine rebellion, which is not strengthened, staid, vpholden, and
propped up by force of arms. This was the cause that Solomon, who in the holy
scriptures is called Rex pacificus, and was still busied with the building of
the holy Temple, forgot not yet to furnish his garrisons with expert men of
war, horses and charriots, neither has there been any well gouerued
commonwelth, which has neglected this care, but they have been at all times,
in all ages, and in all places especially provident in this behalf.

It would be tedious for me to deliver, how cheereful they have been in
encouraging, how liberal in rewarding, how industrious in training, how
diligent in instructing and practicing of men to enable them with skill, and to
make them expert in the knowledge and feats of war, when they were not
ignorant, but would always acknowledge, that both prince, country, life,
liberty, goods, law, justice, religion, and all together, depended in the skill
of the soldier, and the knowledge of arms.

If the matter be of this importance, can you blame princes, that have evermore
been scrupulous in the appointing of their armies, and would never admit of
any to be conduetors, leaders, and commanders, but such as by continuance and
practice were found to be of approved skill, and of tried and known
experience, and not to pester their squadrons with yonglings of little wit and
less understanding, who, because they have seen soldiers alittle trained and
made ready, or perhaps have served some month or six weeks where they
might see alittle, will upon this presume to thrust themselves into charge,
foolishly taking upon them that they are not able to perform, when by the
indiscretion of such a captain a whole army may be ouerthrown, which may
concern no less than the subversion of a kingdom, and the loss of a princes
crown.

The matter therefore is not lightly to be regarded, though I do not amplify
and enforce it as I could, and her Majesty has paid dearly for the service
of some of these hasly mad captains, in some places I could name, if I were
disposed to infer presidents: but letting this pass, if for the attainment
of a seely occupation no less than seven years, apprentiship is required,
before a man may be thought sufficient in skill or admitted to trade, how
happens it then that in the Art Military, wherein there was never man so
well practiced (no though he had served seven times seven years) which was not
yet to seek, and every day to learn, and yet nouices that have not been of
seven months practice, nay sometimes not of seven weeks training have been
thrust into charge, that has neither skill nor science to command, no nor to
perform the least duty that appertains to a captain of understanding.

It is not enough for a man that shall have charge, to march before his company
with a feather in his cappe, and a gilt leading staff in his hand, not although
he have daring enough in him to bring his men to a hot encounter, for Fortune
is in nothing more variable than in the action of war, and more victories have
been lost for want of skill, than for want of strength or courage: but if it be
true that he that has courage enough may be thought to have skill enough, it
were happy for our English nation, that are generally a people of so great
courage and valor, as they are not again to be seconded with the like, and
yet evermore over reached by policy, sometimes with the barbarous Irish.

The Captain therefore that relieth so much in his courage without skill, is
like a blind man in a dangerous passage, and thinks scorn to be led: for
although that courage be an especial ornament, wherewith a Captain should be
iudued, yet courage without skill is not true valiance, but rather may be said
to be rash and foolish hardiness, for so it has ever been defined by the
wise men of the world.

That courage (says Cicero) that is forward to danger without judgment, may
rather bear the name of lewd hardiness, then of manliness: The want of
knowledge breeds the want of skill (says Xenophon: And Solomon says, a wise
man is ever strong, a man of understanding increases in strength. And Cato
prescribes three especial special virtues that ought to be in a Captain,
that is to say, Experience Policy, and Valiance.

Here you may see, that although Valiance be a special ornament for a
Captain, yet it martheth in the rereward, preferring the other two as more
worthy, for it is not enough for the valiant man to do what he can, but he
must likewise take heed that he attempt nothing but what he ought, and
therefore without experience he shall run into many errors, and where Valiance
serves only but for execution, Policy is he that prepares the mean.


Pill But me thinks Captain Skill, you are somewhat too nice in mincing of
this word Valiance, which I do take to be a natural gift, but you would seem
to couple it I know not to what skill, and would admit of no man to be
valiant, that were not almost as wise as Solomon.


Skill It I have bin too nice in the mincing of my words, they are the fitter
for your queas^ie stomach, which I perceive to be neither of sound
disgestion, nor of sauorie understanding, for although I do not think that
every valiant man must necessarily be almost as wise as Solomon, yet of this I
can undoubtedly assure you, that there was never fool that might be said to
have any valiance at al,


Pill But I speak not of extremities, for say that a brave and gallant minded
Gentleman would courageously take a charge upon him, though he never in his
life had served before an enemy, whereby to attain to any knowledge, may not
this man yet be esteemed for valiant? or would you not put some difference
between him and a fool?


Skill Just as much difference as is between a green Goose and a gosling, and
for his valiance you do partly know my mind: but you say that I have already
minced the word over nicely, but I will mince it a little better, because I
would be loath you should hurt your teeth in she chewing.

Valiance is a virtue that fights for equity and justice, for nothing may be
holden for honest, that is void of justice, and as that knowledge, skill, or.
policy, that is severed from justice, is rather called subtlety then
wisdom, and in his best account is esteemed but for craft and deceit, so that
courage that is forward to danger, more for vain glory and greedy desire,
then for a common profit and a general good, is rather to be termed desperate
boldness then valiance.

There is nothing therefore more inciting to true Christian valiance, then when
a man shall remember he goes to fight in a just and honest cause: for when I
know I shall adventure my life in the maintenauce of Gods true religion, in the
service of my Prince, or defense of my country, whether I live or die, in this
case I may live or die in the service and fear of God: my quarrel is good,
here is no corrosiue to my conscience, that may dismay or terrify me, and
therefore I will add thus much more, there is no man may be said to be truly
valiant indeed, that is not truly religious, and has the fear of God before
his eyes: for which cause Machiuell the devils politician, in his politic
Prescriptions, thinks that it is not convenient for a Captain, to be
overmuch inclined to religion, because (says he) if he be too zealous, it
might infeeble his courage: but the Captains that he thus inticeth, be such as
he otherwise induces to all manner of fraud, deceit, and injury, neither to
make conscience of their quarrel, nor by what means they oppress, so they
may overcome, for he knew well enough, that if there were any feeling in them
of true religion, that it would be a check to their ambition and pride, and
thereby an abatement of their harebraind rashness, which by them is called
courage and valiance.

But let Machiuell go, and the rest to bear him company, that do think that
Christian valiance consisted otherwise then in the maintenance of justice and
right, or that a man may be said to be truly valiant, that has no respect to
the equity of his cause, nor remorse to his God.


Pill Why then you grant that the Captain that fears God may yet be valiant,
though he be unskillful.


Skill If you will grant again, that if a Captain fears God as he should,
he would rather be vncaptained, the^ to be a conducter of men to the slaughter
by his unskillfulness.


Pill Captain Skill you do over reach me, but you cannot discaptaine us thus,
for we will be captains and have charge too, say you what you list, or the
best friends that we have shall fail us.


Skill It shall never offend me, I will still wish that your service may prove
but half so beneficial to the Prince, as I doubt not but you will make it
profitable to your selves, and I warrant your friends may then have greater
joy of your preferment, then hope of any hurt that you will do to an enemy.


Pill In good faith captain Skill you are too precise, you are up with your
justice, equity, good conscience, and I cannot tell what: I tell you captain
Skill, it is more preacherlike then souldierlike: then you would cram more
religion into one captain then would suffice for three or four honest men, it
is better for a man (in this age) to be wise in religion, then to be so full of
zeal as you would have him, and I tell you for my part I am just of his
religion, that having several daughters, would not stick to marry one to a
papist, and another to a protestant: and I tell you again they are no fools
that are of that religion.


Skill Captain Pill, hold you still in that tract, for you are now in the
right hie way to promotion, and you may perhaps get an office when it shall
fall, and therefore cling fast to that religion, for I tell you it is full of
policy.


Pill If it be so full of policy, it is the fitter for me that am a Captain,
for I heard you say, that policy was one of the three especial virtues, that
Cato would have appertinent to a Captain.


Skill But in these days there are many things, that do pass under the title
of policy, that in Catoes time they would have called flat knavery.


Pill But I speak of the time as it is now, and you say there be two virtues
more, that Catoes Captains must be inspired with, and that is Experience and
Valiance.

Now for experience, though I have it not in such a form of perfect discipline
for the martialling of men, as I think Cato speaks of in y^ place, yet I
have one principle, which being well observed, may stand a Captain in as much
stead for his profit and commodity, as any experience Cato could prescribe.


Skill May I crave of you what principle that might be?


Pill A matter of nothing among friends, but yet for him that is crept into a
charge, and would be glad to make some gain by his company, he must in no wise
think that bribery is sin, or whatsoever he thinks, let him be sure that he
never open his lips to speak against it,


Skill Perhaps you think that the Clerk of the Chequer would sometimes be
angry with that Captain that should speak against bribery, and that would be
the worse for him when he should pass his musters.


Pill Perhaps I did not so much as think of the Clerk of the Chequer, but
take this for a maxim, he that knows both how to give, and how to take a
bribe, may run through any affairs whatsoever.


Skill If you be so sure as you make semblance, we wit set it down, Probacum
est. And now for Policy and Experience I perceive you are very well furnished,
but what say you now for Valiance?


Pill He that will say I am not valiant, swoones I will give him the stabbe.


Skill Why is that such an argument of valiance, to stab a man suddenly before
he be prepared to make defense?


Pill Yea marry is it sir, and you may easily know a Captain, if he be of any
gallant courage even by that same word stabbe, for that must be still at his
tongues end, then he must have change of oaths, (for that is a wonderful
grace to a valiant man) and to thrust them from him as if he would make his
audience to tremble, and heaven it self to shake but with the very breath of
his displeasure.

These be infallible arguments of a valerous mind indeed, but you would tie
valiance to justice and conscience, and I cannot tell what: but what affinity
has valiance with justice and conscience? the one is fit for the kings bench,
the other for the Chancerie, and what have soldiers to do, with matters of
justice, when you shall never see a Justice of peace, that with his good will
does love to come amongst them in place where they are?

Now for conscience, I think there is no man so ungodly that has not a
special care of it, and I believe (for the greatest number) of as good remorce
as the wolf that went to sir John to be shriuen, who having made a sorrowful
confession of his sins, was enjoined by his ghostly father for penance, to
fast twenty four hours, during which space, he might eat no more meat then
in his conscience was worth above three half pence, the Wolf going homeward
met in the way with an ewe and her lamb, and being very hungry, yet having
respect to his conscience (as the priest had enjoined him) valewed the ewe to
be worth a penny, and the lamb to be worth a halfepeny, and thus did eat them
up both with a good conscience.


Skill Well Captain Pill I would that woluish conscience were not in their
bossomes that can do more hurt in England, then a hundred thousand soldiers
are able to do in Spain.


Pill A hundred thousand soldiers were able for to ouerrunne all Spain.


Skill But a hundred of those wolves were able for to spoil all England.


Pill And he that will make himself a sheep, it is no matter though the wolves
do eat him.


Skill But these wolves are able to make Jack a napes a sheep, a wise man a
fool, and a fool a wise man.


Pill Those are metamorphosing Wolves, but can they not make knaves honest men?


Skill That they will never do, but they will sooner make honest men knaves.


Pill Let those woolues go to the gallows for me, and let not us that are
soldiers seem to contend y^ one against the other, but let us learn of them.


Skill What would you have us learn of them, to go to the gallows with them
do you mean?


Pill Let them go to the gallows by themselves that have deserved it, and let
us learn of them to be wise, let us learn of them to thrive and help our
selves, and lets learn of them to run smoothely through the world, for those
fellows I warrant you can bite when they do not bark.


Skill An ill condition that same, for I remember a foolish tale of a noble man
sometimes here in England, who bearing malice to a poor gentleman that dwelt
not far from him, did by many means so covertly and slily wring and oppress
him, that the poor Gentleman, finding how the game went, thought it best to
seek unto him, and with submissiue speeches besought his lordship, not to
stand grievous unto him, protesting that he had never offended him to his
knowledge, but would be glad to tender unto him any service that might be
favorably accepted of.

Why (quoth my lord) what should make you to use these speeches unto me? My
good lord (answered the other) I do find my self to be crossed and hindered
by many means, and I do undoubtedly know that it is your lordships displesure
borne unto me, that does thus ouer-burthen me.

Why then (said the noble man) if you do find your self so ouerborne by me,
you see then I can bite, though I bark not.

I do see it, and feel it (my good Lord, answered the other) but I protest, if
I had a dog that were of that quality, I would hang him as soon as ever I
came home.

And I promise you captain Pil, I am of this Gentleman's mind, I do not like
of these flearing curres, that will first fawn in a man's face, and after bite
him by the shinnes, I would such curres were hanged (say I) and these base
demeanours of all others, are unfitting for soldiers.


Pil I pray you captain Skill, what is it that you do think to be best
befitting for a soldier?


Skill I have already told you, there is nothing more honorable in a soldier
than true christian valiance, which expelling all particular affectations (with
invincible courage) fights but only for equity and right, for what can be
more blessed then this justice and right, whereby we resraine all injury and
wrong, giving to every one what to him appertains?


Pil But you stand upon the etymology of words, and you would make Valiance
to be but a deriuatiue, drawing it from Justice, Conscience, Religion, and I
wot not what, but if your distinctions be of worth, I know but a few captains
in England, that may be said to be valiant, and that were an ill turn for her
Majesty when she should have occasion to employ them.


Skill. You say I would derive Valiance from Justice, Conscience, Religion,
and you know not what, but you would derive it from stabbing, swashing,
swearing, blaspheming, and it makes no matter what: but for valiant Captains,
no doubt but her Majesty is better provided than your understanding does serve
to conceive of, if not, she might pay dearly for it in the time of service,
for what success might be hoped for by these wars, that are supplied by men
altogether irreligious, profane, godless, and sometimes unskillful withal: far
be it from her Majesty's thought, to put her trust in those men that have
neither trust nor fear of God, or to commit her quarrel to their fortunes,
whom God has not promised to bless, but has confidently pronounced against
them his malediction and curse.


Pil Without doubt (captain Skill) you do too much over run your self, your
words do rub a great many Gentlemen overthwart the shins more than you are
aware of: what and if a Gentleman sometimes, of a brave and lusty courage
should swear half an hour together by the clock? a wise conclusion I promise
you, that for swearing of two or three dozen of oaths, a man should therefore
be condemned to be irreligious, profane and godless, a pretty jest, fitter
for a fool to sport at, than for a wise man to believe, and for these
fellows that prate so much of religion, that have nothing for an oath but, yes
verily, and no truly, and I pray you swear not, trust such a one he that
lists, but I can tell you what you shall find of him: but away with the
hypocrite, and give me him that cannot dissemble, who speaking what he
thinks, will swear what he speaks: here is no double dealing, this man has
neither falshoode forged in his tongue, nor passion smothered in his heart, but
his words, his oaths, his countenance, his demeanor, and all his whole
government, shall bewray and lay open, how he is affected, to what he is
inclined, and whereunto he is disposed.

But for a man to express his anger in a mild and softly manner, it is more
Meacocke-like than Souldier-like, how disgraceful were it for a captain upon
any coffeehouse, when he should thunder forth his fury, and that with such
horror as the heavens should tremble at the very echo of his oaths, but
neglecting this captaine-like demeanor, as though he were half afraid, will
pinch me forth an oath; swearing like one of the Queens silk women, now by
gods dainty dear, I will not digest so great indignity, and by cock and
pie, I will be revenged of the injury.

How ill beseeming were this for a Soldier? but most odious and loathsome for a
captain: but these threedbare oths are most fit for threedbare fellows, and
let soldiers show themselves in all their demeanours, lik men, and not like
meacockes.


Skill Without doubt captain Pill, you have spoken as well in the commendation
of swearing, as if you had been a graduate in that profession: but yet for the
courage that you would thereby attribute to those that do use it, it is like
the commendation that a noble man's fool did sometimes give to a merchant of
London in the praise of his wives honesty, which (as I remember) fell out in
this manner:

A noble man that was invited by a merchant of London to a dinner, brought with
him a fool, who being but a natural, was yet so full of sport (which pleased
so well his Lord and master) that he would never have this fool from his
heels: and coming to the merchants house, he found a great Ape that was tied
in a chain without in the court, with whom the fool incountering, the Ape
amongst our newfangled fellows, was not to learn, but had got the Mop, the
Mow, the Mump, the Nod, the Shrug, the Baseles mains, the Congee, and all the
rest of those graces; that are used by our Fantastikes in these days.

And the fool again, he could dowke with the Friar, look askaunce with the
Physician that were casting of a woman's water, grinne with the young heir that
had lately buried a miserable father, gape with him that waited for a benefice,
frown with him that was chanced six and seven and all to ten, yet lost both
by and maine: to be short, he could change his looks, and make as many mad
faces as he that takes Tobacco.

This glee between the Fool and the Ape made the company merry, but specially
my lord who laughed heartily to see the greeting and entertainment that was
between them: at the last, the fool turning to the goodman of the house,
asked of him, who that same was that he had so tied up, whom the merchant
answered, that it was one of his boys: now by my troth (said the fool) it is
a very pretty boy, and I warrant him, it he live, he will prove a very good
fellow.

Thus leaving the Ape, they were no sooner entered into the Merchants house, but
the Fool espied a great Munkie. What said the fool to the merchant, is this
another of thy boys? Yea mary is it Robin (said the merchant) this is an other
of my boys, and as honest a man as the other, though he be somewhat younger.
Well (said the fool) I warrant thee thou have an honest woman to thy wife:
Why so Robin (said the merchant) how know thou that? It must needs be (said
the fool) thy boys be all of them so like thy self.

Now I can not see but that this commendation thus given, does as fitly
concern the woman's honesty, as the praises you have so much endeavored, may
concern any man's courage or valiance, for the babes that you so much set forth,
they are but like the merchants boys, this swearing, this staring, and this
blaspheming, which you would have so captain like, they are all but Apes and
Munkies.


Pil I cannot tell (captain Skill) what construction I should make of your
history: but I hope you do not mean to give me the fool by circumstance.


Skill I hope (captain Pil) I shall not need to do that, for if you were
thoroughly acquainted with me, you would say there were no circumstance in me.

You say you profess Arms, and I am contented to believe you, you take upon
you to be a captain, yet you never had charge but in Finsbury fields, you
think that any man that is valiant is fit to have conduct, and you cannot tell
what true valiance means. Once again therefore I am contented to tell you,
every virtue has his counterfeit follower, for as deceit, sometimes creeping
in is called Policy, so Rashness shrowdeth it self under the title of
Fortitude: and as it is true, that all valiant men are hardy, so it is likewise
as true, that all hardy men are not valiant: and therefore briefly to
conclude, he is not truly said to be valiant, that is not first strengthened
by God, and fortified again by his own skill and knowledge.

Now concerning Captains, it is not the place of a Captain that dignifieth
the unworthy person, who is not able to execute it, but it is the worthiness
of him that is appointed to the place, that dignifieth and renowneth the rowme.

The title of Captain has been an honorable reputation, it is now grown to
be a matter of scorn to be called Captain, when so many base and unworthy
persons will needs march under that title, that knows not the least duty
that appertains to a Captain.

The antiquity would never admit of any Captain that was either insufficient
in skill, or openly detected for vice: swearing breeds hatefulness to al
honest ears, covetousness extorting both of Prince and Soldier, pride
brings with it disdain: but how odious a thing it is to see a Captain
himself to be glittering in gold, and to see his poor soldiers to follow
with no hose to their legs, nor shoes to their feet.

Cato being Censurer to make choice of a General in the Panonian wars, openly
disgraced and dismissed Publiu^, because he had seen him walk the streets
of Rome perfumed.

And as they were thus precise in the choice of their captains, so they were
as heedefull, not suffering them to enter into unlawful actions, that were
void of justice, honesty, or piety: they punished nothing with more
severity then those enterprises that were either attempted against
commandment, or undertaken against reason: but as they punished those
victories that were attained by lewd and foolish hardiness, so misfortune
diminished not his reputation, that attempted with discretion, neither
attributing cowardlinesse to ill success, nor valiance to good fortune.

The camp in those days was a school of honor, justice, obedience, duty,
and loyalty, but now a den of deceit, treachery, theeuerie, robbery, and
all manner of impiety.

But if this regard in the choosing of captains were used by the antiquity so
many years ago, when armies used to appoint the field, and when their whole
forces were brought to an encounter, where the weakness of a captain might
be the better borne withal, where there were so many superior officers to
direct him, how much more rather should we be more circumspect in these days,
in the appoynting of our captains, when his skill and knowledge does not only
concern the safety or loss of many men's lives, (which every good captain
should prefer before the killing of his enemies) but especially service
standing now as it does, most comely in skirmishes, where the captain is not
helped, but with the advantage of his own experience? I wonder therefore how
so many insufficient men dare oppose themselves to undertake a matter of so
great importance, where their want of knowledge may sometimes be the occasion
of too much rashness, and sometime again lead them into timeritie and want
of courage, which may concern no less then the loss of all together.


Pill You say there is no circumstance in you, and then your plain meaning
must follow thus, you would not admit of any man to have conduct, but he that
has experience, and I am contented to allow you that, but here is the matter,
you think no man can attain to this experience, that has not served in
Flanders or in France: you say I have served but in Finsburie fields, and you
see me to make but a trifle of that: but captain Skill, to deal without
circumstance, as you say you have done with me, and to tell you in as plain
terms as you have told me, I think you do not know from whence experience
grows, nor where it is to be sought for, you think no where but in Flanders
or in France, but sir, you are deceived, neither is it long training and much
exercise that makes every man fit to be a captain, although there is no
man so unapt, but with use is made more perfect: but that experience that is
fit for a captain, and that is worthy to carry the credit of Martial
skill (indeed) is to be attained unto without crossing the seas, nay, without
any manner of training at all, and that by two especial means.


Skill I pray you lets hear the first.


Pill The first is, when almost every ordinary about London may be said to
be an Academie of martial skill, where many times those captains that are of
our Regiment shall spend you the whole mealetide, be it dinner or supper, with
nothing but martial discourses, dilating of offices, of orders, of laws, of
disciplines, of stratagems, of watching, of warding, of charging of retyring,
of offe^ding, of defending, of winning, of loosing, of approaching, of
surprising, and you shall never hear them but they will still conclude with
victory, and therein consists their skill, that they will evermore be
conquerours, they will never loose by any misfortune, and yet but in one
dinners discourse they will settle the king of France into a quiet government,
they will banish the Spaniards from out the low countries, they will reform
Ireland, they will thrust the king of Spain clean out of Portingall, they will
take from him his Indies, and they will not forget to eat their meat, and to
drink three or four healthes.

What service has there been, or may be so performed, which shall not be
there lectured and read of a commentary drawn from the circumstances, every
parcel paraphrased and altogether metamorphosed.


Skill Captain Pill, as long as I have lived, and as many places as I have
travailed, I could never tell whither to go where I might hear a lecture of
the art Military to be read before, but now I perceive it is at your ordinaries
where you use to dine and suppe.


Pill Now you know where experience is to be sought for, but from whom is it
to be learned, what from your low country Soldiers only do you think? no
sir, there is no such matter, yet herhaps some of these readers have been in
France or in Flanders a fortnight or three weeks, but what is this in
comparison of their skill, or how should they attain to this grounded
experience, that never saw an enemy surprised in the field, and yet they will
perform greater conquests but sitting at a table, then ever did Alexander when
he conquered the world? you may easily think now this is not a months
training in the field, that could thus enable these men, but that there is in
them such further science and art, as does tar surmount their field
experience.


Skill I think it be one of the seven liberal sciences that does thus enable
them, and I believe this exceeding skill consists especially in the Art of
Asse-trologie.


Pill Your conjecture is pretty, and there is some ground to lead you unto it,
because by Astrology they may calculate both of fortunate and unfortunate
hours, and a captain of that skill may help himself in all his enterprises,
but for these men, they are not able only to control what is already past,
but they are of like ability to censure any thing that is yet to come, for let
there be any enterprise undertaken, or service intended, and they will say
aforehand what will be the success, as soon as ever they do hear of it.


Skill It is wonderful knowledge that you speak of, and I think it every way
comparable with the physician, that if he did but look of a Cowes water, could
tell how many pintes of milk she would give in a year: and now I perceive
that the first of your two especial means where martial skill is to be sought
for, is at a London ordinary: now me thinks your second should be in a Barbers
shop, for there be many learned discourses handled, or else I have heard lies.


Pill The second mean whereby to attain to the full perfection of Military
skill, is by reading of books, Lucullus by that only study, became one of the
noblest Captains of all the Romans: and is it any marvel, when there we may
find written a perfect form, as well of orders, disciplines, stratagems, and
whatsoever has been observed, practiced, and experimented by the most
skillful Captains of all ages, and what knowledge our predecessors has
attained unto by forty years study, we may partly comprehend in one months
reading.

A man if he have seen the accidents what has happened in the wars thirty
or forty years, it may be said he has seen much, but in books, what has
been performed in a thousand, may be ouerlooked in a very few hours.


Skill I will confess where experience is helped by learning, there experience
is far more excellent, wit more pregnant and policy more ready, for
without art who can conceive the ordering and disposing of men into several
forms of battle, and suddenly to alter them again into new proportions,
upon new occasions, or what memory can contain so many forms, and so many
proportions for all manner of numbers without Arithmetike: again, for
fortifications, who can comprehend any small knowledge in it, or any ingenious
instruments, that may be either apt for offense or defense, that has not some
skill in Geometry?

And as art and science is thus beneficial to Martial knowledge, so the
reading of books may be of like importance, to give give us light how wars
have been arered, prosecuted, and performed, but he that has no better
experience then his reading, is as fit to be a Captain, and to have the
conducting of men to the field, as he that has but read the art of Nauigatio^
may be fit to conduct a ship to the sea: for although Galene furnishes the
physician with approved medicines for every disease, yet he were a desperate
patient that in an extremity of sickness would venture to take Physic of him
that has never had better practice then his reading.


Pill Thus I perceive you will not admit that a man may attain to any
perfection in Martial skill, by reading or by the study of his book, but he
must needs go seek it in the French or Low country services: and you do well
to arrogate to your selves this science and knowledge, but there are some other
that are of a contrary opinion, who do think, that amongst all the rest that
do profess arms, they must needs be most insufficient, that have had their
only training but in those tumultuarie and licentious wars, where neither
order, discipline, nor any form of tuo militia was ever observed.


Skill But what wars are these that are so tumultuary and licentious as you
speak of?


Pill The tumultuarie wars of Flanders, and the licentious wars of France,
which have been first undertaken by sedition, passion, and faction, and
sithence continued by spoil, disobedience, confusion, and disorder, where the
precepts and prescriptions of the great Captains that have served in the well
formed wars of Emperors and Kings, has been neglected, despised, and set
at naught, by newfangled fellows lately start up, with too much ouerweening of
their own experience, who under the pretense of skill have confounded all
skill left unto us by the antiquity, and in the steed thereof have set up a
discipline of licentious liberty, of spoiling, of robbing, of disobedience,
and disorder.


Skill I would not for forty shillings that any wise man in England should be
of this opinion, or that any fool were so mad to believe it.


Pill I can assure you it has bin confidently persuaded, by some that are not
only known to be of a glorious wit, but also of no less understanding in
matters military, it is likewise received and believed, and by no sooles, but
by a great number of men of all sorts, that do not only think those wars to
be licentious, tumultuary, disordered, begun, maintained, and continued,
against all right and honesty, but it is further believed amongst them, that
those country services are unfit to make a soldier.


Skill But those men that will not believe that those country services are fit
to make a soldier, will easily believe that one of those country priests may
make a god.


Pill I know not that, but what is this to the purpose?


Skill Because if their belief be not mere madness, it is a matter of more
importance to make a soldier the^ to make a god, for they will not deny but a
priest may make a god but with three words speaking, but they will not confess
how those wars will breed a soldier in thirty years training, it is no
matter therefore what they affirm or deny in any thing, that are so blind
and senseless in every thing.


Pill But for all that captain Skill, there be many particulars inferred
against your Low-countrie captains, that are both odious and reproachful to be
recited, and yet are so received, disgested, and believed for matters of
truth, as will not easily again be dissuaded to the contrary.


Skill And may I crave to hear some of those particulars what they be?


Pill I will not stick with you for that, but will recite some of them as I
have heard them aleadged, neither will I speak of the low country services,
how they have been managed in these latter times, but how they were abused,
corrupted, and confounded, before my L. of Leicester came into that country,
since which time, those abuses, corruptions, and confusions then hatched up,
have bin retained until this day, and are yet prejudicial to the laws,
disciplines, and ordinances left to us by the great captains of former ages,
as in some particulars I will hereafter deliver. But now a little of the
services themselves, and first to speak of the intestine wars so many years
continued in France, where they have not had any possible means to maintain
any other then a deformed and disordered Militia, by reason of the long
continuance of those troubls and dissentions, whereby the rentes, revenues, and
other aids and supplies of treasure, have so failed and wanted amongst them,
that they have not bin able to pay their armies, whereby to contain their men
of war in any discipline or order.

The like again is to be said of the Low countries, where both Mercenaries and
subjects have served, but under a popular government, consisting of diverse
heads, where the hirelings of several nations were drawn together, who
through want of pay, (and having no other hope of reward for extraordinary
desert) lived only by forraging, filching, spoiling, and stealing.

From hence it is not only to be presupposed, but may rather certainly be
concluded, that such officers captains and soldiers whosoever, that have had
their training and practice in such licentious and tumultuary services (be they
subjects or mercenaries) are never fit after to serve in any reformed wars,
who will not be reduced to co^taine themselves under any severity of laws
martial, where order or discipline should be duly observed.


Skill These allegations (captain Pill) that you have here inferred with such
pregnancy and skill, we may well deride them into three parts.


Pill You mean you may divide them into three parts, I am sure you will not
deride nor scoff at any thing that has been formerly avouched by men of
great gravity and wit: but let us hear your division.


Skill Well, seeeing you will not have it a derision, the sum of what you have
said is thus much in effect.


First, the want of pay, inforceth the breach of discipline.

Secondly, the breach of discipline inforceth but licentious and tumultuarie
wars.

Thirdly, tumultuarie and licentious wars, traineth up unfitting Soldiers
to be employed in any reformed services.

Now for the first, that the want of pay inforceth the breach of discipline,
it is not to be denied, but in those wars where Soldiers are not paid, or at
the least provided for of victual, that they must necessarily make disordered
shifts, or famish: but does the discipline of war consist only in that
point, that when Soldiers be kept from spoil, that then thy be kept in true
Martial discipline? I trow in the French and low country services they have
observed other parts of discipline, or they could never have triumphed in so
many worthy victories, against so mighty enemies.

For the second, say that the disciplines of war were thus infringed and
broken, does this second assertion (that the breach of discipline ingendreth
but tumultuarie and licentious wars) therefore necessarily follow? if that be
a consequence, what wars has there ever been performed, that may be said
to be legitimate, but that the disciplines in some mean or other, has been
infringed by disordered persons, or what government under any Prince might not
then be detected and discredited, that has his laws and ordinances many
times broken by disordered subjects? and the church of God prescribes
disciplines, which are continually infringed and broken, but shall we
therefore when we have occasion to speak of this church, put to any
opprobrious or irreverent additions?

Now who knows not but that the Low Country wars were first undertaken for
the rights and liberties of the Country, to free themselves from a tyranicall
government, usurped by the Spaniards, as also for the free passage of the
Gospel, and therefore both honest, just, and godly? in like manner that of
France, and therefore they cannot be said to be tumultuarie, licentious,
disordered, etc. because their disciplines are broken, but they worthily to be
suspected that will so maliciously report of them.

Now for your third consequence, that soldiers trained up in those services,
should be unfit to be otherwise employed in any reformed wars: the conclusion
is too rank, it smelles from whence it came, but is it not possible, that a
Soldier, because he has been driven sometimes for want of pay to relieve
himself from famishment, (although by the breatch of law) shall afterward
reduce himself, and be confirmable to any law, order, or discipliue, where he
should either be better provided for, or duly paid?

I could allege presidents to make for my purpose, but what should I need?
these colericke conjectures are well enough known from whence they were first
gathered, and by whom they have sithence been retained: by those that have
labored at al times, and by all means, to disgrace and deface the whole
actions both of France and Flanders, together with the actours, because they
know we have evermore fought in the defense of the Gospel, in despite of
their mass.


Pill I must confess, Captain Skill, that for my self I never came in
Flanders nor France, and therefore am able to deliver nothing of mine own
knowledge, but what I have heard by other men's reports, neither will I add any
thing of mine own invention maliciously to stander, I shall not need to do
that, for it is too much that is already published and spread in the disgrace
of your French and Low Country Captains, if al be true that is reported, but
leaning generalities, I will speak of some particulars. They are accused, not
only for despising, but also for perverting the laws, customs, orders and
ordinances left unto us, by the great and notable Captains of former ages
innouating, altering and inuerting al our ancient proceedings in matters
millitarie by them prescribed into orders of their own invention, attributing
to themselves greater science and skill, then they will seem to acknowledge in
our predecessors, procuring moreover (so much as in them lies) by frivolous
objections and exceptions, taken against our Archerie, to suppress and
extinguish the serviceable use of our natural English weapon, the long bow.


Skill The matter is not great (Captain Pil) whether these accusations be of
your own making, or of any other man's reporting, for any great substance or
wit that is in them, and for this particular, it were no great matter to
acknowledge and confess it to any man that would enforce it, for if it be a
fault to innouate, I dare boldly avouch, there is no art, no science, no
occupation, no handicraft, nor any other profession whatsoever, but they
innouate, alter, and inuert, and that continually, and with great reason, when
from age to age al things are perfected, bettered, and drawn to a form of
greater excellency, then ever our predecessors understood of.

The reason is, our ancestors from time to time have left unto us in writing,
whatsoever they attained unto by any manner of skill, knowledge, science, or
art, and we have put unto it our own invention, and what we can otherwise
apprehend by daily practice, I hope then that Soldiers are not generally so
gross headed, when there is likewise left unto them in writings, a perfect
form, as well of orders, laws and disciplines, as of all other observations,
whatsoever has been practiced by the most skilful Captains of al ages, but
that they could something better their experience by twenty or thirty years
practice, in the French and Lowcountrey wars, where so many honorable
services have been so continually performed.

Or why should any man find fault with soldiers, though they innouate their
orders in these days, according to the practice and condition of the time? may
it not be done without any prejudice to the grounds and principles left us by
the antiquity. The physicians do fetch their direction from Galen, Hypocrates,
Pliny, Paraselsus, and such other that have left unto them prescriptions of
physic, and from whom our phisitio^s at this present do fetch their greaiest
light, but if they should now minister the self same medicines used in those
days by these learned Physicians, amongst ten patients if they recovered
one, they would kill all the rest.

Shall we say now, because our physicians do innouate, that they do therefore
attribute to themselves greater skill, learning, and science then they would
acknowledge in their predecessors.

Now in martial causes, although the antiquity, who long before either Musket
or Caliuer were known, armed their people with crosbowes, targets, long
swords, glaiues, partisins, bills, and such other, and according to those
sorts of weapons, proportioned their battles, in such sort as they might
bring most hands to fight, which was good and necessary for that time, when
the service consisted altogether by incounters of Pell Mell, and that they were
still brought to handie blows, and had no other use but of manual weapons,
but our squadrons being now armed with weapons of greater force, and more
advantage, have left their ancient observations to themselves, and have
followed an order perfected by time, and bettered by experience, when every
Captains page is not ignorant that the alteration of weapon does necessarily
enforce the alteration of order.

For our natural English weapon the long bows, if there be a natural that
would persuade better of the^, then men of experience do find service in
them, I pray God send him more wit, and that is all the harm that I would
wish him, and so we will leave them for the service in Finburie fields, to the
woonted Regiments of Prince Arthur and the Duke of Shordich.


Pil Some other accusations wherewith your Low country captains are charged
withal, is in the neglect and little care they used even in usual and
ordinary causes, for it is not unknown to any man that has judgment in
matters Military, but at the first forming of armies or regiments, there is
likewise prescribed laws martial, the which are still notified and made known,
to the end, to contain their armies in obedience, and that none might
transgress through ignorance: but this your low country captains have still
neglected, either upon contempt, or by them not understood, which bewrays
their malice or want of skill.

The like neglect they used in the stablishing of their counsels at wars, and
in the training and making ready of their soldiers in the practice of their
weapons, in the providing for them of powder, shot, munition, victualles, and
all other necessaries, when they should march upon any occasion of service.

These, and many other like matters that are of common course and usual to
soldiers that are of the least skill and experience, were by them omitted and
forgotten, or at the least nothing at al respected.


Skill I warrant you he that first smelt out these accusations, had a tender
nose, but if he wanted not alittle wit, I am sure he wanted a great deal of
understanding, when every soldier, if he be but of one months training, is
not ignorant, that where they erect armies, they forget not in like case to
erect laws, the which at the first are usually published with the sound of a
trumpet, and after hanged up in the market places, either of their camps or
garrison towns, but these laws and disciplines are evermore prescribed, by
Generalles and Counsels of armies, and not by every particular captain or
Colonel (and yet a Colonel may institute for his own private regiment) but not
any laws general, as your accusation would intimate.

Now the wars of the low countries were as well supplied with Dutch, French,
Wallons, Scotts, as English, which were al mercenary, and hirelings are
evermore to obey laws, and not to make laws, but serving under the prince of
Orange and States, were likewise to receive their laws from whom they received
their pay.

But who was be of our Nation before my lord of Leicesters time that had
authority to prescribe laws, more then the French, Wallons, and Scotts?
what, was it sir John Norris, that noble gentleman of our Nation that had been
there a General, but is now dead, and what can I say of him now he is dead,
that should not diminish the worth that was in him when he was alive? what shall
I praise his birth and honor of his race? the world knows it was noble, but
what is that in comparison of his virtues? What then? his experience and
knowledge in the field that advanced so many victories? if his friends should
not applaude it, his foiled foes would yet confess it: or should I commend his
noble and courageous heart, that no misfortune could dismay, nor enemies ever
daunt, why Flanders, France, Portingale and Spain can witness this, and his
enemies may spite at it, but speak against it they cannot? he is gone, but
the honor he has done to his country by his services will not be forgotten.

This noble gentleman, so highly renowned for his sernice amongst the whole
regiments, of English, of Dutch, of French, of Wallons and of Scotts, was
especially authorized and employed as General: is there any man now so simple
to believe that so great a captain, reputed and well known to be sufficiently
able to direct an army against so great an enemy as the Spaniard, was not of
like skill to ordain and establish laws to contain his soulders in order?

For those other neglects, for not establishing a Counsel at wars, for not
practicing of soldiers, and not for providing for them munition, victualles,
and other necessaries when they should march, if these objections were true, as
they are most slanderous and false, yet whom would you blame by these
neglects but the Prince of Orange, and the States, the which if any man would
take upon him to do, I think all the soldiers of Europe would hiss at him
(as well enough they might) for who were so simple as to think that so famous a
captain as the prince of Orange, so worthily renowned for the managing of
martial causes, were yet so careless or ignorant, as not to prescribe laws,
and likewise to provide necessaries, as well as to procure forces.

Our English therefore are not to be charged with any one of these defects no
more then were the Regiments of other Nations, namely the Dutch, the French,
the Wallons, and Scots that served with our Nation, al in one predicament, and
received altogether their laws from whom they received their pages: and these
ignorant ill willers, that would spy out these faults, only to deprave the
English, are not much unlike the old servant that sometimes follows king
Henry the eight, who used evermore to strike him that stood next unto him.


Pill There be some other obiectious against your Low country captains for
shameful misdemeanors to their poor soldiers, some for sending their
companies into dangerous attempts, better hoping of their dead pays, then of
any service they could perform.

Some other upon hatred and displeasure borne to their folowers, would devise
desperate enterprises, of purpose to be revenged.

Others again, when they had receined their soldiers pay, would likewise
send them to the slaughter, that they might keep their pays in their own
purses.


Skill Me thinks you should tell me of some other of our captains, that
conspired and practiced with the Spaniard against the Prince and States that
gave them pay, and yet sought to betray them in all their enterprises and
services, and sometimes would surrender unto the enemies, towns and fortes
which the Prince had committed to their guarde and placed them there in
garrison.


Pill Captain Skill, for these matters that I have already delivered unto you,
and many other, that I have yet to speak of, all of them concerning the
misdemeanors of our captains sometimes toward their soldiers, sometimes
toward the country people that gave them pay, and in whose defense they came
to fight, and although that in this nature thus alleged, there be many
shameful abuses wherewith they have been charged, yet to my remembrance, I
never heard of any mention made of treasons, or traitorous surrendering up of
towns to the spaniards, as you have now mentioned, I would be loath to do them
so much wrong as to charge them with those matters, that I never heard to be
enforced against them.


Skill And yet I can assure you, that these matters which you say you never
heard of, were very true, and there were diverse of our English Nation that
dealt most traitorously with the Prince, which did both conspire and surrender
up towns to the enemy: and what is the matter that these collections of
treason were not as well gathered in the disgrace of our Low country captains,
being true, as the other which you have here enforced, being false, and some
of them matters of impossibility, as those very last objections by you
alleged (which every soldiers boy could control) as hereafter I will make
more evidently to appear, even to him that has but half a sense? But first
of al let any man of understanding considder with himself from whence these
accusations against our French and Low country captain should proceed, they
are charged with many shameful abuses, the most of them untrue, the rest not
worth the speaking of, and for some other that were odious and hateful indeed,
namely, treason, treachery, confederacy, and conspiring with the Spaniard (and
al of them apparent, and not to be gainsaid) these matters were never spoken
of: nay these were no faults at al, but of my conscience were rather esteemed
to be works of Supererrogation, meritorious matters, and as good a ladder to
scale heaven withal, as a Bull of Scala coeli purchased from the Pope.

Who sees not now by whom these accusations have bin collected? it is well
enough to be perceived, that they have only their proceeding, but from old
papistical enmity, that has evermore been busied in defacing, disgracing,
and detracting those French and Netherland services, and never sparing to
backebile those that have endeavored themselves in defense of the gospel
against their Pope: but the contrary part evermore faultlesse though they
performed nothing, but by treason, deceit, forgery, and al manner of villainy.

It is yet within the compass of our own memories, and hundreds of thousands
are now living that do well enough remember the very maidenhead of these wars,
when they were first undertaken, both in France and Flaunders, yea and in
Scotland too, about matters of religion: how long they were in arms and in
civil broiles among themselves, whilst we lived here in England, by a most
gracious government in the calm of quiet peace: we heard of wars round
about us, but with us we had none but at Westminster hall. Yet alarmes were
sometimes hot amongst lovers, when their Ladies were disposed alitle to be
froward, our warlike instruments were laid aside, and almost out of use, our
shril trumpets for the field, were turned to still music for the chamber, our
drums to tabrets, our martial exercises to may games: this sweet and quiet
peace brought with it a careless security, our gallant youths forgot to
bestride the stirring steedes, and walked up and down with feathered fannes in
their hands, maskes to cover their faces, and tawdry laces about their necks,
they became effeminate in all their demeanours, disguising themselves like
demi-harlots. Our happiness was envied by our neighbors that did inuirone us,
but what could they do to disturb our quiet? it was the Lord of Hosts that
protected our Elizabeth: and in the midst of this our delicacie when the wars
were in their greatest heat on every side about us, and their armies supplied
by the most haughty hearts out of all the parts of Europe, some of our Inglish
bloods, no less thirsty of honor, than he that is most covetous for pelf,
shaking off that nicity which the time had the^ fostered, thrust themselves
into these services. Amongst the rest, our noble sir John Norris became a
president to his countriemen, a pattern for them to immitate, a lamp to give
them light, a loadstarre to direct them in that course, that leads unto
hanour and so to endless fame: his example gave heart and courage to many others
that followed him, they served in defense of the Gospel, they attained by their
service to that perfection of martial knowledge, that they are thereby enabled
to serve their prince and country against all foes domestical or foreign.

How they bare themselves in those services against the pride of the
Spaniardes, what honorable victories they obtained against the greatest and
most experimented Captains that christendom could afford, what overthrows
they gave unto them, and how many notable exployts they performed against them,
the world I am sure can witness, and the matters are yet so fresh in memory,
that Spite may well fret himself to the gall, but to deprive them of their
honor it can not, and therefore they are driven to these threedbare shifts, to
slander them with misdemeanour toward their soldiers, to accuse them with
the breach of discipline, the neglect of laws, with such a number of other
trifles as would require a volume to express: and by this they would persuade,
that such soldiers as had bin trained in suth licentious and tumultuary wars
were never after to be employed in any reformed services: and then if her
Majesty should have any occasion to use soldiers, where should she seek for
conducters that were of sufficiency? Disgrace those that have had the
practice and especial training in France or Flaunders, and how many are
there left? or where should we seek for them, unless at your eighteen penny
Academs, where you tell me you have such reading of Martial Lectures?

But I would not wish we should hazard a days service to make trial of the
fortune and unknown experience of these Academicall Captains: for the others
they have been sufficiently tried, and therefore are the better to be trusted.
But notwithstanding, these disgraces that they would offer to our French and
Low Country services, I cannot think that any Captain, Gentleman, or
soldier whatsoever he be, that has been trained up in those services (so
maliciously reported on) do think the worse of their own skill or ability,
because envy coupled with ignorance, has sought to disable them: Dixit
insipiens cannot dismay them, nor make them to think so evil of themselves,
but that they will be always ready to defend their credits, against any one
that will seek to disgrace them. Leaving other circumstances, and to make a
short conclusion for all together, I do not think how that honorable Earl
(that is the glory of this age for martial matters) does any whit at all
mislike his own worthiness, because he has voluntarily opposed himself in
those French and Low Countries: but howsoever it pleases him to think of
himself, let us acknowledge him to be as he is, his countries comfort, our
Englands Champion, whom Honor and Virtue have stirred up and pricked forward,
but in the very April of his age, that he might become the guarde to his
Prince, the refuge of his Country, and the bulwark and castle of defense to
them both. And now Captain Pill that it might appear to any man of reasonable
judgment, how unlikely those accusations are to be true which you have
hitherto alleged, let us but examine your three last objections.

Some Captains (you say) would send their Soldiers into dangerous attempts,
rather hoping after their dead pays, then expecting any service they could
perform.

Othersome upon displeasure were sent to the like enterprises: and a third
some, when they had received they: Soldiers pays, would send them to the
slaughter, because they would keep all in their own purses.

What malicious reports be these? and yet not possible to be true, and I think
(as I have said before) that every soldiers boy does know it is death by the
laws of arms, for any Captain to enterprise any attempt, without direction
from the General or Council at wars: perhaps some will say it is truth,
where the disciplines of wars are truly observed, but the exceptions that are
taken against those country services, does only proceed upon that neglect,
because there was neither discipline nor order regarded: but let us therefore a
little look into their actions, and let any man that has judgment but
consider of the proceedings, it will appear that a poor Prince assisted with
a few states men, and should continue wars so many years together as they did
against the King of Spain, the Monarch of Christendom, for dominions, for
money, for wealth, for expert and trained Soldiers, for great and notable
Captains and commanders raked together out of Spain, Italy, Germany,
Burgundy, Wallone, Albanie, yea, from all the parts of Europe, with the best
Counselors of wars, Inginers of all sorts, and for all purposes, the best
experimented that Christendom could afford, or money procure, the which he
consumed there in large and huge sums (as the world can witness) and yet two
small provinces Holland and Seland, a little corner heaped next the sea,
environed about with enemies on every side, ouermatched with numbers, what was
it then that preserved them but their very order and discipline, the which if
it had been so neglected, that every man might have devised and attempted
what himself listed, their wars would quickly have had an end, and the King
again possessed of the country? it cannot therefore be gainesaid, but that
next under God, their greatest defense was their order and discipline,
prescribed and set down by the Prince of Orange, (who was not to seek in
those directions) and as by this I might well conclude, that they neither
wanted discipline nor conduct, yet thus much I dare further anouch, and I do
confidently affirm it of mine own knowledge, that the breach of discipline in
those Low Country services, were evermore punished with as great severity, as
in any wars that has been undertaken in our age, in what place or country
soever.

We may therefore conclude, that they wanted a great deal of matter, that were
driven to pick out so manifest untruths to slander those actions, and as much
as in them did lie, to disgrace the actours.


Pill I perceive Captain Skill the first tale is never good, till the second
be heard: you have very reasonably (in my opinion) discharged these
accusations, but yet those that have been the first reporters of them, have
delivered them for such undoubted truths, and under the pretense of such
Martial skill, that there be many thousands in England that do retain them,
and will hardly be dissuaded to a contrary. And seeing I have begun to rip up
your abuses, I will yet continue to tell you what I have heard, ill favored
matters they be as they have enforced the^ against you, and therefore it would
be much available to your reputations, if they could be sufficiently excused.


Skill It is no great matter (Captain Pill) what every Goosecap does conceive
in these matters against us, he that would satisfy all, shall satisfy none:
my desire is only to satisfy the wise, and for any thing that you have
hitherto alleged, I think a scoff were more fit then an answer. But you
say you have more behind, you were best to empty your stomach, for it is but
draffe, and therefore out with all.


Pill Your Low Country Captains are accused for being too prodigal of their
soldiers lives, for where it is evermore a custom amongst Captains that are
of skill or judgment, upon the assault of any place fortified, to make their
approaches with trenches, cross trenches, gabions, and other inventions as the
ground will admit for the saving of their Soldiers lives, and never to make
any attempt, until by battery they have made a sufficient breach, and have
displaced the flankers, and other artilery of the enemies that might be noisome
or dangerous: but these despisers of all discipline Military, have been so
careless of their Soldiers, that neglecting these principles, they have sent
them as it were to the butcherie, to give assaults to Castles, Sconces, and
other such fortifications, without either regard or consideration of any of
these promises before spoken of.


Skill I warrant you captain Pill he that comes in with all these tricks for
the surprising of fortifications, has heard much reading at your London
Accadems, and I believe can better direct how to assault the Castle in
Newfishstreete, then to instruct them that have had any continuance in the Low
country services, which does rather consist in assaulting and defending
fortifications, more then in any other incounters in the field, and therefore
he that serves there, is not to learn how to give assaults.

For the surprising of any City, Town, Castle, Fort, Sconce, or whatsoever
other place fortified, it is to be done by composition, by famine, by mining,
or by assault.

Composition is first embraced by all good Captains, for that is done without
the spilling of blood on either side.

To win by famine is used of policy, for the safety of his people that does
besiege, but many times enforced by constraint, when the situation of the
place admits of no other forcible mean.

Mining is especially preferred, as well for expedition, as the lightness of
the charge, if the ground will permit.

Assault is the last refuge, and cannot be used upon any plot that is well
fortified without battery, yet in some other places not thoroughly helped by
nature, nor fully supplied by Art are saultable enough with ladders and other
provision commonly used, before great Ordonance was invented: and in the
Low-countreyes we had many earth works, commonly called sconces, some of
greater, and some of less importance, builded usually upon streights or
passages, and fortified accordingly as was behoouefull for the place: and where
any one of them were found noisome or prejudicial for service intended, there
was likewise used such force and mean for the taking of the^ in, as the
situation, or strength or force of the place required: and I have known
diverse of those Sconces have been taken by scale without any artillery, and
yet without the loss of any one of the assailants: and what and if at some
other time we have lost men by assaults? it is not possible but if the
defendants will do their endeavor as they ought, that assailants can enter
without some loss of men, no not when there is made breaches most easy to be
assaulted, and therefore he that could find this fault, I warrant you had good
ability to find fault at any thing.


Pill Your Captains are yet once again accused of flat cosonage toward their
Soldiers, who to defeat them of their pays, gane them allowance of bread and
cheese, and other victual of the basest sort, which they call by the name of
Prouand, a strange name, and as strange a devise to coosin the poor men of
their money, and in steed thereof to give them prouand, a matter never heard on
before, as it is reported by men of great experience, some of them yet living,
that do wonder at the invention, and do very bitterly reprove those that were
the first inuenters.


Skill Is bread and cheese become so contemptible, that it is reputed amongst
the basest kind of victual, O shameful slander to Essex, where so many good
Cheeses are daily created, and no less indignity to Wales, where a piece of
roasted cheese is meat for a Monarch: but for those that will accuse our
Captains of cosinage toward their soldiers, because they gave allowance of
Prouand, if there be but as much Martial knowledge in any of them, as there is
good meat but in the paring of an Essex cheese, I will be contented to be
tried by all the captains pages that ever have but seen an army to march about
any expedition, and if they shall find me guilty, I am contented to suffer
the most unhappy death that ever any man did yet endure, (and that I think
were to be peckt to death with Capons.)

The name of Prouand you say is strange, and the devise used by our Captains
no less strange, to cousin their soldiers under the pretense of giving them
Prouand to keep away their pays. For my life they that do so much admire the
name, do think that the word Prouand was first derived from an Osterie, for
there the Ostler does keep his prouender and gives it out again from thence
by measure, and many of these Ostlers if they be not well looked unto, will
coosin a man's horse mightily in their Prouender, and this is the cause that
they suspect Captains of the like coosinage toward their Soldiers in their
Prouand: and I remember a fellow that once brought his master a reckoning of
riding charges, and amongst many Items put down in his bill, one was Item for
a penieworth of horse bread two pence. His master began to chafe at the
reckoning, and desired his man to make a better exposition of that part of the
text, the fellow making a low courtesy down to the ground, answered, forsooth
sir I drank a pot of Bear whilst my horse was eating of his bread: now if
there were any Captain that used the like deceit, to drink a can of Renish
wine whilst his soldiers were eating of their prouand, and after would put it
down upon his Soldiers accounts, then here comes in the coosinage, for
otherwise, what commodity for a Captain to have his Soldiers to be paid in
prouand? if there be any gains to be made, it falls out to them that do
provide and deliver it, which is not the Captain, and therefore to his
himderance, for if he would make a profit of his company, he should do it
much rather with receiving of ready money, then in receiving of his soldiers
pays in Prouand.

And for those that will affirm that the delivering of Prouand was a matter
never heard on before, but invented only by our Low Country Captains, let
them pretend as much Martial knowledge as they list, but I think they could
not devise to lay open their ignorance more apparently, then not to know that
Soldiers must of necessity be victualled upon many occasions, how well
soever they be otherwise paid.

One example that is familiar unto us I think may well suffice: her majesty
has services in Ireland, and in many parts of that country, if she should
pay her soldiers with ready money, and not make provision of victualles for
them, where otherwise they can come by none, they might quickly famish with
their money in their purses.

This necessity therefore has evermore been carefully provided for, and the
fault finders that up think it so strange a matter, that soldiers should
sometime receive their pay in victualles, no doubt their service has been in
plentiful places, where they might either go to ordinaries, or send to the
cooks for their dinner: yet I am not ignorant that vittailers will sometimes
follow a camp, but not at all times, nor yet in all places: and this Prouand
that is here so much wondered at, was no other but as her majesty provided for
her Garrisons in Barwick, and as all other Princes in Europe do and have done,
wheresoever they have held or do hold Garrisons of soldiers: and these
provisions are not commonly made of Phesants, Partrich, Quails, Capons and
other like dainties, but usually of Cheese, Butter, Bacon, Saltfish, and such
other victual as shall need no great cookerie, nor be long in making ready,
especially upon any expedition of service.

Those therefore that would persuade this victualling of Soldiers to be a
matter never heard on before, but invented by our Low-countrie Captains, for
their own profit and commodity, they have herein showed themselves to be most
simple and ignorant, and but in ordinary matters appertaining to the wars.


Pill Captaineskill, if I should prosecute these occasions accordingly as I
have heard them enforced against your French and Low Country Captains, I might
yet infer a hundred other objections, and all of them very bitter and
disgraceful unto them: but I see your answers are such as it rather falls
out to their disgraces that were your accusers, then by any means reproachful
unto you that were accused: I will therefore omit to speak any further in
these particular cauils, and will come to a matter of greater importance, being
a general il, the which if it be true, as the reporter does confidently
protest, it may concern no less then our utter wrack and ruin, and does
threaten in the end the destruction of our English nation.


Skill Marie Captain Pil, he that could spy me out that infirmity, were
worthy to have a physicians fee, but he that could prescribe a medicine for
the malady, were worthy to be esteemed the Ascalaphus of his country.


Pill The sickness is known, and the cause from whence proceeding is likewise
gathered, by those that are of great account for their experience and skill, it
is found to proceed from a vehement hot humor, abounding in your
Lowcountrey captains, who under the pretense of the excellency of your
weapons of fire (your Musket and Caliuer) would thereby bring in carowsing and
drunkenness, to the abolishing and utter subuerting of our artillery, and the
use of our long-bowes, the ancient and natural weapon of our country, by the
means whereof we have tryumphed in many notable victories from time to time,
and age to age, the which weapon if we should now neglect, (as our Lowcountrey
captains do altogether endeavor) this Noble Realm of England so famed and
renowned by the service of our artilerie, should now be left to the spoil, and
remain but as a prey, fit for every enemy that would attempt or assail us.


Skill Without doubt he that was the first finder out of this disease, had as
great knowledge and skill as the physician, who would needs persuade his
patient that he had taken a surfeit by eating of a horse, because he saw a
saddle lie under the sickmans bed. But in goodfellowshippe captain Pill,
tell me true, is this an objection against our Low-countrie captains, that
under the pretense of the weapons of fire, they would bring in carowsing and
drunkenness, by means whereof (you say) they would suppress the exercise of
the long how, and whereby our country should he left a sit prey to every
enemy that would attempt us.


Pill Captain Skill, what I have received, that I have delivered, I have told
you the true circumstance of that I have heard reported, if I have failed in
the manner, I am not mistaken in the matter, if perhaps I have something
missed of the words, yet I am sure I have not erred in the sense.


Skill Why now I know what the reason is why cooks will never be without a
Jack of beer in the kitchen, and what is it that makes Smiths to be so
local, that if you miss them at the forge, you shall be sure to find them in
the alehouse, they have to deal with a thirsty element, the element of fire,
that brings in this carowsing and drunkenness, that again expels the use of
the long-bow, the neglect whereof threateneth Englands overthrow.

So now how these matters are depending the one of the other, tied together
with a packthreed, and I will show you a similie how it may come to pass, an
ancient collection to prove by like circumstance that drinking may bring a man
to heaven: and thus says the text: He that drinks well, sleeps well, He that
sleeps well thinks no harm. He that thinks no harm sins not, and he
that sins not goes to heaven: here is now the conclusion, and he that can
choppe me up such Logic, I hope may bear the bell for a Logician: let him go
where he list.

Now for your water-casting wisards, that in the deepnesse of their experience
(as you say) have looked into Englands estate, and do think that the neglect of
the long bow may breed such a surfeit as you speak of. God be thanked the
sickness is nothing so dangerous, as the silly ignorant sort would persuade
it, the nature of the disease has bin examined, and carefully considered of by
men that are no less renowned for their wisedme and experience, then honored
for the love and zeal they bear to their country, they have found the first
to be a matter of no importance, but rather thought it behooueful and necessary
for us to inure our selves to that diet, which all the nations of the world
besides do especially account of, and have retained as a restoratiue to their
better safty, which being by us neglected, might be such a preparatiue for an
enemy to take advantage by, as your Physicians could never be able to restore,
not with all the medicines they could compound, either of their crossebows or
long bows.

A fool ^crach him then say I that would give us such purgations, or under the
pretense of a Cullis whereby to comfort us, would give us indeed a potion that
would undoubtedly poison us.

What should I say more then to these calculating companions, that are so
narrow eied to look into common wealth causes, that they think the countries
good is evermore neglected, where their own foolish prescriptions are not
always observed.

Let such vain prognosticators fable what they list, God has blessed England,
he has plentifully poured his blessings upon us: first, in our most gracious
Elizabeth, whom he has established, and holden up in despighte of all Popish
practices, he has delivered her when she has been compassed with many
dangers, whereby he has showed his mercy to us her people, whom she has
still governed in happy peace and prosperity. He has given her the assistance
of a most grave and discreet counsel, amongst the rest Burghley by name, the
man admired through christendom, whose watchful eyes to prevent ensuing
mischiefs, have evermore been vigilant, whose wisdom next under God and her
Majesty has been the best conseruer of our quiet, and happy peace, whose
experience in commonwealth causes, is singular to himself. And for the action
of war. O noble earl of Essex, how is England blessed in thee? thou have
honored thy country with thy victories obtained, enriched it with the spoils
of thine enemies, freeed it from the force of foes that were ready to assail
it, whom thou have dismayed and daunted at their own doors.

If I should now speak of domestical matters, for the execution of law and
justice here at home, according to equity, right, and conscience, England may
think it self happy, and the Court of Chauncery has as great cause to glory,
where Egerton adorneth the bench.

Thus you may perceive (captain Pill) that England is in no such distress as
your dreaming dizardes would persuade, they threaten us to be almost at deaths
door, when there is no manner of sign nor show of sickness, you see who they
be, captain Pil, that are Englands watchmen, and have so consecrated themselves
to the good of the commonwealth, that what perils may pass which shall not be
by them discerned, and what foreign practices or domestical disorders can be
so plotted out, which shall not be by them both foreseen and prevented, if it
do either concern the good or ill of our country.


Pill Captain Skill, me thinks you have been too compendious and brief in
the subject that you have now undertaken, a breath of wind is not enough to
comprehend their praises, that would ask a longer discourse than all that has
bin hitherto debated between us: but will not your words be taken in ill part?
for there be many honorable personages in England, that without doubt are
faithful and firm both to their princes and country, that perhaps will hang
the lip, and think themselves to be greatly wronged, that any one should be so
particularly preferred before them, especially for those causes.


Skill I hope the praise of one is no dispraise to another, neither am I
ignorant, but am undoubtedly persuaded, that there be many, as well of the
nobility, as other of the inferior sort and calling, that are of equal
desire, though not of equal ability: I commend him that can follow the wise
advise of others, but I prefer him that can foresee perils that are to come,
and is able to discern of things needful and requisite. My conclusion is, I
honor all that are worthy of honor, but I say again (and without offense to
any I hope I may boldly avouch it) these that I have named are the ornaments of
England, the Ministers of God next under her Majesty, by whom England is made
happy, the one famous for his counsel, the second renowned for his
magnanimity, the third reverenced for his justice, and al of them honored for
the care they have of their countries good, three notable pillars of our
commonwealth, to whom I may add a fourth, the noble Lord of Hunsdon, who for
his fidelity to his prince, matched with equal love to his country, together
with the magnificence and nobleness of his mind, may march in equal rank
with those that are most highly honored, and for their virtue most worthily
renowned.

You see now (captain Pill) that England is not so negligently provided too,
that it should run into such vnexperted danger as your squint eyed Diuiners
would pretend to foresee, but let them dream and make what doubts they list,
they are to be suspected of some defects that do seem to be so fearful of
the moone-shine in the water.


Pill But captain Skill, you deal somewhat too roundly in this matter, I
would wish that you could more advisedly consider of my speeches, the matter
objected is against your Low country Captains, who under the pretense of the
excellency of the weapons of fire, would bring in carowsing and drunkenness,
and thereby would utterly suppress and abolish, our longbowes, and archery of
England. From hence issues this danger to our country, that being bereaved of
this weapon which our predecessors have ever found so available, and of so
great advantage against their enemies, we should thereby so weaken and disable
our selves, against any that would invade us, that we should rather be left to
the spoil, than be able to make defense: and although that those noble patrons
of our country which you have named, are sufficiently able to discern of
perils (as I do acknowledge their virtue to be far exceeding the
commendation you have delivered, so there is no doubt but that they in their
wisdoms can well enough consider how this neglect of ours may threaten
greater danger and turn to a worse consequence than you do conceive of, when
it is avouched by them of known experience, and the reasons fortified by many
presidents of great antiquity drawn from Alexandria in Egypt, from
Constantinople in Greece, and from many other countries and kingdoms: besides,
it is proved by many examples, what notable conquests, have been obtained by
the use of bows, and how many nations, kingdoms, and common wealths have
been subverted, surprised, and brought into servitude, where they have
neglected that notable weapon, and set it aside.


Skill If our Low country Captains do pretend such excellency in the weapons
of fire, they do it by good authority, having had sufficient trial of the
effects, but how these weapons should bring that carowsing and drunkenness you
do speak of, I protest it passes my conceit how it may hang together.

For drunkenness I do pronounce it to be a most detestable vice, beastly and
hateful in the opinion of any man, that is worthy the reputation of a man, and
I have known some of our Low country Captains, that have been shameless
when they were drunk, but they have blushed again when they were sober, but he
that delights in that vice, is a fitter companion for swine, then worthy to
associate men.

And is it our Low country captains that have brought in the exercise of
carowsing and drunkenness, I wonder at them that could travel so far
countries, to fetch so many presidents, for the antiquity of bows, and could
not have brought one president with them, for the antiquity of drunkenness,
if it were but how Alexander killed his Clytus?

And for carowsing it was new christened in England from a carowse to a hearty
draught, I think before the most of our Low country Captains were borne.

Now for this neglect of the long bow which is thought to be a matter of such
danger, and such a weakening to our country, we may commend them a little for
their care that do so fear it, but never a whit for their experience that
would persuade it, and least of all for their wit that would believe it. For
the presidentes that have bin so transported from those far countries in the
behalf of the long bow, they are all as patte for the purpose (that should be
proved by them) as he that alleged that Tenterden steeple was the cause of
Goodwin sands.


Pill If you will deny presidents because they are far fetched, that do make
good in the behalf of the bow, we will bring you some nearer home, and I hope
you will not deny our own histories and chronicles, that do concern our own
actions, some of them within the compass of men's memories yet living, how many
testimonies are there recorded in the behalf of our archery, what services they
have performd what conquests they have achieved, and what victories they have
obtained, I shall not need to relate them in particular; they are so apparent to
every reader, that I hope you will not do your self that wrong to gainsay
them.


Skill And with what discretion can you or any one for you allege them? you
bring us out presidents, what services have been performed by our archery in
times past, but where was then that celleritie and readiness in the weapons of
fire that is now practiced? you tell me of conquests performed, and victories
obtained, but it was in diebus illis, when neither musket nor caliuer were
known nor heard of.

I confess the bow has been a weapon of great effect in service, but the
case is altered, every thing has his time, and I could wish with all my heart,
that our archery of England were but by the one half so effectual, as
ignorant men will dream of.


Pill That the bow is more effectual then you do esteem it, is to be proved
by such forcible reasons, as your low co^try captains are not able to resist,
let us but seek the testimonies of the holy scriptures, and we shall find
what account the prophet David made of that weapon after the overthrow and
death of king Saul, besides in one of his Psalms he calls them, A mighty
power, and in another place, The vessels of death.

Another of the prophets sent from the almighty to terrefie the people for
their sins, speakng in the person of GOD says, That he had bent his bow, and
made ready his quiver. Many other places might be inferred to confirm the fury
and force of that weapon, if men were not overmuch given to infidelity and
misbeleefe.


Skill If the Prophet David had slain Goliath with an arrow out of a bow, as
he kilde him with a stone out of a sling, I perceive there would have bin some
great hold taken of the matter, for the credit of bows, but if he had killed him
with a bow, must it therefore be granted that bows did excel all other
weapons? Sampson kilde a great number of the Philistines with the iawe-bone of
an Ass, yet if I should fight I would not trust to that weapon, if I might
have mine own choice.

And because it is said by the prophet, that he had bent his bow, does that
therefore conclude the bow to be most excellent of all other weapons? This
logic is much like unto his, that affirmed men to be more godly then women,
his reason was, because there is a town in Surty that is called Godlime^, but
there is never a town in England yt is called Godlywomen, ergo men are more
godly then women. And because God has said, I have bent my bow, and never
makes mention that he had chargde his musket, Ergo the bow is better then the
musket. And I remember another place where it is written, He had whetted his
sword, but it is not said that he had made sharp his brown bill, and
therefore the sword is a better weapon then a brown bill: But captain Pill,
let us leave this logic, for it is twenty to one if ever it be known, the
schole boys will laugh at us.


Pill. Let them laugh (captain Skill) at your error that do attribute such
commendations to your musket and caliuer, that thereby you would condemn and
suppress all other weapons of far greater excellency and use, but if you
will needs give such principality to your weapons of fire, it is neither your
musket nor caliuer that are so singular, but as it is resolved by captains of
great skill and knowledge, the harquebuz is to be preferred before them both,
and that for many considerations by them alleged.


Skill And what might be the considerations that your great captains have so
preferred the harquebuz?


Pill For that the Harquebuz is more maniable in a skirmish, and a great deal
more light to make a hasty retrait, where your Musketeers in such actions
through the weight of their pieces, are driven to throw them quite away and to
trust altogether to their heels.


Skill Then I perceive the error of our Low Country captains is, because they
would arm their people in such sort as they might be able to put the enemy to
a retrait, but your great captains clean contrary would have them so
appointed as they might be light and nimble to run away themselves: and he
that should bring his men but furnished with paltry harquebuz to encounter the
musket and caliuer were fitter indeed to run away from an ennemie that would
offer to assail him, than be able to tarry by him in the field.


Pill And all the reason you can make, is, because of the far shooting, and it
is not denied, but that your musket well charged with good powder, would carry a
full bullet 24. or 30. scores: but yet that any of them should give their volies
above ten, twenty, or thirty pieces at the uttermost, is accounted but a
mere mockery.


Skill And if the far shooting be of no advantage, why then there is no odds
between a bodkin and a pike, but in truth one of the most especial causes
that muskets are so much regarded, is because they may be brought 24. and 30.
scores off to beat upon squadrons either of horsemen or footmen, to break and
dismember them: and in like manner to beat passages or grounds of advantage
taken by the enemy, or for many other services, either assailing or defending
as well in the field, town, trench, or where, or howsoever, the musket is still
found to be a weapon of wonderful advantage, and only by the far shooting:
but for those that do no better value of the musket, but to give their volies
at ten, twenty, or thirty paces: it should seem they knew of no other
service in the field, but when enemies do meet, they will strait draw their
squadrons to an encounter, which shows their little understanding, for when
such meetings do happen, captains that be of experience are accustomed to place
the stand of pikes (wherein consists their strength) upon some ground of
advantage, and as near as they can will bring some hedge, some ditch, some
shrubbes or bushes, or some other like helps, between them and the enemy,
because they would not lie open to the musket shot, that the other will then
thrust out, (if they can be suffered) to play upon these squadrons or armed men
24. and 30. scores off. Loole shot being thus shaken off, oportunities and
advantages are watched on both sides, as well by horsemen as footmen to take
their times and occasions, their squadrons standing still a good distance the
one from the other, with wings, fillets, and troops of shot, to give those
volies at hand (that you speak of) if they should be charged, and many times
it falls out, that squadrons be broken and put to a retrait, by advantages
taken and procured by these skirmishes, but especially being galled and beaten
by the fury of shot a far off, when the squadron of the contrary part has
not so much as appeered in sight: those weapons therefore are most to be
valewed that will do his execution farthest off, and if it were possible to
devise a weapon that would annoy and spoil an enemy in distance as far as
three muskets, such a weapon were three times more available for services at
longth, and ten times more profitable for such exploites, then once to give
volies so near at hand, to be delivered within that distance of ten,
twenty, or thirty paces as you speak of.

And yet for those services when occasion shall require, what weapon more
terrible than the musket, that within twenty, thirty, forty, or a hundred
paces, will deliver four or five caliuer shot at one discharge, to the
wonderful spoil of such as will approach them: and for this occasion the fillets
and wings of battelles and squadrons, are compounded of those weapons to give
their volies if they should be charged: and this is the cause that the Spaniard
finding this weapon to be of so great importance for all manner of services,
has converted the greatest part of his shot into musketires: and this is the
cause that such of our Nation as have served against them, may the better
speak of that weapon by experience what themselves have found.

For others that have but gathered their presidents from tabling houses or
otherordinaries, may better speak according to their knowledge then according
to the matter. And who be those that will evermore contend against that weapon,
but such as have not seen their effect and service in the field, but inforceth
against them their hundred year old exampls, before shot was ever perfited,
or in manner known.


Pill Thus I do see we English men are very sharp witted to make reasons
against our selves, and Lord how ready we be to change a certainty for an
uncertainty. But will you so disable our bows, that you will allow them no place
in the field? I hope against horsemen you will do them some favor, for to
spoil and gall horses, what weapon of more effect, or who will deny them that
right?


Skill But how shall we bring them to that place of service where they may do
this annoyance to horsemen? it is not to be deuied but that Archers would
perform great service against horsemenne: if they might be brought to the
place where they might serve, but as they must be fortified, either with hedge,
ditch, or other artificial means that horsemen may not charge them, so the
place from whence they may do their execution, must be open and plain, where
whilst they draw their bows, their bodies must remain in open view. Now
what enemy of judgment would suffer them to keep such a ground, but that
with three or four hundred musketeers they would displace two thousand
Archers, and without any manner of danger to themselves, by reason of their
far shooting, so that he might be counted a very weak witted enemy that
would suffer us to bring our bows where they might perform any exploit either
against horsemen or footmen, but contrariwise for the musket and the caliuer
every hedge, every ditch, and every thicket, which almost every ground
affords, is such an advantage for them, that they will not be displaced, but
with great danger and loss of the assailants, where they have once planted
and settled themselves.

Again, they can serve out of every bush, and from behind every tree
undiscerned or seen by those that shall serve against them, whereas the Archer
must stand in open show, and make himself an open mark to his enemy, or
otherwise he cannot serve at all.


Pill Why then belike all the advantage that your shot has, is to hide
themselves. But let me ask you a question: if a thousand of your shot, and a
thousand of well chosen Archers were together in the plain field; which part
would you there take if you might have your own choice?


Skill But in what field do you mean (Captain Pill) let me first know that?


Pill And what a question is that to be asked, if it be in a field where there
is no advantage of covert for your shot to hide themselves in, I take no other
exceptions to any field.


Skill Mary sir but I do, and your question may be full of subtlety, for I
remember there was one that should have been begged for an Idiot, and such a
question was asked of him, how many legs a sheep had, he asked again
whether they meant a sheep as he went to the butchers, or as he came from the
butchers? why, what difference make you in that (said the demaunder?) great
difference sir (answered the other) for a sheep going to the butchers has
four legs, but coming from the butchers, has but two legs and two
shoulders. And your question may have the like fallace, for you ask me if a
thousand shot and a thousand Archers were in the field, whose part I would
take, now if you mean in Finsburie field, as they are there with the Duke of
Shordich, and Prince Arthur, I would then take part with the Archers, for then
I were sure I should never catch harm with a bullet, and I should have good
cheer, during the time of our service: but if it were in the field where they
should serve for their lives the one against the other, if I should then say I
would take part with the Archers, I am afraid^, Captain Pill, that you would
beg me for an Idiot.


Pill And I do know them again that do think their experience as good as
yours, or as any that shall say to the contrary, that dare undertake with one
thousand of choice Archers, to encounter with two thousand of the best shot
you can bring into the field.


Skill I would some of those undertakers would undertake to build up Poules
steeple, for me thinks they should adventure to undertake any thing.


Pill they dare adventure to undertake this, and so to discomfite your shot,
that they shall not dare to show their faces in the field, or else they will
loose their lives, or will wager for the performance all that ever they have in
the world.


Skill Nay if they go to wagering, I on the contrary part will play them fair
play, for I will lay them Cockpit-ods that they shall not do it.


Pill Sir I dare undertake you shall be taken up, but what is that you call
Cockpit-oddes?


Skill Cockpit-oddes is lightly two to one, and he that will undertake to make
good your challenge, I will lay both my pantofles to his wit.


Pill It should seem Captain Skill) you are driven to a bare board, that are
feign to shift out your matters with such unsavory jests.


Skill I hope they smell as sweet as the challenges you do make, of one
thousand Archers against two thousand of our best shot.


Pil I tell you again, there be thousands of that opinion, and do think that
an Archer hand to hand, is by great odds too hard for any shot you are able
to turn against him.


Skill I tell you again they are in a wrong opinion, and I account him a very
insufficient shot that dare not undertake any Archer that ever I heard on;
unless it be one.


Pill It is happy you will confess one Archer of such sufficiency, but I
pray you who may that one Archer be that you stand so much in doubt of?


Skill Marie sir it is Cupid, he that never shootes but he does some mischief
(they say) and therefore there is no dealing with him, and I would never wish
my friends to meddle with him.


Pill I perceive these jests will never be left off, but they are your best
helps, and therefore to be borne withal.


Skill I must commend you (Captain Pill) for your modesty, but you are
deceived, I use no suth helps for want of matter, but I have learned that
frivolous questions are fittest to be answered with a jest, or not to be
answered at all, and those comparisons that you have made of your Archers with
our Musket and caliuer, are so far from al reason and judgment, that they
are to be laughed at by any man that has either reason or judgment, or any
manner of spark of experience in him.


Pil If this be enough that because captain Skill has thus affirmed,
therefore it is true, there shall need no further answer, but if you will
truly discern of these doubts, let us examine what may be the defects as well
of your weapons of fire, as of our archers, or what casualties may fall out
that may hinder their services: by this you shall perceive which weapon is of
greatest effect, and likeliest to do service.

Then first for your Caliuer and Musket: there be many accidents that may
happen through the default of such soldiers as shall use them, for besides
they may neglect to keep their pieces in serviceable sort, so in the very
instant of their service they may fail in their sight, as commonly with too
much haste they are accustomed to do, whereby they never shoot greatly to
endanger: again their bullets being too low, may fly uncertain, in
continuance their pieces may wax hot, there may be fault in their powder,
there may be fault in their match, there may be fault in their charging,
there may be many other faults and casualties, that are incident to shot, and
all of them an impeachment to the service: but for Archers, what is there more
then the breaking of the bow, or the breaking of the string, that may be any
impediment to them? and this is a very seldom casualtie, and may be prevented
with a matter of nothing, for a little wax, rosine, and tallow tempered over a
fire, and chafed in with a woollen cloth, preserves the bow: and for the
string, if it be made of good hemp, water, glue, and strongly whipped with
silk or fine thread, it will not fail in a long continuance: the Archer
therefore being least subject to mischances, is of greatest importance, and
readiness for service.


Skill But captain Pill, this argues you to be a very partial physician, yt
would not likewise find out some medicines for shot when you have found so many
infirmities depending upon them, but have left them to all their diseases, as
though they were incurable: but if I would deal as narrowly with your archers,
as you have done with our shot, I could pick out more casualties then the
breaking of a bow or a bow string, for it might be they might lose their
shooting gloves, and the^ they could not shoot for hurting of their fingers.
Again, they might have sore elbowes, and then they could not draw their bows:
but especially they are to take heed when they shoot, that they shoot not the
fethered end of their arrows forwards, for then they will never flee right.


Pil What gawds be these you do still adict your self unto? ywis it would be
more for y^ credit of your cause, to answer with more discretion, these frumps
are to little purpose, but rather to the discredit of that you would fainest
maintain.


Skill Captain Pil, I do deal more discreetly with you then I perceive you
can conceive of: for you know it is fair play in every tennis court to toss
you back again your own balls, that your self have first served to the
house: and because you speak of gaudes, what gaudes be these that you have
inferred against shot? that they may neglect their sightes, that their bullets
may be too low, that there may be fault in their powder, that there may be
fault in their match, that there may be fault in their charging: what
objections be these but gaudes and trifles? for who would allow him for a
shot, that takes no sight of his mark but shoots at randon, or that cares
not whether his powder be wet or dry, or that will not keep his piece in
serviceable sort from rusting or furring, or that knows not how to give his
piece her due charge, but will put in the bullet before the powder, or that
thinks his piece never to be charged till he has filled the barrel to the
very top? I have known such, but what of this? are these things to be
reckoned in the disparagement of perfect shot? no they are but cauils, and the
question is not of the imbicilitie of the man, but of the goodness and advantage
of the weapon being used in his kind, and according to skill: But for these
accidents before spoken of, if any of them happen, the fault is not to be
imputed to y^ weapon, but to the soldier that has committed some negligence.
Confess now a truth, and say that the musket and caliuer are of greater force
and service in the field or elsewhere, then any other shot that has bin
hitherto known, if the soldier that bears them be expert, as he should be,
and neglects no part of his duty, and then I will answer you thus.

The very mean to bring a shot to perfection and experience, is practice, and
then that man is much to blame, that (ignorantly and without knowledge) will
seek to dissuade that which does so greatly concern his countries good, and
would advise us to neglect a weapon of such excellency accounted (and try to
be of) in all the parts of Christendom, that would so weaken us, and
advantage any enemy yt would assail us, as God defend that by any persuasion
we should be induced to submit unto, but rather with all carefulnes to inure
them, knowing that the very perfection of those wepons, does especially consist
in the practice of the bearer, and he which has not celeritie and redines to
use them, is liker to end anger a friend, then hurt an enemy.


Pill And for this celeritie and readiness the archer is especially to be
preferred, that are always ready to give their volies, and to shoot four or
five arrows, before your shot shall be able to discharge one bullet.


Skill This position is one of the greatest reasons that they have in the
behalf of archers, yt they will shoot faster and oftener then shot can do,
but this is ever more aleaged by ignorant men, for although it be true that
every archer ordinarily will shoot faster then every shot can do hand to hand,
yet for service to be performed in the field, if there be 1000 shot, and 1000
archers, every captain of any sufficient experience, will so maintain his
skirmish, that he will still have as many bullets flying, as the archers can
shoot arrows, if they will shoot to any purpose to annoy those that shall
serve against them, and there is no such necessity of hasty charging, as
unskillful men will dream of, but that shot may take convenient time, and
the more they be in number the more may be their leisure. Now for their redines
to give those volies that is spoken of, I hope shot, having their pieces
charged, proined, their matches fired, and al things ready (as they are evermore
accustomed, if there be such occasion, they can discharge with quicker
expedition, then an archer can nocke his arrows and draw it to his head.


Pill But the Archer that always marches with his bow ready bent, may be
thought likewise to be most ready for all manner of services, and for all
manner of weathers, whether fair or foul: again, the arrows in their
descent are most noisome (...) terrible to the enemy, lighting upon their
faces, their breasts, their bellies, their codpeeces, their thighs, their
legs, and there is no place that is free from their danger, but that they
gawle and spoil both horse and man. Besides, flying together in the air as
thick as hail, they do not only terrify their eyes with the sight, but they
do likewise amaze the very ears and hearts of men, with the noise and
whistling they do make in the air.


Skill Lord have mercy upon us, what a fearful description is this, and I
will not deny (indeed) but that they may hit us in the faces, in the breasts,
and in the bellies, but for the codpeece, the tailers have taken order they
shall never hurt us there any more, for they use to make our hose now without
codpeeces, and I perceive it is done for a good intent and for the whistling
that they do make in the air, if that be a matter of such terror, who would
not be afraid to come amongst a flock of Geese when they have young goslings,
but he that has been in place where a volie of Musket and Caliuer shot, has
passed by him, and has heard any thing of their whistling, will never after
think that the fluzzing of an arrow, is so fearful a matter.

But Captain Pill to end this trifling, and to show you my opinion in a few
words, the readiest way to find out the effects of these weapons, is first to
consider of the place where they may be brought to serve, y^ time when they may
do service, and what may be ye effects in the execution of their services.

First for the place, archers, are not serviceable at all, neither in trenches
nor in any fortifications whatsoever, because they cannot in those places be
brought to serve, but they must make their bodies an open mark to the musket
and caliuer, which are vsualy placed in such sort, that a man cannot put up his
head above the rampire, but with great danger and peril. So that their place
where they may serve, is only in the plain and open field, where they must be
guarded with trench, hedge, ditch, or otherwise that horsemen may not charge
them, and yet there they cannot do their execution, but they must stand in
open view to the Musket and Caliuer, who taking the benefit of hedge, ditch,
trees, bushes, shrubbes, or other couerts which almost every ground affords
them, or otherwise by the advantage of far shooting, will without any danger
at al to themselves, easily displace the other, and put them from the ground:
where the Musket and Caliuer having once taken place of aduantage-will not be
displaced neither with horse nor foot, but with great hazard to those that
shall assail them.

For the time when these weapons may do their service, first for the bow, it
cannot be but within the distance of nine or ten score, for until that time
the archer is not able to shoot home, for although there be many that in their
gaming bows and their arrows, fitted to their length, and neately feathered,
will shoot sixteen or eighteen score, yet when they shall be brought to
their liuerie bows, which are rather made to endure weather, then for free
shooting, their arrows likewise big timbered, their feathers ruffled, whereby
they will gather wind, and ordinarily made of such length, that very few will
draw them to the heads by two three inches, these things considered, if ten
amongst a hundred do shoot above ten score, all the rest will shoot short
of nine. What advantage then has the Musketeres, that may take their times to
beat upon troops either of horsemen, or footmen, thirty score off, but
within 24 with great forceand fury. Here is now a special matter to be noted,
the arrow coming in the air in the descent, when it (...) furthest to fly,
but it falls to the ground, where contrariwise the shot discharged from the
Musket, even from the place of the first delivery, runs still current within
the compass of a man's height, and all the way in possibility is indaunger, so
that this may be concluded, neither can it be denied, as the arrow has no
possibility to endanger, in above one or two ranks, so the musket shot has
as great likelihood to hurt, in more then two or three and twenty.

Now touching the effects of these weapons for their execution, the greatest
perfection of the bow, is to gall a horse or naked men that are unarmed, and
the arrow easily defended with matters of light carriage, as our barbarous
Irishmen, that invented targets made of small wickers, like basket liddes,
which weighing not above two pownd weight, would cover them from the top to
the toe, and sometimes with their mantles hanging loose about their arms,
which was the cause that our captains of that country, long sithence have
converted all their bows to caliuers, and from that time have so continued.

The musket shot is of a greater effect, both against horse and man, and who is
he that can carry such an armor as will hold them out? Of the further effects
of these weapons I think I shall not need to speak, but this may suffice to
those that are not disposed to cavil, and for those that are perverse, I have
neither hope nor intention to alter or dissuade the^, and will therefore make the
more sparing conclusion.


Pill Captain Skill, you could never have concluded in a better time, for we
are come to a good town, and I hold it best that we ride no further to night.
And for these matters thus discoursed between us, although you have in a sort
satisfied me, yet I have something else to say which I will defer till our
next conuenience, but now I hold it best to take up our lodgeing for this
night.


Skill It is a very good motion, captain Pil, and lead you the way to what
Inn you are best acquainted at, and I will follow you.


FINIS.

