A Friendly Farewell, which Master Doctor Ridley, late Bishop of London did write
being prisoner in Oxeforde, unto all his true Lovers and friends in God, a
little before that he suffered for the testimony of the truth of Christ his
Gospel.

Newly set forth and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queen's
Majesty's Injunctions.

Ecclesiasticus. 4.

For the truth strive thou unto death.

Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath. S.
Martius. 1559. The.10. of Nouembre.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regia Maiestatis per Septe^nium.

JOHN FOX to the gentle Reader.
Amongst many other worthy and sundry Histories, and notable acts which we
have in hand, and ente^de (by the grace of Christ our Lord) shortly to set
abroad, of such as of late days have been persecuted, murdered, and martyred
for the true Gospel of Christ, in Queen Mary's reign. First to begin with
this litell treatis of Doct. Nicholas Ridley, late Bishop of London, this
shall be to desire thee (gentle Reader) to accept it, and studiouslye to peruse
it in the mean time, while the other Uolumes be addressing, which we are about,
touching the full History, process, and examinations, of all our blessed
brethren, lately persecuted for rightuosnes sake. Which Histories wha^ they
shall come to light, (I suppose) thou shall see as horrible a slaughter of the
Saints, joined with as much cruelty of some English hertes, as ever in any
one realm before Christ, or after was seen. In the mean time because all
thing can not be done at once, and the Uolumes be long, accept well in worth
this little, (but pithie) work of this forsaid Bishop, in expectation of
greater things, which shall (perchance) more largely satisfy thy desire.
Concerning the contents of this Book, the Argument does easily import. For
the worthiness thereof, the name only of the Author is a sufficient
commendation, though I bestow no praise thereof. First when thou readist it by
the name of a Fare well, thou may understand a faithful Declaration, as of
one, being in that case, nothing dissembling his conscience in such matters
and controversies of religion, wherefore he suffered.

Again, when thou readist written by Doctor Ridley, Bishop of London, by
that only name, thou may understand, of what excellency and learning, the
work is to be thought procedynge from such a man whose profounde learning is
unknown to few.

Thus doble ways are we bound to the Lord, who not only by the blood and
death of his Saints, confirms the testimony of his truth, but also
besides their death, leaves such monumentes behind them, which no less
co^founde the adversary, as confirm the godly.

Briefly, as there is nothing in this Book that greatly neadeth any man's
commendation, being able enough of his own praise: so neither do I so mistrust
thy virtuous towardnes (good and Christian Reader) in godly study and reading
that thou should greatly nead my exhortation thereunto, or any Epistle before
the work: save only that I would desire the aid of thy Christian prayer,
whereby the things may the more luckely come forward, which for thy sake at
this present we do acheue, to the fortheryng of God his glory, the testimony of
true religion, and establishing of thy conscience. Thus desyring the brotherly
help of thy prayer I wish thee to fare well with well fare in the Lord. The
grace of Christ confyrme us, and stablyshe us in all well doing, to the glory
of his name.

Amen.
A FRIENDLY farewell.
AS a man minding to take a far journey and to depart from his familiar
friends, commenly, and naturally has a desire to bid his friends farewell
before his departure. So likewise now I, lokyng when that I should be called
for to depart hence from you (O all ye my dear beloved brethren, and sisters
in our Savior Christ,) that dwell here in this world, having now a like mind
toward you all. And also blessed be God of this such time and leisure, whereof
I right heartily thank his heavenly goodness, I bid you all my dear brethren
and sisters in Christ, that dwell upon the earth, after such manner as I can.
Farewell.

Farewell my dear Brother George Shypside, whom I have ever found faithful,
trustye and loving in all state and conditions: And now in ye time of my
cross, over all other to me most fre^dly, and steadfast. And that which liked
me best over al other things: in Gods cause ever herty.

Farewell my dear sister Alice, his wife: I am glad to hear of that that thou
do take Christ's cross, which is laid now (blessed be god) both on thy
back, and mine in good part: Thank thou God, that has given thee a godly, and
a loving husband: Se thou honor him, and obey him, according to Gods law.
Honor thy mother inlawe his mother, and love all that perteyneth unto him:
being ready to do them good as it shall lie in thy power. As for thy children I
doubt not of thy husband, but that he which has given him a heart to love,
and fear God, and in God, the^ that perteine unto him, he shall also make him
frendely and benefyciall unto thy children, even as if they had been gotten of
his own body.

Farewell my well-beloved brother John Rydley of the Waltown and you my gentle
and loving sister Elizabeth, whom besides the natural leauge of amity, your
tender love which you were said ever to bear toward me, above the rest of
your brethren does bind me to love: My mind was to have acknowledged this your
loving affection, and to have acquitted it with deeds, and not with words alone,
your daughter Elizabeth I bid farewell, who^ I love for the meke and gentle
spirit that God has given her, which is a precious thing in the sight of God.

Farewell my beloved Sister of Unthancke, with all your children my Nephews
and Nices, since ye departure of my Brother Hughe, my mind was to have been
unto the^ in the stead of their father. But the Lord God must and will be their
father, if they will love him and fear him, and live in ye trade of his law.

Farewell my well-beloved worshipful Cozein Nicholas Ridley of Willymountswicke
and your wife, And I thank you for all your kindness showed both to me: and also
to all your own kinsfolk and mine. Good Cozein, as God has set you in that
our stock and kindred not for any respect of your person, but of his abundant
grace and goodness to be as it were the Belwether to order and conduct the
reast, and has also endued you with his manifold gifts of grace both
heavenly and worldly above others: So I pray you good Cose^, as my trust and
hope is in you, continue and increse in maintenance of truth, honesty,
righteousness and all true godliness: and to the uttermost of your power to
withstand falshed, untruth, unrighteousness and all ungodliness, which is forbid
and condemned by the word and laws of God.

Farewell my Coze^ Raffe Whitfield, oh your time was very short with me: mi mind
was to have don you good, and yet you caught in that little time a loss. But I
trust it shall be recompe^ced as it shall plese almighti god.

Farewell al my whole kindred and countrymen. Farewell in Christ altogether: the
Lord which is ye searcher of secreates knows, that according to my hearts
desire, mi hope was of late yt I should have come among you, and to have brought
with me abundance of Christ's blessed Gospel: according to the duty of that
office and ministry, where unto among you I was chosen, named and appointed by
the mouth of that our late piereles Prince and king Edward. And so also
denounced openly in his court by his preuy counsel.

I warn you al my well-beloved kinsfolks and contreimen that ye be not amassed
or astonished at the kind of my departure or dissolutio^. For I ensure you I
think it the most honor that ever I was called unto in all my life. And
therefore I thancke my Lord God heartily for it, that it has pleased him to
call me of his great mercy unto this high honor, to suffer death willinglye
for his sake, and in his cause, unto the which honor he called the holy
Prophets, and his dearly beloved Apostels, and his blessed chosen martirs. For
know ye that I doubt no more, but that the causes wherefore I am put to death
are Gods causes and of truth, then I doubt that the Gospel which Ihon wrote
is the Gospel of Christ, or that Paul's Epistles are the very word of God.
And to have a heart willinge to abide and stand in Gods cause, and in Christ's
quarrel even unto death, I ensure the (O man) it is an in estimable and a
honorable gift of God given only to the true electes and dearly beloved
children of God, and inheritoures of the kingdom of heaven. For the holy
Apostle, and also martyr in Christ's cause. Saint Peter says: If ye suffer
rebuke in the name of Christ, that is in Christ's cause, and for his truths
sake, then ye are happy and blessed, for the glory of the spirit of God
rests upon you. If for rebuke sake suffered in christ's name, a man is
pronounced by the mouth of ye holy Apostle, blessed and happy, how much more
happy and blessed is he that has the grace to suffer death also. Wherefore al
you that be my true lovers and fre^des, rejoice, and rejoice with me again.
And render with me hearty thanckes to God our heavenly father, that for his
Sons sake, my Savior and redeamer Christ, he has vouchsaued to call me,
being else without his gracious goodness, in my self but a sinful and a vile
wretch: to call me I say, unto this high dignity of his true Prophets, and of
his faithful Apostles: and of his holy elected and chosen Martyrs, that is to
die and to spend this Temporal life in the defense and maintenance of his
eternal and everlasting truth. Ye know that be my Country men, dwellinge
upon the Borders, where (alas) the true man suffers ofttimes much wrong at
the thieves hand: if it chance a man to be slain of the thief (as it often
chances there) which went out with his neighbor to healpe him, to rescue
his goods again, that the more cruellye he be slain: and the more steadfast
he stooke by his neighbor in fight against the face of the thief, the
more favor and friendship shall all his posterity have for the slain man's
sake of all them that be true: as long as the memory of his fact, and his
Posteritye does endure.

Even so ye that be my Kinsfolk and Country men, know ye, how so ever the
blind, ignoraunte and wicked world hereafter shall rail upon my Death,
which thing they can not do worse then their fathers did of the death of Christ
our savior of his holy Prophets, Apostles, and martirs. Know ye (I say) that
both before God, and al them that be godly, and that truly knows, and
follows the laws of God, ye have and shall have by Gods grace ever cause to
rejoice, and to thanck God highly, and to think good of it: and in god, to
rejoice of me your flesh and blud, whom God of his gracious goodness has
voutchsafed to associate unto the blessed company of his holy martirs in
heaven: and I doubt not in the infinite goodness of my Lord God, nor in the
faithful fellowship of his elect and chosen people: but at both their hands
in my cause, ye shall rather find the more favor and grace. For the Lord says
that he will be both to them and theirs that loves him, the more louinge
again in a thousand generacions. The Lord is so full of mercy to them I say:
and theirs which do love him in deed. And Christ says again that no man can
show more love then to give his life for his friend. Now also know ye all my
true lovers in God, my kinsefolke and Countryme^, that the cause wherefore I am
put to death, is even after the same sort and condition, but touching more
nie Gods cause, and in more weighty matters: but in the general kind al one,
for both is Gods cause, both is in the maintenance of right, both is for the
commen wealth, and both for the weal also of the Christian brother: although
yet there is in these two no small difference, both concerning the ennemies,
the goods stolen, and the manner of the fight. For know ye al, as there: when
the pore true man is robbed by ye thief of his own goods truly gotten,
whereupon he and his household should live, is greatli wro^ged, and the thief in
stealing and robbing with violence the pore man's goods, does offend God, does
tra^sgresse his law, and is injurious both to the poor man and to the commen
wealth: so I say know ye all that eue^ here in the cause of my death, the Church
of England, I mean the congregation of the true chose^ children of God in this
realm of England, which I knowledge not only to be my neighbors, but rather the
congregation of my true spiritual brethren and sisters in Christ, yea members
of one body, wherein by Gods grace I am and have been grafte in Christ. This
Church of England had of late of the infinite goodness and aboundaunte grace
of almightye God, great substance, great riches, of heavenly treasure:
great plentye of Gods true and sincere word, the true and wholesome
administracion of Christ's holy Sacramenes, the hole profession of Christ's
religion truly and plainlye set forth in Baptism, the plain declaration
and understanding of the same taught in the holy Cathechisme to have been
learned of al true Christians. This church had also a true and sincere form
and manner of the Lords Supper, wherein according to Christ's own ordinance
and holy institucion: Christ's commandments were executed and done. For upon
the bread and wine set upon the Lords table, thanks were given, the
co^memoration of the Lords death was had, the bread in the remembrance of
Christ's body torn upon the cross, was broken, and the Cup in the
remembrance of Christ's blood shed, was distributed, and both co^minicated
unto all that were present and would receive them: and thereunto were also
exhorted of the minister to do. All was done openly in the mother tongue, so
that every thing might be both easily hard and plainlye understand of all the
people to Gods high glory, and the edification of the hole Church. This
Church had of late the hole divine Service, all commen and public Prayers
ordained to be said and hard in the commen congregation: not only framed and
fashioned to the true vain of holy scripture: but also all things so set
forth according to the commandment of the Lord and Saint Paul's doctrine
for ye peoples edificatio^ also in their vulgar tongue, it had also holy and
wholesome Homelies in commendation of the principal virtues, which are commended
in scripture, and likewise other Homelies against the most pernicious and
capital vices that uses (alas) to reign in this Realm of England. This
Church had in matters of controversy, articles so penned and framed after the
holy Scripture, and grounded upon the true understanding of Gods word, that in
short time if they had been universally received they should have been able
to have set in Christ's church, much concord and unity in Christ's true
Religion, and to have expelled many false errors and heresies, wherewith this
church (alas) was almost nigh ouergone. But, alas, of late into this
spiritual possession of this heavenly treasoure of these godly riches, are
entered in thieves, that have robbed and spoiled all this heavenly treasoure
away. I may well complain on them and cry out upon these Thieves with the
Prophet, saying Deus venerunt gentes in hereditatem tuam. etc. Psalm. 79.

O Lord God the gentiles, heathen nations are come into thy heritage, they have
defiled thy holy Temple, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones, that is, they
have broken and beat down to the ground thy holy City: This Ethenishe
generation, these Thieves of Samaria, these Sabei and Caldei, these robbers have
rushed out of their dens, and has robbed the Church of England of all the
foresaid holy Treasoure of God, they have carried away and overthrown it,
and in stead of Gods holy word, the true and right administracion of
Christ's holy Sacraments, as of baptism, and others, they mixte their
ministry with men's folish fantasies, and many wicked and ungodly tradicions
withal.

In the stead of the Lords holy table, they give the people with much
solemn disgisinge a thing they call it their mass, but in dead and in truth
it is a very maskinge and a mockery of the true Supper of the Lord or rather I
may call it a craftye Iuglinge, whereby these false thieves and Iuglers has
bewitched ye minds of the simple people yt they have brought the^ from the
true worship of god unto pernicious Idolatry, and make them to believe yt to be
Christ our Lord and savior, which in deed, is neither God nor man, nor has
any life in it self, but in substance is the creature of bread and wine, and
in use of the Lords table is the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood. And
for this holy use which the Lord has ordained them in his Table, to
represent unto us his blessed body torn upon the cross for us, and his blood
there shed, it pleased him to call the^ his body and blood, which
understanding, Christ declares to be his true meaning, when he says: do
this in the remembrance of me. And again Saint Paul does set out the same
more plainly, speking of the same Sacrament after the words of the
consecration, and saying. As often as ye shall eat of this bread and drink
of this Cup: ye shall set forth (he means with the same) the Lords death
until his coming again: And here also these thieves have robbed again the
people of the Lords Cup, contrary to the plain words of Christ, written in
his Gospel. Now for the comme^ public prayers which were in the vulgar
tongue: these thieves have brought again a strange tongue, whereof the people
understand not one word: wherein what do they else but rob the people of their
divine service, wherein they ought to pray together with the Priest. And to pray
in a strange tongue, what is it but as saint Paul calls it barbarousnes,
childishnes, unprofitable folly: yea and plain madness. For the godly
articles of unity in Religion, and for the wholesome Homelies, what do these
thieves place in the stead of them, but the Popes laws and decrees, lying
Legandes: and fained fables and miracles to delude and abuse the simplicitye of
the rude people. Thus this robberye and theft is not only committed (nay
sacrilege and wicked spoil of heavenly things) but also in ye stead of the
same is brought in and placed the abominable desolacion of the tirant
Antiochus, of proud Senacherib, of the shameless faced king, and of the
Babilonical beast. Unto this robbery, this theft and sacrilege because I can
not consent nor God willing, never shall, so long as the breath is in my body,
because it is blasphemy against God, high treason unto Christ our heavenly
King, Lord, Master, and our only savior and redeamer: it is plain contrary
to Gods word, and to Christ's Gospel, it is the subversion of all true
godliness, and against the everlasting salvation of mine own soul, and all my
brethren and sisters whom Christ my savior has so derely bought with no
less price then with the effusio^ and shedding forth of his most precious
blood. Therefore all ye my true lovers in God, my Kinsfolk and countryme^, for
this cause know ye that I am put to death, which by Gods grace I shall
willingly take with hearty thanks to God therefore: in certain hope without any
doubting to receive at Gods hand again of his fre mercy and grace,
everlasting life.

Although the cause of the true man slain of the thief, healpinge his
neighbor to recover his goods again, and the cause wherefore I am to be put
to death in a generality, is both one, as I said before, yet know ye that
there is no small difference. These thieves as against whom I stand, are much
worse then the robbers and thieves of the borders.

The goods which they steal are much more precious, and their kind of fight
are far diverse. These thieves are worse I say: for they are more cruel, more
wicked, more false, deceitful and more craftye. For those will kill but the
body. These will not stick to kill both body and soul. Those for the general
theft and robbery be called (and are in deed) thieves and robbers. But these for
their spiritual kind of robbery are called Sacrilegi, as ye would say,
Church robbers. They are more wicked. For those goes about but to spoil men
of worldly things, worldly riches, gold and silver, and worldly substance.
These go about in the wais of the devil (there gostly father) to stele from the
universal church, and perticulerly from every man, all heavenly treasure,
true Faith, true Charity, and hope of salvation in the blood of our savior
Jesus Christ: yea to spoil us of our Savior Christ, of his Gospel, of his
heavenly spirit: and of the heavenly heritage of the kingdom of heaven, so
derely purchased unto us with the death of our Master and savior Christ.
These be the goods and godly substance whereupon the Christian before God
must live. And with out the which he ca^ not live. These goods, these thieves,
these church robbers, go about to spoil us of. The which goods as to the
man of God they excel, and far passes all worldly treasure: so to
withstand even unto the death such thieves as go about to spoil both us and
the hole Church of such goods, is most high and honorable service done unto
God.

These Church robbers be also much more false, craftye, and deceitful then
the thieves upon the borders. For these have not the craft so to commend
their theft, that they dare avouch it. And therefore as acknowledging the^
selves to be evil, they steal commenlye upon the night, they dare not appear
at judgments and sessions, where justice is executed. And when they are taken
and brought thither: they never hang no man, but they be often times hanged
for their faults.

But these Church robbers can so cloak and color their spiritual robbery,
that they can make the people to believe falshed to be truth, and truth
falshed, good to be evil, and evil good, light to be darkness, and
darkness light, Superstition to be true Religion, and Idolatrye to be the
true worship of God: and that which is in substance the creature of bread
and wine, to be none other substance but only the substance of Christ the
living Lord both God and manne. And this there falshed and craft they can
so Iuggle and bewitche the understanding of the simple, that they dare avouch
it openly in Court and in town, and fears neither hanginge nor heddinge as
the poor Thieves of the borders do. But stout and strong like Nembrothe, dare
condemn to be burned in flaming fire quick and alive, who so ever will go
about to bewray their falshed.

The kind of fight against these Church robbers, is also of an other sort
and kind: then is that which is against the thieves of the borders.

For there the true men go forth against the^ with spear and lance, with
bow and byll, and al such kind of bodily weapons, as the true men has.

But here as the enemies be of another nature: so the watchmen of Christ's
flock, the warriors that fight in the Lords war, must be armed, and fight
with another kind of weapons and Armor, For here the enemies of God, the
soldiers of Antichrist although the battle is set forth against the Church
by mortal men, being flesh and blood, and nevertheless members of their
father the devil: yet for that their graunde master is the power of
darkness, their members are spiritual wickedness, wicked spirits, spirits of
errors, of heresies, of all deceate, and ungodliness, spirits of idolatry,
superstition, and Hipocresie, which are called of S. Paul Principates and
powers, Lords of the world and spiritual subtilties conserninge heavenly
things. And therefore our weapons must be fit and meet to fight against
such, not carnal nor Lordly weapons as spear or sau^ce, but spiritual and
heavenly: we must fight against such with the armor of God, not entending to
kill their bodies, but their errors, their false craft and heresies, their
Idolatry, Superstition and Hipocrisye, and to save as much as lies in us both
their bodies and souls. And therefore as S. Paul teaches us, we fight not
against flesh and blood, that is, we fight not with bodily weapon to kill the
man, but with the weapons of God, to put to flight his wicked erroures and
vice, and to save both body and soul.

Our weapons therefore are faith hope and Charity, righteousness, truth,
patience, prayer unto God: and our sword wherewith me smite our enemies, we beat
and batter, and bear down al falshed, is the word of God. With these weapons
under the banner of the Cross of Christ we do fight: ever having an eye
upon our graund Master, Duke, and captain Christ. And then we reckon our
selves to triumph and to win the crown of everlasting bliss: when enduringe
in this battle without any shrinking or yelding to the ennemies after the
example of our graunde Captain Christ our Master, after the example of his
holy Prophets, apostles and martirs, when (I say) we are slain in our mortal
bodies of our ennemies, and are most cruelly and without all mercy murdered
down like a mainy of sheep. And the more cruel, the more painful the more
vile and spiteful is the kind of the death, whereunto we be put ye more
glorious in God, the more blessed and happy we reckon without all doubts our
martyrdom to be.

And thus much dear lovers and friends in God, my countrymen and kinsfolk I
have spoken for your comfort: least of mi death (of whose life you looked
peradventure sometimes to have had honesty, pleasures, and some commodities) ye
might be abashed or think any evil, but rather to rejoice if ye love me in
deed, for yt it has plesed God to call me to a greter honor and dignity, the^
ever I did enjoy before either in Rochester or in the sea of London, or ever
should have had in the Sea of Durham, whereunto I was last of all elected and
named: yea I compte it greater honor before God in deed to die in his cause
(whereof I nothing doubt) then is any earthly or temporal promocion or honor
that ca^ be given to a man in this world. And who is he that knows the cause
to be Gods, to be Christ's quarrel, and of his Gospel, to be the commen
weal of all the elect and chosen children of God, of all the inheritours of
the kingdom of heaven: who is he (I say) yt knows this assuredly by Gods
word, and the testimony of his own conscience, as through thinfinite goodness
of God, not of my self, but by his grace, acknowledge my self to do, who is I
say that knows this and both loves and fears God, in deed and in truth,
loves and believes in his master Christ and his blessed Gospel, loves his
brotherhode the chosen children of God, and also lusts and longs for
everlasting life, who is he (I say again) yt would not or can not find in
his heart in this cause to be content to die. God forbid that any such should
be that should forsake this grace of God. I trust in my Lord God, the God of
mercies, and the father of all comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord that
he which has put this mind, will, and affection by his spirit in my heart, to
stand against the face of the ennemy in his cause, and to chose rather the
loss of my worldly substance, yea and of my life to, then to deny his known
truth, that he will comfort me, aid me, and strengthen me evermore even unto
thend: and to the yelding up of my spirit, and soul: into his holy hands,
whereof I most heartily beseech his holy sacred Majesty of his infinite goodness
and mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Now that I have taken my leave of my Countrymen and kinsfolk: and the Lord
does lend me life and gives me laysour, I will bid my other good friends in
God of other places, also farewell. And whom first or before other then the
university of Cambrige, where as I have dwelte, longer, found more faithful
and hearty friends, received more benefits (the benefits of my natural parents
only excepted) then ever I did even in my own native country wherein I was
borne.

Farewell therefore Ca^bridge, my loving mother and nurse. If I should not
acknowledge thy manifold benefits, yea if I should not for thy benefits at the
least love the again truly I were to be co^pted ungrate and unkind: what
benefits had thou ever, that thou use to give and bestow upon thy best
beloved children that thou thoughtest to good for me? thou did bestow on me
all thy scole degrees. Of thy common offices the chaplainship of the
university, the Office of the proctorship, and of a common reader. And of thy
private commodities and emolume^ts in colleges, what was it thou made me not
partner of? First scholar, then fellow, and after mi departure from the, thou
called me again to a mastership of a right worshipful college: I tha^ck the my
loving kindness for all this thy kindness. And I pray God yt his laws and the
sincere Gospel of Christ may ever be truly taught and faithfully learned in
thee.

Farewell Pembroke hal, of late mine own College, my Cure and my charge? what
case thou art in now GOD knows. I know not well. Thou wast ever named
since I knew the which is now a.xxx. years ago to be studious, well
learned, and a great setter forth of Christ's Gospel, and of Gods true word:
so I found the, and blessed be God so I left the in deed. Woe is me for the
mine own dear College: if ever thou suffer thy self by any means to be
brought from that trade. In thy Orchard ye walls buts and trees if they could
speak, would bear me witness, I learned without book almost all Paul's
Epistles, yea and I wene all the Canonical Epistles (save only the Apocalipse)
of which study although in time a great part did depart from me: yet the
sweet smell thereof I trust I shall carrye with me into heaven. For the profit
there of I think I have felt in all my life time ever after. And I wene of
late whether they abide there now or no (I can not tell) there was, that did the
like. The Lord grant that this zeal and love toward that part of Gods
word, which is a key and a commentary to all holy scripture may ever abide in
that college so long as the world shall endure.

From Cambridge I was called into Kent by the Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas
Cranmer yt most reverend father and man of God. And of him by and by sent to be
Uicar of Herne in East Kent. Wherefore farewell Herne the worshipful and
wealthy parish, the first cure whereunto I was called to minister Gods word.
Thou have hard of my mouth ofttimes the word of God preached, not after the
popiste trade, but after Christ's Gospel. Oh that the fruit had answered to
the seed. And yet I must knowledge me to be thy debtoure for the Doctrine of
the Lords Supper, which the^ at that time I acknowledge God had not reveled
unto me. But I bless God in all ye godly virtue and zeal of Gods word, which
the Lord by preachinge of his word did kindle manifestlye both in the heart,
life and works of that godly woman, there my Lady Phynes. God grant yt his
word took like effect there in many other mo.

Farewell thou Cathedral church of Canterburye the Metropolitike sea, where of
once I was a member. To speak things pleasant unto thee I dare not, for
danger of conscience, and displeasure of my Lord God. And to say what lies in
my heart were now to much and I fear were able to do thee now but a little good.

Nevertheless for the friendship I have found in some there: and for charity
sake I wish the to be washed clean of all worldliness and ungodliness, that
thou maiste be found of God after thy name in truth, Christ's Church in deed.

Farewell Rochester, sometime my Cathedral sea. In whom to say the truth I
did find much ge^tlenesse and obedience, which I trust thou will not say
the contrary, but I did use it to Gods glory, and thine own profitte in
God. Oh that thou had and might have continued and gone forewarde in the
trade of Gods law, wherein I did leave thee.

Then thy charg and burden should not have been so terrible and dangerous, as I
suppose verelye it is like to be (alas) on the latter day.

To Westminster other aduertisemente in God I have not now to say, then I have
said before to ye Cathedral church of Canterbury. And so God give the of his
grace that thou may learn in deed and in truth to please him after his own
laws. And thus fare you well.

Oh London, London, to whom now may I speak in the, or who^e shall I bid
farewell: shall I speak to the Prebendaries of Poules, alas all that loved
Gods word, and were true setters forth thereof are now as I hear say some
bre^t and slain, some exiled and banished and some holden in hard prison: and
appointed daily to be put to most cruel death for Christ's Gospel sake. As
for the rest of the^ I know they could never broke me well, nor I could never
delight in them. Shall I speak to the Sea thereof wherein of late I was placed,
almost and not fully by the space of iii. years. But what may I say to it,
being as I hear say, I am deposed and expulsed by judgment as an unjust
usurper of that rome. O judgment, judgment: can this be just judgment to
condemn the chief minister of Gods word, the pastor and bishop of the
Dioces, and never bring him into judgment, that he might have hard what
crimes were laid to his charge, nor never suffer him to have any place or time
to answer for him self.

Thinckest thou that hereafter when true justice shall have place, that this
justice can ever be allowed either of God or of man? well as for the cause and
hole matter of mi deposition, and the spoil of my goods which thou possessest
yet, I refer it unto God, which is a just judge. And I beseke God if it be
his pleasure, that that which is but my personal wrong be not laid to thy
charge on the latter day. But this can I pray for thee. O thou now wicked and
bloudye sea, why doste thou now set up again many alters of Idolatry, which
by ye word of God were iustlye taken away? why haste thou overthrown the
Lords Table? why do thou daily delude the people, Maskinge in thy Masses in
the stead of the Lords holy Supper, which ought to be commen as well (says
Chrisostom, yea the Lord him self) to the people as to the Priest? why dare
you deny to the people of christ contrary to his expressed commandment in the
gospel his holy cup? why bablest thou to the people the commen prayer in a
strange tongue, wherein. S. Paul commands in the Lords name no man should
speak before the congregation, except it should be by and by declared in their
commen tongue that all might be edefied. Nai harken thou whorishe band of
Babilone, thou wicked limme of Antichriste, thou bloudye Wolffe, why slaiest
thou down and make hauoke of the Prophets of god? why murtherest thou so
cruelly Christ's pore selye sheep? which will not hear thy voice because
thou art a stranger, and they will follow none other but their Pastoure
Christ his voice?

Thinckest to escape, or that the LORD will not require the blood of his
Saints at thy hands. Thy GOD which is the work of thy hands, and whom
thou say thou have power to make. That thy Deaf and dum God will not in
deed, nor can not (although thou art not ashamed to call him thy Maker) make
the to escape the reuenginge hand of the high and almightye God. But be thou
assured, our living Lord, our savior and redemer, which sets on the
rightha^d of his father in glory, he sees all thy wicked wais and cruelty
done to his dear members, and he will not forget his holy ones. And his
hands, O thou whorish drabbe, shall thou never escape. In stead of my
farewell, to the now I say. Fie upon the. Fie upon the filthye drabbe and all
thy false prophets.

Yet O thou London, I may not leave thee thus, although thy Episcopal sea,
now being joined in league with the seat of Satan, thus has now both
handled me and the Saints of God, yet I do not doubt but in that great City
there be many preuy mourners which daily mourns for that mischief which
never did nor shall consent to that wickedness, but do detest and abhor it as
the ways of Satan. But these preuy mourners here I will pass by and bid them
farewell with their fellows hereafter, when the place and occasion shall more
conveniently require. Among the worshipful of the City, and specially which
were in office of the meralty, ye and in other Citezens also whom to name now
it shall not be necessary. In the time of my ministerye, which was from the
latter part of sir Rowland Hills year, unto sir George Barnes year, and a
great part thereof, I do acknowledge that I found no small humanity and
ge^tlenes, as me thought. But to say the truth that I esteem before all other
for true Christian kindness that is showed in Gods cause, and done for his
sake: wherefore O Dobbes, Dobbes, Alderman and Knighte: thou in thy year did
win my heart for evermore, for that honorable act, that most blessed work of
God, of the erection and setting up of Christ's holy Hospitalles and truly
religious houses, which bithe and through the was begone. For thou like a man of God, when the matter was moved for the relief of Christ's pore selye
members to be helped from extreme miserye, hunger and famine, thy heart was
moved with Pity. And as Christ high honorable officer in that cause, thou
calledst together thy Brethren and Aldermen of the City, before whom thou
brake the matter for the poor, thou pleadest their cause, yea, and not only in
thy own Person, thou did set forth Christ's cause, but to further the
matter, thou broughtest me into the Counsel Chamber of the City before the
Aldermenne alone, which thou had assembled there together to hear me
speak, what I could say as an advocate by office and duetye in the pore men's
cause. The Lord wroughte with thee, and gave thee the consent of thy brethren.

Whereby the matter was brought to the Commen Counsel, and so to the whole
body of the City. by whom with an uniform consent, the matter was committed
to be drawn, ordered, and devised by a certain noumber of the most wittye
Citizeins, and Politic, endued also with godliness, and with ready hearts to set
forward such a noble act as could be chosen in all the hole City. And they
like true and faithful Ministers, both to their City, and to their Master
Christ, so ordered, devised, and brought forth the matter, that thousands of
sely pore members of Christ, which else for extreme hunger and miserye should
have famished and pearished, shall be relieved and helped up, and shall have
cause to bliss the Aldermen, the commen counsel and the hole body of the
City, but specially thee o Dobbes, and those chosen men by whom this
honorable work of God was bego^ne and wrought: and that so long through out
all ages, as that godly work shall endure: which I pray almighty God may be
ever unto the worlds end.

And thou o sir George Barnes, the truth is to be confessed to Gods glory, and
to the good example of other, thou waste in thy year not only a furtherer and
continuer of that, which before the, by thy predecessor Dobbes was well begone:
but also did labor so to have profited the work, that it should baue
been an absolute thing a perfect spectacle of true charity and godliness unto
all Christendom.

Thine endeavor was to have set up an house of occupations, both that all kind
of poverty, being able to work, should not have lacked whereupon
profitablye they might have been occupied to their own relief, and to the
profit and commodity of the commen wealth of the City, and also to have
retired thither, ye pore babes brought up in the Hospitals, when they had come
to a certain age and strength.

And also all those which in the Hospitalles aforesaid have been cured of
their diseases: and to have brought this to pass (not without diligence and
labor both, of the and thy brethren) thou obtained at that godly king Edward
that christian and pierles Princes hand, his Princelye place of Bridewell,
with what other things to the performaunce of the same, and under what
condition it is not unknown: That this thine endeavor has not had like
success, the fault is not in thee, but in the condition and state of the
time, which the Lord of his infinite mercy voutchsafe to amend, when it
shall be his gracious will and pleasure.

Farewell now all ye Citezens that be of God, of what state and condition so
ever ye be: undoubtedly in London ye have hard Gods word truly preached. My
hearts desire and daily prayer shall be for you, as for whom (for my time) I
know to my Lord God I am co^ptable: that ye never swerve, neither for loss of
life or worldly goods, from Gods holy word, and yield unto Antichrist, whereupon
must needs follow the great displeaser of God, and the loss of your bodies and
souls into perpetual dampnation for evermore.

Now that I have gone through the places where I have dwelt any space in the time
of my pilgrimage here upon earth. Remembering that for the space of King
Edwardes reign, which was for the time of mine Office in the Seas of London
and Rochester, I was a member of the higher house of the parliamente. Therefore
saying my God has given me laysoure, and the remembrance thereof. I will
bid my Lords of the temporaltie farewell: They shall have no just cause by Gods
grace to take it that I entend to say in ill part. As for spiritual prelacy,
that now is, I have nothing to say to them: except I should repeat again a
great part of that I have said before now, all ready to the Sea of London.

But to you my Lords of the te^poralty, understand ye this first. That when I
wrote this, I looked daily, when I should be called to ye change of my life.
And thought yt that this my writing should not come to your knowledge before
the time of the dissolucion of my body and soul should be expired: and
therefore know ye that I had before mine eyes only the fear of God, and
Christian Charity toward you, which moved me to write: for of you hereafter
I look not in this world, other for pleaser or displeaser, if my talk shall do
you never so much pleasure or profit, you ca^ not promote me. Nor if I displese
you, ye can not hurt me, or harm me: For I shall be out of your reach. Now
therefore if you fear God, and can be content to hear the talk of him that
seeks nothing at your hands, but to serve God, and to do you good: herke^ what
I say: I say unto you as. S. Paul says to the Galathians, I wonder mi Lords
what has bewitched you, that ye so suddenly are fallen from Christ unto
Antichrist: from Christ's gospel unto men's tradicions: from the Lord that
boughte you, unto the Bishop now of Rome. I warn you of your pearill, be not
deceived, except you will be found willingly consenters unto your own death.
For if ye think thus, we are lay men, this is a matter of Religion, we follow
as we are taught and led, if our teachers and governors teach us, and lead
us amiss, the fault is in them, they shall bear the blame. My Lords this is
true, I grant you that both the false teacher, and the corrupt gouernoure,
both shall be punished for the death of their subject, whom they have
falselye taught and corruptlye led: And his blood shall be required at their
hands. But yet nevertheless shall that subject die the death him self also,
that is: he shall also be dampened for his own sin.

For if the blind lead the blind, Christ says not the leader only, but he
says, both shall fall in the ditche. Shall the Sinagoge and the Senate of
the Jews (trow ye) which forsook Christ and consented to his Death,
therefore be excused, because Annas, Caiphas, with the Scribes and Phariseis,
and their clergy did teach them amiss? yea and also Pilate their gouernoure,
and the Emperoures Lieuetenaunte by his tirranny did without cause put him to
death. Forsothe no my Lords, no: but notwithstanding that corrupt doctrine or
Pilates washinge of his hands, neither of both shall excuse other, that
sinagoge and seigniour, or Pilate. But at the Lords hand for the effusion of
that innocents blud on the latter dai, al shall drink of the deadlye whip. Ye
are wittye and understand what I mean. Therefore I will pass over this, and
return to tell you how you are fallen from Christ to his aduersarye the Bishyp
of Rome.

And least my Lords I may peradventure think me thus barely to call the
Bishop of Rome Christ's aduersarye, or to speak it in plain terms to call him
Antichrist, that it is don in mine anguish, and that I do but rage, and as a
desperate man do not care, what I say, or upon whom I do rail. Therefore that
your Lordships may perceive my mind, and understand that I speak the words
of truth and of sobriety, as S. Paul said unto Festus. Be it known unto
your Lordships al, that as concerning the bishop of Rome, I nether hate the
person, nor the place. For I ensure your Lordships, ye living Lord bears me
witness before whom I speak, I do think many a good holy manne, many
martirs and Saints of God, has set and taught in that place, Christ's Gospel
truly: which therefore iustlye may be called Apostolici, that is true
Disciples of the Apostles. And also that Church and congregation of Christians:
Apostolic Church, yea and that certain hundredth years after ye same was
first erected and builded upon Christ, by the true Apostolical Doctrine,
taught by the mouths of the Apostles them selves.

If ye will know how long that was, and how many hundredth of years: to be
curious in poyntinge the precise number of years, I will not be to bold, but
thus I say, so long and so many hundred of years, as that sea did truly teach
and preach that gospel, that religion, exercised that power, and ordered every
thing by those laws and rules, which that sea received of the Appostles (and
as Tertulyan says) and the apostles of Christ, and Christ of God: so long
that Sea might well have been called Peter and Paul's chair and Sea, or rather
Christ's Chair, and the Bishop thereof Apostolicus, or a true Disciple of the
Apostles, and a minister of Christ. But since that time, that Sea has
degenerated from that trade of truth and true Religion, which it received of
the Apostles at the beginning, and has preached a another Gospel, has set
up an other Religion, has exercised an other power, and has taken upon it to
order and rule the Church of Christ by other strange laws, Cannons and
rules, then ever that Sea received of the Apostles of Christ, which things
it does at this day, and has continued so doing alas, alas, of to, to
long a time. From time I say that the state and condition of this Sea, has
thus been changed. In truth it ought of duty and of right to have the
names changed, both of the Sea, and of the sitter therein.

For understand my Lords, it was neither for the Privilege of that place or
Person thereof, that that Sea and Bishop thereof, were called Apostolic: but
for the true trade of Christ's Religion, which was taught and maintened in
that Sea at the first, and of those godly men. And therefore as truly and
iustlye as that Sea, then for that true trade of Religion and co^sanguinitie of
Doctrine, with the Religion and Doctrine of Christ's Apostles was called
Apostolic: So as truly and as justly for ye co^trariety of religion and
diversity of doctrine from Christ and his apostles, that Sea and the Bishop
thereof at this day, both ought to be called, and are in deed Antichristian. The
Sea is the seat of Satan, and the Bishop of the same that mainteyneth the
Abominations thereof, is Antichriste him self in deed. And for the same
causes this sea at this day is the same which.s. Ihon calls in his
reuelacion, Babylon, or the whore of Babylon, and spiritually Sodoma and
Egiptus, the mother of fornications, and of the abominations upon the earth.
And with this hoar does spiritually mell and lies with her, and commits most
stinking and abominable adultrye before God. Al those Kings and Princes, yea
and all nations of thearth, which consents and does use and practice her
abhominacions.

That is of the innumerable multitude of the^ to rehearse, some for example
sake, her dispensacions, her Pardons, and Pilgremages, her invocation of
Saints, her worshipping of Images, her false cou^terfaicte religion, in her
monkery and frerage, in her traditions, where by Gods laws are defiled, as in
her Massing, and false ministering of Gods word, and the sacraments of Christ
amiss, contrary clean to Christ's word and the Apostles doctrine, whereof
in perticularitie I have touched something before in my talcke, had with the
Sea of London, and in other treatises more at large, wherein if it shall please
God to bring the same to light, shall appear I trust by gods grace plain lie to
the man of God, and to him whose rule in judgment of religion is Gods word.
That that religion that rule, and order, that doctrine and faith, which this
whore of Babylon, and the beast whereupon she does sit, mainteineth at this dai
withal violence of fire and sword, with spoil and banishment (according to
Daniels Prophecy) and finallye with all falshead, deceit, Ipocrisye, and all
kind of ungodliness, are as clean contrary to gods word, as darkness is unto
light, or light to darkness, white to black, or black to white, or as Belial
unto Christ, or Chirst unto Antichrist him self. I know my Lords and for saw
when I wrote this, that to so many of you, as should see this my writing, and
not being before endued with the spirit of grace and and light of gods word,
so many would at these my words Lordlike sta^pe and sporn at, spit at it. But
sober your selves with patience and be still, and know ye yt in mi writing of
this mi mind was none other but in God, (as the living God does bear me
witness) both to do you profit and pleasure. And otherwise as for your
displeasure by that time that this shall come to your knowledge, I trust by
gods grace to be in ye hands and protection of thalmighty mi heavenly father,
and the living Lord, which is (as S Ihon says) ye gretest of all. And thed
the^ I shall not need I trow, what any lord: no nor what any king or prince can
do unto me.

My Lords if in times paste ye have been contented to hear me sometimes in
matters of Religion before the Prince in the pulpit, and in the Parliament
house, and have not seemed to have despised what I have said: when as else then
if ye had perceived just occasion: ye might have suspected in my talk,
though it had been reasonable, either desire of worldly gain, or fear of
displeasure. How has the^ your Lordships more cause to harke^ to my word, and
to hear me patiently seeing now ye cannot justly thinck of me being in this
case appointed to die, and loking daily when I shall be called to come before
the eternal judge, otherwise, but that I only study now to serve my Lord god:
and to say that thing which I am persuaded assuredly by Gods word, shall and
does please him, and profit all them to whom God shall give grace to hear and
believe what I do say. And I do say even that I have said heretofore, both of
the sea of Rome, and of the bishop thereof, I mean after this their present
state at this day. Wherein if ye will not believe the ministers of God, and the
true preachers of his word, truly I denounce unto you in Verbum domini, except
ye do repent be time, it shall turn to your confusion: and to your smarte on
the latter day. Forget not what I say my Lords for Gods sake forget not,
but remember it upon your death bed. For I tell you moreover as I know I must
be comptable of this my speking thus, to the eternal judge: (who will judge
nothing amiss) so shall you be comptable of your duetye in hearing, and you
shall be chardged, if ye will harken to Gods word, for not obeying to the truth.
Alas my Lords, how chaunseth this, that this matter is now a new again to
be persuaded unto you: who would have thought of late but your Lordships had
been persuaded in deed sufficiently, or else that ye could ever have agreed so
uniformly with one consent to the abolishment of the usurpation of ye bishop
of Rome. If yt matter were then but a matter of policy, wherein the Prince must
be obeyed, how is it now made a matter, wherein as your Clergy says now
(and so says the Popes laws in deed) stands the unity of the catholic
Church, and a matter of necessitye of our salvation? Has the time being so
short since the death of the.ii last kings, Henry the eight, and Edward his
son, altered the nature of the matter? If it have not, but was of the same
nature and danger then, as it is now, and be now, as it is said by the Popes
laws, and the instructions set forth in English to the Curates of the
dioces of York, in deed a matter of necessity to salvation. How then
chaunsed that ye were all (O my Lords) so light, and so little passed upon the
Catholic faith, and the unity thereof (without the which no man can be
saved) as for your Princes plesures, which were but mortal men to forsake the
unity of your Catholic faith, that is to forsake Christ and his holy
Gospel. And furthermore if it were then, and now so necessary to salvation,
how chaunsed it also, that ye all the hole body of the Parliament agreing, with
you, did not only abolishe and expel the Bishop of Rome, but also did abjure
him in your persons, and did decre in your acts great oaths to be taken of
both the spiritualty and temporalty: whosoever should enter into aniwaity and
chargeable office in the comme^ wealth. But on thotherside, if that law and
decree, which makes the supremacy of the Sea and Bishop of Rome over the
universal church of Chirst, a thing of necessiti required unto salvation, be
an Antichristian law (as it is in deed.) And such instructions as is given to
the dioces of York, be in deed a setting forth of the power of yt beast of
Babylon, by the craft and falshed of his false Prophets, as of a truth compared
unto Gods word, and truly judged by the same, it shall plainly appear yt they
be: then my Lords never thinck other, but the day shall come when ye shall be
charged with this your undoing of that, that once ye had well done: and with
this your perjury and breach of your oath, which oath was done in judgment,
justice and truth agreeable to Gods law. The hoar of Babylon maywel for a time
dally with you, and make you so drunk with the wine of her filthy stews and
horedome, as with her dispensacions and promises of pardon, A pena and culpa,
that for dro^kennes and blindness ye may think your selves safe. But be ye
assured when the living Lord shall try the matter by the fire, and judge it
according to his word: when all her abominations shall appear what they be.
The^ ye my Lords (I give your Lordships warning in time, repent if ye be happi,
and love your own souls health, repent I say, or else without all dout) ye
shall never escape the hands of the living Lord for the gilt of your Prince and
the breach of your oath. And as ye have banketed and line with the whore in the
fornication of her whorishe dispensacions, Pardons, Idolatry, and such like
abhomioacions: so shall ye drink, with her (except ye repent be time) of the cup
of the Lords indignacion and everlasting wrath, which is prepared for the
beast, his false Prophets, and al their partakers. For he that is Partner with
them in their whoredom and abhominacions, must also be partner with them of
their plages. And on the latter day shall be thrown in with them, in the lake
burninge with brimstone and unquenchable fire. Thus fare you well my Lords al.
I pray God give you understanding of his blessed will and pleasure, and make you
to believe and embrace the truth.

Amen.
To the Prisoners in Christ's Gospels cause, and to al them which for the same
cause are exiled and banished out from their own country, choosing rather to
lose all worldly commodity then their master Christ.
FArewell my dear beloved brethren in Christ, both you my fellow prisonners,
and you also that be exiled and banished out of your Countries, because ye
will rather forsake all worldly commoditye then the Gospel of Christ.

Farewell al ye together in Christ farewell: and be mearye. For you know that
the trial of your faith, brings forth patience, and patience shall make us
perfect, whole and sound on every side. And such after trial ye know shall
receive ye crown af life: let us therefore be paciente unto the coming of the
Lord. As the husbandman abides patiently the former and latter rain. For the
encrese of his crop: let us likewise, be pacient and pluck up our hearts for
the coming of the Lord approaches apase. Let us my dear brethren take
example of patience in tribulation of the Prophets, which spoke likewise Gods
word truly in his name. Let Job be to us an example of patience. And the end
which the Lord suffered which is full of mercy and pity, we know my brethren by
gods word, yt our faith is much more precious then any corruptible gold: and
yet yt is tried by the fire. Even so therefore our faith is tried likewise in
tribulations, that it may be found (when the Lord shall appear) laudable,
glorious and Honorable: For if we for Christ's cause do suffer that, that is
grateful before God, for thereunto are we called. That is our state and our
vocation, wherewith let us be content: Christ we know suffered for us
afflictions: leuing us an example that we should follow his fotesteppes. For he
committed no sin nor was there any guile found in his mouth, when he was
railed upon, and all to reviled he did not threaten, but committed ye
punishment thereof to him that judges a right.

Let us ever have in fresh remembrance those wonderful comfortable sentences
spoken by ye mouth of our savior Christ. Blessed are they which suffer
persecution for ryghteousnes sake, for theirs is ye kingdom of heaven. Blessed
are you when men revile you, persecute you, and speak all evil against you
for my sake. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For so
did they persecute the prophets, which were before you. Therefore bear this
always in your mind, yt if any inco^modity does chance unto us for righteousness
sake, yt happy are we whatsoever the world does think of us. Christ our
master has told us before hand yt the brother shall put ye brother to death,
and the father the son, and the children should rise against their parents
and kill the^. And yt Christ's true apostles should be hated of all me^ for his
names sake But he that shall abide patie^tly unto thend he shall be saved. Let us
the^ endure in all troubles patiently after thexa^ple of our master Christ, and
be contented therwt. For he suffered being our master and Lord, how does it not
then become us to suffer? For the disciple is not above his master nor the
servant above his Lord. It may suffice the disciple to be as his master, and
the servant to be as Lord. If they have called the master of the family, the
master of the household Beelzebub, how much more shall they call so, them of
his household? Fear them not the^ says our savior, for all preuities shall be
made plain. There is now nothing secreate, but it shall be showed in light. Of
Christ's words, let us neither be ashamed nor afraid to speak it. For so
our master commands us, saying. That I tell preuely, speak openli abroad:
and yt I tell you in your ear, preach it up on the house top. And be not afraid
of your self, of them which kill the body, for the soul they can not
kill. But fear him which can cast boothe Body and soul into hell fire.
Know ye that the heavenly father, has ever a gracious eye and respect toward
you, and a fatherly providence for you, so yt without his knowledge and
permission, nothing ca^ do you harm. Let us therefore cast al care upon him,
and he shall provide yt which shall be best for us. For if of.ii. small sparrowes
which both are sold for a mite, one of them lights not on the ground without
the father.

And all the heeres of our head are nombred, fear not then says our Master
Christ, for you are more worth then many small sparowes. And let us not stick
to confess our master Christ for fear of danger whatsoever it shall be:
remembryng the promise that Christ makes and says: every one that shall
confess me before men, him shall I confess before my father which is in heaven
But whosoever shall deny me, him shall I likewise deny before my father which is
in heaven, Christ came not to give unto us hear a carnal amity, and a
worldly peace or to knit his unto ye world in ease and peace: but rather to
separate and divide them from the world: and to ioyn them unto him self. In
whose cause we must if we will be his, forsake father and mother, and stycke unto
him, if we forsake him, or shrinck from him for trouble or deaths sake, which
he calls his cross: he will none of us, we cannot be his, if for his cause we
shall lose our temporal lives here, we shall find it again and enjoy it for
evermore: but if in his cause we will not be contented to leave nor lose it
here: then shall we lose it so, that we shall never find it again. But in
everlasting death.

What though our troubles here be painful for the time, and the stinge of death
bitter and unpleasant: yet we know they shall not last in co^pariso^ of
eternity, no not the twinkling of an eye. And that they patiently taken in
Christ's cause shall procure and get us, unmeasurable hepes of heavenly glory,
unto the which these temporal pains and troubles of death compared: are not to
be esteemed, but to be reioysed upon. Wonder not says S. Peter, as though it
were any straung matter that ye are tried by fire (he means of tribulacio^)
which thing says he, is done to prove you. Nay but in yt ye are partners of
Christ's afflictions rejoice, yt in his glorious reuelacion, ye may rejoice with
merry hearts. If ye suffer rebukes in Christ's name, happy are for the glory of
the spirit of God rests upon you. Of the^ God is reviled and dishonored: but
of you he is glorified. Let no man be ashamed in yt he suffers as a christian
and in Christ's cause. For now is ye time yt judgment and gods correction must
begin at ye house of God. And if it begin first at us, what shall be thend of
those think ye, which believe not yt gospel? And if the righteous shall be
hardly saved, the wicked and the sinner where shall he apere? wherefore they which
are afflicted according to ye will of God, let the^ lay down and commit their
souls to him, by well doing as to a trusty and faithfulmaker: this as I said may
not seem strau^g to us. For we know yt al ye hole fraterniti of christ's
congregation in this world is served with the like: and by the same is made
perfect: for ye fervent love yt the appostles had unto their master christ for
ye great commodities and increse of al godliness, which they by their faith to
ensue of afflictions in Christ's cause, and thirdlye for the heaps of heavenly
ioyse which the same do get unto the godly which shall endure in heaven for
evermore. For these causes I sai, the apostles of their afflictions did joy,
and reioysed in that they were had and accounted worthy to suffer contumelies
and rebukes for christ's name: and Paul as he glorified in the grace and
favor of God, whereunto he was brought and stood in by faith: so he glorified
in his afflictions for the heauenli and spiritual profits, which rests upon
them, yea, he was so much in love with that, yt the carnal man loathe the so
much, yt is with Christ's cross, that he judged him self to know nothing else,
but christ crucified, he will glory he says in nothing else but in Christ's
cross, yea and he blesses al those (as thonli true Israelites and elect
people of god) with peace and mercy, which walks after ye rule and after none
other.

O Lord what a wonderful spirit was that, that made Paul in setting forth of
him self against the vanity of Satan his Pseudo postels, and in his claim
there, that he in Christ's cause did excel and pass them all? what wonderful
Spirit was that I say, that made him to reckon up all his troubles, his
labors, his beatings, his whippings his scourginges, his shipwrackes, his
dangers and pearils by water and by land, his famine, hunger, nakedness, and
cold: with many mo and the daily care of all the congregacions of Christ. Among
whom every man's pain did pearse his heart, and every man's grief was
grievous unto him.

O Lord is this Paul's primacy wherein he thought so much good of it, that he
did excel other? Is not this Paul's saying unto Timothy his own scholars and
does it not pertain to whosoever will be Christ's true soldier? bear thou
(says he) the afflictions like a good souldioure of Jesus Christ. This is true
if we die with him (he meneth Christ:) we shall live with him. If we suffer
with him, we shall reign with him. If we deny him, he shall deny us: if we be
faithless he remains faithful, he cannot deny him self. This Paul would
have known to every body. For there is none other wai to heaven, but Christ and
his way. And all that will live godly in Christ, shall (says Saint Paul)
suffer persecution.

By this way went to heaven the Patriarckes, the Prophets, Christ our
master, his Apostles, his Martirs, and all the Godly since the beginning. And
as it has been of old, that he which was borne after the flesh, persecuteth
him which was borne after the spirit. So it was in Isaackes time, so said
Saint Peter, it was in his time also. And whether it be so or no now, let the
spiritual man, the manne (I mean) that is endued with the spirit of God, let
him be judge. Of the cross of the Patriarckes, if ye read the book of
Genesis, ye shall perceive.

Of other Saint Paul in few words comprehends much matter, speaking in a
generality of the wonderful afflictions, death, and torments, which the men
of God in Gods cause, and for the truth sake, willingly did suffer after
much particular rehearsal of many, he says.

Other were racked: and despised to be redeemed, that they might obtain a better
resurrection. Other again were tried with Mockinges and scourginges, and
moreover with bonds and imprisonment, they were stoned, hewn insunder,
teinted, fell and were slain upon the edge of the sword, some wandered to and
fro in shepes pilches, in gotes pilches, forsaken, oppressed, afflicted, such
godly men as the world was unworthy of, wandering in wilderness, in mountains,
in caves, and in dens. And all these were commended for their faith. And yet
they abide for us the servants of God, and those their brethren, which are to
be slain as they were for the word of Gods sake, that none be shut out, but
that we may all go together to mete our master Christ in their at his
coming, and so to be in bliss with him in body and soul for evermore.

Therefore seeing we have so much occasion to suffer and to take afflictions for
Christ's name sake patiently: so many commodities thereby so weighty causes, so
many good examples, so great necessity, so sure promises of eternal life, and
eternal joys of him that can not lie. Let us throw away what so ever might
let us, all burden of sin, and all kind of carnalitie. And pacie^tly and
constantlye let us run for the best game, in this race that is set before us,
ever having our eyes upon Jesus Christ the ringleader, capitain, and profiter
of our faith, which for to have the joy set before him, suffered the cross,
not passing upon ignomie and shame thereof. and is set now at the righthande of
the throne of God Count this yt he suffered such strife of sinners against him
self, that ye should not give over nor fainte in your minds. As yet brethren
we have not withstand unto death, fighting against sin. Let us never forget
(dear brethren for Christ's sake) that fatherly exhortation of the wise that
speaks unto us, as unto his children, the godly wisdom of god, saying thus.
My son despise not the correction of the Lord, nor fall not from him, when
thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves, him does he correct, and
scourges every child whom he receives, what child is he whom the father
does not chasten? If ye be free from chastisement (whereof al are partners) then
are ye bastardes and no children. Seeing then when as we have had carnal
parents, which Christened us, we reverenced them: shall not we be much more
subject, unto our spiritual father? and shall live. And they for a little time
taught us after their own mind: but this father teaches us to our commoditye,
to give unto us his holiness. All chastisement for the present time, apereth not
pleasant but painful. But afterward it rendereth the fruit of righteousness on
them, which are exercised in it. Wherefore let us be of good chere (good
brethren,) and let us pluck up our feeble members that were fallen or began
to fainte, heart, hand, knees, and all the reaste, and let us walcke up a
right and straighte, that no Lympinge nor Haulting bring us out of the way.
Let us look not upon the things that be present, but with the eyes of our
faith, let us steadfastly behold the things that be everlasting in heaven.

And chose rather in respect of ye which is to come with the chosen members
of Christ to bear Christ's Cross, then for his short life time to enjoy all
the riches, honors and pleasers of the broad world.

Why should we Christians fear death? ca^ death deprive us of Christ which is
all our comfort, our joy, and our life? Nay forsooth. But contrary death shall
deliver us from this mortal body, which lodeth and bears down the spirit,
that it can not so well perceive heavenly things in the which so long as we
dwell, we are absent from God.

Wherefore understanding our state in that we be Christians, that if our
mortal body, which is our earthlye house, were destroyed, we have a
building, a house not made with hands, but everlasting in heaven. etc.
Therefore we are of good cheer, and know that when we are in the body, we are
absent from God. For we walcke by faith, and not by clear sight. But we have
fiance, and had rather be from the body and present with God: wherefore we
strive whether we be present at home, or absent abroad that we may always
please him. And who that has true faith in our savior Christ, whereby he
knows somewhat truly what Christ our savior is: that he is the eternal
son of God, life, light, the wisdo^e of the father, all goodness, al truth,
all righteousness and whatsoever is good, that heart ca^ desire, yea infinite
plenty of al these above that, that man's heart can either conceive or think.
For in him dwells the fullness of the Godhed corporally. And also that he is
given us of the father: and made of God to be our wisdom, our righteousness,
our holiness, and our redemption? who I say is he that believes this in
deed, that would not gladly be with his master Christ?

Paul for this knowledge coueted to have been losed from the body, and to
have been with Christ: For that, he compted much better for him self, and had
rather to be losed then to live. Therefore these words of Christ to the theife
on the cross, that asked of him mercy, were full of comfort, and solace.
This day thou shalt be with me in paradise. To dye in the defense of Christ's
Gospel, is our bounden duty to Christ, and also to our neighbor. To
Christ: for he died for us, and rose again yt he should be Lord over all. And
seeing he died for us, we also (says s. Ihon) should ieopard, yea, give our
life for our brethren. And this kind of geuinge and losinge, is gettinge and
winninge in deed. For he that gives or loses his life thus, gets and
wins it for evermore.

Blessed are they therefore that dies in the Lord. And if they dye also in
the Lords cause, they are most happy of all. Let us not fear then death,
which can do us no harm, otherwise then for a moment, to make the flesh to
smart: but that our faith which is fast fastened and fixed unto the word of god,
tells us that we shall be anon after death in peace, in the hands of god, in
joy, in solace, and that from death we shall go straighte unto life. For Ihon
says, he that lives and believes in me shall never die: and in an other
place: he shall depart from death into life.

And therefore this death of the christian, is not to be called death, but
rather a gate or entrance into everlasting life. Therefore Paul calls it
but a dissolution and resolution. And both Peter and Paul a puttinge of this
Tabernacle or dwelling house, meaning thereby, the mortal body, as wherein
the soul or spirit does dwell here in this world for a small time. Yea this
death may be called to the Christian an end of all miseries. For so long as we
live here, we must pass through many tribulations before we can enter into the
kingdom of heanen. And now after that death has shot his bolt, all the
Christian man's ennemies have don what they can, and after that they have no
more to do. What could hurt, or harm poor Lazarus that lay at the rich
man's gate, his former penury and poverty, his miserable beggary and horrible
sores and sickness? For so sone as death had stricke^ him with his dart: so sone
came the angels, and carried him up into Abraham's bosom: what lost he by death?
who from misery and pain is set forth by the ministry of Angels in a place
both of joy and solace. Farewell dear brethren, farewell, and let us comfort
our hearts in all troubles and in death with the word of God. For heaven and
earth shall pearishe, But the word of God endures for ever.

Farewell Christ's dear beloved spouse, here wa^dring in this world as in a
strange land far from thine own country, and compassed about on every hand
with deadlye enemies which ceseth not to assalt the, ever seking thy
destruction.

Farewell, farewell. O ye the hole and universal congregation of the chosen of
God, here living upon earth, the true Church militant of Christ, the true
mystical body of Christ, the very household and familye of God, and the sacred
temple of the holy ghost. Farewell.

Farewell, O thou little flock of ye high heavenly pastor christ, for to thee
it has pleased the heavenly father to give an everlasting and eternal
kingdom. Farewell.

Farewell thou spiritual house of God, thou holy and royal priesthode, thou
chosen generation, thou won spouse. Farewell. Farewell.

N. R.
FINIS.

