OPINION DIEFIED. Discovering the Jngins, Traps, and Traynes, that are set in
this Age, whereby to catch Opinion. Neither Flourished with Art, nor Smoothed
with Flattery. By B. R. Gentleman, Servant to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

LONDON. Printed for Thomas Adams. 1613.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE SIR THOMAS RYDGEWAY Knight Baronet, viz. Treasurer, and
Treasurer at Wars in his Majesty's Realm of IRELAND, and one of his
Majesty's privy Council in that Realm.
MOst honorable and most worthy to be honored Knight, Cato has set down his
Opinion, That those that did nothing learned to do ill.

I believe him, and I think it again to be true that he does much evil that
knows no good at all.

I may boldly speak thus much (without any great ostentation to my self) that
I do sometimes think of doing good, though I do but little, now he that
sometimes thinks well, perhaps other whiles may hit upon doing well: but
when I look into the Cattalogue where good deeds are commanded, I find it
written that we must Feed the hungry, Cloth the naked, Help the poor and
needy. Comfort the comfortless, Visit those that be sick.

When I look again unto my betters, that are well able to perform these
prescriptions: I find the most good they do, is God help ye, God help ye,
indeed I have not for ye.

Well God be thanked yet, good prayers are good cheap, for we had rather open
our mouths, and say God help ye twenty times, then once to open our purses
and to bestow a penny.

Now to speak of any good that I can do my self, I confess it is very
small, yet to avoid that ill that Cato says we do learn by doing nothing,
I have betaken my self to my pen, thereby to avoid idleness, I have wouen
out the Web of vain Opinion, briefly expressing how it has Dominered from
the beginning: I have made a short Medly of altogether, if it be good for any
thing I care not, I hope it will prove either hot or cold, and then it may
be employed to use, either fit for Summer or Winter, be it good or badde or
how so ever, I have made bold to present it to your judicious view, wherein I
have imitated his simplicity, that presumed to present lines to Minerua, but it
is Opinion that has made me thus bold, yet not the Opinion of mine own wit
or worthynesse, but the Opinion that I have of your worthy acceptance, for I
have so much the better Opinion of my self, knowing my self to be favored
by you: it is your many favors toward me, that has always made me
mindful of your virtue and worthynesse.

I beseech you Sir, to accept it as a service of his good intent that would be
glad to present you with more worthyer presents: in the mean time, can but
wish long life, still lengthened out with all happiness, evermore resting.

To do you all service BARNABE RYCH.

The Contents of the Book.
The potency of Opinion. Chap. 1. The antiquity of Opinion. Chap. 2. What
diversity in Opinions amongst the Philosophers. Chap. 3. What contrarieties in
Opinion amongst Christians. Chap. 4. A general Opinion received by all men.
Chap. 5. Of diverse and several Opinions concerning government. Chap. 6. Of
several conceived Opinions behouefull for Princes. Chap. 7. What diversity in
Opinions who fit to be made Counsaylers. Chap. 8. All humane policy, but
vain Opinion. Chap. 9. It is Opinion that places men in office and authority.
Chap. 10. It is Opinion that makes Fools to be admired for their wisdom.
Chap. 11. The government is never good that is managed by Opinion. Chap. 12.
What diversity in Opinions about the prerogative of Princes. Chap. 13. The
mutability of Opinion in all times and ages. Chap. 14. How opposite in Opinion
to our predecessors, our actions bear witness. Chap. 15. What variety in
Opinion whether the miseries that are drawn in by war, or the vices that are
hatched up in peace, are most tolerable. Chap. 16. What diversity in Opinion
amongst Lawyers. Chap. 17. Of Opinion what it is. Chap. 18. From whence Opinion
has his being. Chap. 19. How Princes and other great personages are led
astray by Opinion. Chap. 20. How unworthy persons do creep into the Opinion
of Princes and other great persons. Chap. 21. Nobility led into Opinion by
Parasites. Chap. 22. Of self Opinion how it besotteth. Chap. 23. The
unconstant Opinion of the vulgar. Chap. 24. Of particular Opinion, how it
infecteth Fools. Chap. 25. What Opinion the antiquity held of Fame. Chap.
26. The vain Opinion of those that have hunted after Fame. Chap. 27. That Fame
and Renown are but popular Opinions. Chap. 28. Of the number of Follies in
this age whereby to win Opinion. Chap. 29. From whence it is that men are so
easily drawn into Opinion. Chap. 30. What it is that only bridleth Opinion.
Chap. 31. Opinion Diefied. Chap. 32.
FINIS.
OPINION DIEFIED.
The Potency of Opinion. Chap. I.
SIMONIDES, a great Philosopher, being desired by Cicero, to enquire what God
was, craved a days respite to meditate of the matter, which request when he
had obtained, and that he began to summon his senses, and to enter into a
consideration of the business, he found it to be so intricate and obscure that
the next day when he should have given his resolution, he was enforced then to
crave one whole month longer, in which mean time he might the better bethink
him: which request being likewise granted unto him, being now in his deepest
cogitatio^s of the task he had taken in hand, he was so confounded in his
enterprise, that the farther he sought, the farther he was from his purpose, he
was therefore enforced to stay his attempts, and to subject his Opinion to the
inscrutable essence of the most highest

Now whether is more to be wondered at in the Philosophers for the insight they
had in natural things, or for their blindness in the knowledge of him that
was the author of all things, who the more they labored by their philosophy
to comprehend, by so much the sooner they lost themselves: I am brought into
this predicament with the Philosophers, for having a little begun to meditate
of this subject by me undertaken, I found the potency of Opinion to be ample
and infinite, that the more I looked and considered of the matter, the less I
found my self able to perform it, and as in the night time, the more we fix
our eyes on the firmament, the greater number of stars we still discover: so he
that shall but look into Opinion, how it has swaied in the world from the
beginning, may easily find matter wherewithal to begin, but never find time
when to make an end: he that should then enter into that Laberinth, had need
of Theseus clew to wind himself well out: but for mine own part, I confess I
never came nere those places where the Muses have used to frequent: I dare not
therefore wade to deep in this subject, for Opinion was never so nice and
foolish to please as she is at this hour: and she is in nothing more curious
then in censuring of books, for he that will presume to publish a book, if he
does not learn with the Tailor and the Atyremaker, to put it into a new
fashion, it will never sell, it will lie still in the Printers hands, and those
lines that are now put in print if they contain any matter of piety, or that
are any whit at all entending to honesty, they do but pester a Stationers
stall, and there are very few or none that will bestow one penny of them, such
is the curiosity of Opinion in this age, but especially concerning books, I
might yet speak of some strange conceited books that has been published by
sundry authors, one amongst the rest In the Contempt of glory, some others In
the praise of the pestilence, In the praise of the Quartane Ague, In the praise
of Baldnes: In the praise of a Fly, in the praise of Nothing: and that great
Clarke Erasmus of Roterdam, writ a book In the praise of Folly: and all these
and diverse others that might be yet named, the mere motives of Opinion.

But leaving to speak of Pamphlets, I might speak of great volumes nay
(excepting the holy scriptures) how many books are extant, which Opinion has
not had some hand in?

It was a strange Opinion that led Alexander to bury his horse Bucephalus,
Augustus to bury his Parrot, Heliogabilis his Sparrow: and what should we say
to Hortensius a Roman Gentleman, that mourned certain months for the death
of a fish.

By this little it may appear the Potency of Opinion, how it has reigned and
ruled in the world in all times, in all ages, in all places, and has had
sovereignty with all sorts of persons.

The Antiquity of Opinion. Chap. II.
THe first conception of Opinion was in heaven, at that time when Lucifer fell:
for it was a self ouer-weaning Opinion that puffed up those glorious Angels
into that height of pride, that was the cause of their perdition.

It was after hatched up in Paradise: for when the Serpent insinuating himself
to curry favor with the woman, that she might the rather conceive a good
Opinion of him: what (says he) has God forbidden you, that you should not
eat of the tree of knowledge? but why stand you in doubt of that prescript,
there is no such danger in the matter as he has protested, for God does know
that when you shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be
as Gods, knowing both good and evil.

This pleasing persuasion so allured the woman to like of his speeches that she
believed all to be true, but it is Opinion that first begets belief
(according to the old proverb) Men are believed as they are beloved, for we
neither trust nor believe him in whom we have no conceit whereby to draw on
our affiance, but where Opinion is a little settled, every moule-hill is turned
to a mountain, we believe impossibilities, we wonder at matters of no moment,
nay we many times, extol, and commend ougly vice, for seemly virtue: this
poor blind Opinion has ever since so dominired in Adams posterity, that it
no less over rules the Prince then the Pesant, the mighty then the mean, the
rich then the poor, the wise then the foolish.

What diversity in Opinions amongst the Philosophers. Chap. III.
What variety in Opinions amongst the Philosophers, and how many sectaries
were there amongst them, as Stoickes, Peripatetickes, Ethnickes, Academickes,
Epicures, and as hystories do make mention, there were 50. several sects
amongst them, and what were these contrarieties, they were but Opinions: and
those that still were striving to uphold Reason with so many reasons, were yet
utterly ignorant from whence Reason came, the wisest amongst them did but guess
of the Immortality of the Soul, yet they were still disputing and arguing one
against an other to uphold opinions, that were sometimes far from the truth.

They could speak many good words concerning manners and conversation amongst
men, but of God, they spoke nothing but dreamingly, neither dreamed they of
him, but ouerthwartly and how many grievous in counters have there been
amongst them concerning the principles of natural things whereof there are
many, that do yet hang before the Judge not fully decided.

Thales Mylesius, one of the wise men of Greece, beginning to look into the
generation of things, concluded that the world had his first beginning by water.

And Archelaus (not far dissenting from his Opinion) affirms that the
creation of the earth, was but by liquid water inflamed by the heat of fire,
and by resolution turned into dust.

Heraclitus, he thinks all things to have their original of fire, concluding
with Aristotle, That the corruption of one thing, is the generation of an
other, Democritus and Crisippus with diverse others, they refer the original
of the world to a little nothing, and making up a something of this Chaos, they
conclude it to be the subject of corruption.

Anaxagoras trusting in his own opinion, fabled that the Sun was composed of
bright Iron, and that the heavens were of stone, wonderfully knit together
least they should fall.

I might yet speak of many other contrarieties in Opinion, that was holden
amongst the Philosophers, about Fate, about Fortune, about Felicity, and what
distinctions they made between Natura Naturans, and Natura Naturata, so that
to conclude the Philosophers that have so much busied them selves to search out
the beginning of things, could never find out God the creator and maker of
all things.

The wisdom of that Philosopher is yet to be admired who suspected the
uprightness of his own carriage, when he heard himself to be commended, by a
man that was noted to be of a lewd conversation.

What contrarieties in Opinion amongst Christians. Chap. IIII.
AS this iarring and seditious disputing was of continuance amongst the
Philosophers, so Opinion is made a mattter of conscience with Turks, Infidels,
Papists, and Sectaries, and there were amongst the Heathen in times past, who
to win an opinion, were feign to persuade the world falsely, that they had
conference and communication with the Gods.

In a great part of the world (even at this day) Mahomet is worshipped, who was
the author of a very foolish religion: And the Jews are yet looking after
their Messiah, but amongst us Christians, it is strange to see what
disagreement there is amongst our clergy men about rites, about ceremonies,
about worshipping, about apparel, about discipline, and about many other
matters too long to be spoken of, but this is especially to be wondered at
above the rest, that they do think by opposition, and contention to ascend
into heaven, for the which in times past Lucifer was thrown down into hell:
the divisions that are amongst divines by sinister opinions holden about
religion, are so diverse, doubtful and contrary, that they have filled the
Schools and Universities with contention and scoulding, who contend not for
the confines of Christian religion, but for the principal appertayning to our
salvation.

I dare not affirm confidently, that learning and knowledge is able to give
virtue unto us, but this I know, it prepares our minds to embrace it: and as
there are many that under the veil of virtue, do shadow their vices, so then
be as many again that do endeavor to learn (but not how to live well) but
how to dispute against the truth, an ungracious study that does nothing else,
but learn how to err.

How many do make themselves blind, by seeing too much, who curiously
searching out the virtue of words, do carelessely subvert the words of the
truth.

A mad opinion in those that having a Saint John's Gospel or an Agnus Dei,
hanging about their necks, do think themselves thereby to be free from all
manner of danger, and that the perfection of a Christian man, does especially
consist in those gaudy trifles: but yet most foolish of all to believe, that
when Christ came to work the salvation of the world, that he did not finish
the work that he came for, but left the greatest part of the business, to
be performed by a popish priest.

And these dreams and fantasies that are but the obstinate, wilful and blind
opinions of papists, they would wrest to be matters of conscience, and do no
less reverence them, then the heathen do their Gods.

A general Opinion received by all men. Chap. V.
ONe religion is the author of unity, but from a confused religion, there
always grows dissension, therefore this opinion is generally received, that
one religion is to be observed in one kingdom.

Contrarieties in religion does move sedition, it draws to conspiracy, to
treason and rebellion, and therefore here is no place for clemency, for those
that do violate religion (by the opinion of all men) are worthy to be
chasticed, yet in diverse countries after diverse manners.

Some cries out burn, torture, torment, saw a sunder, kill, murder, poison,
masaker, blow up with gunpowder, but leaving to fetch any presidents from
any of those tyranicall gouernmentes, yet I never heard of godly policy, where
the disturbers of religion, did ever escape unpunished, but if the Prince be
not sometimes able to rule the minds of the erroneous yet it is very expedient
for him to bridle their tongues.

Let us but ouerrunne all Europe a little in our imaginations, and see for
religion, whether the difference in opinions, does not breed a discordancie in
affections, neither may Princes wink at corrupt and vicious religions, for as
a man cannot serve two masters, so the service that a Christian prince should
yield unto Christ (in respect of his royal vocation) is to make laws for
Christ, which if he should do the like for Antichrist, it cannot be salued but
that he should then serve both God and Mammon: and Saint Augustine was of
Opinion, that light should not be matched with darkness, nor Christ yoked with
Antichrist.

Solomon was rejected for admitting other Gods to be served (within his
dominions) besides the God of Israel, though his toleration were granted in
respect of his own wives which were strangers.

But where the edge of correction is abated and taken away, it gives boldness
to subjects not only to forsake God, but likewise to spurn against the
Prince, and to live in contempt of his laws and proceedinges.

And it moreover draws after it an unbridled liberty to do evil, and makes
offenses to become usual, and to grow headstrong: wholesome severity therefore,
has ever been still commended, and is many times more necessary then this
overmuch clemency.

Of diverse and several Opinions concerning government. Chap. VI.
WHat diversity in Opinions has there been about the government of common
wealths, what disputations, some upholding that which is called Monarchia,
others Aristocratia, other some that which they called Democratia: and as there
were great contrarieties in opinion what government was best, so when it was
resolved that the kingly government was most agreeable both to nature and
reason, then they were as diverse in opinions again, which was most worthy,
either election or succession: and whither this place of regal government,
belonging but to one, what that one should be, whither a man or a woman: then
they made cauels against the female sex, obiecting against them that although
God the creator has given wit unto women yet he has denied them strength and
ability of body, as though virtue were so partial to exclude any, either for
want of strength or for want of wealth, or that she refused to receive any
because of their sex, it is not the body but the mind, for where the body is
weakest, there the understanding is strongest: and although there might be
presidentes enough inferred of many worthy Queens that have been valiant,
wise, and full of providence (some of them reputed for Prophetesses, but as
superstition increased in the world, many of them accounted for Goddesses) yet
leaving them all to their immortal Fame, let me in this place humbly crave
pardon to set down mine own Opinion in this matter, I will neither seek Asia
nor Africa, for a president, but let me with reverence put you in
remembrance of that gracious government (that can never be forgotten) how our
worthy Queen Elizabeth, whose Heroycall virtues all the world did admire,
whose gracious government, whosoever could duly consider of, will never let,
freely to confess, that a good woman inthronized in the seat of sovereignty,
is as great a blessing from God, as otherwise the establishing of the most
worthiest man.

Of several conceived Opinions behouefull for Princes. Chap. VII.
A Prince that is contented to be counsayled by many, becomes of all others
the most wisest, but he that leans but to the opinion of those whispering
chamber counsaylers that are every day buzzing in Princes ears, shall be many
times led into errors.

Thales advises kings and princes, to suspect him most, that is most busy
still to be whispering in his ear.

The king is but one man, and cannot possibly see into all occasions, it must
therefore necessarily follow, that either by giving liberty to his own
appetites, or leaning too much to the opinion of those whom he does affect, he
must be led astray: for surely, it is a matter of more importance then every
ignorant man can look into, for a prince that is aspired to the height of
Fortune to hold a due course in the troublesome sea of government, and not to
be carried away with the winds of immoderate liberty.

It is an easy matter for a king to govern good subjects, yet there is not a
more ready way whereby to incite subjects to be good then by the example of his
own life.

A Prince after he has once incurred the hatred and ill opinion of his people,
and that they have once alienated and estranged their affections from him,
shall hardly attempt any thing, how prouidently so ever intended, but it shall
be blasted with scandal and sinister interpretation.

It is a special virtue in a prince to be well instructed in the disposition
of those that be near about him, but by the general opinion of all wise men,
princes have not so much scarcity of any thing, as they have of that whereof
they should be most plentifully stored with, and that is, of such as should
tell them the truth: but it is not behouefull for princes to give credit to
all informations that will be told them, but especially from any such as they
employ in any places of authority.

What diversity in Opinions who fit to be made counsaylers. Chap. VIII.
AS by the several opinions of diverse learned men, kings and princes should
be assisted with grave and wise counsaylers, so there was as great diversity
in opinions again, how these counsaylers should be chosen, out of what
professions the election should be made, and what persons they thought to be
most fitting for the purpose.

King Drydanus amongst the Cicilians, gave greatest honor to the sacrificing
priests.

Brias king of Argiues, gave especial preferment to the Philosophers.

Numa Pompilius amongst the Romans was of Opinion, that he was worthy to be
especially reputed, to whom had happened the victory of any famous battle,
and that was fortunate in wars.

Anaxarchus ordained amongst the Phenetians that in the common wealth such
should be honored who in the time of peace, entertained the state in
tranquillity, and in the time of war were found to be valiant protectors of
the lymits and liberties of their country: concurring with that of Tully, who
likewise prefers to the highest degree of honor, those who armed do make
war, and roabed do rule and govern the common wealth.

Lactantius, left us his opinion in these words: I repute him to be most wise,
who as occasion falls out, can give good instructions what is fittest to be
done: Next I hold him to be wise, that can follow good advise, that is given
him by others, but he that can neither give nor take counsel, I account him
to be in the highest degree of indiscretion.

The Thebans made a law forbidding that no man should be admitted to the
administration of any manner of government in the common wealth, except he had
first left of buying and selling for the space of ten years, directly
forbidding all men whosoever, that were mercenary, or used any trade or
profession that brought in gain.

This were a hard decree for Lawyers, that do think no man so fit to govern
as he is, that is learned in the Laws: and I confess the study and knowledge
of the Laws, to be an excellent profession, and I reverence the gravity and
wisdom of the Judges that are found to be upright in their Justice and
Judgment, but yet that a proctor, an Advocate, a pleader, or any of those men
that have been mercenary, and have oftentimes been the ministers of falsehood
and injury, bearing about them both minds and tongues, instructed and armed
against justice, it is a hard matter for him to be a lover of justice and
truth, that has inured his tongue to speak for gain and lucre.

In the time of war the common wealth is defended by Soldiers, in the time
of peace it is preserved by Counsaylers: Soldiers and Counsaylers therefore,
have bin ever thought most fit to govern: but a happy and a blessed common
wealth it may be called that is governed by the wisdom and virtue of noble
personages that do commonly manage their authorities with magnificence, and
not by the policies of worldly wise men, that think nothing to be unlawful
that brings in gain.

Honorable nobility is then most fit to counsel a king and the care and
study of good Counsaylers is, still to endeavor those things that shall
concern the honor of God, the preservation of the kings royal person, and
the furtherance of the good of the common wealth, and in the midst of their
most weighty affairs, not to lean so much to the policies of worldly wicked
men, that they impugn the wisdom and policy ordained and decreed by the
almighty himself.

All human policy, but vain Opinion. Chap. IX.
THe world has ever bin full of policy, but these Politicians that have
squared out there gouernementes by the rule of their own wits, have ever been
found to be most dangerous states men.

Would you have some presidents, look into the life of the two Catoes: the one
with his frantic accusation disturbed the whole common wealth of Rome, the
other goinge about over wisely to protect it, did utterly subvert it: And
Cicero, with all his eloquence, was as troublesome amongst the Romans, as
Demosthenes was amongst the Athenians: I might speak of others, that with
their peuish disciplines have disturbed the quiet of states, for to speak
truly what are the policies of men, but vain opinions.

It is truth, that policy is a special part of government, and has been
magnified by a general applause amongst Infidels but amongst Christian Princes,
there is not a more pestylent thing then this plague of policy which diuides it
self from that policy prescribed by the rule of gods word. In matters of
policy, vanity bears sway, when from the force of humayne prescriptions
they think to mayntaine and vphould a common wealth without consideration that
the principal things that do bring miseryes, and disorders to countries and
kingdoms, are such offenses as are directly opposite against the majesty of
God, as where his word is neglected his religion despised, where his glory is
not principally, but respectively considered: where we seek by policy to lift
up our selves and to pluck down God: And where we think to establish such a
government, whereby to please and content our own appetytes, without any
respect at all to the advancement of gods glory.

This policy is to be rejected amongst Christians. And as that policy that is
conducted by the rule of gods word, is the life of government, so policy (as
it has been commonly taken and used amongst a great many) is indeed the high
way to Atheism.

What should I speak of this man, or of that man's opinion concerning this
matter, I do appeal to every man's opinion (that has either wit, or Judgment
together with the fear of God before his eyes) whither that man (how great a
politician so ever accounted) yet if he be not religious, or that his
policies be estranged from that policy that is commanded by our savior Christ
in his glorious Gospel, whither such a politician were not more fit to be
made a Counsayler, to a Heathen then to a Christian Prince.

Then he that has but Mammon for his God, and Machyuell for his ghostly
father, is to be rejected and that common wealth that is governed by such a
policy is not only unhappy, but in the winding up it becomes miserable.

It is Opinion that places men in office and authority. Chap. X.
AS Kings and princes must be thus assisted with honorable Counsaylers, yet
moreover and besides, as the body cannot guide it self with the head alone,
but it must have the help of other members, no more can Common wealths be well
governed without the assistance of inferior officers.

It is called a happy Common wealth where subjects be good, now from whence
this goodness in subjects should proceed, there be diverse opinions, some
would have it to proceed from good laws substantially and duly administered,
some hold opinion that good education does inform it, some others are
persuaded, that the temperature of the Climate does make men apt for Civil
life, and other some do hold Opinion, that the endeavors of good Magistrates
does make good subjects.

I am sure we want no positive laws whereby to bridle abuse, but the example
of a good and godly life in those that should minister the due execution of
those laws, would be more effectual then the laws themselves, because the
actions of those that are placed in authority, are received by the common
people, for precepts and instructions.

But the greatest number of them do rather show their authorities in
correcting other men's faults then in mending their own, and they will
propounde to others what they themselves will never put in practice: but it is
Opinion that places them in office and authority, and it is Opinion again
that makes many men rather to attend their own private, then the public
commodity, because they know that all honors and dignities are given to men
that be rich, but not to men that be honest: there be many therefore, that
distrusting their own virtues, have no other means whereby to advance
themselves, but by bribery, and giving of rewards: and therefore in former
well governed Common wealths, this insatiable desire of honor, was so bridled
and curbed, that these oppressing practices were well enough prevented and so
circumspectly looked unto, that no ambitious person (contrary to the rules of
honesty) should either by bribery, or any other means of corruption, aspire
either to office or dignity.

To speak my opinion I think that common wealth to be happy, where offices are
given to the virtuous, but not to the rich. And where those might be well
punished that do seek by money to oppress virtue: but in those common wealths,
where so great worship and veneration is given to riches, there is nothing so
holy so godly or religious, that covetousness (the fatal plague of all
government) cannot violat and subvert. The Lacedaemonians, consulting of the
continuance of there estate, was answered by Apollo that Sparta should be
destroyed by no means, but by corruption the which fatal prediction to avoid,
they rejected the use of gould silver and brass making a coin (to pass
curra^t amongst the^) of iron.

When Rome began so far to decline from her precedent magnificence that all
things were set to sale, to be bought and sold for money, Iugurtha seeing the
corruption, was of opinion that the city it self would shortly prove salable,
there wanted but a bountiful Chapman, to make a large offer, and it fell so
out indeed, for the Imperial state was bought and sold for money shortly
after, and Saint Peter's Chair has so continued for these five or six hundred
years together, and more Popes since that time have crept in by corruption
then by any orderly Canonical election.

It is Opinion that makes Fools to be admired for their Wisdom Chap. XI.
IN the appoynting of Officers, in former ages, the best opinion, was had of
him that was most profitable to the Common wealth but now who is sooner
preferred then he that is most private to himself and being once placed in
authority, though he never did good all the days of his life, yet if he does
no harm we call him a very good and a most worthy magistrate: and may we not
well repute him to be good, that all the days of his life is good for nothing:
but the most ignorant, are ever most aptest to believe that they are most
worthy of the cheifest promotions, and because they did never manage any
affairs of importance, they know not what burden and difficultyes are there
unto incident.

How many have sought to advance themselves to bear rule and government by
their wealth, who once placed in authority, have made port save both of virtue
and honesty, seeking still to enrich themselves by the ruins of the common
wealth, increasing as fast in their wickedness as they grew in wealth and
riches. And these ignorant men that do seldom understand the truth of any
thing, being drunk with the pleasures and delights that the abundance of
their wealth brings with it, they do believe that the understanding how to
rule is an easy matter, and that there needs neither art nor learning to
compass it, but only an audacious bouldnes, and a rough, and stout behavior,
whereunto they do bend all their thoughts, thinking him to be most happy, that
does live most at liberty thus blinded with ignorance, they do both abhor
and banish Reason, thinking it to be a bridle but to bring them into bondage
and to diminish their ease and contentation, and therefore flatteringe
themselves with an ouerweeninge Opinion, of their own worthiness, they do
labor to get estimation and authority amongst men and to be accounted great,
that in my opinion, may be well resembled to the Giants that are accustomed at
London once a year, to march before the Lord Mayors Pageantes, that outwardly
do make semblance to be men of great might and valiance, but inwardly are
nothing else but Lathes, towe and rags.

Yet these men amongst the ignorant and foolish people, are accounted to be
wise, grave, learned, they are worshipped, honored, and reverently esteemed;
but if they could but see into the barrenness of their brains, and consider
the miserable poverty of their minds, if they did not pity their
wretchedness and misery, I am sure they would laugh at their simplicity and
folly.

The government is never good that is managed by Opinion. Chap. XII.
IT has many times been questioned whither that government be better, where
there is a naughty prince, and good Magistrates under him, or where the prince
is good and the Magistrates ill: Marius Maximus leans to the first, but a
principal pillar of Philosophy, has set down for a Maxim, how that common
wealth is best and most assured, where the prince is ill conditioned, rather
then where the magistrates are corrupt and ill disposed.

But there be many other of great authority, that will in no wise consent,
when former experience has so many times taught, that evil men are oftener
corrected by a good Prince, then an evil Prince amended by good men: but this
is certain, that there can be no worse government, then that which is managed
by Opinion.

It is a desperate evil in any man that is too much in love with his own wit,
but there is not a worse enemy to a state or common wealth, then where a
Magistrate placed in office or authority, is too much leaning to his own
Opinion; for whatsoever affairs shall pass through his hands, he wresteth
them still to his own conceit.

To conclude this chapter, I think this may stand for certain certain, that
where the magistrate is good, the people cannot lightly be ill, so that the
goodness or ilnes of the Common wealth does much consist in the example of the
magistrate.

What diversity in Opinion, concerning the prerogative of Princes Chap. XIII.
AS Emperors, Kings, Princes and Potentates, both them selves together with
their lives and actions, have been ever more censured by opinion, so their
princely prerogatives have been sometimes called in question, and it has been
demanded, whether they might exact upon their subjects loanes, Impositions,
taxes, subsidies, tributes, or any such other like colections: and several men
have seemed severally to determine of the matter, but what is he that dares
prescribe limits or bounds to a king, what he shall take, or what he shall
leave, or who is he (that knows his duty) that dare speak against a princes
prerogative.

If a prince by tyranny will exact, what subject is he that dare impugn, if
he has not a charitable disposition of his own nature toward his people,
there is no crossinge of him in his courses by his own subjects.

This matter was in question when our savior Christ was upon the earth, when
the Scribes and Pharisees demanded of him whether it were lawful to pay tribute
unto Caesar, he did not impugn it, but surrendered himself to pay what was
due, but here is a matter for Princes yet to consider that under this
privilege of taxinge their subjects for their needful and necessary
affairs, that they do not yet oppress them, for their vain and Idle
expenses: it was therefore but a barbarous opinion that was set down by
Eufemus, that nothing is to be accounted unjust in a prince, that brings in
commodity: and the like again in him that durst avouch that in an ample and
large fortune that is most just that is most profitable: but Apolonius was of
an other opinion, for he has set down, that the treasure taken by a prince
from his subjects by tirany, is more base then iron, for being wette with the
tears of the people, it cankereth and becomes acursed: And it was no marvel
though Chrysostom cries out with such admiration, Miror si aliquis Rectorum
potest Saluari: the expenses of a prince are many, and it is he that must
defend his subjects and dominions from the spoil and rapine of foreign
forces: if the king must then defend all, there is no reason but his wants must
be supplied by all, it is warranted by the holy scriptures, and our savior
Christ himself has left us an example, who refused not to pay what was
imposed upon himself

Public actions, must necessarily enforce the use of a public purse, and
the prince must be still prepared and stored with treasure, it is he that in
the time of peace must have all things in readiness against the time of war,
and his subjects must not grudge nor murmur against him, though he importune
there contributions to supply his wantes.

But what madness is hit into my brains, that now when this sweet and quiet
peace has luld us all a sleep, I should disturb them in their pleasant
slumber by speaking of wars, an action that makes every man angry but to
hear it spoken of.

But Polipomines was of opinion, that in the time of peace, it is then best to
prepare for war.

But we have a better instance, Solomon, notwithstanding he was promised a
peaceable government by God himself and called in the scriptures Rex
pacificus, yet he forgot not to furnish his garrisons with greater provisions
then ever his father David had done before him though he were still turmoyled
and tired in the wars, neither was it omitted in former ages, but in the time
of peace they were still provident for the time of war.

The mutabilitie of Opinion in all times and ages Chap XIIII.
IT would be tedious to set down what means has bin used whereby to draw in
money for the supply of wars, for besides Rents, Revenues, impositions, taxes,
subsidies penalties, confiscations, loanes, and such other like: there has
been great sums raised from the pride and excess as well of men as of women;
from their guarded garments, there colored silks, their gould and silver
lace, their plate more then necessary, their chains, their Jewels and such
other like superfluities.

But blessed be that government that has freed us from that expense, we are
not much burdened with any military charge: yet the surfetes of peace is it
that brings on wars, or what peace can be so surely knit but Avarice and
pride will not easily undo.

It is a mad opinion to think that either our mightines our wisdom, our
policy, or that the long continuance of peace, which by a gracious government
we have hitherto inioyed, should be still perpetual, or who can plead
prescription against the justice of the almighty, who limiteth the bounds of
all estates, to his appointed time of correction the which they cannot pass.

Now let us look into the vain opinion of this age that can be contented to
spend infinite sums of money, amongst lawyers, amongst fashion-mongers, amongst
Epicures, and if I were able truly to calculate the sums, that are yearly
spent in all sorts of vanities: I dare be bold to avow it, it would suffice to
maintain an able army, against any Prince in Christendom that would be
adverse unto us, now if his Majesty should have occasion to use soldiers,
either in defense of his own right, or for any other matters in claim, (which
wars have ever been reputed to be both just and honorable, by the general
opinion of the whole world) I think those that are now most prodigal in idle
and ungodly expenses would be then most sparing in their contributions either
for the honor of their Prince, or the defense of their country.

See here the mutabilitie not of Fortune, but of opinion, in former ages they
were honorably esteemed of, that kept bountiful houses, that vpheeld great
hospitality: that were attended on by troops of serving men, that were able
(if need had been) to have served the Prince, to have fought for their
country: but see what Opinion now over rules, when he is thought to be most
provident, that has a foot boy or two, to run by his Coach, and a Page in a
guarded coat, to attend on his trencher, my Lady must have her powdered
perywigs, her painted face, her mock mask, that will do little more then
cover her nose, and do make themselves like maskers indeed, that although
they will put a vizard on their face, yet they would feign be known what they
are.

The Peacocke when he is in his greatest glory, yet when he looks down and
sees his black feet, he pulls down his plumes, but our Gentlewomen, a great
number of them have provided well for that, for their very feet shall glister
with gould and silver, their shoes must be imbroidered, sometimes with
pearl, and because they will have no moniment about them, to put them in mind
of their mortality they will exceed in pride, from the crown of their head to
the sole of their foot.

I have not spoken of these things as a war lover for I confess these
lovers of wars are like Physicians that could wish the city to be full of
diseases, whereby they might be employed for their own gain, but I am just of
his opinion that does hold it for great happiness where the sword and all other
weapons of war were turned into plough irons, what I have spoken is only
against that excessive pride which has been the overthrow of many flourishing
common wealths, which former well governed estates by penal laws have sought
with great diligence to prevent as by the sequel of that which follows shall
more plainly appear.

How opposite we be in Opinion to our predecessors, let our actions bear
witness. Chap. XV.
THe eye of wisdom, that in former ages could look into the enormities, that
are evermore hatched up in the time of peace, made such laws and prouisoes,
that men should not abuse their own riches, nor be suffered to spend them in
riote and excess, I limit excess in these four in plate, in building in
banquitinge and in aparell.

Dionysius of Siracusa (although a tirante) yet he made a law, that those that
excessiuely gave them selves to banquiting and belly-cheare should be punished
with great severity.

There was a law made in Rome called Iulia, the tenure whereof was, that no
man should be so hardy to shut his doors when he was at dinner, that the
officers of the town might have the more easy access, to see if their
ordinary did not exceed their ability.

Licurgus made a law against drunkards, Augustus Caesar against pompous
building, the Lucanes against prodigality, the Lacedaemonians against excess
in apparel, the Egiptians against whordome, the Thebans against negligent
parents, that brought up their children in idleness and insolency.

Cato deprived a Senator of Rome, for kissing of his wife before his daughter.

P: Rufinus was deposed from the Senate by the Censors, for having ten pound
weight of silver in his house.

Amelius Lepidus, having built a house, which cost six thousand pounds, was
for that cause deprived from the Senate.

If these constitutions thus ordained by predecessors for the suppressing of
vices were alowable and good, what may we think of our selves now in this age,
that are so opposite in life and conversation: that we be not endued with those
common virtues that heathen men have learned, either by reason given them by
nature, or by use of living, or by the precepts of Philosophy, for what a
number of us that do profess to be Christians, are seen to live as if Heaven
and Hell were but the Fictions of Fools, or as we call them dreams and old
wives tales.

Let us look advisedly into the actions of this age, when was virtue and
honesty more despised: when was pride, riot and excess more immoderate, when
was adultery and all other kind of unchaste living, either more apparent or
less punished, when were all manner of abominations more tolerated, when
Magistrates will sometimes favor their own vices in others: and every man
accounts that to be most comely, which is most taken up and inured by the
vicious.

How many men do but flatter themselves, by favoring their own vices, which
they think to be but venial, accounting the immoderate use of voluptuous
pleasures, to be but small offenses.

These adulterers, these drunkards, these swearers, these blasphemers, they
have made a sacrifice of their souls to the Devil, and have cast of all care
both of honor and honesty.

We never think of the matter, how negligently we live, and how carelessely we
sleep, every hour besiedged with a number of armed vices, that do keep a
continual watch, to bring us to destruction: the thing that is especially
sought after and desired by all men is peace and quietness, but these kind of
men that do so much incline themselves to this ungodly manner of living, it is
but an unassured peace they hunt after, for the happiness of peace indeed, is
to make war against our selves, and to fight strongly against our own vices,
for with these enemies God himself (which is our true peace) is at variance,
and that with deadly hatred.

The life of a Christian was wont to be called a continual warfare, but it is
now turned to a more peaceable time, when we live in banqueting, in ease and
in idleness, in pleasure and in sport, and in stead of Tents and Pauilions,
we walter and tumble our selves upon our beds of down, and in the stead of
hard Armor, we be clothed in soft silks, perfumed with musk bals, with
powders and pomanders of sweet and pleasant smell: and in the stead of weapons
in the hand of a warrior, a pair of perfumed gloves, or sometimes perhaps a
Curtizans Fan, and thou O mad man cryest peace, peace, when thou have God
thine enemy, the author of peace, that has with open mouth denounced war
against thee, for whosoever is at one with vices, has broken the truce made
between him and God in the time when he was baptized.

What variety in Opinion whether the miseries that are drawn in by wars, or
the vices that are hatched up in peace, are most tolerable. Chap. XVI.
SOme will say that, As the heart thinks, so the tongue speaks: but we see
where Opinion is once ingrafted, we are no less leaning unto it in our
actions, then we be in our words, and our opinions are so variable, that more
changable then the Moon, we erect every day a new choice, loathing that to
morrow, which we liked of to day: and men do vary in opinions, even in matters
of delight: yet amongst all the things that may happen upon this humane Theater
of the world, there is nothing more generally hated then the actions of War,
yet by a contrary Opinion conceived by some other, there is nothing more
pernicious then the blessedness of peace.

Cicero would have it, That an unjust peace, is to be preferred before the most
just war.

Tacitus tells us again, That there is more safety in an unjust war, then
there is in a patcht peace.

One affirms war to be the minister of Gods wrath, when he is displeased,
no less grievous to the world, then the loathsome plague or pestilence.

It is truth (says another) war is the minister of Gods justice, either for
contempt of himself, or of his religion, or for the wicked life of worldlings.

It is yet again alleged, that the effect of wars is the destruction of
countries, the desolation of noble houses, and the sacking of oppulent Cities.

The effect of peace (says another) is to draw the very corruption of manners
after it, and there is nothing that bringes so sweet and easy a subjection to
vice, as the season and idleness of peace, it infeebleth the minds of young
men, it makes them become Hermophrodites, halfe-men, half harlots, it
esseminates their minds, and nuseleth them up in all kind of Folly: It gives
old men opportunity to travel and turmoyle, and to tire themselves, by
oppression, by extortion, by bribery, by perjury, by craft, by subtlety, and
by all manner of ungodliness to escape from my young master his son, and
whilst the father is thus in his money harvest toyling for wealth, the son is
in a Brothell house, sporting and dallying with his wench.

But yet (says one) Wars should ever have an eye to peace, and Wars should
never be taken in hand but to the end to have peace.

It is answered again that peace is it that draws to prosperity, and this
prosperity is it that sets an edge to sloth and negligence, for as peace
is the parent of prosperity, so it is the nurse of pride, and the trainer up
of all careless security.

But wars ruineth both town and Country, inforceth the husbandman to
forsake his labor, it brings in want, dearth, and scarcity, but peace is it
that breeds plenty.

And as peace breeds plenty, so it armeth Cape apee, all sorts of sins,
for in the time of peace there is no wickedness that wantes example: and I
might yet further add that in this time of peace the Merchant finds
liberty, to carry away Corn, Beer, Butter, Cheese, Leather, Tin,
Ordinance, Cloth, Wool, and all other such commodities, so that our store and
plenty, by these means are turned to penury.

Wars that are undertaken by a prince, in defense of his right, though they
may be reputed to be just and honorable, and likewise to suppress a foreign
foe, although the conquest be accounted glorious, yet in Civil wars, all
things are full of misery, yet nothing more miserable then victory: when it
pleases the almighty to punish by War, all things upon the earth are
pressed to fight under his Banner, yea even the ambitiousnesse of Princes, to
punish themselves one by another: but where a kingdom is divided in it self,
the Bar of division proceeds from their sins: and where the neighbor
forsakes the neighbor, seeking to destroy him, God lets loose the reyne to
blood, for to run upon blood, punishing (O great work master) one sin
with another, so that where they once fall from God, they do find no crueller
tormentors, then themselves upon themselves.

War is the scourge of God to punish sins: the hand of Destiny to enforce
change, and as it is the Adamant, to draw courrage unto it, so it is a
Basilique to Fear, that dies to behold it.

War strikes as God wills, works as sin warpes it, and to be brief, it
is a miserable necessity in nature, and a necessary corrector of times
infirmity.

It is yet again alleged that the Prayers that are exhibited in the time of
peace, is far more happy for the common wealth, then the noise of Drums and
Trumpets sounding the Alarums of war.

And yet we may perceive that the vices that are hatched up in peace, are in
far greater number then the inormities that do accompany war, and therefore
if the affairs of war do not busy a Statesman, the diseases of peace will
so turmoyle him, as he must be still vigilent to discover the diseases of the
common wealth daily drawn in by the security and surfeites of peace.

I might yet infer diverse other opinions, some upholding the calamities to
be intolerable that are drawn in by war, whose associates, are Sword, Fire,
Famine, and Murder, other some as bitterly reprehending the abominations that
are daily fostered up in the time of peace, whose compartners are pride,
pleasure, Idleness, lust, Adultery, Sencesualitie, Drunkenness, Gluttony,
voluptuousnes, and all manner of hated villainy: but passing over the rest,
let me yet put you in mind, that the practice and knowledge of arms has
evermore been carefully endeavored, and not without a special consideration,
when Prince, country, religion, law, justice, subjects, and altogether, are
under the protection of Arms.

Osorius confirms it in these words, He that takes away the knowledge of
Arms, works the overthrow of the common wealth.

Cicero again gives us this Item, we must not lay our Arms aside, if we
desire to live in peace.

Tacitus is not to be forgotten: There is nothing more rather to incite an
enemy, then where he finds sloth and negligence

And Caesar was wont to say, It is certain, that mighty Empiers, are not kept
by sloth, but by weapons in the hands of experimented Soldiers.

We will conclude with Plato, who affirms how that a princes Crown, can
never sit close to his head who once neglects the knowledge of Arms: the
common wealth therefore has as great need of valiant men to defend it, as of
good laws to govern it, for majesty without force, was never yet assured.

What diversity in Opinion amongst Lawyers. Chap. XVII.
I Think I shall need to speak but little what diversity of Opinions, there
is amongst the Lawyers, when the Laws themselves (at the least as they are
hand-led) are but the mere opinions of men.

Unhappy may those laws be called (poor suitors may well say) where there is
so much controversy that they cannot be distinguished.

If law be certain, why should judgment be delayed; if but to do right why
are so many poor men wronged, if grounded on conscience, why is it partial.

Men that are out of apparel are desirous to cloth themselves in lasting
suites, but he that would have a lasting suite indeed, let him get him a suite
in Westminster Hall, if it does not last him out three suites of Perpetuana,
the lawyer is but a Fool, that first took the measure of his cause.

There is no worse torture, then the torture of the law, they are so full of
Instances, of Quidities, of Demurres, of Delatories and delays, that what
should I say, though the law it self intends nothing but right, it is yet
made the instrument of injury and wrong, for they have law to overthrow law,
and there is no law be it never so Legitimate or truly be gotten, which with
their wrested glosses and subtle expositions, they cannot Basterdize.

For the law it self I acknowledge it to be honorable (being leuelled and
proportioned according to the first institution) for the end whereunto law has
relation, is to profit the good, to perfect the common wealth, to relieve the
oppressed, to minister right and justice, neither is there any ^ice, which is
not by law bridled (if law were duly executed)

But now they make straight crooked and crooked straight and he that has most
money has most right: they are pugnantia inter se, when amongst themselves
there is no agreement, but what they confirm to day, to morrow they will
frustrate: we may see so many encumbrances, that the Judges themselves will be
of several Opinions, and will dispute the one with the other so long, that
they be ready to change color, and to wax pale, with anger and choler, that
in a matter of difficulty, they cannot discuss significantly, but what one
Judge affirms this day to be law, an other will disauow to morrow to be
scarce worth a straw.

What is the end of all their wrangling, but every man to uphold his own
Opinion.

It is the ill living of wicked men, that did first begette good Laws, for
what else are the great number of Laws that are amongst us, but the
Authentical Registers of our corruptions, and what are the manifold
Commentaries that are written upon them, but a very corruption of the laws
themselves.

Some are of Opinion, that in this age the multitude of our Laws do more
oppress, then the multitude of our enormities could hurt or molest.

Amongst the Locrenses it was provided, that if any man did invent a new law,
he should first propound the same to the people wearing a Halter about his
neck, to the end that if it were thought pernicious, he might forthwith be
hanged.

Ferdinando, sending a Vyzroy into the West Indies, but then newly discovered,
forbadde him to carry any Lawyers with him, to the end, they might not sow the
seeds of sects.

And if a man might now speak the truth, this brawling study of Law, is it
that infecteth all Europe: and as Columella has formerly delivered: It is but
a lawful robbery or Theft.

Of Opinion what it is Chap. XVIII.
OPinion, the Legetimate child of affection, a most inconstant thing, it
stands but upon the pleasure of men, but especially of the Irresolute
multitude, opinion a smookie vapoure, the breath of the vulgar, the applause of
the ignorant, the mother of Hypocrisy.

It is blind, it is lame, it is self conceited, it is decrepit, it is idle, it
is full of sin it draws in Sects Schismies, Herisies, Popery, it is full of
lies It is the effect of ignorance it is nothing, And yet the baits are
infinite, that are laid to catch this nothing.

It is hunted after in the court, in the country, in the town in the city,
and it is an infirmity no less abounding in Princes then in beggars, for
where uncontrolled affections do meet in a high fortune they beget opinions.

It is a plain cosiner, for it deceives Emperors, Kings, Princes, Dukes,
Earls, Lords, and what is he that is not ouer-reached by Opinion.

Is infecteth many times the minds of them which profess (and by there
outward habites do make show) to be religious, but these men that are so wise
and holy in there own opinions are of all other most especially to be avoded,
for if it be no sacrileadge to pilfer a text from out the holy scripture, the
proud Pharisie that boasted so much of his own worthynes, was more odible in
the sight of God, then the publican or Harlot.

The greatest number of men in general, are rather led by opinion then either
by wit or reason: Kings, Princes, Poentates, yea the Pope himself they do
all march (if not in their own) yet in the steps of othermens opinions.

But as that body is nearest unto health, which though it be something wasted,
is yet free from the danger of noisome humors, even so is that mind more
inclineable to the discipline of virtue, which is not besotted with the misty
fogges of a blind Opinion.

Men that are but of a corrupt understanding, are likewise possessed with a
preiudicate opinion: and they are no less led by opinion, either to love or
hate, then they are by wit or reason: but he that will discern a right, must
pluck away the veil of Opinion.

Wise and grave men have ever more made little acount of wavering opinion.

It is truth, that reason joined with wit may sometimes give out precepts, but
opinion joined with passion are of force to countermaund.

Opinion is a vain appetite springing from affection, yet more nice, and
foolish to please, then either with or judgment: to conclude, what is it but
opinion, that rules and turns, the world topsie turuie.

From whence Opinion has his being. Chap XIX.
MAn is made of two parts, that is to say, of body and of soul, the body more
imperfect in diverse natural gifts, then many brute beasts, the soul
because she is more capable of the divine nature, being likewise immortal, she
therefore leaves things that be immortal, and that are of like nature to her
self, yet by the contagiousnes of the bodies infirmities, she is so far grown
out of kind that she is not only made a play fellow, with the bodies
wantonness, but she is likewise drowned in the bodies filthiness, for although at
the first in our primative creation, the body was obedient to the behestes of
the mind, yet sin, having since sown the poison of dissension between them,
has set them so oposite, that the appetites and affections of the licentious
body, are still striving and struggling to suppress the perfections of the
soul.

Reason, that should rule, is enclosed but in a narrow compass of the head,
all the other parts of the body besides are left to affections: our eyes, whose
office should be to direct our steps in a right course, are they not our
greatest stumbling blocks, not the deamers of our discretions, but the very
blinders of the insight of our souls: what enemies more malicious to us then
our ears, that are still wide open to wickedness, ready to liste^ to the
suggestions of Flatterers: our tongue, is it not more apt to speak ill then
good, our hands our feet and all the rest of our parts, more ready and
nimble, to tread the tract of vanity then of virtue, our brains in stead of
wise precepts, are still cloied, with idle imaginations, our industries are
killed by sensuality, that draws the natural well inclined parts of the mind
to the unnatural, natural affections of the body: as the soul and the body
are two things so is the soul divided into two parts, whereof the one has in
it reason, and the other appetite, and as in generation, the body goes before
the soul, so does the unreasonable part of the soul go before the
reasonable, we find the experience in young babes, whilst they be in their
innocence, that immediately after their birth do utter fervent appetite, but it
is a long time after before any Reason appear.

By this it may appear, it is the mist of our affections that does blind the
judgment of our reason, and where the mind is blinded by affection, there the
judgment is seduced and led a stray from the pathe of reason, and does forth
with fall into opinion, whereof follows that they are not only deceived in
the opinion of things honest and profitable, but also with the love of
dishonest and unprofitable desirs blinded: humors and affections have a great
hand over us, and they place and displace reason at their pleasure: where
affection does hold the seat and scepter in the Castle of the mind, they can
judge of nothing but indiscretly, they may guess at many things by opinion, but
at very few according to a truth he that is once wounded with the darte of
affection, it is a hard matter for him to shake it out, he that is strong and
able to encounter his own affections, is able to command, to dispose to
censure and determine, whatsoever is to be presented upon our human theater.

How Princes and other great personages are led astray by Opinion Chap XX.
OPinion is a Burre that evermore cleaves to great personages, and I know not
from whence it is that this vice of affection does evermore follow the court,
and that this infection of opinion, should still bewich the most great and
worthy persons, but where opinion is coupled with confidence, the same being
not likewise coupled with wisdom and discretion they do but make themselves
subject to the wind of vulgar opinion.

Where a great person is inclined to any one (though never so dull and
ignorant) yet his manners and behauiours shall be admired and commended by all
men, nay, we do sometimes magnify his qualities, that has (all most) never a
good condition to bless himself with all.

So contrary wise again the malignant aspect of any person in authority
toward his inferior is thought a sufficient warrant for any other man to
wrong him.

From hence it proceeds, that in the courts of Princes he that once begins
to slide, shall very hardly be able for ever after to recover his footinge
again.

Greatmen that be in authority, do commonly settell their opinions of such men
that are more willinge to follow the delight of the body, then the virtue of
the mind censuring their worth and worthiness by no better rules, then by that
blind opinion, which they themselves have conceived of the^.

Great personages, and men in high authorytie that are the dispencers of goods
temporal here upon the earth should settle their opinions of such men as be
honest and exemplary life and not of such Parasits, as by servile flattery, can
wind themselves into favor, by working a more worthy into disgrace.

There be special considerations to be had before we do grownd an opinion,
and the rules of piety does command it especially to look into the inward
disposition of the man, and not into the outward conversation only, which is
many times shadowed with the beauteous mask of formal dissimulation, but by a
judicial demonstration or an experimented knowledge, for other wise the
judgment may easily be mistaken.

A man is like a tree, whose fruit cannot be discerned till it be through
ripe, we must not respect the greennes, the bud nor the blosome, and the
disposition of a man is not to be coniectured but on the latter season, for I
have seldom heard of him that was accounted to be Semper Idem.

He that will settle an opinion, in those that be unlearned, shall be deceived
in his opinion for the unlearned are they that give themselves to dishonest
practices, for seeing that for the lack of learning and virtue, they know
themselves unfit for any place of preferment, they therefore endeavor to raise
their fortunes by base and seruill shifts, by lying by slanderinge by
flatteringe, by false accusing and by such other dishonest endeavors.

To have a charitable opinion of men's worthiness I confess it to be good, but
yet to give Esops Cock a precious gemme, a barley corn were better: the
judgment of greatness should be able to distinguish between truth and falsehood.

Greatness counseled by knowledge chooses the way of virtue, but blinded by
opinion turns all into vice.

How base and unworthy persons do creep into the Opinion of Princes and men of
great place. Chap XXI.
THis Opinion that is conceived by men of high estate aduanceth into authority
those that be covetous, sometimes inclined to brybery to extortion, to
oppression, it makes fools to be accounted wise, cowardes to be reputed
coragious: and he that can but creep into a great man's opinion, he may
disguise the truth without controulment, he can fight without hands, conquer
without weapons, he can kill a man behind his back with a word, that he never
durst look in the face with a sword.

He can draw a man into some dangerous practice and then by discovering of it,
he can make an other man's offense, the first step to his own advancement.

These Court Parasites, that have their eyes continually fixed upon their
Princes inclination, does watch at opportunities, not only to grace themselves,
but likewise to disgrace others, and the rather to induce a good opinion, they
pretend all their purposes, for honor of the King, and the good of the
country, for these two pretenses, honor and profit, are the two harbengers
that does lodge opinion in the bosom of a Prince.

Now he that can humor a prince in his Affections and has skill to watch his
times, means and opportunities, he is already master of what his heart
desires.

Where Affection is thoroughly settled in the heart and mind of any man, there
Opinion has an easy passage, so that when our hearts are once possessed with
any vehement Affection, there Reason is exempted from his proper office, and
Judgment being taken prisoner, for quietness sake is contented to yield her
self to captivity.

Open and apparent virtues may sometimes bring forth praise, but a foolish
conceived Opinion, does bring forth Fortune, and therefore those fools that
will speak but what is truth without flattery are seldom seen to be
fortunate, yet a lying fool may comfort himself with hope, for there is not a
more speedy way to creep into Opinion, then by lying and flattering.

Piety in the Opinion of the world, is accounted but a fantastic fiction,
and honesty and upright dealing, but for an ayery apparition, true virtuous
actions come seldom on the Stage, but when by necessity of laws they are
enforced to show themselves, if we do any good, it is either in hope of
reward, or to get a popular praise, and amongst many thousands, that do seek
to draw out opinion by servile and base practices, there is scarcely one that
does endeavor it by their good deeds.

Greatness must be flattered in his folly, his humor must be observed and
followed: if Phaleris will torment, Perillus must invent, if Aemelius will
martyr, Pateroulus must minister; if Alexander will be stately, Phocion must
be humble; if Domitius be foolish, Hippodamus must be frantic.

The itching ears of vain glorious men must be scratched by Sycophantes, and
he that cannot make the Devil a Saint, it is time he were in Heaven, this is
no world for him to live in.

They must be soothed in their Opinions, praised in their follies, commended in
their vanities, yea their very vices, must be applauded for virtues.

By these steps of smoothing, Clawbackes must learn to climb, and they know
well enough that if they can make shift to creep into the Opinion of a great
man, it is more available then six of the seven liberal sciences, and
therefore what ado in the Court, first to become gracious in the sight of the
Prince: and then what flattering, what fawning to curry favor with those that
be in authority: what ducking, what dyuing, what creeping, what crouching,
what countenances fained and fashioned to please the superiors: what scorning,
what mocking, what contemning and dispising of inferiors: the briberies, the
extortions, the oppressions of the great men, must not be spoken of, but in
secret, the faults of the poor checked controuled, and openly punished.

Now amongst the rest of those Flatterers, that do poison the ears of
Princes, those only are easily to be discerned, that will still be commending
whatsoever the Prince does whether it be good or bad.

It is fit for Courtiers I confess, to be officious, for the more dutiful
and ready that a man is in the service of the Prince, the sooner he comes to
honor and preferment, but those whose endeavors are but only profitable for
themselves, they are but in common opinion reputed to be the Moathes and Mice
of the Court.

Nobility led into a vain Opinion by parasites. Chap. XXII.
AS Nobility, that is thus drawn into a vain opinion of other men's
worthiness (but by their own sense and feeling) are led into many errors, so
by these supple mouthed parasites, that can pamper the itching ears of
sensuality, by praising and extolling many things in them more then are true:
they are likewise led into as vain a belief of themselves: and by these
commendations given them by Flatterers, they are grown into such an
ouer-weening of their own worthynesse, that they account him to be either
envious or proud that will not sooth and smooth them up in those conformities,
which being examined by wit and judgment, are flat deformities: so vain they
are in their own conceits, that they think themselves to be praised, when
(in truth) they be palpably flattered, for false praise is nothing else but
flat mockery, yet such is their vain glory, that when they be commended far
beyond the pytch of their deserts, they rather attribute it to the abundance
of good will, then to the fraud of the flatterer.

A fawning parasite, seeing Dionisius in conference with company, although he
could not hear his speeches, yet he fell into a great laughter, which being
perceived by Dionisius he demanded of him wherefore he laughed, because (said
he) I do see you talking, and I know your words are so full of witty
pleasantnes, that they will make any man to laugh that is not so dull of
conceit, that he cannot comprehend them.

This tickling by flattery is an old disease, and I think the sickness will
never be cured: Alexander was not free from it with all his Courage, neither
yet Dionisius with all his cruelty: and Themistocles being asked what words
were best pleasing unto him, answered: Those that recount mine own praises.

Alexander flattering himself, would needs be reputed to be the son of
Jupiter, his mother complained of the matter saying He would bring her into
disgrace with Juno: but a certain Philosopher, who seeing his Physician in his
sickness prepare for the recovery of his health a certain Supping, mocking
at this divinity, he said Our God has put the hope of his health in a mess
of Broth.

Me thinks the Emperor Sigismund should not here be forgotten, who hearing a
shameless fellow to call him god stroke him on the ear to whom the parasite
said, Why do thou strike me Emperor: to the which he answered, Why do
thou bite me Flatterer.

I am persuaded, that if Nobility would learn of Sigismund how to deal with
Flatterers, and rather to hit them on the ears, then to lend them their ears,
and to be less attentive to the sound of flattering words, and something
more circumspect to search out the honesty of him that is the speaker, they
could not be so often deceived in their opinions, nor so easily led astray by
dissembling Parasites.

It is flattery in this age that breeds good blood, and there is nothing in
better request then flattery and Tobacco: two smoakie vapors, scarce worth the
speaking of, yet the one robs wise men of their wits, and the other fools
of their money: they be both sociable and fit for the time: and he that cannot
Carouse with Alexander, abstain with Romulus, eat with the Epicure, fast with
the Stoic, sleep with Endimeon, watch with Crisppus, laugh with Democritus,
weep with Heraclitus, take a pipe of Tobacco and go to a Brothell house, he
shall never get credit nor good Opinion.

Of self Opinion, how it besotteth. Chap. XXIII.
AS men are blinded by Affection, to settle their opinions, where themselves
do best love, so it is as blind an Opinion, that is settled more for love then
for honesty; let us now speak of a self Opinion, where (according to the
proverb) A man thinks better of himself then all the world does beside.

These men that be thus infected, do little hurt unless to themselves, for
sometimes when they cannot put the Fool upon some other, they do most
commonly make fools of themselves.

Those that have been lifted up far beyond the level of their own deserts
are mad drunken with their vain greatness, which being founded upon no
worthynes, they are easily trained into opinion, that their state was achieued
by their own virtue for where there is a self opinion, wisdom is divorced: I
have smyled at the folly of such as I have often hard so to extol their own
deserts, as though they would induce the hearers to accuse the country of
ingratitude, that had no better rewarded their endeavors: and some have not
spared to publish knot, whereby they would bring the prince to be their debtour
for those services, that if the very spirit of their endeavors were well
considered of, would rather manifest the vain glory of the writer the^ make
any due proof of that profit that is pretended.

I have heard a mercinary mind make open protestation, that by the very
dexterity of his own wit, he would ease the Prince of that military expense,
that where predecessors, for these many hundred years, could never free
themselves from a continual charge of great garrisons, they should not need so
much as a pay for one Soldier.

O poor blind Opinion whither will thou range do thou not know that the
laws have been many times impugned and that it is the Soldiers sword, that
only vphouldeth the Judge in the seat of Justice?

If thou think to effect that, which so many ages could never bring to pass
I say thou art more behoulding to thine own Opinion then thou art to thy wit.

Self opinion proceeds sometimes from a little wit that is utterly void of
judgment and sometimes from him that has great stoore of wealth and no wit at
all: for ignorance and self love are proper to those that do know nothing,
and yet do think that they know all things and do hold their ignorance for
wisdom: for self conceit is it that makes opinion obstinate.

Hippias most arrogantly gloryed of himself that through the sharpnes of his
wit, and the quicknes of his capacity he could understand any thing, but a man
ought not to speak of himself neither in praise nor dispraise for the one is
a deed of arrogance, and the other of folly.

The inconstant Opinion of the vulgar. Chap XXIIII.
AS the sea, which of it own nature is calm and quiet, yet by the wind it is
raised up into huge billows, so the vulgar people, though of themselves
seeming never so tractable, yet by the breath of opinion, they are presently
stirred up into violent tempests, and therefore they that have in them more
foolish boldness, then advised counsel shall work them to any thing.

As popular love is light, so their opinions are as variable, and therefore
Diogenes seeing the people to throng out at a Church door, pressed as fast
against them to get in, and being asked what he meant, answered, That it was the
part of wise men, to be still oposite to the multitude.

Where the small spark of understanding (which is usually the portion of the
vulgar) is dimmed and obscured with the misty cloud of foolish opinion, what
is to be hoped for in the shallow ignorance of so wavering and vnstedy a
multitude, which can but judge of matters, with a sensitive apprehe^sion

There is no contending against them, amongst whom opinion is of such force, as
Reason is of no force against them.

How uncertain then is that worldly honor that hangs on the brittle balance
of the wavering Opinion of the common people.

Take an example, see what mutabilitie, to day Caesar renouned in the senate:
accounted a pater patriae, the father and defender of his country, no small
time Emperor, beloved by Brutus, saluted by Cicero, now Caesar a Tyrant,
slain by the Senate, Hostis patriae, bereft of his Dyademe, no pater, but
predator, gored by his friends with their own knives, detected and infamed by
the unkind Brutus, exclaimed and rayled on by the declaiminge Cicero; see here
the mutabilitie of opinion in the vulgar.

Of Particular Opinion how it infecteth Fools. Chap XXV.
I Call it a particular opinion, where men will assume to them selves
precedence, some for their wealth that are little troubled with wit some for
their authority, which have neither knowledge nor understanding; and some for
their descent because they can show their ancestors arms, and all these but
blind opinions, that has no regard at all to virtue.

Now first for him that is in such pride of his pelf, whose wit does consist
but in his Prognostication to calculate from thence, what time of the Moon
does serve best to set Beans, or in which of the twelve signs it is good to
geld Horse-Coltes, I can but pronounce him with Socrates to be an immortal
beast: and Aristotle says that the reasonable soul, partaking of the same
general nature with Angels, is ashamed to behold her self placed in a body
which has but fellowship with beasts: there is yet one comfort left unto them
which Nature her self has provided, that as she brought them innoce^tes into
the world, at the time of their birth, so she takes them away again as arrant
fools as she brought them forth, at the hour of their death.

Now for him that should be placed in authority, wanting knowledge and
understanding how to use it, is like a garment in the hands of an ill Tailor
which is many times mardin the making, yet such a man may speak his opinion,
in despite of wisdom, and his words must carry credit and authorytie, for all
his strength and virtue does lie in his tongue and although he does sometimes
amaze the simple and ignorant people with his arrogating explications, yet
wisdom sees the poverty of his mind, and does pity that which the world
admires.

A man's wisdom is in nothing better tried then in speaking his opinion, and
therefore Socrates beholding a young man whom he had never seen before, willed
him to speak that he might know him, but it is Opinion in this age, that
makes many men speak too fast, and when some of them has spoken they know
not what themselves, they have gotten a text out of the holy scripture to
confirm it, Dixit insipiens.

There be some other that to win Opinion, will come out with a Scutchine,
vanting of their ancestors worthiness, that have of themselves neither quality
nor good condition, and some that have no Scutchins of their own to show, will
yet derive themselves from some worthy family, like the Mule, that being
demanded of his birth, being ashamed to say that he was the son of an Ass,
answered, that he was cosine get man to a Horse, or like the Bricklayers son,
who being asked what his father was, said he was a Ieweler, and when it was
demanded what Jewels he used to make, answered, that he used to set stones in
mortar.

The honor of ancestors, as they do ornifie nobility, so they disgrace the
beauty thereof, if they live not virtuously it is better therefore to be noble
by a man's own virtue, then by an opinion, but conceived of his ancestors
worthiness yet some are of opinion, that if they can but paint their halles and
glass windows with Arms and Scutchions, they be noble enough, without either
honesty or virtue of their own.

Let it not move thee when thou see some so high minded for the noble acts
of their grandfathers, or great grandfathers that have in themselves neither
honor nor honesty, nor have nothing to vant of, but the worthiness of their
ancestors, we have in these days variety of Scutchions, sundry sorts of
Arms, multiplicitie of dignities, and honorable titles, but true Nobility is
it that springs from virtue.

What Opinion the Antiquity held of Fame. Chap XXVI.
THere is nothing more generally hunted after the^ Fame, the desire of Fame, as
it is universal to all worldlinges that be great and mighty, so there is not
almost so mean a creature but he is ambitious of Fame: and how many have there
been, that seeking after Fame by a wrong tract thinking to make themselves
famous have hit upon infamy.

Herostratus, that consumed the Temple of Ephesus in one night by fire, that
had been a hundred years in buildinge he did it but to leave himself famed
to posterity.

And Lucius Pius (by a base practice) having obtained a drunken victory, and
returning to Rome craving triumph for his exploit, thinking thereby to make
himself famous, the Romans understanding the manner of his conquest, they
rewarded him with an infamous death.

And what is this Fame, that is so much in request, but the vain opinions of
men perhaps a little popular praise, and what madness in those that does haunt
after the opinions of a wavering and unsteady multitude that can judge of
nothing, but with a sensitive apprehension.

Honorable Fame cannot be attained unto, but by honorable actions, nor honor is
not to be sought after but by virtuous endeavors, for honor is the reward of
virtue, and it is virtue only that must open the gate before honor can enter:
the ancient Ro^anes builded two Temples joined together the one being dedicate
to virtue the other to honor, yet seated in such sort as no man could enter
that of Honor but he must first pass through that of virtue.

I think the Pope has made a new dedication of those Temples, as he has done
of that builded by Marcus Agrippa called Pantheon, and because he could not
bring virtue to turn Papist, he would therefore leave her, never a monument in
Rome.

How many have there been, that not able to leave behind them a good report,
by help of their own virtues, yet to leave themselves famed to posterity,
they have erected stately buildinges and houses of renown, which seemed with
their tops to carry up the earth above the heavens and with their foot to open
the botomles deepth unto which they have set up as marks of their glory, that
are indeed the miserable ensigns (alas other whiles) of a wicked misled life.

And some are of opinion, that for a penny dole to be given by their Heirs or
Executors after their death, it will suffice as well to make them famous to the
world, as for a Quietus est, and a clear discharge of all former extortions,
oppressions, and ungodly exactions whatsoever: and it is now an ordinary
matter, for those to leave a Memorandum to the world by erecting of glorious
Tombs, that were not able to leave behind them a good report merited by virtue.

Cornelius Tacitus writes that in former ages, the Images and statues of
Princes and great men, were so erected, that they might be seen naked,
signifying thereby that princes and magistrates should so lay themselves open,
that their justice and clemency might appear unto all men, to be immaculate,
without any cloaked or covered inward mischief, but after that Acilius
Glabrio, had hatched out this golden statuary, it was generally accustomed in
every country, and as Lactantius says, those golden and imbossed statues of
these latter times did only make manifest, the auaritious minds of men, that
were more possessed with riches then they were with virtues.

The vain Opinion of those that have hunted after Fame. Chap. XXVII.
THey have used in former ages, to erect Images of marble, or of other metal,
sometimes of gold, and to set them up in public places, as well for the honor
they bear to the persons, as for the encouragement of others, that with an
honest envy, they might also endeavor themselves to reach unto that glory.

But those that had their names thus consecrated to Immortality, they did not
erect their own monuments them selves, neither did they leave it in their wills
to their heirs or executors to perform, but it was done by a general consent,
for although virtue seldom seeks any other reward, then that content
wherewith she pays her self, yet these things were performed for the
encouragement of others.

We do read of Fabritius, how he refused the conquest that was offered unto
him by that traitor Timocliares, neither would Camillus receive the
schoole-maisters offer, though he might thereby have subdued his enemies.

These men disdained to win Fame by fraud or treachery, virtue was the mark
whereat they leuelled their actions.

The like is to be thought of Curtius and Sceuola, the one for casting himself
headlong into a devouring pyt, to deliver Rome from plague, the other burned of
his own hand to make the enemies know, that the Romans were resolute in
defense of their liberties.

But how many examples might be inferred out of ancient hystories, of many
worthy persons, who dispising riches and all worldly honors, in all their
endeavors have been guided by virtue: I might speak here of the holiness of
Phocion, the poverty of Fabritius, the courage of Camillus, the justice of
Brutus, the chastity of Pithagoras, the temperance of Socrates, the constancy
of Cato, with many others that despised money, esteemed nothing of worldly
honors, nor were nothing moved with Glory, praise or fame.

They sought for the true effects of virtue, little caring for the foolish
esteem of men's Opinions, thus happy were many of them in former ages, to
despise the vain reputes of the world for virtues sake.

Those on the other side, that are so far in love with Fame they do but
manifest their foolish Opinions, for they do not respect the preciousnesse of
virtue, so much as the desire of a popular praise.

Nero took not so great pains for the atteyning of any thing, as he did to
get himself famed, to be an excellent singer, and he that denied him that
glory, he would deny to let him live in any long security of life.

Cicero in a long letter earnestly requested Luceius to gratify him in three
things: the first, that he would set down seperately from his other stories:
The conspiracy of Catelyne, thereby to give immortal Fame to his name: the
second, that he would add something in respect of the friendship which was
between them, the third that he would publish his book with all speed
possible, that whilst he were yet living* he might taste of the sweetness of
his own glory.

Augustus in like manner, joined to his last will and testament his own acts,
appointing that they should be engraven upon his Tomb, in pillars of brass.

Tryne a common Curtizan, tickled with this desire of Fame, at such time as
Alexander had razed the walls of Thebes, proffered the Thebans to repair
them at her own charges, if (to her everlasting Fame) they would but permit
these words to be engraven on the wall: Alexander razed it, and Tryne raised it.

Here is now the difference between the lovers of Fame, and the lovers of
virtue, the one seeks for commendations but withal he loves to hear it
himself, the other thinks of nothing but meditates to himself of the
sweetness of Virtue: no wonder then, though there be a great difference in
their endeavors that imployeth them but to win a vulgar Opinion, from theirs
again that endeavors for virtue.

That Fame and Renown are but popular Opinions. Chap XXVIII.
LEt us speak now of Fame and Renown, and let honor go with them together
for company, and what are all these, but the vain opinions of men, yet any of
these obtained by virtue is called glorious, but Glory is a Crocodile, that
flies those that follows it and follows them that flies from it: and
glorious Fame is obtained by wise men, by the grace of God, but not by Fools
by their own endeavors.

He that endeavors himself in virtuous exercises without any other respect,
then in the sweetness he conceiueth in the virtue it self, Fame follows him,
but he that endeavors in any virtue (seming never so worthy) with an intent to
be praised by men, he may perhaps win a popular praise, but glorious Fame
flies him.

Valiance is called a virtue that fights for equity and right, but he that
fights without consideration of the justice of his cause, may be said to be
foolish hardy or accounted to be desperately aduenturous, but not valiant.

Aristotle would in no wise admit that Diomedes should be accounted either
valiant or wise for that when the Greeks were put to flight, he remained
alone, and adventured himself against the force of Hector, which he did rather
to win a vain praise of the people then for the right of his cause, wherein
consisted the true end of virtue.

The like he judged of Hector himself, who many times behouldinge his wife and
other women upon the walls of Troy, would more bouldly and courageously
adventure himself, rather fearing some bruit those women might have raised
sounding to his dishonor, then other wise he did respect the justice of his
cause or the general good of the City so distressed by the Greeks.

See here a heathen Philosopher, that would not admit those adventures, to be
so much as reputed wise which in a vulgar opinion would have been consecrated
to immortal Fame.

Our savior Christ himself condemned the Pharisees, that used to give forth
their Alms, with the sound of Trumpetes and to make their prayers in the open
streets thereby to be seen and praised by men, and although to give Alms, and
to pray be the works commanded by God, yet to be done with such ostentation
to the world they merit no reward.

Virtue is the high way then that leads unto Fame, and he that hunteth after
Glory not being directed by virtue, is too vain glorious, but let us praise
virtue how we list, and let us write whole volumes in her commendations, yet if
the sovereignty of virtue does extend no further then to transitory things
here upon the earth, there is not any thing so wretched and miserable as man.

Of the number of follies in this age whereby to win Opinion. Chap XXIX.
AS those that do hunt after Fame, do think to leave themselves eternized, by
their own endeavors, so if I would now under take to speak of them that in
this age, does hunt after the vanity of opinion, I might speak of so many base
qualities, as their foolish devises could not be comprehended by art, neither
yet contained within the acount of number.

How many silken slaves that can creep, crouch, lie, faune, flatter, and all
to get a favor, that can watch, write, dissemble and conspire, whereby to
win opinion.

Some will seek to scrape out opinion with their court complements, by
ducking, by diuinge, by kissing of their hands and furnished perhaps with a
French or an Italian phrase they will prostitute their service to a Dog to
win opinion

Some will seek to woo opinion, with praises and commendations, extolling
those for wit and wisdom, that are so near a kin to the Fool, that they
cannot marry without a license from the Pope.

Some do think to creep into the very guts of opinion, be discoursing at a
table, where they have a reason to show for every unreasonable passion.

Some desirous to win an opinion, to be accounted merry companions, will
ornifie themselves with so many dunghill demeanures, that a man would think
Nature had brought them into the world for a spite and mockery.

Some do seek opinion by breaking of bitter iestes, and these have commonly a
special gift in lying and slandering.

Some will frame their gesture to agree with their words as the dauncer does to
the sound of the instrument, in their very behavior it is easy to be seen
how they do labor to win opinion.

Some to get the opinion, of gravity, do many times incur the suspicion of
folly.

Some to win opinion, will go to Church, with a Bible brought after them,
but look into the manner of their life, by the fruits you shall know the tree.

But I wonder of what Opinion they be that will neither omit a Sermon, nor let
slip a new fashion.

Some to win opinion, does every day suit themselves in new fangled fashions,
like Proteus the god of shapes; and whilst the poor soul is pend up in a
straight Cell, our foolish cogitations are still wandering throughout the world
to seek out new fashions.

Some by wearing a long lock that hangs dangling by his ear, do think by that
louzie commodity to be well esteemed by the opinion of Fools, for although
there be some wisemen that will tolerate in the matter, yet I never knew
wisemen that would follow the fashion,

Some will so curle their hair, pick their brows and will so metamorphife
themselves as well in their atire as in their demeanures, that they rather make
show to be demy-harlots, then men.

Some have sought to shake Opinion out of a Sinque pace, but now their legs
are so over pestered with Garters and Roses, that they are fit for nothing
unless for a Moris dance.

These and such other like may perhaps beget an opinion, and what opinion is
it, but a base opinion, and it is commonly conceived, but by the basest sort
of people.

I had almost forgotten to speak of women, yet they are sometimes conceited
in their opinions as well as men, but to speak truly of those women that be
modest, they do laugh at the foolish opinions of men.

Nature has not ordained all women to be wise, there must be some vain, if it
be but to fit the follies of men, and it is a received Opinion amongst those
women of entertainment, that she that learneth fastest to forget shame is
houlden to be most excellent in fashion.

By this it may appear, that the edge of industry is so abated by the force of
pleasure both in men and women, that they rather studdy to win opinion then
to practice virtue, I will not say how often we be deceived in our opinions,
taking that for virtue that is indeed but vice, but an especial mean whereby
to draw on a virtuous opinion does rather consist in him that does live well
then in him that can talk well; rather in doing of things worthy to be spoken
of, then in speaking of things worthy to be done.

From whence it is that men are so easily drawn into Opinion. Chap. XXX.
REason is a true sense and judgment of things both human and divine, and
as Seneca says it is an excellent power and faculty of understanding and
judgment, which is the perfection of the soul, even as the soul is of man.

Now whosoever is obedient unto Reason, he is Lord over his own lusts, he
commands his own appetites and rebellious Affections, he may with this
thryd pass with Theseus through the Laberinth of his contagious senses, and to
conclude, he is resolute in all good purposes, he is not easily drawn into
Opinion: now opinion is it that still fights against Reason, for Opinion
having his offspring from the body (which is but earth) does yet represent unto
the soul the shapes and forms of things, through the windows of the senses,
whereby she associateth the soul with those things, that does deprive her of
her dignity: and thus opinion being linked and coupled to our gross
Affections, has her seat only in the senses, becomes vain, uncertain,
deceitful, evil in counsel, base in judgment, it depryueth the mind of
constancy and verity, allowing that to day which it misliketh of to morrow,
it has no respect to sound judgment, but to please the body and to content
the senses.

It is therefore the wakefull eye of Reason, that must continually keep
Centinell over our passions, that we be not luld asleep in our own self
conceits, and our judgments dazeled and made drunk with our foolish Opinions.

What it is that only bridleth Opinion. Chap. XXXI.
KNowledge is it that still fenceth the body from al foolish and erroneous
Opinions, and it is celestial wisdom, that is able truly to discern of
opinion.

And as a man that is blind folded, and should be appointed to remove himself
to a certain place, is liker to fail then to perform his purpose, so those
virtues that be potentially engendered in our minds, if they be not aided with
instruction, does often come to naught, because the mind is not satisfied with
nature alone but has need of a politic usage of Reason, which may cleanse
and scour the soul by taking away the dim veil of opinion, from whence
arises all the errors in men, for in case good and evil were well known, and
perceived, every man would choose the good and leave the ill, and therefore may
virtue be said to be a wisdom and an understanding to choose the good, and
vice again a lack of foresight and an ignorance that leads to judge
falsely, because men never choose the ill with Opinion that it is ill, but they
are deceived through a certain likeness of some thing that is good: the Art
therefore that teaches to discern the truth from falsehood may well be
attained unto, and the virtue by which we choose this good indeed, may be called
true knowledge, which cannot be overcome by any affection that proceeds from
the body, especially where the mind is well governed and ruled by Reason, for
such force Reason has, that she makes the senses ever ready to obey, so that
although our sinews, our bones, and our gross compacted flesh, have no Reason
in them at all, yet when there springs in us the motion of mind, that the
imagination pricketh forward, and shakes the bridle to the spirits, all the
members are in a readynes, the feet to run, the hands to undertake, and the
whole body to do and endeavor any thing that the mind thinks upon.

It is requisite therefore that knowledge should evermore march in the foremost
rank, for although Appetite may sometimes have a longing after things that
be good, yet being blind of her self, she cannot make election of the good
from the bad therefore has Nature so ordained* that to every virtue of
knowledge, there is annexed a virtue of longing, and the soul has three
manner of means where by she may learn to know, as namely first by Sense,
again by Reason, and lastly by understanding: of Sense there arises Appetite
or longing, and this is no less common to bruite-beastes then to men: of
Reason arises Election or choice, which is proper to man only: of
understanding (by the which man may be a partner with Angels) arises Will: and
therefore whatsoever is not undertaken with knowledge, by the choice of Reason,
is accomplished by false opinion by the longing of the Senses: and then is
reason in her most especial perfection, when she beholds some purposed end
whereunto she leuelleth and directs her actions.

Knowledge as I would define it, is understanding tempered with reason, neither
vaunting it self for any action of our own, nor of any others that we love,
or belong unto us: and knowledge is it that does refine us from the dregs and
filth of the common people, it serves as a Ladder to climb to Honor and
dignity, it calls us from earthly vanities, to things celestial and divine:
knowledge gives us new eyes to spy into the demeanures of flattering
Parasites, that we cannot be easily deceived in our Opinions: and knowledge
does so unmask any man's eyes to see into himself, that Opinion can never make
him blind.

It is not Opinion that knowledge does hold but judgment, that labors every
thing with discretion and wisdom, what ryseth from the senses, are
affections, what affection thinks is opinion, but knowledge determines
rightly of every thing.

Make much of this wisdom, take her in thine arms and embrace her, set
foolish opinion aside, for they are but foolish wise men that are over reached
with it.

Opinion Diefied. Chap. XXXII.
BY this that has been said, may be perceived the Potency of Opinion, we
see Christian kings, Princes and Potentates, they are in nothing more over
swayed, then they are by Opinion; the Pope and all his Clergy, are but the
vowed votaries of opinion: the great Emperor of the east that ornifieth
himself with so many high titles, what is he but the very slave of opinion.

Old men, young men, wise men, learned men, they are all led and ruled by
opinion.

What were those great Philosophers, but Favorites to opinion.

Nay look into Philosophy it self, and what is it but Opinion.

What traps, what traynes, what labor, what pains, and but to catch opinion.

We spend our time, we spend our wit, we spend our wealth, we spend poor
soul and all, and but to win opinion.

What was it, but to win the Opinion of the multitude, that Pilate delivered
Christ to be crucified, who by his own confession, found no just cause in him
that was worthy of death.

Thus we see, there has been no time, no age, no place nor person, but
opinion has reigned, ruled, and swayed.

Opinion has thus reuelled from the beginning of the world and it will so
continue so long as there is a world: Let it suffice that all worldly happiness
has his being only by opinion. Finding then opinion to be thus regal, thus
mighty, and magnificent, as Christofer Marcellus (in the Counsel of Laterane)
said to the Pope Tu es alter Deus, so say I to opinion, Thou art an other God
here upon Earth.

FINIS.

