THE True Tragedy of Richard the third: Wherein is shown the death of Edward
the fourth, with the smothering of the two young Princes in the Tower: With a
lamentable end of Shores wife, an example for all wicked women.

And lastly, the conjunction and joining of the two noble Houses, Lancaster and
York.

As it was played by the Queens Majesty's Players.

printer's device: McKerrow 299, "Framed device of Truth being scourged by a
hand from the clouds. Between her feet the initials T.C. The motto Viressit
vulnere veritas." VIRESSIT VULNERE VERITAS T C



LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, and are to be sold by William Barley, at his
shop in Newgate Market, near Christ Church door. 1594.

THE TRVE TRAGEDY OF RICHARD THE THIRD.
Enters Truth and Poetry. To them the Ghoast of George Duke of Clarence.
Ghost. CResse cruor sanguinis, satietur sanguine cresse,
Quodspero scitio. O scitio, scitio, vendicta.

Exit. Poetry. Truth well met.


Truth. Thanks Poetry, what makes thou upon a stage?


Poet. Shadows.


Truth. Then will I add bodies to the shadows,
Therefore depart and give Truth leave
To show her pageant.

Poe. Why will Truth be a Player?


Truth No, but Tragedia like for to present
A Tragedy in England done but late,
That will revive the hearts of drooping minds.

Poe. Whereof?


Truth. Marry thus.
Richard Plantagenet of the House of York,
Claiming the Crown by wars, not by dissent,
Had as the Chronicles make manifest,
In the two and twentieth year of Henry the sixth,
By act of Parliament intailed to him
The Crown and titles to that dignity,
And to his offspring lawfully begotten,
After the decease of that forenamed King,
Yet not contented for to stay the time,
Made wars upon King Henry then the sixth,
And by outrage suppressed that virtuous King,
And won the Crown of England to himself,
But since at Wakefield in a battle pitched,
Outrageous Richard breathed his latest breath,
Leaving behind three branches of that line,
Three sons: the first was Edward now the King,
George of Clarence, and Richard Glosters Duke,
Then Henry claiming after his decease
His style, his Crown and former dignity
Was quite suppressed, till this Edward the fourth.

Poe. But tell me truth, of Henry what ensued?


True. Imprisoned he, in the Tower of London lies,
By strict command, from Edward Englands King,
Since cruelly murdered, by Richard Glosters Duke.

Poe. Whose Ghoast was that did appear to us?


True. It was the ghost of George the duke of Clare^ce,
Who was attected in King Edwards reign,
Falsely of Treason to his royalty,
Imprisoned in the Tower was most unnaturally,
By his own brother, shame to parents stock,
By Glosters Duke drowned in a but of wine.

Poe. What shield was that he let fall?


True. A shield containing this, in full effect,
Blood sprinkled, springs: blood spilt, craves due revenge:
Whereupon he writes, Cresse cruor,
Sanguis satietur, sanguine cresse,
Quod spero scitio: O scitio scitio, vendicta.

Poe. What manner of man was this Richard Duke of Gloucester?


True. A man ill shaped, crooked backed, lame armed, withal,
Valiantly minded, but tyrannous in authority,
So during the minority of the young Prince,
He is made Lord Protector over the Realm.
Gentiles suppose that Edward now has reigned
Full two and twenty years, and now like to die,
Has summond all his Nobles to the Court,
To swear allegiance with the Duke his brother,
For truth unto his son the tender Prince,
Whose fathers soul is now near flight to God,
Leaving behind two sons of tender age,
Five daughters to comfort the hapless Queen,
All under the protection of the Duke of Gloucester:
Thus gentles, excuse the length by the matter,
And here begins* Truths Pageant, Poetry
Wend with me.

Exeunt. Enter Edward the fourth, Lord Hastings, Lord Marcus, and Elizabeth. To
them Richard. Hastings. Long live my sovereign, in all happiness.


Marcus. An honorable age with Cressus wealth,
Hourly attend the person of the King.

King. And welcome you Peers of England unto your King.


Have. For our unthankfulness the heavens has thrown thee down.


Mar. I fear for our ingratitude, our angry God does frown.


King. Why Nobles, he that lay me here,
Can raise me at his pleasure.
But my dear friends and kinsmen,
In what estate I now lie it is seen to you all,
And I feel my self near the dreadful stroke of death.
And the cause that I have requested you in friendly wise
To meet together is this,
That where malice and envy sowing sedition in the hearts of men
So would I have that admonished and friendly favors,
Overcome in the heart of yon Lord Marcus and Lord Hastings
Both, for how I have governed these two and twenty years,
I leave it to your discretions.
The malice has still been an enemy to you both,
That in my life time I could never get any lege of amity betwixt you,
Yet at my death let me entreat you to embrace each other,
That at my last departure you may send my soul
To the joys celestial:
For leaving behind me my young son,
Your lawful King after my decease,
May be by your wise and grave counsel so governed,
Which no doubt may bring comfort
To his famous realm of England.
But (what says Lord Marcus and Lord Hastings)
What not one word? nay then I see it will not be,
For they are resolute in their ambition.

Elizabeth. Ah yield Lord Hastings,
And submit your selves to each other:
And you Lord Marcus, submit your self,
See here the aged King my father,
How he sues for peace betwixt you both:
Consider Lord Marcus, you are son to my mother the Queen,
And therefore let me entreat you to mittigate your wrath,
And in friendly sort, embrace each other.

King. Nay cease thy speech Elizabeth,
It is but folly to speak to them,
For they are resolute in their ambitious minds,
Therefore Elizabeth, I feel my self at the last instant of death,
And now must die being thus tormented in mind.

Have. May it be that thou Lord Marcus,
That neither by entreaty of the Prince,
curtuous word of Elizabeth his daughter,
May withdraw thy ambition from me.


Marc. May it be that thou Lord Hastings,
Can not perceive the mark his grace aims at.

Have. No I am resolute, except thou submit.


Marc. If thou be resolute give up the vpshot,
And perhaps thy head may pay for the losses

King. Ah Gods, since at my death you jar,
What will you do to the yoon* Prince after my decease?
For shame I say, depart from my presence, and leave me to my self,
For these words strikes a second dying to my soul:
Ah my Lords, I thought I could have commanded
A greater thing then this at your hands,
But since I cannot, I take my leave of you both,
And so depart and trouble me no more.

Have. With shame and like your Majesty I submit therefore,
Craving humble pardon on my knees,
And would rather that my body shall be a pray to mine enemy,
Rather then I will offend my Lord at the hour
And instance of his death.

King. Ah thanks Lord Hastings.

Eliza. Ah yield Lord Marcus, since Lord Hastings
Is contentented to be united.

King. Ah yield Lord Marcus, thou art too obstinate.


Marc. My gracious Lord, I am content,
And humbly crave your graces pardon on my knee,
For my foul offense,
And see my Lord my breast opened to mine adversary,
That he may take revenge, then once it shall be said,
I will offend my gracious suffereigne.

King. Now let me see you friendly give one an other your hands.


Have. With a good will ant like your grace,
Therefore Lord Marcus take here my hand,
Which was once vowde and sworn to be thy death,
But now through intretie of my Prince,
I knit a league of amity for ever.

Mar. Well Lord Hastings, not in show but in deed,
Take thou here my hand, which was once vowed*
To a shiuered thy body in peecemeales,
That the fowls of the air should have fed
Their young withal,
But now upon aleageance to my Prince, I vow perfect love*
And live friendship for ever.

King. Now for confirming of it, here take your oaths.


Have. If I Lord Hastings falcifie my league of friendship
Vowde to Lord Marcus, I crave confusion.

Marcus. Like oath take I, and crave confusion.(...)


King. Confusion.
Now my Lords, for your young King, that lies now at Ludlo,
Attended with Earl Rivers, Lord Gray, his two uncles,
And the rest of the Queens kindred,
I hope you will be unto him as you have been to me,
His years are but young, thirteen at the most,
Unto whose government, I commit to my brother the Protector,
But to thee Elizabeth my daughter,
I leave thee in a world of trouble,
And commend me to thy mother, to all thy sisters,
And especially I give thee this in charge upon and at my death,
Be loyal to thy brother during his authority,
As thy self art virtuous, let thy prayers be modest,
Still be bountiful in devotion.
And thus leaving thee with a kiss, I take my last farewell,
For I am so sleepie, that I must now make an end,
And here before you all, I commit my soul to almighty God,
My savior, and sweet redeemer, my body to the earth,
My Scepter and Crown to the young Prince my son:
And now Nobles, draw the Curtains and depart.
He that made me save me,
Unto whose hands I commit my spirit.

The King dies in his bed. Enter Shores wife, and Hursly her maid. Shorse. O
Fortune, wherefore were thou called Fortune?
But that thou art fortunate?
Those whom thou fauourest be famous,
Meriting mere mercy,
And fraught with mirrors of magnanimity,
And Fortune I would thou had never favored me.

Hurs. Why mistress, if you exclaim against Fortune,
You condemn your self*
For who has advanced you but Fortune?

Shorse. I as she has advanced me,
So may she throw me down:
But Hursly, do not hear the King is sick?

Hurs. Yes mistress, but never heard that every sick man died.

Shore. Ah Hursly, my mind presageth
Some great mishaps unto me,
For last time I saw the King, me thought
Ghastly death approached in his face,
For thou know this Hursly, I have been good to all,
And still ready to prefer my friends,
To what preferment I could,
For what was it his grace would deny Shores wife?
Of any thing, yea were it half his revenues,
I know his grace would not see me want,
And if his grace should die,
As heavens forfend it should be so,
I have left me nothing now to comfort me withal,
And then those that are my foes will triumph at my fall,
But if the King escape, as I hope he will,
Then will I feather my neast,
That blow the stormy winter never so cold,
I will be thoroughly provided for one:
But here comes Lodwicke, servant to Lord Hastings,
How now Lodwicke, what news?

Enters Lodwicke. Lod. Mistress Shore, my Lord would request you
To come and speak with him.

Shore. I will Lodwicke.
But tell me what news, is the King recovered?

Lod. I mistress Shore, he has recovered
That he long looked for.

Shore. Lodwicke, how long is it since
He began to mend?

Lod. Even when the greatest of his torments had left him.


Shore. But are the nobles agreed to the contentment of the Prince?


Lod. The Nobles and Peers are agreed as the King would wish them.


Shorse. Lodwicke thou reuiuest me.


Lod. I but few thought that the agreement and his life would have ended
together.


Shore. Why Lodwicke is he dead.


Lod. In brief mistress Shore, he has changed his life.


Shorse. His life, ah me unhappy woman,
Now is misery at hand,
Now will my foes triumph at this my fall,
Those whom I have done most good, will now forsake me.
Ah Hursly, when I enterteined thee first,
I was far from change, so was I Lodwicke,
When I restored thee thy lands.
Ah sweet Edward, farewell my gracious Lord and sovereign,
For now shall Shores wife be a mirror and looking glass,
To all her enemies.
Thus shall I find Lodwicke, and have cause to say,
That all men are unconstant.

Lod. Why mistress Shore, for the loss of one friend,
Will you abandon the rest that wish you well?

Shore. Ah Lodwicke I must, for when the tree decaies
Whose fruitful branch have flourished many a year,
Then farewell those joyful days and osspring of my heart,
But say Lodwicke, who has the King made Protector
During the innormitie of the young Prince.

Lod. He has made his brother Duke of Gloucester Protector.


Shore. Ah me, then comes my ruin and decaie,
For he could never abide me to the death,
No he always hated me whom his brother loved so well,
Thus must I lament and say, all the world is unconstant.

Lod. But mistress Shore, comfort your self,
And think well of my Lord,
Who has always been a helper unto you.

Shorse. Indeed Lodwicke to condemn his honor I cannot,
For he has always been my good Lord,
For as the world is fickle, so changes the minds of men.

Lod. Why mistress Shore, rather then want should oppress
You, that little land which you begged for me of the King,
Shall be at your dispose.

Shorse. Thanks good Lodwicke.


Enters a Citizen, and Morton a serving man. Citi. O master Morton, you are
very welcome met,
I hope you think on me for my money.

Mor. I pray sir bear with me, and you shall have it,
With thanks too.

Citi. Nay, I pray sir let me have my money,
For I have had thanks and too much more then I looked for.

Mor. In faith sir you shall have it,
But you must bear with me a little,
But sir, I marvel how you can be so greedy for your money,
When you see sir, we are so uncertain of our own.

Citi. How so uncertain of mine own?
Why do thou know any body will come to rob me?

Mor. Why no.


Citi. Will thou come in the night and cut my throat?


Mor. No.


Citi. Will thou and the rest of thy companions,
Come and set my house on fire?

Mor. Why no, I tell thee.


Citi. Why how should I then be uncertain of mine own?


Mor. Why sir, by reason the King is dead.


Citi. O sir! is the King dead?
I hope he has given you no quittance for my debt.

Mor. No sir, but I pray stay a while, and you shall have it
As Soon as I can.

Citi. Well I must be content, where nothing is to be had,
The King loses his right they say,
But who is this?

Mor. Marry sir it is mistress Shore,
To whom I am more beholding too for my service,
Then the dearest friend that ever I had.

Citi. And I for my sons pardon.


Mor. Now mistress Shore, how fare you?


Shore. Well Morton, but not so well as thou have known me,
For I think I shall be driven to try my friends one day.

Mor. God forfend mistress Shore,
And happy be that Sun shall shine upon thee,
For preserving the life of my son.

Shore. Gramercies good father,
But how does thy son, is he well?

Citi. The better that thou lives, does he.


Shore. Thanks father, I am glad of it,
But come master Lodwicke shall we go?
And you Morton, you will bear us company.

Lod. I mistress Shore,
For my Lord thinks long for our coming.

Exit omnes. Citi. There there, huffer, but by your leave,
The Kings death is a maime to her credit,
But they say, there is my Lord Hastings in the Court,
He is as good as the Ase of hearts at maw,
Well even as they brew, so let them bake for me:
But I must about the streets, to see and I can meet
With such cold customers as they I met withal even now,
Mass if I meet with no better,
I am like to keep a bad hoshold of it.

Exit. Enters Richard, sir William Casbe, Page of his chamber, and his train.
Rich. My friends depart,
The hour commands your absence.
Leave me, and every man look to his charge.

Exit train. Casbie. Renowned and right worthy Protector,
Whose excelency far deserves the name of king then protector,
Sir William Casbie wishes my Lord,
That your grace may so govern the young Prince,
That the Crown of England may flourish in all happiness.

Rich. Ah young Prince, and why not I? Exit Casbie.
Or who shall inherit Plantagines but his son?
And who the King deceased, but the brother?
Shall law bridle nature, or authority hinder inheritance?
No, I say no: Principality brooks no equality,
Much less superiority,
And the title of a King, is next under the degree of a God,
For if he be worthy to be called valiant,
That in his life winnes honor, and by his sword winnes riches,
Why now I with renown of a soldier, which is never sold but
By weight, nor changed but by loss of life,
I reapt not the gain but the glory, and since it becomes
A son to maintain the honor of his deceased father,
Why should not I hazard his dignity by my brothers sons?
To be baser then* (...) I disdain,
And to be more then Protector, the law deny,
Why my father got the Crown, my brother won the Crown,
And I will wear the Crown,
Or i will make them hop without their crowns that denies me:
Have I removed such logs out of my sight, as my brother Clare^ce
And king Henry the sixth, to suffer a child to shadow me,
Nay more, my nephew to disinherit me,
Yet most of all, to be released from the yoke of my brother
As I term it, to become subject to his son,
No death nor hell shall not withhold me, but as I rule I will reign,
And so reign that the proudest enemy shall not abide
The sharpest shoure. Why what are the babes but a puff of
Gun-pouder? a mark for the soldiers, food for fishes,
Or lining for beds, devices enough to make them away,
Wherein I am resolute, and determining, needs no counsel,
Ho, whose within?

Enters Page and Perciuall. Perc. May it please your Majesty.


Richard. Ha villain, Majesty.


Per. I speak but upon that which shall be my good Lord.


Rich. But what is he with thee?


Page. A Messenger with a letter from the right honourale
The Duke of Buckingham.

Exit Page. Rich. Sir give place.
Ah how this title of Majesty, animates me to my purpose,
Rise man, regard no fall, happily this letter brings good luck,
May it be, or is it possible,
Does Fortune so much favor my happiness*
That I no sooner devise, but she sets abroach?
Or does she but to try me, that raising me aloft,
My fall may be the greater, well laugh on sweet change,
Be as be may, I will never fear colors nor regard ruth,
Valor brings fame, and fame conqueres death.
Perciuall.

Per. My Lord.


Rich. For so thy letter declares thy name,
Thy trust to thy Lord, is a sufficient warrant
That I utter my mind fully unto thee,
And seeing thy Lord and I have been long foes,
And have found now so fit opportunity to join league,
To alaie the proud enemy, tell him thus as a friend,
I do accept of his grace, and will be as ready to put in practice
To the uttermost of my power, what ere he shall be to devise,
But whereas he has writ that the removing of the young
Prince from the Queens friends might do well,
Tell him thus, it is the only way to our purpose,
For he shall shortly come up to London to his Coronation,
At which instant, we will be both present,
And where by the help of thy Lord, I will so play my part,
That i will be more then I am, and not much less then I look for
No nor a hair breadth from that I am,
Aiudge thou what it is Perciual.

Perc. God send it my Lord, but my Lord willed me to satisfy you, and to tell
you by word of mouth that he has in readiness a brave company of men.


Rich. What power has he?


Per. A brave band of his own.


Rich. What number?


Per. My Lord, to the number of five hundredth footmen. And horsemen ayders unto
him, is my Lord Chamberlain, and my Lord Hastings.


Rich. Sounes, dares he trust the Lord Hastings.


Per. I my Lord as his own life, he is secret I warrant you.


Rich. Well Perciuall, this matter is weighty and must not be slipped, therefore
return this answer to thy Lord, that to morrow I will meet him, for to day I
cannot, for now the funeral is past I must set a screene before the fire for
fear of suspicion: again, I am now to strengthen my self by the controversy
that is betwixt the kindred of the King deceast, and the Queen that's living,
the young Prince is yet in hucsters handling, and they not thoroughly friends,
now must I so work, that that water that drives the mill may drown it. I
climb Perciuall, I regard more the glory then the gain, for the very name of
a King redouble a man's life with fame, when death has done his worst, and so
commend me to thy Lord, and take thou this for thy pains.


Per. I thank your grace, I humbly take my leave.


Exit Perciual. Rich. Why so, now Fortune make me a King, Fortune give me a
kingdom, let the world report the Duke of Gloucester was a King, therefore
Fortune make me King, if I be but King for a year, nay but half a year, nay
a month, a week, three days, one day, or half a day, nay an hour, swounes
half an hour, nay sweet Fortune, clap but the Crown on my head, that the
vassals may but once say, God save King Richards life, it is enough. Sirrah,
who is there?


Enters Page. Page. My Lord.


Rich. What hear thou about the Court?


Page Joy my Lord of your Protectorship for the most part,
Some murmr, but my Lord they be of the baser sort.

Rich. A mighty arm will sway the baser sort, authority does terrify.
But what other news hear thou?

Page This my Lord, they say the young king is coming up to his coronation,
attended on by his two uncles, Earl Rivers and Lord Gray, and the rest of the
Queens kindred.


Rich. A parlous bone to ground upon, and a rush stiffly knit, which if I could
find a knot, I would give one half to the dogs and set fire on the other.


Page It is reported my Lord, but I know not whether it be true or no, that the
Duke of Buckingham is up in the Marches of Wales with a band of men, and as
they say, he aims at the Crown.


Rich. Tush a shadow without a substance, and a fear without a cause: but yet
if my neighbors house be on fire, let me seek to save mine own, in trust is
treason, time slippth, it is ill jesting with edge tools, or dallying with
Princes matters, I Will strike whillst the iron is hot, and I Will trust never a
Duke of Buckingham, no never a Duke in the world, further then I see him. And
sirrah, so follow me.


Exit Richard. Page I see my Lord is fully resolved to climb, but how he
climbes i will leave that to your judgments, but what his fall will be that's hard
to say: But I marvel that the Duke of Buckingham and he are now become such
great friends, who had wont to love one another so well as the spider does the
fly: but this I have noted, since he has had the charge of Protector, how
many noble men has fled the realm, first the Lord Marcus son to the Queen,
the Earl of Westmorland and Northumberland, are secretly fled: how this gear
will cotton I know not. But what do I meddling in such matters, that should
meddle with the untying of my Lords points, faith do even as a great many do
beside, meddle with Princes matters so long, til they prove themselves beggars
in the end. Therefore I for fear I should be taken nipping with any words, I Will
set a lock on my lips, for fear my tongue grow too wide for my mouth.


Exit Page. Enter the young Prince, his brother, Duke of York, Earl Rivers,
Lord Gray, sir Hapce, sir Thomas Vaughan. Kng. Right loving uncles, and the
rest of this company, my mother has written, and thinks it convenient that we
dismiss our train, for fear the town of Northampton is not able to receive
us: and again my uncle of Gloucester may rather think we come of malice against
him and his blood: therefore my Lords, let me here your opinions, for my words
and her letters are all one: and besides I my self give consent.


Rivers. Then thus may it please your grace, I will show my opinion. First
note the two houses of Lancaster and York, the league of friendship is yet but
green betwixt them, and little cause of variance may cause it break, and
thereby I think it not requisite to discharge the company because of this. The
Duke of Buckingham is up in the Marches of Wales with a great power, and with
him is joined the Protector, for what cause I know not, therefore my Lords, I
have spoken my mind boldly, but do as your honors shall think good.


Vaugh. Why my Lord Rivers, wherefore is he Protector but for the Kings safety?


Riu. I sir Thomas Vaughan, and therefore a traitor, because he is Protector.


Gray. We have the Prince in charge, therefore we need not care.


Riu. We have the Prince, but they the authority.


Gray. Why take you not the Duke of Buckingham for the Kings friend?


Riu. Yes, and yet we may misdoubt the Duke of Gloucester as a foe.


Gray. Why then my Lord Rivers, I think it is convenient that we leave you
here behind us at Northamton, for conference with them, and if you hear their
pretense be good toward the King, you may in Gods name make return and come
with them, but if not, leave them and come to us with speed. For my sister the
Queen has willed that we should dismiss our company, and the King himself
has agreed to it, therefore we must needs obey.


Rivers. If it please your grace I am content, and humbly take my leave of you
all.


Exit. King. Farewell good uncle, ah gods, if I do live my fathers years as
God forbid but I may, I will so root out this malice and envy sown among the
nobility, that I will make them weary that were the first beginners of these
mischiefs.


Gray. Worthily well spoken of your princely Majesty,
Which no doubt shows a king-like resolution.

Vaughon. A toward young Prince, and no doubt forward to all virtue, whose
reign God long prosper among us.


King. But come uncle, let us forward of our iourny toward London.


Rivers. We will attend upon your Majesty.


Exit omnes. Enters an old Inne-keeper, and Richards Page. Page. Come on mine
Oste, what do thou understand my tale or no?


Oste. I faith my guest you have amazed me already, and to hear it again, it
will mad me altogether, but because I may think upon it the better, I pray you
let me hear it once more.


Page. Why then thus, I serve the right honorable the Lord Protector.


Oste. I, I know that too well.


Page Then this is his graces pleasure, that this night he will be lodged in
thy house, thy fare must be sumptuous, thy lodgings cleanly, his men used
friendly and with great courtesy, and that he may have his lodging prepared as
near Lord River (...) ^sible may be


Oste. Why sir if this be all, this is done already.


Page. Nay more.


Ost. Nay sir, and you love me no more, here is too much already.


Page. Nay, my Lords graces pleasure is further, that when all thy guess have
taken their chambers, that thou convey into my Lords hands the keys of every
several chamber, and what my Lords pleasure is further, thou shall know in the
morning.


Oste. How lock in my guess like prisoners, why do you hear my guess? me
thinks there should be little better then treason in these words you have
uttered.


Page. Treason villain, how dare thou have a thought of treason against my
Lord, therefore you were best be brief, and tell me whether you will do it or
no?


Oste. Alas what shall I do? who were I best to offend? shall I betraie that
good old Earl that has lain at my house this forty years? why and I do
he will hang me: nay then on the other side, if I should not do as my Lord
Protector commands, he will chop off my head, but is there no remedy?


Page. Come sir be brief, there is no remedy, therefore be brief and tell me
straight.


Oste. Why then sir here is my hand, tell my Lord Protector he shall have it, I
will do as he commands me, but even against my will, God is my witness.


Page. Why then farewell mine Oste.


ste. Farewell even the woorst guest that ever came to my house, A masters,
masters, what a troublesome vocation am I crept into, you think we that be
In-keepers get all the world, but I think I shall get a fair halter to my
neck, but I must go see all things done to my great grief.

Exit. Enters the mother Queen, and her daughter, and her son, to
sanctuary. Earl Rivers speaks out of his chamber. Ho mine Oste, Chamberlain
where is my key?
What pend up like a prisoner? But stay, I fear I am betrayed,
The sudden sight of Glosters Duke, does make me sore afraid:
I Will speak to him, and gently him salute,
Tho in my heart I envy much the man;
God morrow my Lord Protector to your grace,
And Duke of Buckingham God morrow too,
Thanks noble Dukes for our good cheer, and for your company.

Here enters Buckingham and Gloucester, and their train. Rich. Thou wretched
Earl, whose aged head imagins naught
but treachery,
Like Judas thou admitted wast to sup with us last night,
But heavens prevented thee our ils, and left thee in this plight:
Greeu'st thou that I the Gloucester Duke, should as Protector sway?
And were you he was left behind, to make us both away?
Will thou be ringleader to wrong, and must you guide the realm?
Nay over board al such mates I hurl, whilst I do guide the helm:
I Will weed you out by one and one, I Will burn you up like chafe,
I Will rend your stock up by the roots, that yet in triumphs laffe.

Riu. Alas good Dukes for ought I know, I never did offend,
Except unto my Prince vnloyall I have been,
Then show just cause, why you exclaim so rashly in this sort,
So falsely thus me to condemn, upon some false report:
But am I here as prisoner kept, imprisoned here by you?
Then know, I am as true to my Prince, as the proudest in thy crew.

Buc. A bravely spoken good old Earl, who tho his lims be number.
He has his tongue as much at use, as tho his years were young.

Ri. Spekest you the truth, how dare you speak, for justice to apeale?
When as thy packing with thy Prince, thy falsehood do reveal.
A Rivers blush, for shame to speak, like traitor as thou art.

Riu. A brayd you me as traitor to your grace:
No although a prisoner, I return defiance in thy face.
The Chronicles I record, talk of my fidelity, and of my progeny,
Where, as in a glass you may behold, thy ancestors and their treachery.
The wars in France, Irish co^flicts, and Scotland knows my trust,
When thou have kept thy skin vnscard, and let thine armor rust*
How thou unjustly here exclaim'st,
Yea far from love or kin,
Was this the oath which at our princes death,
With us thou did combine?
But time permits now, to tell thee all my mind:
For well it is known that but for fear, you never would have clind.
Let Commons now have it in hand, the matter is begun,
Of whom I fear the lesser sort, upon thy part will run.
My Lords, I cannot breath it out in words like to you: but this,
My honor I will set to sale, let any comman man come in,
And say Earl Rivers faith unto his Prince did quail,
Then will I lose my lands and life, but if none so can do,
Then thou Protector iniur'st me, and thy copartner too:
But since as Judges here you are, and taking no remorce,
Spare me not, let me have law, in justice do your worst.

Buc. My Lord, lay down a cooling card, this game is gone too far,
You have him fast, now cut him off, for fear of civil war.
Injurious Earl, I hardly brook, this portion thou have given,
Thus with my honor me to touch, but thy ruth shall begin.

Ri. But as thou art I leave thee here,
Unto the officers custody,
First bare him to Pomphret Castle,
Charge them to keep him secretly:
And as you hear from me so deal,
Let it be done immediately:
Take from our Garrison one whole band,
To guard him thither safely.

Riu. And send'st thou me to common Iayle?
Nay then I know thy mind:
God bless these young and tender babes,
That I do leave behind.
And God above protect them day and night,
Those are the marks thou aim'st at, to rid them from their right.
Farewell sweet England and my country men,
Earl Rivers leads the way:
Yet would my life might rid you from this thrall,
But for my stock and kindred to the Queen, I greatly fear the^ all.
And thus disloyal Duke farewell, when ever this is known,
The shame and infamy thereof, be sure will be thine own.

Exit. Rich. So now my Lord of Buckingham, let us hoyst up sail while the
wind serves, this hot beginning must have a quick dispatch, therefore I
charge and command straightly, that every high way be laid close, that none
may be suffered to carry this news before we our selves come, for if word
come before us, then is our pretense bewraid, and all we have done to no
effect. If any ask the cause why they may not pass, use my authority, and if
he resist shoot him through. Now my Lord of Buckingham, let us take post horse
to Stony Stratford, where happily i will say such grace to the Princes dinner,
that I will make the deuoutest of them forget what meat they eat and yet all
for the best I hope.


Exit. Enter the young Prince, Lord Gray, sir Thomas Vaughon, sir Richard Hapc
and their train. Hapc. Lord Gray, you do discomfort the King by reason of your
heaviness.


Gray. Alas sir Richard, how can I be merry when we have so great a charge of
his grace: and again this makes me to grieve the more, because we cannot hear
from Earl Rivers, which makes me think the Protector and he have been at some
words.


King. Why good uncle comfort your self, no doubt my uncle Earl Rivers is
well, and is coming no doubt with my uncle of Gloucester to meet us, else we
should have heard to the contrary. If any have cause to fear, it is my self,
therefore good uncle comfort your self and be not sad.


Gray. The sweet joyce of such a grape would comfort a man were he half dead,
and the sweet words of such a Prince would make men carlesse of mishaps, how
dangerous soever.


Hap. Lord Gray, we hear now by all likelihoods the Protector not to be far,
therefore we are to entertain him and the Duke of Buckingham with courtesy,
both for the Princes behalf and for our own.


Gray. Sir Richard Hapc, I shall hardly show the Protector or the Duke of
Buckingham any merry countenance, considering how hardly I have been used by
them both, but yet for love to my prince I will bridle my affection, but in good
time they come.


Enters Richard, Duke of Buckingham, and their train. Rich. Long live my
Princely Nephew in all happiness.


King. Thanks uncle of Gloucester for your courtesy, yet you have made have, for
we looked not for you as yet.


Rich. Therein I show my humble duty to your grace, whose life I wish to
redouble your deceased fathers days.


King. Thanks good uncle.


Buc. Long live my gracious Prince.


King. Thanks Buckingham, but uncle you will bear us company toward London?


Rich. For that cause we came.


Buc. Gentlemen on before keep your rooms, how now Lord Gray, do you iustle in
the presence of the King? This is more then needs.


Gray. My Lord, I scarce touched you, I hope it be no offense.


Rich. Sir no great offense, but inward envy will burst out, No Lord Gray, you
cannot hide your malice to us of the Kings blood.


King. Why good uncle let me know the cause of your sudden quarrel?


Rich. Marry thus noble Nephew, the old wound of envy, being rubbed by Lord
Grayes venomous rashness, is grown to such a venomous sore that it is
incurable, without remove of dead flesh.


Buc. Lord Gray, I do so much dislike thy abuse, that were it not in presence
of the Prince, I would bid thee combat: but thus and it shall like your grace,
I arest, and atache this Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Vaughon, and Richard Hapce, of
high treason to your grace. And that Lord Gray has conveyed money out of the
Tower to relieve our enemies the Scots, and now by currying favor with your
Majesty, he thinks it to be hid.


Rich. Only this I add, you govern the Prince without my authority, allowing
me no more then the bare name of Protector, which I will have in the dispight of
you, and therefore as your competitor Earl Rivers is already imprisoned, so
shall you be, till time afford the law to take place.


Gray. But whereas we are atacht as traitors to his grace, and govern him
without your authority, why we have authority from the mother Queen. And for
the delivery of the money to the Scots, it was done by a general consent of you
all, and that I have your hands to show for my discharge, therefore your arest
and atachment is not lawful: and yet as lawful as your quarrel is right.


Rich. Thy presumption condemns thee Lord Gray, thy arest is lawful.
Therefore see them speedily and secretly imprisoned, and after the coronation
they shall answer it by law, mean while, Officers look to your charge.


King. A Gods, and is it justice without my consent? Am I a King and bear no
authority? My loving kindred committed to prison as traitors in my presence,
and I stand to give aim at them. A Edward, would thou laist by thy fathers
side, or else he had lived till thou had bin better able to rule. If my near
kindred be committed to prison, what remains for me, a crown? A but how? so
beset with sorrows, that the care and grief will kill me ere I shall enjoy my
kingdom. Well since I cannot command, I will entreat Good uncle of Gloucester, for
all I can say little, but for my uncle Lord Gray, what need he be a thief or
convey money out of the Tower, when he has sufficient of his own? But good
uncle let me bail them all: If not, I will bail my uncle Lord Gray if I may.


Rich. Your grace undertakes you know not what, the matters are perilous,
especially against the Lord Gray.


King. What perilous matters, considering he is a friend to us?


Rich. He may be a friend to win favor, and so climb to promotion in respect
of his equals. His equals, nay his betters.


King. I know my uncle will conceal no treason, or dangerous seeresie from us.


Ric. Yes secrets that are too subtle for babes, Alas my Lord you are a
child, and they use you as a child: but they consult and conclude of such
matters, as were we not careful, would prove prejudicial to your Majesty's
person. Therefore let not your grace fear any thing by our determination, for
as my authority is only under your grace, so shall my loyalty deserve
hereafter the just recompense of a true subject, therefore I having charge from
my brother your father, and our late deceased king, during the minority of
your grace, I will use my authority as I see good.


King. Ay me unhappy king.


Gray. Nay let not your grace be dismayed for our imprisonment, but I would we
could warrant your grace from harm, and so we humbly take our leaves of your
grace, hoping that ere long we shall answer by law to the shame and disgrace of
you all.


Exit. Rich. Go, you shall answer it by law.


Kin. But come uncle shall we to Lon. to our untimely cronatio^?


Rich. What else and please your majesty, where by the way I will appoint
trusty Officers about you.


Buc. Sound Trumpet in this parley, God save the King.


Rich. Richard.


Enter the mother Queen, and her young son the Duke of York, and Elizabeth.
York. May it please your grace to show to your children the cause of your
heaviness, that we knowing it, may be copartners of your sorrows.


Q. Ay me poor husbandles queen, and you poor fatherless princes.


Eliz. Good mother expect the living, and forget the dead. What tho our father
be dead, yet behold his children, the image of himself.


Queen. Ay poor Princes, my mourning is for you and for your brother, who is
gone up to an untimely crownation.


Eliz. Why mother he is a Prince, and in hands of our two uncles, Earl
Rivers, and Lord Gray, who will no doubt be careful of his estate.


Queen. I know they will, but kings have mortal enemies, as well as friends
that esteem and regard them. A sweet children, when I am at rest my nightly
dreams are dreadful. Me thinks as I lie in my bed, I see the league broken
which was sworn at the death of your kingly father, it is this my children and
many other causes of like importance, that makes your aged mother to lament as
she does.


York. May it please your grace.


Queen. A my son, no more grace, for I am so sore disgraced, that without Gods
grace, I fall into despair with my self, but who is this?


Enter a Messenger. York. What art thou that with thy ghastly looks preaseth
into sanctuary, to affright our mother Queen.


Messen A sweet Princes, does my countenance bewray me? My news is doubtful
and heavy.


Eliz. Then utter it to us, that our mother may not hear it.


Queen. A yes my friend, speak what ere it be.


Mess. Then thus may it please your grace, The young prince coming up to his
coronation, attended on by his two uncles, Earl Rivers, and Lord Gray, and
the rest of your kindred, was by the Duke of Buckingham and the Protector, met
at stony Stratford, where on a sudden grew malice between the Duke of
Buckingham and the Lord Gray, but in the end, the Duke of Buckinghams malice
grew so great, that he arested and attached all those of your kindred of high
treason, whereupon the Protector being too rash in judgment, has committed
them all to Pomphret Castle.


Queen. Where I fear he will butcher them all, but where is the Prince my
son?


Messen. He remains at London in the Bishops palace, in the hands of the
Protector.


Queen. A traitors, will they lay hands on their Prince, and imprison his
Peers, which no doubt means well toward him: But tell me, art not thou
servant to the Archbishop of York?


Messen. Yes and it please your grace, for himself is here at hand with
Letters from the Council, and here he comes.


Enter Cardinal. Queen. But here my friend, grief had almost made me forget
thy reward.

A come my Lord, thou bring the heavy news, come shoot thine arrow, and
hit this heart that is almost dead with grief already.


Car. What ere my news be, have patience, the Duke of Gloucester greets your
grace.


Queen. Draw home my Lord, for now you hit the mark.


Car. The Prince your son does greet your grace.


Queen. A happy gale that blew that arrow by, A let me see the Letter that he
sent, perhaps it may prolong my life a while.


York. How does my brother, is he in health my Lord?


Card. In health sweet Prince, but longes to have thy company.


York. I am content, if my mother will let me go.


Card. Content or not, sweet Prince it must be so.


Queen. Hold, and have they persuaded thee my son to have thy brother too
away from me, nay first I will know what shall become of thee, before I send my
other son to them.


Card. Look on this Letter and advise your self, for thus the Council has
determined.


Queen. And have they chosen thee among the rest; for to persuade me to this
enterprise? No my Lord, and thus persuade your self, I will not send him to be
butchered.


Card. Your grace misdoubts the worst, they send for him only to have him
bedfellow to the King, and there to stay and keep him company. And if your
son miscary, then let his blood be laid unto my charge: I know their drifts
and what they do pretend, for they shall both this night sleep in the Tower,
and to morrow they shall come forth to his happy cronation. Upon my honor
this is the full effect, for see the ambusht nobles are at hand to take the
Prince away from you by force, if you will not by fair means let him go.


Queen. Why my Lord will you break Sanctuary, and bring in rebels to affright
us thus? No, you shall rather take away my life before you get my boy away from
me.


Card. Why Madame have you taken Sanctuary?


Queen. I my Lord, and high time too I trow.


Card. A heavy case when Princes fly for aid, where cutthroates, rebels, and
bankerouts should be. But Madame what answer do you return, if I could
persuade you, twere best to let him go.


Queen. But for I see you counsel for the best, I am content that you shall
have my son, in hope that you will send him safe to me, here I deliver him into
your hands.

Farewell my boy, commend me to thy brother.


York. Mother farewell, and farewell sister too, I will but see my brother and
return to you.


Queen. Tears stops my speech. Come let us in my Lord.


Exit. Car. I will attend upon your grace. Hold take the Prince, the Queen and
I have done, I Will take my leave, and after you i will come.


Exit Car. York. How now my friend, shall I go to my brother?


Cates. What else sweet Prince, and for that cause we are come, to bear you
company.


Exit omnes. Enter four watchmen. Enter Richards Page. Page Why thus by
keeping company, am I become like unto those with whom I keep company. As my
Lord hopes to wear the Crown, so I hope by that means to have preferment, but
in steed of the Crown, the blood of the headles light upon his head: he has
made but a wrong match, for blood is a threatner and will have revenge. He
makes havoc of all to bring his purpose to pass: all those of the Queens
kindred that were committed to Pomphret Castle, he has caused them to be
secretly put to death without judgment: the like was never seen in England. He
spares none whom he but mistrusteth to be a hinderer to his proceedings, he is
straight chopped up in prison The valiant Earl of Oxford being but mistrusted,
is kept close prisoner in Hames Castle. Again, how well Doctor Shaw has
pleased my Lord, that preached at Paul's Cross yesterday, that proved the two
Princes to be bastards, whereupon in the after noone came down my Lord Mayor
and the Aldermen to Baynards Castle, and offered my Lord the whole estate upon
him, and offered to make him King, which he refused so faintly, that if it had
been offered once more, I know he would have taken it, the Duke of Buckingham
is gone about it, and is now in the Guild Hall making his Oration. But here
comes my Lord.


Enter Richard and Catesby. Ric. Catesby content thee, I have warned the Lord
Hastings to this Court, and since he is so hard to be won, it is better to cut
him off then suffer him, he has been all this while partaker to our secrets,
and if he should but by some mislike utter it, then were we all cast away.


Cates. Nay my Lord do as you will, yet I have spoken what I can in my friends
cause.


Rich. Goto no more ado Catesby, they say I have bin a long sleeper to day, but
i will be awake anon to some of their costs. But sirrah are those men in
readiness that I appointed you to get?


Page I my Lord, and give diligent attendance upon your grace.


Rich. Goto, look to it then Catesby, get thee thy weapons ready, for I will
enter the Court.


Cat. I will my Lord.


Exit. Page Does my Lord say he has been a long sleeper to day? There are
those of the Court that are of another opinion, that thinks his grace lies
never long enough a bed. Now there is court held to day by diverse of the
Council, which I fear me will cost the Lord Hastings and the Lord Standley
their best cappes: for my Lord has willed me to get half a dozen ruffians in
readiness, and when he knocks with his fist upon the board, they to rush in,
and to cry, treason, treason, and to lay hands upon the Lord Hastings, and
the Lord Stannley, which for fear I should let slip, I will give my diligent
attendance.


Enter Richard, Catesby, and others, pulling Lord Hastings. Rich. Come bring
him away, let this suffice, thou and that accursed sorceresse the mother Queen
has bewitched me, with assistance of that famous strumpet of my brothers,
Shores wife: my withered arm is a sufficient testimony, deny it if thou can:
lay not Shores wife with thee last night?


Have. That she was in my house my Lord I cannot deny, but not for any such
matter. If.


Rich. If villain, feedest thou me with Ifs and ands, go fetch me a Priest,
make a short shrift, and dispatch him quickly For by the blessed Saint Paul I
swear, I will not dine till I see the traitors head, away sir Thomas, suffer
him not to speak, see him executed straight, and let his copartner the Lord
Standly be carried to prison also, it is not his broke head I have given him,
shall exscues him.

Exit with Hastings. Catesbie go you and see it presently proclaimed
throughout the City of London by a Herald of Arms, that the cause of his
death and the rest, were for conspiring by Witchcraft the death* of me and the
Duke of Buckingham, that so they might govern the King and rule the realm, I
think the proclamation be almost done.


Cate. I my good Lord, and finished too.


Rich. Well then about it. But hear thou Catesbie, mean while I will listen
after success of the Duke of Buckingham, who is laboring all this while with
the Citizens of London to make me King, which I hope shall be shortly, for thou
see our foes now are fewer, and we nearer the mark then before, and when I
have it, look thou for the place of thy friend the Lord Hastings, mean while
about thy business.


Cat. I thank your grace.


Exit Catesbie. Rich. Now sirrah to thee, there is one thing more undone, which
grieves me more then all the rest: and to say the truth, it is of more
importance then all the rest.


Page Ah that my Lord would utter it to his Page, then should I count my self
a happy man, if I could ease my Lord of that great doubt.


Rich. I commend thy willingness, but it is too mighty and reaches the
stars.


Page The more weighty it is, the sooner shall I by doing it, increase your
honors good liking toward me.


Rich. Be assured of that, but the matter is of weight and ^reat importance,
and does concern the state.


Page Why my Lord, I will choke them with gifts that sha^ perform it,
therefore good my Lord, trust me in this cause.


Rich. Indeed thy trust I know to be so true, that I care not to utter it unto
thee. Come hither, and yet the matter is too weighty for so mean a man.


Page. Yet good my Lord, utter it.


Rich. Why thus it is, I would have my two Nephews the young Prince and his
brother secretly murdered, Sownes villain it is out, will thou do it? or will thou betray me?


Page. My Lord you shall see my forwardness herein, I am acquainted with one
James Terrell, that lodgeth-hard by your honors chamber, with him my Lord will
I so work, that soon at night you shall speak with him.


Rich. Of what reputation or calling is that Terrell, may we trust him with
that which once known, were the utter confusion of me and my friends for ever?


Page. For his trust my Lord, I dare be bound, only this, a poor gentleman
he is, hoping for preferment by your grace, and upon my credit my Lord, he will
see it done.


Rich. Well in this be very circumspect and sure with thy diligence, be
liberal, and look for a day to make thee bless thy self, wherein thou
seruedst so good a Lord. And now that Shores wifes goods be confiscate, go
from me to the Bishop of London, and see that she receive her open penance, let
her be turned out of prison, but so bare as a wretch that worthily has deserved
that plague: and let there be straight proclaimation made by my Lord the Mayor,
that none shall relieve her nor pity her, and privy spies set in every
corner of the City, that they may take notice of them that releeues her: for
as her beginning was most famous above all, so will I have her end most
infamous above all. Have care now my boy, and win thy masters heart for ever.


Enter Shores wife. Shores. Ah unfortunate Shores wife, dishonor to the King,
a shame to thy country, and the only blot of defame to all thy kindred: Ay
why was I made fair that a King should favor me? But my friends should have
preferred discipline before affection: for they know of my folly, yea my own
husband knew of my breach of disloyalty, and yet suffered me, by reason he
knew it bootlesse to kick against the prick. A sweet King Edward, little
did thou think Shores wife should have been so hardly used, thy unnatural
brother not concent with my goods which are yet confiscate in his custody, but
yet more to add to my present misery, has proclaimed upon great penalty,
that none whatsoever, shall either aid or succor me, but here being
comfortless to die in the streets with hunger. I am constrained to beg, but I
fear it is in vain, for none will pity me. Yet here come one to whom I have
done good, in restoring his lands that were lost, now will I try him to see if
he will give me anything.


Enters Lodowicke. Lo. A time how thou suffrest fortune to alter estates, and
changest the minds of the good for the worst. How many headless Peers sleep
in their graves, whose places are furnish with their inferiors? Such as are
neither nobly borne, nor virtuously minded. My heart hardly bewailes the loss
of the young King, by the outrage of the Protector, who has proclaimed himself
King, by the name of Richard the third. The Commons murmr at it greatly, that
the young King and his brother should be imprisoned, but to what end it is hard
to say, but many think they shall never come forth again. But God do all for
the best and that the right heirs may not be utterly overthrown.


Shore. A gods what a grief is it for me to ask, where I have given.


Lod. A my good Lord Hastings, how innocently thou diedst the heavens bear
witness.


Shores wife. Good sir take pity upon me, and relieve me.


Lod. Indeed it is pity to see so fair a face to ask for alms; But tell me,
have thou no friends?


Shore. Yes sir I had many friends, but when my chiefest friend of all died, the
rest then forsook me.


Lod. Belike then thy fact was notorious, that thy f^iends leaving thee would
let thee go as a spoil for villains. But hearst thou, I prethie tell me the
truth, and as I am a gentleman, I will pity thee?


Shore. A Lodowick, tell thee the truth, why half this entreaty served thee,
when thy lands had been clean gone had it not been for Shores wife, and do
thou make me so long to beg for a little.


Lod. Indeed my lands I had restored me by mistress Shore, but may this be she?


Shore. I Lodowicke, I am she that begged thy lands of King Edward the fourth,
therefore I pray thee bestow something on me.


Lod. A gods what is this world, and how uncertain are riches? Is this she
that was in such credit with the King? Nay more, that could command a King
indeed? I cannot deny but my lands she restored me, but shall I by releeuing of
her hurt my self, no: for straight proclamation is made that none shall
succor her, therefore for fear I should be seen talk with her, I will shun
her company and get me to my chamber, and there set down in heroical verse,
the shameful end of a Kings Concubin, which is no doubt as wonderful as the
desolation of a kingdom.


Exit. Shores. A Lodowick if thou will give me nothing, yet stay and talk
with me. A no he shuns my company, all my friends now forsake me: In
prosperity I had many, but in adversity none. A gods have I this for my good
I have done, for when I was in my cheifest pomp, I thought that day well spent
wherein I might pleasure my friend by suits to the King, for if I had spoken,
he would not have said nay. For tho he was King, yet Shores wife swayd the
sword. I where need was, there was I bountiful, and mindful I was still
upon the poor to relieve them* and now none will know me nor succor me:
therefore here shall I die for want of sustenance. Yet here comes another whom
I have done good unto in saving the life of his son, well I will try him, to
see if he will give me any thing.


Enter a Citizen and another. Cit. No men no laws, no Princes no orders, alls
hushed neighbor now he is king, but before he was king how was the tems thwackt
with ruffians? what fraies had we in the streets? Now he has proclaimed peace
between Scotland and England for six years, to what end I know not, usurpers
had need to be wise.


Shores. A good sir relieve me, and bestow something upon me.


Cit. A neighbor, hedges have eyes, and highways have ears, but who is it a
beggar-woman? the streets are full of them, In Faith. But heeres thou, have thou
no friends that thou go a begging so?


Shore. Yes sir I had friends, but they are all dead as you are.


Citi. Why am I dead neighbor? why thou arrant queen what meanst thou by that?


Shore. I mean they are dead in charity. But I pray sir, had not you the life
of your son saved in the time of king Edward* the fourth, by one Shores wife?


Citi. Yes mary had I, but art thou a sprig of the same bough? I promise you
neighbor I thought so, that so idle a huswife could not be without the
acquaintance of so noble a strumpet: well for her sake i will give thee somewhat.


Shore. Nay then know, that I am she that saved the life of thy condemned
son.


Citi. Who art thou Shores wife? Lie still purse, neighbor I would not for
twenty pounds have given her one farthing, the proclamation is so hard by king
Richard. Why minion are you she that was the dishonor to the King? the shame
to her husband, the discredit to the City? Hear you, lay your fingers to
work, and get thereby somewhat to maintain you. O neighbor I grow very
choloricke, and thou did save the life of my* son, why if thou had not,
another would: and for my part, I would he had been hanged seven years ago,
it had saved me a great deal of money then. But come let us go in, and let the
queen alone.


Exeunt. Shore. Alas thus am I become an open shame to the world, here shall
I die in the streets for want of sustenance, alas is my fact so heinous that
none will pity me? Yet here comes another to whom I have done good, who is
least able to pleasure me, yet I will try him, to see if he will give me any
thing.


Enter Morton a Serving man. Mort. Now sir, who but king Richard bears sway,
and has proclaimed John Earl of Linclone, heir aparant to the Crown, the
young Princes they are in the Tower, nay some says more, they are murdered.
But this makes me to muse, the Duke of Bucking ham and the King is at such
variance, that did all in all to help him to the Crown, but the Duke of
Buckingham is rid down to Breaknock. Castle in Wales, and there he means to
raise up a power to pull down the usurper: but let them agree as they will, for
the next fair wind i will over seas.


Shore. A Shores wife, so near driven, to beg of a seruingman, I, necessity
has no law, I must needs. Good sir relieve me, and give me something.


Seru. Why what art thou?


Shore. In brief Morton, I am Shores wife, that have done good to all.


Seru. A fool, and ever thy own enemy. In troth mistress Shore, my store is
but small, yet as it is, we will part stakes, but soft I cannot do what I would,
I am watched.

Enters Page.
Shore. Good Morton relieve me.


Seru. What should I relieve my Kings enemy?


Shore. Why thou promised thou would.


Seru. I tell thee I will not, and so be answered. Sownes I would with all my
heart, but for yonder villain, a plague on him.


Exit. Page. An honest fellow I warrant him. How now Shores wife, will none
relieve thee?


Shore. No none will relieve her, that has been good to all.


Page. Why twere pity to do thee good, but me thinks she is fulsome and
stinkes.


Shore. If I be fulsome shun my company, for none but thy Lord sought my
misery, and he has undone me.


Page Why has he undone thee? nay thy wicked and naughty life has undone
thee, but if thou want maintenance, why do thou not fall to thy old trade
again?


Shore. Nay villain, I have done open penance, and am sorry for my sins that
are past.


Page. Sownes is Shores wife become an holy whore, nay then we shall never
have done.


Shore. Why hang thee, if thy faults were so written in thy forehead as mine
is, it would be as wrong with thee. But I prethie leave me, and get thee from
me.


Page. And cannot you keep the City but you must run gadding to the Court,
and you stay here a little longer, i will make you be set away, and for my part,
would all whoores were so served, then there would be fewer in England then
there be. And so farewell good mistress Shore.


Exit. Shore. And all such usurping kings as thy Lord is, may come to a
shameful end, which no doubt I may live yet to see. Therefore sweet God forgive
all my foul offense:

And though I have done wickedly in this world,
Into hell fire, let not my soul be hurld.

Exit. Enter Master Terrill, and siir Robert Brokenbery. Broken. Master
Terrell, the King has written, that for one night I should deliver you the
keys, and put you in full possession But good M. Terrell, may I be so bold to
demand a question without offense?


Ter. Else God forbid, say on what ere it be.


Bro. Then this master Terrell, for your coming I partly* know the cause,
for the king oftentimes has sent to me to have them both dispatched, but
because I was a servant to their father being Edward the fourth, my heart
would never give me to do the deed.


Ter. Why sir Robert you are beside the matter, what need you use such
speeches what matters are between the King and me, I pray you leave it, and
deliver me the keys.


Broken. A here with tears I deliver you the keys, and so farewell master
Terrell.


Exit. Ter. Alas good sir Robert, he is kind hearted, but it must not
prevail, what I have promised the King I must perform. But ho Miles Forest.


For. Here sir.


Ter. Miles Forest, have you got those men I spoke of, they must be resolute
and pitiless.


For. I warrant you sir, they are such pitiless villains, that all London
cannot match them for their villainy, one of their names is Will Sluter, yet
the most part calls him black Will, the other is Jack Denten, two murtherous
villains that are resolute.


Ter. I prethie call them in that I may see them, and speak with them.


Forest. Ho Will and Jack.


Well. Here sir, we are at hand.


For. These be they that I told you of.


Ter. Come hither sirs, to make a long discourse were but a folly, you seem to
be resolute in this cause that Miles Forest has delivered to you, therefore
you must cast away pity, and not so much as think upon favor, for the more
stearne that you are, the more shall you please the King.


Will. Zownes sir, nere talk to us of favor, it is not the first that Jack and
I have gone about.


Ter. Well said, but the Kings pleasure is this, that he will have no blood
shead in the deed doing, therefore let me hear your aduises?


For. Why then I think this master Terrell, that as they sit at supper there
should be two dags ready charged, and so suddeinly to shoot them both through.


Terrell. No, I like not that so well, what say thou Will, what is thy
opinion?


Well. Tush, heeres more adoo then needs, I pray bring me where they are, and
i will take them by the heels and beat their brains against the walls.


Ter. Nay that I like not, for it is too tyrannous.


Dout. Then hear me master Terrell, let Will take one, and i will take another,
and by the life of Jack Douton we will cut both their throats.


Ter. Nay sirs, then hear me, I will have it it done in this order, when they
be both a bed and at rest, Miles Forest thou shall bring them up both, and
between two feather beds smother them both.


For. Why this is very good, but stand aside, for here comes the Princes, i will
bring you word when the deed is done.


Exit. Terrill. Enter the Princes. York. How fares my noble Lord and loving
brother?


King. A worthy brother, Richard Duke of York, my cause of sorrow is not for
my self, but this is it that adds my sorrow more, to see our uncle whom our
father left as our Protector in minority, should so digress from duty, love
and zeal, so unkindly thus to keep us up prisoners, and know no sufficient
cause for it.


York. Why brother comfort your self, for tho he detain us a while, he will
not keep us long, but at last he will send us to our loving mother again:
whither if it please God to send us, I doubt not but our mother would keep us
so safe, that all the Prelates in the world should not deprive her of us
again: so much I assure my self of. But here comes Miles Forest, I prethy
Miles tell my kingly brother some merry story to pass away the time, for thou
see he is melancholy.


King. No Miles, tell me no merry story, but answer me to one question, what
was he that vvalked with thee in the Gardeine, me thought he had the keys?


For. My Lord, it was one that was appointed by the King o be an aid to sir
Thomas Brokenbury.


King. Did the King, why Miles Forest, am not I King?


For. I would have said my Lord your uncle the Protector.


King. Nay my kingly uncle I know he is now, but let him enjoy both Crown and
kingdom, so my brother and I may but enjoy our lives and liberty. But tell
me, is sir Robert Brokenbery clean discharged?


For. No my Lord, he has but charge for a night or two.


King. Nay then, new officers, new laws, would we had kept the old still. But
who are they whose ghastly looks does present a dying fear to my living body.
I prithee tell me Miles what are they?


For. One my Lord is called Jack Denten, the other is called Will Slawter. But
why starts your grace?


King. Slawter, I pray God he come not to slaughter my brother and me, for from
murder and slaughter, good Lord deliver us. But tell me Miles is our lodging
prepared?


For. I my Lord, if it please your brother and you to walk up.


King. Then come brother, we will go to bed.


For. I will attend upon your grace.


York. Come Miles Forest bear us company.


For. Sirs stay you two here, and when they are a sleep i will call you up.


Exit. Dent. I promise thee Will, it greeues me to see what moan these young
Princes make, I had rather then forty pounds I had nere taken it in hand, it is a
dangerous matter to kill innocent princes, I like it not.


Will. Why you base slave, are you faint hearted, a little thing would make me
strike thee, I promise thee.


Dent. Nay go forward, for now I am resolute: but come, lets too it.


Will. I prithee stay, heel call us up anon. But sirrah Jack, did thou
mark how the King started when he heard my name? What will he do when he feels
me?


For. But ho sirs, come softly, for now they are at rest.


Will. Come we are ready, by the mass they are a sleep indeed.


For. I hear they sleep, and sleep sweet Princes, never wake no more, for you
have seen the last light in this world.


Jack. Come press them down, it boots not to cry again, (...) upon them so
lustily. But master Forest now they are dead ^^^t shall we do with them?


For. Why go and bury them at the heap of stones at the staire foot^ (...) I
go and tell master Terrell that the deed is done.


Will. Well we will, farewell master Forest.


Enter Terrell. Ter. I (...) now Miles Forest, is this deed dispatched?


For. I sir, a bloody deed we have performed.


Ter. But tell me, what have thou done with them?


For. I have conveyed them to the stairs foot among a heap of stones, and
anon i will carry them where they shall be no more found again, nor all the
cronicles shall nere make mention what shall become of them: yet good master
Terrell, tell the King my name, that he may but reward me with a kingly thanks.


Ter. I will go certify the King with speed, that Miles Forest,
Will Slawter, and Jack Denten, they three have done the deed.
And so farewell.

Exeunt omnes. Enter the Duke of Buckingham with his dagger drawn. Ban. Ah
good my Lord, save my life.


Buc. Ah villain, how can thou ask for mercy, when thou have so unjustly
betrayed me?


Ban. I desire your grace but give me leave to speak.


Buc. I speak thy last villain, that those that hear it, may see how unjustly
thou have betrayed me.


Ban. Then thus my Lord. First, the proclamation was death to him that
harbored your grace.


Buc. Ah villain, and a thousand crowns to him that could betraie me.


Ban. Ah my Lord, my obeisance to my Prince is more.


Buc. Ah villain, thou betraiedst me for lucre, and not for duty to thy
Prince, why Banister, a good servant thinks his life well spent, that spends
it in the quarrel of his master. But villain make thy self ready, and here
receive thy death.


Enter a Herald. Herald. Henry Duke of Buckingham, I arest thee in King
Richards name as a traitor.


Buc. Well Herald, I will obey thy rest. But am I arrested in King Richardes
name, usurping Richard, that insatiate blood succor, that traitor to God and
man. Ah Richard, did I in Guild Hall plead the Orator for thee, and held thee
in all thy sly and wicked practices, and for my reward do thou alot me
death? Ah Buckingham, thou plaidst thy part and made him King, and put the
lawful heirs besides: why then is Buckingham guilty now of his death? yet
had not the Bishop of Ely fled, I had escaped.


Enters six others, to rescue the Duke. All. Come, the Duke of Buckingham
shall not die:
We will take him away by force.

Herald. Why villains, will you be Traitors to your Prince?


Buckingham. Nay good* my friends give me leave to speak, and let me entreat
you to lay your weapons by. Then know this country men, the cause I am
arested this, Is for bringing in your lawful King, which is Henry Earl of
Richmond now in B^ittaine, and means ere long to land at Milford Haven in
Wales, where I do know he shall have aid of the cheifest of the Welsh, he
is your lawful King, and this a wrongful usurper. When you shall hear of him
landed in that pl^ce, then take up weapons and amain to him, he is the man
must reaue you of this yoke, and send the usurper headless to his home, and
poor Buckingham prays upon his knees; to bless* good Richmond in his
enterprise, and when the conquest shall be given to him, grant he may match
with Lady Elizabeth, as promise has to fore by him been past, while then my
friends, leave me alone to death, and let me take this punishment in peace.
Ah Buckingham, was not thy meaning good in displacing the usurper, to raise a
lawful king? Ah Buckingham, it was too late, the lawful heirs were smothered
in the Tower, sweet Edward and thy brother, I nere slept quiet thinking of your
deaths. But vaunt Buckingham, thou wast altogether innocent of their deaths.
But thou vilain, whom of a child I nursed thee up, and have so unjustly betrayed
thy Lord? Let the curse of Buckingham nere depart from thee. Let vengeance,
mischiefs, tortures, light on thee and thine. And after death thou may more
torture feel, then when Excon turns the restless wheel. And banne thy soul
where ere thou seem to rest. But come my my friends, let me away.


Herald. My Lord we are sorry. But come lay hands on Banister.


Exeunt. Enter King Richard, sir William Catesbie, and others. King. The goal
is got, and golden Crown is won,
And well deseruest thou to wear the same,
That ventured have thy body and thy soul,
But what boots Richard, now the Diadem
Or kingdom got, by murder of his friends,
My fearful shadow that still follows me,
Has sommond me before the severe judge,
My conscience witness of the blood I spilt,
Accuses me as guilty of the fact,
The fact, a damned judgment craves,
Whereas impartial justice has condemned.
Meethinkes the Crown which I before did wear,
Inchast with Pearl and costly Diamonds,
Is turned now into a fatal wreathe,
Of fiery flames, and ever burning stars,
And raging fiends has past there ugly shapes,
In studient lakes, adrest to tend on me,
If it be thus, what will thou do in this extremity?
Nay what can thou do to purge thee of thy guilt?
Even repent, crave mercy for thy damned fact,
Appeal for mercy to thy righteous God,
Ha repent, not I, crave mercy they that list.
My God, is none of mine. Then Richard be thus resolved,
To pace thy soul in vallence with their blood,
Soul for soul, and body for body, yea mary Richard,
That*s good, Catesbie.

Cat. You called my Lord, I think?


King. It may be so. But what think thou Catesbie?


Cat. Of what my Lord?


King. Why of all these troubles.


Cat. Why my Lord, I hope to see them happily ouercom'd.


King. How villain, do thou hope to see me happily ouercom'd?


Cat. Who you my Lord?


King. Ay villain, thou points at me, thou hopest to see me ouercom'd.


Cat. No my good Lord, your enemies or else not.


King. Ha, ha, good Catesbie, but what hear thou of the Duke of Buckingham?


Cat. Why he is dead my Lord, he was executed at Salisbury yesterday.


King. Why it is impossible, his friends hopes that he shall outline me, to be my
head.


Cat. Out-liue you, Lord that's strange.


King. No Catesbie, if a do, it must be in fames,
And since they hope he shall out live me, to be my head,
He hops without his head, and rests among his fellow rebels.

Cat. Mary no force my Lord.


King. But Catesbie, what hear thou of Henry Earl of Richmond?


Cat. Not a word my Lord.


King. No: hear thou not he lives in Britain,
In favor with the Duke.
Nay more, Lady Margaret his mother conspires against us,
And persuades him that he is lineally descended from Henry
The fourth, and that he has right to the Crown,
Therefore tell me what think thou of the Earl?

Cat. My Lord, I think of the Earl as he does deserve, A most famous
gentleman.


King. Villain do thou praise my foe, and commend him to my face?


Cat. Nay my Lord, I wish he were as good a friend as he is a foe, else the due
deserts of a traitor.


King. What Is that?


Cat. Why my Lord, to loose his head.


King. Yea mary, I would twere off quickly, then
But more to the strengthening of his title,
She goes about to marry him to the Queens eldest daughter,
Lady Elizabeth.

Cat. Indeed my Lord that I heard was concluded,
By all the nobility of Britain.

King. Why then there it goes,
The great devil of hell go with all.
A marriage begun in mischief, shall end in blood:
I think that accursed sorreresse the mother Queen,
Does nothing but bewith me, and hatcheth conspiracies,
And brings out perilous birds to wound
Their Countries weal,
The Earl is up in Arms,
And with him many of the Nobility,
He has aid in France,
He is rescued in Britain,
And means shortly to arrive in England:
But all this spites me not so much,
As his escape from Landoyse the Dukes Treasuror,
Who if he had been pricked forth for revenge,
He had ended all by apprehending of our foe,
But now he is in disgrace with the Duke,
And we farther off our purpose then to fore,
But the Earl has not so many biting dogs abroad,
As we have sleeping curres at home here,
Ready for rescue.

Cat. But my Lord, I marvel how he should get aid there,
Considering he is no friend to Britain.

King. Ay so thou may marvel how the Duke of Britain,
Durst wake such a foe as England against him,
But evil fare makes open war.
But who comes there Catsbie?
Ha one of our spurs to revenge:
The Lord Standley, father in law to Lady Margaret,
His coming is to us Catsbie,
Were not that his life might serve,
For apprehension against our foe,
He should have neither Judge nor Jury,
But guilty death without any more ado.
Now Lord Standley, what news?
Have you received any letters of your late embassage into
Britain? What answer have you received of your letters?

Enter Lord Standley, and his son George. Stand. Why my Lord, for that I
sent, I have received.


King. And how does your son then, is he in health?


Standley. For his health my Lord, I do not mistrust.


King. Faith tell us, when means he to arrive in England?
And how many of our Nobility is with him?
And what power is with him?

Standley. And please your grace,
His power is unknown to me,
Nor willingly would not I be privy to such causes.

King. Oh good words Lord Standley, but give me leave to gleane out of your
golden field of eloquence, how brave you plead ignorance* as though you knew
not of your sons departure into Britain out of England.


Stand. Not I my Lord.


King. Why is not his mother thy wife, and dares he pass over without the
blessing of his mother, whose husband thou art?


Stand. I desire your majesty but give me leave to speak?


King. Yea speak Standley, no doubt some fine colored tale,


Stand. And like your grace, whereas you mistrust that I knew of my sons
departure, out of England into Britain, God I take to record it was unknown
to me, nor know not yet what his pretense is: for at his departure, was I one
of the privy council to your brother King Edward the fourth, and that she was
able to relieve him without my help: I hope her sufficiency is known to your
grace. Therefore I humbly crave pardon.


King. Well Standley, I fear it will be proved to the contrary, that thou
did furnish him both with money and munition, which if it be, then look for
no favor at my hands, but the due deserts of a traitor: but let this pass.
What Is your repair to our presence?


Stan. Only this my Lord, that I may repair from the court, to my house in the
country.


King. Ay sir, that you might be in Cheshire and Lancashire, then should your
Posts pass invisible into Britain, and you to depart the realm at your
pleasure, or else I to suffer an intolerable foe under me, which I will not.
But Standley to be brief, thou shall not go. But soft Richard, but that it were
better to be alone then to have noisome company, he shall go, leaving for his
loyalty a sufficient pledge. Come hither Standley, thou shall go, leaving me
here thy son and heir George Standley for a pledge, that he may perish for
thy fault if need should be, if thou likest this, go, If not, answer me
briefly, and say quickly no.


Stand. I am to advise my self upon a secret cause, and of a matter that
concerns me near: say that I leave my son unto the King, and that I should
but aid Earl Richmond, my son George Standley dies, but if my faith be kept
unto my Prince, George Standley lives. Well I will except the Kings proffer.
And please your grace I am content, and will leave my son* to pledge.


King. Here come hither, and with thee take this lesson.
Thou art set free for our defense,
Thou shall upon thy pledge make this promise,
Not only to stay the hinderance of the Earl,
But to prevent his purpose with thy power.
Thou shall not seek by any means to aid or rescue him.
This done, of my life thy son does live:
But otherwise thy son dies and thou too; if I catch thee:
And it shall go hard but I will catch thee.

Stand. And you shall go apace, and yet go without me. But I humbly take my
leave of your grace. Farewell George.


King. How now, what do you give him letters?


Stand. No my Lord, I have done: The second sight is sweet, of such a son.


Exit. King. Carry George Standley to prison.


George. Alas my Lord, shall I go to prison?


King. Shall you go to prison, what a questions that?
So prick the lamb, and wound the damme.
How likest thou this Catesbie?

Cat. Oh my Lord so excellent, that you have imprisoned his son.


King. Nay now will we look to the rest,
But I sent the Lord Louell to the mother Queen,
Concerning my suit to her daughter Elizabeth,
But see in good time here he is.
How now Louell, what news?
What says the mother Queen to my suit?

Enters Louell. Lou. My Lord very strange she was at the first,
But when I had told her the cause, she gave concent:
Desiring your majesty to make the nobility privy to it.

King. God have mercy Louell, but what said Lady Elizabeth*


Lou. Why my Lord, strange, as women will be at the first* But through
entreaty of her mother, she quickly gave consent* And the Queen wild me to
tell your grace, that she means to leave Sanctuary, and to come to the court
with all her daughters.


King. I marry Louell let not that opportunity slip, look to it Catesbie,
be careful for it Louell, for thereby hangs such a chance, that may enrich us
and our heirs for ever. But sirs hard ye nothing of the Scottish Nobles that
met at Nottingham, to confer about the marriage of my Niece.


Cat. Not a word my Lord.


Enters Messenger. King. Gogs wounds who is that? search the villain, has he
any dags about him?


Mess. No my Lord I have none.


King. From whence comes thou?


Mess. From the Peers at Nottingham and Scotland, and they greet your
Majesty.


Lou. Sirrah is the marriage concluded between the Scottish Earl and the
fair Lady Rosa.


Cat. Prethie tell us, is it concluded?


Page. How says thou, is it concluded?


King. Nay will you give me leave to tell you that? Why you villains will you
know the secrets of my letter by interrupting messengers that are sent to me?
Away I say, begone, it is time to look about: away I say, what here yet
villains?


Mess. My Lord, I have somewhat to say besides?


King. Then speak it, what have thou to say?


Mess. This my Lord, when the Peers of England and Scotland met at Nottingham
together, to confer about the marriage of your Neese, it was straight
determined that she should be married with the Scottish Earl. And further my
Lord, the Council commanded me to deliver unto your grace the treasons of
Captain Blunt, who had the Earl of Oxford in charge in Hames castle, now are
they both fled, and purposes to aid the Earl of Richmond against your grace.
Now my Lord I take my leave.


King. Messenger stay, has Blunt betrayed, does Oxford rebel and aid the
Earl Richmond, may this be true, what is our prison so weak, our friends so
fickle, our Ports so ill looked too, that they may pass and repasse the seas at
their pleasures, then every one conspires, spoils our Conflex, conqueres our
Castles, and Arms themselves with their own weapons unresisted? O villains,
rebels, fugetiues, thieves, how are we betrayed, when our own swoordes shall
beat us, and our own subjects seeks the subuertion of the state, the fall of
their Prince, and sack of their country, of his, nay neither must nor shall,
for I will Army with my friends, and cut off my enemies, and beard them to
their face that dares me, and but one, I one, one beyond the seas that troubles
me: well his power is weak, and we are strong, therefore I will meet him with
such melody, that the singing of a bullet shall send him merrily to his lo^gest
home. Come follow me.


Enter Earl Rich. Earl Oxford, P. Landoys, and captain Blunt. Rich. Welcome
dear friends and loving countrymen,
Welcome I say to Englands blisfull I Will,
Whose forwardness I cannot but commend,
That thus do aid us in our enterprise,
My right it is, and sole inheritance,
And Richard but vsurps in my authority,
For in his tyranny he slaughtered those
That would not succor him in his attempts,
Whose guiltless blood craves daily at Gods hands;
Revenge for outrage done to their harmless lives:
Then courage countrymen, and never be dismayed,
Our quarrels good, and God will help the right,
For we may know by dangers we have past,
That God no doubt will give us victory.

Oxf. If love of gold, or fear of many foes,
Could once have danted us in our attempts,
Thy foot had never touched the English shore,
And here Earl Oxford plites his faith to thee,
Never to leave in what we have vndertane,
But follow still with resolution,
Till thou be crowned as conqueror in the field,
Or lose thy life in following of thy right:
Thy right brave Richmond, which we will maintain
Maugre the proudest bird of Richards brood.
Then cousin Richmond being resolved thus,
Let us straight to Aarms, and God and S. George for us.

Blunt. As this brave Earl have said, so say we all,
We will not leave thee till the field be won,
Which if with fortunate success we can perform,
Think then Earl Richmond that I followed thee,
And that shall be honor enough for me.

Lan. So says Landoyse that honors Richmond so
With love unfeigned for his valor past,
That if your honor lead the way to death,
Peeter Landoys has sworn to follow thee.
For if Queen mother do but keep her word,
And what the Peers have promised be performed,
Touching the marriage with Elizabeth,
Daughter to our King Edward the fourth,
And by this marriage join in unity
Those famous Houses Lancashire and York,
Then England shall no doubt have cause to say,
Edwards coronation was a joyful day.
And it is is all Landoys desires to see.

Richm. Thanks Landoys, and here Earl Richmonds vows,
If their kind promises take but effect,
That as they have promised I be made King,
I will so deal in governing the state,
Which now lies like a savage shultred grove,
Where brambles, briars, and thorns, ouer-grow those sprigs,
Which if they might but spring to their effect,
And not be crossed so by their contraries,
Making them subject to these outrages,
Would prove such members of the Commonweal,
That England should in them be honored,
As much as ever was the Roman state,
When it was gouernd by the Councels rule,
And I will draw my sword brave countrymen,
And never leave to follow my resolve,
Till I have mowed those brambles, briars and thorns
That hinder those that long to do us good.

Oxf. Why we have escaped the dangeroust brunt of all,
Which was his garrison at Milford Haven,
Shall we dismay, or dant our friends to come?
Because he took the Duke of Buckingham?
No worthy friends, and loving countrymen,
Oxford did never bear so base a mind,
He will not wink at murders secretly put up,
Nor suffer vpstarts to enjoy our rightes,
Nor live in England under an usurping king,
And this is Oxfords resolution.

Rich. But Blunt, look whose that knocks.


Blunt. My Lord, it is a messenger from the mother Queen,
And the Lady Standley your mother, with letters.

Rich. Admit him straight, now shall we hear some news.


Enters Messenger. Mess. Long live Earl Richmond.
The mother Queen does greet your honor.

Rich. Welcome my friend, how fares our mother and the rest?


Mess. In health my Lord, and glad to hear of your ariual safe.


Rich. My friend, my mother has written to me of certain that are coming in
our aid, the report of whose names are referd to thee to deliver.


Mess. First, theirs the Lord Talbut, the Earl of Shreuesbury son and heir,
with a brave band of his own.

There is also the Lord Fitz Harbart, the Earl of Pembrookes son and heir.

Of the Gentlemen of the Welsh, there is sir Prise up Thomas, and sir Thomas up
Richard, and sir Owen Williams, brave gentlemen my Lord. These are the chief.


Rich. Are these the full number of all that come?


Mess. Only two more my Lord, which I have left unnamed, the one is sir Thomas
Denis a Western gentleman, and joined with him one Arnoll Butler, a great many
are willing, but dares not as yet.


Rich. Does Arnoll Butler come, I can hardly brook his treachery, for he it
was that wrought my disgrace with the King.


Oxf. Well my Lord, we are now to strengthen our selves with friends, and not
to reap up old quarrels, say that Arnoll Butler did injury you in the time
of peace, the mendes is twice made, if he stand with you in the time of wars.


Rich. Well my friend, take this for thy good news,
And commend me to our mother and the rest.
Thus my Lords, you see God still prouides for us:
But now my Lords touching the placing of our battle best,
And how we may be least endangered,
Because I will be foremost in this fight,
To encounter with that bloody murderer,
My self will lead the vaward of our troop,
My Lord of Oxford, you as our second self,
Shall hall have the happy leading of the rear,
A place I know which you will well deserve,
And Captain Blunt, Peter Landoyse and you,
Shall by in quarters, as our battles scowtes,
Provided, thus your bow-men Captain Blunt,
Must scatter here and there to gaull their horse,
As also when that our promised friends do come,
Then must you hold hard skirmish with our foes,
Till I by cast of a counter march,
Have joined our power with those that come to us,
Then casting close, as wings on either side,
We will give a new prauado on the foe,
Therefore let us toward Aderstoe amain,
Where we this night God-willing will incampe,
From thence toward Lichfield, we will march next day,
And nearer London, bid King Richard play.

Exit. Enters the Page. Page. Where shall I find a place to sigh my fill,
And wail the grief of our sore troubled King?
For now he has obtaind the Diadem,
But with such great discomfort to his mind,
That he had better lived a private man, his looks are ghastly,
Hidious to behold, and from the privy sentire of his heart,
There comes such deep fetched sighs and fearful cries,
That being with him in his chamber often,
He mooues me weep and sigh for company,
For if he hear one stir he rises up,
And claps his hand upon his dagger straight,
Ready to stab him, what so ere he be,
But he must think this is the just revenge,
The heavens have powered upon him for his sins,
Those Peers which he unkindly murdered,
Does cry for justice at the hands of God,
And he in justice sends continual fear,
For to afright him both at bed and board,
But stay, what noise is this, who have we here?

Enters men to go to Richmond. How now sirs, whither are you going so fast?
Men. Why to Earl Richmonds Camp to serve with him,
For we have left to serve King Richard now.

Page. Why comes there any more?


Men. A number more.


Exit. Page. Why these are the villains my Lord would have put his life into
their hands.

A Richard, now do my eyes witness that thy end is at hand, For thy commons
make no more account of thee then of a private man, yet will I as duty binds,
give thee aduertisements of their unjust proceedings. My master has lifted
out many, and yet has left one to lift him out of all, not only of his
Crown, but also of his life. But I will in, to tell my Lord of what is
happened.


Enters Richmond, and Oxford. Rich. Good my Lord depart, and leave me to my
self.


Oxf. I pray my Lord, let me go along with you.


Rich. My Lord it may not be, for I have promised my father that none shall
come but my self, therefore good my Lord depart.


Oxf. Good my Lord have a care of your self, I like not these night walks and
scouting abroad in the euenings so disguised, for you must not now that you are
in the usurpers dominions, and you are the only mark he aims at, and your
last nights absence bred such amazement in our soldiers, that they like men
wanting the power to follow Arms, were on a sudden more liker to fly then to
fight: therefore good my Lord, if I may not stand near, let me stand aloof
off.


Rich. Content thee good Oxford, and tho I confess my self bound to thee for
thy especial care, yet at this time I pray thee hold me excused. But farewell
my Lord, here comes my Lord and father.


Enters Standley and another. Stan. Captain I pray thee bring me word when
thou do discrie the enemy. And so farewell, and leave me for a while.


Rich. How fares my gracious Lord and father?


Stan. In good health my son, and the better to see thee thus foreward in
this laudable enterprise, but omitting vain circumstances, and to come briefly
to the purpose, I am now in few words to deliver much matter. For know this,
when I came to crave leave of the King to depart from the court, the king very
furiously began to charge me that I was both acquainted with thy practices and
drifts, and that I knew of thy landing, and by no means would grant me leave
to go, till as pledge of my loyalty and true dealing with the king, I should
leave my young son George Standley. Thus have I left my son in the hands of a
tyrant, only of purpose to come and speak with thee.


Rich. But omitting this, I pray tell me, shall I look for your help in the
battle?


Stan. Son I cannot, for as I will not go to the usurper, no more I will not
come to thee.


Rich. Why then it is bootlesse for us to stay, for all we presumed upon, was
on your aid.


Stan. Why son, George Standlyes death would do you no pleasure.


Rich. Why the time is too troublesome, for him to tend to follow execution.


Stan. O son, tyrants expect no time, and George Standley being young and a
grissell, is the more easy to be made away.


Rich. This news goes to my heart, but it is in vain for me to look for
victory, when with a molehill, we shall encounter with a mountain.


Stand. Why son, see how contrary you are, for I assure you, the chiefest of
his company are liker to fly to thee, then to fight against thee: and for me,
think me not so simple but that I can at my pleasure fly to thee, or being
with them, fight so faintly, that the battle shall be won on thy part with
small incountring. And note this besides, that the King is now come to Lester,
and means to morrow to bid thee battle in Bosworth.


Enters Messenger. Mess. Come my Lord, I do discry the enemy.


Stand. Why then son farewell, I can stay no longer.


Richm. Yet good father, one word more ere you depart,
What number do you think the kings power to be?

Stand. Mary some twenty thousand. And so farewell.


Richm. And we hardly five thousand, being beset with many enemies, hoping upon
a few friends, yet despair not Richmond, but remember thou fightest in right,
to defend thy country from the tyranny of an usurping tyrant, therefore
Richmond go foreward, the more dangerous the battle is in atteining, it
proves the more honorable being obtained. Then forward Richmond, God and
saint George, for me.

Quisquam regna gaudit, o fallex bonum.
Enters the King, and the Lord Louell. King. The hell of life that hangs upon
the Crown,
The daily cares, the nightly dreams,
The wretched crewes, the treason of the foe,
And horror of my bloody practice past,
Strikes such a terror to my wounded conscience,
That sleep I, wake I, or whatsoever I do,
Meethinkes their ghoasts comes gaping for revenge,
Whom I have slain in reaching for a Crown.
Clarence complains, and cries for revenge.
My Nephues bloods, Revenge, revenge, does cry.
The headless Peers comes preasing for revenge.
And every one cries, let the tyrant die.
The Sun by day shines hotely for revenge.
The Moon by night eclipseth for revenge.
The stars are turned to Comets for revenge.
The Planets change their coursies for revenge.
The birds sing not, but sorrow for revenge.
The silly lambs sits bleating for revenge.
The screeking Raven sits croking for revenge.
Whole heads of beasts comes bellowing for revenge.
And all, yea all the world I think,
Cries for revenge, and nothing but revenge.
But to conclude, I have deserved revenge.
In company I dare not trust my friend,
Being alone, I dread the secret foe:
I doubt my food, least poison lurk therein.
My bed is uncouth, rest refraines my head.
Then such a life I count far worse to be,
Then thousand deaths unto a damned death:
How wast death I said? who dare attempt my death?
Nay who dare so much as once to think my death?
Though enemies there be that would my body kill,
Yet shall they leave a never dying mind.
But you villains, rebels, traitors as you are,
How came the foe in, preasing so near?
Where, where, slept the garrison that should a beat them back?
Where was our friends to intercept the foe?
All gone, quite fled, his loyalty quite laid a bed?
Then vengeance, mischief, horror, with mischance,
Wilde-fire, with whirle winds, light upon your heads,
That thus betrayed your Prince by your untruth.

King. Frantike man, what meanst thou by this mood? Now he is come more need to
beat him back.


Lou. Sour is his sweet that savors thy delight, great is his power that
threats thy overthrow.


King. The bad rebellion of my foe is not so much, as for to see my friends do
fly in flocks from me.


Lou. May it please your grace to rest your self content, for you have power
enough to defend your land.


Kin. Dares Richmond set his foot on land with such a small power of straggling
fugatiues?


Lou. May it please your grace to participate the cause that thus does trouble
you?


King. The cause Buzard, what cause should I participate to thee? My friends
are gone away, and fled from me, keep silence villain, least I by post do
send thy soul to hell, not one word more, if thou do love thy life.


Enters Catsbie. Cat. My Lord.


King. Yet again vilaine, o Catesbie is it thou? What comes the Lord Standley
or no?


Cat. My Lord, he answers no.


King. Why did not tell him then, I would send his son George Standleys
head to him.


Cat. My Lord I did so, and he answered, he had another son left to make Lord
Standley.


King. O vilaine vilde, and breaker of his oath, the bastardes ghoast shall
hant him at the heels, and cry revenge for his vild fathers wrongs, go
Louell, Catsbie, fetch George Standly forth, him with these hands will I
butcher for the dead, and send his headless body to his fire.


Catesbie. Leave off executions now the foe is here that threatens us most
cruelly of our lives.


King. Zownes, foe me no foes, the fathers fact condemns the son to die.


Lou. But guiltless blood will for reuengement cry.


King. Why was not he left for fathers loyalty?


Lou. Therein his father greatly injured him.


King. Did not your selves in presence, see the bonds sealde and assignde?


Lo. What tho my Lord, the vardits own, the titles does resign.


King. The bond is broke and I will sue the fine, except you will hinder me,
what will you have it so?


Lou. In doing true justice, else we answer no.


King. His treacherous father has neglect his word and done imparshall past by
dint of sword, therefore sirrah go fetch him, Zownes draw you cuts who shall
go, I bid you go Catesby. A Richard, now may thou see thy end at hand, why
sirs why fear you thus? why we are ten to one, if you seek promotion, I am a
King already in possession, better able to perform then he. Louell, Catesby,
lets join lovingly and devoutly together, and I will divide my whole kingdom
amongst you.


Both. We will my Lord.


King. We will my Lord, a Catesbie, thou look like a dog, and thou Louell
too, but you will run away with them that be gone, and the devil go with you
all, God I hope, God, what talk I of God, that have served the devil all this
while. No, fortune and courage for me, and join England against me with
England, Join Europe with Europe, come Christendom, and with Christendom the
whole world, and yet I will never yield but by death only. By death, no die,
part not childishly from thy Crown, but come the devil to claim it, strike
him down, and tho that Fortune has decreed, to set revenge with triumphs on my
wretched head, yet death, sweet death, my latest friend, has sworn to make a
bargain for my lasting fame, and this, I this very day, I hope with this lame
hand of mine, to rake out that hateful heart of Richmond, and when I have it,
to eat it panting hot with salt, and drink his blood luke warm, tho I be
sure it will poison me. Sirs you that be resolute follow me, the rest go hang your
selves.


Exit. The battle enters, Richard wounded, with his Page. King. A horse, a
horse, a fresh horse.


Page. A fly my Lord, and save your life.


King. Fly villain, look I as tho I would fly, no first shall this dull and
senseless ball of earth receive my body cold and void of sense, you watery
heavens roll on my gloomy day, and darksome clouds close up my cheerful
sownde, down is thy sun Richard, never to shine again, the birds whose
feathers should adorn my head, houers aloft and dares not come in sight, yet
faint not man, for this day if Fortune will, shall make thee King possessed with
quiet Crown, if Fates deny, this ground must be my grave, yet golden thoughts
that reached for a Crown, danted before by Fortunes cruel spite, are come as
comforts to my drooping heart, and bids me keep my Crown and die a King.
These are my last, what more I have to say, i will make report among the damned
souls.


Exit. Enters Richmond to battle again, and kills Richard. Enters Report and
the Page. Report. How may I know the certain true report of this victorious
battle fought to day, my friend what ere thou be, tell unto me the true
report, which part has won the victory, whether the King or no?


Page. A no, the King is slain and he has lost the day, and Richmond he has
won the field, and tryumphs like a valiant conqueror.


Report. But who is slain besides our Lord and sovereign?


Page. Slain is the worthy Duke of Northfolke he, and with him sir Robart
Brokenby, Lieftenant of the Tower, besides Louell, he made also a partner in
this Tragedy.


Report. But where is sir William Catsby?


Page. He is this day beheaded on a stage at Lester, because he took part
with my Lord the King. But stay Report, and thou shall hear me tell the brief
discourse. And how the battle fell then know Report, that Richard came to
field mounted on horsback, with as high resolve as fierce Achillis among the
sturdie Greeks, whom to encounter worthy Richmond, came accompanied with many
followers, and then my Lord displayde his colors straight, and with the charge
of Trumpet, Drum, and Fyfe, these brave batalians straight encountered, but in
the skirmish which continued long, my Lord began faint, which Richmond straight
perceived, and presently did sound afresh alarm, but worthy Richard that did
never fly, but followed honor to the gates of death, straight spurd his horse
to encounter with the Earl, in which encountry Richmond did prevail, and
taking Richard at advantage, then he threw his horse and him both to the
ground, and there was worthy Richard wounded, so that after that he nere
recovered strength. But to be brief, my master would not yield, but with his
loss of life he lost the field. Report farewell.


Enter Earl Richmond, Earl Oxford. L. Standley, and their train, with the
Crown. Rich. Now noble Peers and worthy countrymen, since God has given
us fortune of the day, let us first give thanks unto his Deity, and next with
honors fitting your deserts, I must be grateful to my country men, and
worthy Oxford for thy service shown in hot encountering of the enemy, Earl
Richmond binds himself in lasting bonds of faithful love and perfect
unity. Sorry I am for those that I have lost by our so dangerous encountering
with the foe, but sorrow cannot bring the dead to life: and therefore are my
sorrows spent in vain. Only to those that live, thus much I say, I will
maintain them with a manual pay. And loving father, lastly to your self, tho
not the least in our expected aid, we give more thanks for your unlooked for
aid, then we have power on sudden to declare, but for your thanks I hope it
shall suffice that I in nature love and honor you.


L. Stan. Well spoken son, and like a man of worth, whose resolution in this
battle past, has made thee famous among thy enemies. And think my son, I
glory more to hear what praise the common people gave of thee, then if the
Peers by general full consent had set me down to wear the Diadem. Then live
my son thus loved of thy friends, and for thy foes prepare to combat them.


Oxf. And Oxford vows perpetual love to thee, wishing as many honors to
Earl Richmond, as Caesar had in conquering the world, and I doubt not but if
fair fortune follow thee, to see thee honored among thy country men, as
Hector was among the Lords of Troy, or Y^lley among the Roman Senators.


Rich. How fares our lovely mother Queen?


Enters mother Queen and Elizabeth. Queen. In health Earl Richmond, glad to
hear the news that God has given thee fortune of the day. But tell me Lords,
where is my son Lord Marquess Dorset, that he is not here? what was he
murdered in this Tragedy?


Rich. No lovely Queen your son does live in France, for being distressed and
driven by force of tempest to that shore, and many of our men being sick and
dead, we were inforst to ask the King for aid, as well for men as for
munition, which then the King did willingly supply, provided, that as hostage
for those men, Lord Marquess Dorset should be pledge with the^. But Madame now
our troubled war is done, Lord Marquess Dorset shall come home again.


Queen. Richmond, gramercies for thy kind good news, which is no little
comfort to thy friends, to see how God has been thy happy guide in this late
conquest of our enemies. And Richmond, as thou art returned with victory, so
we will keep our words effectually.


Rich. Then Madame for our happy battelles victory, first thanks to heaven,
next to my foreward countrymen, but Madame pardon me tho I make bold to charge
you with a promise that you made, which was confirmed by diverse of the Peers,
touching the marriage of Elizabeth, and having ended what I promised you,
Madam, I look and hope to have my due.


Stand. Then know my son, the Peers by full consent, in that thou have freed
them from a tyrants yoke, have by election chosen thee as King, first in regard
they account thee virtuous, next, for that they hope all foreign broils shall
cease, and thou will guide and govern them in peace, then sit thou down my
son, and here receive the Crown of England as thy proper own, sit down.


Oxf. Henry the seventh, by the grace of God, King of England, France, and Lord
of Ireland, God save the King.


All. Long live Henry the seventh, King of England.


Rich. Thanks loving friends and my kind countrymen, and here I vow in
presence of you all, to root abuses from this commonwealth, which now flows
faster then the furious tide that ouerflowes beyond the banks of Nile. And
loving father, and my other friends, whose ready forwardness has made me
fortunate, Richmond will still in honorable love count himself to be at your
dispose, nor do I wish to enjoy a longer life, then I shall live to think upon
your love. But what says fair Elizabeth to us? for now we have welcomed our
other friends, I must bid you welcome Lady amongst the rest, and in my welcome
crave to be resolved, how you resolve touching my proffered love unto you, here
your mother and the Peers agree, and all is ended, if you condescend.


Eliz. Then know my Lord, that if my mother please, I must in duty yield to
her command, for when our aged father left his life, he willed us honor still
our mothers age: and therefore as my duty does command, I do commit my self
to her dispose.


Queen. Then here my Lord, receive thy royal spouse, virtuous Elizabeth, for
both the Peers and Commons do agree, that this fair Princess shall be wife
to thee. And we pray all, that fair Elizabeth may live for aye, and never
yield to death.


Rich. And so say I, thanks (...) you all my Lords, that thus have honored
Richmond with a Crown, and if I live, then make account my Lords I will
deserve this with more then common love.


Stan. And now were but my form George Standley here,
How happy were our present meeting then,
But he is dead, nor shall I evermore see my sweet
Boy whom I do love so dear, for well I know the usurper
In his rage has made a slaughter of my aged joy.

Rich. Take comfort gentle father, for I hope my brother George will turn in
safe to us.


Stand. A no my son, for he that joys in blood, will work his fury on the
innocent.


Enters two Messengers with George Standley. Stan. But how now what noise is
this?


Mess. Behold Lord Standley we bring thy son, thy son George Standley, whom
with great danger we have saved from fury of a tyrants doom.


L. Stan. And lives George Standley? Then happy that I am to see him freed
thus from a tyrants rage. Welcome my son, my sweet George welcome home.


George Stan. Thanks my good father, and George Standley joys to see you joined
in this assembly. And like a lamb kept by a greedy Woolfe within the enclosed
sentire of the earth, expecting death without delivery, even from this danger
is George Standley come, to be a guest to Richmond and the rest: for when the
bloody butcher heard your honor did refuse to come to him, he like a savage
tygre then enraged, commanded straight I should be murdered, and sent these two
to execute the deed, but they, but they, that knew how innocent I was, did post
him off with many long delays, alleging reasons to alaie his rage, but it was
in vain, for he like to a starued Lioness still called for blood, saying that
I should die. But to be brief, when both the battles joined, these two and
others, shifted me away.


Rich. Now seeing that each thing turns to our content,
I will it be proclaimed presently, that traytrous Richard
Be by our command, drawn thr^ugh the streets of Lester,
Stark naked on a Colliers horse let him be laid,
For as of others pains he had no regard,
So let him have a traitors due reward.
Now for our marriage and our nuptial rytes,
Our pleasure is they be solemnized
In our Abbey of Westminster, according to the ancient custom due,
The two and twentieth day of August next,
Set forwards then my Lords toward London straight,
There to take further order for the state.

Mess. Thus Gentles may you here behold, the joining of these Houses both in
one, by this brave Prince Henry the seventh, who was for wit compared to
Solomon, his government was virtuous every way, and God did wonderously
increase his store, he did subdue a proud rebellious Lord, that did encounter
him upon black health. He died when he had reigned full three and twenty
years eight months, and some odd days, and lies buried in Westminster. He
died and left behind a son.


Mess. A son he left, a Harry of that name, a worthy, valiant, and
victorious Prince, for on the fifth year of his happy reign, he entered
France, and to the Frenchmens costs, he won Turwen, and Turney. The Emperor
served this King for common pay, and as a mersonary prince did follow him. Then
after Morle and Morles, conquered he, and still did keep the French men at a
bay. And lastly in this Kings decreasing age, he conquered Bullen, and after
when he was turned home he died, when he had reigned full thirty eight years,
nine months and some odd days, and was buried in Windsore. He died and left
three famous springs behind him.

Edward the sixth, he did restore the Gospel to his light, and finished that
his father left undone. A wise young Prince, given greatly to his book. He
brought the English service first in use, and died when he had reigned six
years, five months, and some odd days, and lies buried in Westminster.


Eliza. Next after him a Mary did succeed, which married Philip King of
Spain, she reigned five years, four months, and some odd days, and is
buried in Westminster. When she was dead, her sister did succeed.


Queen. Worthy Elizabeth, a mirror in her age, by whose wise life and civil
government, her country was defended from the cruelty of famine, fire and
sword, wars, fearful messengers.

This is that Queen as writers truly say,
That God had marked down to live for aye.
Then happy England among thy neighbor Isles,
For peace and plenty still attends on thee:
And all the favorable Planets smiles
To see thee live, in such prosperity.
She is that lamp that keeps fair Englands light,
And through her faith her country lives in peace:
And she has put proud Antichrist to flight,
And been the means that civil wars did cease.
Then England kneel upon thy hairy knee,
And thank that God that still prouides for thee.
The Turk admires to hear her government,
And babies in ^ury, sound her princely name,
All Christian Princes to that Prince has sent,
After her rule was rumord forth by fame.
The Turk has sworn never to lift his hand,
To wrong the Princess of this blessed land.
Twere vain to tell the care this Queen has had,
In helping those that were oppressed by war:
And how her Majesty has still been glad,
When she has heard of peace proclaimed from far.
Ieneua, France, and Flanders has set down,
The good she has done, since she came to the Crown.
For which, if ere her life be taken away,
God grant her soul may live in heaven for aye.
For if her Graces days be brought to end,
Your hope is gone, on whom did peace depend.

FINIS.

