A TREATISE of Ecclesiastical and Politic power.

SHOWING, The Church is a Monarchical government, ordained to a supernatural
and spiritual end, tempered with an aristocraticall order, (which is the best
of all and most conformable to nature) by the great Pastor of souls Jesus
Christ.

Faithfully translated out of the Latin original, of late publicly printed
and allowed in Paris.

Now set forth for a further warrant and encouragement to the Romish
Catholics of England, for their taking of the Oath of Allegiance; seeing so
many others of their own profession in other Countries do deny the Popes
infalibility in judgment and temporal power over Princes, directly against
the doctrine of Jesuits.

To the PRINCE.

Printed by VV.S. and are to be sold by John Budge, at the great South door of
Paul's, and at Britains Bursse. 1612.

To the Prince.
SIR,
THese are not now idle fancies of mine own, hot ebullitions of a French
blood, youthfully sounding the charge long before the combat; No nor of any
one man alone, never so wise, never so temperat. They are the grave
disputations, the sound decisions of a whole company, one of the most famous,
as one of the most ancient in the world, for divine and humane learning: Who
now sets forth to the open view of all men what their opinion is about the
Popes either lawful or unlawful authority. No more are they any particular
imaginations, or exact conclusions of Protestants, the Popes open adversaries,
or some other (if there be any) of his violent enemies; who, perhaps to forward
in their own way, deny utterly all the authority of the Bishop of Rome,
because he has usurped too much, and would have Rome totally ruyned because
there are many abuses therein; and not rather to be reformed by good laws,
reducing order and conueniency to their own ancient just and lawful use: Much
like unto that people, that wholly forbids the use of that good creature of God,
wine, because hurtful by accident, rather then to temper his fury with water,
or moderate the quantity. They are, I say, the too too gentle, the too too
indulgent determinations of the Popes best friends, of his derest darlings,
nay, of his own strongest support in France, by whom he reigns yet there,
and without whom he (...) not have an inch of credit in that whole kingdom:
Determinations, which yet seeming to make good the reasons of the French
Herald, and conclude, ex obliquo at least, to his Croisade, makes me the
bolder to tender this unto your Highness, to whom that other was also
dedicated: As a confirmation now by these wise men, of those reasons which, as
his own, he did at that time esteem more foolish, then for the respect due
unto the assent of such persons, he dares ever hold them hereafter. For indeed
what should we not boldly execute against him, that with fire and sword, open
invasion and secret treasons, declares himself so violent and bloody an enemy
to us, though we not to him? We, I say, right reformed Christians and
Catholics who, rightly lightened with the shining truth of the spirit and the
Scripture, have so lawfully shaken off that most unjust, most unsupportable
iron-yoake of later years forged in the Church of Rome; when we see his own
men, his own maintainers so flatly condemn him? But alas! what order to be
taken? I am not able to give counsel, much less to command. Only this, my
most hearty prayer unto the Almighty shall be, and as long as I breath I will
never finish it, till it be finished or my self; That now when it seems that
in these latter days, by frequent disputations the truth begins to clear it
self of those dark clouds of ignorance, and thick vayles wherein it had
been hitherto purposely wrapped and ouercast; Now that it seems that all
Christians of all professions, at least those of the better sort among them,
draw nearer then ever they did one to another, and all to that happy medium,
wherein consists the true and only hope of a general reconciliation, it may
please his heavenly goodness to stir up, and strongly move all Christian
Princes and Magistrates, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, to call together a
good lawful and free Council, as general as may be; wherein all absolute and
necessary points to salvation, being considerately with brotherly love, and
without animosity discussed, we may with common consent of all, frame together
a constant substantial and universal profession of our faith: As without
doubt it would be a thing most fit to prevent and avoid many scandals, and
easy enogh to be attained unto, if every one would leave all peremptorinesse
of his own sense, and cleave to the right naked and unpassionate truth. It
remaining, for the rest, lawful to every national Church, in things
indifferent and not altogether absolute and necessary to salvation,
differently to believe according to their best advise and Christian liberty.
It is a thing which (after God) we must solely and only hope from the hands
of that thrice-great King your royal father, he having a particular right to
it by his title of Defender of the Faith, as indeed he makes himself every
day more and more worthy of the same, both abroad and at home, carefully
suppressing heresies ^^en in their birth, there by his credit, here by his
command, there by his word of advice, here by his sword of Justice. Oh! what
help our famous Henry the Great would also have yielded to this, if those that
did smell out some such purpose in him, had not, as vnluckely as traitorously
shortened his days.

But in that happy assembly let it not be forgotten for the first point and
ground of all the following good, to give back again to the Catholic Church
her ancient right and authority; clipping the Popes wings of so much as he
has most tyrannously usurped, and reduced vniuersallity to his own particular.
For otherwise, as long as that tyrannical, unbridled, monstrous, impious,
omnipotency (which none can tell yet how far it runs, or can stretch it
self,) be not limited within the bounds of reason, I mean of the law of God,
there is no hope of reconciliation, no hope ever of any good at all. I do not
deny that the Bishop of Rome has altogether no authority as from God; Neither
but that he may have a great deal more by the free grant of Councels, or by
the liberallitie of Princes. That which he has as from God, let him keep it
still in Gods name; The gifts of God are without repentance. Yea, Romans 11.29.
let him keep that which he has lawfully received of ancient Councels, as
the first place among the five Patriarchs, between whom the care of all the
Churches of the world was friendly and almost equally divided, and to him by
especial assigned the care of these West-churches; In which respect only the
King makes no difficulty to call the church of Rome, In his Majesty's first
speech to the Parliament.
our Mother Church. Let him also keep that which ancient godly Princes have
given him, though he cannot show, nor who, nor how, nor when: so that he
acknowledge it, at least, use it as a free gift, and not like a desperate
ungrateful rebel, to the prejudice of the heyrs of his benefactors. For in
that case the gifts of Princes are not as the gifts of God, and, be they never
so firmly sealed, never so ancient, or pleading prescription, are ever and
most lawfully subject to a just resumption. But if still through shame or
malice he be loath to accept of these most reasonable terms, and be brought
again to his first estate, though glorious enough for any temperate ambition; I
mean to that which he has by the four former general Councels, and by the
Emperors of those times (for otherwise to reduce him to that which he has by
S. Peter, (if even he have any thing by S. Peter) it were but a poor and
very beggarly thing: Finally if he will not voluntarily forgo all
usurpation or abuse, never so ancient or modern, let him be most iustl^
deprived thereof, as a preuaricator, and be brought by mere force to that
which he should voluntarily and wisely yield unto by right. Whereupon
strengthened now the more with the opinions of that famous Society, which is no
less then a little continually standing Council in France, allowed by the
Pope himself, I conclude still with the French Herald, to a general Croisade
against him that is now become the great enemy of Christendom; And that the
execution of the decrees of that blessed council being put into your Princely
hands, as the Lieftenant general of the high Defender of the faith, the whole
Catholic Church, sighing and panting under the heavy load of that cruel
tyranny, may for ever be beholding to your valor, and extol you as the
restorer of her liberty. Up then, up, brave Prince; the eyes of all
Christendom are now cast upon you, to see you begin; you shall not want
friends and followers, even more then you think, even more then perhaps you
look for. Those that now dare not show their heads for want of a General,
will mount upon the tallest coursers they can find to show their whole body,
and draw with more have to be nearest to you; At least you shall know who be
your friends. For if the first blow be not given unto that monster by your
Royal father, and the second and last by your self; sure, sure, I know not
who will begin, much less who shall make an end. And least any man believe
that I stand yet wilfully and without just causes in my old vain; or that I
persuade you upon the reasons of strangers, or any modern writers only; I
end with an instance of your own, a grave prophecy or a sentence, if you
will, given in this case almost four hundred years since, by a right
reverend, godly bishop of yours, Robert of Lincoln, altogether out of
likelihood to savor any thing of the hot French, or of the interessed
Protestant. Another man of yours, your ancient and learned Mat. Paris cites
it, In Henrico iii. An. 1153.
out of whose books I could bring almost as many arguments to this purpose, as
there are leaves, howsoever otherwise a passionate mainteiner of the Apostolic
sea. That good old Prelate dying in a full age, after that he had lived and
served here under the tyranny of three or four Popes, Gregory 9. Celestin 4.
Innocent 4. having held a long discourse with his Priests and Clergy the same
night that he dyed, in complaint of the hard and miserable estate of the
Church in those times, accusing the Popes only, as the total cause thereof,
and calling them Heretics and Antichrists, at last did willingly yield up his
blessed soul (the nearer to happiness, the sharper-sighted and surer in her
judgments) with great vehemency, sending forth this last Oracle from the
bottom of his heart. The Church shall never be delivered out of this Egiptian
bondage, unless it be by the mouth of the bloody sword. To the sword then,
Nota.
to the sword, I durst almost say even at this instant, for at last when
Council and all is done, we shall ever be put to it. Possession is very
sweet; and that Judicious man, best acquainted with the humor of Popes, knew
full well that they do not part so easily from what they have once catched
hold of. If all this do not satisfy the world, truly then I know not what
shall, though I know very well what should; howbeit hardly of more weight
then that which is handled through all this Book. Finally, to the end none may
say that I am more ready to talk then to do, I vow faithfully that if ever
this holy purpose go forward, and God let me enjoy my self, I shall be one
of the forwardest, in my poor condition, to show by my best endeavors in life
or death, how much I am

Your Highnesses Most humble, most faithful and most devoted servant D

To the Romish Catholics of England.
MOst dear, though but half brethren, whom yet I wholly love, even though you
were but men, a great deal more being Christians, most of all, being English
Christians, and subjects to that great Monarch, my adoptiue Master; who having
been so gracious unto me, far, far beyond my deserts or any hope I might
ever have builded thereon, has bound me for ever to apply, vow and dedicate
all my life, studies, service and best endeavors to him and for him, and for
his sake to all such as are his: In his Majesty's first speech to the
Parliament.
whom, even for that respect only, I must needs love, though they were but half
his, as long as he wants the best part of them, that is their souls, as he
himself in some place says of your selves.

In that resolution, and for as much as the whole need not the Physician, and
that indeed I am no Physician at all, leaving to God and themselves that other
part of the good people of this famous kingdom, which agrees in faith and
belief with us; And choosing you, as the fittest object for my love and
service to work upon, and in you that best part of you, your souls: yea, even
in that leaving that greter business of your whole conversion for spiritual
things, to the working care of that so worthy Abbot, who has deserved to be a
more worthy Archbishop and Prim^te of so flourishing a Church, Of an eloquent
King of London, Of an acute indeed, and much acute Montaign of Bathes and Wels;
Of that other learned Abbot, Of that right divine and Judicious Leyfield, Of
substantial and fruitful Field; yea, d^ring to leave you to the lively remains
of a rich English Jewel, Of a solid Hooker, so skilful, that with one only hook
he fisheth of both sides, with many others, both alive and a sleep, so easy to
be found, so hard to be nu^bred; and meddling only in temporalty and such
things as are and have ever been received for constant and common religion
thorough all the world, but only some few years since, that the devil, being
almost at a bay, strugleth with his last and most violent endeavors, against
the truth that strangleth him; Nevertheless meddling herein more for your own
good, then for his Majesty's, which yet as a right Pater Patriae, as a kind
Pater-familias of the Commonwealth, he will ever esteem his own when it is
yours: I thought some months a go to have presented you in your own language
that famous letter of a great friend of yours, the Jesuit Cotton, written in
French to the Queen Regent of France in disalowance of Marianaes book, and
other writings of other Jesuits, approouing disobedience of subjects to their
own lawful kings, in temporal matters, even to their poisoning and murder.
But another man with more have then good speed (I am sure) though not with a
better mind then my self, serving it unto you in another dish and with a
sower sauce in the end, of that odious chamber of meditations, did quite mar
the good use that ye both and we, I mean the whole state, might very well
have reapt thereof. All things are not fit to be said at all times, neither
ought we so nakedly to uncover the shame of our brethren as long as there is any
hope of amendment, principally being most certain that the best part of you
does not allow, yea, I dare say, not know those abominable, execrable and
almost incredible courses. For no doubt but it would have made some impression
in your hearts, to have seen (without such a bitter addition, quite then out of
season, and rather to exasperate then to pacify you) so famous a man, a Jesuit
by profession, and one of your greater saints, writing of set purpose to so
eminent a person, and impugning whatsoever hitherto has been, or hereafter
might be, written by any of his own order, or by others, against the temporal
authority of Princes over their subjects; cyting orderly one by one, as
numerus certus pro incerto a doze^ of famous Jesuits, Cardinal Tolet,
Cardinal Bellarmine, Gregory of Valencia, Salmeron, Delrio, Heyssius, Becanus,
Gretzerus, Lessius, Serrerius, Azor, Richeom, every one with some special
place mainteining the Princes temporal authority. And for better fortifying
thereof setting down of himself, and without any urging, 15. heads and
principles of the faith, and belief of their whole society about that matter
whereof among the rest, the 6. 7. 8 9. 10. 11. 12. are these, after that in the
former he has established and highly commended the monarchical state, as the
best.

Simeon Archbishop of Thessalonica says) may understand that they ought to be
inviolable, and respected as holy and sacred persons.

Romans 13.2.



1. Pet. 2.18.

Nebucadnezar, and Baltazar Bar. i. ii. And that those persecutions, losses of
goods, and other afflictions which are patiently suffered for that cause, and
without rebellion against their superiors, are things most pleasing to God,
and agreeable to that praise which Paul gives to the Ebrewes, cap. 10.34. and
to that ordinance by himself published in the Church. Romans 1^ 1.



All which articles and letter, though by some, accused of some equivocation,
truly at least by all honest plaine-dealing men and fully good subjects, of to
much sparingnesse and cohibition in a matter which deserved with an open mouth
to have been more clearly and largely extended; yet willing to take al things
in the best sense, even in our adversaries, and receive as lawful and current,
the coin of ill pay-masters, never so base, never so clipped, so it be but
indifferent good: I then purposed with a peaceful, charitable, and truly
Christian and brotherly mind and fashion, to set them before your eyes, to the
end you might with as peaceful a spirit, and not stirred or distasted by any
unsavory appendix, conceive at least of this point, That so many other Jesuits
of other nations are not of the same opinion in that behalf with your Parsons,
Campion, Creswell, Garnet, Hall, Greenwell, Gerard, Hamo^d, and other your
fiery Jesuits; which as right Puritans among their other fellows, that is
abstractum de abstracto, (as though England were the only Seminary in the
world, for such a cumbersome, to sharp-sighted, and to sharp-minded zeal)
defin^ng and refining law and Gospel according to their own humors and
private ends, till they have (I fear me, and God forbid) finished and
dissolved all, make Religion where there is none, and irreligion of that which
is most sacred and religious: As by all laws both divine, natural,
Ecclesiastical, politic and positive, temporal obedience of subjects to their
Princes is, and has ever been held.

But that good duty being intercepted, as I told you before, I had very
willingly requited it by presenting you another book of another, though yet my
Countryman, still of your own profession, for with other arms will I never
urge you, then those that your own men shall put into my hands; A man truly
most worthy and learned, A book most worth reading, entitled Of the common
offense and privileged case, wherein showing by degrees, and from age to age,
the incroaching increase of the authority of the Popes and Churchmen, in that
old time of thick ignorance, when scarce any in the world but they could read
or write his name, that Author most excellently proves that a principio non
erat sic, and that from the beginning and many hundred years after, al
Churchmen without exception were subject to the full obedience and Justice of
their civil Princes, till by their favorable grant and relaxation, or rather
by an ouer-religious stat^nesse, vnprouidency and scrupulous simplicity,
Churchmen by tract of time got to be released in some cases; from whence first
arose the distinction, betwixt delictum commune and casus priuilegiatus as they
call them.

But fearing least that book never so clear, never so well followed, might not
be of great moment with you, as being written by a private man, not perhaps so
famous among you as your own father Cotton, though a noble Judge of one of our
high Courts of Parliament, and his book openly printed, allowed and licenced
by Catholic learned Divines I thought rather to look for a better
opportunity; which, I am sure, has not been ever since so effectual as this,
nor perhaps will be a long time hereafter. For unless it be in a general
Council, it is not to be hoped that you may ever have a constant resolution of
so many and so learned Doctors of your own and above all so little interessed
in your case, but rather which being able to claim more then you, as being
Churchmen themselves, disclaim honestly and willingly that which is not theirs,
the more therefore to be believed. It is no more Luther that speaks in Bohemia,
Calvin in Geneua, Henry 8. in England, James the sixth, in Scotland; you cannot
impute this to any particular quarrel, or heresy. They are not private men of
another Country that speak in their own sense, and of which you might say
they may ouershoot themselves, though of your own profession, as the two above
mentioned. It is not one Blackwel your Archpriest, one VVarmington, one
Sheldon, your Priests, of whom you might say the two former were prisoners,
the last a Runne-away. VViddrington at least was free, that so learnedly
confutes Bellarmine by Bellarmine himself, and is your own still, yea most
passionate; as the fashion is of all those that have forsaken us, therefore the
more worthy to be credited by you. Though it be a great wonder how he has
been able to reserve still so much reason and honesty to make a stop there,
since it is not the good hap of such as fall once from the steep rock of the
truth, to graspe any where, but rather always to tumble from an error to an
heresy, till they be, legs and lims all broken, overwhelmed in the bottom
or rather in the bottomless pit; yet it is not he that speaks It is not the
King himself, of whom you might say he speaks in his own cause, though no
otherwise then a good Father, commending natural duty to his belooued
Children, And, I pray you, who shall loose most, or be punished at last, either
the godly father for admonishing his rebellious children, or they for denying
him his due? It is not that so powerfully fulmino^^ in vanos illos fulminatores
et vacua fulmina Capitolij, learned Andrews, or any other of our grave men; of
whom you might say, they speak to please the King. They are free and frank
Frenchmen that speak, in France it self, the mother of all fraunchise and
freedom; free, not only in their bodies, but without prejudice in their
minds. For of those Frenchmen they are not that part, which, being nearer in
faith to us here, you might perhaps nickname Puritans, open and opposite
enemies to the Pope; No such matter; They are your own dear Brethren, rather
then our common friends, the same sheep of one pretended fold with your selves,
the Popes most obedient and gentle children: who rather by too gracious and
charitable a granting, then by a restraining manner, rather give a new far
stretched power to your common father, then abridge him of any of his old. It
is, I say, whole France that speaks by her Sorbonne, and that whole society
agreeing together as one man speaks also by one man, their Sindick and learned
Speaker Riche^, very well known though not named: The Sorbonne of Paris, I say,
so famous through all Christendom, and which being an ancient company of the
most grave and learned French doctors in Divinity, and both canonical and
civil law, is, as it were, a continual standing council in France allowed by
the Pope, at least represents it as long as there is none else; and to their
oracles, in that respect, all France in a time of need, yea verte often many
foreign Countries have had their refuge. For eue^ when at the first this very
same book came forth without a name, as a child exposd to fortun, that it might
be the more free to any to oppose and allege what they would, what they could
against it; Then indeed the Nuncio, perceiving his master so thoroughly let
blood, not only in his Cefalica or Basilica, that is in his headship over the
church, or royalty over Princes, but even in his Arteria magna, wherein
consists the life and the spirit of all his being, runs in a great heat to
diverse Bishops and Cardinals; and gathering as many as he could to accompany
one, the greatest indeed among them all, willing nilling (as one that truly
has ever bin very moderate, but yet has so near an interest in the Pope,
both by oath and by hope he may well have to be a Pope himself one day, is,
sure, he is more worthy of the place, then the place, as now it is, of him)
sends him in all the have to complain to the Counsel, and demand the
suppression of this book. But that right worthy of that name Henry de Bourbon,
most worthily the first Prince of the blood, having thoroughly perused it
before hand, undertakes bravely the defense thereof and, in the behalf of our
young Jews his Lord and near kinsman, ouerthrows the reasons without reason,
of the Bishops, Cardinal and all, giving by authority of the whole Counsel,
more authority to the book then it had before. For even that other eye of
France Charles de Bourbon, Earl of Soissons, taking then first notice of the
book, and therefore not able to speak much to it, but upon the assurance of
his nephews sufficiency, caused it purposely to be translated to understand it
better, and finding it also most just, equitable and well grounded, it was
publicly printed in French, whereas it was before but in Latin. Then was
Sorbonne also consulted (as they use in such cases) which gave freely their
opinion in favor of the book, as knowing full well from whence it came, and
beginning the, as it were, to auow it as their own. Whereupon the Nuncioes crew
yet not yielding, but continuing to gather, it self together three or four
days to advise of some means for their redress, as soon as that famous high
Court of Parliament of Paris, the right arm of our Kings, and in some sort
Protectors of the kingdom in a nonage, had notice of it, they sent immediately
the kings Atturny general to bid the^ upon pain of the Kings displeasure to
separate themselves, and leave off such co^uenticles, which were not only
without, but against the Kings authority, and of the Church about such things
as were allowed by his Majesty's most honorable priu^ Counsel, by the
Sorbonne, and by themselves, them three representing, as it were, the three
Estates, that is to say the whole kingdom.

And now that which that most Christian France says, is nothing new, or of
her own self, but Serenissime Venice has said as much upon mature
consultation of al her Divines, and says so still; Catholic Spain it self
thinking no less: which yet has spoken sometimes as far as any of the rest,
if not further, as their own manifold Councils held at Toledo, most learnedly
cited in that Royal Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, do manifestly iterate
and testify. France, Spain and Venice, the three Charites, the three minions
of the Pope, that yet stick most strictly to him, and nevertheless, two of
them at least, do but hold by a bare and very small thread; As the third also
would stand in the like case, but that being so near and terryfying a
neighbor of all sides unto the Pope, he holds him by the throat (as they say)
being able to starve him to death with all the Consistory, whenever he will
but restrain the transportation of corn out of Sicily and other his dominions
round about: whereby he commands more then he is commanded (not perhaps more
then hated, if they durst show it) and never gives their holy Ghost leave to
sing any other song, but that which he sends him ready pricked from Madrid.

Now then, if these men when they have done al their utmost power, yea, in the
stretching of their love and filial duty, enlarged kindness beyond that which
they can well warrant; yet can they assign unto their father the Pope, no more
then a general care of souls with a ministerial direction only for order
and execution of Canons over particular Churches; no power at all over the
universal Church in gross, much less over a general Council, much less,
or in the same degree, over the bodies of men by violence, or any temporal
punishment, but by mere counsel and persuasion only: And if not so much as
over private bodies, least of all over Kings and civil Princes, which rather
they allow and openly acknowledge to have right and authority to command both
Church and Churchmen in some cases; to which Princes all men, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, must be most humble and faithful subjects, as being
(in so much as they be Lords of the territory) established by God, Protectors
and Defendors of the Church, and of both Divine and Natural laws with
attribution of the material Sword to themselves only, priuatiuely and
exclusiuely from all others within their own dominions. What stop then any
more, dear brethren, but that you should gladly yield your natural duty and
allegiance to your natural king, since ye are bound to yield it even to the
froward? 1. Pet. 2.18.
That you should willingly give him but that simple pawn of your loyalty,
your oath, the simplest that could ever be imagined upon that great straight
and necessity whereunto the State was brought by that portentuous mischief,
which did once so nearely and daungerously threaten kingdom and us all, as you
your selves have been most vndoubting eyewitnesses? You shall not be
Catholics nevertheless, and you know how little or nothing besides that, is
required at your hands; your consciences are no ways pressed; your thoughts
are most free, and your words (thank God for it and your gracious King) may
freely express them. In so much that every day some of you (God forbid I
should say all) dispute as peremptorily, speak as odiously, decide as
unchristianly, inueigh as publicly against us, and our Religion here, in the
midst of London, to our selves, and one to another to our own faces, as though
they were in the very middle of Rome or Seuil very far from the pitiless
fires of those hot Countries, where they burn without remission, not only such
as speak the least word, I do not say against God (for they let them alone)
but against the Pope, (for that is the greater sin) yea even against those
they can by any means discover to have had, at any time, any thought, or be
able afterward to have it, against him. Only all you may complain of, is
that ye have not as free and as public exer^ise, as we, of the rites of your
Religion: And yet in some sort have ye it, by hook and by crook, or by a
sovereign transcendency of grace; so much have ever all Magistrates of our
Religion abhorred extreme execution of the laws, but being forced thereunto
by violent attempts. For shame therefore be contented; Enjoy peaceably that
liberty which you may buy so cheap; and rather love the certain quietness of
your present estate, then the incertitude of another, which sure cannot be but
troublesome. Force not by an unnatural rebelliou^ wilfulness in so just, in so
lawful a matter, your natural and most gracious King to be most
vnvnwillingly, and with a great grief to h^s heart, more sharp against you
then the sweet inclination and meeknes of his royal nature will bear.

I conclude with an addition, to your further encouragement, of some decrees d
cided and set down two hundred years ago by the very same Sorbonne against
that false doctrine, and such as seemed then to broach it a new, whom they
never failed to condemn, and caused them publicly to ask pardon and make
satisfaction, as Friar John Sarazin, John Tanquarell, Florentin Jacob, Thomas
de Blanzy, and sundry others at sundry times did; Which decrees yet now of
late they have caused again to be printed by their own Printer, Felix de
Blanuile, in S. Victors street in Paris, and bound together with this present
book, with this title, Of the power and supremacy of the Pope. Against the
Sectaries of this age. Repeating once more the diffinition of the Church, as it
is set down in the title page of this book, to point, as it were, with the
finger that both sprung together out of one and the same fountain: Whereby you
may see how careful they have ever been to dash the young ones of Babylon
against the right rock of the truth.

The decrees are these, after a long rehearsal of the cause and ceremonies of
Sarrazins recantation, in presence of the Rector of the University, and whole
scores of Doctors there named one by one, as witnesses.




his church, and expressly ordained other powers, differing from that of the
Pope.











Finally, most heartily entreating you to take in the best part of this my
loving zeal and fervent affection, I cease; yet never ceasing most devoutly to
pray still both for your own good, for the kings service, for the peace of the
land, and generally for the service of God, that he will give me grace I may
tru^ly say with Paul, in your behalf (since the case is not very much unlike)
that which he says of the Jews, Romans 9. I speak the truth in Christ, I lie
not, my conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, that I have great
heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart, for I would my self even be
separate for my brethren the [Romish Catholikes] to whom pertained the
adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the
service of God and the promises, of whom are the Fathers, and who having
bequeathed or rather bequited them unto us, as the Sinagogue had done unto
them, both remain deprived thereof; Whereunto I pray God from the bottom of
my heart to restore you all again with us, that so both Jews and all
Christians, as natural brethren after a long discord reconciled together under
one God and father, one Lord and Elder Brother, in one Church and Mother, may
enjoy together one eternal glory in the heavenly Jerusalem, which is the
mother of us all. Amen.

The Argument of the whole Treatise consisting of eighteen Sections.






A dicto secu^dum quid, ad dictum simpliciter.
as being inferred from that which is said in some respect, to that which is
affirmed simply.



Peter: And that proved by the practice of the whole Church.

Simon, Behold, Satan has desired to wi^ow you as wheat; but I have prayed
for thee, that thy faith fail not etc.











Appellationes de abusu.
appeals for abuse, as they are termed: And from thence have the liberties of
the Gallicane Church had their beginning.





No body must judge the first See.

Peter is by the Church, and for the Church; as the eye by man and for man.



A TREATISE OF Ecclesiastical and Politic power.
IT is a common Principle and of an undoubted faith, that God and Nature have
still a more chief and immediate regard to the whole, then to any part, never
so noble, thereof. And for an example the power of Seeing has therefore bin
given unto man, that it might be executed by the eye, as man's instrument and
minister to that purpose; for the eye subsisteth both by man, and for man. The
School of Paris building upon that most infallible ground, conformably to the
opinion of all ancient Doctors of the Church, has ever and most constantly
taught, That Christ in the foundation of his Church has more chiefly,
immediately and essentially given the keys, or authority to the whole Church,
then to Peter; Or (which comes al to one) That he has given the keys to the
whole Church, ministerially to be used by one man: Seeing all Ecclesiastical
power belongs properly, essentially and first, to the Church; but to the Pope,
and other Bishops instrumentally, and ministerially, and only so far forth as
concerns the exercising, as the power of seeing to the eye: Let no body
therefore glory in men, for all things are yours (that is to say of the church)
Whether it be Paul, or Apolos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death,
whether things present or to come; for all things are the Churches, and the
Church Christ's, and Christ's Gods. 1. Cor. 3. etc.

Mat. 16.19. to promise by words of future, the keys to Saint Peter in the
name of the whole Church, after this manner, I will give thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, etc. He did afterward actually give and deliver them to
the whole hierarchical order together, First by a general commission, Mat.
18.17. where he does establish the Church sufficient in it self, and a chief
Gouernesse Tell it unto the Church; Secondly, by a real sending forth. Luc.
10.1. The Lord appointed other seauenty also, and sent them two and two before
him, into every city and place whither he himself should come. John 17.18.
Likewise when a little before, or immediately after the celebration of the
Lords supper, he prays to his father for his Church in these words; As thou
have sent me into the world, so have I sent them into the world; and for their
sakes sanctify I my self, that they also may be sanctified through the
truth; And a verse farther, That they all may be one, as thou, O father, art
in me, and I in thee; and may also be one in us, that the world may believe
thou have sent me; And one verse after, That they may be made perfect in one
etc By which words it appears clearly, That Christ has not delivered the
infallible power of the Keys so much unto Peter himself and alone, as unto the
unity it self; as S. Cyprian and S. Austen do confirm, 24. quaest 1. can
Quodcunque, can. Loquitur, can. Alienus Moreover, John 20.21. As my father sent
me, so send I you, Receive the holy Ghost, whosoever: sins you remit etc.
Seeing then, that true and real mission is a conferring of jurisdiction, by
the authority of the Apostle, Romans 10.15. And how shall they preach except
they be sent? And Christ immediately, indiuidually and jointly has sent all his
Apostles and Disciples (which did represent the Episcopal and Priestly order)
as he had been sent of his father, that is with a just and spiritual
authority, necessary for the government of the Church; It follows, That the
whole hierarchical order, consisting of Bishops and Priests, does derive
immediately, yet in a proportion and subordination, his power and jurisdiction
(that is his authority for the governing of the Church) from Christ* As in
France, inferior Judges and Magistrates, although subject to Parliaments,
derive as well and as directly their authority from the King, as the Parliaments
themselves. For those that be are ordained of God: And had never been so
ordained if there were not some subordination between those magistrates, and
the Ecclesiastical persons. And finally the testimony of Paul, Acts 20.28. Take
heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost
has made you Bishops to govern the Church of God. Which doctrine S. Bernard
lib. 3. de Consider, ad Eugen. cap. 10. does very clearly make manifest. Thou
do deceive thy self (says he) if thou think that as your Apostolical
power was ordained by God to be chiefest, so also to be alone. If thou be of
that mind, thou art not of his mind who said Romans 13.1. That there is no power
but from God, Therefore that which follows, Whosoever resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God, though it make principally for thee,
nevertheless not singularly. For the self same who said, Let every soul be
subject unto the higher powers, did not say unto the higher power, as though
they were but in one, but speaks in the plural as being in many. Wherefore
thy power is not alone from God; There are some of the middle sort yea and some
inferior. And as they whom God has joined must not be severed, no more those
who are subject to others must be compared to them. Thou do form a monster,
if removing a finger from the hand, thou will have it hang at the head,
superior to the hand, collateral to the arm: So is it if in the body of the
Church, thou placest the members otherwise then he has disposed them, Ephesians. 4
11
who has set some in the Church to be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfect union of the Saints in
the work of the Ministry, and edification of the body of Christ. Let the
Godly rather look the whole chapter.

But if any happen to object that this power which Christ by an immediate
missio^ did transfer to his Disciples, does not so much concern the authority
of the outward, as of the inward Court. The answer is, that universally all the
ancient fathers of the Church have absolutely expounded it of whatsoever power
necessary to rule the Church, as well in the inward, as in the outward Court;
And that we are bound a great deal more to give credit to their sound
decisions, the^ to the subtle distinctio^s of some Noualists, forged at
pleasure, more easily to maintain and enlarge their liberties, and
extraordinary missions, even to the overthrow of common right. Besides, That
the sum of the whole outward jurisdiction reaches no farther then to the power
of exco^municatio^, which afterward Sect. 6 shall be clearly proved to have
immediately bin delivered up by Christ to the Church. Yet perhaps they will
pretend, that this power of jurisdiction was indeed ordained and co^ferred at
first by Christ to the whole Church, but with such co^ditio^, that it should be
afterward continued and co^ferred to other Bishops, by the Popes, as
successors to S. Peter: And therefore now al authority comes and is derived
only from thence. But thus stop you their mouth, That it is most apparent by
the practice of the primitive Church, and by the holy canons, that al
collatio^s of benefices (as they are now called,) have bin 1400. years
together made by a common right, that is, by holy elections. The reason is,
because al principality, so far as concerns co^pulsiue power, depe^ds of the
co^se^t of men, ^s both divine and natural law do confirm; against which
neither length of time, privilege of places, nor dignity of persons, can ever
prescribe. Which ground being thus laid and settled, of necessity these eight
next ensuing principles must directly follow.

Yet was pleased by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe,
that no flesh should glory in his presence, Cor. 1.25.29. Whereof we will
treat Section. 11. From whence we do also infer, this Article of faith [I
believe one holy Catholic Church] to be of an everlasting verity, seeing as
long as the Evangelical Law does stand, Christ cannot make any divorce from
the Church, his Spouse. Which cannot properly be said of her Simbolicall and
Ministerial head, the Pope; Whom we often see to be absent and present, for
a time at least, without destruction of the Church, for who is ignorant that
the Apostolic Sea has sometimes three, sometimes seven years* been vacant?
So that the Commandment of having a Pope is affirmative, and not negative.

Peter is only the dispenser and Ministerial head, not the Lord, Founder or
foundation of the Church; Titles which belong indeed unto one Christ alone,
and only the essential head; by whom, and for whom the Church subsisteth:
for which cause also he speaks thus to Peter,, Matthew 16.18. Thou art Peter
and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. Wherein is to be noted that he does not say thy Church,
or the gates of Hell shall not prevail against thee; likewise John 21.15.
Feed my Lambs, Feed my Sheep, he does not say thy Sheep, or thy Lambs:
And that purposely, to show that Ecclesiastical men are called to a mere and
simple dispensation or administration, not to any temporal Dominion or
Government merely and absolute Monarchical. The Kings of the Nations reign
over them, but with you it shall not be so Luc. 22.25. and 1. Peter 5.2. Feed
the flock which depends upon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but
willingly, not as Lords of the flock, but that ye may be a good example to
them. Which places of the Scripture Bernard ad Eugen. lib. ^ cap. 5. does
expound after this sort. Go then thou also, and usurp, if thou dare, either
an Apostleship being a Lord, or a Lordship being Apostolical. Thou art
plainly forbidden both, and if thou would possess both together, thou shall
loose both This is the Apostolical form, Dominion is forbidden, ministration
is commanded and commended by the example of the lawgiver, Luc. ^2.27.
I am in the midst of you as one that ministers etc. By which both Saint Peter
and Bernard do set before our eyes a pattern of aristocraticall government*
which shall be more largely described afterward Sect. 5. 6. and 8. I am not
ignorant that our Nouelists, better to defend their privileges, do maintain
that by these words, Feed my sheep, Christ has given the whole Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, solely to Peter alone, to distribute it afterward at his
pleasure to whom he would. But those idle pretenses are so plainly and
manifestly confuted by the Oracles of holy Scripture, by the testimony of all
ancient Fathers, and by the whole practice of the primitive Church, that it is
a great wonder how they dare forge such absurdities. For indeed this speech of
our Lord, Feed my sheep etc. does confer upon S. Peter, as a ministerial head
a prime and full authority of administering, or executing the divine, natural*
and canonical law, according to the rules of aristocraticall moderation: Upon
which point look Sect. 9. Which grounds being thus laid, al those and other
like arguments remain very easily answered, That Petrus is Petra, the
foundation and head of the Church, and therefore without him the Church
falls: Or that as a body being without a head, a stream without a spring, a
beam without a Sun, a branch without a stock, an arm of a tree cut from his
body, perishes and withers; no more can the Church subsist without a Pope.
As though the Pope were the primary, and not the secondary, the essential, and
not the ministerial, Head of the Church. Whence follows that the commandment
of having a Pope binds, Ad semper non pro semper, As Schoolmen speak.
for ever, but not at all times.

Charepiscopi; ibid. Quaest. 1. Can. Ecclesia; and Did. 23. Can. Presbiter.
For the Priests indeed in times past did go (...) the Church in common, as
Saint Hierome doct. wi^nes. Can. Legimus. Did. 93.

The body (of the Church) is not one member only, but many* If the whole body
were an eye, where were the hearing ^ Cor. 12.24.17. And the spirits of the
Prophets are (...) the Prophets; that is to the Church. 1. Cor. 14 (...) There
is but one Bishopric, whereof a part is (...) ^um, that is wholly, by every
one. 24. Quaest. (...) ^tur. Wherefore it is necessary that (...) ^ncernes
all, should be^ also approved (...), Since every high Priest is taken from
(...) ^mpassed with infirmity. Heb. 5.1.2. (...) and be deceived, except he
req^ (...) Church, which is the pillar and groun^ (...) ^refore when Christ was
ready t^ (...) ^hee does promise the spirit of (...) Church, not unto on^ and
only P^^. (...) And I w^^^ pray the Father, and (...) ^ter, that he may abide
with you for ever, (...) ^he spirit of truth. And again. Mat. 18.15. h^^ does
establish his Church sufficient in it self, and a chief Commandresse, by the
erecting of an infalible Court, whiles he does so in these following words
instruct Saint Pet^^, desirous to know how many times he should forgive his
brother offending. If thy brother trespass against thee, go and prove him
between thee and himself, (...) etc. And if he refuse to hear the Church,
(...) unto thee as an H^^then man and a Publican. Verily I say unto you (...)
ye bind (...) shalb^ (...) in heaven etc. Again (...) if two of you sh^^
agree in earth upon any ^^ing whatsoever they shall des^^* it shall be given:
(...) which is in heaven* For where two or three are ga^^^red together in my
(...), there am I in the midst of (...) By which speech we learn that
Christ has grant, the power of ^^communication immediately to the (...) Order,
which is signi^^ hare by the (...) Church; for as the (...) of ten dot^
eminently and causelty com^ ^he ^^^umb^^s ^ likewise does this former speech,
(...) the Church, eminently I say, and causally compre^^^^ all (...) ^a^ power
(...) every supe^^ (...) ma^dued with any jurisdiction, (...) ^ Pope, or a
general Coun^^^^* wherein (...) the supreme and infallible co^^t-co^^^^
^^nesse of authority all (...) resolve. And this is manifest, because as soon
as the Lord had uttered this speech in the singular, Te^^ the Church, he does
immediately add in the plural, Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall
hand ^n earth, etc. Whereby it manifestly appears that the Church is taken
there form^lly and properly for man; ^^en gathered together, not for any one
man alone. Therefore with the same c^^rent of speech, Christ gives also to the
Church the power to assemble it self in a Council, and there infalibly to
decree; Again I say unto you, If two of you shall agree together on earth etc.
for where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them. Neither is it to be past in silence that Christ in this text
does denote the Aristocratical Council established by his own divine law, not
the oligarchicall, afterward instituted by men; And that he has purposely
expressed a certain number, and that the least of numbers, for an uncertain,
to take away from contentious men all occasion of shifting and avoiding; and to
show that for a lust governing of the Church, the consent and agreement of two
or three at the least is required, not of the Pope solely and alone. Truly to
what side soever the adversaries will turn themselves, they must needs
confess that these words, for where two or three are gathered together in my
name, do necessarily exclude that absolute and infallible authority of the
Pope alone, and do prove that the Church cannot be bound against her will, nor
without her consent and advice required, which every way agrees with the
natural law, and is sufficiently confirmed by the practice of the Ancient
Church. For the Council of Jerusalem with the consent and voices of all the
Apostles and Priests concludes with this style. Act. 15.28. It seemed good to
the holy ghost and to us. Moreover the Fathers of the Africane Church, amongst
whom was Saint Austen writ unto Pope Celestin 1. in these words. That it is
not credible that God does inspire the I^stice of examination into any one man,
and deny it to an ^^nume^^^ number of men lawfully gathered together is a
Councel^. The opinion also of Pope Zozimus make for the confirmation of this
doctrine, when writing to the Bishops of France he confesses himself
p^ainely to be infe^^our to the Council, and the au^horitie of the
Apostolical Sea not able to derogat^ from the holy decrees of Counsels, 25
Quaest. 1. C^^^. To decree or change any thing against the decrees of the
fathers, no not the very authority of this (...) is able to do it. Holy
antiquity, lives with v^, unshaken in h^^ foundation, whereunto the decrees of
the fathers have ordained all reverence. To this may well be added the answer
of Gregory the great, Who confesses that he reuerenceth the four general
Counsels, even as the four books of the holy Gospel; for being constituted
with universal consent whosoever presumes to loose that which they bind, or to
bind that which they loose, does but destroy himself and not them Did. 15.
Can. Sicut Sancti Euangelij. And truly if one will, never so little, peruse
the acts of general Counsels, he shall easily perceive, that the Pope does
not solely and himself alone make decrees of the Catholic faith in those
general Synods, but does infer and conclude them by the induction and
consent universally taken of all particular Churches. Which indeed is the most
certain and most evident proof of an Aristocraticall government, and is
confirmed. Can. Maiores. 24. Quaest. 1.

pray for Peter. 22. Luc. 32. that his faith should not fail, and commanded
him to confirm his brethren. We answer to the first part, that this promise
of Christ according to the litterall sense of the Scripture, does not extend
farther then the time of the Lords passion; Wherein the scandal of the Cross
was most furiously to rage against all the disciples, and principally against
Peter, who thrice denied his Master. Whereupon the Lord speaks after this
manner to them all. Mat. 26.31. All ye shall be offended in me this night,
for it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep of the flock
shall be scattered. But Peter answering said unto him, Though all men should be
offended in thee, yet will I never be offended; Jesus said unto him, verily I
say unto thee, that this night before the Cock crow thou shall deny me
thrice. Moreover, Luc. 22.31. Simon, behold, Satan has desired you, to
winnow you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not,
wherefore when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. Wherein is
principally to be noted that Christ did not say to Peter, I have prayed for
thee that thou may never err, or be subject to be deceived; But only I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: And that Peter indeed did err, yet
his faith never failed him, in regard of the habit, but only of the act, for
he did only deny the Lord with his mouth, not with his heart. To the second
point, who will advisedly examine that which preceedes and follows this text,
even at the first sight he shall find that after Saint Peter was out of that
dangerous staggering of his trebble denial, and come again to his right
senses as from a most deep and dead sleep, he was far more able both to
settle and stay his wavering fellows, and to call again to the Church all his
scattered brethren, that there together they might expect the resurrection of
the Lord. Therefore that argument of theirs is fallacious, being inferred a
dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter, from that which is said in some
respect, to that which is affirmed simply. For that privilege did reach no
farther then Saint Peter himself and alone, because of the imminent scandal
of the Cross. And sure if the Pope alone and not the Church, jointly taken, be
infalible, It follows that Saint Paul sinned most grievously, Galat. 2.11.
telling us so plainly that therefore Saint Peter was reprehensible, because he
went not the right way to the truth of the Gospel; Which words are most worthy
to be noted. Besides that, this reprehension, as the Parisian Chauncelor well
observes, is equivalent to an appeal to a Council. For if Saint Peter had at
that time resisted Saint Paul justly reproving him, no doubt but the Church,
gathering herself together in a Council, would have taken up the difference
betwixt them, as a little before she had decided the controversy about the
observation of legal Ceremonies. Act. 15.1. In this place, as for a little
accessorie and enlarging of favor, we may add that Saint Peter by the right
interpretation of the Scripture and Canons, may strengthen in the faith
particular persons, or a Church, which are gone astray; and in that sense Saint
Hierome in an Epistle to Pope Damasus does require of him leave to say, or not
say Hypostases in the plural number, which is as much as the interpretation of
the Nicene Creed; I desire, says he, from a Pastor the assistance he owes to
a sheep; Consider of it according to your judgment, I shall not fear to say
three Hypostases, if if you bid me: And the same has ever been the regard of
Theodoret, and of all the rest, when at any time they have had their refuge to
the holy Apostolical Sea.

Aristotle says in his Politikes, It is far more expedient to be ruled by
laws, then by the absolute power of any whosoever. For laws indeed are
instead of God, and are not possessed either with love or hatred, or any other
humane passion. Whence it comes that you find so often these Phrases in the
Acts of the Counsels, To do any thing besides the Canon, without the Canon,
against the Canon, according to the Canon. By which style is showed that the
Church must be directed by Canon, and that in ancient times nothing was
decreed without a Council, and Aristocraticall moderation. Hence also is it
that we read how the Bishops of France wrote unto Pope Nicholas that the Bulls
and Decretalls of Popes do no way bind unless they agree with the discipline
of Canons, and Counsels formerly received and approved. Can. Si Romanorum
Did. 9. To which also ought to be referred the Canon Omnia. Quaest. 1.
Whereupon look Flodoardus lib. 3. cap. 21. page 231. Who^ Father Sirmond a
Jesuit has even of late published, since indeed the Pope which is but the
ministerial head cannot bind the universal Church without calling her,
without hearing her, and without taking her counsel and consent. For then are
the laws established when they are published, and then confirmed, when
approved by the practice of those that live under them. As Austen witnesses,
Did. 4. Can. In istis And therein stands principally the liberty of the
Catholic Church, or the Aristocraticall government, and is the speediest and
gentlest means to unite and prevent Schisms again. Upon the ground of which
principle Hinemarus Archbishop of Rhemes answers to another Hinemarus Bishop
of Laon, his Nephew, That the decretall Epistles of Popes reported to be set
forth before the Council of Nice are but of small credit, because they agreed
not with the holy Canons. Whereupon look likewise Flodoard lib. 3. cap. 22.
fol. 243 verso etc. 244. recto. And from thence also we may plainly learn
what law our French Predecessors have ever used.

it self might dispense, were it assembled; And that is confirmed by the
opinion of Pope Zozimus, which we have commended Sect. 6. As also of Leo 7.
Can. Priuilegio. Dispensation, says he, is committed unto us, and it shall be
laid to our charge, if the Canons decreed by the fathers be violated, either
with our consent or carelessness. Saint Bernard lib. 3. ad Eugen. cap. 10.
What? say thou, do thou forbid us to dispense? No, but to dissipate. I am
not so ignorant that I do not know that you are placed to be dispensers, but
to edification, not to destruction. Finally it is required at the hands of
dispensers that they be found faithful. Where necessity urges dispensation
is excusable; when utility inciteth it is commended; common utility, I say,
not private. So that in these two points which we have treated of in this
discourse, all the Monarchical estate of the Church, or the fullness of the
Popes authority, does principally consist; not in an absolute power, which
many of our Noualists now, against both divine and natural law, strive to
intrude into the Church. Certainly eight hundred years ago and above, that is
even before the translation of the Roman Empire to our Nation, the Popes did
but call them selves maintainers and executors of the Canons. Finally by tract
of time, when all Christendom lay altogether buried in the logs of darkness and
ignorance, they gathered to themselves absolute authority to decree of all
things; Especially since the time of Gregory the seventh, whole life, largely
written by Onuphrius, those that are curious of the truth of the Story may
read: And they shall further observe that the Pope regularly and ordinarily
has the power to call the general Counsels, in so much as he has power
over the particular Churches dispersed over the face of the whole Earth. Now
the sum of all this disputation is, that from the monarchical State of the
Church, all unity and order, with a powerful execution of the Canons do
proceed. But from the Aristocraticall government proceeds most holy
counsel, infalible providence, and final decision; Whereby the Christian
Commonwealth is governed to a perpetual edification, not destruction.

Duo sunt Did. 96 and Can Principes, 25 Quaest. 5. Conformably to the
commandment of the Lord Mat. 22.21. Give unto Caesar the things which are
Caesar's, and to God those that are Gods. For by this, as by a mutual band of
love and obligation, the Lord was pleased to knit together the Church and the
Civil power; that Princes and Churchmen should not quarrel one against
another. Which wholesome distinction, whosoever they be that know not, or do
dissemble, or confound, do run upon huge and most perilous rocks, and make
Church men, as factious and dangerous persons, suspected to the Civil Princes.

his Kingdom is not of this world? And Luc. 9.58. The foxes have holes, and
the birds of heaven nests, but the son of man has not whereon to lay his
head? As though he would say, That the Church, as from God, has neither
territory, nor use of sword, of prison, or of any corporal punishment: for
the soul, which is the only and proper subject of Evangelical law, is only
moved by an inward, not by an outward beginning: but the right of the material
sword necessarily follows the territory, as they effect the cause. Hence was
it that the Lord did answer^ to one of the people that desired him to bid his
brother to divide with him their fathers inheritance, Luc. 12.14. Man, who made
me a Judge, or a diuider over you? As though he had said, That the Church
which has for her subject the souls of men, not earthly Dominions, ought not
to judge of earthly inheritances and possessions. For walking in the flesh, yet
do we not war after the flesh; for the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God to cast down holds, casting down the
imaginations and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God,
and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. 2 Cor.
10.3. Where is to be noted, that by the material sword the bodies may be
compelled, yea killed, but by no such means the thoughts to be captiuated to
the obedience of Christ; for that is only effected by the wholesome food of the
Word and Sacraments. And to this the witness of Paul, Philip. 3.20. Our
Politeuma, that is Christian government, is wholly in heaven, from whence we
look for the Savior Jesus Christ our Lord; And so indeed would our Lord have
it, that Church men should not meddle in violent and temporal matters. Will
you have also the testimony of Saint Bernard? They shall never show, says he,
when ever any of the Apostles has sitten as a Judge of men, diuider of bounds,
or distributer of grounds. Finally I read that the Apostles did stand before
the Judges to be judged, but not that they did sit judging others. Therefore
your power reaches no further then to sins, not to possessions; because for
those, not for these, you did receive the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, to
shut out offenders only, not possessors. I pray thee, which power and dignity
do thou esteem greater, to remit sins, or to divide possessions? But there
is no comparison therein. These earthly and inferior things have their judges
by themselves, the Kings and Princes of the earth, Why do ye invade other
men's liberties? Against those divine oracles, though more clear then
noone-light, two objections principally are made; The first, that Ananias and
Saphira his wife were punished with death by Saint Peter, because of their lie
to the holy Ghost Act. 5. The second, that the Apostle seems to teach
Christians, whilst they lived under Heathen Princes and Magistrates, that they
might choose Judges among themselves in their civil businesses, 1. Cor. 6.4.
If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set them up
which are least esteemed in the Church. We answer to the first that such a
great action of Saint Peter was altogether miraculous, extraordinary and
wholly by the inspiration of the holy Ghost; And therefore not appliable to
ordinary right, nor can no more be drawn into argument in either, then these
words, Ierem. 1.10. Behold this day have I set thee over Nations and Kingdoms,
to pluck up, to root out, to destroy and to thre^ down; Or that place of the
two swords. Luc. 22.38. seeing both places must be understood Allegorically and
spiritually, but that from an Allegorical and mystical sense there can no
forcible argument be drawn, the very children know it. Neither is there any
reason that the authority of Saint Bernard should breed any scruple in any
man's mind, lib. 4. cap. 4 ad Eugen. Put up thy sword into thy sheath; The
sword therefore is also thine, to be perhaps unsheathed at thy direction,
though not with thine own hand. For both spiritual and material swords
belong to the Church; But the one to be drawn for the Church, and the other by
the Church. That by the hand of the Priest; this, of the Souldior, though
indeed by the Priests apointment, but by the Emperors commandment. For
indeed these words do but show, That the Church has right to give the sign,
that is to say, to teach and persuade when the Civil Prince ought to draw his
sword for the glory of God. Whereof we will speak in the Section following.
And truly when Churchmen did excel in holiness of life, Christian Princes,
to remove all suspicion of injustice from their consultations and enterprises,
did use, and that very justly, the counsel of Clergymen both in peace and in
war. But as justly again have they left to take it, since Churchmen gave
occasion to suspect that they affected that temporal Monarchy, whereof
Eugubinus, Bozius, Garrerius and the very Cardinals Bellarmine and Baronius
have written most laborious books. Which opinion, even though it were true,
yet wisdom and reason, should have taught those authors, at least in those
most unlucky days, to abstain from such manner of writing. The second
argument deceiues ab ignoratione Elenshi, through unskillfulness of arguing;
for howbeit those testimonies of holy Scripture, above commended, conclude
manifestly, that the Church by divine right has neither territory, right of
sword, nor contentious Court: yet they do not deny but by humane right and
grant of Princes, she may very well have it. Now for this place in question,
the Apostle does not speak of the divine right, but of the humane and
arbitrarie right, as when by a mutual agreement of the parties, private
arbiters are chosen friendly to decide differences and controversies, without
troublesome going to law. For every man will easily observe thus much, that
shall read the 6. chap. of the 1. to the Corint. consideratly and without all
prejudice, only bringing with him a desire of the truth.

Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, Charles the great, Saint Lewis, Charles 7.
Francis 1. and others of our Kings have done. Whereupon Saint Austen Epist. 48.
ad Vincent. The Kings of the earth ought to serve Christ, even making laws for
Christ, according to the admonition of David, Psalm 2.10. Be ye wise now
therefore ye Kings, be learned ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord in
fear. Eusebius likewise cap 24 lib. 4 of the life of Constantine the great,
rehearses that that Noble Emperor was wont thus to speak unto his Bishops;
Ye are established Bishops by God, within the Church, and I a Bishop without.
As if he would say, that it is the duty of Christian Princes, by virtue of
their own offi^^ ^o make ordinances for the execution of the divine, natural
and Canonical law; and if occasion require, draw the sword: yet keeping still
the moderation of the parable of the tares Mat. 13.30. That is to say, without
breach of the public peace. And the same is confirmed by the same Saint Austen
Epist. ad Vincent. even now named. All which things being well conceived, It is
easy to perceive both in what sense Optatus Mileuitanus affirms, That the
Church is within the Commonwealth, that is, as it were upon another man's
ground, Territory, and Dominion; And also whether Christian Princes did in
times past assemble the Counsels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon,
and other general Synods, rightfully or wrongfully: for that indeed concerns
the execution of the divine, natural and Canonical law.

right given her by God and Nature, are clearly strengthened in these eight
grounds and principles, so that none can except against them, but withal he
must needs infringe the whole divine, natural and canonical law. And this,
look how often it has happened, so often has it given just occasion to our
Frenchmen to appeal from it as from an abuse; Of which appeals the Prince and
Civil Magistrate, as being the protector of the Church, and defendor of the
Canons, has the supreme moderation. For he judges of the abuse only, and
that belongs to the execution of the case. And inde^^ that manner of proceeding
among our French has caused the beginning of the liberties of the Gallicane
Church, as they are commonly termed. As also I hear that Spaniards and other
christian nations, when any thing proceeds from the Court of Rome, which is
against their customs and orders, are wont to labor by entreaty that it might
not be put in execution. Whence it appears that in the matter it self they
agree with us, but disagree only in the form and manner of proceeding.

A Confutation of the contrary opinion.
Peter, for a Pastor of the Church, and his Vicar, John 21.15. he himself
being the absolute King and Monarch thereof; therefore they conclude that
absolute and purely Monarchical commandment belongs unto Saint Peter, as
being Christ's lieftenant, And by and by that the Pope has not only the whole
Ecclesiastical power, but also all authority over the temporalty, indirectly
at least, and in ordine ad spiritualia, with relation to spiritual things, as
the most reverend Cardinal Bellarmine teaches.

Secondly, they infer that there is no need at all of holding Counsels for
the better and more holy government of the Church, since the Lord has
delivered up unto Peter solely and alone, the infalible authority and power to
confirm his brethren. Luc. 22.32.

Thirdly they conclude that if Counsels be assembled at any time, the Church
never so lawfully gathered there has no right at all to decide of any thing,
the Pope being either absent or not consenting.

Fourthly, that the Pope may abrogate at his pleasure all Canons of general
Counsels concerning Ecclesiastical policy, and altogether disanull them, and
make all new.

Fifthly, that the Pope has not only power over all the particular Churches
scattered over the world, but even over the general Council, and that he
himself is in no case subject unto the Council.

All which weak grounds it is most easy for any to beat down, having once
well conceived of our former principles. For in the first place, they all aim
but at this, to ascribe that very same power to Peter, as the ministerial
head, which only indeed belongs to one Christ alone, being Lord, and founder
of the Church, which is sophistically inferred a dicto simpliciter ad dictum
secundum quid, from that which is affirmed simply, to that which is said but in
a manner. But, I pray you, is there not a great difference between the Master
and the Steward, that is, between Christ and Peter? For the Church is by
Christ, and for Christ; but Peter by the Church, and for the Church, as the eye
by man, and for man.

For confutation of their second principle, you may read it Sect. 7.

The third, the fourth, and the fifth, be not worth answering, being all
fallaciously inferred a dicto simpliciter, ad dictum secundum quid, from that
which is affirmed simply, to that which is said but in a manner as though Peter
had the same power over the Church, which Christ has. And surely if we love
the truth, we must freely say that by nature a desire is given to all men to be
free and happy; but who may naturally be happy without freedom? But if the
infallibility of decrecing, do decide out in the Pope solely and a lone, no
body then shall half the power of deliberatiue voice in the assemblies of the
Church, which is against the pleasure of the Lord Matt. 18 18. Whereupon look
our ^ Section. So that if this opinion take place, it follows that Christ has
suffered all his extremities only to submit his Spouse the Church, that is to
say all Christians, to the sovereign Empire of the Pope Which is directly
contrary to the law of God and Nature.

Peter has been ordained by Christ, to be the Sheep-heard over the whole
Church, in these words. Feed my sheep, and that by that divine speech
neither Apostles nor general Councels are excluded being all Christ's sheep,
and therefore to be fed by S. Peter the Vicar of Christ. To that we answer,
that by these words Christ did give no other authority but ministerial unto
Peter, as we have proved Sect. 4.5. and 9. And that the duty of a Minister and
Vicar is to put in execution the precepts of the Divine, Natural, and
Canonical law, but yet according to the rules of the Aristocraticall temper
ordained by God: And that therefore Peter is accounted a Pastor, only for the
execution of Canons, administration of the word, and other such things, which
may better be managed by one man alone, then by the whole Church gathered
together in a Council.

Their second argument is, That the whole Church gathered together in a
Council, makes but one Family, one Flock, one Kingdom, and visible body of
Christ; therefore must also necessarily have a visible head, the Pope: and, it
would seem a strange Monster, if one body should have two supreme heads, the
Pope, and the general Council. We answer, that the Church is a Monarchical
policy tempered by an Aristocraticall Government. Whence of necessity it
follows that the Council has the supreme power for direction of Government,
correction, and authority, to make Canons; And as for Peter, he has it only
for the execution, exercise, and use of the ^^ies toward the particular
Churches. Look our Sect. 4.5.6. and 9.

Siluester with 280. Bishops it is ordained, cap. 20. Let no body judge the
first Sea, which is desirous to temper justice; The Judge shall not be judged,
no not of the Emperor, not of the whole Clergy, nor of King, nor of People.
Which sentence Gratianus cites 9. quest. 3. Can. Nemo. But if we must needs
tell you what we think thereof, whosoever will duly consider that Canon,
shall even at the first sight perceive that it is more hurtful then favorable
to the Adversaries; because the opinion of the School of Paris, grounded upon
the decree of the Synod of Constance, teaches, that the Pope may be judged by
the Council in that case only, when he does notoriously scandalize the Church,
and is incorrigible. But if he be desirous to temper justice, truly he must be
judged of no body, since he law is not made against a i^^ man, being a
perpetual law to himself. Secondly, although this Canon should decree
absolutely, yet can it not derogate any thing from the authority of the
decrees of the Council of Constance; since it was made in a particular Church,
which indeed ought not to judge of the Pastor of the whole Church, unless he
submit himself to the judgment of that Council, as once Pope Sixtus the
third did. 2. quest. 4. Canon. Mandaslis. Therefore those words, No not of the
whole Clergy, must he understood distributiuely of some Church, or particular
Clergy, but not jointly of a whole general Council, as that of Constance, or
Basil was. Thirdly, who is acquainted with the reading of Counsels, shall
soon perceive, that there are many harsh and improper things in this Canon,
which make it justly suspected of manifest i^^eption. For certainly in those
times the Fathers of the Church did not speak so gloriously, neither did the
persecutions give them leave to think of any absolute power. Moreover, what
needs to have spoken of Kings, since at that time there were none at all, but
only the Roman Emperors? But thou, Christian Reader; we pray thee look
thereupon Cardinal Cusanus. lib. 2. cap. 20. de concordantia Catholicas.

For all other authority, which are cited out of the writings of Popes, and
read 9. quest. 3. there is no great account to be made of them, since John
Gerson, and other Parisian Doctors do answer in a word, That none is to be
believed in his own cause, except his testimony agree with the Divine,
Natural, and Canonical law. But now it is contrary to the law of God and
Nature, that the ministerial head should have power over the Church.

Cephas, that was Peter, is subject unto the Church, as the eye unto man. 1.
Cor. 3.21. Therefore let no man glory in men, for all things are yours. (that
is of the Church) Whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, etc. Item, 2. Cor.
13.10. All power is given to edification, not to destruction. From whence it
arises, as proved, that the Church by the Divine, and Natural law, can
provide, and prevent, that the Pope may not rule her to her own destruction,
as it was decided Conc. Constant. Sess. 4. and 5.

infer, that the Schoolmasters, because he has the authority of
Scholasticall discipline, may disinherite his Disciples of their partrimonie,
if they be obstinate against his discipline; Which also is fallacious, as being
wrested a dicto secundum quid, addictum simpliciter, from that which is said in
some respect, to that which is affirmed simply. For such things which are true
in some one and peculiar sense, ought not to be stretched to an universal and
absolute sense, but by Sophisters and Iuglers only. And if they urge further
that the Church is sufficient in it self, and a supreme commandresse. The
answer is, that that must be limited within those bounds which be assigned by
nature to every thing: But the essential causes of the Church, will not suffer
that churchmen should meddle with violent or secular businesses. Wherefore all
the sufficiency of the Church government ought to be derived from the
observation of the commandments of God, but not from any temporal Monarchy,
or right of sword. Mat. 28.19. Go therefore and teach all nations, baptizing
them, and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you,
and lot I am with you always until the end of the world. For the arguments
which do uphold this doctrine, we will reduce them to three heads. The first
shall contain all the examples which Sanders, Bellarmine, Co^queus, and others
set forth out of the old Testament, but all ab ignoratione Elenchi, through
vnskillfullnesse of arguing. Who is ignorant among us, that there is a far
different nature of the Jews Sinagogue, and of the Christian Church, of the
law of Moses, and of the Gospel. For these indeed had Territory allo^ted
them, and consequently might have right of mere command from God; which no
wise man will ever affirm of the Church. And to this that the Evangelical law
compared to that of Moses, yea to any other law whatsoever, is a law truly
Royal and full of mildness, and most perfect liberty, whereas the law of
Moses was a most servile bondage, Act. 15.10. Gal. 4.3.

The second head offers unto us the authorities taken out the Canonical law,
which Cardinal Bellarmine commended, namely cap. 3. Synod. Lateran. where it
is ordained that Kings and Princes are to be deposed, which do not root out
all Heretics from their Dominions. The answer is, that these and the like
ought to have no more power against civil Princes, then the extrauagant of
Boniface 8. Vnam Sanctam, or the constitution of Paul 4. Cum ei Apostolatus of
sieve, which is to be read in the Directorie for Inquisitors: seeing those
decrees have been made not Synodically, that is, with consent of the whole
Church, but by the Popes privately, and by their own proper motion; which
therefore do not bind, because the Church is ruled by Canon, not by absolute
power. Sect. 5. and 8.

For the third head; we deny absolutely that the deposition of King Chilperi^,
or the translation of the Empire to the French, was by the only authority of
the Popes, without consent, authority, or desire of the people: And though it
were true as they say, yet would it make but very little or nothing to the
decision of our present Controversy, since it rather opens a question of
fact then of right; as also the examples of the deposing of Henry 4. Frederick
2. and other Emperous or Kings. Let therefore our Adversaries dispute of right,
not of fact: for our Lord Jesus Christ has ordained the Christian
commonwealth, to be governed by good manners, and Canons, not by examples.

The solution of all other arguments drawn either from holy Scripture, or any
where else, may be taken out of the most learned Treatise of M. John of Paris
touching Regal and Papal authority.

Let all these things be subject unto the judgment of the Catholic Church.

FINIS.

