A New Description OF IRELAND: Wherein is described the disposition of the
Irish whereunto they are inclined.

No less admirable to be perused then credible to be believed: neither
unprofitable nor unpleasant to be read and understood, by those worthy
Citizens of London that be now undertakers in Ireland: By Barnabe Rich, Gent:

Malui me diuitem esse, quam vocari.



Printed at London for Thomas Adams. 1610.

The Contents of the Chapters contained in this Book.
OF the little credit that is to be given to their testimonies, that have
hitherto written of Ireland. Cap. 1. Of the temperature of the air, and the
fertility of the soil universally through Ireland. Cap. 2. Of the nature and
disposition of the Irish how they are inclined. Cap. 3. From whence it
proceeds, that the Irish are so repugnant to the English. Cap. 4. That the
Irish by nature are inclined to cruelty. Cap. 5. Of the ingratitude of the
Irish. Cap. 6. Of the inciuilty both of manners and conditions used by the
Irish. Cap. 7. Of the Vulgar sotte of the Irish, what account they make of an
Oath. Cap. 8 That a Conquest should draw after it, Law, Language, and Habit.
Cap. 9. Of certain septs and degrees amongst the Irish. Ca. 10. Of the manner
of the Irish Coshering. Cap. 11. How Ireland was purged from all venomous
worms, by the prayers of Saint Patrick. Cap. 12. Of the holy Saints that has
been borne, bred, and brought up in Ireland. Cap. 13. Of the superstitious
conceit that is holden by the Irish, about certain Wels. Cap. 14. A true
description both of the City, and Citizens of Dubline. Cap. 15. Of some
defects in the government of Dublin. Ca. 16. Of the trade and traffic that is
used in Dublin. Ca. 17. Of the ambition of the Irish. Cap. 18. Of the Doctrine
of the Pope, how embraced by the Irish. Cap. 19. How the Papists of Ireland,
are neither ashamed nor afraid, to manifest themselves. Cap. 20. The
inconvenience of Popery, how it hurts in Ireland. Cap. 21. Whither there by
any possibility, that the Irish should be able to maintain war against the
Kings Majesty. Cap. 22. Of those lets and impedimentes that defeated our late
gracious Qu. in her services against the Irish. Ca. 23. Of Pardons and
protections, how hurtful in Ireland. Cap. 24. Of the dallying out the time of
service, and the delays of Ireland. Cap. 25. How Tyrone was still supplied
with Soldiers, and all other provisions for war, at the Queens charges.
Cap. 26. That the Irish are more dangerous then necessary, for his Majesty
service in Ireland. Cap. 27. The conclusion.
To the Right Honorable, Robert Earl of Salisbury, Vicount Cranburn, Baron
Cecill of Essenden, Lord High Treasurer of England, principal Secretary to
his Majesty, one of the Lords of his Honorable Privy Council, and Knight
of the Noble order of the Garter, etc.
MOst Honorable, and most worthy Earl, the several Books that are spread,
bearing the names and Titles of Histories, of summaries of Chronicles, and of
diverse other collections drawn from unworthy Authors: some of them printed,
some otherwise published here in Ireland, by Papists, by lieng Chroniclers, by
idle Poets, by Bardes and Irish Rythmers, all of them containing matter of
untruth: As the memories of superstitious foundations, lies and Fables,
foolishly meddled and compacted together: written rather in the maintenance and
favor of lewd misdemeanor, of Superstition, of Idolatry, and do rather give
encouragement to wicked Subjects to enter the field of Rebellion, to take Arms
against the Prince, to disobey, to contemn, to despise, not only the Princes
laws, and his Majesty's gracious proceedings, but also setting open the wide
gate that leads to many misdemeanors against the Prince himself. I have
therefore thought it a matter much importing his Majesty's service, to do my
best endeavor to stop this gap thus broken down, that thus opens the way to
the wastfull spoil of Rebellion, of Treason, of Superstition, of Idolatry, of
Disobedience, of Contempt: and to give a Book to the well-disposed of that
Realm of Ireland, wherein they may behold that truth, which they themselves
have heard with their ears, have seen with their eyes, and are able to
testify upon daily experience.

These lines thus squared out, I durst not presume to present to your Honor, in
respect of any ability that I acknowledge to be in my self, I know there
can come nothing from me, that may be any ways answerable to your exquisit
judgment or worthiness: but it is your own virtue, your own affability and
Noble disposition, that was yet never known to despice or discountenance any
man's endeavors, that were honestly intended, or undertaken to a good end and
purpose.

It is this, your Honorable inclination, that has encouraged me: this is it
has made me to presume of a favorable acceptance. To you therefore, and to
your honor alone, I have in most humble and submissiue manner, bequeathed those
experiments, which forty years observation has taught me to know. To your
Honor, whose exquissite judgment is best able to discern, and whose wisdom
and knowledge is most fitting to redress: by whose Honorable care for the good
of the commonweal, England and Ireland, are both made happy. By whose
providence and wisdom (next under his Majesty) we have hitherto reaped the
fruits of a most happy and blessed government. To your Honor therefore, I
submit my labors, my Love, my lines, my service, my self, my endeavors, and all
that I have, to be at your Honors dispose: and thus will rest to pray for your
Honor, that GOD would still continue his blessings upon you, as hitherto he
has done.

Your Honors, in all humble and dutiful affection: Barnabe Rych.

To the Courteous and friendly Reader, either English or Irish, either
Protestant or Papist, either learned or unlearned, or to any other whosoever, I
care not.
ONe of the diseases of this age, is the multitude of Books, that does so
ouercharge the world, that it is not able to digest the abundance of idle
matter that is every day hatched and brought into the world, that are as diverse
in their forms, as their Authors be in their faces.

It is but a thriftlesse, and a thankelesse occupation, this writing of Books,
a man were better to sit singing in a Cobblers shop, for his pay is certain, a
penny a patch: but a Booke-writer, if he get sometimes a few commendations of
the Judicious, he shall be sure to reap a thousand reproaches of the
Malicious.

Books are like Cheese, that is never well seasoned to every man's taste; for
one will say it is too salt, another will say it is too fresh, a third will say
it is to tart, another thinks it to be too mild; one will have it too hard,
another too soft, another too tough, another too brittle, it never pleases
every man's taste; no more do Books.

I am censured for writing of a Book, to be a malicious enemy to Ireland, to
poor Ireland, that (God knows) is rather to be pitied, then spighted.

I confess, I have made my self known in print, to be an enemy to Popery, but
not to Ireland.

Aristotle being vpbraided by some of his friends, that he had been over
merciful to a wicked man: I have indeed (said Aristotle) bin merciful
toward the man, but not toward his wickedness.

So say I by Ireland, though I find fault with the Idolatry that is committed
in the Country, yet I find no fault with the Country it self, nor with a
great number of good people that are of the Irish birth, that I never meant to
reprove, neither am I able to detect.

But for those that have found, so many faults with my book, that I so honestly
meant for the good of the country. I forgive them from my heart, for I durst
swear for them, they did it more for want of wit, then for any malice they
bear to my person.

I have lived in Ireland of a poor pay, the full recompense of 47. years,
spent in my Prince and Countries service, I have not begged nor purchased any
man lands, rents, or reuennewes; I have not heaped to my self, either Offices
or Church-liuinges: yet something I have noted of the Country by observation.
I see a number of good people, that are both capable of obedience and
discipline, if they were not misled: but their minds (alas) are still poisoned
with Popery, and what is he that it not touched with a kind of compassion, to
see the poor and silly people so seduced and carried away by these iuggling
Jesuits? What monstrous miracles are there daily presented, and how many lying
woonders are there to be witnessed, testified by men scarce worth to be
credited, and yet with what confidence are they received and believed?

I have yet once again betaken me to my pen, and I have writ something. I
know not what my self: he that would understand it, let him read a Gods name,
he shall find I have dealt plainly, without welt or guard.

I would not have it thought, that I make any difference between the English
and the Irish, in respect of their birth, for I know there be as worthy men in
Ireland, as any are in England, though not in such generality, nor so many in
number: neither is that to be wondered at, for there are many reasons to enduce
it: So I know, there are too many of the English, that are planted in all the
parts of Ireland, that are no less superstitious, no less Idolatrous, nor no
less contentious both to God and the K. then the most wild or savage Irish
man, that never came in place where to learn good or bad.

It is not therefore either the Country or the Countryman, that makes me
either to love or hate, it is their manners and conditions that makes me both
to praise or dispraise.

As M. Stanihurst therefore in his description of Ireland, in the 8. Chapter,
discoursing of the manners and dispositions of the Mere Irish (for so he
terms them) before he enters into the matter, fore-warneth his Reader, not
to impute any barbarous custom, that he should there speak of to the
Citizens, Townes-men, or to the Inhabitants of the English pale, for that he
reputeth the^ to be men of another spirit, better trained up in science,
knowledge, ciuility, in courtesy, and such other like complements of humanity.
Let me entreat the like favor, that having now occasion to speak of the
manners and customs of the Irish, do not think me yet to be so general, but
that I do make a great difference, between those that are rude, uncivil,
vnreuerent, uncleanly, and untaught, and those other again that are mild,
modest, merciful, kind, courteous, and that are every way endued with wit,
reason, and understanding. And I do make the like exceptions between those
that are irreligious, superstitious, Idolatrous, seditious, rebellious; that
do retain Jesuits, Seminaries, and other Traitorous priests, then of those,
that contrariwise are professors of the gospel, that do embrace the holy
Scriptures, and do endeavor themselves in the service of their God, and
obedience to their Prince.

Now, for these men of little wit, and less understanding, that because by the
Text of the holy scriptures, I have hunted their Pope from Saint Peter's Chair,
to the seat of Antichrist, would therefore conclude, that I were an enemy to
Ireland; let them understand, that I love Ireland, and that I think there is
as near a high way to go to Heaven from out of Ireland, as there is from any
part of England, or else my self would never have stayed so long in the
Country. Now, for the people, they are in Ireland, as in all other places,
some good, some bad, yet more rude and uncivil in Ireland, then they be in any
part of the world that is known: but for Popery (I protest) they are more
foolish-superstitious in Irelande, then they be in Rome it self. But I do
therefore, rather pity, then malice them; there be a great many of known
Papists in Dublyne, that I do love, and wish well unto: for, may not a man
love a papist, as he loves a friend that is diseased? Admit I had a Brother
that were visited with Morbus Galicus it self, might I not love him, and hate
his sickness both at once? Even so I love a papist, I love the party, when I
defy his Religion. But Popery is a malady not easy to be cured, and I think
these lines of mine will sooner move Choler, then give contentment, or produce
amendment. And yet as I mean not in this my Description of Ireland, to busy
my self about any matters of State, so I will not meddle with the discovery of
any hidden secrets, that may be brought into any question of doubt, for the
truth and certainty: for, as I have used no other help then mine own
experience, so my best method shall be, to speak nothing but what is true, and
so to be approved. If there be any exceptions taken by Fools that be
ignorant, I hope the wise and learned will make no worse construction then the
matter does import: for the rest that be of a wrangling disposition, let them
do as they have done, fret and fume at that which they are not able to
contradict: let them ioyn impudency to their ignorance, and because they
cannot comprehend the sincerity of true religion, let them carpe and cavil
against it, and let them never spare.

An Epistle, added in the due praise and commendation of that worthy and
worshipful Gentleman, Master WILLIAM COKYNE, Sheriff and Alderman of the most
renowned and Honorable City of LONDON.
WOrthy Gentleman, if the kingdom of heaven were to be merited by a man's own
deseruings (as a number of Grosse-headed Papists will not let to affirm) you
were then happy, for you neither needed to purchase any Popes Pardons, or to
buy any Masses of Scala Celi, to be sung for your soul when you are dead.

You have begun a work of Supererogation, more merritorious in the judgments
of all those that are (indeed) godly wise, then either the building of a
Chapel, or a Chantery, or the giving of perpetuities, either of lands or
livings, what or how soever bestowed about any Popish purposes.

This enterprise, the rather by your encouragement thus undertaken, for the
planting of the Northern parts of Ireland, with the English, cannot be but
acceptable in the presence of God, when it shall draw so much to the
advancement of his glory, making way for the Gospel of Jesus Christ to be
truly preached in a place where there was nothing but Idolatry and
superstition formerly practiced; giving light and understanding to a blind and
ignorant people, to discern the way of salvation, that do rather hope to be
saved by the means of Saint Patricke, then by the mercy of God.

This action cannot be but pleasing to the Kings most excellent Majesty, when
the sequel shall not redound to his honor, but likewise to his profit: But how
happily will it fall out for a number of poor people in England, that are
oppressed with penury, by reason of the multitude that does so superabound,
whereby the scarsity of victuals does the more exceed, that may there be
relieved by their own industry: for Ireland is able to render relecfe to forty
thousand people, but to be placed in those parts of the Country, that at this
present lies wast, and altogether uninhabited: and yet where the Country is
best planted and peopled throughout the whole realm, the third part of the
commodity is not raised, that the soil would afford: the reason is, by the
ill Husbandry of the Irish, that either for want of wit, or for want of
knowledge, does not manage their Husbandry according to skill.

And although it be out of my element to speak of husbandry, that all the
days of my life, could never play the good Husband for my self: yet I am not
so dull of conceit, but I can see a number of defects, and that in the most
principal points of their Husbandry; as in the manner of the Tilling of their
ground, and sowing of their Corn, they have no other means whereby to draw
the Plough, but every Horse by his own tail, so that when the poor beast by
his painful labor, has worn the hair of his tail so short, as it can be
no longer tied, the Plough must stand.

I might speak of many other defects, and one amongst the rest, of the
unseasonable time that they use in the making of their Hay: but to speak truly
of their ill Husbandry in that point: in the greatest part throughout all
Ireland, they use to make no Hay at all, although they have as good ground as
any other Country does afford: so that their poor Cattle in the Winter
season, have no other fother, then what they can pick up, and gather from the
ground: but in those parts near about Dublyne, where they use to make Hay,
they never meddle with the cutting of their grass, till they be likewise
ready to cut their Corn, so that they will have their Hay harvest, and their
Corn harvest, to come both together, which commonly never falls out, till
September be well spent: at which time of the year, there sometimes falls out
great store of rain, so that from the best Meddow Lands, which is evermore
upon their lower grounds, their hay is many times either utterly marred, or
altogether swept away with a flood.

I might here conclude and boldly affirm, that if those parts of Ireland that
now lies wast, were inhabited by an industrious people, and that the rest of
the Country were manured and husbanded according to skill, Ireland would
sustain more people by two parts, then are now inhabiting in it. But leaving
to speak of Ireland in general, I will come to that part of the North now
intended to be planted, namely of the Derry and the Colrane. In the time of Sir
John Parrates Government, I my self lay at Colrane, with a hundred soldiers
under my leading, I may therefore speak something of mine own experience.

For the Land that is adjoining about Colrane, it is very fertile, and the
whole Country that stretches it self between the River of Band, and the
river of Lough-foile, that was sometimes O-Cannes Country, is not only a most
pleasant place, but is likewise very commodious both for Corn and Pasture.

On the South side of the river of Band, fast by Colrane, there lies a goodly
country, called the Rowt, no better Corn land in any part of Ireland, and it
did at that time so abound with Conies, so exceeding fat, and therewithal so
sweet, as I never saw the like, neither in Ireland, nor in any other place
where I have travailed.

What should I speak of the Salmon fishing of the Band, which is so famously
known and spoken of: and there is moreover for three months of the year,
between September and December, such a fishing for Eeles, as I think is not
the like again in Europe, especially when there shall come men that has skill
to take them, which the Irish has not to any purpose, yet they take great
store, by reason of the great abundance of such notable Eeles, both for
greatness and for goodness, as the like are no other where else to be found.

I might speak here of the fishing for fresh water Trowts, whereof there are
great plenty in every River, in every Brook, in every Lough, and that
throughout the whole Realm of Ireland, but specially in those Northern
parts about Colrane and the Derry.

But let me speak now of the fishing for Seafish, and first for Cod and Lyng:
what ships are yearly set out from all the parts of England: some to
New Foundland, some to Island, some to Shotland, some to Ward-house, some to
one place and some to another: and I think of my conscience, that at the very
entrance as well of the river of the Band, as of the River of Lough-foyle,
which are not above some eight or ten miles distant, there will fall out as
good fishing both for Cod and Lyng, as in any other place that I have formerly
spoken of.

Now for Herring-fishing, who can name a better place then Loughfoyle it self,
and there is one other Loughe fast by, called by the name of Lough-Sully, where
he that were but standing upon the shore at the time of Herring-fishing, would
think that the very Sea it self did swell of herrings, there are such
abundance all along that Coast.

Without doubt, there will be found good fishing for Ray, for Haddock, for
Whiting, for Gurnard, and for all manner of other fish, which never fails
all along the Coast of Ireland, if it be sought for.

As I have now spoken of fishing, so I might yet again speak of fowling: but
let it suffice, that as well for fish, for foul, for Conics, for Cattle, and
whatsoever is otherwise needful for man's sustenance, the whole Realm of
Ireland is as rich and fertile as any other Country in Christendom: yea and
for all manner of fruits: as Apples, pears, and plums, in many parts of the
Country, where men have bin industrious to plant, they have as good fruit in
Ireland as any is in England.

To conclude, there wants nothing in Ireland but the true knowledge of God,
and obedience to the Prince, the which by Gods permission, will so much the
rather be brought to a good pass, when that part of the Country that in
former ages has bin most rude and inclined to inciuilitie, that has evermore
bin the receptacle and refuge for the worst disposed people, shall by this
Plantation, be made a pattern of good example, as well for Godly as Civil
Government, to all the Realm besides: but there is a kind of temeritie that
does no good, yet is conveyed by those men, that are utterly ignorant in the
affairs of Ireland.

Since my coming from Dublyn, within six days after my arrival here at
London, I think I was asked sixteen several times, what I thought of this
Plantation in the north of Ireland, and whether it were possible that those
labouerers and workmen that are now sent over for the building, could save
their throats from cutting, or their heads from being taken from their
shoulders, before the work were finished: or what assurance there could be,
but that when this erection were fully perfected, and that men did think
themselus to be most quietly settled: why might not the Irish do then as they
had done before, in one night to lay wast and consume al with fire and sword?
So that I see there be a number that are afraid, but it is but of their own
shadows.

But let timorous men doubt as they list, and let ignorant men write what they
please: Ireland (God be praised) is in no such dangerous manner of plight.
That doubt is dissolved, and the danger is past: for men may work as
quietly in those places whereunto they are now sent, as they might do if they
were in Cheapeside. And in that part of the Country, through the which a
thousand men in times past would have been intercepted, I dare now undertake
to pass my self and my Boy.

But there be some will say: And why may it not come to pass, that there may
be as great danger as ever there was, and that the Irish may be as Potent to
execute mischief, as ever they have bin before?

I say, They cannot. And whosoever shall please to read the sequel herein
contained, I hope shall be fully satisfied in that point, for only to that
end and purpose, I have endeavored these Lines. And all the matter that I aim
at throughout this whole Book, is but to make it manifest, that the Irish are
of no such resistance at this hour against his Majesty, as they have been in
times past against our late Queen.

I am not ignorant, that although Ireland be reduced to a great conformity,
and that his Majesty has a number of loyal and faithful Subjects in every
part of that Kingdom, yet I know again there be some, that are not to be
trusted, and therefore I speak not of their minds, but I speak of their
manners: And I say, that the Rebel of Ireland shall never more stand out
hereafter, as they have done in times past.

If any man please to read, let him judge of my reasons, in the mean time,
there is but one thing (worthy Gentleman) that is to be feared, and may very
easily be helped, if you suffer no Papist (either English or Irish) to plant
himself among you. Look well but to that, and there is no doubt but the
Almighty God himself will bless your enterprise, and England and Ireland
both, shall hereafter call you happy, and I shall rest still to wish you well.

Your wel-willing Friend Barnabe Rych.

A Description of IRELAND, together with the Manners, Customs, and dispositions
of the people.
CAP. 1.
Of the little credit that is to be given to their testimonies, that have
hitherto written of Ireland.
I Think Ireland to be in nothing more unfortunate, then in this; that the
History of the Country was never vndertake^ to be truly set forth but by
Papists. Giraldus Cambrensis, whose testimony of that Country is most
ancient, and upon whose authority all that have hitherto written of Ireland
do especially rely, was a Papist, and in his description of Ireland has
fabled so many follies, as Stanihurst himself, though he makes mention of
them in his History which he has written of Ireland, yet he durst not avouch
them to be true, but leaves them to the discretion of the Reader, to judge of
them as he finds himself disposed.

But to put the matter quite out of doubt, Cambrensis himself, in his Epistle
Dedicatorie to King John, gives advice to the K. that the Peter Pence might be
paid throughout the whole Realm of Ireland, that his Father had formerly
promised to the Pope; in performing whereof, he might thereby deliver his
Fathers soul, (I think he meant from Purgatory) for he was not so mad to
believe that a soul could be delivered from Hell.

A second Writer, that has made colections of the History of Ireland, as
Stanihurst himself reports in his Epistle to sir Henry Sidney, was his fast
and sure friend Edmond Campion. I need not discribe the man any further, for
his end made trial of his honesty: but like will to like (quoth the Devil to
the Colliar) and birds of a winge (they say) will fly together: but for
master Stanihurst himself, I knew him many years sithence at Antwarpe, where
he professed Alcumy, and undertook the practice of the Philosophers stone,
and when he had multiplied lies so long, that every body grew weary of him,
he departed from thence into Spain, and there (as it was said) he turned
Physician, and whether he be alive or dead I know not: but these three,
Giraldus Cambrensis, Edmond Campion, and Richard Stanihurst, are the only
Authors that have patched and peeced together the History of Ireland: who
besides, that they have stuffed their volumes with manifest untruths, so they
have enterlarded their lines with such ridiculous matter, as they themselves
are ashamed to avouch them for truth. For the rest that has been attempted by
Holinshed and Hooker, they have referred the whole matter of what they have
writ, concerning Ireland, to those men's authorities: Holinshed, to what had bin
collected by Campion and Stanihurst; and Hooker, to no more then he had
translated out of Giraldus Ca^brensis.

These lying authorities, do evermore engender ignorance, and there is nothing
that has more led the Irish into error, then lying Historiographers, their
Croniclers, their Bardes, their Rythmers, and such other their lying Poets; in
whose writings they do more rely, then they do in the holy Scriptures, and
this rablement do at this day endeavor themselves to nothing else, but to feed
and delight them with matter most dishonest and shameful: for in their
speaking and writing, they do nothing but flatter them in their ungracious
humors, still opening the way with lying praises of their progenitors, what
Rebellions they have stirred up, and how many mischiefs they have performed;
this is such a whetstone to their ambitious desires, and being thus made drunk
with these lying reports of their Ancestors worthiness, that they think
themselves to be reproched for ever, if they should not be as apt and ready to
run into al manner of mischief, as their fathers were before them. From hence
it comes, that being thus drowned in ignorance, they think it to be the true
highway to happiness, for every man to do what he list, and do therefore
seek to free themselves from Law, Justice, and reason, because they would not
be brideled, or compelled to obey, either to duty or honesty.

For Ireland otherwise, the less it has been famed for any memorable matter,
the more it has bin replenished with horrible murders, and actions of blood;
there are no histories of good things worthy to be followed, but Tragedies of
cruelty, fit to be abhorred.

One of the greatest felicities wherewith Ireland has bin blessed, is the
government of godly princes, which have endeavored themselves, to their great
expenses, to reform that country, and to reduce the people to ciuility, and
to a reasonable knowledge of humane society.

CAP. 2.
Of the temperature of the Air, and the fertility of the soil universally
through Ireland.
MY meaning is not to make any Cosmographicall description of Ireland, I have
nothing to do with Longitude, with Latitude, nor with Altitude: I will not
speak of the Country how it stretches it self toward the East, or toward
the west, nor how it is divided into Provinces, into Shires, nor into
Countries; nor how the country is replenished with Cities, with Towns, and
Villages: but to speak something of the temperature of the Climate, under the
which it is adjacent. I say, we do not find Ireland to be cold in the winter,
nor so hot in the Summer, as it is in England. The frosts in Ireland, are
neither so hard nor of that continuance as they be in England, and yet the
Country is very cold, with a kind of rawish moisture, but not so nipping, nor
dureable, as the dry cold that commonly coms with frosts.

Ireland is wonderfully inclined to fogs and mists, and given to very much
rain, as well in summer as in winter, and the Country is full of springs, and
great currants of water that falls from the mountains, which with a shewer of
rain will rise very suddenly, and will fall again as quickly when the
weather clears up.

Ireland is full of great Rivers, and mighty huge Loughes, such as we call
Meeres in England, wherein are many large and spacious Islands, where the Irish
have many times fortified themselves against the Prince, but are still ferreted
and drawn out by the ears, though other whiles with great difficulty. To
speak of Ireland generally, it is replenished with Rivers, with Woods, with
Bogs, and with as good land, both for corn and pasture, as any Europe
affoords; but not so well manvred, nor so well husbanded: for the Farmers of
Ireland, are far to seek in many points of good husbandry, and the women (for
the most part) have as little skill of huswifery.

From hence I might affirm, and confidentlie conclude, that throughout the
whole Realm of Ireland, what between the ill husbandry of that which is
inhabited, and so much of the Country again lying wast for want of
Inhabitants, there is not the third part of that profit raised, that Irelaud
would afford.

For fish, for foul, for Conies, they are very plentiful throughout all the
parts of Ireland, and for red-Deare, they have them upon the mountayns, but
not in such plenty as I my self have known. Fallow dear are not so common,
unless it be in some few Parkes.

To be short, there is nothing wanting in Ireland that is behouefull for the
sustinance of man, yet I dare not stretch so far as M. Stanihurst, that would
have Ireland the Treasure-house of the world, as he has published in his
Book, I will not say how vainly or how unwisely. Let other men judge of that,
but I think he means of hidden Treasures that are not yet discovered. It is
truth, there are some small store of Pearl now and then found, chopped upon by
chance, but not in such abundance that they be worthy to be so spoken of, nor
those few that be found, are neither so oryent, so praise worthy, nor of such
price and estimation, as those that are brought from other places, both from
the East and West Indies, and yet I once saw an Irish Pearl that was sold for
xv. pound. I never heard of any Mines either of Gold, or Silver, or Copper, or
Tin, or Lead, or of any other Mineral matter that was found in the
Country, that would quit the charge in refining; but to speak truly, the
Irish are so malicious that they will not suffer men of art and skill to make
search for them: One of the best Mines that is known to be in Ireland, is
that of Iron, which is very rich (indeed) if it would hold out, or that there
were any store of the Oore to be found, as like enough it would do if the Irish
would give men leave to seek for it. It is many years ago since I heard
talk of an Alum Mine that was found, and great hope was had of profit and
commodity, but how it was left, I know not, I think by the unwillingness of
the bad disposed people of that Country, that will never (by their good
wills) suffer men to work with their heads upon their shoulders. Ireland
(without doubt) is a fruitful Country, and it yeildeth in most abundant
manner, all convenient necessaries that is behouefull for human sustinance,
but to hope after Mines and Minerals in Ireland, I think there is no such
likeli-hood, for those are evermore to be sought after, in those Countries
that are warm, or at the least very dry, but not in those places that are so
ouercharged with rain, and so much given to moisture as Ireland.

CAP. 3.
Of the nature and disposition of the Irish, and how they are inclined.
I Think it shall not be impertinent to this my description of Ireland, to
discipher the disposition of the Irish, of what temper they be framed, and
whereunto they be naturally inclined. But before I will set down mine own
understanding, what I my self have gathered by experience, I will deliver what
M. Stanihurst has written on the very same matter, whose words be these: The
inclination of the Irish people is, to be Religious, frank, amorous, yrefull,
sufferable of infinite pains, very glorious, many Sorcerers, excellent
Horsemen, delighted with wars, great Almes-giuers, passing in Hospitality,
The lewder sort (both Clerks and laymen) sensual and ouer-loose in living,
the same (being virtuously bred up or reformed) are such mirrours of holiness
and austeritie, that other Nations reteyne but a shaddowe of Devotion, in
comparison of them. As for abstinence and Fasting, it is to them a familiar
kind of chasticement. They follow the dead Corpse to the grave with howling and
barbarous outcries, pitiful in appearance, whereof grew ( as I suppose) the
proverb; To weep Irish.

Thus far have I cited, what Master Stanihurst himself has published of
the disposition of the Irish whereunto they are inclined. And now (not to
impugn any thing that Master Stanihurst has written) I will yet once again
take a superficial survey of what he has set down, and will give him mine
opinion, what I do think of his Description.

And first, he says [ They are Religious] I say, It is truth, but I would to
God it were according unto knowledge. [ They are frank,] Neither will I
impugn that, for the Irish are beneuolent enough among their friends and
acquaintance. [ they are Amorous] I think he means to women: but if he
speaks in general, I say and affirm, that the greatest number of the Irish,
are utterly ignorant what honest Love does mean. [ They are yrefull] the more
is the pity, for it has cost the price of much Christian blood. [ They are
sufferable of infinite paines] but yet at any hand they will not, or can cannot
endure to labonr, for there is not a greater plague sore to Ireland, then the
idleness thereof. [ They are very glorious] very true; and they are no less
proud, for the meanest Shackerell, that has scarce a mantle to wrap himself
in, has as proud a mind as Oneal himself, when he sits upon a green bank
under a bush in his greatest majesty. [ There are many Sorcerers] and the
Country does no less abound with Witches; and no marvel that it should so do,
for the Devil has ever bin most frequent and conversant amongst Infidels,
Turks, Papists, and such other, that do neither know nor love god, then he
can be amongst those that are the true professors of the Gospel of Christ. [
They are excellent horsemen] yet good for nothing but for the service in
Ireland. [ They are delighted with warres] they are delighted with Rebellions,
Commotions, and Insurrections; but they cannot be called wars, that are stirred
up by subjects against their Prince. [ They are great Almes-giuers,] I never
heard any great commendation of their Almes-giuing, in any such generallitie,
unless it were to a Friar, a Priest, or to some other of that anointed Order.
[ Passing in Hospitality,] I would be loath to bar the Irish of that right;
for to give them their due, they are as bountiful of their meat and drink,
as any other Nation in Europe whatsoever. [ The lewder sort both Clarks and
Lai-men, sensual and ouer-loose in living,] By that same word [ Clarkes] so
joined with the Laity, I think he means the Irish Clergy, which he says are
of lascivious and lose living: he might have added farther, that the greatest
number of them are traiterous Priests, protested Enemies to their Prince, and
so vowed to their Pope; [ The same being virtuously bred up or reformed, are
such Myrrors of holiness and austerity, that other Nations retain but a
shadow of Devotion, in comparison of them.]

A proud praise, that the holy ones of Ireland should so far out-stretch all
the holiness in the world besides: but I will not contradict M. Stanihurst;
for without doubt he spoke but as he thought: And here we may see, that these
lying suppositions thus published by our Irish Writers, have led the people
into such a blind arrogance, that they will admit nothing for truth, but what
they receive from their own Authors, or gather out of their own books; And
now it follows.

[ As for Abstinency and Fasting, it is to them a familiar kind of
Chastisement.] I think this Abstinency and Fasting, is the holiness which
Master Stanihurst has formerly spoken of, for this is a visible holiness
(indeed) which every man may see and wonder at: for let me speak of the most
abject Creatures, that I think either Ireland or the world affoordeth, and
those are the Kearne of Ireland, amongst whom, there is not so notable a wretch
to be found, that will not observe his fasting days, three days in a week
at the least, and those are Wednesdaies, Fridaies, and Saturdaies: then they
have other Vigiles, and such Saint Eeues, as I never heard of but in Ireland,
nor I think be known in any other place, which they observe and keep with
such religious zeal and devotion, that I am sure Cardinal Bellarmine himself
cannot be more ceremonious then these be, nor show himself to be more holy,
nor more honest; yet that very day, that for conscience sake, they will
abstain from eating of Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Milk, Eggs, and such like, that
very hour they will not forbear to spoil, to rob, to ravish, to murder,
nor to commit any other villainy, what or howsoever.

And let me say something for our Females in Ireland, and leaving to speak of
worthy Matrones, and of those Women that are honest, good, and virtuous, (as
Ireland Good be thanked is not destitute of many such) I will speak only of
the riffe-raffe, the most filthy Queanes, that are known to be in the
Country, (I mean those Huswiues that do use selling of drink in Dubline, or
else where) commonly called Tauerne-keepers, but indeed filthy and beastly
Alehousekeepers: I will not meddle with their honesties, I will leave that to
be testified by Master Mayor of the Bull-ring, but otherwise for the greatest
number of them (for God defend that I should condemn them al) they are in the
manner of their life and living to be detested and abhorred: yet on their
prescribed fasting days, if there be any sanctity in abstaining from flesh,
from Butter, from Cheese, from Milk, from Eggs, they are as holy (I dare
undertake) as the Pope himself, and why not as honest? This is the holiness
which (I think) M. Stanihurst has so highly commended to be in the Irish; And
this is to be lamented, that the poor people of that country should be so
seduced and made believe, that their fasting, their praying in Latin, their
running wels and to other Idolatrous places, is a full satisfaction for any
sins that they can commit, how detestable or abominable soever; for thus they
are taught, and so they believe.

But is not this a mad manner of fasting, that marches in equal manner with
Theft, with murder, with Treason, with drunkenness, with whoredom, and with all
manner of Sodometry? but the cause of all things must needs tell whose child
the effect is.

Now lastly, M. Stanihurst seems to find fault at the manner of the Irish
burials, and says; They follow the dead corpse to the grave, with houling and
barbarous outcries pitiful in appearance, whereof grew ( as I suppose) the
Proverb To weep Irish.

I think it would be admired in any part of Christendom, to see the manners of
the Irish, how they use to carry their dead to their graves, in the remote
parts of the Country; to a stranger that had never seen the sight before, at
the first encounter, would believe that a company of Hags or hellish Fiendes,
were carrying a dead body to some infernal Mansion; for what with the
vnseemlinesse of their shows, and the il-faring noise they do make, with
their howling and crying, an ignorant man would sooner believe they were Devils
of Hell, then Christian people. But as M. Stanihurst says; [ it is pitiful
in appearance:] pitiful indeed, that a people so many years professing
Christianity, should yet show themselves more Heathen like, then those, that
never heard of God.

M. Stanihurst farther supposes, that the proverb, to weep Irish, had here
the first beginning: It may be so, and it is troth, that in Cities and Towns
where any deceaseth that is of worth or worthiness, they will hyre a number of
women to bring the corpse to the place of burial, that for some small
recompense given them, will furnish the cry, with greater shriking and howling,
then those that are grieved indeed, and have greatest cause to cry; and
hereupon arises this Proverb, to weep Irish, that is to say; To weep at
pleasure, without cause, or grief.

Here is thus much more to be considered, that notwithstanding this
vnchristian-like demeanor of the Irish, that in their burials do show
themselus like Infidels, repugnant to all Christianity, there is neither
Jesuit, Seminary, nor Popish priest, (that do so swarm in the Country,) that
will once rebuke or find fault at the matter. But they are not to be blamed, for
the Popes doctrine has no such operation, to draw men from darkness to light;
but it serves rather to hood-winke them, or put out both the eyes, and so make
them stark blind.

CAP. 4.
From whence it proceeds, that the Irish are so repugnant to the English.
I Remember, there was sometime one Alan Cope, who has written of many
matters, who, if a man might judge of, (but as he has testified of himself)
was a most arrogant and superstitious Papist, yet writing against that foolish
conceit houlden by the Irish, that Ireland was purged from venomous worms, by
the only prayers of S. Patrick, was therefore complained on, and accused by M.
Stanihurst, that Cope had wronged and slaundered the whole Irish Nation.

I hope I shall not be so dealt withal, that because I have detected and
reproved the uncivil demeanors of those that be blameworthy, I shall not
therefore be exclaimed on, to be an open deprauer of all that whole Nation.

I protest, I do know never a man in Ireland that I do hate, or that I do wish
any harm unto, and therefore if I hapen to glance at the abuses of those that
be ill, let not those that be good think themselves thereby to be detected, or
so much as touched. But as the throng of fools, does evermore exceed the
number of the wise, so the multitude of the rude and ignorant among the Irish,
do far pass the number either of the religious, or ciuilly reformed. I do not
hold, that every Citizen or townsman that lives in common society, is
therefore to be accounted civil; neither does it follow, that every man
inhabiting the Country, is therefore to be called uncivil; for ciuillity and
vnciuilitie, has no relation to the City or Country, but it has
consideration to the manners and conditions of men, that are therefore to be
accounted civil or uncivil, according to the dispositions of the mind.

All the Countries that are known (especially in Europe) have their several
inclinations as well to virtue as vice: We say, the Frenchmen are politic and
deceitful, and not so valiant in conquering, as provident in keeping. The
Spaniard is said to be proud and tyrannous. The Italian full of courtesy, and
full of craft. The Dutch are more wise when they be in their Cups, then when
they be in their Clossets; the English are reputed to be more wise to look
after, then they are to foresee: and the Englishman (indeed) does then think
himself to be best in fashion, when he is most out of fashion. To speak now
of the Irish more at large, for to them my talk does especially belong, I say
they are behoulding to Nature, that has framed them comely personages, of good
proportion, very well limbed, and to speak truly, the English, Scottish, and
Irish, are easy to be discerned from all the Nations of the world: besides,
as well by the excellency of their co^plexions, as by all the rest of their
lineaments, from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot. And although
that in the remote places, the uncivil sort so disfigure themselves with their
Glybs, their Trowes, and their misshapen attire, yet they appear to every man's
eye to be men of good proportion, of comely stature, and of able body. Now to
speak of their dispositions, whereunto they are adicted and inclined. I say,
besides they are rude, vncleanlie, and uncivil, so they are very cruel,
bloody minded, apt and ready to commit any kind of mischief. I do not impute
this so much to their natural inclination, as I do to their education, that
are trained up in Treason, in Rebellion, in Theft, in Robery, in Superstition,
in Idolatry, and nuzeled from their Cradles in the very puddle of Popery.

This is the fruits of the Popes doctrine, that does preach cruelty, that does
admit of murders and bloody executions; by poisoning, stabbing, or by any
other manner of practice hosoeuer: the pope teaches subjects to resist, to
mutiny, and to rebel against their Princes.

From hence it proceeds, that the Irish have ever been, and still are,
desirous to shake off the English government.

From hence it does proceed, that the Irish can not endure to love the English,
because they differ so much in Religion.

From hence it proceeds, that as they cannot endure to love the English, so
they cannot be induced to love any thing that does come from the English;
according to the proverb, Love me, and love my Dog: so contrariwise, he that
hates me, hates in like manner all that comes from me.

From hence it is, that the Irish had rather still retain themselves in their
sluttishnesse, in their vncleanlinesse, in their rudeness, and in their
inhumane loathsomnes, then they would take any example from the English, either
of ciuility, humanity, or any manner of Decency.

We see now the author of this enmity, is he that never did other good, where
he had to do with men's consciences.

There is yet a difference to be made, of those faults that do grow from our
weakness, and those that do proceed from our malice: and the Irish in this
are the more to be pitied, that are no better taught; whose educations, as
they are rude, so they are blinded with ignorance, and I think for devotions
sake, they have made a vow to be ignorant.

But although the vulgar sort, through their dull wits, and their brutish
education, cannot conceive what is profitable for themselves, and good for
their Country, yet there be some other of that Country birth, whose thoughts
and minds being enriched with knowledge and understanding, that have done good
in the Country, and whose example hereafter, may give light to many others: For
I think, that if these people did once understand the pretiousnesse of virtue,
they would far exceed us; notwithstanding, our long experience in the
Sovereignty of virtue.

CAP. 5.
That the Irish by nature are inclined unto cruelty.
IT cannot be denayed, but that the Irish are very cruel in their executions,
and no less bloody in their dispositions, the examples are to many, and to
manifest, to be by any means contradicted.

But some will say, their cruelty does not so much proceed from that natural
inclination that is in themselves, as from the malice and hatred they bear to
the English government, which they have always spurned at, and are still
desirous to shake off; but their rebellious dispositions are thereby made the
more apparent, and they ought therefore to be so much the more restrained: for
there is not a more dangerous thing, to rely either in the promises, or in
any other assurances of those men, that are by nature ambitious, disloyal,
cruel, and accustomed to shed blood.

But let us make a short suruay, what they are in behavior amongst themselves,
and we shall find that it is the English government that staieth them from
their bloody executions, the one of them against the other, and that our late
gracious Queen was in nothing more troubled, then in keeping them from
persecuting and prosecuting the one the other, with fire, with sword, and with
such raging fury, that the most barbarous savages that never knew ciuility, are
not more tragical in their executions, then are the Irish.

The time has been, when they lived like Barbarians, in Woods, in Bogges, and
in desolate places, without politic Law, or civil government, neither
embracing Religion, Law, nor mutual love.

That which is hateful to all the world besides, is only beloved and embraced
by the Irish, I mean civil Wars and domestical discentions.

The wild uncivil Seythians, do forbear to be cruel the one against the
other. The Canibals, deuourers of men's flesh, do leave to be fierce amongst
themselves, but the Irish, without all respect, are ever most cruel to their
very next neighbors.

In civil broiles, every base Rascal is an equal companion with the greatest
commander, and their liberty to do wrong, is no less the one then the other;
for they know they are the more willingly drawn to undertake commotions and
rebellions, for the aid and assistance of these licentious routes that follow
them: they therefore forbear no mischief, abstaining no more from that which
is holy, then from that which is profane: neither marriage nor honor so
protect any, that Rape be not mingled with murder, nor murder with Rape.

All things are full of misery in civil Wars, and as in foreign encounters,
there is nothing more honorable then Conquest, so in civil and domestical
conflictes, there is nothing more miserable then victory: for the rebellious
that are led by cruelty first to undertake, can use no moderation where they
become victors.

These civil furies, are by several means ingendered: many take arms
oppressed by the tyranny of Princes, but these through sufferance and overmuch
liberty: some others, having been offered wrongs and injuries, have therefore
betaken themselves to actions of rebellion; but these fearing to be punished
for wrongs by themselves committed, do therefore seek to prevent it by
playing the Rebels: Some to free themselves from thraldom, (as they pretended)
have opposed themselves against their Princes (and as they say) to purchase
liberty: but what Subjects in Europe, do live so lawless as the Irish, when
the Lords and great men throughout the whole Country, do rather seem to be
absolute, then to live within the compass of subjection? neither have I known
any amongst the Irish, that have stood upon those terms of liberty, but whom
they wuld set free from the Prince, they would inthrall to the Pope. I never
yet heard of any man that was an enemy to the common quiet of a Realm, but he
was likewise an enemy to the commonwealth.

Alexander was wont to say, that the clemency of Kings and Princes, consisted
not so much in them selves that were to command, as in the disposition of their
subjects, that were to obey. And one, attributing the flourishing estate of
Sparta, to the government of the Kings that knew how to rule well; nay,
answered another, It is to be imputed to the virtue of the Citizens, that
know how to obey well.

Alas poor Ireland, what safety may be hoped for thee, that art still so
addicted to disobedience, to contempt, to sedition, to Rebellion, that thy
wounds are no sooner closed up, but thou thy self go about to open them
again? Your granfathers have felt the smart of disobedience, your fathers have
complained of it, your selves have seen the calamities of contempt, and God
grant that your childrens children, have not just cause to curse the miseries
that are raised up by Rebellion.

The extremest point whereunto the cruelty of man may stretch, is for one man
to kill another, yea Divinity it self, wills us to show favor, and not to be
cruelly inclined, no not to bruit beasts, which the Almighty has created and
placed amongst his other creatures, as well for his glory as for his service,
and has himself had merciful respect unto them; as when he said to Jonas,
Should not I spare Niniuy that great City, wherein are six score thousand
persons that cannot discern between the right hand and the left, and also much
Cattle.

We see here God himself had some commiseration to the poor cattle, and it
was not without respect, that he prescribed to Moses in the first Table of the
Commandementes, that as well the cattle as the stranger within thy gates, should
cease from their labor, and rest on the Sabbath day.

If it has pleased God the Creator of all things to be thus regardfull to the
work of his hands, I am fully persuaded, that such as by nature do show
themselves to be no less bloody minded toward men, then toward beasts, do
show themselves to be naturally inclined to cruelty, the vglines whereof, is to
be abhorred and detested amongst men.

CAP. 6.
Of the ingratitude of the Irish.
THE Irish, as they are naturally inclined to cruelty, so there is neither
lenity, love, nor liberality, whereby to confirm them in their duty and
allegiance to their Prince.

Some will say that there is not a readier mean whereby to draw subjects to a
settled love, then a gracious clemency to be used by the Prince: but in times
past it would not serve, and I shall not need any far-fet presidents, let us
but remember our late gracious Queen, with what mildness and with what mercy,
she ruled and governed forty and odd years, and with what disloialty was she
still requited.

Her Majesty thought in being gracious, she might thereby have won their
hearts to a more loving and willing obedience, and to this end, to draw them
to a more dutiful regard, what did she neglect, that was either befitting for
a Prince to grant amongst subjects, or behouefull for subjects to receive from
their Prince? If clemency might have mittigated the rigor of cruelty, what
pardoning, what protecting, and what tollerating of offenses that were daily
and continualy committed against her.

But for the better discovery of their ingratitude toward her Majesty, how
did she continually grace and countinance the Nobility of that realm, not
only suffering them to triumph and tyranize over their Tenants and followers,
with such privileges and prerogatives, as were more befitting Kings, then
behouefull for subjects, but also she bountifully bestowed of them,
contributions, stipendes, pentions, and other daily paies out of her Cofers,
for the better upholding of their decayed estates, and to have won them (if it
had bin possible) to her love and their allegiance; and how some of them
requited her, it is so manifestly known, as it were but lost labor any further
to rehearse.

How many Gentlemen again of that country birth, came daily into England about
suits, that were still begging and craving, and were continually returned from
her Majesty's Court back again into Ireland, laden with guiftes and
prefermentes, that she graciously and liberally bestowed on them; who after
they had passed and possessed their grants, would never com in place to say
Amen, when they heard her Majesty prayed for; but rather by their ill example
of contempt, made some others more obstinate and stubborn, then otherwise they
would.

I think the ingratitude of the Irish (considering how mildly they have bin
and are yet governed) deserves no lesle to be condemned the^ their Treasons:
and Rebellious: and there is nothing so much detested amongst the Irish
themselves, as this vice of ingratitude.

Ingratitude is no way to be excused nor colored, Theft, Robery, Murder, yea
Treason it self, may be a little flourisht over with some blind excuse, but
ingratitude can neither be covered nor shadowed by any means, but remaining
naked, must mannifest it self every where with shame and dishonor.

Not to requit a benefit received is ill, but this may be said to be the
frailty of man: but to render and requit evil for good, is most pernicious,
and this malignity has evermore proceeded from detestable Creatures, denounced
and abhorred by God and all good men.

The Egyptians used to geld such persons as were detected with this vice of
ingratitude, to the end that there might been no farther procreation of so
viperous a brood: if this severity were used to those of the Irish that have
tasted of the bounty, liberality and mercy of their Princes, and have repayed
them again with grudge; murmnre, disobedience, contempt, and sometime with
Treason it self, I say the Eunuchs of Ireland, would far exceed in number
over and above all the rest that were fit for propagation.

They have bin still governed by such Princes, who shunning the severity of
Laws, have rather conformed themselves to divine mercy, then to due Justice;
they have bin and still are, governed by Christian Princes, endued with the
knowledge of the truth, that have ruled and do rule with courtesy and clemency,
but it is the imperfections of their judgments, that makes them to mistake
the perfection of their Princes.

CHAP. 7.
Of the inciuility, both of manners and conditions, used by the Irish.
IF I should set down the sluttish and uncleanly observations of the Irish, as
well of the men, as the Women, but especially of those manners and conditions
whereunto they invre themselves in the remote places of the Country, I might
set down such vnreuerent and loathsome matter, as were unfit for every queasie
stomach to understand of.

I will not speak of those affairs belonging to Childbearing women, that are
no less uncivil then uncleanly, in many their demeanors belonging to those
businesses: Neither will I speak of their unmannerly manners in making of
their Butter, nor of the beastly Physic they have used to apply to a Cow,
when she will not give down her Milk.

I might speak here what I my self have seen in the North parts of Ireland,
how vnhamsomely the women do use to grind their Oat-meale.

But to speak generally throughout the whole Realm of Ireland, in those
things wherein they should be most neat and cleanely, they do show
themselves to be most sluttish and filthy; namely, in making of their Butter,
and washing of their Linen.

First, they do abuse one of the greatest blessings of God bestowed upon that
Country, for as God promised the children of Israel to transport them into a
land that flowed with Milk and Honey, so the plenty of milk throughout all
the parts of Ireland does so abound, that the greatest part of the people (of
the poorest sort) are especially relieved and sustained (both Summer and
Winter) with Milk and Butter; but according to the Proverb, GOD sendes meat,
and the Devil sends Cooks; so, it pleases God to send them plenty of Milk,
but as they behave themselves in the using of it, it is fit for no body but for
themselves, that are of the uncleanly diet: not only in their Milk and
Butter, but in many other unsavory dishes besides.

It is holden among the Irish, to be a presagement of some misfortune, to
keep their milking vessels cleanly, and that if they should either scald or
wash them, some unlucky misaduenture would surely betide them: upon this
conceit, all the vessels that they use about their milk, are most filthily
kept: and I my self have seen, that vessel which they hold under the Cow
whilst they are in milking, to be furred half an inch thick with filth, so
that Dublyne it self is served every Market day with such Butter, as I am sure
is much more loathsome then toothsome.

Now, in the manner of their washing, they are yet more filthy then in any
other of their exercises, wherein they are most vncleanlie, and I do almost
loath, but to think of their scouring stuff which they do use in the stead
of Soap; but he that came in place when they were in their Laundry, in their
Nettyng (as they call it) would never after stop his nose, if he chanced to go
by where they were scouring of a Privy.

These and many other loathsome observations are used by the Irish, from the
which they will not be diswaded, but the vnnurtered sort among them are no less
admiring our decency, then we their rudeness and vnciuility. And as I have
said elswher, they will not take any presidents from the English, and long it
was before they could be brought to imitate our English manner, in diverse
points of husbandry, but especially in the ploughing of their land; in the
performing whereof, they used the labor of five several persons to every
plough, and their Teem of Cattle, which commonly consisted of five or six
horses, were placed all in front, having neither cords, chains, nor lines,
whereby to draw, but every horse by his own tail; and this was the manner of
ploughing when I knew Ireland first, and is used still at this day in many
places of the Country.

Demand of them, why they should be so much addicted to their own durtie
demeanures, and that they should not conform themselves to those civil
courses which they see are to be performed with less pain, and more profit;
they can satisfy us with no other reason but custom, Thus did our Ancestors.

Custom is a Metal amongst them, that stands which way soever it be bent;
Check them for their vncleanlinesse, and they plead Custom: reprehend them
for their Idolatry, they say thus did our Fathers before us: and I think it
be Custom that draws them so often into rebellion, because they would do as
their fathers have done before them.

But alas! their judgments are both blind and lame, and they are deaf to all
good counsels, they are fallen into a blind arrogance, and they are so
generally bewitched with Popery, that they will neither draw example nor
precept from the English.

But I hope my general speeches, will breed no general offense; to say that
the Irish are generally adicted to Popery, it would argue but a quarrelsome
disposition, to denay that truth which we see in daily example before our
eyes, and the Irish themselves (I am sure) would be much offended, if they were
not able to drop ten Papists, for one Protestant, throughout the whole Realm;
themselves are neither ashamed, nor afraid to confess it, and I would we
might as well trust them in their fidelity to the King, as we may believe them
in that: but they all speak fair, and they say they love the king, and
without doubt there are some small number, to whom it has pleased God to open
their eyes, and that do stand assured to his Majesty: but for the greatest
number of those that be Papists, what fair semblance soever they make, his
Majesty may well say with our Savior, This people honors me with their
lips, but their hearts are far from me. And for these, whatsoever they speak
with their lips, their hearts are at Rome. Do they not show it through every
part of the Realm, in City, Town, and Country, in their receiving and
entertaining of Jesuits, Seminaries, and Popish Priests, the protested enemies
to his Majesty?

With what face may they then avouch themselves to love the King, that does
with such feruencie embrace his Majesty's deadly enemies. I will never believe
them, neither can it sink in my head, that an honest man may be brought to be
in league with God and the Devil, and to be in perfect love and charity with
them both together.

The vulgar sort of the Irish, wanting faculty to judge of things truly as
they are, and suffering themselves to be led and carried away with outward
apparitions, are not only possessed with bold nesse to despise, but likewise
with malipertnesse to impugn those means, that should as well induce them to
the love and obedience of their Prince, as to the true knowledge of their God,
wherein consists the state of their salvation.

It is ignorance that hunteth after light in darkness, that believes
shadows to be substancial; but Divine knowledge, from whence proceeds all
blessings, it is the parent of Peace, of Wisdom, of Obedience, and it is the
light of reason, that discovers truth from falsehood, and therefore the most
resplendant ornament of Man.

CHAP. 8.
Of the vulgar sort of the Irish, what account they make of an Oath.
THe multitude of the Irish (I mean the ruder sort) are very regardlesse of
their Oaths, and there are many reasons to induce it; for I have known
Ireland these forty years, yet (to my remembrance) I never knew any man
punnished for perjury, by any Judicial course of the Princes Laws.

They have a custom, that upon any controversies amongst themselves in the
Country, the Tenants are enjoined to swear by their Land-lordes hand; the
which Oath, if the Landlord do by any means disprove, he imposes a great
fine upon the party, and he shall be sure to pay it: they are therefore very
circumspect in taking of that Oath.

They have some respect again to their Oaths, when they are deposed upon a
Masse-booke: And I will trust him better, that offers to swear by bread and
salt, then him that offers to swear by the Bible* I mean, amongst the
greater number, that make no conscience what they swear upon an English book.
And the simpler sort of them, do hold their Oaths to be so much the more, or
so much the less, according to the bigness of the book: for if they swear
upon a little Book, they think they take but a little Oath.

Thus, what between those that are simply ignorant, and the other again that
are blinded with Popery, there will hardly be found a Jury that will find for
his Majesty. And here (with all reverence) I must needs remember that ever
renowned Qu. Elizabeth, who would many times say, That the Irish were so
allied in kindred the one with the other, and she having never a Cosine in the
Country, could never get her right. But woe be to him, that has his state
depending upon the verdict of a Jury in Ireland, especially if he be a
Protestant.

The honesty of him that should give testimony in any matter whatsoever, is
to be reputed for more or less, according to the company that he is known
to frequent. I do not think it therefore convenient, that a Papist, that is
trained up in the deuillish doctrine of Equivocation, and that they may swear
what they list, with A mental reservation, is to be received as a witness
against a protestant, or to be believed or credited in any thing that he
shall either say or swear against him.

Because the two Midwiues, Shiphuah and Puah in the first of Exodus, told a
lie to the King, who had commanded that all the male children of the Hebrews
should be slain, therefore says our holy Father the Pope, it is lawful to
lie for advantage. Methinkes his holiness might have borrowed such another
from the 12. of Exodus, where by the commandment of God, the children of
Israel borrowed Jewels of Silver and Gold of the Egyptians; if the Popes
catholics might have the like liberty with Protestants, then it were an
excellent matter to be a Papist, for then a man might both lie and steal by
authority, and they are not far from the matter: for it is known well
enough, that in the time of our late gracious Queen, the Pope gave full power
and authority to dispense with all Popish Recusants, neither to hold word,
promise, contract, nor protestation, what or howsoever, that had bin formerly
conditioned, or were hereafter to be made with any Heretic (as they call
him) that will not acknowledge the Pope to be Christ's high Vicar here on
earth, and that he has thereby full authority to depose Kings and princes at
his own will and pleasure.

Methinkes this Doctrine of Equivocation and Mental reservation, was very
acceptable to the young married wife, who in her Husbands absence being
solicited by an amorous friend, she consented unto him, upon condition, that
he should not meddle with her lips, neither to kiss, nor so much as to
touch them; Her lover demanded the reason, she answered; That at my marriage
day, this mouth of mine made inviolable promise to my husband of continency;
and therefore, what my mouth has Religiously vowed, shall Ceremoniously be
kept: content thy self therefore with the other parts of my body, for my
lips are only vowed unto my Husband, and for him I will reserve them. I
think of my conscience, this Woman was as firm in the promise she made to her
husband, as a number of Papists in their Oaths they do make to the king.

This Doctrine is not only warrantable against Protestants, but it may
sometimes serve to salve a vow that is rashly made to God himself, as the
holy Pilgrim, that made solemn protestation to offer the one half of his
good fortunes at the high Altar, whatsoever should betide him in his journey.
And by the way as he passed, fortuning to find a bag of Nuts, he eat up the
Kernels, and offered up the shells.

What call you this, Equivocation, or Mental Reservation? But call it what you
list, this Doctrine does fit our holy Fathers tooth, for he has taught us long
ago, There is no Faith to be holden with Heretics.

CAP. 9.
That a conquest should draw after it Law, Language, and Habit.
Master Stanihurst is of opinion, that a Conquest should draw three things
after it, and that the vanquished should surrender themselves to imitate the
Laws, the Language, and the manner of Apparel used and accustomed by the
Victors.

I could wish that the Irish would submit themselves to the obedience of our
English Laws, for I say the Country is accursed, that is not governed by Law,
but it is ignorance that breeds contempt of Law; contempt of Law, draws on
Rebellion; and Rebellion is the utter decay, ruin, and desolation of countries
and kingdoms.

It is ignorance joined with obstinacy, that has not only contemned the
positive laws of Princes in Ireland, but they have likewise despised and
impugned the divine laws of the living God. And where God is not known, the
Prince cannot be obeyed: for it is the light and knowledge of Gods word, that
contains subjects in obedience unto their Princes; and where the Gospel is
generally received, there is peace and tranquillity universally embraced.

It is not so in Ireland, and they are in nothing more repugnant then against
the law of God. And as for the imitation of Language (as M. Stanihurst has
said) it has been thought very expedient, for diverse respects, that the
conquered should surrender themselves to the language of the Conqueror: and for
this very cause, when William Duke of Normandy had conquered England, hoping to
translate our English language into French, he caused al our English Laws to
be written and set down in the French tongue, and so they have continued, and
are still remaining at this very hour.

But here beehold the godly disposition of our gracious King that now reigns,
who comiserating the calamity of the hunger-starued Realm of Ireland, that has
never yet tasted of any thing published in their own language, but lies,
fables, and popish fantasies, that has but led them into ignorance and error.
To give them some taste therefore of that heavenly food, whereof they have never
yet felt smack or savor; he has caused the New Testament, together with the
Book of Common Prayer, in that form and manner as it is now used in our
English churches, to be both translated into Irish, and to be printed in the
Irish Charracter, that as well the lettered sort, that can read their own
language, as also the unlearned, that can but understand what they hear others
read, may reap the benefit of his Majesty's clemency and love toward them,
that does seek by courtesy to win them, that might otherwise enforce them by
compulsion of Laws.

Now, for the Irish to invre themselves to speak English, I think it were
happy for England and Ireland both. If never a Papist throughout that whole
country, could either speak, or so much as understand a word of English: and it
is holden for a Maxim in Ireland, that ten English will sooner become Irish,
then one Irish will be found to turn English.

Now, for the imitation of habit and attire, that (M. Stamhurst says) should
likewise follow a conquest, I protest I would not wish the Irish so much harm,
to inioyne them to follow our English fashion in apparel, when there is
almost never a passage from Chester to Dublyne, but one Fool or other comes
over with a new fashion, either for men or Women, or for both. And although the
Irish are proud enough of mind, yet they are not lightly proud in their
apparel; and yet the example of our English pride, has done a great deal
of harm amongst that people.

I remember many years ago (when I was a little Bookish) I have read of a
pretty Prouiso, devised for the prevention of Pride, an Act established,
debarring all sorts of people, as well men as women, from the wearing of any
gayish or light-coloured apparel ( Players and Curtizans only excepted) to
whom free liberty was given to wear what they themselves listed.

This did not only incite those that were honest, to live within the compass
of modest and comely attire, but it was alike inducement to those that were well
known Strumpets, to shelter themselves under the habit of modesty, thereby to
escape from being reputed infamous.

But as the Proverb is, It is not the Frocke that makes the Friar, so without
doubt, those women are not all dishonest of their bodies, that by the outward
shows in their Attire, a man would think, they had sent their Consciences
unto the Stews.

It were pity that beutie should be Mercenary, or that by strange inventions
it should set it self to sale; And why are those beauties veiled, that Women
themselves desires to show, and every man desires to see? But they say it is
for modesty, and I commend it, but let them be modest likewise in their
Manners.

Pithagoras Niece was wont to say, that a Woman going to bed with a man,
ought together with her Peticote, to put off all bashfulnesse, but in the
morning to put it on again: Not like her, that when she first went to bed with
a Seafaring man, stripped her self quite of her modesty, and could never find
a time to put it on again after. But modesty (as well in attire, as in
conversation and manners) has ever been the reputed Ornament of women; but to
speak truth of our Gentlewomen of Ireland: that be of Irish birth, they have
little practice, either in pride or in good huswiferie; for they are for the
most part always busied in taking their ease. And it is holden for a servile
kind of baseness amongst the Irish, for a gentleman or a gentlewoman, to be
seen in any manner of faculty, Idleness only excepted. And this conceit of
theirs, is another occasion of ignorance, which as it engenders many vain and
lascivious thoghts, so it draws after it, wicked and dishonest deeds.

To conclude this Chapter, I say, that those of the Irish that have reduced
themselves to ciuility, (were it not for their Religion) are otherwise, of very
good conversation; and as well in their manners, as in the decency of their
apparel, they are very modest and comely, but they are so charmed by their
ghostly fathers, that if an Angel should come from heaven, and speak against
Popery, he should be condemned amongst them, yea and holden for accursed.

CHAP. X.
Of certain Septes and degrees among the Irish, how they are reputed.
THere is amongst the Irish, as amongst all the Nations of the world, diverse
degrees, accorto the which each man is regarded.

For the Nobility of that Realm, they are amongst them as Honorable, and as
worthy to be honored, as of any other Nation whatsoever; so likewise again,
both of Knights and Gentlemen.

After their Gentlemen, whereof a great number of them are rude and uncivil
enough, the horsemen succeeds in the next rank, who is more fit to serve his
lord and Captain in an action of Rebellion, then in the service of his Prince.

The Galloglas succeeds the Horsman, and he is commonly armed with a Scull,
a shirt of maile, and a Galoglas Axe: his service in the field, is neither good
against horsemen, nor able to endure an encounter of Pikes, yet the Irish do
make great account of them.

The Kerne of Ireland are next in request, the very dross and scum of the
Country, a generation of Villains not worthy to live: these be they that live
by robbing and spoiling the poor Countreyman, that makes him many times to
buy bread to give unto them, though he want for himself and his poor
children. These are they, that are ready to run out with every Rebel, and
these are the very Hags of Hell, fit for nothing but for the gallows.

We are now come to the hors-boyes, so termed by their professions, which is,
to keep or dress horse; and as in England we call them hors-keepers, so in
Ireland he carries the name but of a horse boy how young or old soever.

There are other Septes or professions, namely of Bardes, which are in manner
of Poets or Rythmers, which do nothing but sit and compose lies. Then they have
Harpers, and those are so reverenced among the Irish, that in the time of
Rebellion, they will forbear to hurt either their persons, or their goods, but
are rather inclined to give them, and are very bountiful, either to Rymers or
Fools.

Then is there a certain brotherhood, called by the name of Karrowes, and
these be common gamsters, that do only exercise playing at Cards, and they
will play away their mantels, and their shirts from their backs, and when they
have nothing left them, they will trusse themselves in straw; this is the life
they lead, and from this they will not be reclaimed.

But here is now a matter to be noted, that among all these sorts and
professions of the Irish, the child is ever desirous to imitate what his father
has bin before him. If the father has been a horseman, the son will be a
horsman: if the father has been a Galoglas, the son will be a Galloglas: if
the father has been a Kerne, the son will be a Kerne: if the father have
been a horse boy, the son will be no better. But this is most of al to be
wondered at, that if the father had bin a Rythmer, the son would be a Rithmer;
which seems strange unto me, that Poetry in Ireland, should succeed by
descent from the father to the son, that must be helped elsewhere, not only
by Nature, but Art: and therefore, if their Irish Rymers be of such excellency,
as the Irish themselves will commend, I say it is wonderful.

Every great man in the Country has his Rymer, his Harper, and his known
Messenger, to run about the Country with Letters.

These altogether among themselves, do observe the Law of Complements, and
every profession has his particular Decorum, I cannot commend them for their
Ciuility, nor they do not superabound in honesty: their Virtue is, they will do
nothing but what their Fathers have done before them.

CHAP. XI.
Of the manner of the Irish Coshering, and of the credulity in believing of Lies.
THere is amongst the Irish, a kind of feasting or banqueting, which they
call Coshering, and this is the manner of it; Good company both of men and women
being drawn together a feasting, to entertain the time between meals, they
have their Rythmers and their Harpers; the one, to sing, and the other, to
play: the songs that they use to sing, are usually in the commendation of
Theft, of Murder, of Rebellion, of Treason, and the most of them lying fixions
of their own Collections, invented but of purpose, to stir up their hearts
to imitate the example of their Ancestors, making repetition how many Cowes
they had stolen, how many murders they had committed, how many times they had
rebeld against their Prince, and what spoils and outrages they had done
against the English.

The manner of their sitting in this great feasting, is this; Stools nor Tables
they have none, but a good bundle of Straw strewed about the flower, they set
themselves down one by another: Another burden of straw being shaken over
their legs, does serve them to set on their dishes. Perhaps, if it be in the
time of Summer, or where the place will afford it, then in the stead of Straw
they use green Rushes; but whether it be Straw or Rushes thus strewed over
their legs, this is both Table and Table-cloath, whereon they use to place
their dishes.

Victuals they shall have plenty, Beef, Mutton, Porke, Hens, Rabits, and all
together served in a great wooden platter: Aqua vite they must have good
store, or else it is not worthy to be called a feast. Upon Wednesdayes,
Fridayes, and Satterdaies, they have like plenty of fish, for upon those
days, to eat a bit of flesh, is a more deadly sin, then either drunkenness
or Letchery.

And commonly the Irish custom is, that when they are served with flesh, they
have no bread with their meat, but if their store be such that they hauebread,
their finest Manchets are ordinarily Oaten-Cakes, in this sort prepared.

First, in the remote places of Ireland, in the stead of Threashing their Oats,
they use to burn them out of the straw, and then winnowing them in the wind,
from their burnt ashes, they make them into meal, but if I should say how
unhandsomely they do grind them, or if I should tell, how my self have seen
a woman sitting with a Mustarde Quearne between her bare thighs, grinding of
Oatmeale, I think a man would have little list to eat of the bread; but of
this Meal, as ill in complexion (to look upon) as a little dirt under a man's
feet, they make their Cakes, for other bread they have none, and it is but
seldom when they have this.

I might tell some other unmannerly tales used by the Irish, in those times of
Coshering, but I will let them pass. And as M. Stanihurst says, the
antiquity of this manner of feasting, is set forth by Virgil, when Dido
entertained the Troyan Prince and his company; but Master Stanihurst shall
never make me believe, that the Irish manner of Coshering was drawn from that
president: but the manner of our Irish writers, have ever been, to draw
presidents from ancient and Worme-eaten Authorities: for with these Trifles
they do bewitch the poor ignorant people of the Country, that they make them
believe what themselves list to persuade; and the Irish are wonderfully
addicted to give credit and belief, not only to the fabulous fixions of their
lying Poets, but also to the Prognosticating Soothsayers and Witches, like our
Husbandmen of the Country, that do draw all their knowledge from the Counsel
of a Calendar. And if any of their wise men, or wise women (as they call them)
do prognosticate either good or evil fortune, they do more rely in their
presagements, then they do in the four Evangelists: and sooner they will
believe them.

They do believe in Charms and Incantations: then they have words and Spells
to drive away rats, and to heal diseases: then they have enchanted Gyrdles,
that can defend the violence of shot, and are of such defense, that no sword,
or any other weapon shall hurt the party that is girded with them.

It were both admirable and incredible for to set down the observations used
by the Irish, upon certain Saints Eeues, but especially on May-Eeue, and
Midsommer Eeue; what watching, what rattling, what tinkling upon pannes and
candlesticks, what strewing of Herbs, what clamors, and what other Ceremonies
are used, and not only in the Country, but in Dublyne it self, the very
marks and badges of infidelity, neither observed nor believed amongst any
other people in the World, but amongst Infidels, Pagans, and Papists.

And it is a wonder to see, how from these vain fantasies, so many famous
impressions do arise, or rather (I may say) how many infamous lies are
believed, and as when a man has once gotten the end of a Clue, he may wind
off at pleasure what himself lists; so men that are naturally inclined to
nourish Novelties, having once received any thing for truth, he thinks it a
deed of charity to impart it to his friend, and fears not to add something
of his own invention, the better to make the matter to be believed: and thus
from a particular error, by this manner of handling, it becomes public:
for as the flixability of our inventions, to frame reasons unto all manner of
dreams and fantasies, are very apt and ready, so our immaginations are
likewise found as easy to receive impressions from falshoode, derived from
very frivolous and foolish apparitions: but it is commonly said, that to be
light of belief, and easily persuaded, proceeds from a lightness of the
wit, and weakness of the brain.

CAP. XII.
How Ireland was purged from all venomous worms, by the Prayers of Saint
Patrick.
Master Stanihurst, in his Chronicle of Ireland, is very angry against May.
Alan Cope, that seemed to scoff at the Irish conceit, that will needs
attribute the purging of venomous Worms from out of Ireland, to the Prayers of
S. Patruke.

Now, although Master Alan Cope, sufficiently proves by the Testimony of
several writers, that Ireland was destitute of all these venomous worms, many
hundred years before Saint Patricke was borne; yet Master Stanihurst is so
angry, that there should be any doubt or question made of that which has
been so long received and believed for an undoubted truth amongst the Natives
of Ireland, that he pickes a great many of quarrels against M. Alan Cope;
finding fault first, that he neither observed Decorum persona, nor Decorum
dialogi, and then he quarrelleth with his Divinity, which (as he says) is
far dissonant from the Rules of Charity.

And when he has charged M. Cope with many other absurdities, he sets down
this proposition, That like as God in his Justice punishes a Country that is
hard hearted, with Worms and Vermin, so of his mercy they are removed again
from a Realm, that is obedient and ready to follow his Laws and Precepts.

To put this out of Question, he brings this President, That as Pharaoh
would not listen to those threats denounced him by Moses and Aaron, was
therefore punnished with Frogs and Flies, and such other vermin, yet upon his
show of repentance, at the instant request of Moses, those plagues were
appeased, and the worms extinguished: why then ( says he) may it not likewise
hold, that Saint Patrick, finding the Irish so pressed and ready to embrace the
Christian faith, might not stand so highly in the favor of God, as through his
earnest Prayers, the venomous and poisoned Worms should be abandoned.

But alas ( says he) this is not a matter of such difficulty to be believed,
when it was fore-promised by Christ himself, who in the xvi. of Mark says,
And these tokens shall follow them that believe, they shall cast out devils in
my name, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall drive away Serpents,
etc.

Were not these places of Scripture well spyed out by our Irish Chronicler, and
as aptly applied, as those of the Devil, that willed Christ, if he were the
son of God, he should cast himself from the Pynacle of the Temple, For it is
written, That his Angels should hold him up, that he should not dash his foot
against a stone.

But I will not contend with M. Stanihnrst, nor with any other, whether it were
Saint Patricke, who by his Prayers has thus purged Ireland from Toads, from
Snakes, from Adders, and from other like venomous Worms: but there are other,
as well Beasts as Birds, as the Roe-Buck, the Moule, the Pianet, the Nytingale,
that are as mere strangers in Ireland, as the other, and I cannot think but
that it was one man's work to expel all these together, and all at one time.
But if it were Saint Patrick, or whosoever otherwise, that was so severe
against the Nytingale, the sweet Querrister of the Wood, whose delectable
harmony is pleasing to every ear, I would he had been as strict in Justice
against that foul mouthed Bird the Cuckoo, whose notes were never yet pleasing
to any man's ear, that was jealous of his wife.

And yet to do the Irish no wrong, this gauling grief of jealousy, is no
general sickness in Ireland, it troubles very few, and I account them so
much the wiser; it is a kind of frenzy, that never yet did good, the wise men
of the world has ever sought to restrain it by discretion.

If Histories be to be credited, Lucullus, Caesar, Pompei, Anthoni, Cato, and
diverse other gallant men, were Cornuted: and although they themselves knew it,
yet they made no stir about it, that Coxcombe Lepidus only excepted, who
dyed with very grief that his Wife had made him Cuckold.

But how many husbands have their been, that have endured this accident, not
only without reproach and offense against their wives, but with singular
commendation to their own Virtue, in concealing it from the world.

Some women there has been, that has prostituted themselves, thereby to
advance her Husbands credit, sometimes to save her husbands life: but this
subject is not for this place, and these presidents are out of season for this
age, but there has been Husbands known, that have of themselves made
Port-sale of their wives honesties, as well for their profit, as for their
preferment: as Phanlius the Argian, who through ambition, offered his wife to
King Phillip: And as Galba, who bestowed a Supper of Merenas, and perceiving
him to cast some amorous glances on his wife, being risen from the Table,
shrunk down upon his Cushion, as one oppressed with sleep, thereby to give
him the better scope, whereby he might persist.

It is a foolish curiosity for a man to seek for that which he would be loath
to find, and that when he has found, he cannot amend.

I rather commend me to him, who taking his wife so tardy, that he needed no
other witness, then what himself had seen, would not yet believe his own
senses, but would say, that he would never condemn a true dealing wife, for a
false misdeeming eye. I applaude his Wisdom, that with his own Virtue, could
suppress his own shame.

It is not said without judgment, that a good marriage might be made between a
deaf man, and a blind woman. But I say, I would not wish that a man should
either be too light in hearing, or too quick of sight, to look into his wives
affairs: and for him that would live in a quiet content, I say that one eye
were enough, and with the most, for him that will be still peeping and prying
into his wives business.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the holy Saints, that have bin borne, bred, and brought up in Ireland.
IF a man may believe Master Stanihurst in his description of Ireland, there
has bin many holy Saints, natives of that Country, that were full of
Miracles, and performed so many wonderful matters, as there is never a wise man
in the world would believe them to be true, and so they continue still at this
present hour. Our holy, holy brood of Jesuits, Seminaries, Friars and such
other, do perform stranges things, but specially for the increase and
propagation of children, not a barren woman in an house where they be lodged:
for she that is not Childbearing, a blessing from one of these of the holy
order will make her so to fructify, that her husband (whatsoever he wants
besides) shall be sure to want no Children.

But as Master Stanihurst advises his reader not to be over credulous to
believe all that is written of those holy Saints themselves, nor yet of their
fained Miracles: so I protest, for the love that I bear to a number of my
Ireland friends, I could wish them to be well aware of this holy brood of the
Popes Cockrels, the proverb is old, and not so old as true: That Pigeons and
Priests do make foul houses.

I have heard of many Miracles, and there is no place or Country where Popery
is professed but they are full of Miracles, full visions, and full of strange
euentes, but the Miracles of Ireland, they are more foolish, more ridiculous,
more gross, and more absurd then any other, that I have either heard or read
of. It were strange to make relation of the Miracles that have bin wrought at
the holy Cross, but especially at Saint Patricks Purgatory; and it is a piece
of Rethoricke, sometimes by seeming to affect ignorance, to set forth a
subtilty; and he that should but read, what Master Stanihurst himself has
set down of that miraculous place of S. Patrickes Purgatory if he has bin but
a little touched with the Tincture of wit, will find out the very mystery of
gross and palpable Knavery.

And as Ireland is full of strange Miracles, so I think there are more Saints
known in that Country, then ever was heard of in Heaven, or were ever
registered in the Popes Golden Legend.

We read of a holy saint that was long since in the North of Ireland,
called by the name of Saint Wooddoge, to whom was given a large portion of
lands, the which were after translated to the Bishops sea of Rapo; but some of
those lands being houlden at this day from the Bishop that now is, and being
called in question upon what consideration the Church liuinges should be so
detained, there is a record brought forth, how a holy Bishop, many hundred
years since, conveyed away that parcel of la^d to one Sugere a Boylle, with
these plain words, For the use of his Daughters body. They have moreover in the
North of Ireland, an old monument (called by the name of Baughall Murry) and this
is reserved only for O-Neale to swear by. There is mention made of many other
Saints; as Saint Colme, Saint Branden, Saint Keuen, Saint Mac-Looge, Saint
Dolocke, and they say there are some few Saints of a later edition: as Saint
Bedloc, Saint Brown, and there is great hope that if Tyrone be not already in
the Popes Calendar that he shall not be long out.

I think this Saint Colme before spoken of, is that great Saint in the North,
called by the name of Coleme Rille, in great veneration at this day for many
strange Miracles, the which they say he still performs. Then they had a
gentlewoman Saint, that Stanihurst in his History makes mention of, called by
the name of Bridgit, not that Bridgit who in the time of Pope Vrbane errected a
certain order of Nuns, (called Bridgidians) but this without doubt was a
very holy woman, for she lies buried with two men; namely with Saint Patrick,
and Coleme Rille, as apeareth by an ancient Monument in the Cathedral Church
of Down in the North of Ireland, where this inscription is to be read: Hi
tres in Duno, tumulo tumulantur in vno,
Brigidia, Patricia, atque Columba pius.


I have not numbered Saint Patrick amongst these Saints that be of Irish birth:
for if a man may believe M. Stanihurst, he was a Welch-man borne. He sets
down in his Chronicle the certain place of his birth, and how coming over
into Ireland, he bound himself Prentise to a Master, that set him to keep
Hogs, and following his Masters Swine in the field, one day as they were
rooting, one Hog among the rest, turned up with his snowt a parcel of
Gold, the which Patricke taking up, brought home his Hogs to his Master, and
with that Gold, he bought his own Freedom: and thus departing again into his
own Country, he travailed after that to Rome, where being instructed in the
Christian Faith, from thence he returned again into Ireland, where he
established the Christian Religion, and wrought a great many of Miracles more
then were true.

Thus far M. Stanihurst, and till I had read it of his own setting down, in
his description of Ireland, I would have laid two to one, that S. Patrick had
bin an Irishman borne. But I will be better advised hereafter, both how I lay
any wagers, and how I believe any such authorities. But let S. Patricke be what
countriman he list, I wonder how he found the Irish so confirmable as M.
Stanihurst reports, that will believe nothing now, but what their fathers
have believed before them.

They are now so much inclined to custom, that they will give no place to
reason, but let the^ stand upon Custom as much as they list, yet truth is
truth, in despite of Customs heart: but presumption is our natural and
original infirmity, and this opinion of wisdom is the plague of man.

I think the over good conceit and self-weening opinion that man has of
himself, is the mother of false opinions, both public and particular, when
there is nothing whereunto men are more addicted, then to give way to their
own opinions.

It was a bold speech delivered by Pliny: This only is sure, that nothing is
sure, and nothing more miserable, and yet more arrogant and obstinat then man.

Obstinacy, is no other thing, then a settled and firm purpose and
determination, either to do, or not to do something: he that is in this manner
resolute, is unfit to receive either council or advise, how wise, how learned,
how behouefull, or how honest soever. And such men, preferring their own
opinions, are the cause of many evils, and do many times bring themselves and
others into extreme dangers: and it is but lost labor to dissuade any such
persons by the rules of reason, for they presuming to know more then all the
world besides, do stop their ears to all good councels, and their eyes to all
dangers, and persisting in their obstinacy, without reason or judgment, the
Brownists themselves are not more precise, nor sir Patricke, (Saint Patrick I
mean) the canonized saint of Ireland, was never more holy, then these
obstinate fools do assume unto themselves in their own conceits.

Courtesies that are bestowed upon obstinat persons, are evermore bestowed in
vain, for there is no courtesy nor clemency that can be so used, but the
nature of obstinacy, is rather to impugn, then to make any show of humility.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the superstitious conceit that is holden of the Irish, about certain Wels.
THere are yet other admirable matters in Ireland, such as I am half ashamed
to speak of, and yet if there were but one half of the virtue in them that
the Irish do believe, and will confidently auow, we needed no other physic
nor Surgerie to heal all manner of diseases. The blind might be restored to
their sight, the halt and lame to their limbs; there is no infirmity, but it
might be cured at sundry sanctified and holy wels, whereof there are great
plenty in Ireland. The City of Dublin is quartered out with them. First, on
the East part, they have Sai. Prtricks Well, the water whereof, although it be
generally reputed to be very hot, yet the very prime of the perfection, is
upon the 17. of March, which is Sai. Patricks day, and upon this day, the water
is more holy then it is all the year after, or else the Inhabitants of Dublin
are more foolish upon that day, then they be all the year after. For upon that
day thither they will run by heaps, men, women, and children, and there, first
performing certain superstitious ceremonies, they drink of the water; and when
they are returned to their own homes, for nine days after, they will sit and
tell, what wonderful things have bin wrought by the operation of the water of
Sa. Patricks Well.

On the west part of Dublin they have Sa. Ieames his well, and his feast is
celebrated the 25. of Iulie, and upon that day, a great Mart or fair is kept
fast by the Well. The commodity that is there to be vented, is nothing else
but Ale, no other merchandise but only Ale: I think such another Fair was
never heard of in any other place, where a man can not buy so much as a
penniworth of pins, but what money he has to bestow, he must lay it out for
Ale, and yet it carries the name of S. James his fair.

The multitude of rascal people that uses to frequent this fair, are first
accustomed to perform certain ceremonies at S. James his well, in casting the
water, backward and forward, on the right side and on the left, and over their
heads; then drinking a draught of the water, they go into the Fair, and there
installing themselves in some Brothel-booth, they sit and drink drunk all the
day after.

On the South side of the town, they have Sa. Sundaies well: I cannot tell what
country man Sa. Sunday was himself, but his well is of precious estimation
amongst the Irish (I mean) amongst the Popish sort of the Irish, that do
flock thither so thick upon sunday mornings, in the summer season, that I am
sure, that if saint Sunday were there in person to read a Lecture out of the
New Testament, they had rather go altogether to an alehovse then they would
travel so far to see him.

To the North-wards from the City of Dublin, they have S. Dolocks well;
another sanctified place ceremoniously frequented at certain seasons, foolish
and ridiculous to be spoken of; so that let the wind blow which way it list,
East, West, North, or South, Dublin is so seated, that a Papist may go from the
high cross, with a Blown Sheat right before the wind, either to an Idalatrous
Mass within the town, or to a Superstitious Well, without the Town.

But this is most of all to be admired, that a people that has bin so many
years instructed and informed in the doctrine of the Gospel, should still
submit themselves to such gross and perverse foolerie.

I might speak of diverse other Wels, for I think there is neither Apostle nor
Patriarch, that never came near unto Ireland, and yet there be Wells,
Fountains, and other holy places, that be attributed unto them. But if I
should speak of the wonders and miracles, which they say are wrought there, it
would make a more admirable history the^ that of sir John Mandevile: It would
undo all the Physicians in England and Ireland. For at those holy Wels, and at
many other of those sanctified places, the blind are made to see, the Lame are
made to go, the Cripple is restored to his limbs, or what disease soever,
never so strange, never so inueterate, which is not there cured.

But I am sorry for Dublyn, the place where I my self do live, the town that
of all others in Ireland, I do best love, I do not therefore speak any thing
maliciously (I appeal to their own knowledges) whether I speak true or
false: I have often said, and still do say, that there be many good people in
Dublin, and so throughout all the parts of Ireland besides, men of all sorts,
of all professions, and of all degrees, that are not to be detected. And thus
(I hope) the good will take no exceptions at any thing that I shall truly
report of those that be ill.

And although I direct my speech still to the Irish, I make no such difference
between the English and the Irish, but that I know there be as perverse
Papists that come daily creeping out of Eng. to plant themselves in Ireland,
that give worse example, and are more dangerous to his Majesty's estate, than
those that are naturally borne in Ireland.

I dare be bold to avowe it, that there is never a Pulpit within the City of
London (that at Paul's Cross only excepted) that is better supplied, then
that Pulpit at Christ-Church in Dubline; and how many grave and learned men,
that upon a Christian Comiseration have charitably admonished them to desist,
from those blind fantastical follies which they themselves by many years
experience, have found to proceed but from their own vain and superstitious
conceits: but neither preaching nor teaching can so prevail amongst them, but
that they become thereby to be more froward and stubborn, and do with the more
obstinacy persevere, not so much of ignorance, but rather in despite. But I am
come now to a strange event, a tale of Master Stanihurst his own setting down
in his History of Ireland, and it is worth the reporting, if it be but laughed
at, and thus it follows:

There is in the Notth part of Ireland a mighty Loughe, 30. Miles in length,
and 15. in breadth, called by the name of Lough-Earne, but now called Lough
Sidny, I know the place well.

This Lough (as Master Stanihurst says) was at the first one of these holy
Wels, and was frequented and sought unto, by the inhabitants of those parts,
for many Miraculous accidents that was there effected.

A prescribed custom there was, (belike set down by some angry Saint) that
the Pilgrims at their departure should not leave the Well uncovered, fore
warning them aforehand, that when the spring should be left open, the water
should so abound, that it should drown all the Country adioying near about.
And it happened (as Master Stanihurst says) that an old Trot came to
sanctify her self at that Well, and having uncovered the spring, a child of
hers which she had left but fast by, began to cry, the which the woman hearing,
forgetting the observance of her prescribed order, which was to cover the Well,
she made have to still her brat, and returning back again to have mended her
miss, she was incountered with the water, which was so far overflowed, that
it was past her help, whereby both she, her child, and all the rest of the
inhabitants with in that territory, were al together drowned. And here
Master Stanihurst, fearing that his lie is to palpable and aparant, yet to the
end it might be something the better believed, he adds, that there is the
more likelihood of truth in this story, because the Fishers in a sunny day, may
see the Steeples and other Piles plainly, and distinctly in the water. And this
is a larger lie and more ridiculous then the first, for to begin withal, it is
well enough known, that the Lough is of no such deapth as M. Stanihurst would
persuade: large it is, and very full of Islands, and somewhat deeper in one place
then in another, but not so deep to drown Steeples. Again, Master
Stanihurst has very fondly forgot a School Principle, Oportet mendacem esse
memorem: for Master Stanihurst being an Irishman borne, could not be ignorant
(I am sure) that in all that part of the Country near about Lough-Earne,
there was never yet any Steeples known, unless it be the Steeple of Armagh,
there is never another steeple now to that Lough, not by a great many of
miles, perhaps (as M. Stanthnrst says) there may be some lately builded in
the bottom of the Lough, but I am sure that there neither is, nor never was
any upon the land, in all that part of the Country.

I do not meddle with this matter of any set purpose, whereby to impugn M.
Stanihurst in his history of Ireland; although he has therein fabled forth a
great number of untruths: but I have done it indeed, whereby to make manifest
the light belief of obstinate Papists, that are ready to give credit to idle
lies and fantasies, then they are to believe the testimony of the word of God.

CAP. XV.
A true description both of the City and Citizens of Dublin.
HE that had no other knowledge of the City of Dublin, but as it is described
by M. Stanihurst, in his Chronicle of Ireland, would think it to be far
exceeding in stateliness of building, and in many other commodities more then
it is at this hour, and yet I am sure that within these forty years that I
have known Dublin, it has bin replenished with a thousand chimnies, and
beautified with as many glasse-windowes, and yet it makes no such sumptuous
show: But (says M. Stanihurst) It does exceed in gorgeous buildings, in
Martial Chivalry, in obedience and loyalty, in largeness of hospitality,
and in manners and ciuility. First, for the gorgeous buildings in Dublin, there
be some other Towns in Ireland that do far exceed it: And to speak truly,
the buildings of Dublin, are neither outwardly fair, nor inwardly handsome: a
ruynous kind of building, neither convenient nor well cast: neither do I think,
that either the Masons, nor yet their Carpenters, are of skill to contriue any
better.

For their Martial Chivalry, I will not disauowe them, no doubt they have able
men among them, both of body and mind, but I believe there are better soldiers
in Ireland, then any be in Dublin. For their obedience and loyalty, let me not
flatter (if he means it to the Prince) I say, that if they would mix but a
little love with that loyalty that he speaks of, the Popes vermin could not
be so well entertained in Dublin as they be. It is but folly to dissemble any
longer, for if we did but look a little into the course of experience, we
should find, that this mocking and dallying with them, has done more hurt
then good.

For their largeness of Hospitality, I will not deprive them of their right:
They are bountiful enough of their meat and drink, according to their
abilities. Now lastly, for their manners and ciuility, I confess, Dublin is
very well reformed, since M. Stanihurst writ his Chronicle. And now he comes
again to speak of the pleasantness of the situation, and by seeming, he
would make it a town impregnable. But I think M. Stanihurst had little skill in
the Art of Fortification. Then he describes it with so many Churches, with so
many chapels, with so many streets, with so many lanes, with so many Gates, and
with so many Bridges, as I protest, I having known Dublin these forty years,
yet know not where to find the one half of them he has named; and a great
many of those that are to be seen, when they are found, make but a sorry show in
respect of the commendation he has given.

Master Stanihurst makes mention of a certain Tower scituat in Dubline,
commonly called by the name of Lsoudes Tower. Which as he says, as it first
took the name from La Bell Lsoude, so it seemed unto him to be some Castle of
pleasure, for Kings to recreate themselves in.

The pleasantness of the Tower is very well known, in what case it was when
M. Stanthurst writ his chronicle, fitter (in good faith) to have made a house
of office, then for a Palace to entertain Kings, and yet I cannot tell what
manner of Kings they had in Ireland in those days; but if they had no better
houses then Lsoudes Tower to recreate themselves in, they were the sillieth
Kings that ever I heard on: but I wonder if Copper Ally had flourished when
Master Stanihurst writ his Chronicle, as it does at this day, what praises he
could have published in the worthynesse of that work.

To speak the truth of Dubline as it deserves. First for the Town it self,
it is convenient enough, pleasantly seated, as well for the serenity of the air
as for the pleasing walks that are round about the City.

The Citizens themselves, are wonderfully reformed in manners, in ciuility, in
curtesy: themselves and their wives modest and decent in their apparel (I
speak of the better sort) and they are tractable enough to any thing, Religion
only excepted. I had almost forgotten to speak of honesty, but it is in Dublin
as in all other places where I have traveled, an easy matter to play the
Iugler, to make a show and appearance of honesty, but to keep a due rule and a
formable decorum in our actions, that's the very point.

The very names of goodness and honesty, are many times the names of mere
contempt, and who dares find fault at his honesty, that is a known dissembler
both with God and the world.

God bless me for speaking against pride, letcherie, drunkenness, or against
Idolatry. I will not speak against Dublin, but in many parts of Ireland it is
more dangerous to be reputed an honest man, then to be a known knave: greater
peril to be a dutiful subject to the King, then to be a professed votary to
the Pope.

Men are not to be deemed by their outward appearance: for Infidels, and those
that have no belief in Christ, will counterfeit holiness: he is but a foolish
Painter, that cannot paint both white and black with one Pensill. I will never
believe him to be an honest man, that will first swear obedience to his
Prince, and then will submit himself to the service of his Pope; that will go
to Church openly, and hear a Mass privily; that will listen a little to the
Preacher when he is in the pulpit, but will never come near a Communion.

God keep me from being an honest man, according to the description that I see
made of honesty now adays. And I say Heraclitus was but a fool to passionate
himself with comiserating the follies of his age; but I think Democritus would
laugh till he were ready to burst, if he were now living in Ireland, to see
the commixture of manners and dispositions, how they are now carried.

I will talk no more of idle matters, but now a little of Religion in Dublin:
If there be one that does submit himself to his Majesty's procedings, there is
ten for one that is vowed to the Pope.

Who knows not this to be true, that knows Dubline; the Papists themselves
do rejoice in it, and they not love to dissemble the matter, but they will show
it both by words and deeds, that they are so, and will be so accounted; and I
think they would be angry with him that should otherwise report it.

Among many other privileges that they have, one amongst the rest is, that if
there be any Man within the City (be he free, or be he foreign) if he do
seem to find fault at their entertaining of Jesuits and Popish priests, they
may by their Charter, be at their choice whether they will love him or nay.

If any man that is freeborn in the City, that is conformable to his
Majesty's proceedinges, and does show himself a dutiful subject to his
Prince, it is at the Sheriffs choice, whether he will bid him home to dinner
or no.

But Dublin is not yet so destitute, but that there are some, as well learned
Divines, as other grave and godly Citizens and Townsmen, that God has
blessed with the light of his word, to spy out all the Pageants of Popery, that
do daily endeavor themselves to give good example, seeking no less to advance
the glory of God, the honor of their Prince, the good of their Country.

CAP. XVI.
Of some defects in the government of Dubline.
THis inclination to Popery, whereunto the greatest number of the Citizens of
Dubline are so much adicted, is not only prejudicial to things appertaining
to piety and godliness, but it is hurtful to matters that are belonging to
civil government; for this diversity in Religion, causes opposition, and that
the Maiestracy of the town being principally swayed by those of the Popish
crew (that does far exceed the rest in number) brings a tolleration of Popish
inormities.

First, where it is the use and custom of every well governed City or Town,
that on the Sabbath day, during the time of the divine Service, there is a
general restraint to all Inne-keepers, Tauerners, Alehouse-keepers, and to all
sorts of victualers to shut up their doors, and not so hardy as to retain
any guests within the house, or to serve either Wine, Beer, or Ale, without
the house, till the Service and the Sermon both be ended: and that this might
be the better performed and seen unto, they have certain sworn men to make
search, and to present all such as shall be found to offend in the premises:
the which offenders, by all Officers that be of worth, be they Majors,
Baylifes, or Sheriffs, are evermore severely and sharply punished.

But in Dublin, then in the time of divine service, and in the time of the
Sermon, as well in the forenoone as in the afternoon, even then (I say) every
filthy Alehouse is thronged full of company, that as it were in despite of
our Religion, do sit drunkening and quaffing, and sometimes defiling themselves
with more abominable exercises: so that the Sabbath day, which God has
commanded to be sanctified and kept holy, is of all other days most profaned
and polluted, without any reprehension or any manner of rebuke. And although
many godly Preachers, and some other of the better sort of the Clergy, has
endeavored a reformation, so far as their Commission does warrant them, the
which (indeed) is but by the way of exhortation to admonish and persuade: but
those that have authority to punnish and correct, and does challenge to
themselves a special prerogative, to manage all affairs whatsoever within
their City, are for the most part of them so blinded with Popery, that they
can neither see, nor be persuaded that this dishonoring of the Sabbath day is
any offense at all.

I cannot tell from whence it should proceed, whither of ignorance or
despite, that they should keep so many Popish holy days in Dubline (more then
ever were heard on in England) the which because they are allowed by the Pope,
are therefore kept, as it were in contempt of his Majesty's proceedings.

There be some that are numbered in the Beadrole of Saints, and have their
Feasts solemnly celebrated amongst the Irish (especially at Dubline) that of my
conscience are damned Devils in Hell.

I know this will be grievously taken, and our Papists will say my censure is
very uncharitable, and more then becomes a Christian to avouch, but blind men
can judge no colors. And if our Catholics of Dublin, could duly conceive
how horrible a sin it is, for a Subject to become a conspirator, a Rebel, or
a Traitor to his Prince, they would sooner pronounce Thomas Becket to be a
damned villain in the pit of Hell, then every year to celebrate his feast
with such solemnity as they are accustomed. I might speak of some other such
like holy ones, that be inrouled in the Popes Calender: And there is scarcely
one week in a year, but we have one Popish holy day or other solemnized at
Dubline, more then they have at London, and yet I think there be as wise men
in London, as any be in Dubline, and as true, and as loyal to their Prince,
but the vidimus of the matter is, our Londoners are neither vowed nor sworn to
the Pope. Can there be a more dangerous matter, then where impiety becomes
to be lawful, and by the Magistrates leave and liking, to take the cloak of
virtue. I might speak hear of Friars, Jesuits, and other of the pole-shorne
order, well known to be his Majesty's vowed and protested enemies, that are
yet entertained, vpholden and maintained in Dublin, not without great
contributions allowed unto them, by the Papisticall sort of the Citizens, that
will grudge and murmr to give a Soldier a nights lodging, that is drawn in
by the Lord Deputy, but for the guard of himself, and of his Majesty's Castle,
and for the prevention of traiterous practices.

This harboring and upholding of Traitors, must necessarily either put his
Majesty to a charge for his own security, or leave his estate in a desperate
condition, evermore subject to the plots and practices of his capital enemies.
And I can see no reason why his Majesty should be drawn to an expense, by the
misdemeanors of his false hearted Subjects, but that they themselves should be
made to feel the penalty of it, if not in their persons, yet in their purses.

But in Dubline, his Majesty should have little need of Soldiers, or of any
other martial men to put him to charges, were it not for the contemptuous
demeanor of the Popish sort of the Citizens: but if upon any urgent occasion,
there be but one hundred of Soldiers to be ceased amongst them, the which
they themselves by their obstinate impugning his Majesty's proceedings, does
many times enforce, they will impose the charge (as much as in them lies) upon
those that they know to be best affected to Religion, and that do stand most
assured to his majesty, both in duty and obedience; and would not only draw
contributions from Forrainers and Strangers, such as have neither Trade nor
Traffic in the Town, but would likewise enforce it from his Majesty's
Pencioners, and other Gentlemen, that are there attendant upon the State, if
they have but a house or a chamber within their Liberties.

And they do not only show an unwillingness to his Majesty in these trifling
matters, but they do likewise make manifest their ingratitude by many other
means. And whereas their Corporation has been dignified by several Kings and
Princes of England, with many large privileges, and that they have the whole
trade and traffic amongst themselves, no man to buy or sell within their
liberties, unless he be a freeman, yet upon any imposition, though it does
properly belong unto the City, and not so much but for an annual rent, which
they are to pay to his Majesty for those lands and liberties that they do hold
from his Highness, yet they would exact it from strangers, that are neither
free, nor have any manner dealing in the City, but to spend their money, which
only the Citizens does gain by; and there is neither merchandise, nor any
manner of commodity that is brought from Spain, from France, from Flanders, or
from any other part of England or Scotland, but they will have the whole
bargain to themselves, not suffering any man that is not free, to buy for his
own provision, no, not so much as a drinking glass, but it must be had from
them, and by that means he shall be enforced to pay double the price.

Thus the freemen, by virtue of their Privileges, will reap the whole
commodity among themselves, and they would make the Forraigners to pay their
rent, and to become contributors to any impositions whatsoever it shall please
them to assign, and yet in their demaundes, they have neither certain sums
set down, what any man ought to pay, nor who they be that should pay, but the
Sheriffs of Dublyn are the men that do cease at their pleasure whom they
list, and does impose upon every man what they list; so that if the Sheriffs
of Dublin be a little stuffed in the head with a Pope (the disease being so
common amongst them, that there are very few that does escape it) where they
cease a Papist at six pence, they will ask a Protestant ten shillings, the
which if the party denaies to pay (or at the least to satisfy them to their
own content) they will break open a door, contrary to Law and equity (and
I believe farther then their Charter will reach unto, if it were well
ouerlooked) they will carry away with them any goods whatsoever they be, that
they can find.

I could speak of many other mattres, and I could speak by experience: for
although I be not a Freeman of Dublyn, yet I was thus much behoulding to the
two late Shcriffes, that because I would not give them ten shillinges which
they had imposed upon me, at their own will and pleasure, (I know not why nor
wherefore, unless it were for writing a Book against the Pope) but they very
kindly drew me out of mine own house and carried me to prison, where they kept
me forth-comming for one night, and this (I hope) be very well known, by the
same token, that the very next Sunday after, I could have met with one of
them, in Hang-mannes Lane at an Idolatrous Mass.

But I cannot blame them, though they be somewhat sparing of their purses unto
the Prince, for with out doubt, they are at greater expenses with the pope; but
if they could draw in his Majesty's Pencioners, and those Gentlemen that are
to attend his Highness service, to be contributers with them to those payments
it pleased them to impose, I would more commend their wisdoms, then I can do
their honesties.

This description of the government of Dublin, cannot be a general reproach to
the Citizens universally: for as I have said before, so I say still, that
Dubline is replenished with many worthy Townes-men of all sorts; and amongst
the Aldermen themselves, there are are some few that are well known to be
assuredly confirmed, both to God and to his Majesty, and that does hate and
detest this Iesuited generation of the Popes Riffe-Raffe: but they are
ouerswaied with the multitude, the Papists do far exceed them in number; and
do they not impugn the Prince himself? then alas what can they do, in a
matter that could yet never be redressed, neither by the prescript of law, nor
by the intimation of love.

But were not this contemptuous disobedience of Subjects, enough to bereave his
Majesty of his royal disposition: but I confess, it is not good to put a
Prince into any jealousy, or to bring him into any doubt or suspicion of his
Subjects; for these are means, not only to trouble a Princes mind, but also
many times to betake himself to those extraordinary resolutions as might be
offenciue. But it is very expedient for a Prince to have due intelligence,
as well of his enemies as of his doubtful friends, in what estate they remain,
what determinations they hold, and to have knowledge of their enterprises,
what courses they undertake, and what purposes they pretend, but especially
those Princes that are incertaine and unassured of the love of their Citizens
and Subjects.

CAP. XVII.
Of the Trade and Traffic that is used in Dublin, and from whence they do
exact their greatest Commodity.
THe City of Dubline is principally vpholden by the English; for the Lord
Deputy holding there his Majesty's estate, and the whole body of the Counsel
of that Realm, together with the Captains, Pencioners, all Officers, as well
appertaining to the Army, as to the four Courts, all their servants, friends
and followers, being there for the most part resident; this makes the
Citizens to raise their prises in all things, their Houses, Chambers and
Lodginges, are dearer rented in Dubline, then they be in London.

It is the nicitie of the English (that are every day innouating and devising
of new fashions) that helps the^ away with their Sattins, their Silks, their
fine cloth, both woollen and linen, their new striped stuffes, their lace of
Gold, of Silver, of silk, and a number of other gaudy devises, that the
English do use to buy at unreasonable rates, that would never be vented amongst
the Irish themselves.

The trade that they commonly use is but to London, from thence they do furnish
themselves with all sorts of wares for their shoppes, for shipping they have
none belonging to the Town that is worth the speaking of, yet they will be
called Merchantes; and he that has but a Barrel of salt, and a bar or two
of Iron in his shop, is called a Merchant. He that does but sell earthen Pottes
and Pannes, soap, Otmeale, Trenchers, and such other like trash, is no less
then a Merchant: there be shopkeepers in Dubline, that all the Wares they are
able to show, are not worth a poor English Pedlers Pack, and yet all these
be Merchantes. But now to speak the truth, there are several Citizens of
Dubline, that are very wealthy and men of good abillity, that have there
Shoppes well replenished withal sorts of wares, as well Mercery, as Grocery,
and Drapery, both linen and woollen, and there is neither Silk-man, nor
Milliner in London, that can show better wares (for the quantity) then some of
those can do, that be called Merchantes of Dubline.

But I am now to speak of a certain kind of commodity, that outstretcheth
all that I have hitherto spoken of, and that is the selling of Ale in Dubline,
a Quotidian commodity, that has vent in every house in the Town, in every day
in week, at every hour in the day, and in every minnute in the hour: There
is no Merchandise so vendible, it is the very marrow of the common wealth in
Dubline: the whole profit of the Town stands upon Alehouses, and selling of
Ale, but yet the Citizens a little to dignifie the title, as they use to call
every Peddler a Merchant, so they use to call every Alehouse, a Tavern,
whereof there are such plenty, that there are whole streates of Tauernes, and
it is as rare a thing, to find a house in Dubline without a Tavern, as to
find a Tavern without a Strumpet.

This free Mart of Ale-selling in Dublyne, is prohibited to none, but that it
is lawful for every Woman (be she better or be she worse) either to brewe or
else to sell Aale. The better sort, as the Aldermens Wives, and the rest that
are of better ability, are those that do brew, and look how many houshoulders
there are in Dublyne, so many Ale-brewers there be in the Town, for every
Houshoulders Wife is a Brewer. And (whatsoever she be otherwise) or let her
come from whence she will, if her credit will serve to borrowe a Pan, and to
buy but a measure of malt in the Market, she sets up Brewing: then they have
a number of young idle Huswiues, that are both very loathsome, filthy and
abominable, both in life and manners, and these they call Tauerne-keepers, the
most of them known harlots; these do take in both Ale and Beer by the
Barrel from those that do brue, and they sell it forth again by the pot,
after twoe pence for a Wine quait. And this (as I take it) is a principal
cause for the tolleration of many enormities; for the gain that is gotten by
it must needs be great, when they buy malt in Dublyn, at haulfe the price
that it is sold for at London, and they sell their drink in Dublyn, at double
the rate that they do in London: and this commodity the Aldermens wives and
the rest of the Women-brewers do find so sweet, that master Mayor and his
brethren are the willinger to wink at, and to tolerate with those multitude
of Alehouses, that themselves do even know to be the very Nurseries of
Drunkenness, of all manner of Idleness, of whordome, and many other vile
abominations.

I have hitherto spoken but of Ale-brewers, that are almost as many in number
as there be dwellinge houses in the Town. There be likewise some three or
four that have set up Brew-houses for Beete, whereof they are accustomed to
make of two sorts; that is to say: Strong Beer, and Ordinary: their
ordinary Beer* they do use to serve to the English, that are there
inhabiting in Dublyn, that does keep Servants and Families, and this Beer
they do prize at six shillings the Barrel, which according to their measure,
amounts to xlviij. s. the tun, and in London their iiij. s. Beer, that is
sold after the rate of xxiiij. s. the tun, is better Beer by odds.

Their strong Beer is commonly vented by these Alehouse Queanes,
Tauerne-keapers, (as they call them) and this they do take at xij. s. the
Dubline Barrel, and that is just after the rate of xvj. s. a London Barrel,
which amounts to iiij.l.xvj. s. the tun, shameful for the Magestrates of
the Town to suffer, considering the cheapnesse of Malt.

Here is now to be considered, that there is almost never a Householder in
Dubline (whatsoever Trade he otherwise uses) but he will have a blind corner
in his house reserved for a Tavern, and this (if he have not a Wife of his
own to keep it) shall be set out to one of these Women-Tauerne-keepers, she
takes in drink both Beer and Ale, after the rate of xij. s. the Dubline
Barrel, she pays moreover to the party of who^ she hireth her Tavern, vj.
s. out of every Barrel that she utters: if she does not get vj. sh. more for
her self, she will never be able to keep her self honest, so that here is
xxiiij. s. made out of every Barrel of Beer, which comes just to ix.li.xij.
s. a tun. How shameful a thing to be suffered in a well governed City, let
wise men judge, for with those that be called honest, I will not meddle.

I have been so long amongst these filthy Alehouses, that my head begins to
grow idle, and it is no wonder, for the very remembrance of that Hogs wash
which they use to sell for ij. d. the Wine quart, is able to distemper any man's
brains, and as it is neither good nor wholesome, so it is unfit for any man's
drinking, but for common Drunkardes; but I will here leave my women
Tauerne-Keepers to Master Mayor of the Bull-Ringe to look unto, and I will
now have about with our Dubline Bakers, that will be sure to sell their Bread
at double the price that they buy their Corn: and although there have been
several Majors of the City which have seemed to be angry at the matter, yet
as long as I have known Dubline, I never knew Mayor, but he was either
ashamed or afraid to reform it. But there be some that will make ilfauored
reasons, and will say, that the Bakers have such a kind of dexterity, that they
will make any Mayor both deaf and blind: I cannot tell how it comes to
pass, but the Bakers do make a good shift for themselves, for they neither
reform their own bread according to the prises of Corn, neither will they
suffer the countrey-Bakers upon the Market days, to bring in bread that is
reformed to a true assise.

Thus the Magestrates of Dubline does tolerate and bear with a number of
inormities, unfit to be tolerated in any well governed City, the which (as I
suppose) they do the rather wink at, when they know well enough that this
extortion that is exacted by selling of Bread and Beer, does pinch none but
the English, those that are to follow the State, and those again that are of
the poorer sort of the Irish, for there is not a Citizen in Dubline (that is
of any abillity worthy to be spoken of) but he has a Farm in the Country,
that yields him Corn, both for Bread and Beer, enough to find his own
house; but the English that must go to the Bakers and the Brwers, are made to
pay dearly for it (and so they do for every other thing that they buy) and as
the Irish do know all this well enough, so they have therefore the less care
to redrese it: and yet if the Lord Deputy should but withdraw himself but for
two years together into any other part of the Country, the greatest part of
the Citizens of Dubline, would be ready to beg, that do now dwell in a
malicious conceit against the English.

CAP. XVIII.
Of the Ambition of the Irish.
THe Irish are very Ambitious of Fame and renown, but it is with Herostratus,
that sought to leave himself in record by burning the Temple in Ephesus; so
the Irish do hunt after Fame, and to leave themselves regestred to posterity,
they will kill, they will murder, they will rebel, and what action so
ungracious which they will not attempt, to leave an odible memorandome to their
lousy Bardes and Rithmers, that can writ in the commendation of nothing but of
vice and villainy.

By this example of the Irish, we may distinguish between the lovers of Fame,
and the lovers of Virtue, and although it be true that Virtue has Fame for an
attendant, yet Virtue seeks not for Fame: for glory with the Crocodill flies
him that follows it, and follows him that flies it; no wonder then though
there be great difference in their values that employ them for Fame, from
those again, that endeavors for Virtue.

This vain ostentation, we see whereunto it leads: and he that seeks
renown in a wrong box, either by unlawful attempts, or base endeavors
stumbleth many times upon Infamy in stead of Glory: so he that hunteth after
dignities by unworthy deserts, in seeking after Estimation, betrayeth himself
to open Derision.

Amongst the wise, a man is esteemed but only for his virtues. For Offices,
authority, and Riches; al these, are but the gifts of Fortune, but for a man
to be exalted to a dignity, and to be deemed worthy of the place by a common
consent, that mark is infallible, for there magnificence does manifest and
make known it self.

The office of a Prince does crave obedience in his Subjects, but our
affections are still depending of his virtues: if thus to a Prince, what hope
is there then left to a Pesant, that has neither virtue, wit, nor honesty
wherewith to bless himself withal, and will yet throng himself into a
Dignity, and only but to make it durty.

Nero, demanding of a Souldior why he hated him, was answered: Because (said
he) whilst thou wast worthy of love I honored thee, but now thou art become
an enemy to virtue, I therefore abhor thee.

Ambition is no vice for any of these love-prized Swains. For when I see a
fellow that is but base of birth bare of of honesty barren of wit, and that is
but dropped into a dignity without desert, I never look upon such a creature but
methinks I see a Jack anapes in a satin suit. This is a base Ambition, and
right of the Irish stamp, for there is not a people under the sun, that are
more desirous to be famed then the Irish or that will adventure upon more
desperate resolutions then they, and but to leave themselves i^^^^^^d in some
one of their Rymer-rolles.

The miserable malefactor at the very hour of his death, when he is going to
execution, does even then affect Fame, and is much more desirous that his
lokers on should see him take his death with resolution and without fear,
then he is to reconcile himself unto God, and is more ashamed that it should
be said, that his countenance began to change with faint nesse of courage, then
he is of the crime that he has committed, how abominable soever. And all
this, but that he might appear constant; and to whom, but to those that do
behold him, that are commonly more inconstant then the wind.

Sir Thomas More, whom Ballarmine (in his letter to George Blackwal the Popes
Archpriest) so confidently avoweth for so worthy a Martyr, was sick of this
disease, and at the last hour, when he was to take his death for Treason, he
did sacrifice to Fame; for when the Executioner was ready to strike off his
head, he prayed him, in any wise to be good to his beard, telling him, that he
should find his neck so short, that if he were not very wary in the
performaunce of his business, it might prove a blemish to his reputation.

Methinks it to be but an unseasonable conceit, at the last hour of a man's
life to fall a jesting with the world for vain ostentation, and neglecting to
seek the fruition of eternal felicity, to rest himself upon the smoakie
applause of Fame.

It may sometimes serve for a shroude to shelter a shame, but it is an ill
chose time, to fall a jesting with the Hangman, when he may play too much upon
the advantage, if not by viuacitie or quickness of wit, to thrust back a jest
upon the Iester himself, yet Ex officio, he may do it by action, that does
pinch nerer the quick, then the bitterest words.

But if More were a Martyr as Bellarmine would have him, I say he was but a
mocking Martyr, that would fall a scoffing with the executioner, at that very
instant when he was to take off his head.

But I have heard of some others that have been of this merry disposition, and
I think as well worthy to be Martyrs as More; one amongst the rest that was
condemned to the Gallows, and when the hangman came to fasten the halter about
his neck, he desired him of all friendship, that he would not bring the
rope too near his throat: for (said he) I am so ticklish about that place,
that without doubt I shall hurt my self with vnreasoneble laughter.

Such another, going to the place of Execution, desired the officer to shun a
street that lay right in the way as he should pass, and to go a little about:
The Officer demanding the reason, he told him, because he ought a Citizen a
little money that dwelt in the same streat, and he feared that if he should
see him passing by, he would arrest him, and bring him unto some trouble of the
law.

I must not forget one more of these merry conceited fellows, who going to the
gallows to be executed, was admonished by his ghostly father to take his death
patiently, assuring him, that though his dinner were somewhat sharp and harsh,
yet he should find a joyful supper in Heaven. Alas (said the malefactor)
that's but a cold comfort to me, for I never use to eat any supper.

We cannot judge of any man's assurance by the boldness of his death: for it
falls out many times, that men in those cases, will make great show of
resolution and courage, but for ostentations sake, and there is not a people
that are more inclined unto that then the Irish; but amongst those that have
most valiantly resolved themselves to execution, it is yet to be doubted
whither in so dangerous an intent, constancy, or obstinacy had the pre-eminence.

Every Cowarde can despise death in misery, for to the distressed, life is but
a scourge, and death their only solace: but he that can endure the calamity of
all misfortunes with patience and constancy, more rather deserves the Chariot
of Triumph then Caesar himself. Those that in the times of execution are seen
to run to their end and to hasten on the execution, they do it with
resolution, but because they will defeat themselves of time to consider of the
horror of death, for it grieves them not to be dead, but to die. Heliogabulus,
the most disolute man in the world, had a resolution to die some desperate
death, as it might apeare by those provisions he had made for the purpose; for
first, he built a stately Tower from whence he might cast himself, he also
caused cords to be made of gold and Crimsin silk, wherewith to strangle
himself; he further provided a rych golden Rapier of purpose to murder
himself; and he prepared poisons, and kept them in boxes of Emeraldes, and
Topases thereby to poison himself.

Every man that dares adventure to desire death, cannot be said to be resolved
to dye; for many a man that has seemed to wish for death, has fainted
again, when they have been put to the trial.

Poverty, misery, diseases, and death it self are subjects of a heavy burden,
that do weigh and grieve especially those minds that are but of the common
stamp: we had need therefore to be very well instructed both how to sustain,
and how to combat with those kinds of accidents. The best aim we can take
whereby to judge of a man's death, is but to consider of the manner of his life:
for have we known him to live constantly and quietly it is likely he should
then die resolutly and reposely, for it is to be supposed, that he that
konweth how to live, knows likewise how to dye.

Amongst all the benefits that Virtue bestows of us, the contempt of death
is most aproued and precious: and as the place is uncertain where death
looks for us, we must therefore be the more vigilant to expect him every
where, for the premeditation of death, is but a fore-thinking how to live and
die well. It skilles so much the less when death does come, so we be provided
for it, for all the time that we live, we do but steal it from death, and the
continual work of life, is in the end determined by death.

The iollity of youth and the gravity of age are different in this point, for
the one looks forward and the other backward, youth delights it self with
wanton allurements, Age preaches severity, and reads daily Lectures of
temperance and of reformation, and whether it wake or sleep, it does not
permit us one hour but to think on instruction, on patience, on repentance,
and on Death.

I might have enlarged this Chap. with other matter of some particular persons
in Ireland, that have sought to make themselves famous amongst their
Contrymen, by those endeavors, that were directly prejudicial to the
dignity of the Prince, but I will here omit them, and for conclusion say, there
is no Na- in the world, that are more ambitious of Fame then are the Irish, nor
that does hunt after it with more contrary courses then do the Irish.

CAP. XIX.
Of the doctrine of the Pope, how it is embraced by the Irish*
THey say it was S. Patrick that purged Ireland from all manner of venomous
Worms, and it is the Pope that has poisned it ten times worse with his Locust
vermin of Friars, Monks and Jesuits, and he has so infected the whole
Country with Toades, Frogs, and padocks, that in the habit of popish priests
do keep such a continual croking in the ears of the poor people, that they
have made them deaf to all good council. It is only the poison of the Popes
doctrine that inciteth to seditions, to Rebellions, and that sets subjects
against their Princes. Look into Bellarmines writings, that has taken such
pains in behaulfe of the Pope, and you shall find, that all his Books are
stuffed with no other Doctrine, but that Popes may degrad Emperors, kings,
Princes and potentates, may abrogate their Laws, may dispense with their
subjects for their allegiance, that they may take Arms against their
Sovereigns, that they may rebel; yea, and although Treason and murder be the
most hateful offenses that any man can commit, and are most abhorred and
detested of all men, yet they are admitted, maintained, and vpholden by the
pope, and he does not only tolerate those offenses, but he does likewise give
pardons and dispensations to his villains, both to practice and execute them,
as that holy Pope, that gave Parry plenarie indulgence and remission of all his
sins to murder Queen Elizabeth.

A filthy Religion, that has abased the simplicity of all natures, and defiled
the people of so many Nations, not only through Idolatry, and superstition,
but also by bloud-shedding, and detestable murders, as though it were lawful
and no offense (if it be done under the color and show of Religion) to abandon
all honesty and shamefastness: insomuch, that such horrible and detestable
crewelty has been shown, that their Alters have been oftentimes inbrewed and
stained with men's blood, as though God were pleased with those horrible
murders, practiced and committed by those abominable wretches, that care not
how they defile themselves with all kind of beastliness, and detestable
villainy.

This is the Religion which the Irish do embrace, and this Doctrine is it that
has deluded a number of poor people of that Country, and has set them so
opposite, that they despise to learn any thing from the English, be it never
so necessary, that does but appertain either to Ciuillity, Morallity, or
Humanity: it makes some of them maliciously to impugn the proceeding of the
Prince, it has induced a number of them into open Rebellion. And this
Idolatrous Doctrine is it that fitteth their turns, that are so addected and
inclined to undertake against the Prince. The property of true Religion, does
evermore keep men within the bounds of duty, it illumineth them with the true
light of holiness, and sanctimony; and so desirous are they which follow the
rule and discipline of Christ, by immitation to exprese the gracious goodness
and mercy of God, that in the same they repose the whole sum of Religion:
therefore neither provoked with taunts, they are any thing moved, and being
vexed with slandrous reports, they are not yet kindled with anger; and although
they be sometimes provoked with injuries, they do not go about to be
revenged: nay, rather they suppose that trial to be laid upon them, that they
by a heap and multitude of good turns, should abate the edge of their enemies
wrath.

Whilst the Popes doctrine had overwhelmed the Realm of England, with the
misty fogs of darkness, what commotions, what rebellions, and what tumults
were stirred up from time to time, by the commons of that Realm: but after
that the minds of men were able to behold the extraordinary light of the
heavenly doctrine, they submitted themselves to that duty and obedience, which
the rule of Gods word both prescribes and commands to subjects: yet after
this, when Queen Marie had again reestablished the Idolatrous Religion of
Rome; when Hell was broken loose, and that the Devils themselves had stirred up
the hearts of our English Popelings to all cruel tyranny, that they left no
torture nor torment unattempted, that might have wrought the subversion and
overthrow of Christian Piety: what a multitude both of men and women, suffered
themselves to be tortured and cruelly tormented, through all the parts of the
Realm for the Faith of Christ, without any manner of resistance: and although
this horrible cruelty had continuance for five whole years together, yet where
was their heard of a Rebel that offered to arise in arms, or by any means to
oppose himself against that monstrous tyranny.

The Christian Faith was first established by preaching, and the Disciples and
those that followed Christ, prevailed still by suffering: the Pope vpholdeth
his doctrine, only by persecuting, by murder, by Treason, and by tyranny;
such diversity there is between the doctrine of Christ, and the doctrine of
the Pope.

It is truly reported of the French K. that was lately cruelly murdered, who
many years since lying before Rone, had intelligence of an enterprise that
should have been attempted against his life, and being well informed of the
party that had undertaken it, the king chancing to descry this Gentleman thus
described unto him, caused him to be called; who coming before his presence,
the King perceiving him already begin to tremble, as one doubting some bad
measure, said unto him: I am fully persuaded, you fore-imagine what I have to
charge you with, and your countenance does already bewray it, but I am so well
instructed in the business you have taken in hand, that if you would go about
to hide it, you should but make the matter the worse for your self; fail not
therefore as you tender your life, to confess the truth of all your purpose.

The Villain, that saw himself thus discovered, began to hold up his hands
and to plead for mercy: but the King interrupting him in his pretense, said
unto him; Did I ever do you any wrong? Have I ever offended any friend of
yours? or how happens it? or what might move you to conspire and enterprise
my death?

The Gentleman with a very fainte trembling voice, and a selfe-accusing look,
answered him again: That no particular occasion had ever moved him to do
it, but the interest of the general cause of his faction, for that he was
persuaded by some of his ghostly fathers, that to root out (and in what manner
of sort soever) to make away so great an enemy unto their Religion, would be an
execution full of piety, and a work of supererogation.

Well then (said the King) I will show you the difference of our Religions:
yours persuades you to kill me having never done you wrong, but mine wills me to
pardon you convicted as you are: go your ways therefore and avoid out of my
sight, and let me never see you here again, and henceforward be better
advised in your enterprises, and take honester counsel then those that be of
your own Religion, and thus he let him pass.

We may here still see the fruits of the Popes Religion: but presidents in
Ireland do serve to little purpose, if they make against the Pope; all the
testimony that the holy scriptures can afford, will never be credited in that
point. We believe in Ireland, that when Christ came to work the salvation of
the world, he did not finish the work he came for, but left the greatest part
of the business to be performed by a Popish Priest. We can tell how to worship
a god that is of our own making, but we know not how to worship the God that
has made us: we know how to receive benefits and blessings from the Prince,
but we know not how to render that obedience that belongs to Subjects. My
conclusion is, that as men cannot make known their dreams till they be
awake, no more can these acknowledge their faults till they mean to amend.

CHAP. XX.
How the Papists of Ireland are neither afraid nor ashamed to manifest
themselves.
THey say, a man ought not to be ashamed to speak what he seems not to
think; it should then follow, that men should not be ashamed to hear of that
they are not ashamed to do. The Irish are not ashamed to manifest themselves,
as well by words as by deeds to be professed Papists; they are not afraid to
confess it, and it may well be supposed that when men have a daring to speak
ill, they have likewise an intent to do ill. But I must say, they are al his
Majesty's subjects, and so I think they be, but I pray God send his Highness
to have need of them against the Pope, for if it came to voices between them
two, his Majesty would hardly be able to reckon with the Usurer, after ten in
the hundred thrughout the whole Realm, but that the Pope would still be able
to encounter him with ten for one. That the Irish are thus inclined to the Pope
and to popery, I shall need no other testimony then their own demeanors, and I
would be glad for their own sakes, that they could convince me of slander:
but as I hope they will not go about it, so I think they will not be offended
with me for speaking, when they themselus are not ashamed so publicly to
manifest it. For, as they do show themselves to be apparently malicious to his
Majesty's laws and proceedings, so they do hate and detest him, that does but
speak against their Pope, or that will take any exceptions against that
Catholic brood of the Pole-shorne order, that they do both harbor in their
houses, and uphold with their purses (without doubt) to their great charge and
expenses, considering the abominable number of those Balamites, that does so
abound throughout that whole Realm, in City, town and Country, that does
daily practice against his Majesty's government.

And what Prince in the world would endure to be thus crossed by this
contemptious demeanor of undutiful subjects, and would not make them to feel
the penalty of their wilful disobedience, but that excelent Majesty that is
not only inclined to all gracious clemency in his own person, but with the
like royal disposition he has so provided, that his Ministers and those that
he puts in Authority in that Realm, does behave themselves in their
government with that mercy and mildnes whereunto he himself is addicted.

If I shoud speak of the government, how it is managed at this present, by
that most honorable Gentleman, the Lord Deputy that now is, who is likewise
assisted with diverse other of his Majesty's Counsel of that Realm, Men in
like manner of great wisdom and judgment; I might perhaps fail in making a
true relation of their worth and worthiness. I do therefore appeal to the Irish
themselves, when they did ever know Ireland to be better supplied, either with
a Deputy, either with a Counsel, either with a Clergy (I mean those of the
Clergy that have been invested by a lawful Authority from the Prince) or that
the affairs of that Realm, were every known to be managed with more mildnes,
with more mercy, or with more love and lenity then now they be: and I would but
demand of them again, when they did ever know the Papists of Ireland to be
more perverse, more obstinate, or more apparently contemptuous then now they
are. I could yet say more, but I will wade no further in this, and I am sure
the papists themselves (although they will not let to lie for adantage, yet)
they they will not for shame deny this truth. The papists of Ireland are (as
in other places) of two kinds, the seducers, and the Seduced.

The Seducers are those, that under a little show of litterature, or under the
pretense of being Travelers, that they can say they have bin in Spain, or at
Remes, or at Rome, or that have bin Iesuited, or that carries the mark of a
Monk, of a Friar, or a runnagate Priest, that can but say a Mass, or read our
Ladies psalter; any of these shows, any of these pretenses, or any of these
tytles, are enough to grace and credit a Dog, and not only to bring him into a
venerable estimation, and to be holily accounted of, but to give him that
reputation amongst the multitude, that he shall be believed, and he shall be
beloved; for men are commonly believed, as they are beloved.

And these seducing spirits under a counterfeit show of holiness* are still
endeavoring to pervert the simpler sort of his Majesty's poor subjects, to
withdraw them from their duties, and to arm them with all disobedience and
contemptuous demeanor toward their Prince.

The second kind of Papists, that I have said to be seduced, are the unlearned
and ignorant sort, that are abused and misled, by the only inducements of
those counterfeit Hypocrites, thus formerly described.

Now, if there be any comiseration to be had to a people that are thus
enchanted, these are to be pitied, and it is for their sakes only that I have
endeavored these lines, the which if I would go about to confirm by any
authority drawn from the holy Scriptures, I know it would be to very little
purpose, when there is no testimony that can be alleged, either from Peter, or
from Paul, or from any other of the Apost. or from Christ himself, that will
be either admitted or received against the Pope. Whatsoever I have therefore
related in this Description, that may any ways concern the Irish, I have
neither inferred presidents, nor enforced other matter, but such as they
themselves are best acquainted withal, and what is most frequent and
conversant to their owue experiments. And there is not a Nation under the sun,
that are more apt to make collections of accidents that shall happen, or that
will sooner refer them to presagements of misfortune, then will the Irish.

And although our Papists of Ireland, are generally compacted of a dull
metal, that has little sense or feeling but of ignorance and arrogance, yet
thus quick sighted they be, to look into those events that does make nothing
at all for their purpose, and are starcke blind on the other side, to discern
of those matters that do especially concern themselves.

If they would but remember, what a number of runnagate shakerels the Pope
has sent from time to time, laden with his trash: with his Bulls, with his
pardons, with his Blessings, and with his Ban-bels, which they take to be a
strong Supersedias against all perils and dangers, what or wheresoever; and yet
if there were but half that sanctity in them that they suppose, they could
not all miscarrie, some of them would take effect; for they are assuredly
persuaded, that he that can but furnish himself with a little holy water, an
holy candle, an Agnus dei, a pair of hallowed beads, or with some such other
of the Popes trinkets, he is free from al misfortunes: and yet they have seen
the popes Holy-banner that was brought amongst them from Rome by D. Saunders,
that holy ambassador, sent from the Pope, and they were persuaded, that where
this banner was once displayed, the very sight of it had bin enough to have
dismayed a whole army of devils; but this vain hope of theirs cost a number of
Rebels lives, and sent a many of Traitors heads to Dublin.

They saw what becam of the Popes two holy prelates, Ailyn and Saunders, whom
the Pope had sanctified and al-to be-blessed: and thus hallowed, he sent them
into Ireland, in assistance of them that were then out in Arms against their
Prince, and they saw what became of them; the one was slain in the field among
a number of other Rebels, and the other finished a traytorous life by a
miscrable death, and died in the Woods, and as it was supposed, was devoured
by Wolves: but others say, he died in the Wood Clannedi, partly thorough famme,
and partly of the Irish Ague.

They have seen how many confederates, how many conspiracies, how many
practices of Treason has bin plotted, hom many detestable exploits have been
undertaken, yet all of them discovered, and the practisers still confounded, our
silly Papists of Ireland have not only heard of these things with their ears,
but they themselves have likewise seen it with their eyes. But they profit
nothing, neither by hearing, nor in beholding: they can wonder at them, and
they can say with the Egyptians, when they saw the Miracles wrought by Moses;
The finger of God is here, but they have no grace to repent, it does but harde^
their hearts, it armeth them with despite both against God, and against the
Prince.

CHAP. XXI.
The inconvenience of Popery, how it hurts in Ireland.
MIght we now judge of the tree what it is by the fruit, or (as the Papists
themselves are accustomed) to deem of all causes by their own effects, Popery
could not hide it self, but that it would appear in it own likeness,
loathsome to every eye. But it is very easy for a man to wink at that, which
himself is unwilling to see; but if we would not be enemies to our own
discretions, to discern of things with judgment and reason, though reason it
self be but a gadding instrument, and is many times misled by our own
affections, it could not yet lead us so far astray, but it would undoubtedly
confirm us, that popery is the only plague sore, that has so poisoned
Ireland.

It is Popery that has drawn the people from that confidence and trust that
they should have in God, to believe in Saints, to worship Idols, and to fly
from Gods mercy to other men's merits, and to set up a Pope-holy
righteousness of their own works.

It is Popery that has alienated the hearts of that people, from that faith,
fidelity, obedience, love and loyalty, that is required in Subjects toward
their Sovereigns.

It is Popery that has set afoot so many rebellions in Ireland, that has cost
the lives of multitudes, that has ruyned that whole Realm, and made it
subject to the oppression of Theeus, Robbers, spoilers, murderers, Rebels and
Traitors.

It is Popery, that has still hardened the hearts of that people, as well
against God as against all goodness.

I have known Ireland long, and I have heard of many odible exploites that
has been accomplished, by Murder, by Rebellion, by Treason, and by many
other villainies; but they have been evermore plotted, conspired, acted, and
performed by Papists: It is the Papist that is still the Author, the
undertaker and the Executioner of all manner of villainies, how barbarous, how
cruel, or how odible soever.

God be thanked, Ireland was yet never so destitute, but there has been a
number of good people natives of that Country, that has zealously and
religiously professed the Gospel, yet I never heard of any of those that was
ever tainted, stained, or detected with any of these capital crimes: no, it
belongs to Popery, it is a parcel of the Popes doctrine; for he auoweth it
to be a work meritorious, for any of his Disciples to lie, to flatter, to
counterfeit, to discemble, or to enter into any action, be it never so base,
be it never so abject, be it never so servile, yet if they can by any of these
means compass a plot of villainy, they may do it by prescription, he gives
them Bulls, he gives them Pardons, he gives them Dispensations.

From hence it is, that the poor Popelings of Ireland, do think there is no
other highway to Heaven, but that which leads by these damnable endeavors,
thus graced and countenanced by the Pope. And they know again well enough,
that his holiness is in nothing beter pleased, then in those that will impugn
and exploite against the Prince. The better therefore to countenance the
matter, and to give themselves opportunity, they pretend great love and
loyalty, they will protest subjection, perhaps they will go to Church and
hear a Sermon, and what care they for taking of an oath which they never mean
to keep, the Pope is able to forgive all, and this is the way to give them
credit, whereby they may practice what they list, and how they list, they know
it well enough: But if I would go about to infer presidents, I might be
infinite in example, to show what murders, what massacres, what treacheries,
and what Treasons have bin performed, which the Irish could never have been
able to have effected, but by that honest repose there has bin had of their
fidelity, and by that countenance and credit that has bin given them by the
Prince.

It is by our trust that they compass their treason and it is our sufferance
that inableth them in all their mischief, and what they perform by fraud, by
falsehood, by perjury, by breach of faith and fidelity, is still ascribed unto
them, for wit, for policy, for valiance, and is evermore reputed to their
glory and our disgrace.

If I were demanded of the drift of my lines whereunto they tended, I could
not well make answer on the sudden, yet I have a meaning; but I am brought
into the laborinth of the Metaphisickes, who wading in a matter past their
reach, would conclude of some thing, but they know not what: I would approve
by reasons, that the Irish are not to be trusted, because they have already so
often deceived: And yet I do reprove my self, for I know there be in Ireland,
a number of worthy subjects that cannot be detected, nor their fidelity and
trust to their Prince by any means impeached, and these do not only deserve
to be countenanced, but likewise to be cherished; yet the Traitor of Ireland,
as well in words, in looks, in appearance, and in the whole course of his
conversation, does so nearly resemble and imitate the true meaning man, that
they cannot be discerned nor distinguished by their outward shows. It were
therefore a desperate matter (and of no small adventure) to commit a trust to
those that are so hardly discerned. I will therefore conclude nothing, yet I
say, for him that is a known Papist, I would never trust his word, his
promise, his vow, nor (if it were for the Princes service) I would never trust
his oath, for Papists when they swear fastest, they commonly lie fastest.

I have discovered my self to the full, and although I have thereby made my
folly the more apparent, perhaps it may yet give some little blaze of light to
those that be wise, for wise men may learn more from fools, then fools from
wise men: but the only part to play the fool well, is amongst fools to seem
to be wise, yet I could be contented to play the fool a little, and so to be
accounted amongst our Irish Catholics, if they would vouchsafe, but to draw a
little spark of wisdom from my over much folly.

There were many matters more to be wished for, but wishing in Ireland is out
of date, and our English Recusants do know it well enough; they have therefore
so planted themselves through every part of Ireland, that they are more
pernicious in their example, then the Irish themselves.

I may now conclude (and I hope with a good conscience) that the Popery of
Ireland, is the bar that excludes all regard of duty, both to God and the King.

CHAP. XXII.
Whether there be any possiblity that the Irish should mainetaine a war
against the Kings Majesty.
THE broiles that has been stirred up by Papists in Ireland are infinite, and
they have cost the price of many men's lives, and the expense of great sums of
Treasure.

But methinkes, it cannot be called a war, that is maintained by Subjects
against their Sovereigns: It is for Princes to make war that are absolute,
not for Pesants that are dissolute: And for this Papistical generation, that
are evermore seditiouslie contending against their Sovereigns: I cannot do
them so much credit, to say they mainetaine wars, but that they stir up
tumults, discentions, vprores, commotions, insurrections, and give them the
best Titles that can be applied, and they are but rebellious, and they
themselves are Rebels and Traitors that do first undertake them.

Now, that the Irish should have any means or ability to bear out a
rebellion against our gracious King, I think there is no Soldier so unwise to
affime it.

Wars are not to be performed without Soldiers, nor soldiers can be
contained without pay; for besides men, Money, Munition, armor, weapon, and a
number of other necessaries belonging to War, there is neither means to
conquour, nor hope to defend.

What may we now think of the Irish; first their greatest wealth, wherewithal
to maintain a war, consists in Otmeale and Butter: their wisdom is our
ouer-sightes, their strength our sufferance; And they have ever been more
beholding to their English friends with their Irish hearts, then to their wit,
their policy, their valiance, their wealth, or to any other thing that
Ireland could afford them.

They are altogether unfurnished of all manner of warlike necessaries, either
for defense or offense, neither are they able so to fortify themselves in any
ground of advantage, but that we are still able to fetch them out by the ears,
either by force or by engine: they cannot deal so with the English: for they
having neither Artillirie to batter, nor means to approach, a small company of
our English Soldiers will make good any place against the whole forces of the
Irish, and although they be but slenderly fortified.

And I would but learn how it were possible for a people (how valiant or
politic soever) that has neither Mint to make pay, shipping to transport,
that has no manner of provision, no store, nor storehouses furnished with
Munition, Powder, Shot, Pieces, Pikes, Armory, Weapons, nor with a number of
other Ingines and Implements belonging to the War, without the which, a war
cannot be maintained; They have no provision for cariages, but what themselves
are able to carry upon their backs, neither are they able to leauy new forces*
nor have they means to supply their old, with convenient necessaries
belonging to an Army. Now if it be possible, that a people thus distitute,
should be able to wage War against so mighty and puissant a Prince, I will
never trust experience again so long as I live. But let us look into their
ability, what they are able to perform in the day of fight, and
notwithstanding that I can take no exceptions to their ability of body, yet
being neither armed, with Corslet, nor Pike (not in any convenient number nor
in able sort) by this defect they are not able to make a stand upon any firm
ground, where our hors-men are either able to charge or chase them, neither are
they able to endure the encounter of our armed Pikes: so that upon any equal
ground, that yeldeth no other advantage then the virtue or valiance of him that
does command, and where Hors-men and foote-men may be both brought to serve,
the Irish are not able to abide.

The Horsemen of Ireland; again, are not fit to serve in the time of fight,
neither against Horse nor foot, until it does come to a flat running
retraite, and then in a chase they are good for execution, but otherwise, they
can stand in little steed.

The reason is, by defect of their appointment, for they are armed with a
Skull, a Shirt of Maile, and a Staff, which as they use to carry, is of no
service, but for execution in a chase: and their Horse likewise, being as
slightly furnished with a Padde, wherein the Rider having neither Stirrops nor
stay, no otherwise then if he shoud sit on the bare Horse back, is therefore
quickly unhorsed and easily overthrown.

I might farther enlarge, how they are not able to uphold any Garrisons, nor to
maintain a Camp, nor yet to contain themselves in any company, one whole
week together, but that they must betake themselves to their Woods, to their
Bogges, and to their starting holes.

I know I shall be incountered here with presidentes, and they will tell me
of more then twenty several Traitors, that has maintained Rebellions against
our late gracious Queen: what sums of money they have spent her; how many men
they have consumed her, and yet how little she preuaild against them,
notwithstanding her great expense, and the many years expired in their pursuit.

To the end therefore, to make discovery why there was no better service
performed, I will unrip those occasions, that were the lets and impediments:
the which being made manifest, may give some light for his Majesty's future
service in that Realm, and therefore I hope not altogether unnecessary.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of those lets and impedimentes that defeated her Maiestic, in her services
against the Irish.
IT is not unknown to all the world (I am sure) in what magnificent manner our
late gracious Queen behaved her self against the King of Spain, the Monarch
of this part of the world, that has kingdoms at command, that has Indies
upon Indies, both of silver and Gold to make pay to Soldiers, and to bear his
expenses: that had the prime choice of skillful Captains, and of Martial men
of al sorts that Europe could afford, that left no practice vnatempted, that
either Sapine, Rome, or Hell it self could plot or conspire. And all this (and
much more then I have spoken of) employed for many years together, to have
ruined and subverted this worthy Princess whom he so much maligned: but she,
not only prevented him in all his purposes, but she many times incountred him,
as well by Sea as by Land, and triumphed in several notable victories, and
several exploytes performed against him, sometimes at home in his own
dominions, yea almost at his own Court gates.

Why then (will some say) if her Majesty were able to perform so much against
so mighty an enemy as the King of Spain, why could she not find means to
suppress the Rebellions of so base and beggarly a people as the Irish, that
are so lightly accounted of.

I answer, because she was never so soundly advised, nor faithfully Counseled
how to prosecute the Irish, as she was to encounter the Spaniard.

It will be yet again replied, what might be the reason that her Majesty
should be better advised against the Spaniard, then against the Irish? Alas,
who is ignorant of the cause, it is well enough known, that there was never
any great affinity between the English and the Spanish, unless a little
between Merchantes for trade and traffic. But her Majesty had not a
Counselor in England, that was a Spaniard born, or that was combined with the
Spanish, either by Marriage, either by fostering, either by gossiping, or by
any other means whereby to confirm love and friendship between them: but as
they were all noble and honorable personages, so they were firm and assured
as well in their loyalty to their Prince, as in their love to their Country,
and therefore in all their Counselles and consultations, they more respected
the honor of their Prince, and the good of their Country, then they did their
own private profits.

Now in Ireland, there were diverse belonging to the Counsel table, who
although they were of English birth, they were yet so linked and combined with
the Irish, as well by Marriage, as by many other means, that I never knew so
arrant a Traitor in Ireland, that was destitute of English friends, that would
undertake in his behalf, yea although he were out in open rebellion, that,
they durst not apparently adventure, yet by secret means and practices, they
would both strain themselves and try their friends, to help out a Traitor
when it came to a pinch.

Of this combination between the English and the Irish, I might speak more
then perhaps would be thought necessary to be openly published; and it should
seem, that our progenitors many ages since, finding out the inconveniences,
what hurt it did, seeking means therefore to prevent it, they established by
act of Parliament, that no man of the Irish birth, should have charge or be put
in trust, with any Castle or place fortified, belonging to the Prince. They
were likewise prohibited, from diverse principal affairs, and amongst these
prohibitions, the English were likewise enjoined, neither to Marry, foster, nor
combine with the Irish.

I think our ancestors were not more careful, then we be now, but it should
seem, they employed their cares better then we do now.

Amongst many reasons that might be rendered, why the English should be so
indeuouring and helping to the Irish, there be three especial reasons, more
importing then the rest.

The first, is grounded upon foresight or providence, for those of the English
that have settelled themselves with Lands or liuinges in the Country, do
find it to be a matter of approved policy, to combine with those of the
Irish, that are most likeliest to play the Traitors, especially, if they be
bounding or bordring upon him: for he thinks by these means, not only to
save his lands and tenementes from the spoil of the party himself that is
most likely to endanger him but also by being in league and friendship of such
a one, that is but in the state and condition of a demy-Traitor; that is, half
in, and half out, he hops by his means so much the rather to escape
scot-free, from the spoil of others: from which conceit of theirs, this
proverb does arise: That it is good to have a Rowland for an Olyuer: or after
our English interpretation; a Thief to encounter a Thief.

A second reason, that induces the English to be so undertaking for the
Irish, is grounded upon consideration, peradventure some hundred Cowes, some
times more, and sometimes less: for gifts and presents, though they consist
but in Cowes, in horse, or in ready money it self, will be received, and he
that knows how to steal from oue, and what to give to another, shall find
friends.

Now, a third reason, and that which most inforceth the English to stand so
firm for the Irish, is, for that it concerns our own freehold: for we are
so linked and combined with them, what by marryeng, what by fostring, and what
by one means or other, that we must not see them quail, we must not see them
confounded but their hurts will be to our own detriments if not of our selves,
yet of our children of our brethren, of our Cosines, of our wives, of our
alies, of our friends, or of some other such of our families, as we must put to
our helping hands, we must not see them utterly overthrown.

Who will demand now, how the Irish have been able so to dally with their
Priuce, and to continue their rebellions as in times past they have done, when
they have bin still bolstered out by the English, when they have had such
friends, that (if they could not prevail in Ireland) durst adventure to write
into England, yea sometimes to the Queen her self, and under those plausible
pretenses of profit and policy, would persuade, what a sparing it would be,
both of money and of men's lives, that a Traitor that had committed infinite
spoils, and spent her Majesty huge sums of money, should be brought in by
composition, by pardon or by protection, and how many ways it would be
available to her Highness, that he should be received to mercy.

And how many of these have I known, that after they had received all these
favors, and having again strengthened and enabled themselves, have watched
their oportunities, but to commit new stealths, and to execute some other
actions of villainy, and thus going out again, have been ten times more
chargeable then they were at the first.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of Pardons and Protections, how hurtful in Ireland.
AS I never knew the Irish to want English friends that did uphold them so they
are never destitute again of some others, to procure them pardons.

This Port-sale of pardons, has been the utter undoing of Ireland: for what
between those pardons that were sent from the Pope, and the other again that
were obtained from the Prince, every Traitor, every Rebel, every murderer,
every These and every Robber, might put in practice what he listed, without
dread or danger, for the Pope he dispensed on the one side, and the Queen she
pardoned on the other, and thus between them (as time and occasion served) it
was holden for the high way to preferment, for a man to play the traitor, and
to stir up Rebellion: for he that was found to be most dilligent, most
dangerous, and most desperate, in the execution of Treason, should not only
be sure to have a pardon, but he should be likewise gratified with a
pension, or with some daily pay, from out of the Princes Cofers.

Now, who would forbear to be a Traitor, or a Rebel, or a Thief, or to
enter into any mischief whatsoever, that could still warrant himself a pardon
for a few stolen Cowes?

This generality of pardons and protections, did much harm in Ireland, for
they still gave encouragement to the ill disposed to adventure of any
enterprise, and to do any manner of villainy what themselves listed, and there
wanted not those that were favorites and followers to the Lord Deputy, that
were still hunting after suits, that obtained both Pardons and protections, and
many other Grants, that were so prejudicial unto the service of our late
gracious Queen, that she had been better to have given them stipends of some
thousands by the year to have maintained them in England, rather then to have
suffered them to have made such Traffic in Ireland, as they did at that time.

As these Pardons were the only encouragements to give daring Traitors to
attempt against their Prince, so they were again the very cause of dismay,
whereby to terrify the subject from the service of his Sovereign: for when a
Traitor was out in rebellion, those that were bordering upon him, that had
best knowledge in the strength and fastness of his Country, durst never serve
against him; for they knew well enough that there was not a Rebel in Ireland so
foolish, but that he had English friends to procure him a pardon, and then they
were sure that the winding up would be (as it has been in many other things)
that he that should oppose himself to serve his Prince faithfully, should be
left to the spoil of a Traitor, who having once made his own peace by pardon
or protection, would live to be revenged of as many as had served against him.

Is it now so much to be wondered at, that her majesty could have no better
service performed against her Rebels in Ireland, when by her over much
clemency, she defeated her self of their services, that were best able to
stand her in stead.

I might speak further of Pardons, that has been many ways more
prejudicial, then I have set down: but I will conclude, That so long as there
are any pardons to be hoped for in Ireland, so long there will be Traitors in
Ireland: and so long as a proclaimed traitor shall be able to compass either
pardon or protection, so long the Prince shall have no service performed
against any Rebel, either by English or Irish, that are dwelling near about
him, and that can best serve upon him.

CHAP. XXV.
Of che dallying out the time of service, and the delays of Ireland.
THere is nothing wherein our English policy has been more ouer-reached, then
in mannaging the Wars against the Irish, that were still prosecuted with
delays, and dallying out the time with deluding parlies (which they termed
times of Sessation) but under those coloured-treaties, and counterfaite truces,
though we let slip both time and occasion, yet the enemy forgot not to take
all advantages. For in those dallying times of their deluding parlies, the
Rebels recovered Conaughe, they took Eniskaline, Monohan, the Blackwatre; they
supplied themselves with Wine, with Aqua vitae, with Armor, with Weapon, with
Powder, with Shot, and with all other necessaries whatsoever they wanted, from
all the parts of Ireland; yea, from out of Dubline it self.

The Presidents are innumerable, what practices have been performed in the
time of parlies. And as Alexander would not admit of any of these night-stoln
victories, so amongst the Romans, these entertaining of Truces was banished
as an enemy to their ancient proceedings, who were still desirous to fight by
Virtue, but not by deceit.

He only is judged to be overcome, that is not vanquished by craft, nor by
fraud, nor by fortune, nor by chance, but only by mere valiance.

The time has been, when it was never deemed to be a worthy victory, where
the enemies courages were not daunted by true valiance and magnanimity.

But for the seruiees in Ireland, rest is evermore dangerous then rashness,
and although it be a foul imputation for a Commander, to be reputed headie or
haire-brain'd, yet amongst the Irish, expedition that is sometimes
unseasonably taken, is more available, and has ever concluded with better
success, then this temporziing and trifling out the time with delays and
delusions. For, the Rebel of Ireland, must have no leisure to take his breath;
he must be hunted like the Fox that is new rouzed from his den, he must be
chased from Covert to Covert; and ply him thus but one three Weeks or a month,
and you quail his courage, his edge is taken off, and his pride is suddenly
abated. But would ye have a president, let me put you in mind of the Traitor
Odougherty, one of the Gallants of the North of Ireland, a Champion of such
worthiness, that the Papists were in great hope, that he would have proved no
less then a second Tyrone; but will you see what became of this mirror of
magnanimity, he compassed a plot of Treachery, and of Treason both, but such a
plot as he could never have effected, but by the trust that was reposed in him
by the English. For this is the ground work of all their villainies: we advance
them, we countenance them, we credit them, and we enable them; and this
trust, and this confidence which we repose in them, gives them matter to work
upon; and by this means, Odougherty performed his enterprise without
resista^ce, and as he never struck stroke in the exploiting of his villainy, so
he never struck stroke after, till his head was taken of, neither durst he
ever show his face after, but in woods and Bogges, where he thought to catch no
harm. We see here the difference between expedition and delay, for as
Odougherty was spedy in the execution of his mischife, the Lord Deputy made as
quick a dispatch for the prosecution of revenge, and making a special choice
of a celected company for the following of that service, there was one amongst
the rest (sir Thomas Ridgway by name) who of a voluntary disposition (without
weeting or knowledge of his dearest friends) conveyed himself from his own
house, and came to the place of service with the foremost man, and with the like
speed he so persued the Rebels with such judgment, valiance and industry
(and many times with a far less company then the Rebels were in number)
that they expecting a more leisurable pursuit, such as Tirone and other
Traitors had had before them (being now deprived of that hope) they begane to
faint at the first, and were in a short space as easily surprised.

Sedition durst never yet attempt any thing valiantly, and the multitude, has
ever had more courage to rebel then to fight.

Now to be short, it was the expedition of the Lord Deputy and the diligence
of the Treasurer, that brake the neck of this rebellion in a much shorter time
then has been acustomed: And as this president of theirs may give a further
light for his Majesty's future service, so by this it may appear, that if the
Irish be well followed with a direct course, they are of no such ability, as
some ignorant men have dreamed and believed.

CAP. XXVI.
How Tyrone was still supplied with Soldiers, and all other provisions for
war, at the Queens charges.
THe greatest matter reputed to be in the Irish in times past was this, they
had Treachery to contract a plot of Treason, and wit to conceal till they had
performed it, and that being once effected, their greatest courage afterward,
whereby to maintain their Traitorous attempts, consisted in the hope of a
pardon; in the mean time, they kept themselves like foxes in their dens, and
we hunting and ferriting after them, if sometimes by casualty, we fortuned to
light upon them, they trusted better to their heels then they did to their
hands.

It will be said, that the Irish in the time of Tyrones Rebellion, showed
themselves to be men of better worth, then I do seem to account of them. And
it is truth, that in that Rebellion of Tyrones, they put the Queen to a great
expense of Treasure, and continued the war a much longer time then has
formerly been accustomed; but how it came to pass, that the Irish were so
enabled on the sudden, to maintain their Rebellion, and to continue it as
they did, whether it were by any new supply either of strength, courage, force,
or fortune, or by any other ability either of body or mind, inspired or
infused into them more then their predecessors have had before them, this would
be known. And this I think were not unnecessary to be descouered.

I will not speak how Tyrone was befrended by the English, neither will I make
any repetition, how the English soldiers were generally enfeebled and brought
so weak that they were not able to perform a good days march (I will not say
how it came so to pass, but it is well enough known that so it was:) And
although that this penury wherewith our Eng. troops were thus pinched, had been
enough to have abated the courages of the most able minded men, yet that was
not it that made Tyrone so potent as he showed himself, nor that did so much
enable him against his Prince.

The matter that strengthened him, was the continual supplies, as well of men
as of munition, armor, weapon, powder, shot, he was still furnished with
Soldiers, ready armed and trained at her Majesty's costs and charges, and it
was her Majesty's purse that relieved him from time to time, with those
supplies, that he himself (otherwise) had never been able to have compassed.

Our Ancestors many years since, that had some speculation in the Irish
disposition, foreseeing well enough the danger that might ensue, by training
them up in any warlike discipline, thinking to prevent the inconvenience; they
ordained by statute, that no Englishman, serving in that Country with command,
should retain into his Company of one hundred soldiors, above three Irishman
at the utmost, and these were entertained rather for guides then for any other
expectation that was hoped for by their service.

Whilst these observations were charily observed, the Irish were not able to
make any encounter against the Prince: and Ireland was able (not only) to
bear it own expenses, but also to contribute to the princes Cofers, some
twenty or thirty thousand pounds, per An. as appears by ancient records that
are yet to be seen.

By this we might conclude, that it is better for wayfaring men, to tread
those tracts already traced out to their hands, then to seek unknown ways,
that if they do not sometimes lead astray, are sure at all times to lead the
furthest way about: for if those Presidents left by predecessors, had bin by us
as carefully observed, as they were by them wisely prescribed, the rebellious
sort of the Irish had not been so well enabled to have maintained their
rebelions, as now of late they have done: But Tyrone was the man that the Irish
did extol, and Tyrone was the man that was beholding to his English friends;
he was beholding to those deluding parlies, to those deceitful times of
sessasion, that gave him still opportunity to help himself by many
advantages: sometimes when he was driven (as it were) to the very last gasp,
and when he was not longer able to hold out, then there was a parle procured:
by means whereof, he relieved himself with all manner of necessaries, and
would lightly enterprise something, that was both to the disadvantage and
dishonor of the Prince.

I have already made mention of a prescript, wherein our English Captains were
enjoined, that in every company of one hundred, they should not retain above
two or three that were of the Irish birth, but during the whole season of
Tyrones rebellion, there were some companies, that for every three of the
English, there were three and twenty of the Irish; and to speak truly, it
might have been called a special and a choice company, that had not three
Irish for one English. How it fell out that our English Captains were thus
inclined to entertain the Irish, and to discharge the English, I shall not
need to make relation; there was a reason why, but they raked up all the Irish
that were to be gotten, that there was not a Horse-Boy left in the Country,
but he was armed and trained, and when he had committed insufferable spoils,
away he went to the enemy.

The Rebels themselves sent as many Rogues as they were able to procure, to be
thus armed and trained, and to watch their opportunity to perform some exploit
of villainy, and so to make their return.

Besides this, there were whole companies of the Irish raised at her Majesty's
costs and charges, and that received her daily pay, that were as arrant
Traitors, as any were with the Rebels, and committed as many spoils, killing
and burning only excepted.

All these, still furnished Tyrone with daily supplies of Soldiers that were
thus armed and trained at her Majesty's charge, and he had the like helps to
supply himself with many other wants, but especially with powder and shot,
wherewith he was still relieved from out the Queens store; sometimes by those
Irish bands and companies, that made more provision for the rebels, then they
did for themselves.

Sometimes again by some Gentlemen of the country, who under the pretense of
making themselves strong against the Rebels, would fetch out of the Queens
store, Powder, Shot, Armor, Weapon, and what besides was there to be had,
wherewith they still supplied Tyrone, who otherwise had never been able to have
maintained one good days fight.

I might yet speak further, how that every pedling fellow that kept a Shop,
was suffered to sell Pieces, Powder, Swords, and such other implements of War,
not allowable for every man to sell, and (considering the state of the
Country) not sufferable for every man to buy.

I will here couclude, how all that extraordinary Wisdom, policy, and
valiance, that was attributed unto Tyrone, was but our ouer-sights, our
negligences, and our winking at that which was apparent unto every Wise man's
eyes: and let the Irish project unto themselves what they list (I say) if
Tyrone had been as well hunted after as Odougherty was, he must have come unto
the very selfsame Market that Odoughertie did.

CAP. XXVII.
That the Irish are more dangerous then necessary for his Majesty's service in
Ireland.
IN ever read of any such policy, where a rebellious people, that were every
day ready to reuoult from their duty unto their Sovereign, should be
permitted to exercise chiualry, or should be inured with the practice of Arms:
but I could set down a number of presidents, how prudent and pollitique
Princes, when they have been so continually vexed and urged by rebellious
Traitors, have not only prohibited them from the use of weapons, but have also
restrained and deprived them from all manner of practices appertaining unto
War, by the severity of Laws.

I know amongst the Nobility of Ireland, there has been (as there are
still) many honorable persons (and so there are of many other Gentlemen)
that without all doubt are as forward, as ready, and as willing to serve their
Prince, as any other whosoever. But to speak truly, sithence I have known
Ireland, I never knew any of the Nobility of that Realm, that was able to
perform any service (that was worth the speaking off) with their own
Contrymen, in the behalf of their Prince, no not against a mean Rebel:
such a one as in a private quarrel, durst not lift up a sword against any
Noble man, that did dwell near or border upon him. And this is a matter to be
admired, that any threadbare Rebel should be so apt and hardy to oppose
against the Prince, and so timorous again to offend a Nobleman of his own
Country: and it is no less strange, that every Nobleman of Ireland should be
potent enough to right his own causes against any of that ragged rabble, that
dares but look awry upon him (as I could show may presidents) and can perform
nothing in the service of his prince, no not against the most basest Rascal,
that ever marched under the Title of a Rebel.

The Mystery of this matter is easy to be decided, for although I know that
amongst the Nobility of Ireland, there be some that would be both willing and
desirous to do the Prince unfeigned service in their own persons, yet they
themselves know well enough that they shall never be followed in those
endeavors: their own household servants would fail them in such a case; and
he that could bring a thousand followers into the field, in an action of
Rebellion; is not able to bring one hundred, in the service of his Prince: they
are so vowed and protested to the Pope, that they will not be induced to serve
their prince, at the leastwise, not in that due respect of love, that subjects
are bound and do owe unto their Sovereigns. Perhaps in somptiuate quarrel
between themselves, they may perform some exployt the one against the other, but
it shall be don more in revenge of their own malice, then for any love they
owe to the service. There is nothing, wherein the Irish do more privily deride
us, then in this conceit that we have of their help: and therefore they have
hatched up this pretty intergatory: Where was it ever known, that one wolf
would prey upon another. And it has ever been thought a most dangerous
thing, to have friends and enemies both of one Nation. But I know the Irish
did never want friends, to persuade that their service is very behoouefull: it
may sometimes serve indeed, to help to stop a gap, but I answer it will shortly
after break down the whole hedge, and it is but a mad part for him that would
defend an entry, to shut up the wicket, and then set open the great gate.

The Irish do but betray the service and strengthen the enemy (I speak of the
multitude) and to have them trained as heretofore they have bin, (especially
those that are so much addicted to the Pope) I say it is dangerous, and a
gross oversight. I have hitherto displaied, (though not all that I know) yet
so much as I think necessary, the which although it please not all, yet I would
be glad it should prove profitable to some. I have but glanced at things, by
giving them a touch and away, which if I should enlarge but as they deserve,
I might write a whole volume in folio.

The virtue of things is not so much in their magnitude as in their quality,
and so likewise of reason, which being wrapped in a few words, have the best
tongue.

My purpose is to profit, not to please; to entice, not to entrap; to council,
not to control; and I rather desire to make my friends penitent, then leave
them insolent.

I have directed my lines but to the forming of good manners, and moderating of
affections, and who can be silent in these matters here handled, if he love his
prince. And yet I know, that nothing can be so well or prouidently spoken, but
malice will find matter whereat to carpe and repine: yet I hope my good
intent will be the rather born with all, in that I do but set down precepts of
good council, but not decrees to be resolved on.

I hope it will be accepted of by some, that will reap profit by it, and find
fit aduertisements and examples for them to imitate: which if it do, I shall
think my time and labor the better bestowed: if otherwise, my care is the
less, because it has contented my self, in keeping me from Idleness.

But I know some will say, it were as good be idle, as ill occupied: It Is true,
There is no endeavor wherein a man may busy himself, that is more distasteful
then the writing of books (especially if they be of a reprehending humor) but
it is to those that have guilty consciences, but to men of pure and honest
life, they little force what any man can either write or speak against them.

I may speak something by experience, for I my self have been mistaken, and
am reputed to be an open enemy to Ireland, and all but for writing a Book,
entitled, The Survey of Ireland, wherein I have labored nothing, but the
discovery of the Pope.

But such is the malignity of Papists, that they cannot endure to have their
Idolatry checked, no not with presidents and examples that are drawn from the
holy scriptures.

Certain Pagans offering outrageous violence to a Religious Christian, mocking
and vpbraiding him for his Religion, they asked him in the end, what profit
he had by his Christ: Is not this a singular profit, quoth he, Not to be moved
with your bitter words, but to pardon and forgive the wrongs you do unto me.

I answer with the Christian: Let the Papistsly and slander how they list, I
thank God, I am taught by the Religion I profess, to put up all wrongs and
injuries, whatsoever they can offer unto me, and not only to forgive them
their vpbraiding and deprauing of me, but also pray to God that he would so
open their eyes, that they may see the right way of their salvation.

I hope there is no man that will accuse me of parciality, to say I have more
forborne to speak against the follies of the English, then against the manners
and customs of the Irish: or that I do otherwise distinguish between them,
but value them both alike, the good, to be good, and the bad, to be bad. I
confess I have bin very plain with the Citizens of Dublin, but it is those
that are only addicted to the Pope, it is with those that have so be-pusseld
themselves in Popery, that they yield to a number of disorders, that are no
less odious in the sight of God, then injurious to the King: yea and to
eclipsing the reputation of their City if they did but well advise themselves,
with discreet consideration.

Perhaps it will be imputed to me for an offense, that I have so avowed the
greatest number of the Irish to be papists: But if Popery be so Catholic a
matter as they themselves do believe, I have then done them great honor and
credit so to repute them, but if it be a doctrine that seduceth, and that
draws subjects rather to Rebellion then to true obedience to their Princes,
is it not then best to speak the truth, if it be but to shame the Devil?

And now to purge my self from any malicious intent, I do here protest before
the face of the living God, and do further auow it by that Religion that I do
openly profess, that I do know never a Citizen in Dubline, nor any other
person that is a native borne in Ireland, that I do either hate or dislike; no,
not he that has done me the greatest wrong, but do wish him as well as I wish
to my self, that god would make us all wise, and set us in the right tract
that leads to life everlasting.

This is all the malice I bear them, this is all the hurt I mean them, to
this end and porpose I have written this Book, not against any Papist in
particular, but against Popery in general; for Popery in Ireland is the
original of a number of imperfections, that otherwise would be reformed, and
it is Popery only that has secluded the English and the Irish from that
perfect love and amity, which else would be embraced on both parts as well to
the glory of God, as to the great benefit of this Country.

God bring it once to pass, that we might all join together as well English
as Irish, in the true acknowledgement of one God, of one Religion, of one King,
of one Law, and of one love, this is all that I wish for, and this is all that
I have endeavored.

FINIS.

