A SHORT TREATISE of Magneticall Bodies and Motions.

By J Park ^^d^ey Dr in physic and Philosoph^ (...)

Physician to the Emperor of Russia, and one of ye eight principals or Elects
of the College of Physicians in London.

LONDON. Printed by Nicholis Oaks.

1613.

engraved title page

A Preface Magneticall.
PVrposing to deliver a brief and easy doctrine as concerning this new Art of
Magneticall Bodies and Motions: I thought good here to free the same from the
luster and gloss of disputable points and other conceits, only purposing to
handle nothing in the same but the plain matter and demonstrations.
Magneticall themselves, thinking it more fitting to place these flowers in the
Preface, if any delight rather in them, then in the matter it self, to the end
they may in some sort be provided of both. As concerning the first finding out
of the Magnet-stone, whereof I am to treat, Pliny and Nicander have fained
that a certain Heardman being in the fields, having his shoes shod with iron,
and his staff armed with an iron pike, and resting himself upon a quantity of
this stone, could not easily remove his feet, or lift up his staff, whereupon
he perceived the attractiue virtue of this stone, that it did attract and hold
iron. Other think that the pioners and diggers of metals, by their diligence
and obseruances first found out the Lodestone, and his virtue of attracting
iron, by which property it was well known to the ancient Egyptians and
Graetians in times past. Some have thought that the Magnet would leese this
quality attractiue, if he were anointed with garlic, or touched with a
Diamond, and of this opinion were Ptolomie, Plutarcke, Pliny, and Baptista
Porta; for this mallady Ruelius has found a remedy to anoint the Lodestone
with Goats blood, and Paracelsus with his oil of Crocus Martis, will not
only cure him of this evil, but can make him ten times stronger then he was
before, likewise Cardanus and Alexander Amphrodiseus have labored to nouris^
the Magnet with fitings of iron and steel.

Many have striued much to inquire out the cause how the Magnet should attract
iron unto it, Epicurus, Aphrodiseus, Carus, Johannes Costaeus, Plutarke, and
Thomas Aquinas do suppose this attractiue virtue to proceed from certain
motes, insensible parts or vapors issuing forth of the Magnet, and entering into
the iron by convenient figures, and in their retiring back again do attract
the iron to the Lodestone.

Plato and Fernelius have thought the cause of this attraction to be Divine and
from above. Thales and Anaxagoras say that the Magnet has life in it, whereby
it attracteth the like substance as living things do. Some think that there is
a certain sympathy between the Magnet and iron, as between the male and
female, as Orpheus and Lucretius have sung.

Auaroes, Scaliger, and Cardinal Cusanus would have iron to move unto the
Magnet, as to his beginning and matrixe, from whence he came. Gulielmus
Puteanus, Galen, and others, do judge that by his substantial form he draws
iron unto it, but Doctor Gilbert, whose labors are the greatest, and best in
Magneticall Philosophy, does conceive that the Magnet and iron do move one
unto the other, not by any specificall form, but from the essential form of
the Magneticall globe of the earth, being an essential part of the same, which
is not so, as it shall be demonstrated in the last Chapter of this Treatise.

To illustrate this virtue of attraction in the Loadstone, Serapio and the
Moors, like far travelers, have reported that in the Indies there be mighty
craggie rocks, all of Magnet-stone, that will stay the ships as they sail by
them, and pull the iron nails out of them; this story Olaus Magnus also
confirms to be so in the North, and that there, least the rocks of
Lodestone should pull the iron works and nails from the vessels and boats,
they build them with wodden pins, and sow the boords together with lines of
the barks of trees; which indeed they do both for want of our skill in
building ships and barges, and for want of iron works, whereof they have
little store.

And because this stone has virtue to attract, therefore Marbodeus a
Frenchman, Petrus Bairus, Pictorius and Arnoldus de villa noua do feign that
this stone will procure the love of Princes and of women, and maintain love
between husband and wife. Haly-abbas will have the Lodestone to cure the
gout, if it be held in the hand, and the East Indians say that it preserves
youth. Caelius Calcaginus says, that if the Magnet be preserved in the salt of
the sea-Lampron or Remora, that is thought to stay a ship under sail, that
then the Magnet will draw up gold that is fallen into the deepest well.

And Fracastorius testifies that he has seen a Magnet that would draw silver
unto it, and chase iron from it. Cardanus, Antonius de Fantis, Petrus
Perigrinus, and John Taisner do deliver that there might be made a perpetual
motion by the virtue of the Lodestone, but by the experience of many ingenious
practices I find it impossible to be done.

Since the finding out of the Sea-compasse, which was about 300 years ago, by
one Thomas Goa, borne near Naples, or by Marcus Paulus Venetus, who learned
that skill in China, as is thought, and first brought it into Italy, there have
grown many opinions how this Compass should be directed into the North and
South. Marcilius Ficinus, Paracelsus, and Cardan think that the virtue of the
constellation of the Bear does govern the Magnet and iron, and therefore both
these are directed into the North. Petrus Peregrinus, Friar Bacon, John
Taisner, and many other would have the Compass to observe the North pole: But
since that Sebastianus Cabotta, did find out that the Compass did vary from
the true meridian, it has been imagined that there is some place in the
heavens that the Compass should respect, as Cardan would have it, to observe
the star in the tail of Vrsa major. Bessardus, a Frenchman says that it
does behold the pole of the Zodiac, Martin Cortesius would have an attractiue
point above the heavens, and Robert Norman an Englishman, denies that there is
an attractiue point, but affirms that there is a respective point, to the
which the Compass does move, especially the Inclinatory-needle, whereof he was
the first invent or.

Liuius Sanulus supposes that there is a certain Magneticall meridian, and
Francis Maurolicus, that there is a Magneticall Island, and Fracastorius holds
that there be certain Magneticall mountains, which be set out in Plancius his
Card, that the Compass does respect. But Doctor Gilbert, our friend and
Collegiat, has discovered these errors, and set forth the causes of the
variation of the Compass in his book De Magnete.

Yet lately Gulielmus Nautonerius, a Frenchman, and Anthony Linton an
Englishman have supposed that the Magneticall-needle and Compass do move and
turn themselves upon the Magneticall meridian always unto their own
Magneticall poles, placed upon the superficies of the earth that be near, and
within the circles polar, not varying at all from their own meridian, but
deuidte only and decline from the meridians of the pole of the world, and with
this conceit, these two, with many curious calculations and proiects, will
presently find the longitude of all Cities and Countries; but this their strong
imagination has failed them, being grounded upon observations from the
variations of the needle, from which these two men have set forth different
Magneticall poles; and if they should work from 500 observations, they might
guess at near half as many variety of poles (for variations are not regular,
but irregular, because their scattered causes be irregular) so that these men
have found instead of the longitude of places, a longitude of unprofitable
labors.

Therefore, not purposing to dazell any ones conceit with the repetition and
confutation of any opinions, terms of Art, or words whatsoever, I will come to
the Tractate it self, thinking that the quiuering Magneticall-needle will be
trouble enough to handle for the better knowledge and delight in Magneticall
experiments.

M. R.

A TABLE OF ALL THE CHAPTERS contained in this Treatise.
CHAPTER. I. OF Bodies Magnetical. CHAP. II. Of the Magnet-stone, his form and
caps. CHAP. III. Of Iron. CHAP. IV. Of the Earth. CHAP. V. Of the two poles,
and how those points are found out. CHAP. VI. Of the virtue of the poles. CHAP.
VII. Of the Axis. CHAP. VIII. Of the equator. CHAP. IX. Of the meridians.
CHAP. X. Of the Paralels. CHAP. XI. Of the Horizo^. CHAP. XII. Of the 2 circles
that the needle makes about the Magnet. CHAP. XIII. Of noe circle the needle
makes round about the Magnet. CHAP. XIIII. Of the distance and orb of the
Magnets virtue. CHA. XV. Of applicatio^s. CHAP. XVI. Of preserving the virtue
of the Magnets. CHAP. XVII. Of contributing the virtue Magnetical to iron or
steel. CHAP. XVIII. Of augmenting the virtue of the Magnet. CHAP. XIX. Of the
decay and decreasing of the Magnets virtue. CHAP. XX. Of the co^mutatio^ of the
virtue Polar. CHAP. XXI. Of the discord of the two points of the Adamant. CHAP.
XXII. Of the Magneticall union. CHAP. XXIII. Of attraction Magneticall. CHAP.
XXIIII. Of the strong apprehension of the Magnet. CHAP. XXV. Of Magnetical
direction from the earth. CHAP. XXVI. Of the variation of the Compass from the
true meridian. CHAP. XXVII. Of finding the variatio^ of the co^pas by 1
observation. CHAP. XXVIII. Of finding the variatio^ of the Compass by the
circles of the Astrolobe. CHA. XXIX. Of finding the variation of the Analemma.
CHAP. XXX. Of finding the variation of the Compass by an Equinoctial Dyall.
CHAP. XXXI. Of finding the variation of the Compass by rings. CHAP. XXXII. Of
finding the variation of the Compass by an Horizontall Dyall. CHAP. XXXIII. Of
finding the variatio^ in degrees and minutes, by the doctrine of Triangles.
CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the Application of the Inclinatory-needle to the Axis of the
earth. CHA. XXXV. Of the Inclinatory-ring and needle. CHAP. XXXVI. A Diagram of
the needles inclination to the axis of the earth and horizon in any latitude.
CHAP. XXXVII. Another Diagram of finding the angles of the Inclinatory-needle
in any parallel. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of finding by the needles inclination unto the
horizo^, the altitude of the pole by an instrument. CAAP. XXXIX. Of finding the
needles inclination in every latitude by table. CHAP. XL. Of finding the angles
of inclination the Magnetical meridian and the Azimuth together. CHAP. XLI. Of
the variatio^ of the Inclinatory-needle. CHAP. XLII. Of finding the variation
of the Inclinatory-needle. CHAP. XLIII. Of finding the longitude. CHAP. XLIIII.
Of the matter of the Magneticall globe of the earth by the needle.
MARCUS RIDLEVS CANTABRIGIENSIS IMPERATORIS RVSSIAE ARCHIATRVS Eta ^4. (...)
1594.
Mis^us ab Elisa Ruthen^s qumque per annos
Anglis (...) desis t^ Vocat (...) domum
Tu^e mathematicis clarus magnetica calls
P^o^ias lauds doctus Vbi que capis
portrait of Marcus Ridleus

To the Courteous Reader.
COurteous Reader, I have written thee a small Discourse as concerning
Magneticall Bodies and Motions, the which I hope will not be obscure unto thee
through his brevity, because of his plain method, and easy demonstrations,
which with their pleasantness will prove very ready and apparent unto thee,
especially being animated from the Magnet stone it self, as from a most lively
and perfect teacher: Therefore I would advise thee, that when thou read this
book, that thou would provide thy self of such like forms of Magnets as I
have described in the first Table and figures of the second chapter, as also of
needles, wiers, and waights of iron and steel, set forth in the second Table
of the third chapter of this book, which thou may have made and provided
for thee by the help of some skillful workmen: when thou shall be furnished
with these kinds of provisions, then thou may read and practice the
operations and demonstrations of this book, which will be both easy and very
pleasant unto thee; and though that there be many precepts and practices in
this Book, which be not for example sake set down in tables and figures unto
thy sight, because I desired to be very brief, yet if thou shall not be
altogether unskillful in these demonstrations that be delineated in the Tables
of this book and their often practice, thou will be able enough to understand
and put them in ure, with these forenamed provisions. But if thou shall desire,
besides thy instruction in this kind of learning, to put in use and make
benefit of these matters Magneticall, either in traveling or sailing upon the
Magneticall globe of the earth, then it will be very necessary for thee to be
stored with the Mariners Compass for the sea, perfectly drawn and framed, to
know the way, and of what hand and point to sail and travel, and also to have
the Inclinatory-needle truly placed in his ring, and a Directory-needle, or a
little fly Magneticall in the box, fastened at the bottom in his convenient
distance, for to know under what latitude thou art every day of thy voyage:
Likewise if I should declare unto thee how beneficial the
Directory-Magneticall-needle is for the description of Ports, Havens, Forlands,
Capes, Bays and Rivers, for the more perfect making of Sea-cards, how
necessary for the positure of buildings, directing of dials, and all
Mathematical instruments for measuring and surueying, for pioners and
underminers of forts, for searchers of minerals, metals, sea-coles, and other
subterestriall bodies, I should be too tedious unto thee, and will rather
refer thee for these matters to that which is set down by others, because I
meddle here in this book only with those things that be Magneticall.

In this place I think good to advertise thee as concerning the magnitude of
the seven Planets, with their respect unto the earth, out of Ticho Brabe,
described in the top of the Title Page; that whereas their proportion cannot be
set forth truly in any types, being at too great odds: therefore I have
deciphered that in figures; as let the Earth be but one part, the Suns
greatness will be 140 times so much; Saturnes 22, Jupiters 14. And if that
Venus have 6 parts, the Earth will have 37 parts, if Mars be one part, the
Earth is 13, if Mercury be one part, the Earth is 18, if the Moon be one part,
the Earth will continue her 42 times. Besides, I have drawn the Axis in the
greater Planets, as being bodies Magneticall: for I trust that these following
times will discover whether they be parallel one to the other, or no, as also
what natural motions else they have, because that Astra natant, auis instar in
aere, aut piscis in vnda, and here it might be said that we hope that many new
points in Philosophy and Astronomy will blossom and spring out of this kind of
learning hereafter,

Thine in all affection, M. R.

A SHORT TREATISE OF MAGNETICALL BODIES AND Motions.
CHAPTER I.
Of Bodies Magneticall.

THAT we define to be a Magneticall body, which seated in the ether or air,
does remain and place it self in one place or kind of situation natural, not
alterable; as all stars do, and the great regent Globes of Saturn, Mars,
Jupiter, the Sun and the Earth do; or such as with respect and attendance
follow other Globes, as the two stars which support Saturn, the four
attenders upon Jupiter, lately discovered by the trunk spectacle, the two
trauesers about the Sun, called Venus and Mercury, and lastly the Moon,
which does follow, or go about the Earth, and respects the same always with
one pole: and therefore has a peculiar Magneticall virtue that guides her in
this kind of situation.

All Magneticall Globes have some parts of their bodies which be also
Magneticall, which being separated from their proper globes, and no way
hindered, will seat themselves or be seated unto the natural situation of
their particular Globes.

The Earth, whereon we live and move, has two minerals that be Magneticall,
the one is the Magnet or Lodestone, which draws iron unto it, and this iron
or steel is the other. Either of these two being conveniently, and
artificially placed in the air, or in a boat on the water, freed from all
obstacle and renitency, will place and rest certain parts of themselves, which
be called the poles of their body, respondent unto the poles of the Earth,
which situation we call North and South, because they be parts of the
Magneticall globe of the Earth, who by her attractiue and disponent virtue,
does thus direct and situate them.

CHAP. II
Of the Magnet stone, his form and caps.

THe Magnet stone is heavy and massy, like unto iron, having much steel and
iron in it, this stone will attract, hold, disperse, and compone like a little
earth other less Magnets and Magneticall forms of iron and steel to his
conformity of axis and poles. This stone is called the Magnet, of a country
in MACEDONIA so termed, where plenty of them are found, it is called Hercules
stone, of a City of that name, and it is called the Iron stone of drawing it,
we call it the Lodestone, the Adamant stone, and the Osmound stone in our
Iron-mongers shops; because of his leading directive and attractiue quality,
and it is well termed the Osmound stone, because he is as it were Os mundi, the
bone of the world: for by his virtue Magneticall he is like a bone and pillar
whereby this world and globe of the Earth is sustained and supported in his
just situation, as the little world of the body of man is supported by his bones.

The color of the Magnet is like to duskish iron, of a sad brown and sanguine
color like a liver, some of them are cole-blacke, bluish, ashey, or of a
whitish color. Some are as heavy as iron, firm and sollide, other rare
porouse as a sponge, some very hard not to be cut with axe or chisell, but must
be ground and fashioned on the grind-stone, other are very soft.

The best and strongest are commonly found of one entire piece, such as be of
one mine and broken from the rock are of one strength, if they be suddenly
severed; some Magnet stones be very weak and of little force to take up, only
good to move the Needle. The stone is not so scarce, but that in all countries
one sort or other of them are to be found.

It is very convenient and necessary for diverse uses and demonstrations to
have the Load stones ground and formed by the grind-stone: or otherwise sawen
with sand and emery into diverse forms, fashions, and figures, and after by
the Cutter of precious stones to be finely polished: and also artificially
capped and armed with steel, or iron, by the hand of some ingenious Tab: I
diagrams Smith.

The first form of the Magnet, which I offer unto your eyes, Table I. Fig. 1.
is a large one, in fashion of a round ball, boule or globe, and we do call it a
Terrella, or little earth, because that upon this figure of the body of the
Magnet stone, we shall hereafter show how to find naturally the poles and the
rest of the circles of the Sphere, proving unto your eyes all kinds of
Magneticall demonstrations on it, and shall after, most fitly and naturally,
declare how to observe them in traveling or sailing upon the great Magneticall
globe of the earth. This form may be artificially capped and armed with
steel, or iron, at his two poles, Tab. I. Fig. 1. a. b, for to take up iron
waights, or to touch Magneticall needles withal.

The next fashion is a round and flatforme, of a reasonable thickness like a
coite, cake, half boule, Holland-cheese, or part of a column, Table I. Fig.
2. and may be called a Semiterrella his poles, Tab. I. Fig. 2. a b must be
situated in the midst of the sides of the roundle. This form may be capped
artificially at either pole, Tab. I. Fig. 2. a b with two square teeth of iron,
Tab. I. Fig. 2. a b, descending at right angles to the line of the axis, Tab.
I. Fig. 2. a b, and this is almost as convenient as the former in the first
figure of this first Table for all Magneticall demonstrations, which are
performed only upon a Meridian circle that passes by the two poles, which
this form has. And the stone for this form is more readily procured then
that is of the first and globous fashion.

The Oual and long form like an egg, Tab. I. Fig. 3. is thought to be the
best fashion, by some, for to touch the needles of the sea Compass withal, and
to take up waights at one end, Tab. I. Fig. 3. a b, because he has a long
diameter line, Tab. I. Fig. 3. a b.

The long egg form flatted at the bottom with two iron teeth from the two
poles, Tab. I. Fig. 4. a b, as the Semiterrella has, Tab. I. Fig. 2. a b, the
square forms with four teeth from the two poles, Tab. I. Fig. 5 and 6. a b,
two teeth at one end, all these are very fit fashions to take up great waights,
and to touch Magneticall bodies and instruments withal, as shall be hereafter
set forth.

There be many other fashions that may be invented and wrought at pleasure of
the Cutter, or as the Lodestone will be fittest for, as the sixth square, Tab.
I. Fig. 7. the six angles unequal, Tab. I. Fig. 8. The four angles, Tab. I.
Fig. 10. and of many other fashions, as Tab. I. Fig. 9. 11. 12. which may be
described, all which being flatted or rounded at their poles, Tab. I. a b,
having their caps with one or two teeth, will take up by them both, or
severally, and are good to touch needles, wiers, knives, daggers, and such like
long forms, to give them virtue to take up smaller wiers, sowing-needles and
such like small waights, or to give the virtue polar.

You may cap and arm some kind of forms of Magnets with four teeth, two
teeth from the side flatted at either pole, as we have described Tab. I. Fig.
7. which has four square iron teeth, like a four footed stool, to raise up
waights with four teeth together.

If you had a Magnet stone of a flat form, that had his poles in the center of
the stone, as these I have described have their poles in the ends, then you
might place one side with his pole downward, and the other side upward, and
provide you a cap for the uppermost side, like a Greek (...), and a cap for
the nethermost side like a Slauonian (...), and these being artificially and
discussiuely fastened to this Loadstone, would take up waights with five teeth,
as it were an hand with five fingers.

I have drawn a line a b in all these forms, parallel to the axis of the
Loadstone, to the end that the caps of iron, crossing the poles and axis a b at
right angles, may be the better perceived.

Nevertheless, in fashioning of some Load-stones, the axis cannot so aptly be
always placed in the midst of the ends of the Load-stones being flatted,
unless there be a greater part of the Load stone taken away, and the bulk
very much deminished, which will lessen much the strength of the stone: for the
greater that the bulk is, the more is the strength of the Magnet.

Therefore I have set down a type in the last place, Tab. I. Fig. 12. where
the diamiter a b lies awry, and the poles be situated higher and lower at the
ends, and yet the Loadstone shall take up as much in weight as if his diamiter
lay not obliquely.

The hilly knobs and angulous parts of the Loadstone may be sawen away with
sand or emer^, without any hurt to the virtue of the stone, and sometimes many
ounces may be cut away without any loss of Magneticall vigor, especially if
any substances of other nature be intermingled and agglutinated to the Magnet,
which may be known by their color and hardness very easily.

Also, if there be any cauities and hollow places, or broken parts of the
Loadstone that do diminish his virtue, or disfigure his form, this may be
supplied, mended and filled, either with a piece of another Loadstone, or with
a cement of the powder of the Loadstone, and the filings of steel or of iron
brayed and grinded very small upon a painters stone, mixed with rozen and wax,
melted and colored to the color of the Magnet that is mended, putting into
this cement more or less of the filings, according to the strength of the
Loadstone. Some with this cement, and such like glutinous matter, make diverse
forms of Magneticall bodies artificial.

It is very convenient for makers of sea-compasses, and masters of ships to
have a Magnet well capped, that takes up at one end half a pound weight at
lest, for it is not wholly necessary that the same should be of the best vigor
and strongest rock: for all Loadstones, both of great and less vigor, have
the same faculty Magneticall to all intents and purposes. The greater stones
of the same rock have a larger virtue then the less, and every part and small
pieces of Magnet stones have every one of them the same virtue and vigor
Magneticall the great ones have, saving that they be more weak, and not
always proportionable in strength unto them.

CHAP. III.
Of Jron.

IRon is a metal decocted out of the Loadstone, or out of a mine of that
kind. The best iron-mine and Loadstone is all one thing and body Magneticall,
for it being placed artificially, either in the air or upon the water, moves
North and South, attracteth other iron unto it, and performs the same
conclusions that the Magnet stone does.

This metal is heavy and of a bluish black color after that it is tried
from the dross, and is made of certain iuces and vapors in the convenient
bowels of the earth by a specificall virtue working him. Besides the mine this
metal is excocted out of diverse stones, sands, earths and clayes of diverse
colors, which have much Iron like matter in them.

If some clay (...) burnt in the fire, being of a long form, cooling North and
South, after being hung on (...) in the air, or put into a dish in the water,
it will turn and move it self too and froe, till it rest North and South, and
some clay being burnt, will show a little iron upon his sides that was melted
out of him, so that this Magneticall substance of iron is not very scant to be
found: for in all countries and regions there is great store of this metal,
being the principal matter of the external bark of the globe of the earth.

Steel and iron are the best Magneticall materials for Magneticall uses;
because by the Smithes skill they will be extended and fashioned into diverse
forms, fit for the practice and use of Magneticall demonstrations. Of this
metal are made caps for Loadstones of diverse forms with teeth, to take hold
of, and lift up great and small fashions of waights of iron, and diverse other
Magneticall needles and forms.

Waights of iron are made of diverse forms, as long and narrow at the top,
Tab. II. Fig. 1. to be taken and lifted up at one end of the Loadstone, and
with one tooth. Others have an headless cross upon the weight, as Tab. II.
Fig. 2. long, and finely smoothed above, that the Loadstone may take the better
hold with Tab II
diagrams both his teeth. Some greater waights may be made in fashion of an
ankor, Tab. II. Fig. 3. with a cross head, or in form of a sith, Tab. II.
Fig. 4. also you are to have in readiness longer forms of iron and wiers,
great and small, as in Tab. II. Fig. 5. to apprehend alone, or one at the end
of another: also very small wiers of iron, the length of a barley corn, Tab.
II. Fi. 6. are fit to set upon the Magnet, for diverse intents and purposes.

It is good to have long plates of iron reasonable thick, Tab. II. Fig. 7.
round plates of iron, Tab. II. Fi. 9. and round rings of iron of diverse
weights and bigness, Figure 8.

It is convenient to have diverse directory Magneticall needles, great and
small, Tab. II. Fig. 10. 11. for dyals and instruments, and needles for
Compasses, Tab. II. Fig. 12. and 13. to fasten to the Cards, or to take off at
pleasure: we use short wiers fastened to thrids; and a little Loadstone in a
third to take up a weight.

Also it is necessary to have Inclinatory-needles, Tab. II. Fig. 16. to put
into his ring, and a short one with a Lute-string in the midst, Tab. II. Fig.
17. or else put in a frame of brass or silver, as Tab. II. Fig. 18. to find
the pole of the Loadstone, and to demonstrate his oblique inclination to the
Loadstone, as he is carried about him, or else to have a little round Loadstone
put into a frame with an axletree, having his poles marked Fig. 19. which
applied about the Loadstone, turns and conucrteth it self diversely, also it
is fit to have a short and thick needle, Tab. II. Fig. 20. into the end of it,
there is to be put a wier of filuer, brass, or of a piece of a Whale-bone, for
uses hereafter to be declared. Also a long wier thrust through a cork, Fig.
21. serves for Magneticall uses in the water. These forms of iron, with
others that the ingenious will easily invent and make, are very fit for
Magneticall demonstrations, as well as the variety of Magnet stones are.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Earth.

THis great Globe of the Earth whereon we move and travel, is found to be a
Magneticall body, by such as have traveled and sailed round about her, as Sir
Francis Drake did, and M. Candish, whose Magneticall Compasses were always
directed Magnetically, that is, the Lilly of their Compasses was turned always
toward the North Pole in all places wheresoever they sailed, by the virtue
Magneticall, and disponent faeulty of the Magneticall Globe of the Earth, as it
is demonstrated in the XXV. Chapter of this Book. Also by such as have made
their course northerly and southerly, it has bin observed that the Magneticall
Inclinatory-needle does in every elevation of the pole conform and apply it
self, or rather is conformed and disponed unto the axis of the Earth,
according unto certain correspondent angles to the Latitude, as it is
demonstrated in the XII. XIII. XXXV. and XXXVI. Chapters of this Book, whereby
it is demonstratiuely to be concluded, that the Earth is a Magneticall body,
directing both her self and the other two Magneticall bodies into the North
and South, by the virtue of her Meridian circles and parts, as is demonstrated
in the IX. chap. and others.

Moreover, the Earth has naturally two Magneticall poles, unto the which these
meridionall parts do direct, bend and force, not only Magneticall bodies near
the Earth; but also her own mighty and massy situation, stability and
firmness, and feateth her self so strongly upon her two poles, by her
natural and Magneticall vigor, passing from her meridionall parts to the
poles, as if she were tied by many mighty strong cables unto two most firm
pillars, far stronger then any Hercules pillars, not to be removed by any
force from her natural position; which thing, if it might chance that it
should come to pass, yet certainly she would return again unto her former
firm seat and place, as all Magneticall bodies and directory needles do, as
is demonstrated hereafter.

Thus we prove that the Earth is placed and firmed by her Magneticall virtue,
and not by her gravity and weight, though that the parts of the Earth do
conioyne and adhere together by their gravity moving to their Center. But the
Magneticall nature moves, conformeth, and firmly seateth it self to the
poles and Axis.

Now for that the poles of the Earth do always, by their natural virtues hold
the Earth North and South in one certain and uniform situation, elevation and
place, there is no doubt but that the whole globe of the Earth, inwardly stored
with many materials and rich minerals, and outwardly adomed with many trees and
excrescences, all for the use of man, with living creatures innumerable, as
also in reason it is an infallible certainty, that the Earth has, at her first
creation, bestowed upon her a globous and starlike vigor, or intelligence,
whereby she may, having her whole parts united together, by the virtue of
gravity unto the center, and her place made sure Magnetically by her poles
immovable; yet move naturally, keeping her place circularly and diurnally out
of the West into the East, to the end that all creatures should receive the
comfortable and lively beams of the Sun, and the influences of the rest of
the Planets and Stars.

This motion many learned men have attributed unto the Earth, for the benefit
of calculating the motion of the Planets the better, which naturally she has
in her self; for even as it were needless for a wheel to have her naue,
spokes and rimme about her, if it should not be used to turn about; so it were
to no purpose that the Earth should naturally have a globous body, two poles,
an axis, meridians and equator, as shall be demonstrated hereafter, parts fit
for circular motion, and not for to turn her equator and paralels about, as
the wheel does.

Although these arguments will hardly persuade us to believe the earths motion;
yet because that it is lately observed unto our senses by help of the
trunckespectakle, both by Galileus and Kepler, famous Mathematitians, that the
great body of the globe of Jupiter, being twelve times greater then the Earth,
does turn about in less time then a day upon his axis and poles, who also
have observed four Moons, attendant on Jupiter, which move round about him,
the slowest in 14 days, the next in seven days, and the rest in shorter time.
So likewise John Fabricius has observed, that the great globe of the Sun,
having three great spots, like continents in him, and being sixty times greater
then the Earth to move about his axis and poles near the time of ten days, or
there abouts, so Galileus and Kepler have seen the Planet of Venus to move
about the Sun in ten months, and to have her light from the Sun in this
time increased and diminished upon her body, as we see the Moon here nearer
unto us to have; therefore it being certain by observation, that the globe of
Jupiter and the Sun do turn about their axis and poles, whose materials we
know not, we need not doubt that the Earth should have a circular motion for
her great good. But how the Earth does turn circularly we cannot well see it,
with the sense of our eyes, unless we had them placed in another globous body
and star, as if they were in the Moon, where we might see the spots of the
Earth to turn about, as well as now we see the spots in the Sun, and Jupiter
to move circularly in their place. And as contrariwise our eyes here on the
Earth do see that the Moon does not turn about, by the placing of her spots,
always in one fashion unto us: for we may observe with our eyes, that the
Moon has poles of a kind of Magneticall nature, which do always hold her to
behold the center of the Earth, and so stays and conformeth her, that
howsoever she move, higher or lower, or wheresoever she be, yet always the
spots of half her globe be alike apparent unto our eyes, and conform her to
behold the center of the Earth with one pole: neither does the Moon turn
about her body upon two poles, as the Earth does upon hers, but is kept firm
and immovable from circular motion, about her axis, by other two poles that be
upon the edges and equator of her body, because her spots be always alike on
her East and West side, that hold her firmly and stiffely that she can by no
means turn about upon her first two poles: For it is the virtue polar and
Magneticall that holds all globes in their position whatsoever. Besides, the
Moon has another virtue given her at her first creation, whereby beholding
always the center of the Earth, and moving nearer and further from the Earth,
as tied with an axletree, she moves, slideth, and passes monthly about the
Zodiac, that all the parts of her globe may be illuminated and refreshed with
the beams of the Sun, and influences of the Stars: for as a ship upon the
water is directed even forward by the stern and ruther, which has not only a
right line to direct forward, but also a right angle descending downwards,
that she wave not sidelings or turn about; yet having this position, if ankors
be laid out, either forward, or backward, or sidelings, with their cables on
board, if there be force or virtue on board to hale forward, she moves
forward, if drawn backward, she goes backward, if pulled by the cable on the
left hand, yet keeping her position, she betaketh to that hand, and so to other
parts. Even so the Moon being seated, as before is said, does move on her axis,
higher or lower, on this side or on that, according to the virtue and strength
of the multiplicity of her axletrees, being her limbs to stay and move
withal, as the body has arms and legs, with variety of muscles to move on
all hands.

But the Earth, whereon we live and travel, has never been found by any to
have any poles in the equator of her body, or near the same: for if we were
so happy to find any in the East or West of the earth, then the matter of
longitude would be perfectly attained unto, which has so greatly busied all
the ingenious wits of the world: and therefore we affirm that the Earth does
turn about, because there are no poles in the equator to hinder her, as there
is in the Moon from circular motion. But leaving these motions to others that
do labor more therein, here in this book I purpose only to entreat of the
great globe of the Earth, as she is a Magneticall body, which shall be first
performed, by way of imitation, in a little Magneticall earth, or Terrella and
Semiterrella, made of a round Loadstone and Adamant, whereby we shall plainly
and sensibly demonstrate, that there be two poles, an axis, meridians,
paralels, and an equator in every Loadstone and Magnet, and we shall produce
many other pleasant demonstrations, manifest Theoremes, and sensible practices
unto your eyes and understanding, which we shall after illustrate to be in the
globe of the Earth, to prove it to be a third Magneticall body, different in
substance from the other two Magneticall bodies, spoken of in the two former
Chapters.

CHAP. V.
Of the two Poles, and how these points are found out.

THe ancient Mathematitians and Astronomers of forms times, observing the
diurnall motions and apparences of the Planets and Stars, fained certain
fixed poles, and other circles in the heavens, by which they discoursed of the
risings, settings, motions, and of the places of the planets and stars; never
imagining that these fained matters were naturally and sensibly to be found in
the globe of the Earth, much less to be seen naturally, and in a round
Loadstone, and in all other forms of the Magnet stone, being long severed and
kept from touching and couching in the bowels of the Earth.

I will first prove how the two poles are found out in the Magnet stone, which
are very necessary to be known, before that the Lodestone be fashioned into
any form, for the better proportioning of the same; and this matter may be
accomplished six or seven manner of ways.

The first way is to role the Lodestone in small and

The second way is to hang a sowing-needle by a Tab. II. Fig. 3 14. or as in
Table III. Fig. 1. over those places of the Loadstone whereabout the poles are
likely to be, and the needle and wier will move from his perpendicularity, and
hang directly over the point, and desire to touch the pole. So likewise, if
there be a small piece of a Lodestone, Tab. II. Fig. 15. cemented to a third,
and held so that one of his poles bend downwards, and it will affect to touch
and to unite it self to to the contrary pole in the stone.

Thirdly, take the needle of a dyall, or some of the Tab. II. Fig. 10. and 11.
place the same, being touched Magnetically upon his pin or stake, Tab. III.
Fig. 1. then turn the Loadstone round about, holding it somewhat near unto
the needle, and it will point at the pole of the Magnet, desiring to touch it.

Fourthly, take a piece of small wier, of iron or Tab. II. Fig. 6. and cut off
a part as long as a barley corn, and set it upon the Lodestone, and it will
stick fast at one end unto it, but erect it self* at the other end, and being
put forward, will stand upright only there, where the pole of the Magnet is,
Tab. III. Fig. 2.

Fifthly, take a little Inclinatory-needle, before described, Tab. II. Fig. 17.
that has a Lute-string put through him, or take that Inclinatory-needle which
is placed on a frame, and borne upon an axis, Tab. II. Fig. 18. and carry either
of these round about the Loadstone, and they will conform themselves obliquely
unto the stone, and only at the poles will direct the points of their ends
perpendicularly over the same. Also take the little round Magnet, before placed
upon his axletree and frame, Tab. II. Fig. 19. having his two poles marked, and
this stone will turn and conform it self to the Loadstone, and apply his
contrary pole directly over one of the poles of the Loadstone.

Sixthly, place a small wier under the Loadstone, and

Seventhly and lastly, take that wier that is thrust Tab. II. Fig. 21. and put
it in water, holding a Loadstone unto it, and it will draw near, and bend it
self to join to the pole of the Magnet.

If a stone be divided and sawen in two parts from one pole to the other, or by
a parallel, Tab. III. Fig. 3. the poles will be in their parallel place, Tab.
III. Fig. 3. a b, and are to be found in the midst of the substance of the
Loadstone, unless they be drawn aside by excrescenses and leuities.

CHAP. VI.
Of the virtue of the Poles.

THere is no one part of the Loadstone that has so great a virtue to attract,
lift up, and conform Magnetically as the Pole has. And although that some
have declared that all the pairs of the Loadstone, from the equator to the
Pole, do bestow their virtue and strength upon the Pole; yet if trial be made
what the Pole will take up perpendicularly, and also what the parts about 34
degrees will lift up, it will appear to be more then half as much
perpendicularly, so that the Pole does not take up so much as this, and the
other part does on the other side. Neither is it certain that, according to
the largeness of the cord in the arch, the attraction shall be in strength:
for then the middle cords would be very strong, and stronger in lifting up then
the other; because their cords are curtalled at the equator, which deuideth
the Loadstone into two natures. But because Magneticall bodies do most apply
and conform themselves unto the Poles, and make one straight axis with the
center of the Magnet: therefore the attraction and apprehension at the Poles, is
more strong then it is in other parallel places of the stone, where the
Magneticall bodies conform and Tab: III
diagrams apply obliquely unto the Terrella, whereby the attraction and
apprehension in the spaces near the equator is weaker, and lifts up lesser
waights.

Magneticall bodies have two poles or points, the one is North, and the other
is South, which be known either by hanging a Loadstone leuelly in a third, or
putting it in a wodden dish to swim in a basen of water, and then the one Pole
will always turn to the North, and the other to the South, which are to be
marked accordingly.

But whether that Pole that seateth it self South or North may be termed by
that part which it respects, some have labored much to clear. If you chance
to find out the rock where the Loadstone does grow, where you purpose to take
out a part of the same, mark your part with notes for the North and South,
then cut out your piece out of the rock, and put it into a bole to swim on
the water, and your marks will be turned to a contrary situation, to that they
had in the rock, and the North note will be turned South, and the South North,
and so would the rock of the great Magnet it self, if it were so placed, make
the like alteration in his situation, by the general conformation and
direction of the mighty Magnet, the globe of the Earth. Therefore the reason
why that the Loadstone in the boat upon the water, turns, bends, and
seateth it self to a contrary situation, to that he received and had
primarily, whilst he was in the bowels of the Earth, and united with the body
of the great Magnet, is because that every piece and part of a Lodestone,
being separated from the whole whereof he was a part, is now become a perfect,
complete, and sole Magneticall body, and is as it were, a little earth of it
self, having all the proprieties Magneticall that the great Earth has, as his
two poles, meridians, equator, and such like: and therefore according unto the
nature of Magneticall union, hereafter spoken of in the XXII. chapter, will in
no wise endure, and cannot be suffered to match and seat it self as he did
before, but thinks it more natural, and a thing of more perfection and
conueniency to turn his aspect a contrary way, to that he had primarily at his
first making and endowement with Magneticall virtue.

This alteration of polity is to be observed likewise in Magneticall needles,
and long pieces of iron that be touched, and animated, and adhere to that part
of the Lodestone, which seateth it self North, which being at liberty and
separated from the Loadstone, will turn that part and end that was touched at
the North pole, and seat it always in the South, and it shall be sufficient
for use to know and mark with a note which is the North Pole of your Magnet,
and which is the South-pole.

There is another virtue in the Poles of the Loadstone, and that is, that the
South-pole turned downward, will take up more then the North Pole will, and
the North pole will erect a greater weight th^n the South part or pole will, as
some say, Tab. III. Fig. 2. a b. But I have always observed, that the Pole of
the Magnet that seateth it self North, is always the most vigorous and strong
Pole to all intents and purposes: unless he lack the quantity and like
substance the South part has.

These Poles which be in the great Magnet of the globe of the Earth, have a
marvelous strong Magneticall power imparted unto them, that they cannot be
turned either higher or lower, or moved to the right hand or to the left, but
hold the Earth continually in a true and certain position and place, and would
if any force or power should move their great strength awry from the true syte
and meridian latitude, return to their right syte and place again, and this
is the true virtue of the Poles of globes, which the Sun and Jupiter have as
well as the Earth.

These Poles be most certain and sure marks for all Magneticall bodies,
conveniently carried to direct themselves unto, Tab. III. Fig. 9. as appears
by our Compasses, which in all places of the world turn their Lilly into the
North, whereby the Mariner knows what course to take. And the Magneticall
Pole, and Poles of the world, both articke and antarticke, are all one and not
diverse, as some have imagined, which have lost both their oil and their
pains; and this is true, by the demonstrations and motions of the
Inclinatory-needle, although there be many momentary causes of variation.

These Poles hold the Earth certainly in her polar position, while she turns
her self about to receive the Sunbeams, and influences of the stars and
planets, for the generation and maintenance of all inferior bodies, upon her,
in her, and proceeding out of her.

Lastly, these Poles of the Earth, in certain great number of years, have
naturally a little inclination in the polar circles of the Zodiac, for the
receiving and moderation of the beams, lights, and influences of the stars,
whereby the progressions and anticipations of the aequinoctiall, and the
mutations of the greatest declination of the Sun are perfectly understood, to
prevent the faining of many Spheres above the stars, as the ninth, tenth and
eleventh, and their impossible motions.

In fashioning the Loadstone, it is convenient to make flat or roundish the
ends of the Magnet, where the Poles are the better to cap and arm them with
iron or steel, to lift up their convenient waights, Tab. III. Fig. 2. and 12.
and as the most are, Tab. I.

At the Pole the Inclinatory-needle does not incline obliquely to the axis,
Tab. III. Fig. 6. as the needle c c to a b the axis, as in other places, but
aspecteth the Pole directly and perpendicularly, as Tab. III. Fig. 1. the
needle c respects the axis b a directly, and makes one line with it.

Also at the North Pole that point of the directory-needle, and compass, that
did behold the South of himself, being applied to the North Pole, does turn,
as some think, but this is true only at the equator in the spaces between the
equator and the 34 degree, as is demonstrated in the XII. chap. and not at the
Pole it self, and the places near adjoining: for at the North Pole, if the
Magnet be truly placed, that point that points toward the South, does point
to the South directly, and in the places near adjoining does it obliquely. A
wier touched Magnetically has two Poles, as Tab. III. Fig. 5. the one end a is
North, and b of the nature of the South.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Axis.

THe Axis or axeltree of the Magnet, is a line that passes from the one Pole
to the other, by the center of the body of the Loadstone, and after this order
there is an Axis* understood to be in the Earth, Tab. III. Fig. 1. 2. 3. and 9.
10. In fashioning of Magnets, if a piece be taken away parallel from the Axis,
then in these two Loadstones the Axis with his poles will be removed into the
midst of the stone, as Tab. III. Fig 3. a b, the Axis in either piece is in
the midst of the stone, so whether that bunches be taken away from the
Loadstone, or any cauities filled, the Axis will always be placed in the
midst of the most vigorous bulk of the Lodestone, as a b in every figure.

It is said in the latter end of the V. chapter, that if a Loadstone be sawen
in two parts, from one pole to the other, upon the Axis, that the poles and
Axis will be found in the midst of the bulkes of the two pieces parallel to
the old Axis, Tab. III. Fig. 3. and the poles of the lesser piece will be
altered.

Also when as a side of the Lodestone shall be made flat and parallel to his
Axis, that side will attract, hold and unite unto him long pieces of iron
sidelings and paralelly, Tab. III. as Fig. 4. c the piece of iron is adjoined
paralelly to a b the Axis, as the pole erecteth perpendicularly to it, Tab.
III. Fig. ^. the weight c is attracted plim-wise to the Axis a b. And also two
Magnets somewhat long, in form swimming in their vessels upon the water, will
adhere and unite in a meridian parallel to their Axis, Tab. XI. Fig. 5. that if
one of their vessels be haled, the other vessel with the other Magnet his
loading will follow, both being fast grapled together, so that they cannot part
asunder.

Likewise, take two Magnets, that be armed with their teeth of iron or steel,
descending from these poles at right angles to the Axis, to take up, with both
teeth together, and have their Axis both of one length, as Tab. III. Fig. 12.
place the teeth descending from the South-pole, unto the teeth that have the
vigor from the North Pole, and they will cleave and unite together as one body
and Lodestone paralell-wise to the Axis, and the one, though he be the weaker,
will lift up the heuier perpendicularly.

Also all Magneticall bodies, whether it be at the equator, at the poles, or
at any intermediall part, between these two, do all of them apply, conform,
and unite their bodies together, according to a correspondency of their Axis,
as shall be declared hereafter, and not with their center to the center of the
others body.

If a wier be touched Magnetically at one end, the vigor will run through all
the wier, or Axis, and have a contrary virtue in the other end, the one North,
the other South, and half the Axis will be of one nature, and half on
another, Tab. III. Fig. 5. the end of the wier at a is of the nature of the
North Pole, and the end at b is of the South-pole.

We said in the IIII. chapter, that the Moon does always turn one Pole of
her body toward the center of the Earth, and moves nearer and further from the
same, as if that a long axeltree were passed through her body, and fastened in a
joint to the center of the earth, on which she should make her Epigeum and
Peregeum; in like manner, it is to be probably gathered, that the earth may
naturally have a Helicall and Spirall virtue to move on the Cilinder of her
Axis in spirall lines, not unlike the arches of the longitude of the day, to
perform the Zodiacall motion, partly illustrated in the XXII. chapter by the
bead, in an instrument of rings for the finding of the variation, where the
bead, as an earth, is placed in the Axis, higher and lower, according to
Zodiacall direction, and Magneticall virtue will permit this spirall motion,
like as the sap passes in the earth from the North hemisphere, to the South
province.

It is a thing worthy of better observation from the Truncke-glasse, to know
whether the Axis of Jupiter and the Sun be parallel one to the other, and
with the Axis of the Earth, which is to be examined by the turning of the spots
about.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Equator.

IN all Magnetical bodies there is an Equator, or middle fence, that divides
the whole body in the midst between the two Poles, like a middrift, into two
equal parts, hemispheres, and provinces: outwardly in the middle part in the
greatest circumference from the poles, there is an Equator, circle, or line,
that deuideth the North-part of the stone from the South part, as by a
border-marke, so that if a directory-needle touched Magnetically, be conveyed
to any part between this Equator and the poles, presently the end of the
needle that is of the nature of the other province beyond the line of the
Equator, will turn about from that part, and the other end of the needle that
has affinity and natural conformity with the pole of that province, will
offer it self, as Tab. III. Fig. 6. 7. 9. 10. in the province of the
North Pole a above the Equator and pricked line, the bearded end of the
needle does only offer it self, and desire to apply and unite to that part,
but the cross end of the needle will fly from it; so this cross end of the
needle will only affect to behold the south province under the Aequators
pricked line to the pole b, and the bearded end of the needle will shift away.
This assertion is not only found to be true in the Loadstone, but also in other
forms of iron and steel, and in the great Earth it self. As take a round
plate of iron that has lain some time quietly without stirring, as Tab. III.
Fig. 6. or a ring of iron, Tab. III. Fig. 7. and offer the sides of this plate,
or ring, unto the needle, turning them about, and the bearded point of the
needle will respect the one half of these iron circles, and the cross part of
the needle, being of the nature of the other semicircle, will apply and have
respect thereto. Here in these iron forms the Equator and limit of the two
semicircles, is better perceived where it should be marked, then the poles are:
for when the Magneticall needle is once past the bounds of the Equator,
presently he turns about his other point that respects the contrary
semicircle, or rather hemisphere, the which for distinction sake might be
painted of a red color.

Moreover, if a directory-needle, or Mariners compass be placed near the
Equator of a Loadstone, of these iron forms, or of the earth, they will
situate themselves parallel to the axis of the poles, as Tab. III. Fig. 6. 7.
and Tab. VI. Fig. 1. Tab. VII. Fig. 1. 2. and incline neither to one pole, or
the other, being placed in a right sphere, where the poles lie in the Horizon,
the needles standing in equal balance with the Horizon, looking North and
South, parallel to the axis.

Whereas it has been declared in the VI. Chapters before of the vigor of the
poles, that the vigor and strength Magneticall proceeds by little and little
from the Equator to the poles, increasing in their passage by the meridians
unto the poles, to the end to augment their virtue of retaining, and consisting
most firmly and constantly in the North and South, whereby the Equator of the
earth is left void of all virtue of consistence, and left free, or rather
deprived of constancy and retaining of any firm situation, and remaining
naturally, by reason of his great circumference and weak renitency, most apt
and prone for circular motion, which by her star like vigor and intelligence,
having this her globous body so firmly fastened naturally in her poles, as it
were in two strong pillars, and fitted in the Equator and paralels, as in
Chariot-wheeles: for circumuolution turns her self daily about from the West
into the East, to meet with, and receive the pleasant beams and influences of
the Sun, Stars, and Planets, for to cherish, comfort, and inuigor all those
goodly creatures that be placed upon her, grow out of her, or be bred and
conceived in her, as also for the continual change and vicissitude of seasons,
being a thing more natural and fit that the earth should thus move for her
own good, then that all the heavens should furiously move to serve her.

It is to be observed in fashioning of the Magnet stone, that when the axis of
the same shall be cut shorter, that then the Equator remoueth necessarily to
the midst of the body of the Loadstone, as if a long Magnet should be sawne
and divided into two pieces, as Tab III. Fig. 8. upon, or parallel to the
Equator, the poles will be in the midst of the stones, and the Equator will
also be in the midst of either stone, as a b, and the pricked lines be.

For every piece and part of a Loadstone has his poles and Equator, with the
rest of the circles, as well, and as naturally as the earth, or any great
Magnet has, and will be divided into two jurisdictions by his Equator though
before all his part was but of one province and nature. Even so if you part a
needle, or long, wier Magnetically touched, in two pieces, the parts will have
their several poles, as Tab. III. Fig. 5. the poles a b are in either part of
the wier.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Meridians.

THe Meridians be great circles drawn by the equator upon the Loadstone, or
as may be observed by the needle upon the face of the Earth, from the one pole
to the other, where they do all touch, as in the centers, Tab. III. Fig. 9.
they be naturally in every Loadstone, and in the earth, and are thus found out:
for they be the paths whereon all Magneticall motions are trauersed and
directed. Lay a wier of a reasonable length upon the Magnet, as Fig. 9. a b,
and it will turn and seat it self upon a Meridian, and point to the poles,
and if he be moved from the Meridian by any force, he will soon return to the
same again, and by this wier you may mark out a Meridian; Likewise take a
little directory-needle of a small dial, and set it upon a small pin with a
foot, setting them upon the Terrella, Semiterrella, or any Magnet, Tab. III.
Fig. 9. and the needle will point toward the pole, make a mark, removing the
needle forward, and make more, then join all the points together, which make a
part of a Meridian, and being continued forward run to the pole, so a small
and short wier placed upon the Magnet from place to place between the
equator, and the pole, will stick fast at one end, and erect the other
obliquely, and the several places, being noted with chalk or emery, will set
out a Meridian to the pole, at the equator, being no longer then a barley
corn, will lie flat to the stone, put him forwards toward the pole, and then
he will erect himself a little, sticking at the other end upon your Terrella,
Semiterrella, or Magnet, put him more forward, and he will be erected less
acutely, and about 34 degrees from the equator, he will make a right angle
with the axis of the Magnet, and being brought and placed upon the pole,
stands upright in one continued axis, with the axis of the Loadstone, Tab.
III. Fig. 9. This variety of application to the Magnet, does produce a certain
kind of motion Magneticall, which may be called the motion of inclination,
conversion, or conformity of one Magneticall body unto another; but the little
directory-needle demonstrateth this motion best, being carried about the
Terrella and Semiterrella, as shall be demonstrated in the XII. Chapter
following.

I have, spoken before somewhat as concerning the making flat of a side of the
Loadstone, parallel to the axis, which is a Meridian line parallel thereto,
whereby weight may be apprehended, Tab. III. Fig. 4.

Therefore having a Magnet stone first made flat at the ends, where the poles
are, and after a side made plain and straight, parallel to the axis for a
Meridian, then you may form the stone into what fashion you please, as into a
foure-square, into a figure of 5, 6, or 8 equal angles or sides, or into
unequal sides, as has been thewed in the first Table in many types.

Cut a part from a Magnet stone meridionally, and that end which was placed
South when it was whole, being severed, will turn North, though naturally at
first it was the South point, as in Tab. III. Fig. 3. the poles a b in the
little piece are turned contrary to the poles a b in the greater Magnet.

CHAP. X.
Of the Paralels.

THe Paralels be circles and parts equidistant from the pole, and Parallel to
the equator, and do possess the whole space between the equator and the
pole, as Tab. III. Fig. 10. these circles are pricked out, as the equator is,
and are found by the Inclinatory-needle, being carried at one angle about the
Terrella, and in all these places the small wiers, Tab. III. Fig. 9. and
directory-needles, Tab. III. Fig. 10 do apply their axis or line of length
obliquely to the axis of the body of the Magnet a b, or of the earth.

For to find out these oblique angles in every Parallel, and what correspondency
they have unto them, there be diverse operations, diagrammes, instruments, and
calculations found out to demonstrate, and to know what angle of inclination
will answer to every Parallel: for in every Parallel of the earth the
Inclinatory-needle makes a diverse angle of inclination to the axis, but one
angle, and of one sort, in one and the same elevation of the pole or Parallel,
and by this means of the Inclinatory-needle in a ring, the latitude of the
pole is known on both sides of the aequinoctiall, without any sight of the
Sun and stars, by the Magneticall disposition from the earth.

If in forming of the Loadstone, some Paralels be cut away, as it should seem
in the Terrella, by cutting and flatting the end where the pole is, Tab. III.
Fig. 11. yet in truth they remain still upon the Magnet, though the Meridian
lines be changed from crooked lines to straight lines, and this is to be
observed, that always the Parallel near 34 degrees in the perfect Terrella,
Semiterrella, and round Meridian, or straight Meridian, where the
directory-needle aspecteth, that edge, or angle, at right angles, unto the
axis, Tab. III. Fig. 11. and Tab. VII. Fig. 2. as the most protuberant and
middle place between the pole and the equator, as in this Lodestone
truncated and flatted at the pole.

In the Paralels of like distance from the pole, all Magneticall bodies do
apply and conform alike, and have the like inclinations of their axis, that
denotate like eleuations of the pole, and do attract and retain with like
forces and virtue, Tab. III. Fig. 11.

Place two wiers upon a Parallel of the stone, as you would say East and West,
and they will not conioyne or unite together, Tab. III. Fig. 11.

Rub the needle of a dyall Paralell-wise on the Loadstone, and it will hardly
be excited and animated, unless the touching be nearer unto the pole.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Horizon.

THe Equator, the Meridians, the Paralels, the Poles and Axis, are all
naturally in the Globe of the Earth, and in every Magneticall body, and not
imaginary in the heavens, as Astronomers heretofore have thought, not knowing
in what body to find them naturally. Now it remains to write of the Horizon,
which is a great circle that deuideth the Globe of the Earth into two
hemispheres, or into two equal parts, like as the equator does divide the
Magnet into two provinces, and though that the Horizon be of great use in
Magneticall practices; yet I cannot affirm that the Horizon is naturally in
the Earth, or any other Magneticall body, as the equator is, only every point
and place upon any meridian and parallel may be the center of the Horizontall
circle, which center is Magneticall, and of many uses in Magneticall
demonstrations, both to know on what parallel and elevation of the pole, above
the Horizon the inclination and conformation of the Inclinatory-needle is
observed, whereby we come to the knowledge of the angle that inclinatory makes
with the Horizon, in every parallel of the earth, and by a respondency that it
has with the axis of the elevation of the pole we come to know, as has been
said, the latitude of the pole in all places of the world, without the usual
help of the celestial bodies, having as certain an help from the materials
of the Globe of the Earth, and their vigor for this conclusion, as from any
other globe whatsoever.

This center of the Horizon also is the place whereon the Pilot places his
Compass, and composeth the same leuelly and parallelly to the circle of the
Horizon, so that by the firm direction of the Lilly of the Compass to the
North, he knows which way to steer his ship to the desired port.

The Horizon therefore of use is a plain and parallel superficies unto the
horizontall circle it self, and is to be divided into 360 parts, from which
lines are to be drawn to the center of this horizontall circle, and may be
called the lines of position, verticals, and Azimuth, whereof one of them is of
principal note, and is called the Magneticall meridian line, from whence the
rest are to be numbered, and by which we are helped to know the declination of
the Mariners Compass from the true meridian of the world, which thing is
commonly called the variation of the Compass. For although that naturally the
directory and Magneticall needle, or Compass, should place it self upon the
true meridian, by the disponent virtue of the Magneticall globe of the Earth,
yet by reason of the neighborhood and approaching of other eminent, forcible,
and great Magneticall continents, this needle is turned awry from the true
meridian and varieth, and declineth to the one side or the other, certain
parts and degrees to be reckoned upon the horizontall circle.

Whereas it is said by some, that the horizontall circles make always right
angles with the axis of the earth, this assertion cannot always be true, but
this circle of the Horizon makes always a right angle with the meridian,
whereon he stands.

CHAP. XII
Of the two circles that the Needle makes about the Magnet.

Having explained before the nature of the poles, the axis, and the circles,
and parts of the Magnet to be naturally in the same, and in the globe of the
earth; Now it follows that we demonstrate how the Magneticall needles and
wiers do conform themselves to the meridian of the round Magnet, whether it
be a Terrella or Semiterrella.

For this purpose it is very necessary to have these forms truly rounded, to
be carried artificially upon a foot, and fitted within the head of the same, in
a circular and hollow cauitie, that may receive the stone, so that the two
poles of the Magnet do lie level with the Horizon, leaving a thin ring of the
foot about the stone, under which there is a shoulder, a quarter of an inch
thick, left of the abatement of the height of the foot round about, to bear
a round verge or limb of past-boord, brass, or silver, for a meridian or
right circle, as is used to be done in the placing of all globes in their frame
or foot, whereon may be made diverse situations of needles, and descriptions
Magneticall, as Tab. IIII. Fig. 1.

In the first figure a b c d e, is the round Magnet, a the Tab: IIII
diagrams North Pole, b the South-pole, a e b the axis, c e d the equator, a k
b and a l b the meridian circles, meeting at the poles, and a c, and b d the
meridian, or right horizon, having the poles in it, f g and h i be two
paralels. The Magnet being thus adorned outwardly, as it is endowed inwardly,
after place the needles, being before touched, on the limb over against the
poles a b, and they do aspect the same directly, making one straight line with
the axis of the Magnet, then set needles in the verge against the equator c d,
and they will carry themselves in a parallel syte to the axis of the stone, and
look neither to the one pole nor the other: so that hereby you may gather that
there is a semicircle between every one of these 4 needles. Now to find out
the quadrants of these semicircles, apply needles in the limb at m n o and p,
which letters be about 33. degrees. 58.. 13.. distant from the equator, on each
side on him, and they will be situated at right angles with the axis of the
stone, where these eight needles have eight quadrants between them that is 4
semicircles, which make two whole circles, one on each side of the equator:
for the reason hereof I will give you a conceit at the latter end of this
book. And if you place needles in the midst, between the equator and the
poles, as in q r s t, they will behold the equator, but will respect the axis
obliquely, as in all other places and parts, except in the eight places before
mentioned.

The better to understand this foresaid demonstration, I would wish you to have
in readiness a little directory-needle, with a foot flat and round, and a
pin in the center of it, to carry the needle, as in the third type of this
IIII. Table. Let this circular foot be divided into four parts and quadrants,
with lines crossing each other at right angles in the center ^, where the pin
that carries the needles, and at the beginning of every quadrant set these
figures, at the first 1, at the second 2, the third 3, and the fourth 4, now in
the limb, free from all needles, set down this needle with his foot at the
equator d, and the needle will seat it self parallel to the axis of the
Magnet a b, then turn the foot of the needle about, that the diamiter of the
figures 1, 3, may be directly under the needle, thus in this syte carry the
foot and this diamiter of the needle always parallel to the axis of the
Magnet, and place it in m, where it will point over the figure 2, the beginning
of the second quadrant having finished one quadrant of circumuolution about the
foot or epicicle, then carry this foot with the needle with this diamiter
parallel to the axis, as before, and place it against a the pole, and the
needle will point to 3 the figure of the foot: having finished half the
epicicle of his foot, then remove the foot with the diamiter 1, 3, parallel
to the axis of the Magnet, and rest it at o in the rimme, and the needle will
point at 4, having perambulated three quadrants, and then rest him at the
equator c, where he will point to the figure of 1, again, having finished a
whole epicicle about his foot, in this journey about half the Magnet: so
likewise if the needle be transported beyond the equator to travel by the
other pole b, to finish another epicicle, the point of the needle, that is of
affinity with this jurisdiction, will offer his service, whereto place the
figure of 1, to stand just under him at the equator e, which here likewise
will be situated parallel to the axis of the Magnet, and the foot being in
this sort aequidistant-wise to the axis conveyed in the limb to p, the pole b
to n, and lastly to the equator d, again the needle in this hemisphericall
part of the body of the Magnet will describe another epicicle about the foot
that carries him, so that it is most apparent that the needle in his
circu^ambulation about the Magnet, does turn himself twice about, and make
two whole circles, or epicicles in this voyage, as has been demonstrated.

Whereas the needle in his progress from d the equator to m is but almost 34
degrees from the same, in which space he makes his first quadrant, but the way
from m to the pole a, is almost twice as large, in which he makes another
quadrant, it is necessary that this circumuolution of the needle from the
equator d to m not 34 degrees, should be much more sudden and swift, being in
so little a space of the quadrant d a, then that forming of a quadrant by the
needle upon the epicicle of his foot when he passes from m to the pole a,
being a space almost as large again, and therefore the moving of the needle in
making the second quadrant of his foot, should be almost twice as slow as the
finishing of the first quadrant, if like time be allotted to both their
passages. I thought good to set this needle and foot in the III. figure, upon
the limb in the next Tab. V. which will serve also for the demonstration in
the chapter following.

Yet it may be noted to the contrary hereof, the case being altered, that if
there were a cutting away made of part of the paralels about the pole, and that
the pole were made flat and plain, as it has been showed Tab. III. Fig. 11.
that then the application of the needle at right angles, to the axis, at the
angle and edge of the Magnet, being the most protuberant place, and the needle
would describe but one quadrant from the equator to this angle, and the other
quadrant of the needles conversion, between this angle and the pole, would be
on the flatted end; and then in this truncated body, the motion from the
equator to the angle, for the first quadrant would be very slow, and the
motion for the second quadrant would prove far swifter.

Now for Magneticall attraction and apprehension, it is to be observed, that at
the poles the Loadstone does attract and retain Magneticall bodies
perpendicularly and most strongly, and at other places most weakly and
obliquely, and nearer the pole more strongly. But where the poles be flatted,
as is said, and the application at right angles, there the erection of waights
is altogether as strong as at the poles, taking up in paralell-sort unto the
axis of the Lodestone by two teeth, and at right angles by one tooth.

Lastly, for the use of the application of the Inclinatory-needle, I have set
down a second figure, and in the margent have delineated out in pricked lines,
what application the needle has, and makes in every tenth degree of the
quadrant, from the equator to the pole in the limb of the quadrant C B, as
likewise in the quadrant D A, there is set forth how the small wier and short
erecteth it self in every tenth degree in that quadrant, a thing hereafter
more plainly demonstrated by a diagramme in the XXXVI. chapter, by
calculation, and by ring, but indeed the matter will be more naturally and
truly demonstrated in the chapter following.

CHAP. XIII.
Of one circle the Needle makes round about the Magnet.

EVen as in a semicircle if sights be applied Euc. 3. Prop. 2 ^
to the diamiter, and a plim line fastened to one end of the diamiter, this
semicircle will serve only for the use of one quadrant, though it have two
quadrants contained in it, so this Chapter will abreuiate the motion of the
needle in the former Chapter, as the quadrant does the semicircle that in the
former Chapter described two circles about the Magnet, and show a way and
device how the needle, being always carried about the Magnet, shall make but
one circomuolution about the circle of his foot, although before he made two
circles about it, and this demonstration is of most necessary use for to find
out the angles of the Inclinatory-needle, with the axis of the Earth in every
elevation of the pole, and what they are from the Horizon, and knowing what
number of degrees they include in any place, the altitude of the pole in the
same place shall be accordingly known.

It is convenient for the performing of this demonstration, to have a verge and
limb for the said Loadstone mounted upon his carriage, as before, somewhat
loose, not fixed, that it may the more fitly be moved and turned about the
Magnet, I would it were furnished Tab^. ^
diagram with two semicircles after this manner.

In the Terrella or Semiterrella let the poles be A for the North, and B for
the South, and the equator C D, part the semicircle A D B into two quadrants
at D, then make other semicircles in the verge without A D B for the degrees
and figures in each quadrant, as is used to be done in other quadrants, then
divide each quadrant, and every one of these into three other parts, then
divide these parts into smaller parts, and if the circle be big enough,
divide these last into five parts a piece, and thus have you either quadrant
divided into ninety parts, then set the usual numbers of tens at every tenth
part to ninety, ending at D, as in this type, Tab. V. Fig. I.

Then about a quarter of an inch above c in the verge, draw a line at I, at
right angles to C D, and from I as a center describe upward a semicircle to
touch that line F I G, divide this semicircle into two parts and quadrants at
H, joining I H together in one line, after draw other semicircles within the
semicircle F H G for the degrees and other numbers, as you did in the former
quadrants, then divide each of these quadrants into 90 parts, beginning the
divisions at F G, and ending at 90 in H, then set the figures at every tenth
degree, as is used to be done. Lastly, upon this center I, place the
Magneticall needle upon his pin, Tab. II. Fig. 20, that is, the needle that is
thick and short, having at the one end an hole drilled, for to receive a wier
of brass or silver, to counterpoyse the thick head of the needle, and to
reach unto the farthiest circle of the deuisions of the two quadrants of this
semicircle: this needle and semicircle would be covered with some glass and
slude, as dials use to be covered, for a little air and the breath of your
mouth, when you look near to see what deuisions the tail of the needle
cutteth, will move the needle and drive it away.

This limb and verge thus furnished with these two semicircles, and this
needle being placed about the Terrella or Semiterrella, so as it may very
easily without any great force be turned about; in this situation of the
needle, as it is in the type, the needle sees it self at the equator C,
parallel to the axis of the stone A B; we will call the inner semicircle of the
limb A D B, that is next to the Terrella or Semiterrella, the meridian circle
of the altitude of the pole; the outward external semicircle F H G, we will
term the meridian Inclinatory semicircle, because the needle Inclinatory does
show in these quadrants certain parts and degrees, answerable to every degree
of the elevation of the pole, of the Terrella, or Semiterrella, declared in the
inner quadrants of altitudes of the pole.

For practice hereof, if it be desired to know where the pole is elevated ten
degrees above the Horizon, what degrees the Inclinatory-needle will point at in
the Inclinatory meridian semicircle answerable thereunto. Here turn about the
limb and verge, until ten degrees of the semicircle of altitude be placed
just with the pole A, the pole being elevated so many degrees above the
Horizon, then look in the quadrant of the meridian inclinatory semicircle, and
his needle will point to 20 degrees, the very true parts, the
Inclinatory-needle being placed in his ring and meridian circle, hereafter to
be described, will point at in traveling where the pole is elevated ten
degrees, after this manner seek out what will be correspondent where the
latitude of the pole shall be 20 or 30 degrees, and this needle will point out
the correspondent degrees of the angle of inclination in the
meridian-inclinatory semicircle, to these or any eleuatio^ that shall be desired.

Therefore here you see how profitable, and of what great use this
demonstration is, in helping to attain to the reason and true knowledge of the
Inclinatory-needle, which placed in his ring, and carried about the earth in the
meridian, does only show his angle and inclination to the axis, but this
demonstration directs from the stone it self what will be the number of
degrees that the angle of the inclination makes above the horizon, and what
degree of the elevation of the pole will be answerable thereto, and from hence
Tables may be made and collected what degrees of the Inclinatory-needle will be
answerable to every elevation of the pole.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the distance and Orb of the Magnets virtue.

THere is a certain faculty in the Magnet, being round, or of any other form
that is sent out and dispersed from the limits of his body, which be, and make
as it were a sphere, and orb of Magneticall vigor and power, where within
Magneticall needles and bodies being placed in any distance within the
farthiest limit and border of the same, do conform themselves in that place of
the orb, according to a circumference of their semidiamiters, from the center
of the Terrella or Semiterrella, to the center of the needle, which needle is
always in every part of this circumference, conformed and situated as
proportionably as if this orb of Magneticall vigor from the Loadstone were a
material Magnet, and the needle beholds that pole with his point that has
affinity with the same, and also makes the same angles with the axis of his
circumference, which other needles do in the same arches and places, whether
they be in an orb situated nearer the Terrella or Semiterrella, Tab. VI
diagram or further off, so that the conformities of these Magneticall bodies
are not so fashioned as if the Loadstones and Adamants drew and attracted all
Magneticall bodies to be situated according to the measure of his own small
axis. But in these orbs Magneticall-needles are moved, incited, disposed, and
conformed in all correspondency, as if these orbs were material spheres. For
the setting to view of this demonstration, it is convenient to have a large
limb and verge about the Terrella and Semiterrella, as in this type, Tab. VI.
Fig. 1. describe the letters about the Terrella or Semiterrella, A B the two
poles, and C D the equator, from the center E make three circles, or more, in
the limb or verge, at an indifferent distance one from the other, for the
distinction of these orbs, within the vigor of the Magnet, then at these orbs
where they cross the axis and equator produced, place certain Magneticall
needles, which being placed upon the axis will presently all of them make one
line with the same, and such as be set at the orbs of the equator, will
settle themselves parallel to the axis, and at right angles to the equator.
But these peradventure thus placed, do not demonstrate the orbs so well as I
would, which therefore I shall set down needles in the middle places between
these two diamiters, and all these will behold the center where the
aequator-line crosses their own orb, and be parallel one unto the other, as
you may see in this Table, Tab. VI. Fig. 1. I have set four wiers F G H I upon
the body of the Loadstone, and these do erect themselves in this outward
superficies of the stone in such order that a line drawn from them, does
directly behold the equator C D of the Magnet it self. Also to demonstrate
this demonstration to your sense the better, I have set down in two orbs
needles at K L M N o P q r at about 34 degrees from the equator, where these
do in these orbs seat themselves at right angles to the axis, and parallel
unto the equator, beholding one the other in the same orb and province in a
right line, as if every orb were a sollide Magnet. So likewise such needles as
be placed in the midst of the quadrants in the orbs behold the equator of
their proper orb, as others placed above the equator behold the pole of their
orb.

Place wiers, about an inch in length, within their length in the orb of a
good Magnet, and they will skip unto the Magnet, as though they were quick,
and will unite and adhere fast unto it, until they be taken off.

The celerity of motions, attractions, and conformities within the Magneticall
orb is according to the goodness of the Loadstone, the greatness of his
bulk, conueniency of his figure and smoothness, and in the shortness of the
distance in the air, or in water; yet further then in these the Loadstone
extends his virtue by contaction and continuation in a long wier set unto his
pole, which wier will move a needle, or adhere to another wier at the end of
his length; but this is done by augmentation of the Loadstones vigor, as shall
be declared.

Although that such substances, which be not Magneticall, be placed between
the needle and Loadstone, yet they cannot hinder the orb and proceeding of the
Magneticall vigor, as if a Loadstone should be enclosed in a box of wood,
stone, tin, silver, or brass, yet the Loadstone will extend his Magneticall
orb, wherein many pretty and ingenious Magneticall practices may be wrought
admirable to behold, as having the forms and protractors of creeping things,
beasts, footmen, horsemen, and flies drawn in past-boord, having but a short
wier closely conveyed into them, and placed upon a trencher, paper, or plate,
shall be caused to move, stir, pass on, and flicker, as though they were
alive, only by moving the pole of a good Magnet directly under them.

Also if a Magnet be fastened in the roof, or over a door, it will hold an
iron weight in the air, Tab. VI. Fig. 2. that has a thread fastened to it to
hold it short that it be not drawn close for to be united unto the Lodestone.

Likewise if a short piece of iron, or cap, be held within an inch of a strong
Magnet stone, Tab. VI. Fi. 3. it will take up great waights in this orb,
though not so much, as if it touched the stone and pole: but if the cap be held
over the pole, it will hold a weight up rather then the pole, Tab. VI. Fig. 6.
I hold it needless to demonstrate how all the needles of dials, Magneticall
instruments, the Mariners compass, and inclinatoryring do all of them move
within the orb of the Magneticall vigor of the earth, only I will show you a
pretty practice or two for delight. Get a wier of four or five inches in
length, and thrust it through a cork, then it being touched with the
Loadstone, place it in a basen of water, and it will move and direct it self
North and South, by the vigorous orb of the earth, Tab. VI. Fig. 4. and also
incline and conform a convenient angle with the Horizon and axis of the earth.
This practice is profitable for travelers, who having sowing needles touched,
may prick them upon any piece of wood, and place them in the water, and it
will set out the North and South instead of a compass: but if for
pleasure-sake you take another wier, thrust through a round cork, and let his
upper end be touched at the contrary pole, and placed in the basin of water,
these two after some time will take knowledge of each other, and will begin to
move and stir, and draw nearer and nearer together, Tab. VI. Fig. 5. and
coming near, will move the faster, and suddenly join together at the upper
ends, on these wiers paper-tilters on hors-backe might be fastened, and they
would run their course together upon corkes in the water, etc.

CHAP. XV.
Of Applications.

I Have demonstrated in the three former Chapters the conformities and
applications that Magneticall wiers and needles have unto the meridian of the
round Terrella and Semiterrella, which may be appropriated unto the great
Magneticall globe of the earth it self. Now in this chapter we are to propound
unto your view certain practices Magneticall, and applications unto long
Magnets, and forms, that have the poles in the ends, or in the midst where
the needles do vary and alter, as they shall be applied unto them severally, or
between two of them that have the poles in the ends, or else in the midst,
which peradventure may be of some use in sailing or traveling amongst some
mountenous Tab VII
diagram Magneticall eminences on the earth.

Take a long Magnet that has the poles in the midst, Tab. VII. Fig. 1. as A
B and the equator C D, the needles placed in the midst, apply directly upon
the axis, and at the ends, and at the other places obliquely. The second stone
is a long Magnet, that has his poles A B in the ends, and the equator C D in
the midst, Tab. VII. Fig. 2. here the needle against the equator stands at
right angles unto it, and parallel unto the axis, but at the either end of the
Loadstone the needles apply themselves at right angles to the axis, and
parallel to the equator, and in the intermiddle spaces the needles apply
obliquely to the Magnet.

Now I would have you to provide two long Loadstones, that have the poles in
the midst, like that Tab. VII. Fi. 1. and before him place three Magneticall
needles, two at the ends, and one against the midst, or pole, as in Tab.
VIII. Fig. 1. the middle needle will behold the pole, and the other will apply
obliquely, as before in Table VII. Fig. 1. now bring near the second
Loadstone, that has his poles in the midst, and place B the South-pole
toward the needles that behold the South-pole B of the first stone, and these
needles will, between these two South-poles, respect neither pole of these two
stones, but seat themselves parallel to both stones, and make right angles
with these two poles of one nature, as Tab. VIII. Fig. 1.

Now take away one of these stones, and after turn the North Pole A, toward
the needles that behold the South-pole B of the other stone, and they will all
of them situate themselves equidistant-wise, and at right angles to the
aequators of both stones, as Table VIII. Fig. 2.

Tab: VIII
diagram

Moreover, take other two Magnets that are long, with the poles in the ends,
like that Tab. VII. Fig. 2. and lay it before you, and place three needles
before it, two at the end, and one in the midst against the equator, which
will apply parallel to the axis of the stone, and those two at the ends will
seat themselves at right angles to the axis, as before; then set the other
long Magnet that has his poles in the ends with the North pole A, against the
North Pole A of the first stone, Tab. VIII. Fig. 3. and all the three needles
will apply themselves in a straight line parallel to the axis, somewhat like
the order of the first type, yet contrariwise.

Now take away this second stone, with the poles in the ends, and turn it, and
place the South end B, against the North end A, as Tab. VIII. Fig. 4. and then
the 3 needles will stand at right angles to the axis, and parallel one unto
another, and to the equator.

This is to be observed in these applications, that the nearer the second
Loadstone is placed to the needles, in aspect with the first Magnet, the better
will they shape out these figures of applications, and in the approaching they
will vary, by little and little, from their first situation, until the virtue
of the two Loadstones be equal in their orb.

It may be imagined that these applications, for the most part, should be found
naturally upon the earth in traveling or nauigating between two great Islands
or high Magneticall continents, but the first and fourth figure of this eighth
Table cannot be found naturally in any place, Tab. VIII. Fig. 1. and Fig. 4.

There is also much variety of variation in one needle near two Magnets, or a
Magnet and Magneticall body, as place a needle on a little foot upon the
Terrella, Semiterrella, or Loadstone, and it will direct it self rightly upon
the meridian of the stone, as has been proved before, Tab. III. Fig. 9. but if
you hold a little piece of iron toward the point of the needle, the point will
fly from the iron, and deflect from his meridian a little. Yet let this piece
of iron touch the Lodestone and be united unto it, and put it toward the
needle a far off, and the needle will turn from his meridian, and decline
and vary toward it, the contrary is to be said, if this iron be put toward
the tail of the needle.

Now take two long Magnets, that have their poles in the end, and place a
needle before the equator of one of them, and it will apply parallel to the
axis, then bring the other Loadstone, and place the end where the pole is
against the equator of the first Loadstone, as Ta. VIII. Fig. 5. and then the
needle will vary his position, and seat it self at right angles, to the axis
of both Magnets.

So also take two Loadstones, and let one of them have the poles in the
midst, and the other in the ends, and you shall behold much artificial
variety of the application of one needle unto them. Place a needle before the
midst of the Loadstone, that has his poles in the midst, and it will
behold the pole: after lay down the other Magnet, that has his poles in the
ends, and set his equator against the needle, and it will vary his position,
and stand parallel to the equator of the former Magnet, whose pole he beheld
before, as Table VIII. Fig. 6.

Apply a needle to the end of a Magnet that has his poles in the midst,
where it will place it self obliquely unto the stone, then place the equator
of the Loadstone that has the poles in the end, Tab. IX. Fig. 1. Tab. IX
diagram unto the needle, and it will vary parallel to the axis he first
beheld, and at right angles to the axis of the second stone.

Set a needle against the end of the Lodestone, that has his poles in the
ends, and it will rest it self at right angles to the axis, then apply the
second Magnet to the needle that has his poles in the midst, Tab. IX. Fig.
2. and the situation of the needle will be altered to be parallel to the axis
he beheld at right angles at first.

Place at the corner of that stone that has the pole B in the midst, a
needle, and it will apply obliquely, then lay the end of the other Loadstone
that has the pole A in the end, and the needle will apply at right angles to
the axis of both the stones, as it is Table IX. Figure 3.

But set a needle before the end of the stone that has his pole B in the
midst, and set the end of the other Magnet that has in the end the pole B of
the same denomination, as Tab. X. Fi. 1. and the needle will apply, as is to be
seen in the type in a straight line to the last, and parallel to the axis of
the first.

Also apply the equator of this second stone, that has the poles in the ends
unto the needle, placed as before, unto the first stone, Table X. Figure 2. and
the needle will be parallel to both axis, let the needle stand against the
corner of the first stone obliquely, and apply the end of the second stone with
the pole in it, Tab. X. Fig. 3. and the needle will apply, as in the Tab. IX.
Fig. 3.

Tab X
diagram

CHAP. XVI.
Of preserving the virtue of Magnets.

Having treated of the parts of the Magneticall bodies, of their motions, and
applications, now we will speak of his other natural virtues and properties.
Some have thought it very convenient to keep the Loadstones in filings of
steel and iron, to preserve their virtue and vigor, thinking that the Magnet
is fed, or, at least, very much refreshed with them, because they will cleave
so fast to the sides near the pole; But I do not allow this way so good to
preserve them, rather I like the keeping of them in a bag, or cloute of
woollin-cloth, close from the injury of the heat and cold of the weather, or
in a case or box fit for them, and it is very necessary to wipe them often
from dust and grease, and to have a care that they do not rust.

Also it is very commodious and natural for them that they be laid up, and
placed according to that natural situation the which they would affect and
respect, if they were carried in a place and fashion free from renitency and
resistance in the air or water; therefore they would be laid up, or hung
accordingly as their poles and points do particularly respect, to the North
and South, which will comfort them exceedingly.

Besides, if the Loadstone be sometimes polished, it will strengthen and
relieve the body of the Magnet very much. If a weak Magnet be rubbed at one of
his poles with a stronger Loadstone, he will be bettered by it in his vigor and
virtue, if not augmented therein.

Set a Magnet of no force or strength, that can easily be perceived, upon a
Loadstone of good strength and vigor, especially upon his poles, and he will
show a vigor, as if he were as strong as the Loadstone is, whereunto he is
united, but after that he is taken away, he will be as weak as before, unless
it be often done.

CHAP. XVII
Of contributing the virtue Magneticall to Iron or Steel.

THe iron bars in windows, being there placed North and South, do receive a
polar virtue, and directory faculty in time from the vigor of the orb of the
Magneticall globe of the earth, and having marked them with notes to know which
end was South, and which North in the window, take them out and tie a third
about the midst of them, that they may hang leuelly in the air, and the end
with the South note will turn it self into the North, and the other note will
behold the South, contrary to their place in the window, where they were first
animated Magnetically.

Likewise, if a long piece of iron be forged North and South, and laid by to
cool in the same situation, he will be animated and indewed with a polar
virtue, and move in the air, being hung in a third, or put in a boat on the
water, and turn to the contrary pole to that from which he first received the
Magneticall vigor.

If a rod of iron, a wier, or directory-needle, be ouerheat in the fire, so
that they have lost all Magneticall vigor to direct them North or South, yet
let them be touched with the Loadstone at one end only, and they will be
excited with a directory and polar vigor at both ends, and the one end of the
semidiamiter will be of the North, and the other of the South province and
nature, and being placed according to Magneticall orders, will direct their
points to the North and South, contrary to the pole that animated them with
this virtue polar.

Also take rods of iron, wiers, and Magneticall needles, that have never bin
touched with the Lodestone, and rub them upon the poles, caps, or teeth of the
Loadstone at the ends, and they will be much refreshed, vigorated, and animated
with the polar and directory virtue at both ends, both of the North and
South-poles, as though they had a new life of quickness infused into them, and
these shall refresh other needles that shall be touched with them, and
apprehend and draw them away like captives, and will not let them loose from
them, unless by force you sever them.

The best way to touch, incite, and give the polar directory and Magneticall
vigor and faculty unto needles and Mariners compasses, is to rub them from
the midst of the needle where the equator of their axis is unto their points
upon the pole, cap, or tooth of the Loadstone, drawing them thus from their
middle to the ends, upon the cap, pole, or parallel near the same, unto the
axis, or at right angles to it, the^ after draw the other end upon the other
pole, cap, or tooth, diverse times, as before, and these needles, wiers, and
plates for compasses, shall be perfectly touched and vigorated.

In long Loadstones that have the poles in the ends, if a wier be drawn
parallel to the axis, from the poles end to the equator, it will be incited
with that pole.

It is doubted whether the touch and polar virtue will be given as well from a
parallel some distance from the pole, as from the pole it self, it is plain,
that from those paralels and parts, near adjoining to the pole, the greatest
vigor of polity Magneticall does proceed, yet in paralels, nearer the
equator, it will be given likewise, and the virtue directory will be very
sufficient.

If you touch the needle amongst the paralels, it is the best way to rub the
needles along the meridians toward the pole, rather then to rub the cross
the meridians, in a parallel manner, yet this way will give the polar and
Magneticall virtue also.

Some have thought it better to touch compasses, and Magneticall needles,
rather on the Loadstone then upon their caps, thinking that the vigor and
faculty Magneticall will continue longest that is given from the bare Magnet
stone, the truth is to be observed in time. Yet the cap and tooth gives and
imparteth a stronger vigor to the needles then the bare stone does, because
the virtue of the Loadstone is increased as much by the armor and cap as if his
bulk simply were tripled.

Needles and wiers of steel, heated to an height, and reduced back to a
bluish color, will receive a stronger touch, and retain it ten times longer
then iron will, howsoever he be hardened, yet iron is best for caps placed near
the stone.

That end of the needle, whether directory or inclinatory, which is to be
touched, ought to be somewhat lighter then the other, especially for the North,
and most vigorous touch end of the stone, because that the touching will sway
down a little, and the needle has two motions, one of direction, the other of
inclination, and then the needles and compasses will play more level and
aequidistant to the horizon for the said uses.

When any Magneticall needle or wier is touched from the North Pole, or tooth
of the Adamant, that end of the needle will respect the North Pole of the
Magnet, but being severed out of the orb of the Adamant, it will be directed
into the South by the Magneticall virtue of the earth.

But if a round globe or ring of iron be touched with the North Pole of the
stone, the place touched will have the virtue of the South-pole, and the
North Pole will be in the opposite part, and being severed from the Magnet, it
will not turn to the contrary part, as it falls out in long Magneticall
needles and compasses, as before.

If a ring of iron be touched, the correspondent pole will be in the opposite
part, but if this ring be cut asunder, and made a straight wier, then both ends
will have the vigor of one pole only.

Excite a directory needle at both ends from one pole, and they will both be of
one nature, and look what point was last touched, and that will turn, as if
he only were touched, and direct more surely, with less wavering too and fro,
then the other touchings will, spoken of before.

Let a long piece of clay newly burnt, cool North and South, and it will
receive power Magneticall from the earth.

Set two Loadstones with their poles of one denomination, at the ends of a
piece of clay whilst it cools, and both ends will be of one nature.

If a long wier be touched in the midst by the Loadstone, and passed through
a cork, and set for to swim in the water, it will waver up and down
uncertainly, as though it were not touched: but if it chance to rest it self
toward the pole, in time it will be indewed with his virtue.

Set a piece of iron upon a Loadstone, as you did a weak Magnet in the end of
the former chapter, and it will have a great force, but take it away from the
stone, and almost all the vigor will be departed.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of augmenting the virtue of the Magnet.

THere is a means found out whereby the Load-stones that will take and lift up
a very small weight, may by being armed with a corselet and teeth, be enabled
to take up more ounces with his armor, then he could, being naked and unarmed,
lift up scruples and grains.

The first way is by fashioning caps of iron or steel to either pole, as has
been described, Tab. I. in the second Chapter, whereby the Magnet will lift up
a great weight of Iron at one end perpendicularly to the axis, and after, if
you turn the other end to the weight, it will by his force lift up the same
weight also, if the stone be good and of equal substance and fashion.

This way or arming is most usual, for those Loadstones that be of a long
ouall form where at the poles there is fitted and placed two concaue pieces of
steel, which are fastened and held close to the same by three or four long
narrow plates of silver or brass, not unlike to that order which is used in
tipping of cups with silver, that be of Ostridge-egges, Indian-Nuts,
Mace-wood, and Stone, which from the bottom to the verges and edging, have
silver plates for to hold the edging and bottom together: some trim their
Load-stones all over with silver, and guild both the silver and the armor,
joining altogether with pretty joints, as in a case to open and shut.

There is another way of capping and arming of Load-stones when they have a
side parallel to the axis, made straight, plain, and flat, and the pole
rounded or flatted in the end, such as are the Semiterrella, or half ouall
form. Tab. I. Fig. 2. 4. and of many angles, as in the types of the first
Table, all these forms may have their armor on the ends, where the poles are
of such breadth, as shall be comely, but the larger they are, the better it is,
and from these cappes to have two square forms of Steel or Iron, like unto
teeth, a little descending lower then the bottom of the stone, of bignsse and
length, as the bulk of the Magnet shall permit, these teeth because that they
do descend at right angles from the poles, will jointly take up great weights,
Tab. XI. Fi. 12. 13. parrally to the axis of the Magnet, and yet at one of the
teeth Tab. XI. Fig. 11. will lift up as much as any cap does directly, and in
one axis from the pole, the weights for this form, ought to have the heads of
their weightes, like an headless cross, as is described, Tab. II. Fig. 2. 3.
4. Here observe what weight one of these teeth will eleuate ^n the air, for
both teeth jointly lifting and holding one weight together, will take up from
the ground four times as much in weight. There be some Magnets that will take
up with two teeth, six times as much as one tooth shall, and one I have seen
that will take up twelve times as much with both teeth, as he will do with one
tooth, these teeth are to be fastened to the stone, with plates of silver or
brass, by the skillful workman.

Such Magnets as be made plain at both ends, having the axis in the midst of
the stone, Tab. I. Fig. 5. 6. 12. may have their armor with teeth on both
sides, two teeth on the one side and two on the other, these will take and lift
up with like strength on both sides.

More-ouer, the virtue of the Lodestone may be further augmented, by
increasing the number of teeth and shaping them so, as that they may take hold
with four or five teeth, as Tab. I. Fig. 7. and Tab. XII. Fig. 11. where the
poles being in the ends of the stone, and have had two teeth descending on
either side, now the sides be turned, and these are also turned, in form of a
Greek (...), and the stone has his force multiplied and is made to take up
with four teeth, having two teeth descending from either end where the poles
are, which two teeth, are of one nature, and the other two of another,

The other fashion for to take up with five teeth, as it were a hand with five
fingers, must have the pole in the midst of the stone, which being made, the
bottom must have his cap, for this part, to have three teeth, like a Slauonian
(...), as Ta. XII. Fi. 12. and the other cap from the top must descend with two
teeth like a Greek (...), as in the type.

There is a way to cap the Loadstone, so that it shall take up with eight
teeth, using four at one time, and four at another, the stone would have two
broad sides where the poles are, and the teeth would be in form like a Roman
X. or S. Andrews cross the center hereof would be placed on the pole, and the
teeth artificially fastened.

If there be two Load-stones that be capped with their teeth descending from
either end of like Diameter and length, then place those teeth together that be
of a contrary nature, Tab. III. Fig. 12. and Tab. XII. Fig. 10. and they will
unite and adheare together, and if they continue thus some time, the weaker
will lift up a better weight.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the decay and decreasing of the Magnets virtue.

THe vigor of the Lodestone is much diminished by the evil keeping of it, as
when it is laid in the open air against the heat of the Sun, and subjected to
cold, and all change of weather, or laid up, as some do, in a box with rusty
fylings of steel and iron, in a place near a pan of char-cole to keep it
warm in winter.

There is nothing that hurts the Lodestone more then the fire does, for if
the Lodestone be burnt in the fire it will leese all his Magnetical virtue and
strength, the which may be a little restored by touching a good Magnet, and how
weak so ever he be, he will be a convenient Magneticall medium, to carry the
extent of the Magneticall vigor to a farther orb.

Aqua fortis will eat the Lodestone, and burn and mortefie him, as he does
eat into Iron.

The Magneticall Needle being touched and excited by the Lodestone will not
pursue and point out the veins of such Iron as be very stony and full of
dross, as not worthy the labor to be dug, because they have little
Magneticall matter and Iron in them, and if that part of the Mine of Iron be
beat and stamped into powder, the Magnet will take up very little of this
dust, declaring the Mine to be naught, unless the Mine be heat.

Crocus Martis will not be attracted by the Lodestone, because his Magneticall
vigor is clean defaced and euaporated by the fire.

If a Magneticall Needle, lately touched and inuigorated by the Magnet, be
heated red hot in the fire, he will leese all his potency polare, and directive
faculty.

It is also conueient to understand, that having touched and animated a Needle
Magnetically, if contrary to this excited, the Needle be rubbed from the point
to the midst upon the pole of a Magnet, cap, or tooth; so any long piece of
Iron, or Steel else, as knife dagger, or sword, which before would have
attracted and lifted up Magnetically, other Irons of some weight by being thus
rubbed back again from the point to the midst, have that virtue taken away,
which they received before from the Lodestone, and are as void of all virtue
attractiue, as they were before they touched the Magnet, so that they neither
will adhere or lift up the least weight, which was nothing to that they would
have done being excited.

If two Magneticall bodies be joined together at their poles, these two poles
that touch together, have the nature of the equator, and will not then excite
or hold a needle thus touching.

An Adamant does loose much of his strength, if he be diminished, and have
any part of his body taken from him, especially if his figure was good before.

Some have thought that certain forms of the Magnet, which may be allowed for
convenient figures, do lessen the Magneticall vigor, chiefly in their
attraction, as a sphericall or plain superficies in the poles, of globes, and
of square and angulous figures, but these full and obtuse superficies and flat
forms at the poles do attract best with their cappes, and lift up most, as
has been declared in the eighteen chapter before, for this vigor proceeds
from the substance of the Adamant, better then in long and piked forms, which
have very little substance left about the poles, yet this assertion is partly
true in such like forms of Iron, for in this mettle the long fashion is best.

A round plate of Iron to the pole, cap, or tooth of the Magnet, disperseth and
diminishes the direct extent of his vigor, like-wise a long plate, or square
piece of Iron or Steel, Tab. II. Fig. 9. 17. applied to the two teeth of the
Lodestone, does deforme the figure of the body and deprave his virtue.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Commutation of the virtue Polar.

THe Polar virtue is said to be changed, when as the North Pole is made the
South-pole, and the South-pole altered into the nature of the North Pole in
Magneticall bodies; this thing is effected, in a weak Magnet, by placing him a
long time by a Magnet that is stronger, unnaturally, which is done by adjoining
the two North-poles, or the two South-poles of the two Load-stones together a
long time, where the strong Magnet, will by his neighborhood take away that
contrary nature of pollity that was in the weak Lodestone, and will make, and
infuse into him that polar virtue, which does naturally unite unto the pole of
the strong Adamant, making that point and pole to be South which was North.

This thing is not only experienced in two several Magnets lodging together
in one chamber and box, but also if you shall agglutinate and cement diverse
Magnets of diverse strengths together, they will all of them be conjoined and
united together, as if it were one stone and body, and may be made and
fashioned into a convenient figure, and will be endued with one vigor
Magneticall of one province, though separated they were of diverse polities and
jurisdictions.

Magneticall needles and long forms of iron, as knives, daggers, wiers, and
such like, if at one time they be touched and excited with the North Pole, and
made of his nature in all operations Magneticall, then another time let these
North points be touched, as is used to be done with the South-pole of the
Loadstone, this end now has lost his former nature, and is made of affinity
and allegiance unto the South-pole, and after if you shall bestow upon him, by
touching him again at the other pole, the virtue of the North Pole again, and
then he will march under his banner, and look by which pole he is last touched
and relieved, he will remain at his service always after and bear his badge.
Put clay of a long form in the fire, after let him cool North and South, and
it will receive a polar virtue: after burn it again in the fire, and let that
end which cooled first North now cool South, and it will be commutated into
the nature of the South, and the other North. Furthermore if a strong Loadstone
be held somewhat near such compasses and needles, as have been excited and
touched with the virtue directory from the north by the Magnet, although they
be in their boxes, yet the other end of the Loadstone will alter their
situation, and the Lilly of the Compasses will be clean turned, that that part
and Lilly that should always turn North, will either stand South, or else
move up and down imperfectly, and weakly, having his first polar virtue
changed for another, or else taken away.

This conclusion makes many affraide to let two Magnets come too near
together, lest the one should rob the other, but this will not be effected
presently in the Loadstones themselves, though that it be proved soon to come
to pass in the Magneticall bodies of steel and iron.

If a directory-needle be excited at both ends from one pole, it will have the
virtue of that pole at both ends, but if both ends be rubbed back from the
points to the midst, on the same pole, both ends will have the nature of the
contrary pole, and if one end be passed from the point to the midst, that end
will have the nature of the contrary pole, and the other end will keep his
nature still.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the discord of the two Points of the Adamant.

THis Proposition is demonstrated by two Magnets swimming in their boats, in a
basin of water, as Tab. XI. Fig. 5. 6. for if by force, their two North-poles
or South-poles be placed together, they will abhor the one the other, and
part asunder by speedy flight.

If a smaller piece and part be taken away ^^om a greater Magnet, of whose
body and bulk he was a part, animated, as it were, living and endued with one
and the selfsame life and vigor with the whole Magnet, like a child, that
lives and is nourished in his mothers womb, as a part of the body of the
mother, yet being severed and taken out of the greater Loadstone, does become a
complete Loadstone of it self, as a perfect Tab XI
diagrams newborn creature, with all the vigor and lineaments of his own,
belonging to a perfect Magneticall body, notwithstanding such is the nature of
this little, and this greater Magnet, that their love and agreement, in their
virtues and points, is not such as it was in their union in one body, but their
kind aspect, all one way is altered to be at discord, and if you set
South-pole to South-pole, and North Pole to North Pole, you shall force them to
tarry other-waies, like as if they were foes at discord they will swim away
and fly asunder very speedily, not enduring so to confort together as they did
at first when they were both one body.

When two Adamants shall confort, and keep together, at their contrary poles,
at the approaching of a third Magnet they will be separated and fly asunder
Tab. XI. Fig. 1. because that the pole of their Adamant, that is offered unto
them, is of the nature of the pole of one of the two Loadstones, which the
stone of that denomination perceiving, flies away from the company of the
other, because two South-poles and two North-poles, in diverse Magnets, be at
discord and war together, and cannot abide to dwell as neighbors together, but
each of them, placed out of the others Orb, will both aspect the North, with
their North-poles, and the South with their South-poles, and thus two needles
excited as Tab. XI. Fig. 2. will each of them, out of the others Orb, have
respect to their propper pole, but if the needles be within the Orb one of
the other as Tab. XI. Fig. 7. then they will move and adhere together at their
contrary poles, but if a third Needle be brought near unto them as Tab. XI.
Fig. 8. then one of those Needles that did adhere, that had his pole of the
same nature, with the pole of the needle that does approach, does cast about
for to offer his other end of the contrary quality unto it, and thus the first
two Needles will aspect this third with their points of one denomination.

But this discord is not found between the Adamant, and the Magneticall
Needles that be excited and animated from one of his poles, for as long as the
Needles be within the view and orb of the Adamants Magneticall orb, so long
they will behold and aspect him with a certain dutiful conformity,
application and respect unto his axis, as it has been demonstrated in Globous
and Angulous Magnets, but being severed out of the Adamantine Orb of the
Loadstone, then they will fly, as from a foe, from that pole from whence they
received their life and vigor Magneticall, and by the virtue of the earth
conform themselves to the contrary pole.

Contrariwise, take a large Globe or Ring of Iron, and touch them with the
North Pole of the stone, and the animated place will have the virtue of the
South-pole, and adhere to the North Pole of the Magnet, and being severed will
keep the same situation in the water, contrary to all Needles that turn the
touched part to the contrary pole, as before.

Set two short and slender wyars upon the pole of a Magnet, Tab. XI. Fig. 3.
and they will adhere at the lower end unto the same, but whereas they should
erect their other ends perpendicularly, those ends of the wyers will decline a
great distance asunder, unless by force they be united and joined together.

Contrariwise it will fall out if these two short wyers be fastened to two
several thirds with wire, and hanged over the pole, then neither of their ends
will behold the pole, but for the hatred that the one bears to the other,
they bear off asunder in a great distance, desiring rather that their upper
ends, farthest from the, Loadstone should unite, then that they should do it.

Hold a knife to the Needle of a Dyall that is touched Magnetically, and the
one point of the Needle will come to it and follow it, and if that the knife
be offered to the other end of the Needle it will fly away from the knife, so
one end of any wire, though untouched, will attract the Needle at one of the
ends, and drive the other end away, Hereof more has been written in the sixth
Chapter. Some think that this quality of the poles, thus to fly off the one
from the other, that it is no enmity, but proceeds from a disponent virtue,
to cause these Magneticall bodies to move and turn away, to the end that they
may better frame and dispose themselves to a convenient and natural unition.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Magneticall Union.

MAgneticall union is when one Magneticall body naturally conformeth it self
to unite unto any other Magneticall body, by convenient angles and positions,
that is, the South-pole of the one Magnet will apply and unite unto the
North Pole of the other, as may be seen in Loadstones, carried in their boats
upon the water, and in Magneticall Needles and Wyers of Steel and Iron.

If two Magnets, or two Needles do unite at convenient points, a third Magnet
or Directory Needle will first separate one of them till he turn his contrary
part, at the which he will unite with the third as Tab. XI. Fig. 1. 8.

There is a strong union, of body to body, and a weak, the strong conjunction
is three manner of ways.

The first is commonly observed to be at the Poles, where one body Magneticall
is conjoined and united unto the other in a right line, upon the axis at the
pole Tab. XI. Fig. 10.

The second strong union falls out when the superficies where the pole is
placed is made plain, where at the edges, Magneticall bodies adhere at right
angles unto the axis, as Tab. III. Fig. ^^. and Ta. VII. Fi. 2. but more
plainly, this strong union appears when as the Adamant shall be capped with
two teeth at either pole, descending at right angles unto the axis, for here a
tooth will lift up as much perpendiculerly at right angles to the axis, as it
will at the pole in a right line. Table XI. Figure 10. 11.

The third strong union, and strongest, is when at a Meridian in the Loadstone
there is a superficies made flat and plain, parallel unto the axis, where the
coition according to the conformity in the equator, inclining neither to one
pole, nor to the other, is most strong, for whereas wyers and weights, at the
pole, hang and adhere unto it, but by one end only, here they will adhere
along their axis, leaping more violently to adhere with their whole side and
unite, then they will from their ends unto the poles, as Tab. III. Fig. 4.
therefore the Adamant being armed artificially with two teeth, at right angles
unto the axis, will in this paralel-conformity unto the axis, apprehend and
lift up weights heavier by many times, then the caps at the poles will, Tab.
XI. Fig. 12. because these receive their vigor from the forces sent out of
both Provinces of the Magnet.

The weaker unition of Magneticall bodies together is in the other parts of the
Meridians, where the conformity and applications of their bodies is oblique to
the axis, though that near the pole, the oblique coition is stronger then it
is by the equator, Notwistanding, there is an oblique coition, as strong as
the strongest union, and will take up as great weights, as the parallel unition
to the axis does, and this is, as it were, a parallel coition also between the
teeth and the head of the weight, yet oblique to the axis of the body of the
Magnet, as Tab. XI. Fig. 13. having his supplies of strength from all the
Magneticall body of the stone.

Unition also, is either natural, half violent, or else depraved; the
natural coition is when the union and conioyning of Magneticall bodies is by
the contrary parts, as in Adamants, by the poles North to South, and in needles
by head and tail, as Tab. XI. Fig. 7. Tab. XII. Fig. 5. 6. 9. so two wyers
swimming on their corkes in the water, being touched by contrary poles, will
march and hasten to salute one the other, like two lovers, Tab. VI. Fig. 5.
Likewise in Adamants that be armed with two teeth, it falls out that they
will embrace the one the other, only with the teeth and parts that be of
contrary provinces, and not with those of like nature and province. Tab. III.
Fig. 12. Tab. XII. Figure 10.

The half violent coition, when as a small Loadstone, which has been taken
out of the side of a greater, is placed in his former seat again, where there
is made a perfect union again in one entire whole; so in the two short wyers
that stick upon the pole, being here united, but at the other ends fly off
asunder, yet being put together by force, will adhere and have an union and
conjunction along their sides and Meridian, Tab* XII
diagrams as well as in the other way of unition. Table XI. Figure. 3.

Now that unition, which Magneticall needles touched and excited at the pole of
the Adamant have, may be thought to be half violent and somewhat strange,
Tab. III. Fig. 1. 6. 7. Tab. IIII. Fig. 1. because that here there is an
affinity of two Magneticall bodies of the same nature and denomination, and not
of the contrary, that it seems that the Magneticall nature, between the
Adamant and the Iron, is both very different from all other Magneticall bodies
and somewhat imperial; for it is not to be seen either in Magnets one
toward the other, though they be of the same rock and piece, or in any wyers
of iron or steel of one toward the other, or in the earth it self, with
those that she does Magnetically animate, that that pole which is excited, or
animated with a pole of the same nature, should respect and conform it self,
being artificially, without renitency, carried unto a pole of the same nature
and denomination, from whence he received his first vigor.

Here therefore, no doubt, the Adamant is Masculine unto his beloved the Iron
and Steel, and these are Femenine, as more apt to obey, respect, and follow
the Masculine, subject to be attracted by him, whose presence quickens,
reuiueth, and animateth them in all kind of vigor and commutation.

Thirdly, when iron is untouched, and vnexcited, the coition is the weaker, but
when a small piece of Iron shall be in a boat, with materials of other lading
to be united to a Magnet in his vessel, here the coition is depraved and
weak, because the Magnet affects and draws his own beloved best, when she
is not laden or mixed with materials that be of different nature not
Magneticall, and for this cause the Adamant will take up a greater weight, all
of Iron or steel, then when a great weight of other subance, is fashioned to a
small weight of iron or steel.

The greatness of the bulk of the Adamant helps unition, so does the length
of the axis, and virtue disponent to set the Magneticall bodies in convenient
situation.

Besides, there is a virtue attractiue, besides the disponent virtue, and a
directive and inclinatory faculty in the Adamants, that bring Magneticall
bodies to unition and apprehension, the two first retain them in union and
conjunction, proceeding especially from the goodness of the stone, the latter
two help the disponent virtue, and are to be found in all Loadstones, and in
the earth it self.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of attraction Magneticall.

MAgneticall attraction is a natural incitation and disposition conforming to
contiguity and union of one Magneticall body unto another, and no violent
haling of the weaker to the stronger, being an appetite of unity proceeding
from both bodies that are separated, as two Magnets floating in their boats do
not at first run together, as it were, from center to center of the bulk upon
a violent disposition or attraction, but the disponent virtue first works,
then the allicient and Adamantiue virtue in them, both for unition, does show
his vigor to join them by convenient terms the one body unto the other, Tab.
XI. Fig. 5. 6.

Also the Adamant does more strongly attract iron, having a more Masculine
nature to attract her, and inableth her, bestowing upon the iron, that he
touches, a great quantity of his strength without any loss unto himself, so
that she has power to attract other iron strongly, which before the
excitation from the Magnet she could not do, and therefore excited forms of
iron and steel, are quicklier attracted, then such as are not touched, because
they have more Magneticall vigor in them.

Such Magnets as be armed with iron, attract more strongly then the bare stones
do, because that hereby their vigor is increased, being more strong, and
extends it self further, as if a long iron wire be conjoined to the pole,
or tooth of a Loadstone, and to the end of this, lay to another, and at the end
of that a third, and so forward, the Adamant will hold them all, or most of
them, according to his vigor and strength, Tab. XII. Fig. 1. all touching one
the other, and cleaving together, as linked in a chain.

Place a wire somewhat short upon a Lodestone near the pole, or further off,
and hold an iron or Magneticall body toward it, and the wire will rather be
attracted away by this weaker body, and leave this strong Magnet, Tab. VI. Fig.
6. and before the iron touch it, it will decline and bend toward the iron that
approaches, so will needles directory deflect awry, being placed upon the
Magnet, from their conformity to any untouched wire, and be attracted by them,
and this proves, that the eminent parts of the earth being Magneticall, may
attract the Compass to vary from the true Meridian of the earth.

The natural attraction of Magneticall bodies, is that the North Pole do
attract the South-pole, and the South-pole the North, although between the
Adamant and the iron there is that sociability, that the North-poles love one
and the same pole.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the strong apprehension of Magnets

THe apprehension of Magneticall bodies is a strong union, cleaving and
sticking of them together, that they will hardly be severed, being strongly
retained by the virtue and love Magneticall, as though they were tied, glued,
and soudred together, this conjunction and agglutination is performed by
certain convenient positions, whereof I have spoken in the XXII. chapter of
union; according hereunto if two Magnets be swimming in their boats upon the
water, within the orb and vigor Magneticall one of the other, they will move
to conioyne and be grappled together like two ships, and if one of the vessels
be halled, the other will follow, Tab. XI. Fig. 5. 6.

A strong Magnet will hold but a very small Magnet at the poles, having the
North Pole applied to the South-pole, for to lift the small Magnet in the air,
but offer a wier of pollished iron or steel, that is a good deal heavier then
the fragment of the Magnet was, and the Loadstone will lift this up from the
ground and retain it firmly, Tab. XII. Fig. 5.

If Magnets be of one mine, the biggest will lift up and hold the greater
weight, for this purpose the longer form from pole to pole is best, and bulk
being compared with bulk, this form will take up the greater weight, because
his diamiter is longest.

Take a long piece of iron or steel, as a knife, or dagger, or sword, that is
finely polished, and touch and excite them Magnetically, and these shall take
up a greater weight of iron then the Adamant it self, so it be very good and
little shall, that gave them their vigor Magneticall to lift up, and retain
firmly, Table XII. Fig. 2.

I have a Loadstone that will vigorate a sword to take up and hold a pound
weight. Likewise Magneticall needles and excited wiers will strongly retain
and adhere one unto the other at their convenient poles, hale one the other,
and lift them up, and retain them firmly, for such Magneticall forms of iron
and steel as be touched and animated Magnetically, are sooner apprehended,
held fast, and lift up in the air then those that be untouched and vnexcited,
because that when the Magneticall vigor is infused, dispersed and spread
through all the parts of the iron-waights, or of steel, these forms are
sooner united and faster tied, as it were, with strong ligaments and cords,
both unto the Lodestone, or one unto the other, Tab, XII. Fig. 3. therefore if
sand or other matter that is not Magneticall be fastened and bound unto a small
piece of iron, or this small piece of iron be fastened to a pair of seals,
that have strings to the scales, though iron be the waights of the scales: yet
the Magnet will lift up and hold a greater weight that is all continued iron,
then he will do of these mixture and intermission of Magneticall medium, of
diverse and different substances, not Magneticall.

If a Magnet be fastened to the pole of another Loadstone by his convenient
upper pole then a greater weight then before will be apprehended by the
Loadstone and taken up, because that the Load-stones, virtue is increased and
augmented by the addition and adjoining of the other Magnet, Ta. XII. Fi. 6. 9.
Even so, for the same cause, if a wedge of iron be placed on the upper pole of
a Lodestone, the other pole that is downward will take up a greater weight,
Tab. III. Fig. 2.

If there be a thin plate of steel or iron held or fastened unto the nether
pole of the Adamant, between the Loadstone and the weight, then the Magnet
will lift double, and sometimes decuple, or ten times as much again, from this
practice begun and grew the arming and capping of Adamants with steel and
iron, after diverse manners, Tab. II. and as has been declared in XVIII.
Chapter, Of the augmenting the virtue of the Lodestone; by this arming of the
Loadstones with steel and iron in convenient places, their virtue and potency
is greatly multiplied, both to unite, attract, apprehend, and lift up greater
waights, and also to move, turn, and conform Magneticall needles a far off,
and the needles by having a strong vigor infused into them direct and retain
themselves more firmly in their conformity and direction Magneticall.

If a plate or cap of iron be held to any parallel between the equator and
the pole, crossing in any meridian, there will be an apprehension and retention
of iron, wiers, and waights, much heavier then the bare unarmed stone will hold
without this cap, Ta. XII. F. 7.

Where the superficies of the Magnet about the pole is flatted and made plain,
having armor applied to it, and a tooth descending from the point at right
angles to the axis, here this tooth will take up and lift as much as the cap at
the pole will, Tab. XI. Fig. 10. 11.

Those Adamants that be capped to take, apprehend and lift up at the pole
only, if there be three of them readily provided, put the second to the nether
pole of the first, and he will retain him firmly, then add the third to the
nether pole of the second and the first, by virtue infused into the second, and
the third, will strongly hold them both in the air, Tab. XII. Fig. 9. all of
them being armed and communicating their vigors together firmly to unite.

So a dagger or sword excited, will lift up one weight at the end of another,
and if the upper that touched the sword or Lodestone, be held an inch off, yet
by the virtue that is extended within the orb Magneticall, the waights will
cleave together still.

Set a short and small wier at the pole of a Magnet, and it will be erected,
set another on this, and it also will be carried upright, set on the third, and
all three will be apprehended and borne up, Tab. XII. Fig. 7.

Also set a short wier on the pole, and another on a meridian, not far off
the pole, or set them upon two several meridians, upon a strong Magnet, then
lay another short wier on their heads, and they will hold and carry it, and
this also will carry another wier upon his back, Tab. XII. Fig. 8.

There be certain forms of Magnets, as the Semiterrella, in fashion of an
half boule, the long ouall made plain at the bottom, the long square forms,
described, Tab. II. all these may be armed and capped with two teeth, at right
or oblique angles to the axis, which being thus prepared, will apprehend great
waights, and retain them most firmly in the air, Tab. XI. 12. 13.

If two Magnets, armed with two teeth apeece, be set before us, the one being
strong, the other weak, or much less, whose axis or diamiter between the
teeth is equal of like length, then set the teeth of these together that come
from contrary poles and parts, and the stronger will apprehend and lift up the
weaker, and the weaker being united and incorporated with the stronger, by the
virtue that he receives from the stronger, will lift up from the ground, and
retain the stronger and greater very firmly, although he be much heuier then
the weight, the small stone does ordinarily lift up, Tab. III. Fig. 12. Tab.
XII. Fig. 10.

Let a Magnet be armed with two teeth descending, and two ascending, as Tab. I.
Fig. 5. and 6. the upper teeth will cleave fast to a great weight of iron, and
hold by the same firmly, apply a weight to the: nether two teeth, and all will
be retained and held together most firmly by parallel virtue of the meridians
from the axis.

Such Magnets as be armed to one superficies, with four or five teeth, or
more, Tab. XII. Fig. 11. 12. must needs apprehend more and greater waights,
retain and lift them up most easily.

A piece of steel well tempered, being excited, will lift up a greater weight
then the like form and bulk of iron will, also this tempered metal in a
kind of form might be capped like a Magnet.

It has been proved that the apprehension is better between the bare stone
and iron, as also the armed Adamant, with the armed Adamant, is most strongly
retained, and far more firmly then the retention of one Loadstone is with
another small and bare stone.

Now it is to be observed that steel, by reason of his dryness, (...) his
vigor Magneticall, bestowed upon him, better then the iron does that is softer,
which entertaineth the virtue Magneticall sooner, and retains it the less
time where his substance is less extensible and glutinous; so steel being
very often excocted and euaporated in the fire, becomes very brittle, and will
not receive the Magneticall vigor, yet being reduced from that hardness, and
easily tempered, not to be over hard, will retain the vigor Magneticall
better then iron.

Those Adamants are the best which are bare and naked without their furniture
and armor to take up their own waights, or more, at one of their points and
poles, and retain the same firmly. Such Adamants will cleave unto a piece of
iron by their meridian, and hang unto it, and will retain a great iron weight
also adhering to the meridian parallel to the Axis.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Magneticall direction from the earth.

HItherto I have discoursed of the Magnet, and other Magneticall bodies, parts,
motions, applications, virtues and effects, as they have one unto the other,
which have been of that quality, that they might be almost all of them
experienced and observed at home and in our houses, handling the Load-stones as
little earthes and globes, and turning them about with our hands, to see,
observe, and understand all the qualities, virtues and effects of the same
whatsoever, comparing these Magnets, as diverse earths and Magneticall globes
together, with the motions, compassions, and conclusions, proceeding from a
present, particular, and unnatural cause and potency in the stone before our
eyes.

And having before partly discovered the motions that Magnets have with the
earth, being taken out of the same, and bred, and animated therein, as also the
motions of such irons as have been excocted out of the mines, and such like
veins, or rather bones of the Earth, that have been also endued and excited
with the directory and Magneticall vigor from the Earth, both at their first
forging and forming, as also by their placing upon the ground whilst they
cool, and become tractable with our hands, and their position in houses,
windows and other places.

Also I have showed how this virtue directorie, polar, vigor, and polity is
to be given to compasses for the sea, and to directory needles, that direct our
moveable dials into the meridian line, and to the Inclinatory-needle, or any
other needle or Mathematical instrument whatsoever.

Now I am to declare how such demonstrations as have been learned at home out
of the Terrella and Semiterrella magneticall may be put in practice and use by
such as sail to far countries by sea, or travel by land, for their great
benefit, both to teach them how to direct their course, and to tell them in
what place and climate they are in, which thing they may perform and learn
very perfectly, having the directory in their compasses, and the
Inclinatory-needle in the meridian ring artificially made about them.

In comparing the two Magneticall bodies of iron, and the Magnet with the
earth, the great and mother Magnet of all Magneticall bodies, we shall see and
behold, that not only in the Lodestone the Terrella and Semiterrella, but
principally in the great Terra and Magneticall globe of the Earth, there is
naturally found the two poles, the North and South, the equator, the
meridians, paralels, axis, and horizon, whereupon all the motions and
conclusions that have been made upon the meridians of the said forms in the
Magnet, are proportionably and agreeably to be found in the Magneticall globe
of the earth, in passing about her meridians, for all Magneticall motions are
performed upon the meridians principally, as has been said. Therefore place
any Magneticall body, as is used to be done, free from all obstacles, Tab. XI.
Fig. 5. 6. that may hinder their motion and conformity, and they will be
situated conformably unto the meridian of the earth, because that the earth
has primarily, naturally, and from her first creation, all Magneticall
faculty, vigor, virtue, power, and potency in her self.

And first if a Magnet whose poles are known by the Art before taught, be
placed in a boat, or boule of wood, and put into a great basin or boule of
water, it will conform, direct, and seat it self North and South, according
to the same position and meridian that passes directly unto the poles of the
earth; Likewise take a Magneticall needle that has been excited with the
Adamant, such as be in moveable dyals, or else take the Mariners compass, and
place them in quiet situation, and they will be directed by the disponent
virtue and Magneticall vigor of the earth toward the North, and Southpoles
upon the true meridian circle and line, if there be no obstacle.

All direction is observed by Magnetical bodies, especially by the
directory-needle and compass upon one certain horizon, whose center is in a
meridian cut by some of the paralels, and on this center the needle and
compass is supposed to be placed, being truly peased and composed, that they
may play, turn too and fro, and rest level and parallel unto the horizon,
fitly placed upon a pin of brass or silver, and be well touched and excited,
to the end they may be directed more certainly toward the poles upon the
meridian, Tab. XII. Fig. 13.

All Magneticall needles would be touched with a good vigorous and big
Lodestone, that being capped lifts up at least half a pound weight of iron,
to the end it may carry the fly and card of the compass more strongly to his
true direction and situation; all needles and compasses that are to be animated
and excited with that part of the Magnet that seateth it self North, swimming
in a dish upon the water, by the disponent power of the earth, and being freed
from out of the orb and virtue of other Magneticall bodies, these are turned
and directed by the vigor of the earth into the South upon the meridian line.

Even so a rod of iron that stath been placed North and South in a window a
long time, whereby he has received a true touch of polar virtue from the
Earth, being within the orb of his vigor, and being removed from this
position, which would be noted with chalk, and hanging leuelly in a string in
the air, will move his North part, and seat it in the South quietly.

Therefore all Magneticall bodies, whether it be the Magnet that is taken out
of the Earth, or a part of a Magnet taken out from this stone, that was cut
immediately out of the earth, or any iron or steel that is excited, either from
the earth, from an Adamant, or from another excited needle, iron, or knife, or
long form of burnt clay, all these whatsoever receiving their directive and
polar faculty from another Magneticall body, being set at liberty artificially
in the air or water, to move and turn, will seat and be directed to the
contrary pole they were first revived by.

Every part from the equator to the pole does give a polar and Magneticall
virtue unto diverse forms of iron and steel to move unto a contrary position,
by the directive faculty of the earth.

This faculty directive is as strong upon the equator as elsewhere, though it
do not bestow it to others, being fortified from both provinces on either side,
and when the needle and compass shall be in the equator of the earth, because
their libration and leuelnesse is all one with the horizon: therefore here the
direction is conformable and strong: but in other places, and near the pole
especially, the leuelling of the needles is more violent, because they would
incline and make an angle with the axis, and therefore the direction here is
thought by some to be very weak: yet in this place near the pole in the
Terrella and Semiterrella, the little needle on his foot bears himself most
strongly and stiffely, that being with a finger turned awry, it will turn
again to his direction very violently, though inclining to the stone, and rest
it self very speedily, without many turnings to and fro, so that near the
pole the direction is very strong, neither by leuelling hindered.

Always and in all places the Lilly of the compass or cross of the
directory-needle stands and is seated into the North, both in this North
side, and on the other South side of the aequinoctiall line or circle of the
earth, Tab. III. Fig. 9. Tab. XII. Fig. 13. contrary to the syte of the needle
near the Terrella or Semiterrella, because they are touched and excited at
that point of the Load stone that in his boat rests South, and being set at
liberty from the Loadstone by the earth is turned North, as the point touched
at the North Pole of the Adamant is turned South, neither needs there here
any conversion of the compasses in sailing and going from one province of the
equator to the other, as the needle idoth toward the Magnet being masculine,
and the needles of iron or steel feminine, but the needles to the earth are
perfect Magneticall bodies, and do keep their correspondency with the earth,
as if they were Magnet stones, or diameters of little earthes: therefore the
needles and compasses passing from one side of the equator to the other, in a
meridian and great circle, proceeds on still in a right line uniformly,
only the points of the needles and compasses do take their turns to be
predominant in their direction in their own provinces, especially if their
leuel would suffer the virtue Inclinatory to prevail, which thing is most
apparent by the Inclinatory-needle in his ring, that being on this side of the
equator erecteth his lilly above the horizon toward the pole, but on the
further South side of the equator dippeth his Lilly under the horizon, and
suffers the Point to respect his own pole with convenient angles to the
axis. But this thing cannot be done by the compass and directory-needle, which
lie always parallel to the horizon, but only is demonstrable by the stone in
the 4 and 5 tables before.

This were a fit place, to speak of the order of making Sea-Compasses, the
instruments for Magneticall direction, the making whereof is very well known
unto Artificers, yet I could wish, that they were more artificially made then
they are, though the price were somewhat more, with some additions, which we
do partly touch in the Chapter following, and wish also that the points were
48. in use, that every point might be half an hour.

All direction is performed upon the true Meridian respecting directly with the
Needle the poles of the earth, as the Needle does in the good and pollished
Lodestone and Terrella, unless it be weakened, depraved, and forced to
decline from the true Meridian of the earth, by the causes of variation.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the variation of the Compass from the true Meridian.

THe body of the Magneticall Globe of the Earth, is the author and cause of all
direction, and true motion to the North and South upon the Meridian, the which
would always be certainly pointed out by the directory-needle Tab: XIII
diagram and Compass, if the substance of the globe of the earth were in all
parts and places alike, and equally Magnetical, as in some round Loadstones;
neither would there be any variation and declination of the compass and Needle
at all, from the true Meridian of the earth, no more then there is of the
Needle, upon a firm pollished and round Lodestone.

But because the Globe of the earth is known unto us, to be very uneven and
vn-equally mixed, with many materials, differing from Magneticall substance,
having great and stony Mountains, large Valleys, deep Seas, long and high
Continents and fore-lands, some with mighty scattered rocks of Loadstone, of
Iron-Mines, and other Magneticall matter, and some without, as also the
entrails, and interior substance, bark or scarf of the earth, consisting of
a great quantity of substance not Magneticall, whereupon it comes to pass,
that when the Magneticall faculty of the earth shall direct these Magneticall
instruments of the Needle and Compass, they are not composed or set directly
upon the true Meridian that passes right on to the poles of the earth, but are
drawn and forced awry toward some vigorous and Magneticall eminency of the
earth, whereby the Meridian which the Needle and Compass makes does decline
and vary from the true Meridian of the earth, certain parts and degrees in the
Horizontal circle, which is called the variation of the Compass; the Meridian
that this declinatio^ of the compass and needle makes, may be termed the
Magneticall Meridian, to distinguish it from the true Meridian, and the space
between the Magneticall Meridian, and the true Meridian is the difference of
variation; So that here the needle and Compass do dispose themselves into the
North and South obliquely, and not truly and exactly, and according to the
diversity and strength of the scattered Magneticall bodies, being the causes of
variation, the arch of the declination is greater and lesser, as in sailing by
great Continents, and High-lands Magneticall, either the point or tail of the
Needle, and Compass, is forced awry toward the East or West, as is
demonstrated in the chapter of Applications, and in the XXIII. Chapter.

For if the Magneticall eminency, whether it be iron like clay, mine of iron,
or rockeof Lodestone, be contiguous unto the Magneticall Globe of the earth
and fastened in the same substance unto it, then the Compass and Needle will
leave the direction of the Magneticall Globe of the earth, and deflect toward
this eminency, but if this Mountain Magneticall be not continued with the
Globe, and have other Materials under and about him, then the Needle and
Compass will be thrust awry, and fly from it, declining as much, in a manner,
the other way, leaning unto it by the other point or tail, as it is
demonstrated in the rule of Application of one Needle, in his varrying upon the
Lodestone, unto a piece of Iron, touching and not touching the stone.

And no less does the Needle and Compass upon the continent and inner-land,
decline Easterly or Westerly, when as a great part of the earth shall be of a
substance no way Magneticall, and the other part shall be of a vigorous and
Adamantine quality to attract unto it.

For although all direction to the North and South by the Needle and Compass,
be from the virtue of the whole Magneticall Globe of the earth, yet a strong
effectual, and near particular cause, though weaker, as it is proved in the
end of the XXIII. Chapter, varieth their direction diversely, and erratically,
by that Land especially which lies and treats North and South.

Where as the vigor and potency Magneticall increases from the Equinoctial to
the poles of the Magneticall Globe of the earth, as it does in the Terrella,
whereby the like eminency Magneticall, in the parts near the poles, be of more
allicient and Adamantine property, then they are about the Equinoctial,
therefore it may be thought, that in sailing upon one Meridian, in like
distance, from this eminency, enriched with this vigor, it will make a greater
variation of the Compass near the pole, then it does near the Equinoctial,
but this matter may be helped and lessened by the great vigor that the needle
is directed withal from the Adamantine. Globe of the earth, especially if the
Seas be shallow, and the Needle in a near Orb unto the same, for thus the
Needle will very hardly be removed, because the force of the earth is great
that directs it, but mark that in the XXIII. chapter, where a smaller
strength Magneticall alters quickly the retention of the whole more vigorous
Magnet.

Also it is thought, that the variation of the compass is much furthered by
the natural inclination of the needle and his conformity to an high-land,
along the Meridian, between the equator and the pole, like the demonstration
of the Tab. VII. Fig. 2. where the long Lodestone varieth the Needle from the
Meridian by little and little to a right angle, so if it could be found out,
that a near particular cause were so potent to vary the needle, as the
long-stone, there is the side of the land would vary much, but the cap far
more, also at the equator, as in the Tab. VIII. Fi. 5. an eminent part of
land, ending at the equator, might vary the needle much, as is there
demonstrated.

Although these applications be great inducements that there should be such
positions of the Compass, in some places between vigorous lands, to be
observed, yet because that these eminences from land, are not any particular
and complete Magnets of themselves, but adherences and protuberances of some
part of the Magneticall Globe, and have their nature according to the vigor of
that parallel where they stand, and have not every one of them a pole near
their caps and angles, as these Magnets have, in their demonstrations set
down. I cannot wholly approve them for sufficient demonstrations of variation,
though they may help very much for the understanding of the same.

Therefore, for the better knowledge of the variation of the Compass by the
Terrella, it is very convenient to apply a strong Magneticall body upon the
Terrella, along the Meridian, or a little obliquely, then carrying a little
needle upon the Terrella, the needle will vary more from the true meridian
near the equator, then it will do near the pole, because the Needle near
the pole is directed very strongly and stiffely by those parts, and will hardly
be forced from his direction.

But let the eminency be very vigorous thick, and about twenty degrees high,
then hold the Needle so high from the Terrella in that Orb, then the Needle is
to be conveyed from the equator to the pole, and first bring this eminence
toward the Needle, and it will begin to vary from his direction, being
within twenty degrees or parts of the eminency, and so increase his declination
continually till he be varied toward sixty degrees, in the parts near the
equator, and about fifty degrees, at the most, in the parts nearer the pole in
the same Orb, therefore the deeper that the Seas are, the greater is the
Magneticall Orb, and the more subject to suffer the Needle to be attracted by
a near eminency, and the shallower that the Sea is, the less is the
Magneticall orb of the earth, which more hardly suffers the Compass to vary.

This is to be noted that high-eminences and lands near the poles, being
before the Compass do not cause the same to decline, but only such eminences
as are placed according to the Meridians, and trent North and South, or
obliquely a little on either side, to these the Compass will be attracted awry
from his true direction.

But if there be a narrow passage between two high-lands, then the Compass
and Needle will respect neither eminency, but carry and direct it self
paralelly between them both, when the strength of two high-lands is of equal
force; as it is demonstrated upon the Terrella, and not unlike to the figure,
Tab. VIII. Fig. 3.

This is to be observed also, that the midst of an high-land, by
demonstration upon the Terrella, does attract most, and make the greatest
variation, and toward the ends it decreaseth by little and little, and once
passing by the eminency it varieth the compass no more, and it is likely so to
do upon the earth.

If there be a Magneticall rock lying sidelings under the water, it will make
the needle vary a little from the true Meridian.

Therefore the farther that the Compass is distant from an high-land, that
attracteth, the less is the variation, and passing further out of the orb of
his virtue there will be no variation at all, unless the deepes and substance
of the earth be partly Magneticall, and partly of different substance, For
these causes it is observed, that places of a small distance assunder do differ
much in their variation, holding one proportion, neither in passing upon a
meridian, or on a parallel, yet in one and the selfsame place variations
never differ, but remain certain and constant.

The West-shore of a magneticall continent does make the variation of the
compass Easterly, and the East-shore of a maine-land beholding the Sun
rising attracteth on the North-side of the equator, the Lilly of the Compass
that it decline West from the true Meridian, on the South Side of the
Equinoctial the point of the Needle is attracted, Table XIII. Fig. 1. 2.

About the Islands of Azores the Compass has little variation, as at Fayall
the Compass varieth to the East three degres, and at Coruo the variation of
the Compass four degrees to the West.

Some think that Islands, though Magneticall, make no variation, being too
weak and feeble in regard of the great strength of the directive globe of the
earth, which directs the needle and compass, because that the Island of Elba,
near Florence, being full of Loadstones, causes no variation of the compass
more then other places near adjoining do, but if upon the Terrella, as in the
XXIII. chapter there be never so little wiers applied near a needle, it will
deflect toward them, so that here perfect observation may be desired, which by
the common rules is long and tedious to perform: therefore I will set down
ready and easy ways to observe the true meridian by the Sun, that the
variation of the compass may be plainly perceived, and that in a moment, by
one observation only, to the end that industrious and skillful pilots will in
time furnish themselves and the world with the true observation of variations
in all parts of the world.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of finding the variation of the Compass by one observation.

FOr this purpose there are certain things to be known, and observations to
be had in a readiness before this conclusion be found out, first the place is
to be set down by name or note, where this observation is made; then the
altitude of the pole in that place is to be known and set down, after the day
of the month; and the declination of the Sun are to be set down, all these
things skillful pylots know very well to perform. Then having a good
seacompasse for the water, and a large directory-needle for the land, it is
necessary upon the outmost part and circle of these to have a limb or verge a
quarter of an inch broad for the horizontall circle, and to have the one half
of it divided into two ninties of degrees, with his convenient parts and
figures, as is usual in all quadrants, beginning the numbers from the
meridianline, and ending them at East and West.

Next provide a diamiter somewhat longer, then that of the circle, of brass,
wier, or silver, having in the midst or center of it a small wier of the same
metal, fastened and soudred unto it at right angles, as a Semidiamiter, all
this being framed will be like in fashion to the beam and tongue of the
balance of a pair of scales, Tab. XIII. Fig. 3. and just at the East and West
put this diamiter through two holes of the sides of the compass, or fasten it
there with two loopes of brass, that you may turn the semidiamiter up and
down just over the center of the compass and needle, and this may be set
upright at either end, with two little shoulders of brass to keep the
semidiamiter upright and perpendicular unto the horizon.

Having the compass and needle thus furnished, place the needle and Lilly of
the compass just against the beginning of the divisions, then set the compass
before the Sun, with this semidiamiter erected where the compass and needle
standing in their Magneticall meridian, the shadow of the Sun from this
semidiamiter will show upon the degrees of the limb the Magneticall position,
and azimuth of the Sun, which is presently to be noted down, as it is East
or West.

Note that at sea if the ship turn any thing about, the box of the compass
must also be turned, that the meridian of the fly may be always against the
beginning of the divisions.

Likewise, because of the ships unsteadiness at sea, it is fit to have a wier
erected from the center of the fly, whose shadow among the divisions, upon the
fly of the compass, will show the Magneticall azimuth.

Then instantly having a Jacobs staff at sea, and a quadrant at land, take the
altitude of the Sun, which is to be noted down, and after at pleasure and
leisure, having these petitions, the variation of the compass for that place
may thus be had.

Take M. Blagraues Mathematical Jewel, or the Astrolabium Catholicum, set out
first by Gemma Frigius, which is not so ready as this, because it lacks the
rete which this has; place the horizon of the rete to the altitude of the pole
for that place, and look where the Suns altitude that was observed and
almicantareth crosses and meets with the parallel of the Suns declination for
that day before set down, and the azimuth or vertical circle that crosses
these two in that point where they touch, and this is the true azimuth of the
Sun from the true meridian, which differing from the Magneticall azimuth as
first observed upon the compass, the difference of these two azimuths is the
arch of the variation of the compass, and of the Magneticall meridian from the
true meridian, which is to be set down, that this is the variation of the
compass toward the East or West for that place.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of finding the variation of the Compass, by the circles of the Astrolabe.

FOr this purpose the petitions required in the former chapter, are to be writ
down, and in a readiness, as the place of the observation, with the altitude
of the pole in that place, the day of the month, with the declination of the
Sun for that day, the Tab: XIIII
diagram Magneticall azimuth, and the altitude of the Sun for that one instant
of observation. Now in describing the circles of the Astrolabe for this
purpose, first upon a line B E D at the center E make a circle a B C D, and by
the center E draw the line A C at right angles to B D from A toward B, number
the altitude of the pole, to which point apply a ruler from D, cutting the line
A C into the zenith point F, set one foot of the compasses in F, and describe
an arch toward B at any distance above and below, after the compasses
unremoved set the foot of the compass in B, and cut the former arches into
points, unto which applying a ruler, draw an obscure line to divide the line A
C produced into K, from the center K, according to the distance to F, describe
the vertical circle F G H I, making the line K G I at right angles to F H, now
from A toward B number the declination of the Sun for the day proposed for
the North signs, and toward D for the South signs, place a ruler to this
point and to D, cutting the line A E into L from the center E, as is the
distance E L, describe a circle for the parallel of the Sun, next from D
toward A, number the altitude of the pole to M and by the center E draw an
obscure diameter M, E, N from M N toward A B number the altitude of the Sun
before observed, applying a ruler from D to each division, to cut the line A C
in two points from the midst, as a center between these two, and by them
describe a circle for the almicantarath of the Sun, dividing the parallel of
the Sun at O, from O and F make obscure arches to cut one the other, from
whose center P to O F, describe an arch of a circle for the true azimuth. Which
to know what it is, draw an obscure line from F by P, to the circle F G H I
unto q, then divide the arch q h in the midst at r, and the arch g r resolved
into degrees, shall be the distance of the true azimuth from the meridian. The
difference of the Magneticall azimuth from this azimuth, shows the distance
of the meridian of the compass from the true meridian, which distance is the
variation of the compass for the place observed.

A short way upon land to draw the meridian line upon a plain superficies
leuelled to the horizon; immediately before the observing of the altitude of the
Sun, hold a plummet by a thread, that the shadow light on this superficies, in
this shadow make two pricks to be joined together in a straight line, after
out of this type set the angle g k r, which shall be the meridian from the line
of the azimuth mad^ ^y the shadow.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of finding the variation by the Analemma.

Being furnished with the petitions, before recited in the former chapters,
make this Analemma, about the horizontall line A E C, describe a meridian
circle, and make the vertical diamiter B D by E, at right angles to A C, then
from A to F in the quadrant A B, number the complement of the altitude of the
pole, and by E draw a line F G for the intersection of the equator and
meridian, the^ number from this equator on both sides the declination of the
Sun for the day of observing, being 10 degrees, and from the points draw the
line H I for the parallel of the Sun, next in either quadrant above the line
A C, number the altitude of the Sun before observed to be 30, to k and l
join these two Ta: XV
diagrams together in a line parallel to A C the horizon, passing through the
center of the Sun, and cutting the vertical line B D into M, and the
parallel of the declination of the Sun H I into N from M a center, describe a
semicircle to k l, and from n draw a perpendicular line with k l unto this
semicircle, dividing the same in O, and join m O by a line together for the
distance of the azimuth from the true meridian, which being resolved into
degrees, and compared with the Magneticall azimuth, the difference between
these azimuths shows the degrees of the variation of the compass.

CHAP. XXX.
Of finding the variation of the Compass by an Equinoctial Dial.

Provide in a readiness, an universal Equinoctial Dyall upon a plain, that
may artificially be erected to the height of the complement of the Latitude of
the pole, for the place of observation, and upon the center of the
Equinoctiall-circle place a ruler, and at eitheir end of the ruler erect a
plate of brass, little more then a quarter of an inch broad, that may with
iointes conveniently be raised at right angles, to the ruler and superficies
of the Dyall, and upon these plates place the divisions of the Trigon of the
twelve signs, after this manner. Tab. XV. Fig. 2.

Draw a straight line a b, and from a center, describe a quadrant of a circle
to c, and let c a cut a b at right angles, then divide the quadrant c b into
ninty degrees, then from b toward c number the greatest declination of the
Sun, which is 23 degrees and an half, ending in d, and at d draw a line at
right angles, to a b, which is d b, and set the length of the line d b from a
to h in the line a c, then produce the line a b, obscurely to e, and from b as
a center according unto the distance b d, make an obscure semicircle over the
line a b e, divide this semicircle into six parts, for six signs, every
division containing 30 degrees, when it shall be sub-deuided then join these
divisions together in parallel lines to a b e, for the beginning of the six
South-signes, then from d b draw a parallel line f g, according to the breadth
of the plate, and from d to f make a parallel to a b e in d f, the plate being
somewhat higher, make an hole, as in a Diopter, that the Sun may shine in at
it in Summer time, upon the other plate at a h for the North-signes, which
plate a h i k, would be of the same breadth and height that b d, f g is, then
let the obscure parallel lines of the beginning of the South signs be drawn
upon this plate, place Libra above the line b g, Scorpio above next line,
Sagitary above the next line, and under the line d f place Capricornus, under
the next Aquarius, and under the next Piscis, the other plate for the
North-signes, mnst have the same parallel lines in it that this has, for the
beginning of the North-signes, and an hole in it for the Diopter, that the
Sun may pass through it to the first plate of the winter-signes to show them
that part of the plate or end that has the Diopter in it is to be placed in
the line b a k, contrary to the situation of the paralels in the first plate,
and under the vpper-most line h i, place Aries, under the next Taurus, under
the next Gemeni, then above that line that has the Diopter, in it place
Cancer, above the next Leo, and above the next Virgo, so is all the characters
of the signs placed in their plates, let the ruler be of the breadth of the
plates, and in the midst of it draw a line, and in the middle of it make a
hole of the center L, the better to be fastened to the center of the
Equinoctial: k and m must be artificially joined with joints together and g
n, at which the ruler from l is produced to make an Index upon the
Equinoctialldyall to show his hour as it is Tab. XV. Fig. 2.

More-ouer, there is to be placed in the foot of this Equiquinoctiall Dyall, a
large directory-needle, having his outer-most circle divided into four
ninties, beginning to number the parts from the Meridian to the East or West.

This Equinoctial Dyall being thus furnished with the ruler and plates for the
Zodiake and the directory-needle, and erected to the Equinoctial of the place,
where the observation is made, turn the whole frame of the Dyall and ruler
about with his plates, until the Suune-shine directly upon the sign and parts
that he is in for that day, then his whole frame will stand in the true
meridian, and the directory-needle will stand in his Magneticall meridian, and
point out so many parts in his horizontall circle, as his variation in that
place is to the East or West, which is to be noted down, and the ruler in the
Equinoctial circle shows the true hour and part of the Sun, for that day and
instant.

Tab: XVI.
diagram

CHAP. XXXI.
Of finding the variation of the Compass by Rings.

THere is an other instrument consisting of four ringes of Brass, one to be
placed within the other, which is an universal Dyall, having a
directory-needle in a box, fastened at the bottom of the same, which does
show likewise presently the variation of the compass hanging perpendicularly,
Tab. XVI.

The first two rings of this instrument are two meridians, the outer-most is
broad, and has a ring to hold it by, fastening it to the upper end or top, and
the North-quadrant toward the ring or handle is divided into ninty degrees for
the numbers of the altitude of the pole, also this ring has fastened unto it
at the bottom a directory-needle in his box, the limb whereof is divided
into two ninties from the meridian to the East and West.

Within the ring of this broad meridian, there is an other meridian-ring
placed, so kept on the sides, that it may be moved higher or lower, so that
his broad Index, fastened unto one of the four quadrants, may be set to point
out the degrees of the altitude of the pole, this Index has a lower end for to
stay the fourth ring that carries the Trigon of the signs, and a thread like
an axis with a moveable beade thereon.

The third ring within the second is for the Equinoctial circle, and it is
fastened to the moveable Meridian-ring at right angles to the elevation of the
pole by two pinnes, whereon it may be moved at right angles to the meridian,
though it will be laid within the said meridian, in the inner part of this ring
there is a circle to be drawn for the Equinoctial circle, and to be divided
into 24 parts, for the hours of the day, from the meridian; and sub-diuided
with convenient lines and figures.

The fourth ring is fitted within this Equinoctial ring, and at six of the
clock, or at the East and West is fastened to it with two pinnes, to move at
right angles unto the same, this carries an axis which being moved about is
stayed by the nether end of the moveable meridians index, descending into a
nicke in it to hold it at right angles with the aequinoctiall-circle in manner
of a sphere, and holds the said circle at right angles with the meridian,
within this fourth ring, whose axis is stayed by the Index from either side of
the aequinoctiall, having the center in the aequinoctiall at the side of the
ring, there is described above it, and below it, the greatest declination of
the Sun, and the arch between the same and the aequinoctiall is divided into
such parts for the beginning of the twelve signs as the plates before were in
the former chapter, adding the characters of the twelve signs, as it was there
done; then at the sides of this ring in the aequinoctiall where the center of
the foresaid declination was taken, fasten the head of a pin of brass, and
from it beholding the sign and place on the other side that the Sun is in that
day, and between the eye and that place in this line place the beade upon the
axis and so fix it.

Now having this instrument thus prepared, set the Index of the moveable
meridian unto the altitude of the pole, and moving the Equinoctial circle, and
the colure-circle or different of the signs, and fasten it firm at the lower
end of the Index, hold the instrument by the ring, or handle, like a sphere
perpendicularly, and turn it too and fro till the shadow of the bead light
upon the middle line of the aequinoctiallring, thus the meridian of this
instrument stands upon the true meridian, the shadow of the beade shows the
hour and his part of the day, and the needle in the box points out the
variation of the compass in the limb of the horizontall circle.

These rings, at pleasure, may be folded one with in the other for conueniency
of carriage, and in time of use set abroad like a sphere.

Any universal, or Astronomers ring, would be of especial use for the
finding of the true meridian, as well as these, and having the needle added
unto them, the variation of the compass would be found.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of finding the variation of the Compass by an Horizontall Dyall.

When I was a young student in the University and delighted in making of Dyals,
I was always wont to place the lines of the twelve signs in them, that when I
set any bodies of Dyals in the Sun, upon a level foot, I always directed
them by the shadow of the Sun upon his sign and part into the true meridian
and South, and having a large horizontall Dyall for any Region, with the lines
of the twelve signs described in it, placing the same upon a level
plat-forme, and turning it until the nicke of the shadow of the style light
upon the place and sign that the Sun was in for that day, then fixing a
compass or needle with his meridan parallel to the meridian of the Dyall, the
needle will show in the limb of the horizontall circle the variation of the
compass, and the Dyall shows the hour and his part of the day.

This Dyall might be made universal as well as the aequinoctiall, if that in
traveling North the North side were elevated by means of a quadrant, that the
plain of the Dyall might always have the pole of the Dyall erected above him
to that latitude for which it was described, and in passing Southerly the
South Side of the Dyall would be situated by the quadrant to his propper
elevation.

And if that the Azimuths and Almicantars were put into this Dyall, then the
Azimuth and altitude of the Sun, with the place of the Sun and hour, would
be presently showed by the shadow of the style, so that for these purposes,
this horizontall Dyall would be made universal, as a general Astrolabe or
Astronomicall ring.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of finding the variation in degrees and minutes by the doctrine of Triangles.

WHereas many may be desirous to know precisely the degree and minutes of the
variation of the compass, for to satisfy these men's appetite, it is very
convenient to understand the doctrine of Triangles, for by the Tables of sines,
Secants, and Tangents, with the Axioms and consequents, and the Golden rule
this, matter will be attained unto. And therefore for this purpose, I would
advise you to observe and mark the frame of the Analemmaset set down before
in the XXVIII. chapter, Table XV. Fig. 1. with the obscure lines pricked
therein.

First in this Analemma let G C equal to A F be the elevation of the
aequinoctiall line, consisting of 38 and an half, which being called to C L
30. the Suns altitude at the instance of observation for that day, and the
some of these will be 68. whose Sine is the obscure pricked line L P, now take
A K 30. degrees being the Suns altitude, out of A F the aequinoctiall
Altitude 38. there rests K f 8 1/^, whose sine is the obscure line pricked q
K, which added to L P. produced make L P S, 77.

Divide S L into two equal parts ending in t, and take from S t, being 38 the
sine of the Suns altitude K q 8 ^ and take also out h r being 10, the sign
of the Suns declination, and there will remain t V being 20, then join t
and m together in an obscure pricked line, and make a line at right angles to
this from m to x being 20, and is equal unto t V, so have you this
demonstration, and if you look into the Table of sines for the numbers, you
shall find them set down in their place.

And as the sine of t l is unto the sine of l m, so is the fine of x m unto the
sine m n.

So that the angle M B K in the Analemma being the complement of the angle M B
N, will be the Azimuth you sought for, and it is equal to the angle O m D in
the said type, which compared with the Magneticall Azimuth, the difference
between them shows what the variation is from the true meridian.

Secondly, it is to be noted, that if this observation, or taking of the
Suns altitude be before 6 a clock in the morning, or after at night, when
the Sun is in the North paralels, that N the intersection of the Suns
altitude and parallel of the Suns declination be on the same side of the
Analemma that t is on, then take h r the sine of the Suns declination out of l
t, and there will rest t V, join t and m together, and make a small line at
right angles from n to x, equal to t V, for as t l is to k m, so is x n unto n
m, etc.

Thirdly, and lastly, if observation be made when the Sun is in the
aequinoctiall, then make the small line m x equal to P t, and look what
proportion t l has unto l m, the same has x m to m n where n is on the
aequinoctiall line, etc.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of the application of the Inclinatory-needle to the axis of the Earth.

WE have showed how the compass and directory-needle do apply and order
themselves in the Magneticall meridian toward the pole, and of the correcting
of his erring from the true meridian and pole, being carried level and parallel
to the horizon, and seated in any part of the terrestrial globe, whereby, and
to the end the traveler by sea and land may take his course certainly, to any
coast or part of the world. Now it remains that we treat of the use of
another needle, called the Inclinatory-needle, which being artificially placed
in his ring, is as profitable to all Nauigators and travelers, as that
formerly spoken of; for by this they may know the elevation of the pole in all
parts of the world without the sight of the celestial globes and lights.

This Inclinatory-needle fitted in his ring, and placed in the Magneticall
meridian, does apply and conform it self unto the axis of the Magneticall
globe of the Earth (whereas the directory-needle does apply unto the meridian
and pole) and that diversely in diverse eleuations of the pole, for sailing upon
the aequinoctiall of the earth, this Inclinatory-needle makes a paralellline
with the axis of the earth, being upon the pole, this needle will make one
continued line and axis with the axis of the earth: passing from the
aequinoctiall to either pole, this Inclinatory-needle will conform it self
unto certain acute angles with the axis of the earth, which increase from the
aequinoctiall in largeness, and prove less acute in every parallel, so that
the angle of the earths axis, and the axis of the needle is at the greatest
about 42 degrees of the poles elevation, and the difference between these two
will be near 22 degrees and a half, being here at the largest, after it
decreaseth continually toward the pole, where the needle will stand directly
upon the axis of the earth.

Now to know and find out this angle what it is, it is necessary to learn what
angle this Inclinatory-needle makes with the horizon in every latitude of the
pole, because if the elevation of the pole be taken out of this angle with the
horizon, which is always the larger, (unless it be at the aequinoctiall and
the pole) and has the axis of the earth always between him and the horizon,
the remainder is the angle of this needles conformity with the axis of the
earth.

Therefore we will leave to speak of the Inclinatory-needles most natural and
true conformity with the axis of the earth, and hereafter shall deliver by what
means the angle between the Inclinatory-needle and the horizon may be known,
to the end that the elevation of the pole may thereby be found out.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the Inclinatory Ring and Needle.

WHereas the horizon is very easily found out by any massy substance, which
naturally will hang perpendicular and plumbe, by having a level line made at
right angles unto the same, therefore it shall be convenient to place this
Inclinatory-needle in a ring of brass or silver, so artificially, that this
frame being carried about the meridian of the earth, this needle may make all
kind of acute angles with the horizon in the varieties of his inclinations unto
him, as at the aequinoctiall this needle lies level with the horizon, so at
the pole it stands at right angles to the horizon, and directs it self in
one line with the axis of the earth, and passing from the aequinoctiall, it
does eleuate it self above the horizon twice as fast as the pole does, until
the pole have about an 11 degrees of latitude about the horizon, but after the
needle slacketh his pace by little and little, until he come to the pole where
both join together without any angle at all in one line directly.

Also this needle makes always one kind of angle with the horizon in one
parallel and altitude of the pole, and a diverse arch from the same, but one
certain in one latitude, as by this instrument following shall appear, and
every where be observed.

Take a long piece of steele-wier, and through the midst and center of the
same put a short wier thorough Tab: XVII
diagram this same axis at right angles exactly, or rather file a plate of
steel artificially into the form of the Inclinatory-needle with his cross
axis, as you see in this type, Tab. XVII. Fig. 1. and Tab. II. Fig. 16. and at
right angles together. Then provide a round ring of brass or silver, perfectly
polished and rounded, of the breadth of an inch and a quarter, almost as broad
as the short axis is in length, having a little ring, in the top to hold it
perpendicularly, as in this type. This ring must have within it another plate
and ring close fastened unto it, but let it be somewhat narrower, and draw in
the midst of it a middle circle for the meridian circle, which is to be
divided into four nineties, beginning from the sides, and ending the
deuisions, and their numbers in the top and at the bottom.

After provide two narrow plates of brass or silver, to be fastened on either
side of the ring paralelly to the horizon, and in the midst of these, as it
were, against the center of the ring, drill and make two little holes almost
through the sides of the plates for the short axis of the Inclinatory-needle to
play and move in, up and down, according unto this kind of Magneticall and
Inclinatory conformity. Lastly, this instrument would be covered with two
glasses for both sides to keep the Inclinatory-needle from wind and weather,
and a care had that the instrument hang truly perpendicular.

In time of use in traveling, hang this instrument South and North in the
Magneticall meridian, and this Inclinatory-needle will fall with one end under
the horizon in every elevation of the pole, and bear up his other end in every
parallel and altitude of the pole to a certain angle with the horizon, which
may be called the Inclinatory angle for that place, which being noted in the
meridian of this ring, with the degrees he points at, is to be reserved as
proportionable to that elevation of the pole where the observation is made,
this matter was demonstrated by the round Lodestone in every part in the XIII.
chapter before, which being collected by the said demonstration and practice,
are to be placed in their correspondency in a Table for the altitude of the
pole, whereby in all places it may be had readily what will be the angle of the
Inclinatory-needle, and what is the latitude of the pole, caused only by the
disposition of the Magneticall globe of the earth, and also by the diagrams
following it is showed.

CHAP. XXXVI.
A Diagram of the needles inclinations to the axis of the earth, and horizon in
any latitude.

THis demonstration shows most manifestly unto our eyes, both what angle the
Inclinatory-needle makes to the axis of the world, or earth, in all regions,
and also what angle or arch he points at above or under from the horizon in
any latitude of the pole whatsoever, hereby most evidently setting out the
meanings of the two former chapters, and of the XIII. chapter before them,
where it is demonstrated from the stone it self, that this Inclinatory-needle
will make but one circumuolution about the meridian of the earth, as it does
about the Loadstone, the Diagram is this.

From the center A in the horizontall line B C, describe Tab^ XVIII
diagram a meridian circle, like that in the Inclinatoryring, drawing a
perpendicular line cross the same by the center A, from the top or Zenith D,
to the bottom or Nadir E, then divide the two quadrants above the horizon,
ending at D into 90 parts on both sides, setting down the figures at every
division. Now from every tenth degree in the quadrant A B D, draw parallel
lines to the line A D produced, then set one foot of the compass in the arch
B D at 10 degrees, and extend the other soote of the compass to C, and
describe the arche of a circle from C to the line of 10, divide this arch into
90 parts, first into 3 parts, and divide one of these parts into 3 lesser,
containing ten parts a piece, now take the first tenth part from C, and lay a
ruler from A to this division, and draw an obscure line under the
Inclinatory-needle which will light upon this line, and it will divide the arch
of the quadrant D C into that degree and minute which the Inclinatory-needle,
in the latitude of 10, will point at in his isntrumental and meridian-ring,
which being more then 10, the axis of the pole, the ouer-plus from the axis
between the needle and axis, does show the arch of the natural application,
or inclination of the needle unto the axis of the earth, and the parts between
the horizon to this part in the arch which the needle does point at in the
quadrant, C D is the angle that the Inclinatory-needle makes with the horizon
in the latitude of ten degrees.

In like manner from the other ten parts, or 90 degrees, in the quadrant B D
draw paralell-lines to the (...) A D produced, and from every part as a center
extending the compass from the same to C, describe arches from C to those
lines, dividing them into 90. parts a piece, and take like number of parts
answering to these parts in the quadrant C D for the axis of the latitude, then
draw an obscure line from A to the same part, in these larger arches, and that
will show the angle that the Inclinatory-needle makes in his inclination to
the axis and horizon in that latitude. We have only for example-sake
deliniated the inclination of this needle to the axis and horizon, in the
latitudes of 10. 30. and 60. the like whereof might be performed in every one
of the other degrees of latitude, which thing is omitted to avoid confusion of
lines.

What this angle of the inclination of the needle would be in every latitude
of the pole, although by the Diagramme, already set down, it might be
Mechanically taken out of the quadrant C D, as it is reduced into ninty parts.
Yet I will set down, how out of the cannons of Triangles, the arch from I to
C, may be exactly known in degrees and minutes.

In the Diagram G, A, B 30; the elevation of the pole being set for an example,
draw from G these obscure lines, as G F, G K, G C, G A, and A F, the line of
inclination, the content of the angle A G C is 15, C G K is 15. K G F is 20, so
that the angle of the Triangle F G is 18, 50, and the sum of the opposite
angles, which marked upon the semicircle, will be 130 degrees, whose half is
65 degrees, the tangent whereof is 214459690, then we find that the line G F
in the triangle is equal to G C, the Suhtenses of 150 degrees, the half or
sinus hereof is 75 degrees, whose parts out of the Table of sines are 96592583,
which being doubled make the side G F 193185166. The side G A has for his
parts the total sine 100000000, the sum of these two sides is 293185166, and
the difference of them is 93185166.

Now multiply the tangent of 65 degrees 214459690 by the difference of the
sides 93185166, and divide the product 42891938 by the sum of the sides
293185166, the quotient will be the difference of the tangents 146296413,
which taken from the parts of 65 the middle tangent 214459690, the tangent
parts that remain 68163277 give by the Table 34 degrees 16 47.

Here take 3416 47 out of 65 degrees, there rests 3043 13, for the less
angle A F G, so add 34 16 47 unto 65 degrees, and it makes 99 16 47, for F A
G the greater angle, heereto add 30 degrees the elevation of the pole there
amounts 129 16 47 for the angle F A B, which taken from the semicircle 180,
there remains 50 43 13 for F A C the inclination of the needle unto the
horizon where the pole is elevated 30 degrees.

I have here set down a Table calculated out of this diagramme of the degrees
and minutes of the angles of the Inclinatory-needle, with the horizon
answerable to every elevation of the pole, by Mr. Brigges the Geometry reader
in Gresham College, who has far more ready and easy ways to make the
foresaid Table, then I have set down unto thee, and I think that this Table
will agree more truly with the motion from the stone it self then that which
is made by the same man out of the diagramme in the Chapters following.

TABLE.
Eleuat. poli Inclinat ad horiz. G. M 1 2 2 2 4 4 3 6 6 4 8 8 5 10 10 6 12 11 7
14 13 8 16 13 9 18 12 10 20 10 11 22 5 12 23 59 13 25 50 14 27 39 15 29 25 16
31 9 17 32 50 18 34 28 19 36 4 20 37 37 21 39 7 22 40 34 23 41 59 24 43 21 25
44 40 26 45 58 27 47 12 28 48 24 29 45 35 30 50 43 31 51 49 32 52 54 33 53 56
34 54 56 35 55 55 36 56 52 37 57 48 38 58 42 39 59 35 40 60 26 41 61 17 42 62 6
43 62 54 44 63 40 45 64 26 46 65 11 47 65 55 48 66 38 49 67 20 50 68 2 51 68 43
52 69 23 53 70 2 54 70 41 55 71 19 56 71 57 57 72 34 58 73 11 59 73 47 60 74 22
61 74 58 62 75 33 63 76 7 64 76 41 65 77 15 66 77 49 67 78 25 68 78 55 69 79 27
70 80 0 71 80 32 72 81 4 73 81 35 74 82 7 75 82 38 76 83 9 77 83 39 78 84 10 79
84 40 80 85 10 81 85 40 82 86 10 83 86 39 84 87 9 85 87 38 86 88 7 87 88 35 88
89 4 89 89 32 90 90 0

CHAP. XXXVII.
Another Diagram of finding the angles of the Inclinatory-needle in any
Parallel.

HEre we shall set down another Diagram which does properly show the motion,
conversion, and application which the needle makes when that he is carried
about the meridian of the Terrella or Semiterrella when the poles of the same
lie in the horizon, in which circumparragation this needle describes two whole
circles, as he passes round about the meridian, as is demonstrated in the
twelfth chapter before, from the stone it self. For this needle being placed
at the equator, it seateth it self parallel to the axis of the Magnet, being
carried further on the quadrant toward the pole, about 17 degrees it points to
the pole of his orb, and near about 33 and 34 minutes, having made a quadrant
in his motion, he places himself parallel to the equator, and at right
angles to the axis of the Magnet, and passing on to 45 degrees, this needle
beholds there the equator of his orb, and coming to 90 degrees against the
pole, it makes one axis with the axis of the Magnet, and describes another
quadrant, so that from the equator to the pole in passing along this one
quadrant of the stone, this needle has made half a circle, so that if he
should make a perrambulation round about the Tab: XIX
diagram whole meridian, ne would make two epicicles, like to the motions
ascribed to some of the Planets.

But to make use of this motion for the inclination, we shall only set down
what aspects or angles the needle makes with the axis of the earth at every
tenth degree from the equator to the pole, where in this Diagram there be
lines to the inside of the quadrant D B for the inclination of the needle,
which may also be produced outward into the orb of Magneticall virtue upon the
limb, as it is set out in the twelfth chapter, Tab. III. Fig. 2. both in
pricked lines, and also in the erection of a short wier at every tenth degree
of the quadrant: therefore for the better preserving of this matter, we shall
set down the order of the making of this Diagram, as follows.

Describe upon the center E a meridian circle, as it were of the round Magnet A
B C D, which divide into four quadrants, joining A and B for the axis, and C
and D for the equator, together with straight lines, which cut the one the
other at right angles in the center E, divide the quadrant of the poles
elevation D B into ninety parts, beginning from D, and ending the numbers in B,
with the usual figures.

At D draw an obscure parallel line D F for the horizon, and from D, as a
center according to the semidiamiter D A, describe an obscure arch of a circle
A B F, dividing the line D F in F, next upon E, as a center according unto the
semidiamiter E F make an arch of a circle F G, and from B a center, according
to the semidiamiter A B make an arch of a circle that cutteth the arch F G into
G.

Then place the foot of the compass in every part of the quadrant D B, as in
center, extending the other foot to A, and describe arches to F G, and first
place the foot of the compass in the division of 10 in the quadrant, and
opening the compass to A, describe the arch of a circle from A to the arch F
G, and divide this arch from H into ninety parts, first into 3 parts, then part
every one of these into 3 parts, containing ten parts apeece, if they were
subdivided into them, then from 10 in the quadrant, to 10 in the arch from F G
draw a straight line 10 and 10 for the line of the inclination, now draw an
obscure line from E to the degree of 10 in the quadrant, and from this line at
10 make an obscure line at right angles for the horizon to E to, then take the
semidiamiter D E, and place one foot in this line from 10 to H, and from 10 as
a center describe an obscure arch H L to the line 10 and 10, and this arch
shall be the angle that the Inclinatory-needle makes with the horizon, where
the pole is elevated ten degrees above the horizon, and the angle 10 E and 10
is the complement of the former angle.

Next place the foot of the compass in the twentieth degree of the quadrant,
and stretching it to A describe the arch of a circle from A to the arch F G,
which being divided into ninty parts, first into three parts, and these into
three parts, again draw a line from 20 in the quadrant to 20 from the arch F
G, now make an obscure line from E to the 20 degree in the quadrant, and from
this line at 20 make an obscure line for the horizon at right angles to E, 20,
take the distance from E 20, and place it in the line 20 I, and from 20 as a
center, the compasses being unremoved, describe the arch I M, cutting the line
20 and 20 into M, which is the angle the Inclinatory-needle makes with the
horizon, and being set in the arch D B, the number of the degrees of this arch
of inclination will appear.

According to this order draw arches from A to F G, making the divisions in the
quadrant the centers, and their distance from A the semidiamiters of them,
dividing these arches as before is done, and drawing right lines to the
correspondent divisions in their several arches from the several degrees in
the quadrant, whose respondent angles of inclination is known by making at the
same and describing arches according to their semidiamiter from E, as has been
declared in the two former examples, which being reduced into degrees, by
placing the arch in the quadrant D B, from D toward B, will show the quantity
of the needles inclination unto the horizon and his angle with the same.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of finding by the Needles inclination unto the horizon, the altitude of the
Pole by an instrument.

FOr the performance hereof, it is necessary to have the straight lines of the
needles inclination or aspect to the axis, drawn in the former chapter
obscurely, described again by the former art, and the quadrant D B divided
into his parts. At D draw a parallel line to A B, and take the semidiamiter E D
and place it in this line to N, then set one foot of the compass unremoved on
the 10 degree of the quadrant D B, and the other foot in the straight line of
ten obscurely drawn, making a note there, then remove the compass, retaining
the semidiamiter E D, and place one foot in 20 in the quadrant, and the other
in the line of 20, making another note or prick there, so place this
semidiamiter of E D from 30, 40, and the rest in the quadrant on their proper
lines, making notes and pricks upon them where they end, (...) XX
diagrams now join these notes and pricks together with convenient lines, and
there will be a spirall line described of principal use in this instrument,
Tab. 20 Fig. 1.

Moreover describe a moveable quadrant of the same bigness and semidiamiter
that E D B is of, to be moved upon it in a paper apart, past-boord, or some
metal, whereon this instrument may be described, (the larger the instrument
is, the better it will be for use) therefore, according to the semidiamiter E
D, describe a quadrant A B C Tab. XX. Fig. 2. from A the center, and divide it
into ninety parts, first into nine parts, then every one of these into two
parts, and every one of these divided into five several degrees, thus will the
whole quadrant be divided into ninety degrees; and at 90 degrees make a center
at C, and from B to C set the figures on the outer space in the limb unto
every tenth part, as is used to be done, after a little half inch distance;
from the center of the quadrant A, describe a little limb or stay, then cut
out the inward part of the quadrant C B to this limb or stay, and from the
limb to A cut out a part, that the semidiamiter A C may serve for an Index or
ruler, Ta. XX. F. 2. Now bring this quadrant A B C thus cut out, and place, and
fasten the degree of 90 where the center is at C, upon the center E, on the
instrument where the spirall line is on the same, Tab. XX. Fig. 1.

In the time of observation by the Inclinatory-ring, before described, mark
what degree in the ring the Inclinatory-needle points at in the meridian
circle of the same, then in this instrument here described, note the degree
observed in the ring upon the moveable quadrant from B to C, and turn this
quadrant about till that this note or degree does touch the spirall line; here
stay the moveable quadrant, and his index C A will show in the quadrant D B,
the altitude of the pole in that place.

So back ways set the index of the moveable quadrant to any elevation of the
pole, and where the spirall line cutteth the limb of the moveable quadrant,
the degrees and parts show what should be the number, due to the angle of the
Inclinatory-needle, and what parts he would point out in that place. A Table of
the inclination of the needle, answering to every elevation of the pole, might
be made by this instrument.

CHAP. XXXIX
Of finding the needles inclination in every latitude by Table.

THe way to find the angle, which the Inclinatory-needle makes with the
horizon in any latitude, or the degrees correspondent, by a table, is most
profitable and ready, because that knowing any one of these two, that is,
either the altitude of the pole, or the angle of inclination to the horizon,
the other is presently known by the table.

Seek in this Table following the altitude of the pole in the left collumne,
and in the next place toward the right hand you shall find the degrees and
minutes of the needles inclination, unto the horizon, answerable for that
latitude; as for example. I would know what would be the arch of the angle of
the Inclinatory-needle where the pole is elevated 60 degrees, I (...) to R make
the angle S R N to consist of 52 degrees and 12l, which being subducted from
the angle of E R N, containing 63 degrees. and 17l, the angle S R E will retain
only 11 degrees and 5l, whose complement S R T consists of 78 degrees. and 55l,
declaring the inclination of the Magneticall needle unto the horizon R T, where
the latitude of the place is 60 degrees.

CHAP. XXXX.
Of finding the angle of Inclination, the Magneticall meridian, and the Azimuth
together.

IT is very convenient at sea to have a large Inclinatory-ring with his
Magneticall needle of a foot diamiter, that the divisions of the meridian
circle being large, the degree of the moving needle will the better be
perceived, and to have a weight of diverse pounds fastened at the bottom to
hold this ring plumbe and steady: moreover on this weight I would have a
compass, or directory-needle placed in his bottom, and a beam for a diamiter
and semidiamiter of brass, before described, for the observing of the
Magneticall azimuth, as was appointed in finding the variation of the Compass.

These two Magneticall needles, the one in the Inclinatory-ring, the other in
the cauitie of the bottom, being placed five or six inches asunder, will not
hinder diagrams or attract the one the other, being out of the vigor in this
distance of their Magneticall orbs.

A long wier that has been excited Magnetically, being thrust through a cork,
and placed in the water, will show the Inclination and Magneticall meridian, at
one instant, in his quiet situation.

CHAP. XXXXI.
Of the variation of the Inclinatory-Needle.

THe Earth being a Magneticall body and globe, conformeth the
Inclinatory-needle to certain angles of inclination in every latitude of the
pole, which angles are always one and the same in every parallel, as has been
demonstrated in diverse Chapters.

Both by the Lodestone it self, by the fundamental hypothesis, by
instruments, and by tables; but because that the globe Magneticall of the Earth
has many cauities filled with other substances different from Magneticall
nature, and many mountains Magneticall mounted above these substances higher
and lower, so that some attract, being above the point of the
Inclinatory-needle, some being under it; some placed before it, draw the point
of the Inclinatory-needle up unto them, other behind it, being also adamantiue
forts will have this Inclinatory-needle strike sail to them also, by which
means the natural conformity of the Inclinatory-needle to his natural angles
is much disturbed and depraved, whereby it comes to pass that this needle
has his variation also, as well as the directory needle has, as is before
demonstrated.

Therefore the variation of the Inclinatory-needle is, when in one altitude of
the pole this needle points out another angle, different from the true and
respondent angle of that latitude of the pole, being hindered by a mountain, or
part Magneticall, that does attract one of the points of the
Inclinatory-needle, approaching near unto it, either near the poles or
equator, in so much that the angle of inclination is made less or more then
it naturally would be.

In sailing East or West upon a parallel, having hie land on the side toward
the pole, consisting of Magneticall substance, this will attract the
Inclinatory-needle, and cause his natural position to be more perpendicular
then it would be.

If the shore about the pole be situated between the Inclinatory-needle and
the equator, this adamantine eminency will attract the needle unto it, making
his inclination less plumbe then naturally it is.

In sailing East or West nearer the aequinoctiall, where the carriage of the
Inclinatory-needle is less perpendicular, and more tending to the level with
the horizon, the Magneticall eminency between the pole and the needle, will
pull down the higher end of the same, and make him more parallel to the axis
of the earth, then naturally he could endure.

Even so an adamantine mountain, between the Inclinatory-needle and the
aequinoctiall line, will lift up the lower end of this needle, being within the
Magneticall vigor of that mountain, and make him more parallel with the
horizon then his natural conformity requires in that parallel.

The variation of the Inclinatory-needle is greater in the parts nearer the
aequinoctiall, then it is in the parts near the poles, where this needle is
not attracted so many degrees from his natural angle, as usually he is near
the aequinoctiall.

If in the parts near the poles, the Inclinatory-needle be carried between two
eminences Magneticall, in that space of the straight where both their vigors be
of like validity, they will make the application of this needle perpendicular,
crossing them both at all right angles, not much unlike, as it is in XV.
Chapter of applications, Table VIII. Fig.1.

In sailing nearer the aequinoctiall in straights between two adamantine
mountains, whose vigor attractiue surpass the general virtue disponent of
the Magneticall globe of the earth, these will lay the Inclinatory-needle in a
parallel and level to the horizon, though they be many degrees from the
aequinoctiall, as Chapter XV. Tab VIII. Fig. 2.

Lastly, in passing or sailing near and over a vigorous Magneticall rock, in
the sea, or earth, under us, in approaching nearer unto it, the same will
attract the Inclinatory-needle from his right place, and coming nearer the
rock, it will alter him much more, and passing over the same, it will attract
the needle perpendicularly, and being past, this needle will be freed by little
and little from that disturbance of his natural inclination.

These varieties are found upon the Magneticall globe or Terrella, by having a
convenient piece, or pieces of iron placed thereon, as has been said, and
placing the Inclinatory-needles, before described in the II. chapter, the one
of them put upon a Lute-string, the other in his frame, Tab. II. Fig. 17. 18 or
19. so that I hope I need not set down any types hereof, for the ingenious
will better conceive how to gather this matter from the globe of the Loadstone,
then I can possibly explain in many troublesome figures, or the workman
deliniat by his skill unto you in printed tables and figures.

CHAP. XXXXII.
Of finding the variation of the Inclinatory-needle.

Having declared the manifold causes of the variation of the Inclinatory-needle
from his true and natural angle of inclination with the horizon; it follows
that we deliver plainly how to discern these events when they shall fall out,
which are known perfectly by having the true elevation of the pole, where these
matters shall be required.

The rules and ways how to know the elevation of the pole in all places, is so
perfectly set out by most Astronomers and writers of Navigations, and so well
known to all expert Pilots, that it is a thing needless here to repeat them.

Besides the ingenious Pilot knowing the elevation of the pole in some places
of his voyage that he has passed, by keeping a true, not a dead reckoning of
his course in pricking his Card aright, and observing the way with the
logge-line, with other currants and occurrants, will give a very artificial
conjecture of the elevation of the pole in that place where he is, though he
see neither Sun nor Stars.

Notwithstanding because the skillful Pilots may be hindered in this kind of
observation, by the falling of the ship to Lee-wards, and by other
extraordinary change of weather, and other disturbances that may many ways
fall out at sea, therefore I will only remember one way out of the principals
before delivered, whereby he may at any time of the day, the Sun shining,
know the altitude of the pole.

This thing is chiefly performed by knowing the true variation of the Compass,
which shows the true meridian for that place, presently seek out the true
Azimuth also, which is perfectly known by the shadow of the Sun upon the
limb of the Compass, by the furniture of the beam, before described,
instantly take the altitude of the Sun by the Jacobs staff at sea, or a
large quadrant at land.

The true Azimuth and Almicanter thus known, seek the point where they cross
the one the other in the Rete of the Mathematical Jewel and Astrolabium
Catholicum, then observing the parallel of the Suns declination for that day,
turn about the Rete of this instrument, until this parallel of the Suns
declination be touched by the point, where these two circles of altitude and
position meet, and then the horizon of the Rete will show in the limb the
latitude of that place.

The latitude of the pole for any place being known, the true angle of the
Inclinatory-needle is manifest and apparent, as it is set down and known by
the XIII. chapter, in the chapter to know the angles of inclination by the
instrument, and in the table of the degrees of the Inclinatory-needle,
answerable to every elevation of the pole.

Now observe the degrees that the Inclinatory-needle points out in his ring
in that place, and take the difference of these from the degrees of the true
angle, and that is the variation of the Inclinatory-needle for that place.

CHAP. XXXXIII.
Of finding the Longitude.

HEre I purposed to have ended this short Treatise of Magneticall matters, but
because that this thing is not altogether impertinent thereunto, I thought it
not superfluous to annex this little chapter of finding the longitude, for
although that the Magneticall needles, before treated of, do not show the
longitude; yet because the true meridian and altitude of the pole is known by
them, there is much help brought thereby for the knowledge of the longitude,
which by a few easy observations more, from the body of the Moon, will be
obtained, whose motion if it should be set down and ordered in an exact
manner, would require a large discourse, with many rules and observations of
the Moons inequality of motion, anomaly and prostapherisis, of his
excentricity, paralaxis, with the variety of his latitude and nodes, which
thing, being very laborious and curious, shall be here omitted, referring you
herein to Tycho Brahe and his rules, and only I shall here set down rules to
know the place of the Moon at a larger scantling, yet very near the truth
(though not the truth it self, which peradventure the best Studied in this
kind can very hardly do) only borrowing half a days motion at the Moon,
wherein the matters before mentioned will not alter many minutes.

Provide an Almanake or Ephemerides for any place or port, wherein the apparent
place of the Moon in the Zodiac is exactly set down in degrees and minutes
for the noone of every day, especially of the day of observing, then take the
difference of the Moons motion from the day before, and reduce it into
minutes, dividing them by 24 hours, the quotient will show what minutes the
Moon moves in an hour.

Now take the altitude of the Moon at any time of the day or night by the
Jacobs staff, or a quadrant, then observe the Azimuth of the Moon by shadow,
(as before for the Sun) or by a ruler with sights, which if it do differ any
hours from the meridian, allow the parts due of the Moons motion.

Then seek in the R^te of the Mathematical Jewel, or Universal Astrolabe,
where the Azimuth and Almicantaraph of the Moon, newly observed, cut each
other, setting the horizon to the altitude of the pole, and look what parallel
does cut these two, and follow the same unto the Eclipticke line (or do (...)
like of the Moons latitude) in that sign, degree, and minute of the Zodiac,
the Moon is in at that instant.

These degrees, fewer or more then those of the radical and fixed meridian, for
which the Ephimerides was made, do show what hours and parts are to be added,
if the observation be toward the West, or subtracted if in the East, to this
meridian (it is to be noted that every hour contains 15 degrees of the
Equinoctial) and thus the longitude of that place you are in, will be
attained, which you desire.

But to find the longitude of any place you go to, from the place you pass
from, by these Magneticall-needles only, it will be necessary to prick your
Card as well by the degrees of latitude of the pole, correspondent to the
angles of the Inclinatory-needle, as by the way the ship makes upon the points
of the Directory compass, and therefore it will be fit to have both these
needles placed together as in the type of the XL. Chapter, and pendant before
the Mariner at the helm with the Compass and Trauers-boords for them both.

Now for this purpose I would have another Trauers ruler or limb for the
quadrant of the Inclinatory-ring, placed before him, as it is described in the
Page following, where there is only 30 degrees divided upon the same, which
being twice more repeated, will make up 90 degrees, every degree has 6 hol^^,
for pegs to be put into them, for the number of 10 minutes apeece, and on the
first column on the left hand there are 4 holes made to receive pegges
according to the number of hours you sail on such a degree and minute,
pointed in the Inclinatory-ring.

Besides these instruments, provide a perfect Sea-card for your voyage, with
the lines of the winds, and the lines of the longitude and latitude placed
therein; then observing the way that the ship makes in an hour, by the
log-line prick your way on the card out of the Trauesboord for the point of the
Compass you sail on, also by this second work prick your Card by the same
way with the degree of latitude you find by the degree of the
Inclinatory-angle in the Trauers-limbe, as it diagram is correspondent by the
ways, instruments, and precepts delivered from the Inclinatory-needle, then
observe in the meeting of these two sorts of pricking, what meridian passes by
them in your Card, and that shows the longitude of the place where you are,
from that from whence you came; and thus your Card is pricked both for
longitude and latitude only by these Magneticall needles, when you can see
neither Moon nor Stars.

If any errors should chance to fall out by any variations of either needle,
then at any time when the Sun does shine they may be amended by the precepts
already largely delivered in that case of either, both in many Chapters of this
book, and in the last precedent Chapter.

CHAP. XXXXIIII.
Of the matter of the Magneticall globe of the earth by the Needle.

AT length we have brought our short Treatise Magneticall principally and most
profitably to declare the nature of the Directory and Inclinatory-needle, both
toward the Terrella and Semiterrella, and toward the Magneticall globe of the
earth, and how the proportions and similitude of their applications and
conformities to both are alike and the same.

Only the Magneticall-needle being of a saeminine and sequent substance, as
has been demonstrated in the VIII. XXI. and XXII. Chapters, does behold the
round Magnet, and the round Iron, with that point that is of the same nature
and demonstration that the pole is, which he follows and affects, contrary
to the nature Magneticall, that is in the Adamants themselves, one toward the
other, or of the needles one toward the other.

But this Magneticall-needle being freed from the Magneticall orb of the
Loadstone and Iron, will have that point of the needle that followed them
directed by the virtue Magneticall of the earth into a contrary province of
polar pre-eminence.

For the Magneticall-needle does conform it self unto the Earth in the same
fashion that the Adamant and Loadstone it self does; neither is it so
serviceable unto the Magneticall globe of the earth as he is unto the Magnet
and Iron, but is of a fellow-like species with the earth, as well as the
Adamants themselves are.

Whereby I do gather that the matter of the interior parts of the Magneticall
globe of the earth is not the same with these we know of the Loadstone and
iron, into whose bowels never any man, by the deepest mines, or other passages
of fissurs and cauities, made by great Earthquakes, ever yet descended to show
unto us any part of the earths interior substance Magneticall, and though I
take the matter of the bowels of the earth to be Magnetical, yet the
application of this Magneticall-needle demonstrateth, that the Magnetical globe
of the earths inward substance consists neither of sollid Load stone, nor of
iron-like mine or clay or such like materials, as they which have thought
themselves most skillful in Magneticall Philosophy have imagined.

For if the Magneticall globe of the earth were of any Iron-like substance,
then that point of the needle that affects a polar jurisdiction, placed near
the Loadstone and the iron, would also, being applied unto the earth, behold
the same province and jurisdiction polar, being directed by the vigor of the
earths Magneticall orb of like nature; but this is not so, as all confess and
may prove.

Therefore I hold that the great Magnetical globe of the earth consists of a
Magneticall substance unknown unto us, as also the bodies of the Magneticall
globe of the Moon and of the rest do; and so conclude that the works of God
are most wonderful, and altogether past finding out.

But here before I end, I am to satisfy that I made promise of in the XII.
Chapter, that I would show my conceit of the reason why the needle in his
passage from the equator of the Magnet by the pole, to the equator again,
should make the circumuolution of an whole circle in turning about his foot,
having passed a semicircle of the Terrella or Semiterrella, and would make
another whole circle about the other semicircle of contrary nature with his
other point.

For to clear this with the nature of the two provinces, which is adverse one
unto the other. I would wish that you would conceive and propound two globes of
Magneticall nature and substance, as tender as clay, the one of them to be
animated with the North and articke virtue at both poles, as Tab. XX. Fig. 3.
aa, to turn to the North only: and the other globe, with his poles Tab. XX.
Fig. 3. bb to be endowed with the antarticke power to move to the South only.

Now if the globe of the earth, or of the Magnet-stone were made only of one
of these globes, then there would be a strife between the poles of one of the
globes, which should behold his peculiar point, as if the pole a of the North
virtue should behold the North; the other pole a of the same globe, being of
articke nature, would also strive to behold the North, or at least in their
equality of power would rather respect East and West, so that there would be no
stability by the poles of such kind of globes.

Therefore the skillful Potter, who made the earth

TAM ROBVR. TAM ROBOR. NI-COLIS ARBOR IOVIS. 1610

N O

printer's device of Nicholas Oaks

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, dwelling near Holborne-bridge, at the sign
of the Hand. 1613.


