The true Tragedy of Richard Duke of York, and the death of good King Henry
the Sixth,

with the whole contention between the two Houses Lancaster and York, as it
was sundry times acted by the Right Honorable the Earl of Pembrooke his
servants.

Printed at London by P. S. for Thomas Millington, and are to be sold at his
shop under Saint Peter's Church in Cornival. 1595.

The true Tragedy of Richard Duke of York, and the good King Henry the Sixth.
Enter Richard Duke of York, The Earl of Warwick, The Duke of Norffolke,
Marquis Montague, Edward Earl of March, Crookeback Richard* and the young Earl
of Rutland, with Drum and Soldiers, with white Roses in their hats. Warwike.
I Wonder how the king escapt our hands.

York. Whilst we pursude the horsemen of the North,
He slilie stole away and left his men:
Whereat the great Lord of Northumland,
Whose warlike ears could never brook retrait,
Chargde our maine battles front, and therewith him
Lord Stafford and Lord Clifford all abr^st (...)
Brake in and were by the hands o^ common Soldiers slain.

Edw. Lord Staffords father Duke of Buckhingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerously,
I cleft his Beuer with a down right blow:
Father that this is true behold his blood.

Mont And brother heeres the Earl of Wiltshires
Blood, whom I encountered as the battles io^^d.

Rich. Speak thou for me and tell them what I did.

York. What is your grace dead my L* of Summerset?

Norf. Such hope have all the line of John of Ga^^^.

Rich. Thus do I hope to shape king Henry's head.

War. And so do I victori^us prince of York,
Before I see thee seated in that throne
Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
I vow by heavens these eyes shall never close.
This is the palace of that fearful king,
And that the regal chair? Possess it York:
For this is thine and not king Henry's heirs.

York Assist me then sweet Warwike, and I will:
For hither are we broken in by force.

Norf. We Will all assist thee, and he that flies shall die.

York. Thanks gentle Norffolke. Stay by me my Lords,
and soldiers stay you here and lodge this night:

War. And when the king comes offer him no
Violence, unless he seek to put us out by force.

Rich Armde as we be, lets stay within this house?

War. The bloody parliament shall this be calde,
Vnl^^^e Plantagenet Duke of York be king
And bashful Henry be deposde, whose cowardice
Has made us by words to our enemies.

York. Then leave me not my Lords: for now I mean
To take possession of my right.

War. Neither the king, nor him that loves him best,
The proudest burd that holds up Lancaster.
Dares stir a wing if Warwike shake his bells.
I Will plant Plantagenet: and root him out who dares?
Resolve thee Richard: Claim the English crown.

Enter king Henry the sixth, with the Duke of Excester, The Earl of
Northumberland* the Earl of Westmerland and Clifford, the Earl of Cumberland,
withred Roses in their hats. King Look Lordings where the sturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair of state: belike he means
Backed by the power of Warwike that false peer,
To aspire unto the crown, and reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland* he slew thy father.
And thine Clifford: and you both have vowed revenge,
On him, his sons, his favorites, and his friends.

Northu. And if I be not, heavens be reuengd on me.

Clif. The hope thereof, makes Clifford mourn in steel.

West. What? shall we suffer this, lets pull him down.
My heart for anger breaks, I cannot speak.

King. Be patient gentle Earl of Westmerland.

Clif. Patience is for pultrouns such as he
He durst not sit there had your father lived?
My gracious Lord: here in the Parliament,
Let us assail the family of York.

North. Well have thou spoken cosen, be it so.

King. O know you not the City favors them,
And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?

Exet. But when the D. is slain, they will quickly sly.

King. Far be it from the thoughts of Henry's heart,
To make a shambles of the parliament house.
Cos^^ of Exeter, words, frowns, and threats,
Shall be the wars that Henry means to use.
Thou fac^tious duke of York, descend my throne,
I am thy sovereign.

York. Thou art deceived: I am thine.

Exet. For shame come down he made thee D. of York.

York. It Was mine inheritance as the kingdom is.

Exet. Thy father was a traitor to the crown.

War. Exeter thou art a traitor to the crown.
In following this usurping Henry.

Clif. Whom should he follow but his natural king.

War. True Clif and that is Richard Duke of York.

King. And shall I stand while thou sit in my throne?

York. Content thy self it must and shall be so.

War. Be Duke of Lancaster, let him be king.

West. Why? he is both king and Duke of Lancaster,
And that the Earl of Westmerland shall mainetaine.

War. And Warwike shall disprove it. You forget
That we are those that chaste you from the field
And slew your father, and with colors spread,
Marched through the City to the pallas gates.

Nor. No Warwike I remember it to my grief,
And by his soul thou and thy house shall rue it.

West. Plantagenet of thee and of thy sons,
Thy kinsmen and thy friends, I Will have more lives,
Then drops of blood were in my fathers veins.

Clif. Urge it no more, least in revenge thereof,
I send thee Warwike such a messenger,
As shall reueng his death before I stir.

War. Poor Clifford, how I skorn thy worthles threats

York. Will ye we show our title to the crown,
Or else our swords shall plead it in the field?

King. What title haste thou traitor to the Crown?
Thy father was as thou art Duke of York,
Thy grandfather Roger Mort^mer earl of March,
I am the son of Henry the Fifth who tamde the French,
And made the Dolphin stoop, and seazd upon their
Towns and provinces.

War. Talk not of France since thou have lost it all.

King. ^he Lord protector lost it and not I,
When I was crowned I was but nine months old.

Rich. You are old enough now and yet me thinks you lose,
Father tear the Crown from the Usurpers head*

Edw. Do so sweet father, set it on your head.

Mont. Good brother as thou love and honorst arms,
Lets fight it out and not stand cauilling thus.

Rich. Sound drums and trumpets and the king will sly.

York, Peace sons:

N^rthum. Peace thou and give king Henry leave to speak.

King. Ah Plantagenet, why seek thou to depose me?
Are we not both both Plantagenets by birth,
And from two brothers line allie descent?
Suppose by right and equity thou be king,
Think thou that I will leave my kingly seat
Where^n my father and my grandsire sat?
No, first shall war unpeople this my realm,
I and our colors often borne in France,
And now in England to our hearts great sorrow
Shall be my winding sheet, why saint you Lords?
My titles better far than his.

War. Prove it Henry and thou shall be king?

King. Why Henry the fourth by conquest got the Crown.

York. It Was by rebellion against his sovereign.

King. I know not what to say my titles weak,
Tell me may not a king adopt an heir?

War. What then?

King. Then am I lawful king For Richard
The second in the view of maine Lords
Resignde the Crown to Henry the fourth,
Whose heir my Father was, and I am his.

York I tell thee he rose against him being his
Sovereign, and made him to resign the crown perforce.

War. Suppose my Lord he did it vnconstrainde,
Think you that were prejudicial to the Crown?

Exet. No* for he could not so resign the Crown,
But that the next heir must succeed and reign.

King. Art thou against us, Duke of Exceter?

Exet. His is the right, and therefore pardon me.

King. All will revolt from me and turn to him.

Northum. Plantagenet for all the claim thou laist,
Think not king Henry shall be thus deposde?

War. Deposde he shall be in despite of thee.

North. Tush Warwike, Thou art deceived? it is not thy
Southern powers of Essex, Suffolk, Norffolke, and of
Kent that makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the Duke up in despite of me.

Cliff. King Henry be thy title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defense.
May that ground gape and swallow me alive,
Where I do kneel to him that slew my father.

King. O Clifford, how thy words re^iue my soul.

York. Henry of Lancaster resign thy crown.
What mutter you? or what conspire you Lords?

War. Do right unto this princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the house with armed men,
Enter Soldiers. And over the chair of state where now he sits,
Wright up his title with thy usurping blood.

King. O Warwike, hear me speak.
Let me but reign in quiet whilst I live,

York. Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs
And thou shall reign in quiet whilst thou hu'st.

King. Convey the soldiers hence, and then I will.

War. Captain conduct them into T^^hill fields.

Clif. What wrong is this unto the Prince your son?

War. What good is this for England and himself?

Northum. Base, fearful, and despairing Henry.

Clif. How have thou wronged both thy self and us?

West. I cannot stay to hear these Articles.
Exit.
Clif. Nor I, Come cosen lets go tell the Queen.

Northum. Be thou a pray unto the house of York,
And die in bands for this unkingly deed.
Exit.
Clif. In dreadful war may thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandoned and despisde.
Exit.
Exet. They seek revenge, and therefore will not yield my Lord.

King. Ah Exeter?

War. Why should you sigh my Lord?

King. Not for my self Lord Warwike, but my soon,
Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.
But be it as it may: I here intaile the Crown
To thee and to thine heirs, conditionally,
That here thou take thine oath, to cease these civil
Broiles, and whilst I live to honor me as thy king and Sovereign.

York. That oath I willingly take and will perform.

War. Long live king Henry. Plantagenet embrace him?

King And long live thou and all thy forward sons.

York. Now York and Lancaster are reconcilde.

Exet. Accuist be he that seeks to make them soes,
Sound Irumpets.
York My Lord I Will take my leave, for I Will to Wakefield
To my castle.
Exit York and his sons.

War. And I Will keep London with my soldiers.
Exit.
Norf And I Will to Norffolke with my followers.
Exit.
Mont. And I to the sea from whence I came.
Exit. Enter the Queen and the Prince.
Exet. My Lord here comes the Queen, I Will steal away.

King. And so will I.

Queen. Naie stay, or else I follow thee.

King Be patient gentle Queen, and then I Will stay.

Quee. What patience can there? ah timorous man,
Thou have undone thy self, thy son, and me,
And given our rights unto the house of York.
Art thou a king and wilt be ^orst to yield?
Had I been there, the soldiers should have tossed
Me on their lances points, before I would have
Granted to their wills. The Duke is made
Protector of the land: Stern Fawconbridge
Commands the narrow seas. And think thou then
To sleep secure? I here divorce me Henry
From thy bed, vnt^ll that Act of Parliament
Be recalde, wherein thou yeeldest to the house of York.
The Northen Lords that have forsworn thy colors,
Will follow mine if once they see them spread,
And spread they shall unto thy deep disgrace.
Come son, lets away and leave him here alone.

King. Stay gentle Margaret, and here me speak.

Queen. Thou have spoke too much already, therefore be still.

King. Gentle son Edward, will thou stay with me?

Quee I, to be murdered by his enemies.
Exit.
Prin. When I return with victory from the field,
I Will see your Grace, till then I Will follow her.
Exit.
King. Poor Queen, her love to me and to the prince Her son,
Makes her in (...) thus forget her self.
Revenged may sh^e be on that accursed Duke.
Come cosen of Exeter, stay thou here,
For Clifford and those Northern Lords be gone
I fear toward Wakefield, to disturb the Duke.
Enter Edward, and Richard, and Montague.
Edw. Brother and cosen Montague, give me leave to speak.

Rich. Nay, I can better play the Orator.

Mont. But I have reasons strong and forceable.
Enter the Duke of York.
York How now sons what at a jar amongst your selves?

Rich. No father, but a sweet contention, about that which concerns your
self and us, The crown of England father.


York. The crown boy, why Henry's yet alive,
And I have sworn that he shall reign in quiet till
His death.

Edw. But I would break an hundred oaths to reign one year.

Rich. And if it please your grace to give me leave,
I Will show your grace the way to save your oath,
And dispossess king Henry from the crown.

York I prithee Dicke let me hear thy devise.

Rich. Then thus my Lord. An oath is of no moment
Being not sworn before a lawful magistrate.
Henry is none but does usurp your right,
And yet your grace stands bound to him by oath.
Then noble father resolve your self,
And once more claim the crown.

York I, say thou so boie* why then it shall be so.
I am resolude to win the crown, or die.
Edward, thou shall to Edmund Brook Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise:
Thou cosen Montague, shall to Norffolke straight,
And bid the Duke to muster up his soldiers,
And come to me to Wakefield presently.
And Richard thou to London strait shall post,
And bid Richard Neuill Earl of Warwike
To leave the city, and with his men of war,
To meet me at Saint Albons ten days hence.
My self here in Sandall castle will provide
Both men and money to further our attempts.
Now, what news?
Enter a Messenger.
Mes. My Lord, the Queen with thirty thousand men,
Accompanied with the Earls of Cumberland,
N^rthumberland and Westmerland, and others of the
House of Lancaster, are marching toward Wakefield,
To besiedge you in your castle here.
Enter sir John and sir Hugh Mortimer.
York A Gods name, let them come. Cosen Montague post you hence: and boys
stay you with me.

Sir John and sir Hugh Mortemers mine uncles,
Your welcome to Sandall in an happy hour,
The army of the Queen means to besiedge us.

Sir John. She shall not need my Lord, we will meet her in the field.

York What with five thousand soldiers uncle?

Rich. I father, with five hundred for a need,
A woman's general, what should you fear?

York. Indeed, many brave battles have I won
In Normandy, when as the enemy
Has bin ten to one* and why should I now doubt
Of the like success? I am resolved Come lets go.

Edw. Lets martch away, I hear their drums.
Exit. Alarmes, and then Enter the young Earl of Rutland and his Tutor.
Tutor. Oh fly my Lord, lets leave the Castle,
And fly to Wakefield straight.
Enter Clifford.
Rut. O Tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes.

Clif. Chaplin away, thy Priesthood saues thy life,
As for the brat of that accursed Duke
Whose father slew my father, he shall die.

Tutor Oh Clifford spare this tender Lord, least
Heaven revenge it on thy head: Oh save his life.

Clif Soldiers away and drag him hence perforce:
Away with the villain.
Exit the Chaplein. How now, what dead already? or is it fear that
Makes him close his eyes? I Will open them.

Rut. So looks the pent up Lion on the lamb,
And so he walks insulting over his pray,
And so he turns again to rend his limbs in sunder,
Oh Clifford, kill me with thy sword, and
Not with such a cruel threatening look,
I am too mean a subject for thy wrath,
Be thou reuengde on men, and let me live.

Clif. In vain thou speak poor boy: my fathers
Blood has stopped the passage where thy words should enter.

Rut. Then let my fathers blood open it again? he is a Man, and Clifford cope
with him.


Clif. Had I thy brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me.
Or should I dig up thy forefathers graves,
And hang their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not slake mine ire, nor case my heart.
The sight of any of the house of York,
Is as a fury to torment my soul.
Therefore till I root out that curssed line
And leave not one on earth, I le live in hell therefore.

Rut. Oh let me pray, before I take my death.
To thee I pray: Sweet Clifford pity me.

Clif. I, such pitti^ ^s my rapiers point affords.

Rut. I never did thee hurt, wherefore will thou kill me?

Clif. Thy father has.

Rut. But it was ere I was borne*
Thou have one son, for his sake pity me,
Least in revenge thereof, (...) God is just*
He be as miserably slain as I.
Oh, let me live in prison all my days,
And when I give occasion of offense,
Then let me die, for now thou have no cause.

Clif. No cause? Thy Father slew my father, therefore Die.
Plantagenet I come Plantagenet,
And this thy sons blood cleaving to my blade,
Shall rust upon my weapon, till thy blood
Congeald with his, do make me wipe off both.
Exit. Alarmes, Enter the Duke of York solus.
York Ah York, post to thy castle, save thy life,
The goal is lost thou house of Lancaster,
Thrice happy chance is it for thee and thine,
That heaven abridgde my days and calls me hence,
But God knows what chance has betide my sons:
But this I know they have demeand themselves,
Like men borne to renown by life or death:
Three times this day came Richard to my sight,
And cried courage Father: Victory or death.
And twice so often came Edward to my view,
With purple Faulchen painted to the hilts,
In blood of those whom he had sla^ghtered.
Oh hark, I hear the drums? No way to fly:
No way to save my life? And here I stay:
And here my life must end.
Enter the Queen, Clifford, Northumberland, and soldiers. Come bloody
Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchlesse ^^rie to more blood:
This is the But, and this abides your shot.

Northum. Yield to our mercies proud Plantagenet.

Clif. I, to such mercy as his ruthful arm
With down right payment lent unto my father,
Now Phaeton has tumbled from his carre,
And made an evening at the noone tide prick.

York. My ashes like the Phoenix may bring forth
A bird that will revenge it on you all,
And in that hope I cast mine eyes to heaven,
Skorning what ere you can afflict me with:
Why stay you Lords? what, multitudes and fear?

Clif. So cowards fight when they can fly no longer:
So Doves do pecke the Ravens piersing tallents:
So desperate thieves all hopeless of their lives,
Breath out inuectiues against the officers.

York. Oh Clifford, yet bethink thee once again,
And in thy mind orerun my former time:
And bite thy tongue that slaunderst him with cowardice,
Whose very look has made thee quake ^re this.

Clif. I will not bandie with thee word for word,
But buckle with thee blows twice two for one.

Queen. Hold valiant Clifford for a thousand causes,
I would prolong the traitors life a while.
Wrath makes him death, speak thou Northumberland.

Nor. Hold Clifford do not honor him to much,
To prick thy finger though to wound his heart:
What valor were it when a curre does grin,
For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
When he might spurn him with his foot away?
It Is wars prise to take all advantages,
And ten to one, is no impeach in wanes.
Fight and take him.
Cliff. I, I* so strives the Woodcocke with the gin.

North. So does the cunn^e struggle with the net.

York So triumphs thieves upon their conquered
Booty: So true men yield by robbers ouermatcht.

North. What will your grace have done with him?

Queen. Brave warriors Clifford and Northumberland
Come make him stand upon th^s molehill here,
That a^mde at mountains with outst^etched arm,
And parted but the shadow with his hand.
Was it you that reuelde in our Parliament*
And made a prechment of your high descent?
Where are your mess of sons to back you now?
The wanton Edward, and the l^stie George?
Or where is that valiant Crookbackt prodegie?
Dickey your boy, that with his grumbling voice,
Was wont to cheer his Dad in mutin^es?
Or amongst the rest* where is your da^^ing Rutland?
Look York? I dipped this napkin in the blood,
That valiant Clifford with his rapiers point,
Made is^ue from the bosom of thy boy.
And if thine e^es can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy cheeks with all.
Alas poor York: But that I hate thee much,
I should lament thy miserable state?
I prithee grieve to make me merry York?
Stamp* rave and fret, that I may sing and dance.
What: has thy fiery heart so parcht thine entrails,
That not a tear can fall for Rutlands death?
Thou would be feed I see to make me sport.
York cannot speak, vnlesle he wear a crown.
A crown for York? and Lords bow low to him.
So: hold you his hands, whilst I do set it on.
I, now looks he like a king?
This is he that took king Henry's chair,
And this is he was his adopted air.
But how is it that great Plantagenet,
Is crowned so soon, and broke his holy oath,
As I bethink me you should not be king,
Till our Henry had shook hands with death,
And will you impale your head with Henry's glory,
And rob his temples of the Diadem
Now in his life against your holy oath?
Oh it is a fault too too unpardonable.
Off with the crown, and with the crown his head,
And whilst we breath, ta^e time to do him dead.

Clif. That's my office for my fathers death.

Queen. Yet stay: and lets here the Orisons he makes.

York. She wolf of France, but worse than Wolves of France:
Whose tongue more poisoned than the Adders tooth:
How ill beseeming is it in thy sex,
To triumph like an Amazonian trull
Upon his woes, whom Fortune captiuates?
But that thy face is visard like, unchanging,
Made impudent by use of evil deeds:
I would assaie, proud Queen to make thee blush:
To tell thee of whence thou art, from whom deri^de,
Twere shame enough to shame thee, were thou not shameless.
Thy father bears the type of king of Naples,
Of both the Siss^les and Jerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
Has that poor Monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, or it boots thee not proud Queen,
Unless the Adage must be ver^^^de:
That beggars m^unted, run their horse to death.
It Is beauty, that often makes women proud,
But God he wots thy s^are thereof is small.
It Is gouernm^nt, that makes them most admirde,
The contrary does make thee wondered at.
It Is virtue that makes them seem divine.
The want thereof makes thee abominable.
Thou art as opposite to every good,
As the Antipodes are unto us,
Or as the south to the Septentrion.
Oh Tigers heart wrapped in a woman's hide?
How could thou draine the life blood of the child,
To bid the father wi^e his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a woman's face?
Women are mild, pitiful, and flexible.
Thou indurate, stern, rough, r^morcelesse.
Bids thou me rage? why now thou have thy will
Would have me weep? why so thou have thy vvish.
For raging winds blows up a storm of tears,
And when the rage al^ie^ the rain begins.
These tears are my sweet Rutlands obsequies,
And every drop b^gs vengeance as it falls,
On thee fell Clifford, and the false French woman.

North. Beshrevv me but his passions move me so,
As hardly can I check mine eyes from tears.

York. That fac^ of his the hungry Cannibals
Could not have tucht, would not have staind with blood
But you are more inhumaine, more inexorable,
O ten times more then Tvgers of Arcadia.
See ruthlesse Queen a hapless fathers tears.
This cloth thou dipts in blood of my sweet boy,
And lo with tears I wash the blood away.
Keep thou the napkin and go boast of that,
And if thou tell the heavy story well,
Upon my soul the hearers will sheed tears,
I, even my soes will sheed fast falling tears,
And say, alas, it was a pitteous deed.
Here, take the crown, and with the crown my curse,
And in thy need such comfort come to thee,
As now I reap at thy two cruel hands.
Hard-harted Clifford, take me from the world,
My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads.

North. Had he bin slaughterman of all my kin,
I could not choose but weep with him to see,
How inlie anger gripes his heart.

Quee. What weeping ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did us all.
And that will quickly dry your melting tears.

Clif. Thears for my oath thears for my fathers death.

Queen. And thears to right our gentle hearted kind.

York. Open thy gates of mercy gracious God,
My soul flies forth to meet with thee.

Queen. Off with his head and set it on York Gates,
So York may ouerlooke the town of York.
Exeunt omnes. Enter Edward and Richard, with drum and Soldiers.
Edw. After this dangerous fight and hapless war,
Ho^ does my noble brother Richard fare?

Rich. I cannot joy vn^il I be resolu'de,
Where our ^^ght valiant father is become.
H^^ (...) (...) I see him bear himself,
As (...) ^idst a heard of neat,
So (...) our valiant father,
Me thinks it is (...) enough to be his son.
Three (...) in the air.
Edw. (...) the (...) opes her golden gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun,
Da^^^ (...) do I see three suns?

Rich Three glorious suns, (...) separated by a racking
Cloud, but (...) in a pale clear shining sky.
(...) they join, embrace, and seem to kis^e.
(...) vowde some league inuiolate:
(...) are they but one lamp, one light, one sun,
In this the heavens does figure some event.

Edw. I think it cites us brother to the field,
That we the sons of brave Plantagenet,
Already each one shining by his meed,
May join in one and ouerpeere the world,
As this the earth, and therefore hence forward,
I Will bear upon my Target, three fair shining suns.
But what art thou? that look so heavily?

Mes. Oh one that was a woeful looker on,
When as the noble Duke of York was slain.

Edw. O speak no more, for I can hear no more.

Rich. Tell on thy tale, for I will hear it all.

Mes. When as the noble Duke was put to slight,
And then pursu'de by Clifford and the Queen,
And many soldiers m^^:, who all at once
Let drive at him and forced the Duke to yield:
And then they set him on a molehill there,
And crowned the gracious Duke in high despite,
Who then with ^^ares began to wail his fall.
The (...) Queen ^^^^euing he did weep,
Gave him a handkercher to wipe his eyes,
D^pt in the blood of sweet young Rutland
By rough Clifford sl^ine: who weeping took it up.
Then through h^s breast they thrust their bloody swords,
Who like a l^mbe fell at the butchers feet.
Then on the gates of York they set his head,
And there it does remain the piteous spectacle
That ere mine eyes beheld.

Edw. Sweet Duke of York our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone there is no hope for us:
Now my souls palace is become a prison.
Oh would she break from compas^e of my breast,
For never shall I have more joy.

Rich. I cannot weep, for all my breasts moisture
Scarce serves to quench my furnac^ burning heart:
I cannot joy till this white rose be did,
Even in the heart blood of the house of Lancaster.
Richard* I bare thy name, and I Will revenge thy death,
Or die my self in seeking of revenge.

Edw. His name that valiant Duke has l^ft with thee,
His chair and Dukedom that remains for me.

Rich. Nay, if thou be that princely Eagles bird,
Show thy descent by gazing against the sun.
For chair, and dukedom, Throne and kingdom say:
For e^ther that is thine, or else thou were not his?
Enter the Earl of Warwike, Montague, with drum, ancient, and soldiers.
War. How now fair Lords: what sare? what news abroad?

Rich. Ah Warwike? should we report the balefull
N^^^^, (...) at each words deliverance stab poinyardes
In our flesh till all were told, the words would add
More (...) then the wounds,
Ah valiant Lord the Duke of York is slain.

Edw. Ah Warwike Warwike, that Plantagenet,
Which held thee dear: I, even an his souls redemption,
Is by the ^^^^ne L. Clifford, done to death.

War. Ten dai^s a go I drowned those news in tears.
And now to add more measure to your woes,
I come to tell you things since then befalne.
After the bloody fraie at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings as swiflie as the post could run,
Was brought me of your loss, and his departure.
I then in London keeper of the King,
Mustred my sould^ers, gathered flocks of friends,
And very well appointed as I thought,
Marched to saint Albons to entercept the Queen,
Bearing the King in my behalf along,
For by my scoutes I was advertised,
That she was coming, with a full intent
To dash your late decree in parliament,
Touching king Henry's heirs and your succession.
Short tale to make, we at Saint Albons met,
Our battles ioinde, and both sides fiercely fought.
But whether it was the coldness of the king,
He looked full gently on his warlike Queen,
That robde my soldiers of their heated spleen.
Or whether it was report of his success,
Or more then common fear of Cliffords rigor,
Who thunders to his captains blood and death,
I cannot tell. But to conclude with truth,
Their weapons like to lightnings went and came.
Our soldiers like the might Owls lasie flight,
Or like an idle thresher with a ^laile,
Fell gently down as if they smote their friends.
I cheerd them up with justice of the cause,
With promise of hie pay and great rewards,
But all in vain, they had no hearts to fight,
Nor we in them no hope to win the day,
So that We fled. The king unto the Queen,
Lord George your brother, Norffolke, and my self,
In have, post have, are come to join with you,
For in the marches here we heard you were,
Making another head to fight again.

Edw. Thanks gentle Warwike.
How far hence is the Duke with his power?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?

War. Some five miles off the Duke is with his power,
But as for your brother he was lately sent
From your kind Aunt, Duches of Burgundy,
With aid of soldiers against this needful war.

Rich. It Was ods belike, when valiant Warwike fled.
Often have I heard thy praises in pursuit,
But nere till now thy scandal of retire.

War. Nor now my scandal Richard do thou hear,
For thou shall know that th^s right hand of mine,
Can pluck the Diadem from ^aint Henry's head,
And wring the awefull scepter from his fist:
Were he as famous and as bold in war,
As he is famde for mildness, peace and prayer.

Rich. I know it well Lord Warwike blame me not,
It Was love I bare thy glories made me speak.
But in this troublous time, what is to be done?
Shall we gothrow away our coats of steel,
And clad our bodies in black mourning gowns,
Numbering our Auemaries with our beads?
Or shall we on the helmets of our foes,
Tell our devotion with reuengefull arms?
If for the last say I* and to it Lords.

War. Why therefore Warwike came to find ^ you out,
And therefore comes my brother Montague.
Attend me Lords, the proud insulting Queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
And of their feather many mo proud birds,
Have wrought the easy melting king like wax.
He swear consent to your succession,
His oath enrolled in the Parliament.
But now to London all the crew are gone,
To frustrate his oath or what besides
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Th^i^ power I guess them fifty thousand strong.
Now if the help of Norffolke and my self,
Can but amount to 48. thousand,
With all the friends that thou brave earl of March,
Among the loving Welshmen can procure,
Why via, To London will we march amain,
And once again be^^^ide our foming steedes,
And once again cry charge upon the foe,
But never once again turn back and fl^e.

Rich. I, now me thinks I hear great Warwike speak:
Nere may he live to see a sunshine day,
That cries r^tire, when Warwike bids him stay.

Edw. Lord Warwike, on thy shoulder will I lean,
And when thou faints, must Edward fall:
Which peril heaven forefend.

War. No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York,
The next degree, is Englands royal king:
And king of England and shall thou be proclaimde,
In every borough as we pass along:
And he that casts not up his cap for joy,
Shall for the offense make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
Stay we no longer dreaming of renown,
But forward to effect these resolutions.
En^er a Messenger.
Mes. The Duke of Norffolke sends you word by me,
The Queen is coming with a puissant power,
And craves your company for speedy council.

War. Why then it sorts brave Lords. Lets march away.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter the King and Queen, Prince Edward, and the Northern
Earls, with drum and Soldiers.
Quee. Welcome my Lord to this brave town of York,
Yonder Is the head of that ambitious enemy,
That sought to be impaled with your crown.
Does not the object please your eye my Lord?

King. Even as the rocks please them that fear their wrack.
Withhold revenge dear God it is not my fault,
Nor wittinglie have I infringde my vow.

Clif My gracious Lord, this too much lenity,
And harmefull pity must be laid aside,
To whom do Lions cast their gentle looks?
Not to the beast that would usurp his den.
Whose hand is that the savage Bear does lick?
Not his that spoils his young before his face.
Whose ^^ap^s the lurking serpents mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest worm will turn being trodden on,
And Doves will pecke, in rescue of their brood.
Ambitious York did level at thy Crown,
Thou smiling, while he knit his angry brows.
He but a Duke, would have his son a king,
And raise his issue like a loving sire.
Thou being a king blessed with a goodly son,
Did give consent to disinherit him,
Which argude thee a most unnatural father.
Unreasonable creatures feed their young.
And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet in protect on of their tender ones,
Who has not seen them even with those same wings
Which they have sometime used in fearful flight,
Make war with him, that climes unto their nest,
Offering their own lives in their yongs defense?
For shame my Lord, make them your president,
Were it not pity that this goodly boy,
should lose his birth right through his fathers fault?
And long hereafter say unto his child,
What my great grandfather and grandfire got,
My careless father fondly gave away?
Look on the boy and let his manly face,
Which promises successful fortune to us all,
Steel thy melting thoughts,
To keep thine own, and leave thine own with him.

King. Full well has Clifford played the Orator,
Inferring, arguments of mighty force.
But tell me, did thou never yet hear tell.
That things evil got had ever bad success,
And happy ever was it for that son,
Whose father for his hoording went to hell?
I leave my son my virtuous deeds behind,
And would my father had left me no more,
For all the rest is held at such a rate,
As asks a thousand times more care to keep,
Then may the present profit counteruaile.
Ah cosen York, would thy best friends did know,
How it does grieve me that thy head stands there.

Quee. My Lord this harmefull pity makes your followers faint.
You promisde knighthood to your princely son.
Vnsheath your sword and straight do dub him knight.
Kneel down Edward.

King. Edward Plantagenet (...) knight,
And learn this lesson boy* draw ^^y sword in right

Prince. My grat^ous father by your kingly leave,
I Will draw it as apparent to the ^^owne,
And in that (...) to the death.

Northum. Why that is spoken like a toward prince.
Enter a Messenger.
Mes. Royal commanders be in readiness,
For with a band of fifty thousand men,
Comes Warwike backing of the Duke of York.
And in the towns whereas they pass along,
Proclaims him king, and many flies to him,
Prepare your battles, for they be at hand.

Clif. I would your highness would depart the field,
The Queen has best success when you are absent.

Quee. Do good my Lord, and leave us to our fortunes.

King. Why that's my fortune, therefore I Will stay still.

Clif. Be it with resolution then to fight.

Prince. Good father cheer these noble Lords,
Vnsheath your sword, sweet father cry Saint George.

Clif. Pitch we our battle here, for hence we will not move.
Enter the house of York.
Edward Now pe^^u^^e Henry vvilt thou yield thy crown,
And kneel for mercy at thy sovereigns feet?

Queen. Go rate thy minions proud insulting boy,
Becomes it thee to be thus malepert,
Before thy king and lawful sovereign?

Edw. I am his king and he should bend his knee,
I was adopted he^^e by his consent.

George. Since when he has broke his oath.
For as we hear you that are king
Though he d^e wear the Crown,
Have causde him by new act of Parliament
To blot our brother out, and put his own son in.

Clif. And reason George. Who should succeed the father but the son?

Rich. Are you their butcher?

Clif. I Crookbacke, here I stand to answer thee, or any of your sort.

Rich. It Was you that killed young Rutland, was it not?

Clif. Yes, and old York too, and yet not satisfide.

Rich. For G^ds sake Lords give synald to the fight.

War. What say thou Henry? will thou yield thy crown?

Queen. What, long tongde War, dare you speak?
When you and I met at saint Albones last,
Your legs did better service than your hands.

War. I, then it was my turn to flee, but now it is thine.

Clif. You said so much before, and yet you fled.

War. It Was not your valor Clifford, that drove me thence.

Northum. No nor your manhood Warwike, that could make you stay.

Rich. Northumberland Northumberland, we hold
Thee reverently Break off the pa^^^e, for scarce
I can refrain the execution of my big swollen
Heart, against that Clifford there, that
Cruel child-killer.

Clif Why I killed thy father, calst thou him a child?

Rich. I like a villain, and a treacherous coward,
As thou did kill our t^nder brother Rutland.
But ere sun set I Will make thee curse the d^ed.

King. Have done with words great Lords, and Hear me speak.

Queen. Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.

King. I prithee give no limits to my tongue,
I am a king and privilege to speak.

Clif. My Lord the wound that bred this meeting here
Cannot be cru'd with words, therefore be still.

Rich. Then executioner vnsheath thy sword,
By him that made us all I am resolu'de,
That Cliffords manhood hangs upon his tongue.

Edw. What say thou Henry, shall I have my right or no?
A thousand men have broke their fast to day,
That nere shall dine, unless thou yield the crown.

War. If thou deny their bloods be on thy head,
For York in justice puts his armor on.

Prin. If all be right that Warwike says is right,
There is no wrong but all things must be right.

Rich. Whosoever got thee, there thy mother stands,
For well I wot thou have thy mothers tongue.

Queen. But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam,
But like a soul misshapen stygmaticke
Marked by the destinies to be avoided,
As venom Todes, or Lizards fainting looks.

Rich. Iron of Naples, hid with English gilt,
Thy father bears the t^tle of a king.
As if a channel should be calde the Sea;
Shames thou not, knowing from whence thou art deRiu'de,
to parlie thus with Englands lawful heirs?

Edw. A wispe of straw were worth a thousand crowns,
To make that shameless c^llet know her self,
Thy husbands father reueld in the heart of France,
And tam'de the French, and made the Doiphin stoop:
And had he macht according to his state,
He might have kept that glory till this day.
But when he took a beggar to his bed,
And gracst thy poor sire with his bridal day,
Then that sunshine bred a shower for him
Which washed his fathers fortunes out of France,
And heapt seditions on his crown at home.
For what has moved these tumults but thy pride?
Had thou been meek, our title yet had slept?
And we in pity of the gentle king,
Had slipped our claim until an other age.

George. But when we saw our summer brought the gain,
And that the harvest brought us no increase,
We set the axe to thy usurping root,
And though the edge have something hit our selves,
Yet know thou we will never cease to strike,
Till we have hewne thee down,
Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.

Edw. And in this resolution, I defy thee,
Not willing any longer conference,
Since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.
Sound trumpets, let our bloody colors wave,
And either victory or else a grave,

Quee. Stay Edward stay.

Edw. Hence wrangling woman, I Will no longer stay,
Thy words will cost ten thousand lives to day.
Exeunt Omnes. Alarmes. Enter Warwike.
War. Sore spent with toil as runners with the race,
I lay me down a little while to breath,
For strokes receiude, and many blows repaide,
Has robbed my strong knit sinnews of their strength,
And force perforce needs must I rest my self.
Enter Edward.
Edw. Smile gentle heavens or strike ungentle death,
That we may die unless we gain the day:
What fatal star malignant frowns from heaven
Upon the harmless line of Yorkes true house?
Enter George.
George. Come brother, come, lets to the field again,
For yet there is hope enough to win the day:
Then let us back to cheer our fainting Troops,
Lest they retire now we have left the field.

War. How now my lords: what hap, what hope of good*
Enter Richard running.
Rich. Ah Warwike, why haste thou withdrawn thy self?
Thy noble father in the thickest thronges,
Cride still for Warwike his thrice valiant son,
Until with thousand swords he was beset,
And many wounds made in h^s aged breast,
And as he tottering sat upon his sleede,
He want his hand to me and cride aloud*
Richard, commend me to my valiant son,
And st^ll he cride Warwike revenge my death,
And with those words he tumbled off his horse,
And so the noble Salsbury gave up the ghost.

War. ^hen let the earth be drunken with his blood,
I Will kill my horse because I will not she:
And here to God of heaven I make a vow,
Never to pass from f^rth this bloody field
Till I am full revenged for his death.

Edw. Lord Warwike, Id^e bend my knees with thine,
And in that vow now join my soul to thee,
Thou setter up and puller down of kings,
vouchsafe a gentle victory to us,
Or let us die before we loose the day:

George. Then let us haste to cheer the soldiers h^rts,
And call them pillars that will stand to us,
And hiely promise to remunerate
Their trusty service, in these dangerous wars.

Rich. Come, come away, and stand not to debate,
For yet is hope of fortune good enough.
Brothers, give me your hands, and let us part
And take our leaves until we meet again,
Where ere it be in heaven or in earth.
Now I that never wept, now melt in woe,
To see these dire mishaps continue so.
Warwike farewell.

War. Away away, once more sweet Lords farewell.
Exeunt Omnes. Alarmes, and then enter Richard at one door and Clifford at the
other.
Rich. A Clifford a Clifford.

Clif. A Richard a Richard.

Rich. Now Clifford, for York and young Rutlands death,
This thirsty sword that longs to drink thy blood,
Shall lop thy limbs, and slise thy cursed heart,
For to revenge the murders thou have made.

Clif. Now Richard, I am with thee here alone,
This is the hand that stabd thy father York*
And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland,
And here is the heart that triumphs in the^^ d^^thes,
And cheeres these hands that slew thy (...) and brother,
To execute the like upon thy self,
And so have at thee.
Alarmes. They fight, and then enters Warwike and rescues Richard, and then
exeunt omnes. Alarmes still, and then enter Henry solus.
Hen. Oh gracious God of heaven look down on us,
And set some ends to these incessant griefs,
How like a mastlesse ship upon the seas,
This woeful battle does continue still,
Now leaning this way, now to that side drive,
And none does know to whom the day will fall.
O would my death might stay these ciuilliars!
Would I had never raind, nor nere bin king.
Margret and Clifford, chide me from the field,
Swearing they had best success when I was thence.
Would God that I were dead so all were well,
Or would my crown suffice, I were content
To yield it them and live a private life.
Enter a soldier with a dead man in his arms.
Sold Il blows the wind that profits no body,
This man that I have slain in fight to day,
May be possessed of some store of crowns,
And I will search to find them if I can,
But stay. Me thinks it is my fathers face,
Oh I it is he whom I have slain in fight,
From London was I pressed out by the king,
My father he came on the part of York,
And in this conflict I have slain my father:
Oh pardon God, I knew not what I did,
And pardon father, for I knew thee not.
Enter* an other soldier with a dead man.
2. Soul. Lie there thou that foughtst with me so stoutly,
Now let me see what store of gold thou haste,
But stay, me thinks this is no famous face:
Oh no it is my son that I have slain in sight,
O monstrous times begetting such events,
How cruel bloody, and ironious,
This deadly quarrel daily does beget,
Poor boy thy f^ther gave thee lif too late,
And has b^reau'de thee of thy life too sone.

King Woe above woe, grief more then common griese,
Whilst Lions war and battle for their dens,
Poor lambs do feel the rigor of their wraths:
The red rose and the white are on his face,
The fatal colors of our striving houses,
Wither one rose, and let the other flourish,
For if you strive, ten thousand lives must perish.

1. Sold. How will my mother for my fathers death,
Take on with me and nere be satisfide?

2. Sol. How will my wife for slaughter of my son,
Take on with me and nere be satisfide?

King. How will the people now misdeeme their king,
Oh would my death their minds could satisfy.

1. Sold. Was ever son so rude his fathers blood to spil?

2, Soul. Was ever father so unnatural his son to kill?

King. Was ever king thus greeud and vexed still?

1. Sold. I Will bear thee hence from this accursed place,
For woe is me to see my fathers face.
Exit with his father.
2. Soul. I Will bear thee hence and let them fight that will,
For I have murdered where I should not kill.
Exit with his son.
K. Hen. Weep wretched man, I Will lay thee tear for tear,
Here sits a king as woe begone as thee.
Alarmes and enter the Queen.
Queen. Away my Lord to Barwicke presently,
The day (...), our friends are murdered,
No hope is left for us, therefore away*
Enter prince Edward.
Prince. Oh father fly, our men have left the field,
Take horse sweet father, let us save our selves.
Enter Exeter.
Exet. Away my Lord for vengance comes along with him:
Nay stand not to expostulate make have,
Or else come after, I Will away before.

K Hen. Naie stay good Exeter, for I Will along with thee.
Enter Clissord wounded, with an arrow in his neck.
Clif. Here burns my candell ou^,
That whilst it lasted gave king Henry light*
Ah Lancaster, I fear thine overthrow,
More then my bodies parting from my soul.
My love and fear glude many friends to thee,
And now I die, that tough commixture melts.
Impairing Henry strengthened misproud York,
The common people swarm like summer flies,
And whither flies the Gnats but to the sun?
And who shines now but Henry's enemy?
Oh Ph^^bus had thou never given consent,
That Ph^^^on should check thy fiery steedes,
Thy burning carre had never scorcht the earth.
And Henry had thou lived as kings should do,
And as thy father and his father did,
Giving no foot unto the house of York,
I and ten thousand in this woeful land,
Had left no mourning Widows for our deaths,
And thou this day had kept thy throne in peace.
For what does cherish weeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbers bold but lenity?
Bootlesse are plaintes, and curelesse are my wounds,
No way to fly, no strength to hold our flight,
The foe is merciless and will not pity me,
And at their hands I have deserude no pity.
The air is got into my bleeding wounds,
And much effuse of blood does make me faint,
Come York and Richard, Warwike and the rest,
I stabde your fathers, now come split my breast.
Enter Edward, Richard and Warwike, and Soldiers.
Edw. Thus far our fortunes keeps an upward
Course, and we are grast with wreathes of victory.
Some troops pursue the bloody minded Queen,
That now toward Barwike (...) ama^^e,
But think you that Clifford is sled away with them?

War. No, it is impossible he should escape,
For though before his face I speak the words,
Your brother Richard marked him for the grave.
And where so ere he be I warrant him dead.
Clifford groans and then dies.
Edw. Hark what soul is this that takes his heavy leave?

Rich. A deadly groan, like life and deaths departure.

Edw. See who it is, and now the battles ended,
Friend or foe, let him be friendly used.

Rich. Reuerse that doom of mercy, for it is Clifford.
Who killed our tender brother Rutland,
And stabd our princely father Duke of York.

War. From off the gates of York fetch down the
Head, Your fathers head which Clifford placed there,
Instead of that, let his supply the room.
Measure for measure must be answered.

Edw. Bring forth that fatal skrichowle to our house,
That nothing sung to us but blood and death,
Now his evil boding tongue no more shall speak.

War. I think his understanding is berest.
Say Clifford do thou know who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudie death oreshades his beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.

Rich. Oh would he did, and so perhaps he does,
And it is his policy that in the time of death,
He might avoid such bitter storms as he
In his hour of death did give unto our father.

George. Richard if thou think so, vex him with eag^r words.

Rich. Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.

Edw. Clifford, repent in bootlesse penitence.

War Clifford devise excuses for thy fault.

George. Whilst we devise fell tortures for thy fault.

Rich. Thou pittiedst York, and I am son to York.

Edw. Thou pittiedst Rutland, and I will pity thee.

George. Where Is captain Margaret to ^ence you now?

War. They mock thee Clifford, swear as thou wast wont.

Rich. What not an oath? Nay, then I know he is dead.
It Is hard, when Clifford cannot foord his friend an oath.
By this I know he is dead, and by my soul,
Would this right hand buy but an hours life,
That I in all contempt might rail at him.
I Would cut it off and with the issuing blood,
Stifle the villain whose inst inched thirst,
York and young Rutland could not satisfy.

War. I, but he is dead, off with the traitors head,
And rear it in the place your fathers stands.
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned Englands lawful king.
From thence shall Warwike cross the seas to France,
And ask the lady Bona for thy Queen,
So shall thou sinew both these lands together,
And having France thy friend thou needst not dread,
The scattered foe that hopes to rise again.
And though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them busy to offend thine ears.
First I Will see the coronation done,
And afterward I Will cross the seas to France,
To effect this marriage if it please my Lord.

Edw. Even as thou will good Warwike let it be.
But first before we go, George kneel down.
We here create thee Duke of Clarence, and girt thee with the sword.
Our younger brother Richard Duke of Gloucester.
Warwike as my self shall do and undo as him pleases best.

Rich. Let me be Duke of Clarenco, George of Gloucester,
For Glosters Duke dome is too ominous.

War. Tush that's a childish observation.
Richard be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London.
To see these honors in possession.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter two keepers with bow and arrows.
Keeper. Come lets take our stands upon this hill,
And by and by the dear will come this way.
But stay, here come^ a man, lets listen him a while.
Enter king Henry disguisde.
Hen. From Scotland am I stolen even of pure love,
And thus disguisde to greet my native land.
No, Henry no It is no land of thine,
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble su^^^s sues to thee for right,
For how can thou help them and not thy self?

Keeper. I marry sir, here is a dear, his skin is a
Keepers fee* Sir stand close, for as I think,
This is the king, king Edward has deposde.

Hen. My Queen and son poor souls are gone to
France, and as I hear the great commanding Warwike,
To entreat a marriage with the lady Bona,
If this be true, poor Queen and son,
Your labor is but spent in vain,
For Lewis is a prince soon wun with words,
And Warwike is a subtle Orator.
He laughes and says, his Edward is instalde,
She weeps, and says her Henry is deposde,
He on his right hand asking a wise for Edward,
She on his left side craving aid for Henry.

Keeper. What art thou that talks of kings and queens?

Hen. More then I seem, for less I should not be.
A man at least, and more I cannot be,
And men may talk of kings, and why not I?

Keeper. I but thou talkest as if thou were a king thy self.

Hen. Why so I am in mind though not in show.

Keeper. And if thou be a king where is thy crown?

Hen. My crown is in my heart, not on my head.
My crown is calde content, a crown that
Kings do seldom times enjoy.

Keeper. And if thou be a king crowned with content,
Your crown content and you, must be content
To go with us unto the officer, for as we think
You are our quondam king, K. Edward has deposde,
And therefore we charge you in Gods name and the kings
To go along with us unto the officers.

Hen. Gods name be fulfild, your kings name be
Obaide, and be you kings, command and I Will obey.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter king Edward, Clarence, and Gloucester, Montague, Hastings,
and the Lady Gray.
K Edw. Brothers of Clarence, and of Gloucester,
This ladies husband here sir R^chard Gray,
At the battle of saint Alkones did lose his life,
His lands then were seized on by the conqueror.
Her suit is now to repossesse those lands,
And since in quarrel of the house of York,
The noble gentleman did lose his life,
In honor we cannot deny her ^^te.

Glo. Your highness shall do well to grant it then.

K Edw I, so I will, but yet I Will make a pause.

Glo. I is the wind in that door?
Clarence, I see the Lady has some thing to grant,
Before the king will grant her humble lute.

Cla. He knows the game, how well he keeps the wind.

K Ed. Widow come some other time to know our mind.

La. May it please your grace I cannot brook delays,
I beseech your highness to dispatch me now.

K Ed. Lords give us leave, we mean to try this widows wit.

Cla. I, good leave have you.

Glo. For you will have leave till youth take leave,
And leave you to your crouch.

K Ed. Come hither widow, how many children haste thou?

Cla. I think he means to beg a child on her.

Glo. Nay whip me then, heel rather give her two.

La. Three my most gracious Lord.

Glo. You shall have four and you will be ruled by him.

K Ed. Were it not pity they should loose their fathers lands?

La. Be pitiful then dread L. and grant it them.

K Edw. I Will tell thee how these lands are to be got.

La. So shall you bind me to your highness service.

K Ed What service will thou do me if I grant it them?

La. Even what your highness shall command.

Glo. Naic then widow I Will warrant you all your
Husbands lands, if you grant to do what he
Commands, Fight close or in good faith
You catch a clap.

Cla. Naie I sear her not unless she fall.

Glo. Marie godsforbot man, for heel take vantage then.

La. Why stops my Lord, shall I not know my task?

K Ed. An easy task, it is but to love a king.

La. That's soon perfounde, because I am a subject.

K Ed. Why then thy hushandes lands I freely give thee.

La. I take my leave with many thousand thanks.

Cla. The match is made, she seals it with a cursie.

K Ed Stay widow stare, what love do thou think
I sue so much to get?

La. My humble service, such as subjects owes and the laws commands.

K Ed. No by my troth, I meant no such love,
But to tell thee the troth, I aim to lie with thee.

La. To tell you plain my Lord, I had rather lie in prison.

K Edw. Why then thou can not get thy husbands lands.

La. Then mine honesty shall be my dower,
For by that loss I will not purchase them.

K Ed. Herein thou wrongst thy children mightily.

La. Herein your highness wrongs both them and
Me, but mighty Lord this merry inclination
Agrees not with the sadness of my suit.
Please it your highness to dismiss me either with I or no.

K Ed I, if thou say I to my request,
No, if thousaie no to my demand.

La. Then no my Lord, my suit is at an end.

Glo. The widow likes him not, she bends the brow.

Cla. Why he is the bluntest woer in christendom.

K Ed Her looks are all repleat with majesty,
One way or other she is for a king,
And she shall be my love or else my Queen.
Say that king Edward took thee for his Queen.

La. It Is better said then done, my gracious Lord,
I am a subject sit to jest withal,
But far unfit to be a Sovereign.

K Edw. Sweet widow, by my state I swear, I speak
No more then what my heart intends,
And that is to enioie thee for my love.

La. And that is more then I will yield unto,
I know I am too bad to be your Queen,
And yet too good to be your Concubine.

K Edw. You ca^^ll widow, I did mean my Queen.

La. Your grace would be loath my sons should call you father.

K Edw. No more then when my daughters call thee
Mother. Thou art a widow and thou have some children,
And by Gods mother I being but a bacheler
Have other some Why it is a happy thing
To be the father of many children.
Argue no more, for thou shall be my Queen.

Glo. The ghostly father now has done his shrift.

Cla. When he was made a shriuer it was for shift.

K Edw. Brothers you muse what talk the widow
And I have had, you would think it strange
If I should marry her.

Cla. Marry her my Lord, to whom?

K Edw. Why Clarence to my self.

Glo. That would be ten days wonder at the least.

Cla. Why that's a day longer then a wonder lastes.

Glo. And so much more are the wonders in extremes.

K Edw. Well, jest on brothers, I can tell you, her
Suit is granted for her husbands lands.
Enter a Messenger.
Mes. And it please your grace, Henry your foe is
Taken, and brought as prisoner to your palace gates.

K Edw. Away with him and send him to the Tower,
And let us go question with the man about
His apprehension. Lords along, and use this
Lady honorably.
Exeunt Omnes. Manet Gloucester and sp^akes.
Glost. I, Edward will use women honorably,
Would he were wasted marrow, bones and all,
That from his loins no issue might succeed
To hinder me from the golden time I look for,
For I am not yet looked on in the world.
First is there Edward, Clarence, and Henry
And his son, and all they looked for issue
Of their loins ere I can plant my self,
A cold premeditation for my purpose,
What other pleasure is there in the world beside?
I will go clad my body in gaie ornaments,
And lull my self within a ladies lap,
And with sweet Ladies with my words and looks.
Oh monstrous man, to harbor such a thought*
Why love did scorn me in my mothers womb.
And for I should not deal in her astaires,
She did corrupt frail nature in the flesh,
And plasle an envious mountain on my back,
Where sits deformity to mock my body,
To dry mine arm up like a withered shrimpe.
To make my legs of an unequal size,
And am I then a man to be beloved?
Easier for me to compass twenty crowns.
Tut I can smile, and murder when I smile,
I cry content, to that that greeues me most.
I can add colors to the Camelion,
And for a need change shapes with Protheus,
And set the aspiring Catalin to school.
Can I do this, and cannot get the crown?
Tush were it ten times higher, I Will pull it down.
Exit. Enter king Lewis and the lady Bon^, and Queen Margaret, Prince Edward,
and Oxford and others.
Jews. Welcome Queen Margaret to the Court of France,
It sits not Lewis to sit while thou do stand,
Sit by my side, and here I vow to thee,
Thou shall have aid to repossesse thy right,
And be at proud Edward from his usurped seat.
And place king Henry in his former rule.

Queen. I humbly thank your royal majesty,
And pray the God of heaven to bless thy state,
Great king of France, that thus regards our wrongs.
Enter Warwike.
Lew. How now, who is this?

Queen. Our Earl of Warwike Edwardes chiefest friend.

Lew. Welcome brave Warwike, what brings thee to France?

War. From worthy Edward king of England,
My Lord and Sovereign and thy vowed friend,
I come in kindness and unfeigned love,
First to do greetings to thy royal person,
And then to crave a league of amity,
And lastly to confirm that amity
With nuptial knot if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous lady Bona thy fair sister,
To Englands king in lawful marriage.

Queen. And if this go forward all our hope is done.

War. And gracious Madam, in our kings behalf,
I am commanded with your love and favor,
Humbly to kiss your hand and with my tongue,
To tell the passions of my soueraines heart,
Where same late entering at his heedfull cares,
Has plast thy glorious image and thy virtues.

Queen. King Jews and Lady Bona hear me speak,
Before you answer Warwike or his words,
For he it is has done us all these wrongs.

War. Injurious Margaret.

Prince Ed. And why not Queen?

War. Because thy father Henry did usurp,
And thou no more art Prince then she is Queen.

Ox. Then Warwike disanuls great Ioha of Gaunt,
That did subdue the greatest part of Spain,
And after John of Gaunt wise Henry the fourth,
Whose wisdom was a mirror to the world.
And after this wise prince Henry the fifth,
Who with his prowess conquered all France,
From these our Henry's lincallie descent.

War. Oxford, how haps that in this smooth discourse
You told not how Henry the sixth had lost
All that Henry the fifth had gotten.
Me thinks these peers of France should smile at that,
But for the rest you tell a pettigree
Of three score and two years a silly time,
To make prescription for a kingdoms worth.

Oxf. Why Warwike, can thou den^e thy king,
Whom thou obeyedst thirty and eight years,
And bewray thy treasons with a blu^h?

War. Can Oxford that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler falsehood with a pettigree?
For sh^me leave Henry and call Edward king.

Oxf. Call him my king by whom mine elder
Brother the Lord Aubray Vere was done to death,
And more than so, my father even in the
Downfall of his mellowed years,
When age did call him to the door of death?
No Warwike no, whilst life vpholds this arm,
This arm vpholds the house of Lancaster.

War. And I the house of York.

K Jews. Queen Margaret, prince Edward and
Oxford, vo^chsafe to forbear a while,
Till I do talk a word with Warwike.
Now Warwike even upon thy honor tell me true;
Is Edward lawful king or no?
For I were loath to link with him, that is not lawful heir.

War. Thereon I pawn mine honor and my credit.

Lew. What is he gracious in the peoples eyes?

War. The more, that Henry is unfortunate.

Lew. What is his love to our sister Buna?

War. Such it seems
As may beseem a monarke like himself.
My self have often heard him s^^e and swear,
That this his love was an eternal plant,
The ro^t whereof was fixed in virtues ground,
The leaves and fruit maintainde with beauti^s sun,
Exempt from envy, but not from disdain,
Unless the lady Bona quite his pain.

Lew. Then sister let us hear your firm resolve.

Bona. Your grant or your denial shall be mine,
But ere this day I must confess, when I
Have heard your kings deserts recounted,
Mine ears have tempted judgment to desire.

Lew. Then draw near Queen Margaret and be a
Witness, that Bona shall be wife to the English king.

Prince Edw. To Edward but not the English king.

War. Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease,
Where having nothing nothing can be lose,
And as for you your seife our quondun Queen,
You have a father able to mainetaine your state,
And better twere to trouble him them France.
Sound for a post within.
Lew. Here comes some post Warwike to thee orvs,

Post. My Lord ambassador this letter is for you,
Sent from your brother Marquis Montague.
This from our king unto your Majesty.
And these to you Madam, from whom I know not.

Oxf. I like it well that our saire Queen and mistress,
Smiles at her news when Warwike frets as his.

P. Ed. And mark how Jews stamps as he were nettled.

Lew. Now Margaret and Warwike, what are your news?

Queen. Mine such as fills my heart full of joy.

War. Mine full of sorrow and hearts discontent.

Lew. What has your king married the Lady Gray,
And now to excuse himself sends us a post of papers?
How dares he presume to use us thus?

Quee. This proves Edwards love, and Warwiks honesty.

War. King Lewis, I here protest in sight of heaven,
And by the hope I have of heavenly blisle,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edwards.
No more my king, for h^ di^^onours me,
And most himself* if he could see his sh^me.
Did I forget that by the house of York.
My father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass the abuse done to my niece?
Did I impale him with the regal Crown,
And thrust king Henry from his native home,
And most ungrateful does he use me thus?
My gracious Queen pardon what is past,
And henceforth I am thy true s^ru^to^r.
I will revenge the wrongs done to lady Bona,
And replant Henry in his former state.

Queen. Yes Warwike I do quite forget thy former
Faults, if now thou will become king Henry's friend.

War. So much his friend, I his unfeigned friend,
That if king Jews vouchsafe to furnish us
With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
I Will undertake to land them on our coast,
And force the Tyrant from his seat by war,
It Is not his new made bride shall succor him.

Lew. Then at the last I fi^m^lie am ^esolu'd,
You shall have aid: and English messenger return
In post, and tell false Edward thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over Maskers
To revel it with him and his new bride.

Bona Tell him in hope heel be a Widower shortly,
I Will wear the willow garland for h^s sake.

Queen. Tell him my mourning weeds be laidle aside,
And I am ready to put armor on.

War. Tell him from me, that he has done me wrong,
And therefore I Will vncrowne him er'e be long.
Thears thy reward, begone.

Lew. But now tell me Warwike, what assurance
I shall have of thy true loyalty?

War. This shall assure my constant loyalty,
If that our Queen and this young prince agree,
I Will join mine eldest daughter and my joy
To him forthwith in holy wedlockes bands.

Queen. Withal my heart, that match I like full well,
Love her son Edward, she is faite and young,
And give thy hand to Warwike for thy love.

Lew. It is enough, and now we will prepare,
To levy (...) for to go with you.
And you Lord Bourbon our high Admiral,
Shall waft them safely to the English coast,
And chase proud Edward from his slumbring trance,
For mocking marriage with the name of France.

War. I cam^ from Edward as I mbassadour
But I return his sworn and mortal for:
Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stale but me?
Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.
I was the chi^fe that raisde him to the crown,
And I Will be chief to bring him down again,
Not that I pity Henry's misery,
But seek revenge on Edwards mockery.
Exit. Enter king Edward, the Queen and Clarence, and Gloucester and Montague and
Hastings, and Penbrooke, with soldiers.
Edw. Brothers of Clarence and of Gloucester.
What think you of our marriage with the lady Gray?

Cla. My Lord, we think as Warvvike and Jews
That are so slack in judgment* that they will take
No offense at this sudden marriage.

Edw. Suppose they do, they are but Jews and
Warvvike, and I am your king and Warvvikes,
And will be obaied.

Glo. And shall, because our king but yet such
Sudden marriages seldom proves well.

Edw. Yea brother Richard are you against us too?

Glo. Not I my Lord, no, God fore^end that I should
Once gain s^^e your highness pleasure,
^ and twere a pity to sunder them that yoke so well together.

Edw. (...) your skornes and your dislikes aside,
Show me some reasons why the Lady Gray,
Mare not be my love and Englands Queen?
Speak freely Clarence, Gloucester,
Montague and Hastings.

Cla. My Lord then this is my opinion,
That Warwike being dishonored in his embassage,
Does seek revenge to quite his injuries.

Glo. And Jews in regard of his sisters wrongs,
Does ^oine with Warwike to supplant your state.

Edw. Suppose that Lewi^ and Warwike be appeas^,
By such means as I can best devise.

Mont. But yet to have ioind with France in this
Alliance, would more have strengthened this out
Common wealth, against ^or^a^^e storms,
Then any h^me bred marriage.

Have. Let England be true within it self,
We need not France not any alliance with them.

Cl^. For this (...) speech the Lord Hastings well deserves,
To have the daughter and heir of the Lord Hungerford.

Edw. And what then? It was our will it should be so?

Cla. I, and for such a thing too the Lord Scales
Did well deserve at your hands, to have the
Daughter of the Lord Bonsield and left your
Brothers to go seek elsewhere, but in
Your madness, you butie brotherhood.

Edw Alas poor Clarence, is it for a wife,
That thou art mal-content,
Why man be of good cheer, I will provide thee one.

Cla. Naie you plaide the broker so^ll for your self,
That you shall give me leave to make my
Choice as I think good, and to that intent,
I shortly mean to leave you.

Edw. Leave me or tarry I am full resolved.
Edward will not be tied to his brothers wills.

Queen. My Lords do (...) but right and you must
Confess, before it pleased his highness to advance
My state to title of a Queen,
That I was not ignoble in my birth.

Edw. Forthcare my love to ^iwne upon their frowns,
For thee they must obey, (...) shall ob^^^,
And if they look for favor at my hands.

Mont. My Lord, here is the messenger return^ from France.
Enter a Messenger.
Edw. Now s^^a, What letters or what new^^^

Mes. No letters my Lord, and such (...) without your highness special pardon
I dare not ^^late.

Edw. We pardon thee, and as near as thou can
Tell me, What said Lewis to our letters?

Mes. At my depa^tute these were his vetie words.
Go tell false Edward thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over Maskers,
To reuill it with him and his new bride.

Edw. Is Lewis so brave, belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to these wrongs?

Mes. Tell him qu^th she, in hope heel prove a widdower shortly, I Will wear the
willow garland for his sake.

Edw. She had the wrong, indeed she could say
Little less. But what said Henry's Queen, for as
I hear, she was then in place?

Mes. Tell him quoth she my mourning weeds be
Done, and I am ready to put armor on.

Edw. Then be like she means to pla^e the Amazon.
But what said Warwike to these injuries?

Mes. He more incensed then the rest my Lord,
Tell him quoth he, that he has done me wrong,
And therefore I Will vncrowne him er^^ be long.

Ed Ha, Durst the traitor breath out such proud words?
But I will arm me to prevent the worst.
But what is Warwike friends with Margaret?

Mes. I my good Lord* theare so (...) in friendship,
That young Prince Edward marries Warwikes daughter.

Cla. The elder, belike Clarence shall have the
Younger. All you that love me and Warwike
Follo v me.
Exit Clarence and Summerset.
Edw. Clarence and Summerset fled to Warwike.
What say you brother Richard, will you stand to us?

Glo. I my Lord in despite of all that shall
Withstand you For why has Nature
Made me halt down right, but that I
Should be valiant and stand to it, for if
I would, I cannot run away.

Edw. ` Penbrooke, go raise an army presently,
Pitch up my tent, for in the field this night
I mean to rest, and on the morrow morn,
I Will march to meet proud Warwike ere he land
Those straggling troops which he has got in France.
But ere I go Montague and Hastings,
You of all the rest are nearest allied
In blood to Warwike, therefore tell me, if
You favor him more then me or not:
Speak truly, for I had rather have you open
Enemies, then hollow friends.

Monta. So God help Montague as he proves true.

Have. And Hastings as he favors Edwards cause.

Edw. It shall suffice, come then lets march away.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter Warwike and Oxford, with soldiers.
War. Trust me my Lords all hitherto goes well,
The common people by numbers swa^me to us,
But see where Sommerset and Clarence comes,
Speak suddenly my Lords, are we all friends?

Cla. Fear not that my Lord.

War. Then gentle Clarence welcome unto Warwike.
And welcome Summerset, I hold it cowardice,
To rest mistrustfull where a noble heart,
Has pawnde an open hand in sign of love,
Else might I think that Clarence* Edwards brother,
Were but a fained friend to our proceedings,
But welcome sweet Clarence my daughter shall be thine.
And now what rests but in nights couerture,
Thy brother being carelessly encampt,
His soldiers lurking in the town about,
And but attended by a simple guarde,
We may surprise and take him at our pleasure,
Our skouts have found the adventure very easy,
Then cry king Henry with resolved nundes,
And break we presently into his tent.

Cla. Why then lets on our way in silent sort,
For Warwike and his friends God and saint George.

War. This is his tent, and see where his guard does
Stand, Courage my soldiers, now or never,
But follow me now, and Edward shall be ours.
All* A Warwike, a Warwike
Alarmes, and Gloucester and Hastings shes.
Oxf* Who goes there?

War. Richard and Hastings let them go, here is the Duke.

Edw. The Duke, why Warwike when we parted
Last, thou caldst me king?

War. I, but the case is altered now.
When you disgraste me in my embassage,
Then I disgraste you from being king,
And now am come to create yo^ Duke of York,
Alas^e how should you govern any kingdom,
That knows not how to use ambassadors,
Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
No^how to sh^owd your self from enemies.

Edw. Well Warwike, let fortune do her worst,
Edward in mind will bear himself a king.

War. Then for his mind be Edward Englands king,
But Henry now shall wear the English crown.
Go conuaie him to our brother archbishop of York,
And when I have fought with Penbrooke and his followers,
I Will come and tell thee what the lady Bona says,
And so for a while farewell good Duke of York.
Exeunt some with Edward.
Cla. What follows now, all hithertoo goes well,
But we must dispatch some letters to France,
To tell the Queen of our happy fortune,
And bid her come with speed to join with us.

War. I that's the first thing that we have to do,
And free king Henry from imprisonment,
And see him seated in his regal throne,
Come let us haste away, and having past these cares,
I Will post to York, and see how Edward fares.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter Gloucester, Hastings, and sir William Stanly.
Glo. Lord Hastings* and (...) William Stanly,
Know that the cause I sent for you is this.
I look my brother with a slender train,
Should come a hunting in this forest here.
The Bishop of York be friends him much,
And lets him use his pleasure in the chase,
Now I have privily sent him word,
How I am come with you to rescue him.
And see where the huntsman and he does come.
Enter Edward and a Huntsman.
Hunts This way my Lord the dear is gone.

Edw. No this way huntsman, see where the
Keepers stand. Now brother and the rest,
What, are you provided to depart?

Glo. I, I* the horse stands at the park corner,
Come, to Linne* and so take shipping into Flanders*

Edw. Come then: Hastings, and Stanlie, I will
Requite your loves. Bishop farewell,
Sheeld thee from Warwikes frown,
And pray that I may repossesse the crown.
Now huntsman what will you do?

Hunts Marry my Lord, I think I had as good
Go with you, as tarry here to be hangde.

Edw. Come then lets away with speed.
Exeunt Omnes, Enter the Queen and the Lord Rivers.
Rivers. Tell me good maddam, why is your grace
So pa^^^onate of late?

Queen. Why brother Rivers, hear you not the news,
Of that success king Edward had of late?

Riu. What^ loss of some pitched battle against Warwike,
Tush, fear not fair Queen, but cast those cares aside.
King Edwards noble mind his honors does display*
And Warwike may loose, though then he got the day.

Queen. If that were all, my griefs were at an end:
But greater troubles will I ^^ar^ befall.

Riu What, is he taken prisoner? by the foe,
To the danger of his royal person then:

Queen. I, thears my grief, king Edward is surprisde,
And led away, as prisoner unto York.

Riu. The news is passing strange. I must confess:
Yet comfort your self, for Edward has more friends,
Then Lancaster at this time must perceive,
That some will set him in his throne again*

Queen. God grant they may, but gentle brother come,
And let me lean upon thine arm a while,
Until I come unto the sanctua^ie,
There to preserve the f^u^t within my womb,
K. Edwards seed true heir to Englands crown.
Exit. Enter Edward and Richard, and Hastings with a troop of Hollanders.
Edw. Thus far from Belgia have we past the seas,
And marched from Raunspur haven unto York:
But soft the gates are shut, I like not this.

Rich. Sound up the drum and call them to the walls.
Enter the Lord Maire of York upon the walls.

Mair. My Lords we had notice of your coming,
And that's the cause we stand upon our guard,
An I shut the gates for to preserve the town.
Henry now is king, and we are sworn to him.

Edw. Why my Lord Maire, if Henry be your king,
Edward I am sure at least, is Duke of York.

Mair. Truth my Lord, we know you for no less.

Edw* I crave nothing but my Dukedom.

Rich. But when the Fox has gotten in his head,
Heel quickly make the bo^ie follow after.

Have. Why my Lord Maire, what stand you upon points?
Open the gates, we are king Henry's friends.

Mair. Say you so, then I Will open them presently.
Exit Maire. Ri. By my ^aith, a wise stout captain and soon persuaded. The
Maire opens the door, and b^ings the keys in his hand.
Edw. So my Lord Maire, these gates must not be shut,
But in the time of war, give me the keys:
What, fear not man for Edward will defend
the town and you, despite of all your foes.
Enter sir John Mountgommery with drum and soldiers. How now Richard, who is
this?

Rich. Brother, this is sir John Mountgommery,
A trusty friend unless I be dece^ude.

Edw. Welcome sir John* Wherefore come you in arms?

Sir John. To help king Edward in this time of storms,
As every loyal subject ought to do.

Edw. Thanks brave Mountgommery,
But I only claim my Dukedom,
Until i^ please God to send the rest.

Sir John. Then sa^e you well* Drum strike up and let us
March away, I came to serve a king and not a Duke.

Edw. Nay sta^e sir John, and let us first debate,
With what security we may do this thing.

Sir John. What stand you on debating to be brief,
Except you presently proclaim your self our king,
I Will hence again, and keep them back that come to
Succor you, why should we fight when
You pretend no title?

Rich Fie brother, fie, stand you upon terms?
Resolve your self, and let us claim the crown.

Edw. I am resolude once more to claim the crown,
And win it too* or else to loose my life.

Sir John. I now my sovereign speaks like himself,
And now will I be Edwards Champion,
Sound Trumpets, for Edward shall be proclaimd.
Edward the fourth by the grace of God, king of England and France, and Lord of
Ireland, and whosoever gainsa^es king Edwards ^ight: by this I challenge him to
single sight, long live Edward the fourth.

All. Long live Edward the fourth.

Edw. We thank you all. Lord Maire lead on the way.
For this night we will ha^bour here in York,
And then ^s ea^^e as the morning sun,
L^ftes up his beams above this ho^ison
We Will march to London, to meet with VVarwike:
And pull sal^e Henry from the Regal throne.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter VVarwike and Clarence, with the Crown, and then king
Henry, and Oxford, and Summerset, and the young Earl of Richmond.
King. Thus from the prison to this prince lie seat,
By Gods great mercies am I brought
Again, Clarence and VVarwike do you
Keep the crown, and gouerue and protect
My realm in peace, and I will spend the
Remnant of my days, to sins rebuke
And my Creators praise.

War. What answers Clarence to his sovereigns will?

Cla. Clarenc^ agrees to what king Henry likes.

King. My Lord of Summerset, what pretty
Boie is that you seem to be so careful of?

Sum And it please your grace, it is youg Henry,
Earl of Richmond.

King. Henry of Richmond, Come hither pretty Ladde.
If heavenly powers do aim aright
To my divining thoughts, thou pretty boy,
Shall prove this Countries bliss,
Thy head is made to wear a princely crown,
Thy looks are all repleat with Majesty,
Make much of him my Lords,
For this is he shall help you more,
Then you are hurt by me.
Enter one with a letter to Warwike.
War. What Counsel Lords, Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
Is past in safety through the narrow seas,
And with his troops do march amain toward London,
And many giddie people follow him.

Oxf. It Is best to look to this betimes,
For if this ^ue do kindle any further,
It will be hard for us to quench it out.

War. In Warwike shire I have true hearted friends,
Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war,
Them will I muster up, and thou son Clarence shall
In Essex, Suff^lke, Norfolk, and in Kent,
Stir up the knights and gentlemen to come with thee*
And thou brother Montague, in L^ister shire,
Buckingham and Northampton shire shall find,
Men well inclinde to do what thou commands,
And thou brave Oxford wondrous well beloved,
Shall in thy countries muster up thy friends.
My sovereign with his loving Citizens,
Shall rest in London till we come to him.
Fair Lords take leave and stand not to reply,
Farewell my sovereign.

King. Farewell my Hector, my Troyes true hope,

War. Farewell sweet Lords, lets meet at Couentrie.

All. Agreed.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter Edward and his train.
Edw. ^ease on the shamefast Henry,
And once again conuaie him to the Tower,
Away with him, I will not hear him speak.
And now toward Couent^ie let us bend our course
To meet with Warwike and his confederates.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter Warwike on the walls.
War. Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
How far hence is thy Lord my honest fellow?

Oxf post. By this at Da^^trie marching hitherward.

War. Where is ou^ brother Montague?
Where is the post that came from Montague?

Post. I left him at Donsmore with his troops.

War. Say Summerfield where is my loving son?
And by thy guess, how far is Clarence hence?

Summer. At Southham my Lord I le^t him with
His force, and do expect him two hours hence.

War. Then Oxford is at hand, I hear his drum.
Enter Edward and his power.
Glo. See brother, where the surlv Warwike man's the wall.

War. O vnbid spite, is spotfull Edward come!
Where slept our scouts or how are they sedus^e,
That we could have no news of their repair?

Edw. Now Warwike will thou be sorry for thy faults,
And call Edward king and he will pardon thee.

War. Naie rather will thou draw thy forces back?
Confess who set thee up and pulled thee down?
Call Warwike patron and be pe^^^ent,
And thou shall still remain the Duke of York.

Glo. I had thought at least be would have said the king.
Or did he make the best against his will.

War. It Was Warwike gave the kingdom to thy brother.

Edw. Why then it is mine, if but by Warwikes gift.

War. I but thou art no Atlas for so great a weight,
And weakling, Warwike takes his gift again,
Henry is my king, Warwike his subject*

Edw. I prithee gallant Warwike tell me this,
What is the body when the head is off?

Glo. Alas that Warwike had no more foresight,
But whilst he sought to steal the single ten,
The king was finely fingerd from the deck?
You lef^ poor Henry in the Bishops palace,
And ten to one you will meet him in the Tower.

Edw. It Is even so, and yet you are old Warwike still.

War. O cheerful colors, see where Oxford comes.
Enter Oxford with drum and soldiers and al c^ie,
Oxf. Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster. Exit.

Edw. The Gates are open, see they enter in,
Lets follow them and bid them battle in the streets.

Glo. No, so some other might set upon our backs,
We Will stay till all be entered, and then follow them.
Enter Summerset* with drum and soldiers.
Sum. Summerset, Summerset for Lancaster.
Exit.
Glo. Two of thy name both Dukes of Summerset,
Have sold their lives unto the house of York,
And thou shall be the third and my sword hold.
Enter Montague with drum and soldiers.
Mont. Montague, Montague, for Lancaster. Exit.

Edw. Traitorous Montague, thou and thy brother
Shall dearly abie this rebellious act.
Enter Clarence with drum and soldiers.
War. And lo where George of Clarence sweepes
Along, of power enough to bid his brother battle.

Cla. Clarence, Clarence, for Lancaster.

Edw. Et tu Brute, will thou stab Caesar too?
A parlie sir to George of Clarence.
Sound a Parlie, and Richard and Clarence whis^ers together, and then Clarence
takes his red Rose out of his hat, and throws it at Warwike.
War. C^m Clarence come, thou will if Warwike call.

Cla. Father of Warwike, know you what this means*
^ throw mine infamy at thee,
I will not ruinate my fathers house,
Who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Think thou
That Clarence is so harsh unnatural,
To lift his sword against his brothers life,
And so proud hearted Warwike I defy thee,
And to my brothers turn my blushing cheeks?
Pardon me Edward, for I have do^e amiss,
And Richard do not frown upon me,
For hence forth I will prove no m^re unconstant.

Edw. Welcome Clarence, and t^n times more welcome,
Then if thou never had deserud out hate.

Glo. Welcome good Clarence, this is bretherlie.

War. Oh passing traitor, pe^iurd and unjust.

Edw. Now Warwike, will thou lea^e
The town and fight? or shall we beat the
Stones about thine ears?

War. Why I am not coopt up here for defense,
I will away to Bar^et presently,
And bid thee battle Edward it thou dare.

Edw. Yes Warwike he dares, and leads the way,
Lords to the field, saint George and victory.
Exeunt Omnes. Alarmes, and t^en enter Warwike wounded.

War. Ah, who is ^? Come to m^ friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor Y^rke or Warwike?
Why ask I that? my ma gl^d body shows,
That I must yield my body to the earth.
And by my fall the conquest to my foes,
Thus yields the Cedar to the ax^^ edge.
Whose arms g^ue sh^lt^r to the princely Eagl^,
Under whose (...) ad^ the ramp^ng ^ion slept,
Whose top branch ouerpeerd Jove's sreading tree.
The wrinkles in my brows now ^ild with blood,
Were likened often to ^inglie sepulchers.
For who lived king, but I could ^ig his grave?
And who durst smile, when Warwike bent his brow?
Lo now my glo^^e smeerd in dust and blood,
My parkes my wal^es, my manors that I had,
Even now forsake me and of all my lands,
Is nothing left me but my bodies length.
Enter Oxf^rd and Summerset.
Oxf. Ah Warwike, Warwike, cheer up thy self and li^e,
For yet thears hope enough to win the day.
Our warlike Queen with troop^s is come from France,
And at South^h^mpton landed all hi^ train,
And might thou l^ue then would we never fly.

War. Which then I would not fly nor have I now,
But Hercules himself must yield to ods,
For m^^e wounds received, and many more repaid,
Has robbed my strong knit ^^news of their strength,
And spite of sp^tes needs must I yield to death.

Sum. Thy brother M^ntague h^th breathd his last,
And at the pangs of death I heard him cry
And say, commend me to my valiant brother,
And more he would have spoke and (...) he said,
Which sounded like a (...) a vault,
That could not b^ distinguished for the sound,
And so the val^ant Montague gave up the ghost.

War. What is pomp, rule, ra^g^e, but earth and dust*
And live we how we can, yet the w^ m^st.
Sweet rest his soul, she Lords and (...) your selves,
For Warwike bids you all farewell to mee^ ^n H^auen.
He dies.
Oxf* Come noble Summerset, lets take our horse,
And cause retrait be sounded through the camp,
That all our friends that yet remain alive*,
May be awarn'd and ^aue themselves by flight.
That done, with them we will post unto the Queen,
And once mo^eui^ our fortune in the fi^ld
Ex ambo. Enter Edward Clarence, Gloucester, with soldiers.
Edw. Thus still our fortune (...) us victory,
And g^^ts our temples with tr^umphant ^oies
The bigboond traitor Warwike has breathde his last,
An I heaven this day has sm^^de v^on v^^all,
But in this clear and brightsome ^a^e,
I see a black suspicious cloud appear
That will enc^unter with our glorious sun
Before he gain his ^asefull w^ ste^e be ^^es,
I mean those powers which the Queen has got in France
Are landed, and mean once more to menace us.

Glo. Oxford and Summerset are sled to hi^,
And (...) likely if she have time to breath,
Her fact on will be full as strong as ours.

Edw. We are aduertisde by our loving friends,
That they do hold their course toward Tow^burie.
Th^ther will we (...) for willingness rids way,
And in every county as we pas^e along,
O^^ str engthes shall be augmented.
Come lets go, for if we slack this fair
B^^ght Summers day, sharp winters
Sho^ers w^ll ma^e our hope for haie.
Ex* Omnes. Enter the Queen, Prince Edward Oxford and Summerset, wi^h drum and
soldiers.
Quee. Welcome to England, my loving friends of France,
And welcome Summerset, and Oxford too.
On^e more have we spread our sails abroad,
And though our tackling be almost consumde,
And Warwike as our maine mast overthrown,
Yet wa^like Lords raise you that sturdie post,
That bears the s^iles to bring us unto rest,
And Ne^ and I as willing P^lots should
For once with careful minds guide on the stern,
To bear us through that dangerous gulf
That heretofore has swallowed up our friends.

Prince. And if there be, as God forbid there should,
Amongst us a timorous or fearful man,
Let him depart before the battles join,
^east he in time of need intise another,
And so withdraw the soldiers hearts from us.
I will not stand aloof and bid you fight,
But with my sword press in the thickest thronges,
And single Edward from his strongest guard,
And hand to hand enforce him for to yield,
Or leave my body as witness of my thoughts.

Oxf. Women and children of so high resolve,
And Warriors faint, why twere perpetual
Shame? Oh brave young Prince, thy
Noble grandfather does live again in thee,
Long may thou live to bear his image,
And to renew his glories.

Sum. And he that turns and flies when such do fight,
Let him to bed, and like the Owl by day
Be hist, and wondered at if he arise.
Enter a Messenger.
Mes. My Lords, Duke Edward with a mighty power,
Is ma^ching hitherwards to fight with you.

Oxf. I thought it was his policy, to take us unprovided,
But here will we stand and fight it to the death.
Enter king Edward, Cla. Glo. Have. and Soldiers.
Edw. See brothers, yonder stands the thornie wood,
Which by Gods assistance and your prowess,
Shall with our swords yer night be clean cut down.

Queen. Lords, Knights and gentlemen, what I should say,
My tears gainesaie, for as you see, I drink
The water of mine eyes. Then no more
But this. Henry your king is prisoner
In the tower, his land and all our friends
Are quite distressed, and yonder stands
The Wolf that makes all this,
Then on Gods name Lords together cry saint George.
All Saint George for Lancaster.

Alarmes to the battle, York flies, then the chambers be discharged. Then
enter the king* Cla and Glo. and the rest, and make a great shout, and cry,
for York, for York, and then the Queen is taken, and the prince, and Oxf.
and Sum. and then sound and enter all again.

Edw. Lo here a period of tumultuous broiles,
Away with Oxford to Hames castle straight,
For Summerset off with his guilty head.
Away I will not hear them speak.

Oxf. For my part I Will not trouble thee with words.
Exit Oxford.
Sum. Not I, but stoop with patience to my death.
Exit Sum.
Edw. Now Edward what satisfaction can thou make,
^or stirring up my subjects to rebellion?

Prin. Speak like a subject proud ambitious York,
Suppose that I am now my fathers mouth,
Resign thy chair* and where I stand kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee,
Which traitor thou woudst have me answer to.

Queen. Oh that thy father had bin so resolu^d*

Glo. That you might still have kept your
Peticote, and nere have slolne the
Br^^^h from Lancaster.

Prince. Let Aesop fable in a winters night.
His c^^^^sh Riddles sorts not with this place.

Glo. By heaven brat I Will plague you for that word.

Queen. I* thou wast borne to be a plague to men.

Glo. For Gods sake take a way this captive scold.

Prin Nay take away this skolding Crooktbacke rather.

Edw. Peace wilful boy, or I will tame your tongue.

Cla. Vntuterd lad thou art too malepert.

Prin. I know my duty, you are all undutiful.
Lascivious Edward, and thou periurd George,
And thou misshapen Dicke, I tell you all,
I am your better, traitors as you be.

Edw. Take that, the litnes of this railer here.

Queen. Oh kill me too.

Glo Marry and shall.

Edw. Hold Richard hold, for we have done too much already.

Glo Why should she live to fill the world with words?

Edw. What does she swound: make means for Her recovery?

Glo Clarence, excuse me to the king my brother,
I must to London on a serious matter,
Ere you come there* you shall hear more news.

Cla. About what, prithee tell me?

Glo. The Towerman, the Tower, I Will root them out
Exit Gloucester.
Queen. Ah Ned, speak to thy mother boy? ah
Thou can not speak.
Traitors, Tyrants, bloody Homicides,
They that stabd Caesar shed no blood at all,
For he was a man, this in respect a child,
And men nere spend then fury on a child,
What Is worse then tyrant that I may name,
You have no children Devils, if you had,
The thought of them would then have stopped your rage,
But if you ever hope to have a son,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off,
As Traitors you have done this sweet young prin^e.

Edw. Away, and bear her hence.

Queen. Naie nere bear me hence, dispatch
Me here, here sheath thy sword,
I Will pardon thee my death. Will thou not?
Then Clarence, do thou do it?

Cla By Heaven I would not do thee so much ease.

Queen. Good Clarence do, sweet Clarence kill me too.

Cla. Did thou not hear me swear I would not do it?

Queen. I, but thou use to forswear thy self,
It Was sin before, but now it is charity.
Whea^s the Devils butcher, hardfauored Richard,
Richard where art thou? He is not here,
Murder is his alms deed, petitioners
For blood he nere put back.

Edw. Away I say, and take her hence perforce.

Queen. So come to you and yours, as to this prince.
Ex.
Edw. Clarence, whithers Gloucester gone?

Cla Marry my Lord to London, and as I guess, to
Make a bloody supper in the Tower.

Edw. He is sudden if a thing come in his head.
Well, discharge the common soldiers with pay
And thanks, and now let us toward London,
To see our gentle Queen how she does fare,
For by this I hope she has a son for us.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter Gloucester to king Henry in the Tower.
Glo. Good day my Lord. What at your book so hard?

Hen. I my good Lord. Lord I should say rather,
It Is sin to flatter, good was little better,
Good Gloucester, and good Devil, were all alike,
What scene of Death has Rosius now to act?

Glo. Suspicion always haunts a guilty mind.

Hen. The bird once limde does fear the fatal bush,
And I the hapless maile to one poor bird,
Have now the fatal object in mine eye,
Where my poor young was limde, was caught and killed.

Glo. Why, what a fool was that of Cree^e?
That taught his son the office
Of a bird, and yet for all that the poor
Foul was drownde.

Hen. I Dedalus, my poor son Icarus,
Thy father Minos that denide our course,
Thy brother Edward, the sun that ^earde his wings,
And thou the enuio^s gulf that swallowed him.
Oh better can my breast abide thy daggers point,
Then can mine cares that tragike history.

Glo. Why do thou think I am an executioner?

Hen. A persecutor I am sure thou art,
And if murdering innocents be executions,
Then I know thou art an executioner.

Glo. Thy son I killed for his presumption.

Hen. Had thou bin killed when first thou did presume,
Thou had not liude to kill a son of mine,
And thus I prophecy of theo.
That many a Widow for her husbands death,
And many an infants water standing eye,
Widows for their husbands, children for their fathers,
Shall curse the time that ever thou were borne.
The owl s^^ikt at thy birth, an evil sign,
The night Crow cride, aboding lucklesse tune,
Dogs howld and hideous tempests shook down trees,
The Raven rookt her on the Chimnies top,
And chattering Pi^s in dismal discord sung,
Thy mother felt more then a mothers pain,
And yet brought ^orth less then a mothers hope,
To wit* an vndigest created lump.
Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree,
Teeth had thou in thy head when thou wast borne,
Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat,
And made our footstool of security.
Come hither Besse, and let me kiss my boie,
Young Ned, for thee, thine Uncles and my self,
Have in our armors watched the Winters night,
Marched all a foot in summers skalding heat,
That thou might ^epossesse the crown in peace,
And of out labors thou shall reap the gain.

Glo. I Will blast his harvest and your head were laid,
For yet I am not looked on in the world.
This shoulder was ordaind so thick to heave,
And heave it shall some weight or break my back,
Work thou the way, and thou shall execute.
Edward, Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely Queen,
And kiss your princely nephew brothers both.

Cla. The duty that I owe unto your, Majesty,
I seal upon the rosiate lips of this sweet babe.

Queen. Thanks noble Clarence worthy brother thanks.

Gloucester. And that I love the fruit from whence thou
Sprangst, witness the loving kiss I give the child.
To say the truth so Judas kissed his master,
And so he cride all hail* and meant all ha^^e.

Edward. Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my countries peace, and brothers loves.

Cla. What will your grace have done with Margaret*
Ranard her father to the king of France,
Has pawnd the Cyssels and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.

Edw. Away with her, and wa^te her hence to France,
And now what rests but that we spend the time,
With stately Triumphs and mirthfull comick^ shows,
Such as befits the pleasures of the Court.
Sound drums and Trumpets, farewell to sower annoy,
For here I hope begins our lasting joy.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

