THE BENEFIT of Affliction.

A Sermon, first preached, and afterward enlarged, by Charles Richardson
Preacher at Saint Katharines near to the Tower of London.

PSALM. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, O Lord, and teach him
in thy Law.

LONDON Printed by Lionell Snowdon, for W. Butlar, and are to be sold at his
shop in the Bulwark, near the Tower of London. 1616.

To the right honorable and truly Religious Lady, the Lady ELIZABETH Countess
of Lincoln, grace and peace be multiplied.
Right Honorable,
I First preched this Sermon at the burial of one, M. Brocklesby a Goldsmith
in Cheapside.
who on his deathbed gave order, that this Text might then be handled. And
having since, upon some other occasion, enlarged the same, I have presumed, in
your Honors name, to make it more public, by committing it to the Press. The
reason that moved me, besides mine own private respect (whereby I confess I
am bound to do your Honor all the service I can, in regard of the great
favor which for many years I have found at your hands) is this, because I
know the Doctrine of it does most properly appertain unto you: who a long
time have felt these blessed fruits of affliction your self in a most
plentiful manner. James 1.4. Romans 8.37.
If ever Patience has had her perfect work in any, it has been in you: who
have not only been thereby more then a Conqueror: but also have learned to
contemn and despise all outward crosses, as not able to come near your soul,
being mounted up so high above their reach. Yea hereby the graces which GOD
has wrought in your Honor, have been so tried, like gold in the furnace, as
they have shined forth, in such excellent and glorious manner, that all that
have known you, have been drawn into admiration thereof. For mine own part,
I must needs acknowledge, that I never came to your Honor, but I went away
ashamed, to see my self so much inferior in grace unto you. I have many times
wondered, to behold your exceeding diligent attention in hearing the word, your
blessed memory to retain the things which you have heard, and your godly
care to make an holy use thereof in the whole course of your life. And as your
desire is great to hear the word in public: so you spend much time in the
private reading of the same, making it your chief delight, Psalm: 1.2. 1 Cor.
1.5. Heb. 5.14.
to meditate in the Law of the Lord day and night: whereby you are made rich
in knowledge: and, through long custom have your wit exercised, to discern
both good and evil. But you have not thought it sufficient to be thus
Christianly affected your self, but your care has bin likewise extended to
your children that they also might be trained up in sound religion. It would do
a man good, to hear the sweet lessons and gracious instructions, which you
like another Bath-sheba have taught your little ones, Prou. 31.1.
causing them as young Timotheus did, to know the holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15.
even from their cradles. Whereby you have made so deep an impression of
godliness in their hearts, as (I trust) the devil shall never be able to raze
out. Neither has your goodness bin dammed up in your own private family, but
it has also flowed forth to the good of others. For at such time as God
denied your Honor that plentiful use of his word, which I know you thirsted
and panted after, as earnestly as ever did the Heart after the rivers of water,
Psalm. 24.1.
whenever you had any opportunity of hearing it offered unto you, you did
not ingrosse it, as worldlings do their commodities, to your own private use
alone, but with good Cornelius, Acts 10.24.
you called together your neighbors and friends, that they also might be
partakers of the grace of God with you. And howsoever you have not in former
times had such means to perform external works of charity, as God has
afforded unto others: yet to your power, 2 Cor. 8.3.
yea and beyond your power, you have been willing to do good that way also. For
you spent not your estate in pride and bravery (for that you never affected)
but your richest dressings and attire were the ornaments of the Apostle, as
Tertullian says. Your earings were the word of God, your neck-laces the yoke
of Christ, your silken and velvet garments were piety and holiness. By which
means you spared much from vain and idle expenses (wherein too many of your
place do greatly exceed) that you might have something, to give to such as
stand need of relief: especially to the Ministers of the word, which brought
unto you the glad tidings of peace and salvation. There is none that has been
more ready to entertain them at all times, nor to use them with greater
respect then your Honor has done. And as I can witness, how earnestly you
have desired, that you might but live to do more good in the Church of God: so
I doubt not, but God having at the last, in mercy granted your desire, Psa.
66.13, 14
you will be mindful to pay the vows, which your lips have promised, and your
mouth has spoken in your affliction. I doubt not, but with virtuous Ruth, Ruth
3.10.
you will show more goodness in the latter end, then at the beginning: that as
all that have known you, have hitherto called you, The good Lady Clinton, so
you may now be called, The good Countess of Lincoln. You see (right
Honorable) how far I have been transported with the admiration of your
excellent virtues. God is my witness, I have not done it to flatter, or to
give Titles to your Honor, for then my Maker would reprove me: and I know
your humility is such, as you love not to hear your own praises. But I do it
in the sincerity of my soul, that GOD may have the glory of his graces, and
that the Church may be edified by your example: I would all the great Ladies in
the Land would tread in your steps: so should they shine as so many glorious
diamonds in the Church of God. For it is not the greatness of their birth, nor
the eminence of their places, that can so ennoble them, and make them so truly
honorable in the sight of God and his children, as the admirable graces which
appear in you. I pray GOD, even from the bottom of my heart, to bless your
Honor with many happy days, in this life, to perfect the good work which
he has begun in you, and in the end, to bring you to that immortal
inheritance that fades not away, which is reserved in Heaven for you.

Your Honors most humbly devoted, CHARLES RICHARDSON.

To the godly, virtuous and religious Ladies, the Lady Katharine Scot, the
Lady Isabel Bows, the Lady Frances S. Paul, and the Lady Frances Wray,
increase of grace and fruition of glory.
Worthy Ladies:
AS God has united you all in the bonds of nature and alliance; so I am bold
to join you all together in the dedication of this Sermon. I confess, in it
self, it is not worthy the acceptance of any one of you. But seeing it has
pleased God, to make you all instruments of much good and comfort unto me, and
I know not whether I shall ever have opportunity, to publish several things in
every one of your names in particular: I have thought good, to take this
occasion, to manifest my thankful acknowledgement of the kindness of you
all in general: which has been extended, not to me only, but to many others
of my calling. For I may truly give this testimony of you, that you have all
showed great love to the faithful Ministers of God, and when any of them have
resorted unto you, you have according to the Apostles precept, Phil 2.29.
received them with all gladness, and made much of them. The matter of this
Sermon is concerning affliction, whereof you have all had your portion more or
less: and therefore, the Doctrine contained in it, does fitly appertain to
you all. But especially to you my good Lady Scot, whom the Lord has caused to
drink deeper of this cup then many others. But as it has pleased God,
hitherto to support you with grace and patience: so I doubt not, but he will,
in his good time, make a blessed end with you, as he did with Job, James 5.11.
Psalm. 90.15.
making you glad again according to the years wherein you have seen evil.
If these meditatations of mine may minister any comfort unto you, or to any
other in the like case, I shall think my labor well bestowed. And thus
presuming that you will kindly accept of this my poor service, which in my
sincerest affection I tender unto you, I commend all your Ladyships to God, and
to the word of his grace, who is able to build you further, and to give you an
inheritance among them that are sanctified.

Your Ladyships in all duetifull affection. CHARLES RICHARDSON,

Errata.
Page 7. li. 4. read, diverse tentations. page 9. li. 17. read, borne. page
10. li. 18. read silver. lin. 26. read, army. page 11 li. 4 read, were
constrained pa. 28. li. 10. read, concerning inward tentations, is true also
of outward affli^tions. pa 35. li. 10. read, strange. pa. 40. li. 5. put out
And. ^a. 41. li. 18. read, broken in page 45. li. 6. for violent, read, godly.
ibid in marg. lege malacia.

THE BENEFIT of Affliction.
Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been Afflicted, that I may
learn thy Statutes.
IF it be lawful to make comparisons between one part of the holy Scripture
and another, Psalm. 119, 129 2. Tim. 3.16:
which is all most excellent, as David says, being inspired by one and the
same blessed spirit of God: we may truly say that there is no part more
worthy then the book of Psalms, and in them, none more full of heavenly
instruction then this Psalm. The author whereof is generally agreed upon to be
David, whom the Scripture has styled, The sweet singer of Israel. 2, Sam,
^3, 1.
Who as he had a good faculty in the art of divine Poetry, and a great
dexterity in penning of Psalms, to the glory of God, and the edification of
his Church: so it is evident that he showed the excellency of his skill in
composing this Psalm: being there unto occasioned and excited by the great
afflictions that were upon him. For the Psalm seems to have been penned in
the time of his exile and banishment, whereby he labors to confirm his
faith, by many comfortable meditatio^s of the word of God. The matter of the
Psalm contains many instructions and prayers, all tending to direct us in
the way of godliness. The general proposition of it is this, that they that
are truly godly, are truly blessed, and that they are truly godly, that are
acquainted with the word of God, and are careful to frame their lives
according to the directions and rules thereof.

And therefore he labors by many arguments throughout the whole Psalm, and
especially by his own example to stir up all the children of God, both to
the continual meditation, and due practice of the word.

The Psalm, as it is the longest of all the rest, being divided into two and
twenty several parts: so it is more curiously and more artificially penned
then any of the rest. For first, all the parts and divisions of it are of
equal length, each of them consisting of eight verses. Again, every division
in the original begins with an Hebrew letter according to the Alphabet, and
every verse in that division begins with the same letter. And last of all,
Verse 122:
there is not any verse in the whole Psalm but one, which makes not some
mention of the word of God, and has not some title or other, to set out and
commend the excellency of it. As it is called the Law, the Testimonies, the
Ways, the Precepts, the Statutes, the Commandments, the Judgments, the
promise, the truth, the ordinances, the name of God etc. Now the reasons why
the Prophet is so exquisite in framing of this Psalm, is to commend the
excellency of the matter contained in it, that so we may be stirred up to
regard it with greater attention. For where the Lord is curious in speaking,
there should we be most diligent in hearing and learning. As also it was no
small help to the memory: for being written in the Hebrew tongue, it was to
the Jews in steed of an holy Alphabet, which they might learn as our children
do the A.B.C.

Now concerning this ninth part of the Psalm, wherein this verse that I have
read is contained, the Prophet having first thankfully acknowledged Gods mercy
in dealing graciously with him, Ve s. 65.
he makes his petition to be further taught and instructed in the knowledge of
Gods will. Verse. 66.
Which petition he urges and inforceth with diverse reasons. First, because
he had believed Gods Commandment in the end of that verse. A second reason
is taken from his former untowardness and vntractablenesse, that he had been
like an unruly beast, Verse. 67.
that would not keep the way without beating. Where by the way, he shows the
benefit that the children of God do receive by the cross. Namely, that it
subdueth the vntamednesse of their nature, and makes them live in better
order. After this he repeateth his former acknowledgement of Gods goodness,
Verse. 68.
and renueth his petition to be taught, backing it with another reason in the
two next verses. And in this verse he repeateth that which he said before
concerning affliction, though in other words. It is good for me that I have
been afflicted, that I may learn thy Statutes. Wherein we are to consider,
first, the person that was afflicted, and that is David himself. It is good
for me, that I have been afflicted. Secondly, the fruit which he found in
his affliction, which is propounded first generally, It is good for me, etc.
And then by a particular effect, which was wrought in him thereby, That I may
learn thy Statutes. And thus we see the coherence that these words have with
the former, together with the sum and resolution of them. Let us now come to
the several instructions contained in them.

It is good for me.) In the example of David, we learn, that even the Godly
themselves are subject to many afflictions. The dearest of Gods children may,
and oftentimes do suffer affliction with variety, Psalm. 34, 19
extremity, and continuance. Many says David, or great, are the troubles of
the righteous. Psalm. 80, 5.
Yea God does many times feed his own children with the bread of tears, and
gives them tears to drink in great measure. And he threatens even those,
with whom he has made a sure covenant, and from whom he will never take his
mercy and loving kindness, Psalm. 89, 30, 31, 32.33.
that if they forsake his law and walk not in his judgments: If they break
his statutes and keep not his commandments, he will visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes. And to this
purpose is that saying of Solomon, that even a just man, Pro 24, 16
falls seven times, that is, is afflicted often and many times. And the Apostle
James exhorts the faithful, Iam. 1, 2,
to count it exceeding joy when they fall into tentations, or afflictions. And
hereof the Prophet David himself is a most pregnant example. He was a man
that God had set up on high, 2. Sam. 23, 1,
the Anointed of the God of Jacob. 1. Sam. 13.14.
Yea by the Lords own testimony, he was a man after his own heart: and yet he
affirms of himself, that daily he had been punished, Psalm. 73, 14:
and chastened every morning. Every day that went over his head, brough with it
some affliction or other. He was persecuted by Saul, who pursued him from place
to place, 1. Sam. 26:20
as one would hunt a partridge in the mountains. and 22, 9, and 23, 19, 20
He was falsely accused by Doeg, that cursed Edomite, betrayed and discovered
by the false hearted Ziphims. He was discomforted and derided by his wife that
lay in his bosom. He had many heartbreakings with his children. Ziglag, 1. Sam.
30:1, 5.
the town which Achish king of Gath had given him for his habitation, was
sacked and burnt by the Amalekites, and his wives yt were the comfort of his
life, were taken prisoners. Yea it may appear to all that shall read his story
in both the books of Samuel, that, as if he had been a man borne to misery,
he scarce had one good day in all his life.

Neit er was this the case of David alone, but even all the children of God
mentioned in the Scripture, have also been partakers of the same condition.
Romans 9.13.
Jacob that holy Patriarch, on whom God had set his love before he was borne,
was many ways afflicted in the greatest part of his life. He was hated of his
brother, and for fear of his fury, forced to leave his own cuntry and his
fathers house, and to live as a servant in a strange land for the space of
twenty years. Genesis 31.41.
He was vexed with the unkindness of his churlish Uncle, who notwithstanding
his faithful service, changed his wages ten times. He was vpbraided and
slaundered by his Cosins, the sons of Laban. He was grieved with the peevish
behavior of his wives, and much discomforted by his children. Job likewise,
though a godly man, one of whom the Lord himself testified, that he was an
upright and a just man, Job. 1.8.
one that feared God and eschewed evil: Yet his life for a long time, was even
a Map of misery. It was no small affliction to loose such a deal of
substance all in a day, to have his children so pitifully dismembered, to have
his wife and his friends that should have assuaged his sorrow, Job. 16.2. and
6.4.
to play the miserable comforters, and to add affliction unto his misery, and
which was worst of all, to have the terrors of God to fight against him.
Solomon also, of whom the Lord said before ever he were bone; He shall be my
Son, 1. Chr. 22:10
and I will be his Father, and concerning whom he promised, that his mercy
should never depart from him as he took it from Saul: 2. Sam. 7.15.
though he enjoyed great prosperity for many years: yet when he turned his he
art from the Lord God of Israel and keept not that which he had commanded
him, 1. King. 11 9.10.
the Lord raised him up aduersa ies one after another, which molested him with
wars all the days of his life. 1. Kin. 11, 14 23.26
As first Hadad, then Rezon, and after him Jeroboam, and when he was dead, ten
tribes of the kingdom were rent away from his son. And Hezekiah a man so
upright in the sight of the Lord, 2. Kin. 18, 5, 5
as after him there was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, neither
were there any such before him; was notwithstanding exercised with grievous and
continual afflictions. Verse 13, 14, 15, 16
First of all, Sanecherib king of Assyria came up against all the strong cities
of Judah, and took them: and he to make his peace, was constrained to give
him three hundredth talents of silver, and thirty talents of gold. For raising
of which sum, he was forced to take all the silver, that was found in the
house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the kings house, yea he pulled off
the plates of ye door of the temple, and the pillars which himself had
covered over, and gave them to the making up of the tribute. And yet
notwithstanding all this, 17.
Sanecherib presently after sent a great arny against Jerusalem to destroy it,
and 19, 10, 11.
and caused Rabshakeh with a black mouth, to the breaking of Hezekiahs heart,
to blaspheme the name of the living God. And he was no sooner by Gods mercy
delivered out of this danger, and 20, 1,
but straightway he was visited with a sore sickness (and as some think with
the plague) which in all appearance was unto death. So Lazarus, Luk 16.20, 21 22
at whose death the Angels of heaven were employed to carry his soul into
Abraham's bosom, was in his lifetime poor, impotent, harbourlesse, distressed,
and vnpittied. In a word, these famous worthies of the world, that the Apostle
speaks off, of whom the world was not worthy, were tried, Heb. 11, 36.37.38.
some by mockings and scourgings, some by bonds and imprisonment. They were
stoned, they were hewn asunder, they were tempted, they were slain by the
sword, they wandered up and down in sheep skins and goats skins, being
destitut, afflicted and tormented. And as this is true in the general, that
Gods children are subject to many and great afflictions: so it is true also in
ye particular, that there is not any several kind of calamity, but it may
befall a godly man. There can be no greater grief to godly parents, then to be
troubled with wicked and graceless children: and yet the Scripture has many
examples, of the holiest men that ever lived, that have been afflicted that
way. Genesis 6.9 and 9.22.25.
Noah was a just and upright man in his time, and walked with God: yet had he a
wretched Cham that scoffed at the infirmities of his father, and therefore was
cursed, both himself, and his posterity. Abraham that was the Father of all
them that believe, Romans 4.11.
had a wicked Ishmael, the son of the bondwoman, Genesis 21.9.
who, by mocks and taunts, Gal. 4.29.
persecuted Isaac the son of the promise. Holy Isaak had a profane Esau as
the Apostle calls him, Heb. 12.16.
who of set purpose to displease his father took him wives of other nations,
Genesis 26.34.35. and 27.46 and 28.8 9.
as bad as himself, who by their disobedience and rebellion, were a grief of
mind to his parents, and made his mother weary of her life. Good Jacob was
troubled with Simeon and Leui, brethren in evil, who in their wrath and self
will, Genesis 34.30. and 49, 5, 6
committed such a bloody outrage upon the Sichemites, as caused their father
to be abhorred among the inhabitants of the Land. Eli the Priest, a good man,
had sons that were wicked and knew not the Lord, 1. Sam. 2.12.17, 22.
who behaved themselves so vilely in their places, lying with the women that
assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation, that men abhorred
the offering of the Lord. and 3.20.
Faithful Samuel, the Lords Prophet, as he is called by the holy Ghost, had
sons that walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre, and 8.3.
and took rewards and perverted judgment. And David of whom we have heard
such high commendation before, had as much heartbreake by his children, as ever
poor father could have. First Amnon most beastly ravished and defloured Tamar
his own sister. Afterward Absalom, 2 Samuel 13.14.24.28.
to revenge that villeny, invited him to a feast at his Sheepesheering, and
caused his servants treacherously to kill him. And in the end he rebelled
against his father, cap. 15.16.17, 18
drive him out of his kingdom, and had not God prevented him, would have taken
the Crown from his head. It is no small misery, to be exposed to open
contempt and reproach in the world, to be despised and made the laughing stock
of base people. And yet this was Jobs case, and that in as high a degree as
possibly could be. For so he complains, that even they whose fathers he
refused to set with the dogs of his flock, Job. 31.1.
mocked him and insulted over him. Yea the children of villains, 8 9.10.
and such as were more vile then the earth, made him their song and their
talk. Yea they did not spare to spit in his face. Neither was this indignity
offered him by strangers only, but he was despised also in his own family.
and 19.15,
They that dwelt in his house (as he says) and his maids took him for a
stranger. 16
He called his servant but he would not answer, though he praed him with his
mouth. 17.
Yea his breath was strange to his wife, though he prayed her for the childrens
sake of his own body. He that shall consider the great authority that Job
was in before the Lord humbled him, as he says, how men of all sorts esteemed
and reverenced him, may easily think, what a grief it was to his heart, to
be now made a laughing stock to fools. And David, had his part likewise in
the same cross. Psalm. 35 15, 16
For the abiects assembled themselves against him, in time of his adversity,
they tare him and ceased not. The scoffers at bankets gnashed their teeth
against him. Yea, and 69.11.12
he became a proverb and a byword unto them, and the very drunkards made songs
of him.

It is a grievous thing to be imprisoned, and 107, 10.
to lie in darkness in the shadow of death, fast bound in misery and iron,
as David says. And yet many of Gods dearest children have bin tried and
afflicted therewith. Joseph, a good man, and one that was always careful not
to sin against God, Genesis 39.19.20.
by the false accusation of his Mistress was put in prison, where he lay
diverse years, so as his feet was hurt in the stocks and the iron entered
into his soul. Psalm. 105:18,
Jeremiah, Ier. 1.5
a man that was sanctified by the Lord before he came out of the womb, and
ordained to be a Prophet, was often brought into this affliction. First, and
20, 1, 2,
Pashur the Priest smote him, and put him in the stocks that were in the gate
of Benjamin. and 32, 2,
After this, he was shut up in the court of the prison, that was in the King
of Iudahs house. Again, the princes smote him, and laid him in prison in the
house of Iehonathan the scribe, and 37.15, 16,
where he remained in the dungeon a long time. and 38, 6,
And last of all, they took him and cast him into the dungeon that was in the
court of the prison, and let him down with cords, where there was no water
but mire: so that he stacke fast in the mire. So likewise Michaiah a faithful
Prophet, by the commandment of Ahab, 1 Kin, 22, 27,
was put into the prison house, where he was fed with the bread of affliction,
and with water of affliction. And the Apostle Peter was caught up by Herod,
Act. 12, 4, 6, 7
and put in prison, and delivered to four quaternions of soldiers to be kept,
where he was bound with two chains, not his feet only, but his hands also.
And the Apostle Paul and Silas were delivered to a cruel Iaylor, and 16.23.24
who cast them into the bottom, or dungeon of the prison, and made fast their
feet in the stocks. And thus were many of Gods blessed Martyrs used in the
time of Popery. Who were not only put in prison, but they were kept in the
stocks both hands and feet, so long, as some of them dyed as they sat.

Shipwrake is a fearful thing and a heavy affliction: yet the Apostle Paul
suffered it thrice, as he says himself. 2. Cor. 11.25.
The Evangelist S. Luke records one of them at large. Namely, that they were
tosted with an exceeding tempest, in so much as they were enforced to lighten
the ship, Act. 27.18.19 20.
by casting the goods into the sea, yea with their own hands to cast out the
tackling of the ship. Yea the tempest that lay upon them was of that
continuance, that neither sun nor stars for many days appeared, and all
hope that they should be saved was taken away. And in the end, 41.43.44.
the forepart of the ship stacke fast in a narrow place of the sea, and could
not be moved, and the hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves.
And the men that were in her, constrained so many as could swim, to cast
themselves into the sea, and so go out to land, and the rest, some upon bords,
and some on pieces of the ship, to escape and save themselves. He that had
stood on the shore at that time, no doubt should have seen a fearful and
lamentable spectacle: but he that had been a party in it himself, would
have sound it an vpspeakeable danger.

Deuteronomy. 13, 6,
It is a great heaviness for a man to loose a loving friend, which was to him
as his own soul, as Moses says. And yet this was David's case in the death of
Jonathan, 1. Sam. 18, 1, 3.
whose soul was knit to the soul of David, and they loved one another as
their own souls, and they made a covenant together. And how he took it to
heart, may appear by that doleful lamentation, that he makes for him when he
heard the tidings of his death; Woe is me for thee my brother Jonathan: 2. Sam.
1, ^6,
very kind have thou been to me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the
love of women.

The loss of children by any means whatsoever, is a great grief to kind and
loving parents, who have born them with great pain and travel, and brought
them up with much care and cost. But to be deprived of them by untimely and
violent and fearful death, is a grief that cannot be expressed. None knows
the greatness of it, but they that have felt it. And yet this has befallen even
ye dearest of Gods children. Aaron, Psalm. 106, 16.
whom the Scripture calls the Saint of the Lord, had his two sons Nadab and
Abihu fearfully destroyed both in a moment with fire from heaven. Leuit. 10.2:
Eli a good man, 1. Sam. 4 11:
had likewise his two sons Hophni and Phinehas slain in battle both on a day.
Job also, Job. 1, 2, 19.
whose godliness we have heard before, had all his children, seven sons and
three daughters, pitifully slain, and crushed in pieces with the fall of an
house. But the greatest grief of all is, when a man's child is taken away in
some sin, so as, besides the death of the body, he has just cause to fear
the death of the soul. And yet this was good David's case, in the loss of his
Absalom, which made him break forth into such passionate mourning as he did.
2. Sam. 18.33.
O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God I had dyed for thee, O
Absalom my son, my son.

It is a great grief for a man to be deprived of the wife of his youth, Pro.
5, 18.
which has long lain in his bosom, Deuteronomy. 13, 6
which for many years has been unto him as the loving hind and pleasant
Roe, Prou. 5.19
in whose love he has so long delighted, and which was the pleasure and desire
of his eyes. Ezech. 24, 16
And yet this befell those two holy Patriarchs Abraham and Jacob, Abraham was
deprived of his dearest Sara, Genesis 23.2. and 35, 19
and Jacob of Rahel, whom he so much affected.

There cannot be a greater affliction to a poor woman, then to loose a kind
and loving husband, which was the veil of her eyes in all places. Genesis 20.16
But with the loss of an husband, to be bereft of all means of maintenance,
and exposed to extreme poverty, is such a cross as can hardly be imagined.
And yet we have examples even of this kind also. Poor Naomi, Ruth 1.3.
was deprived of her husband in a strange cu^try, where she had few friends,
and small means, and her two sons, which had taken them wives there in the
land of Moab, died also, 5.
so that she was left alone and destitute of succor? And how much she was
affected with this calamity, may appear by her speeches, 20.
when she returned again into her own country. Call me not Naomi, says she
(that is beautiful) but call me Mara (that is bitter) for the Almighty has
given me much bitterness. I went out full, 21:
and the Lord has brought me home again empty: why then call ye me Naomi,
seeing the Lord has humbled me, and the Almighty has brought me into
adversity. So likewise the Prophets wife that dyed in the land of Israel, 2.
Kin. 4.1.
besides the loss of her husband, was left in great debt, and having nothing
to pay, the merciless creditour came to take her two sons to be his bondmen.

It is an uncomfortable thing to die in child birth: Genesis 35.17.18
and yet it was the case of Rahel Jacobs wife, who dyed in the pains of her
labor: Sai. m. 4, 19, 20.
and of Elies daughter in law, who hearing that the ark of God was taken, and
her husband and father in law were dead, bowed her self and traveled, and in
her travel dyed.

It is fearful to dye a violent death, and yet it is a thing that has
happened even unto those that were dear unto God. 1. Sam 4, 18
Eli (of whom we have heard before) when he heard mention of the loss of God's Ark, being heavy and vnweildie with age, fell backward from his seat, and his
neck was broken, and so he dyed. The Prophet of the Lord, that was sent to cry
against the altar, 1. Kin. 13, 24
which Jeroboam had made at Bethel, because he kept not the commandment which
the Lord commanded him, a lion met him by the way and slew him, and his
carkaise was cast in the way. 2. Kin. 23.29
And good Josiah, who is so highly commended for his godliness, was
notwithstanding slain in the wars by Pharao Necho, king of Egypt. Nay a man
may be so far left to himself, as he may commit such a sin, whereby he may
deserve to be cut off by the sword of the Magistrate, and yet still be the
child of God. As the sins yt David committed, by ye express law of God were to
be punished with death, if there had bin any Magistrate above him that had had
power to inflict it. By all these particular insta^ces, and many more that
might be produced, it may appear, that there is not any kind of affliction or
calamity, but ye children of God may be subject to it: according to that
enumeration which the Apostle makes, Romans 8.35.
when he says, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ, shall tribulation,
or anguish or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril or sword, etc. A
man may be subject to all these miseries, and yet not be deprived of the love
of Christ.

But besides all these outward afflictions, the children of God may be, and
oftentimes are subject to inward fear and horror of conscience, which as
Solomon says, Prou., 18.14.
is ye most intolerable torment yt can be endured The spirit of a man will
sustain his infirmity: but a wounded spirit who can bear? Job was not only
afflicted in his body and outward estate, but also troubled and wounded in his
conscience, with the fearful apprehension of Gods wrath. And therefore he
complains, Job. 6.4.
that the arrows of the Almighty were in him, the venime or poison whereof
did drink up his spirit, and the terrors of God did fight, or set themselves
in array against him. And David cries out, Psalm. 22, 1.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from my health,
and from the words of my roaring? And in another place he says, and 32.3.4
When I held my tongue, my bones consumed, when I roared all the day long. For
thy hand was heavy upon me day and night, and my moisture is turned into the
drought of summer. And in another place, he makes such a lamentable complaint,
as if he had been brought to the very pit of desperation. and 38.2.3.4.5,
6.7.8.
Thine arrows, says he, stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore.
There is nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there
any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin. For mine iniquities are gone over
mine head and as a mighty burden they are too heavy for me. My wounds
stincke, aad are corrupt because of my foolishness. I am bowed and crooged
very sore: I go mourning all the day. For my reins are full of burning, and
there is nothing sound in my flesh. I am weakened, and sore broken: I roar for
the very grief of my heart, etc. And again, and 130.1.
Out of the deep places have I called unto thee, O Lord: as if he had been
even in the bottom of hell. In a word, Hezekiah that good King complains,
that besides the sickness which God laid upon his body, that brought him even
to deaths door, the Lord had broken al his bones like a lion, Isa. 38.13.14.
and from day to night he made an end of him, and that he chattered like a
crane or swallow, and mourned as a dove. By this we see, that even the children
of God do many times wrestle with desperation it self: and the Lord does so
long hide his face from them, as they seem utterly to be forsaken, and begin
to think, that his mercy is clean gone for ever, as David says, and that
he will be favorable no more. And therefore, the Church of God is compared
to a lilly among thorns, to give us to understand, that though it be very
lovely and beautiful in the sight of God: yet it is subject to many miseries,
and accombred with many molestations.

But here it may be some will object, if the case be so that the children of
God be subject to so many and great afflictions, then it seems, that either
their sins are not fully forgiven them, or else, that God is not just in
inflicting such punishments upon them. To this I answer, Psalm. 103.3 Col. 2, 13
1, John. 1, 7
that first, for the sins of Gods children, they are all absolutely forgiven.
The hlood of Christ, as the Apostle says, Isa 1, 8,
does cleanse us from al sin. So that though they be as scarlet, yet the Lord
makes them as white as snow, and though they be red like crimson, he makes
them as woll. and, 44, 22.
Yea the Lord puts away our transgressions like a cloud, and our sins like
a mist, Mich. 7.19
he subdueth our iniquities, and casts them into the bottom of the Sea. So
as they shall never rise up in judgment against us to accuse or condemn us.
Again, the Lord is righteous in all his ways, Psalm. 145.17,
and holy in all his works: and being Judge of all the world, as Abraham said,
he must needs do right. Genesis 18, 25
And forasmuch as our Savior Christ has satisfied Gods justice for our sins,
1. Pet. 2.24
and has borne them in his body on the cross: and feing the Lord having
punished them once in Christ, Non his punitur in idem.
cannot justly punish the^ again in us: therefore, it must needs follow, that
the miseries whereunto ye children of God are subject, are not punishments of
their sins, but ye Lord has other ends for which he afflicts them. Now the
ends are many, but for order sake, we will refer the^ to three heads. Some of
them are in respect of Gad, some in respect of us, and some in respect of
others. The end that God aims at in respect of himself, is twofold. First,
thereby to manifest and set forth his own glory As our Savior said concerning
the man that was borne blind, John 9, 2, 3
that that affliction was laid upon him, neither for his own sins, nor for
his fathers sins, but that the works of God might be showed on him. And
indeed no small glory redoundeth unto God by the afflictions of his children.
As the power of God is more magnified and declared in adversity, then ever it
could be in prosperity. For that which the Lord said to the Apostle Paul
concerning outward afflictions, 2. Cor. 12.9
My power is made perfect through weakness. For when we are in prosperity,
and see no evil, we seem not to stand need of Gods help. But when God
delivers us out of troble, then is his power manifested, and then have we
occasion offered to glorifiie him. Psalm. 50.15
As it is said in the Psalm. Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Yea though the Lord for causes best
known to himself, do not deliver his children out of their miseries and
tribulations: yet this is no small matter of glory unto him, 2. Cor. 1, 4. 1.
Pet. 1.8
that in the midst of them all he ministers comfort unto them, and makes
them cheerful, and causes them to rejoice with joy unspeakable, and glorious.

Secondly to declare his anger and indignation against sin, that when the
wicked shall see that Gods dearest children, if they take liberty to sin,
do not escape the rod, they may know what themselves are to look for at his
hands, according to that speech of the Apostle Peter, If Judgment first begin
at the house of God, 1. Pet. 4, 17.
what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God?

The ends that God aims at in respect of us, are diverse. First to correct
and chasten us for our faults. As the Apostle says, When we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord. 1. Cor. 11.32.
As a father that has care of his child, if he see him take evil courses,
will correct him to bring him to amendment: so our most merciful father will
not suffer his children to continue in sin, Heb. 12, 6.
but uses corrections to reclame them. Secondly, to try and exercise the
graces that are in them, and to make them more conspicuous. Not as though the
Lord were ignorant of them. For he that made them, must needs know what is in
them. And therefore, it is said of our Savior Christ, Ioh. 2, 24, 25,
that howsoever many professed to believe in him; yet he did not commit
himself unto them, because hs knew them all, and had no need that any man
should testify of man, for he knew what was in man. But he does it, that men
may know themselves, and that it may appear unto others, what excellent
things God has wrought in them. Thus said Job of his afflictons, he knew they
were no punishments of his sins, as his friends would have persuaded him, but
trials of his faith and patience. He knows my way, Job. 23, 10,
says he, and tries me, and I shall come forth like the gold. 1. Pet 1, 6, 7
And the Apostle Peter says, that the children of God are in heaviness
through manifold tentations, that the trial of their faith, being much more
precious then gold that perishes, might be found to their praise and honor
and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. God will not suffer the graces of
his children to lie idle and to rust in them, but by afflictions will exercise
them and bring them to light. As Saint Augustine says well. Non est paena
criminis, sed vittutis examen. De Civ. Dei lib. 4. cap. 3.
Affliction is not a punishment of sin, but a trial of our virtue. And
first, the faith of Gods children is hereby tried and manifested. When a man is
in no danger nor misery it is an easy matter for him to believe, but when he
groaneth under the burden of affliction, and seems even to be quite forsaken
of the Lord, then by the power of his faith to cry with David, My God, my God,
and with Job, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Psalm. 22, 1. Job.
13.15.
is a matter of great difficulty. Again, their Christian courage appears.
Dulce bellum i^ expe^tis.
We think we are strong enough, till we be put to the trial. (a) As many vain
cowards in the midst of their cups, Marcet sine aduersario virtus,
Gubernatorem in tempestate, in acie militem intelligas. De diuina prouidentia.
will make great boast of their valor, but when they come into ye field, they
dare not look the enemy in the face. Seneca, an heathen man, that never knew
what yt valor of a true Christian meant, could yet say of moral fortitude (a)
yt it withers and becomes feeble if it have not an adversary to encounter
withal. The skill of a Pilot is best discerned in the greatest tempest, and
the courage of a Soldier in the hottest skirmish. So the fortitude of a
Christian Soldier apeareth most in the greatest and heauiest affliction. How
can it be known what courage a man has to endure sickness and poverty,
etc. if he always have his health, and abound in riches. Moreover their
patience is by this means made known. Patience is a virtue which is always
necessary for us, but if it be not exercised we shall have little use of it.
As when a sword is rusted in the sheath, a man may be wounded by his adversary
before he can draw it forth: so when patience is not tried, the Devil may
wound a man to death, before he be able to defend himself with it. Last of
all, by this means their love to God is most of all declared. It is not any
thing worth for a man to love God, when all things prosper with him, and
succeed according to his own desire. Now if a man should not love God then,
even in the judgment of the devil, it were pity of his life. For he could
say when the Lord commended Job. Does Job fear God for naught? Job, 1.9.10.
have thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that
he has on every side? thou have blessed the work of his hands,, and his
substance is increased in the land. Nay he that shall only love God in this
respect, may seem to love him for what will you give me rather then for his
own sake. But he that cleaves unto God in the time of affliction, when all
things go cross with him, that is a token of true love indeed. Thus we see
how the graces of Gods children are manifested in affliction, more then they
could be in prosperity. As brickes if they be not thoroughly hardened in the
fire, will by and by be dissolved; if they come into the water. So unless the
graces of Gods children be continually exercised, the least affliction that is
will overcome them. Spices never give a sweeter smell, then when they are
beaten to powder: so the graces of God in his children are never so fragrant
and odoriferous, as when they are as it were pounded by affliction, according
to that speech of the Apostle, Rom: 5.3, 4.
Tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope, etc. Whereunto agrees that saying of S. August. Non frangit in bonis
perferendi tolerandique virtutem, nec eradicat ex animo pietatem, sed
exercitatam facit foecundiorem. De Civ. Dei lib. 1. ca. 13.
Affliction danteth not the patience and fortitude of them that be good,
neither rooteth godliness out of their minds, but by exercising of it, makes
it more fruitful. And that of Bernard, Ignis afflictionis examinat, non
ex^rit, in Psalm. 91. Sermon 5.
The fire of affliction tries the graces of the godly, but it does not consume
them.

Thirdly, the Lord afflicts his children to prevent sin to come. There is in
the best of us such a mass of corruption, as that upon every occasion we are
apt and proane to fall into sin: and therefore, for preventing thereof, it is
necessary that the Lord should afflict us. As a skillful Physician many times
prescribes medicines to preserve from sickness: so does the Lord use affliction
to preserve his children from sin. Matthew. 9.12
They that be whole (as our Savior Christ says) need not a Physician. So, if
we were sound indeed, and had no corruption in us, we should not need to be
dealt withal in this manner. But being corrupted and distempered as we are,
we stand need to be purged and let blood by affliction.

Foutthly, by afflictions the Lord does give us some comfortable testimony of
the resurrection to a better life. For seeing the godly are for the most, in
this life so evil entreated, they may assure themselves, that in the life to
come, there shall be a blessed change and alteration, Apoc. 21.4.
wherein God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no
more death, nor sorrow, neither shall there be any more pain. But, Lu. 22.28,
29 30.
they that have continued with Christ Jesus in his tentations, shall have a
kingdom appointed unto them by him, that they may eat and drink at his table
in his kingdom, etc. This is that which Abraham told the rich glutto^ being in
hell in torments, Son, says he, Luke 16.25
remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and likewise
Lazarus pains: now therefore is he comforted, and thou art tormented.

Fifthly, by afflictions we are made conformable unto Christ. For he was not
exempt from the Cross, as one says well. Deus filium vnum habuit sine peccato,
nullum sine flagello. Hebr. 5.9 Ma th. 3.17 Call Institut. lib. 3. cap. 8. sect.
1.
God had one son without sin, but none without affliction. Though he were
the author of eternal salvation to all that obey him: yet he was consecrate by
afflictions. Yea albeit he were the beloved Son of God, in whom he is well
pleased: yet we see his Father was so far from cockering and pampering of him,
that we may truly say he was not only exercised with afflictions, whiles he
was upon the earth: but his whole life was nothing else but a continual
cross. John 15.20
Why then should we look to be exempted from that condition which Christ our
head was to undergo? especially seeing he did undergo it for our sakes, that
in himself he might give us an example of patience. And therefore the Apostle
teaches us, that all the children of God are predestined to this end, Romans
8.29
that they might be made like to the Image of him. In a word, by afflictions
the Lord does seal unto us the assurance of our adoption. For as the Apostle
says, Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, He. 11:6, 7, 8.
and he scourges every son that he receives. If ye endure chastening, God
offers himself unto you as sons: for what son is it whom the Father
chasteneth not? If therefore ye be without correction, whereof all are
partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons. Where we are taught, that we
can gather no greater testimony, that we are the sons of God, than from the
loving corrections which he lays upon us.

Last of all, there is a good end of our afflictions in respect of others. If
we be constant and courageous under the cross, our example is a notable
encouragement unto others to tread in our steps. If we be fearful and
faint-hearted, others may learn what frailty there is in man, Romans 12.15 Hecr.
13.3
and may thereby be moved to pity us, as if it were their own case, as also
to comfort us, and to pray for us: and to watch more carefully and diligently
over themselves. To conclude, the way to everlasting glory, is by this means
as it were chalked out. For hereby all men may see, that Whosoever will live
godly in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 3.12.
must suffer persecution: and that Through many tribulations we must enter into
the kingdom of Heaven. Act.s 14.22.
And thus we see the point is sufficiently cleared, that afflictions to Gods
children are no punishments of their sins, but that the Lord sends them for
many other good ends and purposes.

judge wisely, as David says, of the poor, and those that are afflicted.
Psalm. 41 1.
There is a corruption in our nature, which makes us rashly conclude, when we
see a man afflicted with some heavy cross, that surely it is GODS judgment
upon him for his sin. So dealt the Barbarians with the Apostle Paul, when
they saw a Viper leap upon him, and hang upon his hand, they said presently
amongst themselves: This man surely is a murderer, Acts 28.3, 4,
whom though he have escaped the Sea, yet vengeance has not suffered to live.
Yea this corruption will even creep into the best of us all, if we do not
endeavor to keep it out. As we see in Jobs friends, who though they were
otherwise men of great knowledge, and (no doubt) godly: yet when they saw the
strange afflictions that GOD had brought upon him, they by and by, with one
consent, pass their censure upon him, That he was an hypocrite, and that GOD
had now found him out. Job 8, 4,
As Bildad tells him plainly, that his sons had sinned against GOD, and
therefore that he had justly sent them To the place of their iniquity. Job
11.6.
And Zophar bids him know, that God had forgotten him for his iniquity. Yea
Eliphaz comes to particulars with him. Is not (says he) thy wickedness great,
and 22.5, 6, 7, 9.
and thine iniquities innumerable? For thou have taken the pledge from thy
brother for naught, and spoiled the clothes of the naked. To such as were
weary, thou have not given water to drink, and have withdrawn bread from the
hungry. Thou have cast out widows empty, and the arms of the fatherless
were broken. And where we see, he is not afraid to charge Job with oppression
and unmercifulness, as if these had been the causes of his calamity. And the
Disciples of our Savior Christ, when they saw a man that was borne blind,
they straitway imagined, that it was either for his own or his parents sins.
But we must know, John 9.1.2
that every cross is not a pursuing of a man for sin, as our Savior
teaches in the Gospel, when he said to them that showed him of the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate had mingled with their own sacrifices: Lu. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Suppose ye, that these Galileans were greater sinners then all other
Galileans, because they have suffered such things. I tell you nay etc. Or
think ye, that those eighteen, upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell and slew
them, were sinners above all that dwell in Jerusalem? I tell you nay, etc. And
therefore, if any of us have been foolish this way, and have thought wickedly
and uncharitably of our brethren, when we have seen them visited by the hand
of God, let us learn henceforth, as Solomon says, to lay our hand upon our
mouths, Pro 30.32. lest we condemn the generation of Gods children, Psalm.
73.15. Saint Augustine has a most excellent saying to this purpose: Although
says he, the godly and the wicked be alike afflicted, yet they are distinct
the one from the other, there Manet dissimilitudo passorum in similitudine
passionum.
remains an unlikeness of the sufferers, in the likeness of their
sufferings. For, as under one and the same fire, gold shines and glistereth,
and chafe smoaketh: and under one and the same flaile, the straw is broken is
pieces, and the corn is purged: neither are the lees therefore mingled with
the oil, because they are strained out in one and the same press: So one and
the same violence rushing upon the godly and the wicked, tries, Tantum
interest, non qualia, sed qualis quisque patia ur. De Ciu. Dei lib. 1. cap. 8
purifieth and melts the one, but it damneth, destroys, and utterly undoes
the other. h So great a matter it is, not what things one suffers, but how he
is qualified that suffers. For one and the same motion causes the dung to
stincke horribly, and the ointment to smell most sweetly: So that afflictions
are like the red Sea, wherein the Egyptians were drowned, and the Israelites
saved.

Seneca Dc divine. Prouid.
Do thou not see, says he, that fathers love their children far otherwise
then mothers do? They would have their children stirred up betimes to undergo
labor and toil, and cause them to sweat, yea sometimes to weep. But mothers
desire to cherish them in their bosoms, and to keep them in covert and shelter:
they would never have them weep, they would never have them sad, they would
never have them take pains. In like manner (says he) God has a fatherly
affection toward good men, and loves them not effeminately, but manfully, and
exercises them with labors, with sorrows, with losses, that so they may gather
true strength and hardness: So that the greater that our afflictions are, the
better may we be persuaded of the love of God: yea the more comfort we may
take in them. For God having promised, 1, Cor. 10, 13
that He will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able: we may
assure our selves that God sees we have strength to bear them, or else he
would not put us to encounter with the^. When a Captain has a piece of service
weighty and full of danger, he will not send a coward or a white-liuered
fellow about it, but he makes choice of those that are stoutest, and of whose
valor and courage he has had most experience, and to them he commits the
charge of that business. So deals the Lord with us. In his great wisdom and
mercy he proportioneth his afflictions, according to that measure of
strength, which he sees in us. When a Physician has to deal with a Patient
that is of a strong constitution, he ministers to him strong purgations: But
if he be weak and feeble, he prescribes for him milder potions. In like
manner our heavenly Physician makes the cup of our affl ctions more bitter or
more mild, as he knows he has given us ability to bear the same. And so
long as he strengthens us by his glorious power, we need not care what
crosses we meet withal: for we may be sure they shall not hurt us. For, as
so many rivers which daily do run into the Sea, Sen. de diuina Prouid.
and such abundance of rain that falls continually into it from the
Clouds, and such a multitude of fountains that spring from the middle of the
earth, do not change, no nor any whit abate or diminish the salt savor
thereof: so the violence and force of afflictions does not alter the mind of a
violent man, but he abides in his estate, and whatsoever befalls, he
brings it into his own color. And on the contrary side, there is no
greater cause of discomfort, then when we are altogether free from
aiflictions. And therefore one calls a secure life, which is not subject to
crosses, the dead Sea, affirming, that when a man has nothing to stir him
up, and prick him forward, nothing to try the constancy and firmness of
his mind, Non est tranquilitas, malicia est. Seneca epist. 68.
but lies bur^ed in idleness, it is not tranquillity but a dead calm.

Again, this is no small argument of comfort, that God beholds us in all our
troubles and afflictions, as it is said of the people of Israel, Exodus 2.25
when they groand under the bondage of Pharao, that God looked on them, and had
respect unto them. Though they might think, in regard of ye miserable slavery
which they endured, that God had quite forgotten them, and his promise made to
them and their fathers: yet it was otherwise, his eye did still behold them.
Neithet does the Lord look upon us, as an idle beholder, or as one that takes
pleasure to see our misery, but with compassion and a tender regard. As he
says in the former case, Exodus, 3.7.
I have surely seen the trouble of my people which are in Egypt, and have
heard their cry, because of their taske-maisters, 8.
and I know their sorrows. Therefore I am come down to deliver them, etc. 9.
And lo, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me, and I have also
seen the oppression, wherewith the Egyptians oppress them. Where we see,
that the Lord takes to heart the afflictions of his children, Judge. 10 19
zach. 2.8
And his very soul is grieved for their misery, and it goes as near him,
Psalm 56.8
as if a man should touch the apple of his eye. He regards their sighs and
groans, Malac. 3.16
and their tears he puts in his bottell: he registreth their words and
complaints, Exodus 2 23
There is a Book of remembrance written for them that fear him, and all their
cries come up to him. It is true, that the Lord sometimes seems to forget and
neglect his children in the time of trouble. As our Savior Christ being in the
ship with his Disciples, was asleep, till the ship was covered with waves, and
they were all like to perish. John 11 6
When he heard that Lazarus his friend whom he loved, was sick, he did not
presently go to visit him, and to comfort his sisters, but abode still two
days in ye place where he was, so as Lazarus was dead and buried before he
came there. But when he has sufficiently tried and humbled them, he returns
and speedily comfort the^, and so disposes of their afflictions, as he
always enableth them to get the victory. For, Orig. de prin. lib, 3. cap. 2.
as they that had the oversight of the wrastlings and combats among the
Heathen, did not suffer the combatants to begin the conflict hand over head,
nor arm them confusedly, all alike: but making diligent examination, as they
saw men's bodies and ages, they were careful to match like with like, and to
furnish them with weapons fit for them: In like sort, the providence of God
disposes and orders after a most equal manner, all those that descend into
the conflicts of this life, so as one encountreth with the flesh, another with
poverty, another with sickness, another with infamy, another with persecution:
and puts upon every one of the^ diverse kinds of armor, and furnishes them
with greater or lesser strength, as may enable them to overcome the enemy that
is appointed for the^. For God is not like the master of the games before
spoken of, who when he has armed the parties, departs out of the wrestling
place to behold the combat with the rest. But the Lord stands by them still,
and aideth and assisteth them at every turn, and continually succoureth them
that are weaker with greater strength.

And herein the Lord deals with his children, as Joseph dealt with his
brethren when they came into Egypt to buy corn. For as Joseph himself was
many ways tried of the Lord, before he was made Ruler of the Land: so he
likewise many ways tried and exercised his brethren before he would make
himself known unto them, or acknowledge them to be his brethren. First, he
tried them, Genes. 42.7. et cetera ad 24.
whether they had truly repented, and were touched with remorse for the injury
they had done to him, in that so cruelly and unnaturally they sold him into
Egypt: Secondly, he tried them, whether they had attempted any such thing
against Benjamin his brother German, Ibid. ver. 20
in that he enjoined them to bring him with them the next time, that he might
see him: Thirdly, Gen 43.34
when they had brought him, he showed extraordinary kindness to him above
the rest, giving him five times so great a portion as he did any of them, and
all to try whether they did envy him or no: Fourthly, he tried them whether
they loved their brother Benjamin so well, that when he alone was detained,
Genesis 44.1. et cetera ad 14 and 33.
they would all for his sake come back again from their iourny. Last of all,
he tried them whether they loved their fathet so entirely, as yt they would not
return home without Benjamin, Ibid. verse 17, et cet.
which they knew would be intolerable grief unto their father. All this while
no doubt his brethren were in great perplexity and much troubled; and still
Joseph made as though he had not regarded them. But his bowels did earne within
him toward them, and his heart was as much grieved as theirs, insomuch as twice
he was constrained to turn from them and weep. Genesis 42.24 and 43 30 and 45.1,
2, 3
And at the last he could refrain no longer, but he cried out, I am Joseph your
brother. So likewise Christ Jesus our blessed Savior, Matthew 28.10 Heb. 2.11
who is not ashamed to call us his Brethren, does suffer us to be exercised
with many and grievous afflictions, and seems sometimes as though he cared
not for us: but yet in the mean while, Hos. 11 8
his repentings are rolled together, and at the last, when he has sufficiently
tried us, he will manifest himself unto us to our unspeakable comfort.
According as himself says, He that loves me shall be loved of my Father,
John 14.21
and I will love him, and will show mine own self to him: That is as one well
notes, I will love him by trying his love and patience, and when I have tried
him, I will manifest my self unto him. And though peradventure this
manifestation shall not be by any outwatd deliverance in this life: yet at
the day of Judgment he will acknowledge them openly in the sight of men and
Angels. Then he shall not be able to contain himself any longer, but shall
say unto us with a loud voice, so as all the world shall hear. I am Jesus
your Brother, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the foundations of the world. Matt. 25.34. For, as the Egyptians and
all the house of Pharaoh heard the voice of Joseph, when he revealed himself
unto his Brethren, Genes. 45.2. So in the day of Judgment, when Christ shall
manifest himself to his brethren, heaven and earth, and all the Angels in
heaven shall hear his voice: yea all the damned, and the whole house of hell
shall hear it, and shall gnash their teeth for anger: and gnaw their tongs for
grief of heart to see those whom they sometimes had in derision, and in a
parable of reproach, whose life they thought to be madness, and their end
without honor, Wisd. 5.3, 4, 5
to be now counted among the children of God, and to have their portion amongst
the Saints.

Finally, this is another argument of unspeakable comfort to the children of
God, that the greater their afflictions are, the greater shall their glory be.
1 Pet. 4.14.
As the Apostle Peter says, If ye be rayled upon for the name of Christ (and
it is true likewise of all other afflictions) blessed are ye, for the Spirit
of glory, and of God rests upon you. And hereof we have a worthy example in
Joseph before named. For, after the manifold and great calamities which he
endured so many years, he was exalted by Pharaoh, and as himself confesses,
Gene. 45.8
was made Lord of all his house, and Ruler through all the land of Egypt. And
it is worthy to be noted, that for some thirteen years wherein he was
afflicted, he was exalted, and ruled in Egypt for the space of fourscore
years, as may easily be gathered out of the Story. Genesis 37.2 and 41.46
For he was seauenteene years old, when his brethren sold him away: and
50.22.
he was thirty years old when he was advanced by Pharaoh: and he lived
Governor of the land of Egypt, till he were an hundred and ten years old.
Besides, such was the goodness of God unto him, that for the several miseries
which he suffered, he received a several reward. For the hatred of his
brethren he obtained the favor of the King and his Nobles. Genesis 37.19
For the contempt and scorn which his brethren heaped upon him, calling him
Dreamer, etc. and 42.6
he was worshipped of them, with their faces down to the ground. For the
parti-colored coat which they stripped him of, Genesis 37.23
when they cast him into the pit, he was arrayed by Pharaoh with a princely
roabe of fine linen. and 41.42
In stead of the fetters wherewith he was bound in prison, Pharaoh put his own
ring on his hand, and a chain of gold about his neck. In stead of the
prison and dungeon where he lay, he was set upon the Kings best Chariot save
one, and carried in great pomp throughout the city. Whereas before he was
contemned of all men, as a stranger, as a servant and a prisoner, he is now
honored of all men, by bowing the knee at the Kings commandment. In a word,
in stead of his fathers house, from which he was exiled and banished, he had
dominion in all the land of Egypt. So true is that saying even of an heathen
man, quanto plus tormenti, t^n^o plus erit gloriae. Sene^a de divine. Prouid.
The greater torment a man indureth, the greater shall be his glory afterward.
But howsoever the Lord does not always deal thus with his children in this
life: yet in the life to come, without all question, they shall find the truth
of that comfortable promise, delivered by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.17
Our light affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far more
excellent and eternal weight of glory.

the lot and portion of Gods children in this life, that therefore we should
prepare for it before it come. The Lord will not have his children come to
Heaven in a pleasant way, that is strewed with rushes, as it were, but through
many tribulations we must enter into his kingdom. Act. 514.22
As Bernard says well, Non est idoneus ad proemium, qui nondum paratus est ad
patibulum. De coena Dom. Ser. 6
He is not meet for the crown that is not yet prepared for the cross. And
therefore it is good for us to arm our selves before hand, that when they come
they may not hitte us on the bare. We must be careful to store up grace and
comfort against a rainie day, that whatsoever shall befall us, we may be
provided to bear it. In our best estate, we must put our selves in a
readiness to suffer adversity, whenever GOD shall send it. In our greatest
abundance, it is good for us to think of want: in our prosperity, it is good
to look for calamity: and in our perfectest health to remember that
sickness may come. There is nothing that makes all affliction more bitter
and grievous unto us, then because it takes us many times on the blind side,
before we see it, or dream of it. Whereas misery that is foreseen and
premeditated, does little hurt us. Affliction is like the Basiliske, of which
it is written, that if it see a man before he see it, it kills him; but if
he see it first, it has no power to hurt him. So affliction is most terrible
to those whom it finds unprepared. Seneca, though an Heathen man, has spoken
well to this purpose: Si non quicquid fieri potest, pro futuro habes, das in te
vires rebus aduersis, quas infregi quisquis prior videt de tranqu^l cap. 11
If (says he) thou do not make account, that whatsoever can befall, may
come unto thee, thou give adversity power and strength against thee, which,
whosoever sees first, has weakened and abated. And in an other place: Sapiens
assuescit futuris malis, et quae alii diu patiendo leu^a saciunt, hic leuia
facit diu cogitando Epi. 77
A wise man accustometh himself to future evils, and those things which other
men make easy by long suffering, he makes easy by foreseeing.

Fourthly, it teaches us to be patient in all the afflictions that God lays
upon us, because they are his loving corrections, in regard of our daily falls
and infirmities. We may not say with Job, Job 6.2, 3
Oh that my grief were well weighed, and my miseries were laid together in the
balance: and 34.6
For it would now be heavier then the sand of the Sea. And my wound is
grievous without my sin: But rather acknowledge, that we have deserved far
greater punishment, as David says, Psalm 130.3
If thou Lord straightly markest our iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? If God
should deal with the best of us according to our deserts, we were never able
to abide it. And therefore as Bernard says well, Sustinete virgam corripientem,
ne sentiatis malleum conterentem. In ps. 91. sermon. 9
It is good for us to bear the rod of correction, lest we feel the hammer
of confusion. The more we struggle and strive under the hand of God, the less
we prevail, and the more we provoke him to displeasure, and cause him to use
harder courses against us. As a father, having an unruly son, that will not
take correction, binds him to a form. But the sooner we yield and submit our
selves to his will, and kiss his rod, the sooner we shall be delivered.

Last of all, it serves to reprove the profane wretches of the world, who
insult over the children of God in their miseries: and do not stick
blasphemously to say, Mal. 3, 14, 15
What profit have these holy fellows by keeping Gods commandments, or by
walking humbly before the Lord of Hosts? We never regarded Gods service, but
have wrought wickedness, Ierem. 12.1
and tempted GOD all our lives, and yet we are set up and delivered. We have
rebelliously transgressed, even from our cradles, and yet our ways do
prosper, and we have wealth at will. But let all such ungodly persons know,
first, that it is a grievous sin, to add affliction to those that are in
misery. For howsoever God do many times severely correct those that
transgress his Law, though they be never so dear unto him, yet he will not
allow the wicked to insult over them, no more then a father that whippeth his
son for his faults, will suffer his servants spitefully to taunt and reproach
him. Again, the children of God, though they walk never so uprightly before
the Lord, yet their reward is not in this life. 1 John 3.2 2 Timothy 4.8
It does not yet appear what they shall be. But there is a crown of
righteousness laid up for them against the day of Judgment: and when Christ
which is their life shall appear, Coloss. 3.4
then shall they also appear with him in glory. And for themselves, though
their prosperity be never so great for the present, yet it is inconstant, and
shall not endure. Psalm 73.18
The Lord setts them in slipperie places, and casts them down into
desolation, and suddenly are they destroyed, perished and horribly consumed.
For even in the midst of their wealth, they are but fatted and prepared for the
day of slaughter. Ierem. 12.3
And thus much shall suffice for the first point, which I have the longer
insisted on, because it is so necessary for us.

It is good that I was afflicted.) This must be understood of crosses that are
sanctified, when GOD gives grace to make an holy use of them. It is true,
affliction in it own nature, is evil, and a ^ag of Gods vengeance, and a
punishment for sin. But, as the bitter waters, Exodus 15.25
which the Israelites complained of in the wilderness, were made sweet by a
tree, which Moses by Gods direction cast into them: so the Cross of Christ
has seasoned and sweetened all afflictions to the children of God, which have
grace to profit by them: so that now the nature of them is changed and
altered, that they are no more a punishment of sin, but a medicine for the
sinner. According to that excellent speech of David, Non poena, sed remedium
delinquentium. Psalm. 94.12.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him in thy Law.
If the Lord do join his teaching to his correction, to cause a man wisely to
make use thereof, it is a most happy and blessed condition. Whereunto agrees
that saying of the Apostle, Heb. 12.11:
No chastising for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous: but
afterward it brings with it the quiet fruit of righteousness, unto them
which are thereby exercised. If a man be truly exercised with affliction, he
shall find great fruit and benefit by it. So then here we are taught, that
affliction is very profitable and good for the children of God. That God, who
by his mighty power commanded the light to shine out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6
has so ordered the matter in his heavenly wisdom, that even those things,
which to man's nature, and to flesh and blood, are most irksome and wearisome,
should be to his children most beneficial and wholesome. For (as the Apostle
says) All things work together for the best unto them that love God. Romans 8.28
In that he says, all things, he excepteth nothing. Not only prosperity but
adversity also, not only good success, but losses and casualties: not health
only but sickness: not life but death also, make for the good of those that be
godly. And indeed, affliction does not only minister comfort unto them, in
that, as we have heard, it is a pledge of their adoption, but it produces also
many blessed and gracious effects.

First of all, it is a means to purge out the dross of that natural
corruption that is within us. So long as we enjoy prosperity, it is with us as
the Prophet says of Moab, Ierem 48.11 Zephan. 1.12
we are like Wine that is settled on his lees, and frozen in his dregs, and
has not been powered out from vessel to vessel. So we are full of the
dregs of natural corruption, till the Lord by affliction do refine us.
Affliction (as one says well) is unto the children of God, as the flaile is to
the corn, the file to the iron, and the fire to the gold: Si aurum es, per
ignem purgaris* si ferrum es, rubiginem amittis.
As the flaile does purge the corn from the chafe, which grows up with it:
and as the file scowreth off the rust that sticks upon the iron: and as the
fire purifieth the gold from the dross: So does affliction, by Gods mercy,
purge away from us that chafe, that rust, and dross of sin, that is in our
nature. The Goldsmiths takes not the gold out of the forge, till he see it
well and thoroughly purified. In like manner, God does not remove the
afflictions of his children, till they be thoroughly refined. In a word,
affliction is the Lords pruning knife, whereby he cutteth away from us all
withered and unprofitable branches.

Secondly, affliction that is sanctified, does bring a man to the sight of his
sins, and to godly sorrow, and true repentance for the same. Oculos quos
culpa claudit, poena aperit. Greg. in Moral.
As sin shuts up a man's eyes, so affliction opens them. And hereof we
have a worthy example in the brethren of Joseph. For the space of twenty
years they were never touched with any remorse, for their unnatural cruelty,
in selling of him to the Ishmaelites: till at the last, coming into Egypt, to
buy corn, in the time of the famine: and perceiving Joseph to speak roughly
to them, and to charge them to be Spies, that came to see the weakness of the
Land: and fearing imprisonment, or some other hard measure, then they began
to call their sin to remembrance, and to say one to another, We have verily
sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he
besought us, and we would not hear him: therefore is this trouble come upon
us. Genesis 42.21. As one that is fast asleep, will not awake unless he be
raised by thrusting, or by some such violent motion: so many lie snorting in
the long custom of sin, and never think of repentance, till the hand of God
be upon the^. And as the horse that rusheth into the battle, Ierem. 8.6.
neither fears the enemy that comes against him, nor is terrified with the
doleful groans of dying persons, nor with the noise of the gunnes, nor with
the shaking of the pikes: so wicked men are carried headlong to sin, and
neither fear the roaring of the devil, nor are moved with the miserable end
of others before their eyes, nor terrified with the fear of hell. But as the
horse running with violence, being checked by his rider with a sharp bridle,
is enforced to stay his course. So, when sinners run into all excess of
riot, the Lord in mercy, by one affliction or other, as it were by strong
hand, pulls them back, and causes them to see their sins, and so brings
them to repentance. So that we see that God uses his corrections as Sermons,
to call his children from their sins, which many times are more forcible and
effectual then any verbal preaching. According to that saying of S.
Augustine, Multi cum sentiunt poenam, corrigunt culpam, in Psalm. 50:
Many men when they feel the smart, reform the falt. Now what greater
benefit can there be then this for a man to be brought to unfeigned repentance
for his sins, without which there can be no hope of forgiveness. And therefore
Bernard says sweetly. Been pungeris, fi compungeris, in Psalm. 32.
It is a good affliction, that brings a man to compunction, and remorse.

Thirdly, affliction is as a notable means to humble the children of God, and
to beat down their pride. So long as all things go well with us, and we are
free from the cross, our flesh is puffed up, and can hardly be kept under, the
leven of old Adam is in us, and makes us swell in pride. As the moon never
suffers eclipse, but when she is in the full, and then she is always
furthest distant from the sun: so likewise when we abound in outward
prosperity, such is the foolish pride of our hearts, we are puffed up, and
care least for God, till by some affliction or other he humble us and bring us
down. Thus was it with the Prodigal son. Lu, 15.17. etc.
As soon as he had got his portion of his father, he was all on flaunt, and
knew not himself, he could stand on no ground: but when he had wasted his
substance, and was pinched with poverty and famine, his pride was danted, and
he was glad to come home by weeping cross. Genesis 16.4, 9
So was it with Hagar when she had conceived a child by her master Abraham, she
was presently so lifted up with pride, that she despised her mistress Sara,
because she was barren. But afterward, when her mistress had dealt roughly
with her, and made her run away into the wilderness, she cried p^ccaui, and
humbled herself under her hands. Yea David himself, though otherwise an holy
man, had a spice of this disease, as himself confesses, Psalm. 30.6, 7.
In my prosperity (says he) I said I shall never be moved. For thou Lord of
thy goodness had made my mountain to stand strong. See how soon a man is apt
to forget himself, Pressu^a caruit, tumor exc^euit, Aug. in Psalm. 51.
if he enjoy but alittle prosperity. But alas, the case was soon altered
with him. For as he says in the next words, The Lord did but hide his face,
and bring him into some affliction, and straitway he was troubled. And
therefore, in this respect affliction is very necessary and profitable, because
it causes a man to know himself. As we see by common experience, when God
afflicts a man either with ignominy and disgrace in his name, or with poverty
in his estate, or with sickness in his body, or with loss of children, or any
such like cross and calamity, though before he were never so proud, and
carried himself never so high, yet then he begins to droope, and lets
his feathers fall. Plut in Apotheg. Reg: et Imp.
Antigonus, though an heathen king, when he was taken with alittle sickness,
and had recovered thereof, he could make this good construction of it, namely,
that it was well for him that he had been sick and ill: for his disease had
taught him, that seeing he was but a mortal man, he should not too much lift
up his Spirit. And this is the goodness of God toward us, as Saint
Augustine says, August. de vera Relig.
That because the sweetness of earthly blessings does deceive us and puff us
up, we should be humbled by the bitterness of affliction.

Fourthly, affliction is a means to reform the godly, and to make them
better: That which Solomon speaks of children, is true also of aged persons,
Prou. 22.15
that folly is bound in their hearts, but the rod of correction shall drive
it away from them. And therefore, the Apostle says well. That when GOD
corrects and chasteneth his children, it is but to Nurture them (as a loving
father does his son) for their reformation and amendment. 1 Cor. 11:32
When we are judged, says he, we are nurtered of the Lord, etc. The Lord
knows, that a son set at liberty, runs into such licentious courses,
that he is a shame to his father, and a grief to his mother, and therefore he
will not suffer his children whom he loves most tenderly, to go on in their
sins, lest his name should be dishonored, and his holy Gospel evil spoken
of, but by corrections and crosses labors to reclaim them. As Job says,
Job 33.16, 17
He opens the ears of men, even by their corrections which he has sealed:
That he might cause man to turn away from his enterprise, etc. And Solomon
has a speech to the same purpose, Prou. 6.23.
that corrections for instruction are the way of life, to keep and preserve a
man from whooredome, and such like sins: Felix necessitas quae cogit in
melius. De praecepto et dispensat.
So that this (as Bernard says) must needs be a happy and blessed affliction,
that makes a man better.

Fifthly, affliction is an excellent means to enforce us, and stir us up to
prayer. Yea, even they that never thought to pray, as Atheists, and wicked
persons, when any trouble lies upon them, are driven to pray whether they will
or no. As the Prophet says, That such as rebel against God, in the time of
famine, when they want corn and wine, will howl upon their beds. Hosea 7.14
And David reckons up a bead-roll of such persons. Psalm. 107.4, 5
Some that wandered out of the way in the wilderness, and found no city to
dwell in, both hungry and thirsty, their soul fainting in them. Others that
dwell in darkness and in the shadow of death: 10.
that is, poor prisoners, being bound in misery and iron. Others being cast on
their sick beds, 18.
whose soul abhors all manner of meat, and they are brought to deaths
door. Others in danger of shipwreck, 26:
whose soul meltsth for trouble, etc. Howsoever peradventure in the time of
their prosperity, they cared but alittle for the Lord, yet now they cried to
him in their trouble, Verse 6.13, 19, 28
and he delivered them out of their distress: So that trouble and distress
will make any man cry unto the Lord, and betake him to his prayers. So was it
with the mariners that entertained Jonah, Jonah 1.5
when they were afraid of their lives, by reason of the mighty tempest that
God sent upon them, they cried every man to his God. And the proud king of
Nineueh, with all his people, when they heard the sudden destruction that was
threatened against the^ by the preaching of Jonah, and 3.8 2 Chro. 33.6
they cried mightily unto God. And that wicked Manasseh, who did very much
evil in the sight of the Lord to anger him: 2 Kin. 21.16.
shedding innocent blood exceeding much, till he replenished Jerusalem from
corner to corner: yet when God brought upon him the Captains of the King of
Ashur, which took him, and put him in fetters, and bound him in chains, and
carried him to Babel, then when he was in tribulation, he prayed to the Lord
his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers. Yea the
godly themselves are never so fit to pray, as when they are in affliction.
Though they be careful to pray continually: 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
yet they never pray with so great devotion and feruencie, as when some heavy
cross or calamity is upon them. For then feeling their misery, and their own
inabilitie to help themselves, they more earnestly fly unto the Lord for
succor. As the Prophet says, In that day, that is, Esaias 17.7.
in the day of trouble, shall a man look to his maker, and his eyes shall
look to the holy one of Israel. Hosea 5.15.
And in their affliction they will seek me diligently, says the Lord. In our
prosperity we are all of us both good and bad, too full of security, as though
we stood no need of God. As the Lord complains of Ieconiah saying, Ierem.
22.21
I spoke to thee when thou wast in prosperity: but thou said, I will not
hear etc. And so David says of the wicked that because his ways always
prosper, Psalm 10.4, 5
and the judgments of God are high above his sight: therefore he is so proud,
that he never seeks after God. And the Prophet Jeremiah compares such
persons to the wild Ass in the wilderness, Ierem. 2.24
that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure: and it is in vain to seek to
turn her back, but in her month, that is, in her foaling time, then a man
may deal with her. As the little Chickens, when the weather is fair, and
there is no danger toward, straggle a great way from the Hen: but if any
Hayle shewer come upon them, or a Kite houer over them, then they are glad to
run under her wings for shelter. And as the Stagge, when he is at liberty,
will not come near a man: but when he is hotly pursued with the dogs, he
will run to him of his own accord for succor: So it fares oftentimes with
us, when we are at ease, and nothing does molest us, we turn our backs upon
GOD: but when we are brought into distress or danger, we are glad to repair
unto him for help. As one confesses of himself (and it is our case as well as
his) Si been essem sine te, non venitem ad te.
If I could be well without thee, I would never come at thee. As the water when
it is at large, and has scope enough, runs with a still and silent motion,
but being brought into a straight, it makes a great noise: In like manner,
when a man is at large, he looks not much to this duty of prayer: but when
he is in affliction and straites, he will excite and stir up himself
thereunto. So did the children of Israel, in the time of their bondage, they
sighed, and cried, Exo. 2:23, 24
and made their moan unto GOD. And we read in many places of the Book of
Judges, That howsoever in their prosperity they were untoward and careless of
God, Chap. 3. and 4
yet when God raised up any new enemies against them, they cried unto him. And
David says of himself, that although before, while he thought his mountain to
be strong enough (as we have heard) he was foolish and proud: yet when God hid
his face from him, Psalm. 30.2
then he cried unto the Lord and prayed unto him. And we may obscrue, that the
most of his Psalms were made when he was in affliction. Yea our Savior Christ
himself, though all his lifetime he was much conversant in prayer, sometime
rising early in the morning before day, Mar. 1.35
and sometime spending the whole night therein: yet he never prayed more
earnestly, nor more fervently, then immediately before his passion: when, as
the Apostle says, Heb. 5.7
he offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears: yea he
was so seruent, that his sweat was like drops of blood trickling down to the
ground. Luke 22.44
We see then by all that has been spoken, that affliction is as it were a
whet-stone, to set an edge upon our devotion, and sharpen our hearts to prayer.

Sixthly, affliction does contain the children of God in obedience. It is with
the best of us, as Agiselaus said of the Athenians; that Liberi mali^unt, serui
boni.
When they were at liberty they were naught, but when they were in bondage,
they were good: so we in our prosperity do start aside like a broken bow, but
when affliction comes, we submit our selves to the Lords yoke. The people
of Israel, when the hand of God was upon them, either by war, or famine, or
any other calamity, carried themselves very religiously, and walked in
obedience unto his will. But when God carried them up to the high places of the
earth (as Moses says) that they might eat the fruits of the fields: Deuteronomy.
32.i3, 14, 15
when he caused them to suck honey out of the stone, and oil out of the hard
rock: when he gave them butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of
lambs and rams fed in Bashan, with the fat of the grains of wheat: and
made them drink the red liquor of the grape: then they that should have been
upright, when they waxed fat, spurned with their heels: they were fat, they
were gross, they were laden with fatness: therefore they forsook God that
made them, and regarded not the strong God of their salvation. And this does
David confess of himself, when he says, Before I was afflicted I went
astray, Psalm. 119.67
but now I keep thy word. And the Church acknowledges, that before the Lord
corrected her, Ierem: 31.18
she was like an untamed calfe. Though man were created after the Image of
God, and advanced to great honor, yet if God let him alone, Psalm. 49.20
he will become like unto the beasts that perish, as David says. And
therefore, the Lord threatens the rebellious Jews, Hosea 2.6
that he will stop their way with thorns, and make an hedge, that they
should not find their paths. Where he shows that necessity requires,
that he should hold them in with severe Discipline and sharp corrections,
comparing them to wanton and unruly cattle, which must be kept in with
thorns and hedges, lest they leap out of the pasture, and go astray.

Seauenthly, it helps to tame and subdue the unruliness of the flesh, that
it may be in better subjection to the Spirit. The flesh is like an headstrong
horse, which if he be fatted and pampered in the stable for a while, waxes so
frampall, as he can hardly be ruled, and brought to acknowledge his rider: So
this stubborn flesh of ours, if it enjoy but alitle prosperity, it straitway
grows so rebellious, that it will not be subject to the Law of God. Romans 8.7
And as the horse-rider, to pull down the stomach of such an horse, takes
away his prouender, and feeds him with straw and chafe: and if that will not
serve, handles him roughly, and beats him. So does the Lord with our flesh:
he takes away those outward blessings which puffed it up, and made it swell,
and loadeth it with one affliction after another, 1 Cor. 9.27
that so he may beat it down and bring it into subjection. And this is a
great benefit, to have the flesh, with the cursed lusts and affections
thereof, mortified and subdued in this manner. For it is one of those deadly
enemies of our souls, Galat. 5.17
with which we must fight and encounter while we live. Now as he that were to
enter a single combat, with an adversary that were stronger then himself,
would be glad of some body would first weaken and foil him, that so he might
the more easily overcome him: In like manner, the children of God have cause to
rejoice, that it does please the Lord by outward calamities to tame the flesh,
and to tread it under their feet, that so they may with less difficulty and
danger get the maistery of it.

Eighthly, it is a means to withdraw our hearts from the love of the world, and
to raise them up to the desire of heavenly things. Such is the corruption of
our nature, that we doat too much on this world. We are like to foolish
children, that would not willingly be weaned from the breast, and therefore
their mother annoynteth the nibbles of her breast with some bitter thing, to
make them out of love with it. So, if we might have our wills, we would
always hang upon the breasts of the world, and would never leave sucking, if
the Lord did not powder our desires with the cross, and make them bitter to
us. The children of Israel, though they were grievously afflicted in Egypt, to
make them more earnestly desire to possess the land of Canaan: yet we see how
hardly they were brought to depart from thence. Yea, when they were in the way
to Canaan, they would often have returned back again into Egypt to their
fleshpots, Number i4.3, 4 Exodus 16.3 Number. 11.5
their fish, their cucumbers, their pepons, etc. If they had lived in
preferrement there, and enjoyed the fat of the land, as they did in Joseph's
time, Genesis 45.18 and 47.11
it would, no doubt, have been an hard matter to have persuaded them to
depart. So it fares with the most of us: we are in this world, as in a Sea of
misery, never out of one danger or other, yet such is our folly, we love to be
here still. What would we do if we never had any thing to molest us? It is a
lamentable thing to consider that our minds should be so dazeled with the
glittring show of riches, plesures and honors, as they cannot look to heaven,
that our hearts should be so oppressed and weighed down with covetousness and
ambition, that they can not raise up themselves unto celestial cogitations,
and that our souls should be so ensnared with the pleasant inticements of the
flesh, that they seek for their felicity upon the earth. And therefore the
Lord in mercy to prevent this evil, does by daily experience of miseries, put
his children in mind of the vanity of all earthly things, Calvin. instit. lib.
3. cap 9. sect. 1.
lest they should promise to themselves a constant and continual peace in this
world, he suffers them many times to be disquieted and molested, with
wars, with tumults, with robberies, and other injuries: lest they should with
too much greedines gape after brittle and inconstant riches, or should too much
rest in those which they do possess, God brings them to poverty, sometimes
by banishment, sometimes by barrennes of the earth, sometimes by fire,
sometimes by one means, and sometimes by another, lest they should take too
much delight in the comfortes of marriage, he either causes them to be vexed
with the shrewdness of their wives, or humbles them with lewd children, or
afflicts them with the loss and death of their children. And if it fall out
that the Lord do spare them in all these things: yet, lest they should either
swell with vainglory, or rejoice with foolish confidence, he chasteneth them
with sickness and diseases, that they may learn how frail and unstable all
earthly things are, and may lift up their eyes to heaven, where that
incorruptible crown of glory is laid up for them. And thus the Lord in his
unspeakable goodness many times diminishes the health of our bodies, that we
may more earnestly desire the salvation of our souls. He takes away the things
of this life, that we may more carefully seek after the things of a better
life. So that afflictions are like to a great storm at Sea, Philip. 1.23
to make the godly wish to be in the haven. As the waters of the deluge, the
more they increased, the higher they bare up the Arc: So the waters of
tribulation, the greater they are, the higher they lift up the soul toward
heaven: according to that speech of Bernard, Per flagella domini spernuntur
te^rena, amantur coelest^a. De coena dom. sermon 10
By the Lords corrections we contemn earthly things, and love heavenly. And
therefore, as Zeno Diog. Laertius in vita Zenonis.
having suffered shipwreck, became the Scholar of Crates, and studied
Philosophy, and after said it was an happy shipwreck that made him affect
such excellent knowledge: So may we say much more truly It was a blessed
sickness, a blessed poverty, a blessed imprisonment etc, that caused us to look
toward the kingdom of heaven.

Ninthly, affliction does save the children of God from hell and condemnation.
If God should let us alone, we would never rest till we run headlong to hell:
as foolish children, if they be not hinderd, will run into the ditch. And
therefore, it is the Lords mercy, to lay the rod upon our backs, that so we
may bethink our selves of the danger wherein we stand, and may labor to
prevent it. And this is that which Job says, Job 33 16.18
that the Lord opens the ears of men by corrections, that so he may keep
back their souls from the pit, and that their life should not pass by the
sword. And the Apostle has a saying to the same purpose, i Cor. 11.32.
that when we are judged we are chastened of the Lord because we should not be
condemned with the world When a man is desperately about to cast himself into
the fire, or to drown himself in the water, can any do him a greater benefit
then to prevent him and save his life? So there cannot be a greater benefit to
us, then when we are ready to drown our selves in perdition by our sins,
that the Lord by his corrections should stay us, and hold us back.

Last of all, affliction does fit and prepare us for the kingdom of Heaven.
As the Apostle says of the Thessalonians, that by persecutions and
tribulations which they suffered, they were counted worthy of the kingdom of
God. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5 As the parching heat of the Sun ripeneth the corn, and
makes it fit to be carried into the barn: so does affliction ripen the
godly, that they may be meet to be gathered into Gods barn. And this is done
two ways: First, because by afflictions ^as we have heard* we are purged and
purified from our sins, which else would hinder us from coming there. Apocal.
21.27
For no unclean thing shall enter into Gods kingdom. As gold must first be
purified in the fire, before it be laid up in the kings treasury: Prou. 25.4
and as wheat must be cleansed from the chafe, before it be laid up in the
garner: so must it be with us. Affliction is the fire that must purge us, 2.
Tim. 2.21.
to make us vessels of honor for the house of God: and the fan that must
cleanse us, to make us pure wheat for his garner. In the building of Solomon's
temple, 1 Kings 6.7
all the stones were hewn and fitted in the quarry, before they were brought
thither: and There was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron heard in
the temple while it was in building. So in the kingdom of heaven, which is the
spiritual house of God, all the living stones thereof, must be hewn, and
squared, and fitted by afflictions in this life. Secondly, affliction prepares
us for heaven, because it is a means to work holiness in us, Heb. 12.14
without which no man shall ever see the Lord, as the Apostle says. We see
then by all these gracious effects and blessed fruits which affl ction brings
with it, that David had good cause to say, It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. And therefore we may conclude with Saint Augustine, Percutis, vt
sanes ^et occidis nos, ne moriamur abs te. ^onfest. lib. 2.
The Lord smites us that he may heal us, and kills us that we may not die
from him.

This Doctrine (that we may make count it exceeding joy when we fall into it.
James 1.2
I confess it seems otherwise to flesh and blood. For, Heb. 12.11.
as the Apostle says truly, no chastising for the present seems to be
joyous, but grievous. As children are loath to feel the smart of the rod,
nay, they can not endure to hear of it; so is our corrupt nature loath and
unwilling to taste of any correction. It is death to us, to hear that we must
be punished and chastened every morning: Psalm 73.14
and that we must be fed with the bread of tears, and 10.5.
and have tears to drink in great measure. It is a weariesome thing to be
always sick and languishing, and 107.18.
so as the soul abhors all manner of meat: to be continually full of cramps
and aches and pains, so as neither a man's couch can relieve him, nor his bed
bring comfort unto him, as Job says. Job 7.i3:
But when he lays him down, he says, when shall I rise, and the night be
gone? and, he is full with tossing to and fro unto the dawning of the day. 4.
The like may be said of all other afflictions, they are as unsavory to the
flesh, as the white of an egg without salt. Job 6.6.
And therefore our Savior Christ himself, as he was man, Heb. 2 14.
and so partaker of our infirmities, felt in his flesh a loathnesse to have
tasted of that bitter cup of his Passion, Matt. 26.38 39.
his soul was heavy unto the death, and therefore he besought his Father,
that if it were possible it might pass from him: Ser in f^^ia, 5. in Parasc.
which speech, as Bernard notes, seems to be the speech of the flesh, and
not of the spirit, because he adds alittle after, the spirit is willing, but
the flesh is weak. But we must not measure afflictions by the present smart we
feel in them, but by the benefit that follows after them. For as we have
heard, though the sense of the present grief be bitter, yet the fruit that
comes after is most sweet and pleasant. Affliction is to the soul, as
Physic to the body. But as commonly that Physic which is most wholesome, is
withal most untoothsome: so that affliction which is most profitable, is for
the most part most distastefull. As the plant which they call Christ's thorn,
Plin. lib, 24. cap. 14.
is extreme bitter both in the root and in the leaves, and in the branches; but
yet is very medicinable (for the juice of the root clears the eyes, the seed
brings down the afterbirth, etc.) So affliction, though it be in it self
most bitter and unsavory, yet the Lord our most skillful Physician, makes
most sovereign medicines thereof, Psalm. 103.3.
to heal the infirmities of his children, whereby it becomes more profitable
to them then (by reason of their corruption) prosperity could ever be. For as
dead flesh, if it be kept in sweet water, will corrupt and be full of worms:
but if it be kept in salt brine, it will be preserved long, and become
wholesome meat for the use of man: so the children of God, if they abound with
prosperity, are easily corrupted, but being exercised by the cross, they are
preserved from the infection of sin.

Secondly, it teaches us to endeavor by all means; to profit by the
afflictions that God lays upon us, that so we may have experience of this
good which they bring with them: that seeing God intends them for our
benefit, so we may not by our own stubbornness and untowardness, pervert
them to our hurt. It is as grievous a sin as we can commit, to harden our
hearts when Gods hand is upon us. As the Lord complained of the Jews, Ierem.
2.30.
I have smitten your children in vain, they have received no correction. And
in an other place. and 5.3.
O Lord (says the Prophet) Thou have stricken them, and they have not
sorrowed: thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction:
they have made their faces harder then a stone, and have refused to return.
And so it is said of Ahaz, 2 Chr. 28.22.
that in the time of his tribulation he did trespass more against the Lord.
Let us therefore bless our selves from this height of iniquity, and let us
pray to God, to sanctify all our corrections and chasticements unto us, that
we may be bettered and reformed by them: So shall they be infallible
arguments of his fatherly love toward us: otherwise they will be fearful
tokens of his wrath, and certain pledges of our condemnation.

Thirdly, it teaches us to be patient Apostle says, Heb. 12.9.
If we have had the fathers of our bodies which corrected us, we gave them
reverence: should we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of
Spirits, that we may live? especially considering that it is so much for our
good. A man that is sick of a burning fever, willingly suffers himself to
be let blood, because he knows it is a means to abate the violence of his
disease. A man that is pained with the stone, patiently yields himself to be
cut and tortured by the Physician, because he knows it is a means to
preserve his life. A man that is wounded, meekly suffers the Surgeon to
launch and search his wound to the bottom, and with sharp corasiues to eat
out the festered core of the ulcer, because he knows he can not otherwise be
cured. Shall all these endure, and that with admirable patience, so much
torment for the good of their bodies, and shall not we much more be willing,
to suffer Gods sharpest corrections for the benefit of our souls? especially,
seeing our own sins have deserved the greatest punishments that GOD can
inflict. Micah 7.9.
As the Prophet says, I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him. And therefore, let us learn meekely and obediently to submit
our selves to the will of God in this case. And as he sends afflictions with
a right hand, let us not take them with a left. An old Courtier that had
served Caligula, Claudius, and Nero, three cruel tyrants, Emperors of Rome,
being demanded how he could escape the dangers of those times, wherein so many
worthy Citizens were put to death. He answered: Even by taking benefits
thankfully, and by putting up injuries patiently. If he could for his own
safety subdue his mind, to bear with patience the open injuries of such
monstrous tyrants: how much more should we submit our selves with all
meekness to bear the loving corrections of our most merciful Father? And
howsoever it may seem, that God lays heavier and sorer afflictions upon us,
then upon many others: yet we must consider, that he knows the corruption
and hardness of our hearts to be such as could not be subdewed with lighter
corrections. Malo nodo m^lus cuneus.
An hard knot, as the proverb is, must have an hard wedge. The Physician makes
his potions milder or stronger, as the quality of the sickness does require.
In like manner the Lord tempereth his corrections according to our disposition:
if he see us tractable, he deals more gently with us: if we be untamed and
rebellious, he lays it on, and makes us feel the smart. Neither will he
ever cease to follow us with one calamity after an other, till he have brought
us to our knees, and caused us to humble our selves sufficiently under his hand.

That I may learn thy statutes.) Here the Prophet does particularly declare
that which before he had generally propounded. Where by Learning he does not
understand that contemplative and speculatiue learning which swimmeth in the
brain, and is gotten by hearing and reading of the word of God: but that
particular learning, which is gotten by experience. In a word, his meaning is
this, that he felt the truth and comfort of the word, more powerful and
effectual in his afflictions, then at any time before, and that made him more
careful to live godly, when the cross was removed, and the trouble gone. From
hence we learn, that the godly do feel the fruit of their afflictions, and
are made better by the^, when they are past and gone. They are not only good
for the present, while they feel the smart, for so an hypocrite may seem to
be, but the benefit of their afflictions remains with them all the days of
their lives. A proof hereof we have in the example of Manasseh, who did not
only humble himself greatly before the Lord, as we have heard before when he
was in tribulation. 2 Chronicles. 33
But when God was entreated of him, 12.
and heard his prayer, 13.
and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom, then he reformed
himself from his wicked courses, and restored the true worship of God. He
took away the strange gods,.15.
and the Image out of the house of the Lord, and all the Altars which himself
had built before, and cast them out of the city. 16.
And he prepared the Altar of the Lord, and offered sacrifice thereon, and
commanded Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel. The like we see in that good
king Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3.
who was not only religiously and devoutly affected in the time of sickness,
when he was past hope of life (for there is none so wretched, but will make a
show of holiness then) but when he was recovered of his sickness, 9. etc:
he made a holy Song of thanksgiving, wherein he professes the care that
he would have of Gods service for the time to come: So that we see, the fruit
of affliction endures for ever unto the children of God: otherwise they never
made true use of it, they never reaped any profit by it. But I will not stand
any longer in the prosecuting of this point.

It serves for the just reproof of all those that make a show to be somewhat
good, in the time of trouble, but when it is gone, they are as badde as ever
they were. So long as they feel the hand of GOD upon them, they promise great
reformation, but all is but hypocrisy. For they are no sooner enlarged, 2 Pet.
2.22.
but they return unto their former courses with as much greediness, as ever
did the dog to his vomit. And herein they are like children, who while the
rod is on their backs, promise great matters, that they will never do the
like again but they remember that promise no longer then they feel the smart
of the rod. And this we see in the example of Pharaoh, who so long as the
plague was heavy upon him and his land, made no small show of repentance, and
promised; that if Moses and Aaron would pray for him, that the plague might be
removed, he would let the people go, they should tarry no longer. Exodus
9.27, 28. and 10 16, 17. But as soon as ever God had spared him at their
entreaty, he was so far from perfourming his promise, as his heart was more
hardened, then ever it was before. Iron, whilst it is in the fire, is soft,
and pliable, and may be wroght into any form: but if it be taken from the
fire alittle, it straitway returns to his former hardness. In like manner,
many men, while they are in the furnace of affliction, seem to have soft and
melting hearts, and make great show of remorce for their sins: but
afterward, their hearts become as hard as the Adamant. And thus men do use
their repentance like an old germent, they cast it about them in a storm or a
shewer: but as soon as it is fair weather, they lay it by again. But let us
be careful to make such an holy and sanctified use of our afflictions, when
they be upon us, that we may be the better for them all our life after. This
point is necessary to be enlarged, but I have handled it In the repentance of
Peter and Judas:
elsewhere, and therefore I will insist no longer upon it at this time.

FINIS.

