THE HONESTY OF THIS AGE.

Proouing by good circumstance that the world was never honest till now.

By BARNABEE RYCH Gentleman, Servant to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

Malui me diuitem esse, quam vocari.



Printed at London for T. A. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR Thomas Middleton Knight, L. Mayor of the Honorable
City of London.
MOST HONORABLE LORD, to avoid idleness, I have with Domitian endeavored to
catch Flies, I have taken in hand a text, that will rather induce hatred, then
win love, I have spoken against those abominations, that are not less
odible in the sight of the powers of heaven, then monstrous to be tolerated
here upon the face of the earth: I have grasped at greater matters, then (some
will say) is fitting to behandled by a Soldiers pen.

The Adulterer will not endure it, the Drunkard will be angry with it, the
Blasphemer will swear at it, the Bribe-taker will despite it, the Papist will
malice it, to conclude most Honorable) there is no guilty conscience that will
willingly entertain it.

Remaining then in some doubtfulnes of mind, to whom I might bequeath it, that
would either grace or give countenance unto it, I was prompted by Report of
your Lordships worthiness that now in the course of your government in this
Honorable City of London, you have set up those lights for the suppressing of
several sorts of sins, that as they have already advanced your applause,
amongst those that be of the best approved honesty, so they will remain for
ever in Record to your perpetual praise.

Let not therefore my boldness, seem presumptuous, that being altogether
unknown to your Lordship, have yet presumed to shelter my lines under your
Honorable name, and thus in affiance of your Honorable acceptance, I rest to
do your Lordshippe any other kind of service.

Your Lordships to command BARNABE RYCH

To all those Readers that are well disposed.
GENTLEMEN, there are but few in these days, that are willing to hear their
faults: but they are fewer by a great number that are willing to amend them,
Find faults, could never yet get grace, for Adulation is crept so closely into
our bosoms, that smoothing Flattery is more dearly esteemed, then
reprehending Verity.

I confess my self to be ill beholding to mine own tongue, that could never
flatter, lispe, nor lie: Nature has made the carriage of my words to be
something harsh and dull, yet when they seem to be most slow, perhaps
sometimes they be most sure: I speak plainly, and I mean honestly: and
although my words be not imbroydered with high morality, I care not: for I
leave that to Scholars, Masters of Art and Method.

If my lines be plain and true, they so much the more resemble their Sier, and
for children to be like their Parents, besides the Midwife will give it a
blessing, so it is a sign they be Legitimate: defectes I know they cannot
want, that in their procreation were bred and borne before their time, for as I
conueyued of them in an instant, so I was delivered again in a moment: and
these abortiue brates that are thus hastily brought into the world, though they
seldom prove to have any great vigor or strength, yet I hope these will prove
to be of as honest and plain dealing as their father. I make no doubt but they
will please as many as I desire to content, and those are Good men, and
Virtuous women: for the rest that are gauled, if I rub them unawares, it is
but Chance-medly, and then I hope I shall obtain a pardon of Course,
protesting aforehand that I have not aimed at any one particularly that has
not a guilty conscience to accuse himself: if any man will think them to be
too bitter, let him use it as an Apothecaries pill, that the more bitter, the
better purging.

To the Muses.
Pierian sisters, Types of true Renown,
the radyant lights of Art and sacred skill:
I come not to implore a Laurel Crown,
wherewith to deck my rude vntutred quill.
Nor do I seek to climb Parnassus hill.
In brief the world of Folly I vpbrayde,
Yet dare not press, Fair Dames to crave your aid.
I smooth no sin, I sing no pleasing song,
I cloak no vice, I seek to bleare no eyes,
I would be loath to do Minerua wrong:
To forge untruths, or deck my lines with lies,
I cannot fable, flatter, nor disguise.
Yet mounted now on Times discerning stage,
I stand to note the Follies of our Age.
FINIS.
The Honesty of this age.
WHEN Philip that was the Father of the great Alexander, was leuying an army
for the wars which he intended against the Athenians, and that through all
the parts of Macedonia, the Country was filled with the noise of shrill
sounding Trumpets, and of rattling Drums: and that the people in like manner, as
busily bestirred themselves to help and set forward the soldiers, that were
then making ready to follow the Captains.

Every man being thus in action about this great preparation, in the midst of
all this business, Diogenes began to roll and rumble his Tubb, still tossing
and tumbling it from place to place, in that unaccustomed manner that some that
did behold him, demanded of him his meaning in the matter: why (said Diogenes)
do you not see this strange alteration, that every man is doing of somewhat now
on the sudden and why should not I be as busy as the best? I cannot be idle
and although I can do nothing else, yet I will rumble my Tubb amongst them, if
it be but to hold them company.

I would apply this president in mine own excuse, that now in this quick
sprited age, when so many excellent wits, are indeuouring by their pens to
set up lights, and to give the world new eyes to see into deformity, why
should not I that can do little? yet apply my self to do something, if it be
but with Diogenes to rumble my Tubb: yet I know I shall offend, for the world
is so luld a sleep in pleasures lap, that they cannot endure any rumbling
noise, that should awaken them out of that sweet sleep of security, he that
would please the time must learn to sing lullaby to Folly: and there is no
Music so delightful as the smoothing up of sin.

How many worthy Preachers be there in these days that have with Heraclitus
bewailed the iniquity of the time, and that have thundered forth the
judgments of God, which the holy scriptures have threatened to fall upon
impenitent sinners, but what do lamentations avail? they do but make a
rumbling like Diogenes Tubb, the sound is no sooner past, but it is as quickly
forgotten: let them weep therefore that list with Heraclitus, I will make my
self a little merry with Democritus, I will laugh at the Follies of the
world, let the world laugh as fast again at me, I look for no better: and not
only to be mocked at, but likewise to be wounded and tortured with lying and
slanderous tongues.

The blaspheming wretch, that is ready to make the heavens to tremble with
whole vollies of oaths that he will thunder forth, but for the wagging of a
straw, will bitterly swear and protest against me.

The licentious Whooremaster, that in hunting after Harlots, consumes himself
both in body and soul, will censure me.

The beastly Drunkard, more loathsome then a Swine, when he has so ouercharged
his stomach, that he can no longer hold (together with his draffe) will
vomit out my reproaches.

The finicall Fool, that by his nice and queint atyre may well be resembled to
the Sea Mermayd seeming half a man and half a harlot, will not forbear to
mock and deride me.

The bribing Officer, will bitterly curse me.

The Tradesman and Shopkeeper, that do buy and sell vanities, will grudge and
murmr at me.

The country Swayne, that will sweat more on sun-dayes dancing about a May
poole, then he will do all the week after at his work, will have a cast at
me.

The infamous Harlot, that prostitutes her self to every vicious Lecher, will
pronounce me an open enemy to woman kind.

Old mother B. the bawd will shut her doors against me.

Now what will become of me that shall be thus beset with such a graceles
company, let me beseech your prayers, you that be wise and judicious, you that
be endued with wisdom and knowledge, let me yet find favor in your eyes, I
rather desire my confirmation from those fewer in number, whose names are
enrolled in the book of life, then from the multitude, treading those steps
that do assuredly lead to a second death.

And you good and gracious women, whom the holy scriptures do auow to be more
precious then pearl, let me entreat your favorable aspect.

You Damoseles and young gentle-women, that are no less adorned with modesty
then garnished with beauty, I have ever regarded you with a reverent
estimation.

You married wives, that are ornified with honesty, wisdom and virtue, I do
acknowledge you to be the glory of your husbands.

The whole sex of woman kind in general, as well old as young, that have not
tainted their own credites with over much immodest boldness, I do honor
them, and I do prostitute my self for ever to do them humble service.

I have heard speaking of the Golden Age of the world, and some will say it is
long since past, yet some others do think, that the true golden age
(indeed) was never till now, when gold and gifts do compass all things: but
if I might give my censure, I would call this, the Honest age of the world, I
confess that in former ages the world has been simple and plain dealing,
but never honest till now.

Till now that Bribery, Usury, Forgery, Perjury, and such other like impieties,
are honest men's professions, and that those endeavors that in times past were
accounted abominable, are now made usual trades for honest men to live by.

Till now that rich-men be faultlesse, and must not be reprehended in their
drunkenness, in their blasphemies, in their adulteries, they must not be
blamed, nor how soever they oppress and extort, the poor must not complain.

And who dares take exceptions, but to a mean Magistrate that is crept into an
office, perhaps by corruption, no, it is dangerous to look into his
abominations: but he is sure to perish that will but open his lips to
speak against his ill.

And what a dangerous matter would it be to call such a Lawyer, a Pick-purse,
that will take upon him the defense of a matter, that in his own conscience,
he knows to be unjust, and yet will send his Clyent home four times a year,
with an empty purse.

And he that robbes the Realm of corn, and of all other commodities,
transporting it beyond the seas, is he not an honest trading Merchant, and
what is he that dares call him Thief:

And how many Tradesmen and Shopkeepers are there that to vent their
counterfeite stuff, will not stick both to lie, to swear, and to use many
other colusions whereby to deceive, yet who dares tell him that he is but a
common Cosiner.

No, it is more safety for a man to commit sin then to reprove sin, and
what an easy matter is it now for a man to be Honest, over it has been in
times past, when every usurer, every briber, every extortioner, every picker,
every robber, every adulterer, and every common drunkard is an Honest man.

And he that will otherwise deprave them, there is law for him, he must stand
to the mercy of twelve men, a Jury shall pass upon him, and he shall be
convict in an action of Slander.

I am half ashamed to speak of the honest men that be in this Age, and me
thinks when I have to do with some of them, I should borrow his manners, that
having to tell a sober tale to a Justice of peace, would still begin his
speeches with Sir reverence of your worships honesty.

The fellow had learned good manners, and we may well put a Sir reverence when
we do speak of honesty now a days, for every rich man is an Honest man,
there is no contradiction to that, and this makes a number of them to gather
wealth they care not how, by the undoing of their poor neighbors because
they would be honest.

In former ages, he that was rich in knowledge was called a wise man, but now
there is no man wise, but he that has wit to gather wealth, and it is a hard
matter in this Age, for a man to raise himself by honest principles, yet we
do all seek to climb, but not by Jacobs Ladder, and we are still desirous to
mount, but not by the Chariot of Elyas.

Virtue has but a few that do favor her, but they be fewer by a great many
in number that are desirous to follow her.

But is not this an honest Age, when ougly vice does bear the name of seemly
virtue, when Drunkenness is called Good fellowship, Murder reputed for
Manhood, Lechery, is called Honest love, Impudency, Good audacitie, Pride they
say is Decency, and wretched Misery, they call Good Husbandry, Hypocrisy, they
call Sincerity, and Flattery, does bear the name of Eloquence, Truth, and
Verity, and that which our predecessors would call flat Knavery, passes now
by the name of wit and policy.

Then fie upon Honesty, that is thus poluted by men, I hope yet amongst
women, we shall find it more pure and undefiled.

In former ages, there were many imperfections attributed to women, that are
now accounted no defectes at all, neither are they thought to be any scandals
to their reputations.

Moses seems in a sort, to scoff at some foolish nicities, that were used
amongst women in his time Deuteronomy. 28.

And the Prophet Esaias again reprehendeth the wanton gestures that were used by
the daughters of Sion in his days at their Haughtiness of mind, at their
Stretched out necks, at their wandering Eyes, at their walking, and their
Mincing as they pass through the streets: then he sets down (as it were)
by innumeration so many vanities, as for breuities sake I will here omit to
speak of Esaias 3.

As Solomon pronounces the praises of those women that be good, so he marketh
out a number of capital offenses whereby we might know the ill. And the
ancient Romans banished out of their City, all women that were found to be
dishonest of their tongues: yet tollerating with those others that were well
known to be dishonest of their bodies: thinking the first, to be more
pernicious then the last, because the infirmity of the one proceeded but from
the frailty of the flesh, but the wickedness of the other from an ungracious
and a wicked mind: but now, the bitterness of a tongue, the pride of a
haughty heart, the shamelessness of a face, the immodesty of a mind, the
impudency of looks, the rolling of wanton eyes, the lewdnes of manners, the
lightness of behavior, the looseness of life, nor all the rest of those
notes that Solomon has left unto us (the true marks of a wicked woman) all
this is nothing, nor these imputations are no blemish to a woman's credit.

Is she not to be charged with the abuse of her body, it is well, she is
honest, what care we for the deformities of the mind.

Will you see now, a woman's honesty is pent up in a little room, it is still
confined, but from her girdle downwards.

Is not this a happy age for women, men have many faults whereby to taynt
their credites, there is no imperfection in a woman, but that of her body, and
who is able to prove that, one pair of eyes will not serve, 2. pair of eyes
will not be believed, there must be 3. witnesses at the least, to testify the
matter.

How shall we be now able to judge of a Harlot, especially if she be rich, and
has ability to bring her accuser to the Comissaries Court: we must not
condemn her by outward show, by her new compounded fashions, by her paynting,
by her poudering, by her perfuming, by her ryoting, by her roysting, by her
reuelling, by her company keeping, it is not enough to say she was locked up
with a gentleman all night in a chamber, or that she had been seen in a
strangers bed: her Proctor will make you to understand a little Latin, if you
be not able to prove Rem in Re, you have slandered her, you must not believe
your own eyes in such a case, but you must cry her mercy.

This is it that does make Harlots so scant, as they be now in England, not a
Strumpet to be found, if a man would seek from one end of the town to another.

A general corruption has ouergrowne the virtues of this latter times, and the
world is become a Brothell house of sin: It is enough for us now if we seek
but for the resemblance of virtue, for the sovereignty of the thing it self,
we never trouble our selves about it.

Both men and women that are the very Slaves of sin, will yet stand upon their
credites and reputations, and sometimes putting on the visard of virtue, will
seem to march under the Ensign of Honesty.

Whether will you tend your steps, which way will you turn your eyes, or to
whom will you lend your listing ears but you shall meet with vice, look upon
vanity, and hear those speeches, that do not only tend to Folly, but
sometimes to Ribauldry, other whiles to Blasphemy, and many times to the great
dishonor of God.

Will you walk the streets, there you shall meet with sir Lawrence
lack-land, in a Cloak lined through with Velvet, and besides his Dublet, his
Hose, his Rapier, his Dagger, not so much but the Spurs that hang over his
heels, but they shall be beguilded.

Will you now cross the way a little on the other side, there you shall meet
with Sir Henry have little, so trickt up in the spicke and span new fashion,
that you would sooner take him to be Proteus the God of Shapes, or some other
like Celestial power, then a vain Terestiall Fool.

Your ears again, shall be so encumbered with the rumbling and rolling of
Coaches, and with the Clamours of such as do follow them, that are still
crying out O good my Lady bestow your charitable Alms upon the Lame, the
Blind, the Sick the diseased, goood my Lady one penny, one halfepeny, for the
tender mercy of God we beseech it: but let them call and cry till their tongues
do ache, my Lady has neither eyes to see, nor ears to hear, she holds on
her way, perhaps to the Tire makers Shop, where she shakes out her Crowns
to bestow upon some new fashioned Atire, that if we may say, there be
deformity in Art, upon such artificall deformed Periwigs, that they were
fitter to furnish Theater, or for her that in a Stage play, should represent
some Hagge of Hell, then to be used by a Christian woman, or to be worn by
any such as does account her self to be a daughter in the heavenly Jerusalem.

I am ashamed now to ask you to go into any of these Drinking houses, where
you should as well see the beastly behavior of Drunkardes, as likewise hear
such swearing and blaspheming as you would think the whole house to be
dedicated to loathsome sin, and that hell and Damnation were both together
there already resident.

Will you now go visit the Shop keepers, that are so busy with their What
lack you sir, or what is it you would have bought: and let us take a good
survey, what the commodities be that they would thus set forth to sale, and we
shall find that as Diogenes passing through a Fair cried out, O how many
things are here to be vented that Nature has no need of, so we may likewise
say, O how many gaudy trifles are here to be sold, that are good for
nothing, but to maintain pride and vanity.

If sometimes we happen to hit upon such necessaries, as are (indeed)
behouefull for the use of man, let the buyer yet look to himself, that he be
not ouerreached by deceit and subtlety.

Shall we yet make a step to Westminster Hall, a little to ouer-look the
Lawyers.

My skill is unable to render due reverence to the honorable Judges, according
to their worthiness, but especially at this instant as the Benches are now
supplied, neither would I eclips the honest reputation of a number of learned
Lawyers, that are to be held in a reverent regard, and that are to be honored
and esteemed, yet amongst these there be a number of others, that do
multiply suits and draw on quarrelles between friend and friend, between
brother and brother, and sometimes between the father and the son, and
amongst these although there be some, that can make good shift to send their
Clients home with penilesse purses, yet there be other some again, that at the
end of the term do complain themselves that their gettings have not bin
enough to defray their expenses, and do therefore think that men are become
to be more wise in these days, then they have been in former ages, and had
rather put up a wrong, then fee a Lawyer: but I do not think there is any
such wisdom in this age, when there are so many wrangling spirits, that are
so ready to commence suites, but for a neighbors Goose, that shall but happen
to look over a hedge: now what conceit I have in the matter, I will partly
make manifest, by this ensuing circumstance.

As the worthy gentlemen that have been Lords Majors, of the honorable City
of London, have been generally renowned for their wisdom in government, so
they have been no less famed for their Hospitality and good housekeeping,
during the time of their Mairolties.

Amongst the rest there was one, who long since being ready to set himself
down to his dinner, with his company that were about him, there thronged in on
the sudden a great company of strangers, in that vnreuerent manner, as had not
formerly been accustomed, whereupon one of the officers coming to the L.
Mayor, said unto him, If it please your Lordship here be too few stools, Thou
lie Knave (answered the Mayor) There are too many guests.

Now I am persuaded that if Lawyers (indeed) have just cause to complain of
their little gettings, it is not for that there be too few suites, but because
there be too many Lawyers, especially of these Aturnies, Soliciters, and such
other petty Foggers, whereof there be such abundance, that the one of them can
very hardly thrive by the other: And this multitude of them, do trouble all
the parts of England. The profession of the Law, I do acknowledge to be
honorable, and (I think) the study of it should especially belong to the
better sort of gentlemen: but our Innes of Court, now (for the greater part)
are stuffed with the offspring of Farmers, and with all other sorts of
Tradesmen, and these when they have gotten some few Scrapings of the law, they
do sow the seeds of suits, they do set men at variance, and do seek for
nothing more then to check the course of Justice, by their delatory pleas: for
the better sort of the learned Lawyers, I do honor them.

They say it is an argument of a licentious common wealth, where Physicians and
Lawyers have too great comminges in, but it is the surfeits of peace that
brings in the Physicians gain, yet in him there is some dispatch of
business, for if he cannot speedily cure you, he will yet quickly kill you,
but with the Lawyer there is no such expedition, he is all for delay, and if
his tongue be not well typt with gold, he is so dull of Language, that you
shall not hear a comfortable word come out of his mouth in a whole
Michaelmasse Term: if you will unlock his lips, it must be done with a
Golden fee, and that perhaps may set his tongue at liberty, to speak
(sometimes) to as good a purpose, as if he had still been mute.

Let us leave the Lawyer to his study, and let us now look a little in at the
Court gate, and leaving to speak of those few in number that do aspire to the
favor of the prince, by their honest and virtuous endeavors, let us take a
short survey of those others, that do labor their own aduancements, by base
and servile practices, by lying, by slandering, by backbiting, by flattering,
by dissembling: that have no other means whereby to make themselves gracious
in the eye of greatness, but by surrendering themselves to base Employments,
that do sometimes poison the ears of Princes, and under the pretense of
common good, do obtain those suits that does oppress a whole common wealth,
and but to maintain the pride and prodigality of a private person.

In the Courts of Princes every great man (placed in authority) must be
flattered in his follies, praised in his pleasures, commended in his vanities,
yea his very vices must be made virtues, or else they will say we forget our
duties, we malice his greatness, we envy his fortunes: and he that will offer
sacrifice to Thraso, must have Gnato to be his Priest: for the itching ears of
vain glory, are best pleased when they be scratched by Flattery.

By these steps of smooting, Courtiers must learn to climb and more hyts
upon preferment by occasion, then either by worthiness or good desert.

In the Courts of Princes, Fornications, Adulteries and Rauishments, and such
other like, have bin accounted young Courtiers sports.

Honest men have been there oppressed, Rybaulds preferred, simple men scorned,
innocent men persecuted, presumptuous men favored, flatterers advanced.

Let the Prince himself be never so studious of the public good, yet not
seeing into all enormities, he is compassed about with those that be enormious:
let Tryan prescribe good Laws for eternal memory, yet where are they sooner
broken, then in the Court of Tryan: let Aurelius store his Court with wise men,
yet even there they do wax dissolute.

A princes Court, is like a pleasant Garden, where the Be may gather Honny,
and the Spyder suck poison: for as it is a School of virtue to such as can
bridle their minds with discretion, so it is a Nursery of vice, to such as do
measure their wills with witless vanity.

It has been holden for a Maxim, that a proud Court, does make a poor
Country: and that there is not so hateful a vermin to the common wealth, as
those that are Surnamed, The Moathes of the Court: but Courtiers will not be
easily dashed out of countenance, for it is a Courtiers virtue, to be confident
in his own conceit, and he that is so resolute, will blush at nothing.

But now to make an end of this survey of vanity, let us yet make one journey
more, and it shall be to the Church, and at that time when the Preacher is in
the pulpit, and we shall there see such Hypocrisy, such counterfeiting, such
dissembling, and such mocking with God, that were it not but that as his wrath
so often kindled against us for our sins, should not yet as often be quenched
again by his mercy, it could not be, but that the justice of God would even
there ataynt us.

There you shall see him, that in his life and conversation (to the show of
the world) when he is out of the Church lives, as if he made doubt whether
there were any God or no, yet he will there join with the Preacher in prayer,
and will cry out O our Father which art in heaven.

Hollowed be thy name (says the common Swearer) who with unhallowed lyps, does
every day blaspheme the name of God.

And he that reposeth his whole felicity in the transitory pleasures of this
world, that does make his gold his God, and whose heaven is upon this earth,
will there beseech in prayer, Lord let thy kingdom come.

Another that does repine at the ordinances of God, that will murmr and
grudge at those visitations wherewith it pleases him sometimes to afflict us,
will yet make petition, Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.

There you shall see him to make intercession for his daily Bread, that will
polute himself all the week after, with his daily drink.

But what a misery is this, that the contentious, the malicious, the wrathful,
and for him that does seek revenge for the least offense that is offered unto
him, sometimes by bloody revenge, sometimes by suits of law, and at all times
with great rigor and violence, and will yet crave by petition, Lord forgive us
our Trepasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, drawing thereby
their own damnation upon their own heads, when at the day of the general
Sessions, the great Judge shall say unto them, Ex ore tuo, te Iudicabo, depart
from me thou cursed creature, thy portion is amongst the Hypocrites: for as
faith without obedience, is no faith but the true mark of an Hypocrite, so
profession joined with malice, is as certain a note of Hypocrisy.

There you shall see the Extortioner, the Adulterer, the Blasphemer, under the
color of devotion, so transform themselves into a show of sanctimony, that
during the time of the Sermon, they do seem to be Saints, but being out of
the Church door, a man would think them to be Demi Devils.

There you shall see the Usurer, the Briber, the Broaker, with their books laid
open before them, turning over leaves as busily, as if they were in their
Counting Houses casting up of their debts, and calculating what sums were
owing un to them: there you shall see the Merchant, the Shopkeeper, the
Tradesman, and such others as do live by trafique, by buying and by selling,
lifting up their eyes, heauing up their hands, and making show, as if they were
inflamed with a hot burning Fever, of a fiery burning zeal.

But they do use Religion, as women do use their paynting stuff, it serves
but to cover their deformities, they have one Conscience for the Church,
another for the Market, and so they keep a good one for Sundays, it makes no
matter for all the week after.

Should I speak now of women, they do make as great a show of devotion as
men, and although there be a number of them grave and godly matrones, zealous,
and well inclined married wives, gracious and godly disposed damsels, and young
maidens, that are no less virtuous indeed, then they do make show for: yet
there be a number of others that do rather frequent the Church to see new
fashions, then to gather good instructions, and a number of them rather to be
seen themselves, then to seek God.

Now what zeal is that zeal, that will neither let slip a Sermon, nor let
go a new fashion: this strange atiring of themselves may well bring admiration
to Fools, but it breeds laughter to the wise.

You shall see some women go so attyred to the Church, that I am ashamd to
tell it out aloud, but hark in your ear, I will speak it softly, fitter in
good faith, to furnish A. B. H. then to press into the House of God: they are
so be painted so be periwigd, so be poudered, so be perfumed, so be starched,
so be laced, and so be imbrodered, that I cannot tell what mental virtues
they may have that they do keep inwardly to themselves, but I am sure, to the
outward show, it is a hard matter in the church it self to distinguish between
a good woman, and a bad.

Our behauiours, our gestures, and our outward attyres, are tongs to proclaim
the inward disposition of the mind, then away with this pretended zeal, let us
not make Religion a Cloak for Impiety.

If we will seek Christ, let us seek him so as we may find him, in the high
way of humility, but not of pride and Impudency.

I think amongst many women that are thus frequenting Sermons, there be some
that will catch at some pretty sounding words, and let the matter slip, that
they ought especially to attend: as the poor gentlewoman that was so dismayed
at the Preachers words, who discoursing to his auditory of the general day of
Judgment, how we should be then called to a stricte and a straight account:
the poor gentlewoman being returned to her own house with this news,
began to fail into a sudden fit of weeping, which being marked by some
friends that were about her, they besought her to make known unto them, the
cause of her grief, her answer was, that she was but now come from a Sermon,
that had so troubled her in her thoughts, that she could not refrain from
sheding of tears: those that heard her, thinking that she had been stricken
with some godly remorse in remembrance of her former misled life, began to
comfort her, telling her how God had mercy in store for all penitent sinners,
and her tears so distilled being an argument of her hearty repentance, there
was no doubt in her, but to hope of salvation.

Alas (said she) it is not the remembrance of my sins that does thus perplexe
me, but when I consider with my self, what a great assembly will then make
their appearance at the day of that general Sessions which the Preacher spoke
of, it makes me to weep to think how ashamed I shall be to stand stark naked
before such a presence (as he says) will be then in place.

See here the very height of a gentlewomans disquiet, what a scruple it was
that thus encumbered her Conscience, God grant there be not many others that
does make the like colections, and that will sometimes be disputing of the
Preachers words, which they be no less able to conceive, then unwilling to
follow: there be many that will seem to profess Religion as well men as
women, and that with great zeal and feruency, but they live not thereafter,
even those that by their outward show, do thirst after knowledge, those that
will turn over many leaves and seek out several Chapters, and when they hit
upon some interpretation to nourish their sensuality, they stay there, and
are the worse for their reading.

Son of man (says God to the Prophet Ezechiell) my people sit before thee,
and they hear my words, but they will not do them, their hearts goes after
Covetousness.

To speak against sin in this age, it is like the filling of Daneas Tubs,
and either they think there is no God at all, or else they think him to be
such a one, as it were as good there were none at all: for it is less
dangerous for a man to commit sin, then to reprove sin.

To reprehend Drunkenness, Whordome, Blasphemy, or to speak against that
pride, that God will surely punish, we must not do it, they will say we are
too bitter, too biting, too satiricall, and thus we are more afraid to offend
vicious men, then we are desirous to please God.

But tell me now thou beastly Drunkard, thou vicious Adulterer, thou Swearer
and prophaner of GODS holy name, which of you, if you had a wife that had
played the Strumpet, if she should come unto thee with submissiue words and
shows of repentance, and that upon the hope of her amendment, thou would
pardon what was past, would thou not think it much if thou had forgiven
her once, that she should afterward play the harlot again, but if thou
had so much kindness to remitte the second fault, if she should yet come the
third time, with one of her Roaring boys in her company, and should play the
Harlot before thine own face, (thou thy self standing present) and would yet
with smyling countenance, and enticing shows, offer to come and kiss thee,
would thou not defy her, would thou not spite at her, would thou not
spurn at her, would thou not abhor her.

Then what do thou think of thy GOD (if I may so term him to be thy God)
whom thou thy self have disavowed, and broken that contract, which was made
between him and thee, when thou were baptized, that runnest every day from
sin to sin, a whoring, till perhaps on Sundaies, and then thou go to
Church with a smiling countenance to dissemble and flatter with God, and wilt
seem to come and kiss him, nay thou come to mock him, and to speak the
truth, to tempt him, for Sunday it self is scarce ouerpast, but thou returnest
back again to thine Adultery, to thy Drunkenness, to thy blasphemy, to thy
usury, to thy brybery, to thy perjury, to thy pride, to thy vanity, and to
all the rest of thy former impieties: do thou not tremble now at the
judgments of God, do thou not fear his vengeance suddenly to fall upon
thee?

Perhaps thou will think thy self to be in no danger, and wilt but jest at
me, that would but put thee into some foolish fear: well jest at it and spare
not, but when Time has done his office, thou shall see what will come of
jesting.

They were wont to say, the world did run on wheels, and it may well be, it
has done so in times past, but I say now, it goes on Crouches, for it is waxen
old, blind, decrepit and lame, a lymping world God knows, and nothing but
halting between neighbor and neighbor, between friend and friend, between
brother and brother, and down right halting (sometimes) between the Father
and the child, the Son that will crave his Fathers blessing in the morning,
will wish him dead before night, that he might enjoy his inheritance: And as
the world is become thus lame and lymping, so it is otherwise grown so far out
of reparatio^s, that (I think) there is no hope of amendment, the best remedy
were, if every man would mend one, and that will not be performed in have, for
we imitate nothing but what we do see, and whom do we see setting up that
light, that might shine unto us in example, no the world is become feeble, her
spirits are spent, she is grown Bis puer, she is become childdish, and begins
to dote a fresh on that she sometimes scorned.

The possession of gold, unlawfully gotten, was wont to be called a capital
offense, now there is nothing more desired.

In Diebus illis, they bent their whole endeavors to win honorable
reputation, but now for popular praise and vain ostentation.

Our predecessors ordained Laws whereby to restrain the prodigal from
spending their own wealth in riot and excess, but now there is no expense so
laudable as that which is spent in vanity.

In former ages, they thought him to be but a badde states man, that had
aspired to overmuch wealth, but now there is nothing more despised, then for a
man to be poor and honest.

The old fashion was to do well, but now enough to speak well.

In the old time to perform, but now enough to promise.

Men were wont to blush when they went to borrowe money, but now they are
ashamde to pay their debts.

Flattery has been accounted the profession of a Knave, but now, it is better
for a man to flatter too much, then not to flatter at all.

The monuments of goodness are so weather beaten, that iniquity and antiquity,
has almost left no Charecter thereof undefaced.

If men should degenerate as fast the next age, as they have done but within
the compass of our own memory, it will be a mad world to live in.

Children must receive by tradition, what is left unto them by example from
their parents, they can go no further then Imitation, and what was it but
example, that brought down fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorah, when
the abominations of the elder, were still imitated by the younger.

Children can neither hear nor see, either at home or abroad, but that which
is altogether either vain or unlawful.

How is it possible that the daughter should be bashful where the mother is
past shame, or that she should be continent, where the mother is impudent.

The old proverb is, If the mother Trot, how should the daughter Amble: but
there be some parents, that do think the most speedy way of preferment, is
to bring up their daughters in audacious boldness, to make them impudent and
past shame.

Cato deprived a Senitor of Rome, but for kissing his wife in the presence of
his daughter.

We do not fashion our selves so much by reason, as we do by example, for
custom and example are arguments good enough to make us to follow any fashion.

We are become like Labans Sheep, led by the eye, we conceive but of what we
do see: and the vulgar seeing nothing but apparances, makes judgment only
by that which is subject to the sight.

To be virtuous, why it is a Capital crime, and there is nothing more
dangerous then to be securely innocent.

Our ancients sought for the true effects of virtue, and we only but hunt
after a vain popular praise.

How innumerable and (almost) inevitable traps are set in the tract of virtue,
and that in all her walks, perhaps we may hit of some one now and then, that
will kiss the vizard of virtue, but show them the true face, and you turn
all their kisses into curses, there be few that do undertake the tract aright,
no, our whole study is how we may live in pomp, in pride, in pleasure, but
we have no care at all, neither how to live, nor how to die well.

We do seek rather how to cover faults, then how to mend faults, yea, the
most sharpest and quickest witted men, those that be called the wisemen of
the world, what be their policies, or whereunto do they apply their wits, but
to cover their naughtiness.

If they have a little good amongst a great deal of ill, they think that good
to be utterly lost, that has not the eyes of the world to witness it, and to
give it an applause, so that if they do any good, it is but to the end to be
seen and to be praised by men, for in secret they will do nothing.

If they forbear to do evil, it is for fear the world should know it, and
were that fear taken away, they would stick at nothing.

I think there is not a more pernicious creature in the world, then is a man,
if he be both wise and wicked: for where the wit is bribed by affection,
there the weapons of Reason, are many times wrested, and sometimes managed
against Reason it self, neither is there any thing that makes us to be more
unreasonable, then that which we call Natural Reason.

The wisdom of the flesh (that is endued with knowledge) has often times
more endangered, then the feeble force of simple ignorance.

A wicked man endued with litterature, is the wrost of all men, and amongst
Christians, none more pernicious then the Holy Hypocrite.

Origin has left unto us, this caveat for our instruction, The Heretic
(says he) that is of good life, is much more hurtful, and has more
authority in his words, then he that does discredit his doctrine, with the
lewdnes of his life: so that we may conclude those vices to be most
abominable, that are most desirous to look like virtues: now it were a hard
matter for me to distinguish between men, who were good and who were bad, but
if I might give my verdict to say who were the wisest men now in this age, I
would say they were Taylers: would you hear my reason, because I do see the
wisdom of women to be still ouer-reached by Taylers, that can every day
induce them to as many new fangled fashions, as they please to invent: and the
wisdom of men again, are as much ouer-reached by women, that can entice
their husbands to surrender and give way to all their new fangled follies:
they are Taylers then that can overrule the wisest women, and they be women,
that can besot the wisest men: so that if Ma. Majors conclusion be good, that
because Jack his youngest son, ouer-ruled his mother, and Iackes mother
again ouerruled M. Mayor himself, and M. Mayor by office ouerruled the Town,
Ergo, the whole Town was ouerruled by Jack, Ma. Majors son: by the same
consequence, I may likewise conclude, that Taylers are the wisest men: the
reason is already rendered, they do make us all Fools, both men and women,
and do mock the whole world with their new inventions: but are they women
alone that are thus seduced by Taylers, do but look amongst our gallants in
this age, and tell me, if you shall not find men amongst them to be as vain,
as nice, and as gaudie in their attyres, as she that amongst women is
accounted the most foolish.

And how many are there, that if they do think themselves to be but a
little out of the Taylers discipline, they will begin to grow as Melancholy,
and to look as drousily, as the poor Amorist, that is but newly stricken to
the heart, with the coy aspect of Dame folly, his dearest beloved (and scarce
honest) mistress.

We are forbiden by the Scriptures to call our brother Fool, this is it that
makes me something to forbear, yet when I chance to meet with such a new
fangled fellow, though I say nothing to him, yet GOD knows what I think.

The holy scriptures have denounced a curse no less grievous to the
Idole-maker, then to the Idol it self: now (under the correction of
Divinity) I would but demand, what are these Puppet-making Taylers, that are
every day inuenting of new fashions, and what are these, that they do call
Attyre-makers, the first inuenters of these monstrous Periwygs, and the finders
out of many other like immodest Attyres: what are these, and all the rest of
these Fashion Mongers, the inuenters of vanities, that are every day whetting
their wits to find out those Gaudes, that are not only offensive unto God,
but many ways prejudicial to the whole Common wealth: if you will not
acknowledge these to be Idolemakers yet you cannot deny them to be the Devils
enginers, ungodly instruments, to deck and ornifie such men and women, as may
well be reputed to be but Idolles, for they have eyes, but they see not into
the ways of their own salvation, and they have ears, but they cannot hear
the Judgments of God, denounced against them for their pride and vanity.

These Enginers of mischief, that like Moles do lie and wrote in sin, till
they have cast up a mount of hateful enormitie against Heaven, they may well
be called, the Soldiers of the Devil, that will fight against the mighty
hand of God.

There are certain new invented professions, that within these forty or
fifty years, were not so much as heard of, that are now grown into that
generality, and are had in such request, that if they do flourish still,
but as they have begun, I think within these very few years, the worthy
Citizens of London, must be enforced to make choice of their Aldermen, from
amongst these new vpstart companies, which in the mean time do rob the
Realm of great sums of money, that are daily spent upon their vanities.

As these Attyre-makers, that within these 40. years, were not known by that
name, and but now very lately, they kept their lowzie commodity of Periwygs,
and their other monstrous Attyres closed in Boxes, they might not be seen in
open show, and those women that did use to wear them, would not buy them but
in secret.

But now they are not ashamed to set them forth upon their stalles, such
monstrous Map-powles of Hair, so proportioned and deformed, that but within
these 20. or thirty years, would have drawn the passers by to stand and
gaze, and to wonder at them.

And how are Coach makers and Coach-men increased, that fifty years ago
were but few in number, but now a Coachman, and a Footboy is enough, and
more then every Knight is able to keep.

Then have we those that be called Body-makers, that do swarm through all the
parts both of London and about London, that are better customed, and more
sought unto, then he that is the Soul maker.

And how many Items are brought in for the bodies wantonness, but not so much
as a Memorandum for the Souls blissednesse.

The body is still pampered up in pomp, in pride, and in the every dropsy
of excess, whilst the soul remains, poor, naked, and needy, and the Soul
that gives a feeling to the body, does not yet feel her own evil, nor
never reremembreth her own misery, but in the evil which she there endures.

But he that some forty or fifty years since, should have asked after a
Pickadilly, I wonder who could have understood him, or could have told what a
Pickadilly had been, either fish or flesh.

But amongst the trades that are newly taken up, this trade of Tobacco does
exceed: and the money that is spent in smoke is unknown, and (I think)
unthought on, and of such a smoke as is more vain, then the smoke of fair
words, for that (they say) will serve to feed Fools, but this smoke makes
Fools of Wisemen: me thinks experience were enough to teach the most simple
witted, that before Tobacco was ever known in England, that we lived in as
perfect health, and as free from sickness, as we have done since, and look
upon those (whereof there are a number at this present hour) that did never
take Tobacco in their lives, and if they do not live as healthsome in body,
and as free from all manner of diseases, as those that do take it fastest:
they say it is good for a Cold, for a Pose, for Rewms, for Aches, for Dropsies,
and for all manner of diseases proceeding of moist humors: but I cannot see
but that those that do take it fastest, are as much (or more) subject to all
these infirmities, (yea and to the pox it self) as those that have nothing at
all to do with it: then what a wonderful expense might very well be spared,
that is spent and consumed in this needless vanity.

There is not so base a groom, that commes into an Alehouse to call for his
pot, but he must have his pipe of Tobacco, for it is a commodity that is now
as vendible in every Tavern, Inn, and Ale house, as either Wine, Ale, or
Bear, and for Apothicaries Shops, Grosers Shops, Chaundlers Shops, they are
(almost) never without company, that from morning till night are still taking
of Tobacco, what a number are there besides, that do keep houses, set open
shoppes, that have no other trade to live by, but by the selling of Tobacco.

I have heard it told that now very lately, there has bin a Cathalogue taken
of all those new erected houses that have set up that Trade of selling
Tobacco, in London and near about London* and if a man may believe what is
confidently reported, there are found to be upward of 7000. houses, that does
live by that trade.

I cannot say whether they number Apothicaries shoppes, Grosers shops, and
Chaundlers shops in this computation, but let it be that these were thrust in
to make up the number: let us now look a little into the Vidimus of the
matter, and let us cast up but a slight account, what the expense might be
that is consumed in this smoakie vapoure.

If it be true that there be 7000. shops, in and about London, that does vent
Tobacco, as it is credibly reported that there be over and above that number:
it may well be supposed, to be but an ill customed shop, that takes not
five shillings a day, one day with another, throughout the whole year, or if
one does take less, two other may take more: but let us make our account, but
after 2. shillings six pence a day, for he that takes less then that, would
be ill able to pay his rent, or to keep open his Shop Windows, neither would
Tobacco houses make such a muster as they do, and that almost in every Lane,
and in every by-corner round about London.

Let us then reckon thus, 7000. half Crowns a day, amounts just to 3.
hundred ninetine thousand 3. hundred seuentie-fiue pounds a year, Summa
totalis, All spent in smoke.

I do not reckon now what is spent in Tauernes, in Innes in Alehouses, nor
what gentlemen do spend in their own houses and chambers, it would amount to
a great reckoning, but if I could deliver truly what is spent throughout the
whole Realm of England, in that idle vanity, I think it would make a
number of good people (that have any fear of God in them) to lament, that
such a mass of Treasure, should be so basely consumed, that might be employed
to many better purposes.

I have hitherto perused the vain and idle expenses that are consumed in
Tobacco, now by your favors, a little to recreate your wearyed spirits, I will
acquaint you with a short Dialogue, that was sometime discoursed between a
Scholar, and a Shoemaker, which happened thus.

A Scholar (and a master of Arts) that upon some occasions being here in
London, driven into want, hytting upon a Shoemaker, began to make his moan,
and told him that he was a master of the seven Sciences, that was in some
distress, and besought him to bestow some small courtesy on him, for his
relief.

The Shoemaker, having over heard him first wyping his lips with the back
of his hand, answered him thus: are you a master of seven Sciences, and go
up and down a begging, I will tell you my friend, I have but one Science,
and that consistes but in making of Shoes, but with that one Science, I do
live, and with it I do keep my self, my wife and my family, and you with
your seven Sciences to be in want, I cannot believe ye.

Sir (said the Scholar) I tell you a true tale, the more is my grief, I am a
Scholar, and I have proceeded master in the seven Liberal Sciences, and yet
(as my fortune has conducted me) I am driven into distress, and would be
glad but of a poor relief.

Aha (quoth the Shoemaker) now I understand ye, you are a master of the
seven liberal Sciences* I have heard of those same liberal sciences before,
but I perceive they are not half so bountiful to the Purse, as they be
liberal in name: well I am sorry for ye, but I have no money to bestow, yet if
good counsel would serve your turn, I could set you down a course, how
you might live, you should not need to beg.

Sir (said the Scholar) good Counsel commes never out of season, to a man
that is wise, I will give you thanks for any advise you will give me that is
good.

Then (quoth the Shoemaker) you shall let alone those same seven Sciences
that you name to be so liberal, and you shall enter your self into any one of
the 3. companyes that have now better taking, and are grown to be more
gainefull, then all the seven Sciences, that you have hitherto learned, and
put them all together.

And what be those three companies (said the Scholar) that you so much
commend.

They are three companies (said the Shoemaker) that are now in most request,
and have gotten all the Trade into their own hands, the first is to keep an
Ale house, the 2. a Tobacco House, and the third to keep a Brothell House.

I have done with my Dialogue* and I think of my conscience the Shoemaker
aimed something near the mark, for he that did but see the abundance of
Alehouses, that are in every corner, I think he would wonder, how they
could one live by another, but if he did behold again, how they are all
replenished with Drunkardes, every hour in the day (and almost every minute
in the night) and did yet again see their beastly demeanures, hear their
blasphemies and their ungodly words, their swearing and their ribauldrie, would
tremble for fear, least the house should sink. For Tobacco Houses and
Brothell Houses, (I thank God for it) I do not use to frequent them, but
active minds must have exercise, and I think to avoid the inconvenience of a
Brothell House, it were better of the twain, to sit in a Tobacco House.

It has been a great faction, that in former ages, would still undertake to
support Bawdery, and they have bin better men then Justices of peace, that
would both countenance a Curtizan, and boulster out a Bawd.

These poor Harlots have sometimes bin brought to ride in a Cart, when the
Silken Strumpets (perhaps) have ryden in Coaches: but there are no Harlots now
a days, but those that are poor, for she that has any friends at all to
take her part, who dares call her Harlot.

Some good man's livery, the countenance of an office, the bribing of a
Constable, or any thing will serve and she that has not twenty companio^s at
a beck, that will stick to her at a dead lift, let her ride in a Cart in the
Devils name, she deserves no better.

Should I now speak of spiritual Whordome, which the scriptures do call
Idolatry, I dare scarce speak against it, for offending of Papists, that were
never more dangerous, then they be at this hour.

I remember that many years since, I saw a few printed lines, entitled,
The Blazon of a Papist, written by some Herauit of Arms, that had pretily
contrived a Papist in the compass of Armory.

He first made description of a Papist Rampant, a furious beast, and although
it be written, that the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, yet the Devil
himself is not more fierce and rigorous, then is a Papist, where he is of
force and ability to show his tyranny, witness the murders, the massacers
the slaughters the poisoning, the stabbing, the burning, the broyling, the
torturing, the tormenting, the persecuting, with their other bloody
executions, every day fresh in example, infinite to be told, and horrible to be
remembered.

The next is a Papist Passant, this is an instrument of sedition, of
insurrection, of treason, of rebellion, a Priest, a Jesuit, a Seminary, and
such other as do find so many friends in England, and in Ireland, both to
receive and harbor them, as it is much to be feared, we shall find the
smart of it in time to come: we have then a Papist Volant, I think amongst the
rest, these can do least harm, yet they will say they fly for their
consciences, when it is known well enough, they do both practice and conspire.

Then there is a Papist Regardant, he observes times, occasions, places, and
persons, and although he be one of the Popes lutely gencers, yet he walks
with such circumspection and heed, that he is not known, but to his own
faction.

We are now come to a Papist Dormant, a slye companion, subtle as a Fox, he
sleeps with open eyes, yet sometimes seeming to wink, he looks and pryes
into opporrunities, still feeding himself with those hopes, that I am in hope,
shall never do him good.

There is yet again a Papist Couchant, this is a dangerous fellow, and much to
be feared, he creepes into the bosom of the state, and will not stick to
look into the Court, nay (if he can) into Court counsels, he will show
himself tractable to common wealths prescriptions, and with this show of
obedience to law, he does the Pope more service, then twenty others, that are
more resisting.

The last we will speak of, is the Papist Pendant, indeed a Papist Pendant is
in his prime perfection: a Papist Pendant is so fitting a piece of Armory for
the time present, as all the Herauldes in England are not able better to
display him, a Papist is then in chief, when he is Pendant, and he never
commes to so high preferment, but by the Popes especial blessing.

But if Laws were as well executed as they be enacted, popery could not so
spread it self as it does, neither in England nor in Irelande, nor it could
not be but that these devilish practices of poisons, of Pistoles, of stabbing
Knives, and of gunne-pouder traynes, would be important motives, to stir up
the considerations of those that be in authority, to spy out these masked
creatures, that have tongs for their prince, but do reserve their hearts for
their Pope.

But alas good Virtue, art thou becomme so faint hearted, that thou will not
discover thy self, that art thus iniuried: I wis thou had never more need to
look about thee, I would I could wish thee for a time to put away Patience, and
to becomme a little while Choleric, if not for their sakes that do love thee,
yet for thine own security, if Vice dare take boldness to offend, why should
not Virtue take courage to correct: but I know it is but loss of time to
speak against popery, and as little it will prevail to speak against any
manner of sin, yet we want no positive Laws whereby to bridle abuse, but the
example of a good life in those that should minister the due execution of those
Laws, would be more effectual then the Laws themselves, because the actions
of those that be placed in authority, are received by the common people, for
precepts and instructions.

But the greatest number of them, do rather show their authorities in
correcting of other men's faults, then in mending their own, and it is hard,
when he that cannot order his own life, should yet be made a minister to
correct the misdemeanors of others: there can never be good discipline amongst
inferious, where there is but bad example in superiors: but where superiors
have been more ready to support sin, then to punish sin, and when a
Noblemans livery was countenance good enough to keep a Drunkard from the
Stocks, an Adulterer from the Cart, and sometimes a Thief from the Gallows:
when known Strumpets, could vaunt themselves to be supported and vpholden by
great persons, and to receive such countenance from them, that it was holden
for a Maxim amongst a great number of young wantons, that to surrender
themselves to the lust of such men as were in great place and authority, was
the next way to get preferment, and to win them many friends.

This was it that made a number of young women (in those times) to shake off the
vayles of shamefastnes, and to offer the use of their intemperate bodies to
common prostitution, though not verbally in words, yet under the shows of
their gaudie and gadish attiers.

I am not yet ignorant but that in these days there be a number of women,
that in respect of any abuse of their bodies are both good and honest, and yet
if we should judge of them but according to their outward shows, they do
seem more Curtizan like, then ever was Lais of Corinth, or Flora of Rome.

The ancient Romans prohibited all sorts of people as well men as women,
from wearing of any light colored silks, or any other gaudie garments,
Players and Harlotes only excepted, for to them there was tolleration in
regard of their professions.

There is mention made of a Canon in the Civil Law, where it was ordained,
that if a man did offer violence to any woman, were she never so virtuous and
honest, yet attyred like a Strumpet, she had no remedy against him by Law.

And we do find it testified, of a great Lady, who upon some occasion of
business, casting over her a light colored veil, and being thus met withal by
a young gallant, he began to court her with complements of love, the which
the Lady taking in great disdain, reproved his sauciness, that would offer
that disgrace, to her that was honest, that she was not as she seemed to be
to the outward show: the young gallant as angry as she, returned her this
answer.

Be what you list to be (said he) I know not what you be, but if your honesty
be such as you say, be so attyred then, or else be as you are attyred: Virtue
is never decked up with external pomp, to procure respect, her very
countenance is full of Majesty, that commands admiration, in all that do
behold her.

It has been questioned, whether Chastity joined with Vanity, does merit
any commendation or no, but that a proud and a gaudie garment should shroud an
humble or a modest mind, it is Rara Auis in Terris* a matter seldom scene but
this is out of doubt, that this overmuch affected Folly, does live with no
less suspected Honesty.

She is but an ill huswife therefore of her own credit, that will bring it
into construction.

The Philosophers would aim at the inner disposition of the mind, by the
external signs of the body, affirming, that the motions of the body are the
true voices of the mind.

Augustus on a time of great assembly, observed with diligence, what company
they were that courted his 2. daughters, Liuia and Iulia, who perceiving the
first to be frequented with grave and wise Senators, and the other again to
be solicited, with witless and wanton Roysters, he discovered thereby their
several dispositions: being not ignorant, that custom and company does for
the most part simpathize to gether, according to the proverb, Simile Simili
gaudet, like will to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier.

A woman's blush is a sign of grace, and a good woman will quickly blush at
many things, nay, it were enough to make a virtuous woman to blush, but to
think with her self that she could not blush.

The blush of a woman's face is an approbation of a chaste and an honest mind,
and a manifest sign that she does not approve any intemperate actions or any
other wanton speeches or demeanores, that are either offered to her self, or
to any other in her presence.

The woman that forgets to blush, it is an argument that she is past grace,
for shamefastness is not only a bridle to sin, but it is likewise the
common treasury of feminine Virtue.

The bold audacious woman, cannot but be taxed of Impudency, it is one of the
notes that Solomon gives, whereby to distinguish a good woman from a bad.

The beauty of behavior, is more precious in estimation, then the beauty of
the body, and the woman that will maintain her credit, must not be too
conversant: but the time rather serves to look Babyes in women's Eyes, then to
pick out Moates.

Yet I am sorry for some of them, that (I think) will care little for going to
Heaven, because there is no good Coachway.

Licurgus ordained the Laconian women, the exercise of their limbs, as
running, leaping, wrestling, heauing and throwing of waights.

These exercises he permitted, whereby to increase their vigor and strength,
that their propagation and offspring might be the more strong and sturdie.

But now, our women are trained up in Idleness, in ignorance, in pride, in
delicacy, and their issue (for the most part) are leaning to their mothers
constitutions; feeble of body, weak in mind effeminate and fearful, fitter
to ride in a Curtizans Coach up and down the streets, then to bestride a
stirring Horse in the Field, and do know better how to manage a
Tobacco-pipe, then how to charge a Pyke or a Lance.

The Laconian women brought forth a propagation of men of haughty courage,
able both in body and mind, to serve their country, to defend and fight for
their liberties, but our women in these times, they bring a generation of
Mearockes, that do bend their whole endeavors to effeminatenicitie, to pride
and vanity.

Cato being Censurer to make choice of a General for the Panoman wars,
openly disgraced and dismissed Publius, because he had seen him to walk the
streets of Rome perfumed: but now our gallants do think themselves nothing
more disgraced, if they be not so perfumed, be spiced, and be poudered, that a
man may well vent them the breadth of a street.

And from whence comes this wearing, and this imbrodering of long locks,
this curiosity that is used amongst men, in freziling and curling of their
hair, this gentlewoman-like starcht bands, so be edged, and be laced, fitter
for Maid Marion in a Moris dance, then for him that has either that spirit or
courage, that should be in a gentleman.

But amongst all the rest of these ill becoming follies, that are now newly
taken up, (me thinks) these yellow starcht bands should be ever best
suited, with a yellowe Coat.

I have heard of a Gentleman that protested himself to be so fierce and
furious, if he were but a little displeased, that during the time whilst his
anger did last, he never durst look in a glass, for fear he should affraight
himself with the terror of his own looks.

And are not our gentlemen in as dangerous a plight now (I mean these Apes of
Fancy) that do look so like Attyremakers maids, that for the dainty decking
up of themselves, might sit in any Seamsters shop in all the Exchange.

Me thinks a looking glass should be a dangerous thing for one of them to
view himself in, for falling in love with his own looks, as Narcissus did
with his own shadow.

I am yet persuaded, that our women in this age are as really endued with
Natures abilities, as they have been in times past, but they do fail in that
education that they had in times past, they do now (for the most part of them)
see nothing but vanity, neither do I think, but that the same defect is it,
that so infeebleth their offspring.

But I cannot altogether blame the carelesnes of the world, that it is become
so sparing of good endeavors, when there is neither reward nor recompense for
good desert, nor scarce so much as a Memorandum, for the most honorable
enterprise, how worthily so ever performed.

We do read of foreign estates, even at this present time, what care they
have in rewarding the good, and punishing the ill, and in these two points,
that is, as I have said, in rewarding and punishing, consists so high a
policy of good government, that it may well be said, that the Turks, the
Persians, the Tartarians, and many other barbarous infidels, have built the
foundation of their estates, especially upon that ground work, and have
advanced themselves to that greatness, that they be now grown unto, only by
these 2 virtues, in rewarding the good and punishing the ill.

For whom reward they, but Captains and Soldiers, or where use they
liberality, but in the field amongst weapons.

How severe again are they, in punishing of those, that do bear themselves
carelessely in their places and offices committed unto them, yea, they keep no
mean in disgracing base cowardly minds, nor in honoring of haughty spirits,
and valiant Soldiers.

But with us, our Parasites, our Panders, our Fauourets, our Fidelers, our
Fools, our instruments of ambition, our ministers of our wanton pleasures
shall be rewarded, but we never cherish wisdom, till we have cause to use
her counsel, and then (perhaps) she may be rewarded with some Court holy
water words, and which we will bestow, but for our own advantage, and when
our turn is served, our kindness is estranged.

The world is not now the world that it has been, when the saving of a Roman
Citizen, was rewarded with honor, the humor of preserving our Country is now
spent, there is not a Curtius now to be found, and where should we seek for
another Sceuola.

Desert, may now go to Cart, and he that cannot ruffell it out in silks, will
hardly get passage in at a great man's gate.

He that is thought to be poor, is never thought to be wise, nor fit to
have the managing of any matter of importance, all is well accepted that is
spoken by authority, but truth it self is not believed, if it proceed from
the mouth of poverty.

By this contempt of poverty, vice has been advanced, and since riches
have thus crept into credit, the world is rather grown to give way to the
humor of a rich Fool, then to follow the direction of a poor wiseman.

Let us no we a little look into the actions of this age, and speak truly,
when was Virtue and Honesty more despised, when was Pride, Riot, and Excess,
more inordinate, when was adultery, and all other unchaste living, either more
apparent or less punished, when were all manner of abominations more
tolerated, when those that should minister correction, will sometimes favor
their own vices in others, every man accounting that to be most excellent in
fashion, that is most taken up and en-vred, by those that be most vicious.

Thou shall not follow the multitude to do evil, the commandment of the
living God, Exodus 23. but for these Adulterers, these Drunkards, these
Swearers, these Blasphemers, they have made a sacrifice of their own souls to
the Devil, and have cast of all care, both of honor and honesty.

But to leave the general, and to come to the particular, I tell thee thou
Adulterer, I speak it to thy face, that besides the Pox, and many other loath
some diseases, that are incident to Whore-maisters whilst they live in this
world, thy hot burning fire of lust, will bring thee to the hot burning fire of
Hell.

And I tell thee Dives, that pamperest thy self in excess, whilst Lazarus
lies crying out at thy gate, ready to famish, Lazarus shall be comforted,
when thou shall entreat, but for one drop of cold water, to cool thy tongue.

And thou beastly Drunkard, thou monster of Nature, that amongst all other
sinners art the most base and servile: if a Drunkard were as seldom to be
seen as the Bird of Arabia, he would be more wondered at, then the Owl, and
more loathed then the Swine.

How many Crafts men that will labor all the week, for that which on Sun-day
they will spend in an Alehouse, that will there most beastly consume in
Drink, that would relieve their poor wives and children at home, that other
whiles do want wherewith to buy them Bread.

But if Drunkenness were not so common as it is, a number of Tauernes, and
Alehouse keepers, might shut up their doors, but the custom of it does
make it so conversant, that it takes away the sense of sin.

The generallitie of it, I shall not need to express, when there is no
feasting, no banqueting, nor almost any merry meeting, but Drunkenness must
be a principal guest: and what a glory is it after the encounter of their
Cups, for one Drunkard, to see another carried away upon men's shoulders to the
Beds.

The fruits of Drunkenness have been very well known, since Lot committed
incest with his own Daughters, since Alexander killed his Clitus, and since
Lucius pius obtained that victory against his enemies, by making of them
drunk, that he could never attain unto, so long as they were sober.

When the fume of the drink once begins to ascend to the brain, the mind is
oppressed with idle thoughts, which spurreth on the tongue, to contentious
quarrelling, to slandering, backbiting, to idle and beastly talking, to
swearing and blaspheming, and in the end, to stabbing and murdering.

I never yet knew a Drunkard to be fit for any good or godly exercise: and
Caesar was wont to say, that he stood more in doubt of Brutus and Cassius,
that were noted to be sober, then he did of drunken Marcus Antonius.

Let him be of what title he list, if he be a Drunkarde, do but strippe him
out of his gay clothes, and scrape his name out of the Heralds book, and he
is without either evidence or pre-eminence of the basest rascal, that ever was
drunk in an Alehouse.

Now I tell thee again thou Swearer and Blasphemer, that the heavy curse of
GOD is still depending over thy head: thou that upon every light occasion,
do polute the name of God, that is to be reverenced and feared, and do
set that tongue which by the right of creation, should be the Trumpet, to
sound forth his glory, thou do make it the instrument to profane and
blaspheme his holy name.

How many blasphemous wretches are there in these days, that do make oaths
their pastime, and will swear upon pleasure and he that has not for every
word an oath, and can swear voluntarily without any cause, is holden to be but
of a weak spirit, a sign of want of courage: and he that should reprove him in
his blasphemies, they say he is a puritan, a precise Fool, not fit to hold
a gentleman company: their greatest glory, and the way to show themselves
generous, is to set their tongues against Heaven, and to abuse that name, at
the which they should tremble and quake with fear.

In the commandments of the first Table, God himself is the object, for they
immediately appertain unto him, and therefore, he that takes his name in vain
(I think) displeases God as much or more, as he that against the commandment
of the second Table, commits murder, and therefore those positive laws,
that do so severely punish the actual breaches of the second Table, without
any respect to the sins that are committed against the first, were rather
set down by the policies of men, then by the rule of the written word of God.

He that should but touch a man in credit (if he be a man of any sort or
calling) that should impeach his reputation, or slander his good name, there
wants no good Laws to vex and molest him, and to inflict those punishments
upon him, that they will make him to cry peccaui: but he that should deprave
God in his majesty, that shall deprive him of his glory, or blaspheme his holy
name, there is no manner of Law whereby to correct him, there is not so much as
a write of Scandalum Magnatum, to be granted against him.

A common Swearer has no excuse to plead in his own defense, but does show
himself to be abondslaue to the devil, and a fire brand of hell.

God himself has pronounced against him: The Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain, and the vision of the flying Book,
seen by Zacharias, that was twelve Cubits in length, and ten in breadth,
does witness that the Curses are many, that are written, and do hang in
record against Swearers.

I think Bribery is no sin at all, or if it be, it is but venial, a light
offense, a matter of no reckoning to account on.

It is like the disease Morbus Gallicus, which in poor men we use plain
dealing, and call it the Pox, but in great personages, a little to gilde over
the loathsomeness, we must call it the Gowt, or the Sciatica: so that which
amongst inferiors we call a Bribe, in superiors it is called a Gift, a present,
a Gratification.

If a Lawyer for a fee of ten shillinges, do sometimes take ten pounds,
it is a Courtesy, a Benevolence, but these Courtesies and kindnesses are
bestowed with as much good will as the true man, when he gives his purse to the
Thief.

Yet he that has judgment to give a Bribe with discretion, may work wonders,
he may run through-stitch with any business.

Jacob by sending of presents, may appease the anger of Esau.

Claudius by giving of Bribes may escape correction, though he commit
sacrilege in the Temple of Minerua.

Thou shall take no gifts, for the gift binds the wise, and peruerteth the
words of the righteous, Exodus 23.

But to make an end of this text, I will but add thus much, that the giving
and taking of Bribes, and the buying and selling of offices, are 2. such plague
sores to a common wealth where they be suffered, that they are no less
hurtful to the Prince, then prejudicial to the poor subject.

Should I speak now of Covetousness, of Usury, and of Pride.

Covetousness is a sin that evermore has been hated, and Usury is a sin
that the world has still detested.

But the pride of these times (if it were well considered) is much more odious
in the sight of God, and many ways more pernicious to the common wealth, then
both those other of Covetousness and Usury, that are (and have ever bin)
accounted so loathsome.

Covetousness (I confess) is the Curre, that thinks nothing to be unlawful
that brings in gain, it is the canker, that eats and deuoureth the
gettings of the poor.

It is the Viper that spares neither friend nor foe, virtuous nor vicious, but
where there is gold to be gotten, it teareth the very intrailes of whom soever.

He yields yet a reason for his scraping, and pleades the fear of want,
alleging, that his greedy heaping and gathering together, to be but a
Christian-like care that every man should have to provide for his family.

Simonides being demanded why he began to grow so miserable in his latter
years, to fall a hurding up of riches, when he was ready for the grave, to
acquit himself of a covetous disposition, answered: because (said he) I had
rather have goods to leave to mine enemies, when I am dead, then to stand in
need of my friends, whilst I am alive.

Thus we may see there is not a vice so odible, but they have skill to mask
it, with the visard of virtue.

And the Usurer on the other side, he pleades not guilty: nay, he will hardly
be persuaded, that Usury is any sin at all, or if it be a sin, it is such a
sin, as it lies in his own will and disposition, what manner of sin he
himself will make of it, whether a little sin or a great sin, or a sin of
any assize, that he himself does list to form or fashion it.

Now the Usurer does acknowledge that the Scriptures do prohibit the taking
of Usury, and (says he) so God himself has commanded, Thou shall not
steal.

Now for a rich man to be a Thief, every man can say he deserves to be
hanged: but for a poor man that is ready to famish, and in his necessity, he
steals a loaf of Bread to save his life, here is now a theft committed, and
a direct breach of Gods commandment, yet to be comiserated.

From hence they would infer a tolleration in some persons, namely, to men
that be aged, to widows and to Orphans: and there be some that publicly in
writing, have maintained a tolleration to be had in these, and do think it a
matter drawing nearer Charity, for these to make profit of their money,
rather then to waste or spend away the stock.

Here is yet a second collection that is gathered by the Usurer, yet (says he)
if a man be driven into that necessity, that he is enforced to steal (though
it be but a loaf of bread for his relief) yet the theft is to be accounted so
much the more, or so much the less, in respect of the person from whom it is
committed, for in such a case, to steal from him that is rich, the robbery is
nothing so intolerable in the eyes of the world as for him that is poor to
steal from another, no less poor then himself: therefore (says the Usurer)
we may take use of him that is rich, so we have a conscience to him that is
poor, and to fortify his conceit, he alleges certain places of Scripture:
If thou lend money to my people, that is, to the poor, Thou shall take no
Usury, Exodus 22.

Here is now no prohibition but that we may take use of those that be rich, it
is but the poor that are only excepted.

And we are yet again forbidden that we should take no Usury, but it is of
thy brother that is fallen in decay, Leui. 25.

When the Devil came to tempt our Savior Christ, he began with Scriptum
est, and the Usurer to salve up that sin that all ages has detested, all
places have denounced, and all good men have ever abhorred, have learned of the
Devil to allege the holy Scriptures.

But Usury is forbidden by Gods own mouth, and therefore sin, neither is
that relief to be found in it that many do expect, for where it makes show to
give, there it takes, and where it prete^deth to succor, there again it does
oppress.

And therefore he that seeks to assist himself by the help of the Usurer,
is like the poor Sheep, that seeks in a storm to shrowde himself under a
Bramble, where he is sure to leave some of his Wool behind him.

There has been question made of Usury, what it is, for some would have it
to consist only, in the letting out of money, according to the letter as it is
written, Thou shall not give to Usury to thy Brother, Deuteronomy. 23.

Other some do think him to be as great an Usurer, that takes excessive
gains in any thing, as the other that takes use for his money.

He would uphold his reason thus, if a poor man that is driven into
distress, should come to borrowe the sum of twenty shillings of a monyed
man, upon a garment (or some other pawn) that not long before had cost him
forty: promising within one month or two, not only to redeem his pawn, but
also to give him reasonable use for the loan of his money.

He is answered that to lend money upon Usury is against the rule of Gods word,
and therefore (to avoid that sin) if he will fell his garment out right, he
will buy it (if twenty shillings be his price) but other money he will not
lend, nor a greater sum he will not give.

The poor man enforced by necessity, is driven to take that twenty
shillings, and to forgo his garment, which he had been better to have pawned
to an Usurer, though he had paid him after six pence, or eight pence, yea, or
after twelve pence a month, if it had been for a whole year together.

There be some that will in no wise acknowledge this to be Usury, but let them
distinguish how they list, if I should give my censure, I would say it were
flat Knavery.

Every man can call him an Usurer, that sets out his money, but he that
takes advantage of his poor neighbors necessity, as when he knows him to
be enforced to sell for need, he will then have it at his own price, or he
will not buy: and when he is constrained again (by occasion) to buy, he will
make him then to pay dear for his necessity, yet howsoever he oppress him
either in buying or selling (they say) it is no Usury, it is but honest trade
and traffic.

He that sells upon trust, if it be but for one month or six weeks, and
makes the buyer to pay fifty shillings for that which in ready money, he
might have bought for 40* is he not an Usurer.

These Shopkeepers that can blind men's eyes with dym and obscure lights, and
deceive their ears with false and flattering words, be they not Usurers.

These Tradesmen that can buy by one weight, and sell by another, by they not
Usurers.

These Merchants that do rob the Realm, by carrying away of Corn, Lead,
Tin, Hydes, Leather, and such other like, to the impouerishing of the common
wealth, be they not Usurers.

These Farmers that do hurde up their Corn, Butter, and Chief, but of
purpose to make a dearth, or that if they think it to rain but one hour to
much, or that a drought do last but two days longer then they think good,
will therefore the next market day hoyse up the prises of all manner of
victual, be not these Usurers.

The Land-Lordes that do set out their livings at those high rates, that
their Tenants that were wont to keep good Hospitality, are not now able to
give a piece of Bread to the Poor, be they not Usurers.

If these, and such other like Capital Crimes, be not reputed to be Usury, let
them guilde them over with what other titles they list, I think them to be as
ill (or worse) then usury.

If the Books of Moses be advisedly considered of, there be as dangerous
menaces against great Purchacers, as there be against Usurers* and God himself
has said, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, and our Savior Christ
has pronounced a woe, unto him that joins house to house, or la^d to land.

I would not have men therefore to flatter themselves too much, or to think
themselves more honest then (indeed) they be* for if we rely so much upon
the bare letter, he breaks the commandments of God in as express a manner,
that has money in his purse, and will not lend to his needy Neighbor, as he
that lends money to use: for the same God that forbids to take Usury,
says again, Thou shall not shut up thy compassion, but shall Lend: And David
in his 112. Psalm says, A good man is merciful and Lends.

Our blessed Savior again in the 6. of Luke, Do good and lend looking for
nothing again.

It follows then, when a man is enforced by necessity, to borrowe, he that
has money and will not lend, is no better then an Usurer.

And as he is thus commanded to lend, so he is enjoined again not to keep his
neighbors pawn, If thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall
restore it before the sun go down, Exodus 22. And for fear of forgetting,
in the 24. of Deuteronomy. it is yet again Itterated in these words, If it be a
poor body, thou shall not sleep with his pledge.

So that we may conclude, the Usurer, that will not lend but for gain, the
Miser that will not lend at all, the Landlord that racketh up his rents, the
Farmer that hoyseth up the market, the Merchant that robs the Realm, and
all the rest what some ever, that do oppress the poor, they are all in one
predicament, and may be all called the Devils Iorny-men, for they do the
Devils Iorny work.

Here is now to be considered, that these loathed sins of Covetousness and
usury, though they have pleaded in their own excuses, yet they have evermore
been condemned even from the beginning, and so they are continued even at this
present hour.

But this monstrous sin of pride, for the which the Angels were thrown out of
Heaven, and by the which the vengeance of God has been so many times drawn
upon this Globe of Earth, it is now grown into a fashion, and it is become so
general, that it is but in vain for any man to speak against it.

It is community that takes away the sense, and then example is it that
bloteth out the shame, for the power of example being so common as it is, is a
motive good enough, to persuade that pride is no sin, which is in such
generality amongst them that be of the best account.

Pride if in a Prince, it ruins the love of his Subjects, if amongst Subjects,
it breeds neglect of duty to the Prince, if in any Statesman, it draws
contempt, both of Prince and Subject: the pride of this age is grown to that
height, that we can hardly know a Prince from a pesant, by the view of his
apparel, and who is able by the outward show, to discern between Nobility
and Seruilitie, to know a Lord from a Lowt, a Lady from a Landresse, or to
distinguish between a man of worthiness and a base Groom, that is not worth
the clothes that belonges to his back they do shine in silk, in silver, in
gold, and that from the head, to the very heel.

With titles, with worship, and with words, we may distinguish estates, but we
cannot discern them by their apparel.

It is pride that has depryued the Angels of the joys of Heaven, it has
been the overthrow of kingdoms, and common wealths here upon the Earth, it
is the inhanuser of all our miseries now in this age: it has banished
Hospitality and good housekeeping, it has raised the rates and prises of all
things, it breeds dearth and scarsitie, it inforceth theft and robbery, it is
pride that fills the prisons, and brings numbers to the gallows, it is
only pride, that impouerisheth City, Town, and Country, it is it that
makes so many Townes-men and Tradesmen to play Banckropt.

It is pride, that has expelled our Yeomandry, that has impouerished our
Gentility, it has replenished the Realm with bare and needy Knights, and it
threatens a worse succeeding mischief, then I dare set down with my pen.

It is pride, that has banished Hospitality, and where hospitality is once
put to flight, there charity does seldom show his face, for charity is so
combined with Hospitality, that where the one becomes lame, the other
immediately begins to halt.

I did never believe the Popes Transubstantiation, but now I see charity is
transubstantiated into brave apparel, when we shall see him that in a
Hat-band, a scarce, a pair of Garters, and in Roses for his shoe-strings, will
bestow more money, then would have bought his great grandfather, a whole suite
of apparel to have served him for Sun-dayes.

Thus we do see, it is pride that wastes and consumes all things to uphold
it self, it destroys both love and hope, it is pernicious in the poor, it
is maligned in the rich, neither can a Prince himself that is proud, be able
to shroude himself from contempt of the vulgar, but he shall be despised.

Marry the best sport in this sin of pride is this, we shall never see two
proud persons, but the one will envy and despise the other, for pride does
malice pride, and it will mock and scorn at that pride in another, that it
will never mark nor see in it self: it is a vice that is left destitute of
all help or defense, or of friends, it was expelled from Heaven, and it is
the most consuming plague, that may happen upon the earth, and the best reward
that belongs to it, is the burning fire of Hell.

Tell me now thou proud presumptuous flesh, have thou not reason to turn over
another leaf, when wrath seems so to threaten, as though there were no
saving faith left upon the earth.

Nature has sufficiently taught us to lift up the hand before the head,
because the head is more worthy then the hand, and the spirit of God that has
created this Nature, should it not teach us to forsake our own wills, and to
give place unto his, without the which our wills could not be.

We do neglect the Judgments of God, and notwithstanding the miracles he has
showed unto us, we ask with Pharao, Who is the Lord, but we do not lay hold
of them to our instruction, perhaps we may sometimes wonder at them but never
profit by them.

I have thus far presumed to thrust my lines into the wide world, to abide
the fury of all weathers, if they prove distasteful to some palates, yet I hope
there be other some, that will better relish them, for those that shall think
them too tart, let them use them in the stead of Veriuyce, for sweet meats
are ever best relished with souresauce.

FINIS.
Epilogus.
Now after 23. Books by me already published, to make them up just 2. dosen,
and for my last farewell to the Printers Press, I have tasked my self to such
a kind of subject, as is better fitting to be roughly rubbed with a
reprehending verity, then slightly to be blanched over with any smoothing
flattery.

I know I shall offend a number, for I have inueighed against sins and that
of several sorts, perhaps some will say I am too bitter, but can we be too
serious in exclaiming against Pride, against Adultery, against Drunkenness,
against Blasphemy, and against such other, and so great Impiety, as I think
since it rayned fire and brim-stone upon Sodom and Gomorah, there was never
the like: if it be not now time then, both to speak and to write against those
abominations, it is high time the world were at an end.

I have not meddled with any thing that is repugnant to religion: And for
matters of state it fits me not to deal withal, for Satyryck inueyghing at
any man's pryuate person it is far from my thought; Yet I am sure to want no
censuring, but I have armed my self against all those reproaches, wherewith
malice it self is able to load me, my soul and conscience bearing witness
that my intent has been no other, then to draw men into a due consideration,
how much they loose of Time, in hunting after vanities: then let Detraction
whet his tongue and spare not, if I displease any, if they be not such as are
but weak of Judgment, I am then sure they be such, as do know themselves
to be faulty.

FINIS.

