MY LADIES LOOKING GLASS. WHEREIN MAY BE DISCERNED A WISE MAN FROM A FOOL, A
GOOD WOMAN FROM A BAD: AND THE true resemblance of vice, masked under the
vizard of virtue.

By Barnabe Rich Gentleman, servant to the Kings most excellent Majesty.

Malui me diuitem esse quam vocari.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Adams. 1616.

TO THE VVORTHILY HONORED, AND MOST WORTHY TO BE WORTHILY HONORED, the LADY
SAINT JONES, wife to the Right Honorable SIR OLIVER SAINT JONES, Knight Lord
Deputy of Ireland.
MAdame, to avoid Idleness, I have betaken my self to those endeauours, that
the world will repute to be more idle, than idleness it self; and perhaps
some will not let to say, that it had been better for me to have continued
idle still, than to ^^ue been thus ill occupied. For it is now accounted sin
to reprove sin, and there is no exercise accounted to be more idle, than to
reprehend the idle follies of this madding age, that Time has now hatched up,
and are long since become so flush and fligge, that they are flowne into the
world, and they have there nestled themselves amongst the Chickins of virtue,
so disguising themselves under the habit of virtue, that they are reputed to be
of virtues Brood, and are not easily to be discerned by their plumes, or
outward show.

To discover them therefore, to those that have any list to eschew them, I have
composed this looking Glass, which I have fronted in the forehead with the
title of My Ladies Looking Glass. Not that it is any thing less behoouefull
for my Lord, than it is for my Lady to look in; for although women do use
their looking glasses, but to epsy the deformities of their bodily beauty,
yet this looking Glass is composed of a contrary constitution: for this
makes manifest the diseases of the mind, and discovers the Imperfections
as well of men as of women, that does behold themselves in it.

It taxes the abuses of the time and here is to be seen (though in a few
lines) many actual breaches of Gods holy laws. I have presumed to present it
to your Ladyships protection, and although I know it be not fit for every one
to read, that perhaps would winch, if they found themselves to be rubd: yet
your untainted virtues being free from all detection, you may with a clear
conscience, and an vnbended brow, as well vouchsafe to read, as likewise to
protect, when their is nothing therein contained but justifiable truth; the
iniquities of these times being so palpable, that it is as easy to prove, as
it is to reprove them. I have not presumed to present these lines whereby to
instruct your knowledge, nor, to set down precepts for your Ladish* to follow;
but knowing your Ladyship how worthily famed, of whom could I make better
choice than of a Lady so highly renowned both for wisdom and virtue?

I might here endeavor your Ladyships further praises, and that without either
fraud or flattery, but as the unskillful painter, that would take upon him the
draught of some rare perfection that were more then ordinary, how well soever
he might be furnished with colors, yet wanting art, he might rather blemish
than grace the work he took in hand: I will therefore here stay my self,
beseeching your Ladyship to pardon his bold presumption, that will rest to do
you service during life,

Your Ladyships, to command, BARNABE RICH.

TO ALL READERS, EITHER CVRTEOVS OR Captious I care not.
CVrieous Reader, if thou prove so indeed, I would be glad; but if thou be
disposed to cavil, I care not greatly: thou shall but bewray thine own
guilty conscience. And I am become to be a little foolish hardy. (And why may
I not call it true valiance?) I have Adventured one of the labors of Hercules,
to strike at Sin: And is not that as much as to fight with the Hydra? Nay, it
is more: for where the Serpent had but two heads starting up, where one was
taken off; let Sin but be dismembered of one vicious folly, there springs up
tenin the place of that one, more strange to be seen, and monstrous to behold;
this general sickness of Sin is grown so contagious, that it is past
recoucrie. It lies at the last gasp, and yet it is more dangerous to prescribe
a Remedy, than it is to describe thee Malady. We must not say that the world
is sick, nor that worldlings are infected with the diseases of Pride, of
whoordome, of Drunkenness, of Swearing, of Swaggering, of Bribery, of Fraud,
of Deceit, of Perjury, of Popery, of Idolatry. No, we must not speak of these
abominations: we dare not say that sin is sin. And more safety for a man to
commit sin than to reprove it.

I have adventured yet, to Bayt the vanities of this madding age at the Stake
of Reproach, And I do look my self to be Baited at again, by the whole
rablement of these Slaves of Imperfections* but it is no matter, they shall do
but their kind, and there best conviction is but Slander: If the better sort
accept of it (as I make no doubt) let the rest except what they can, I care
not; their inuectiues are as Impotent as themselves are Impudent. Take this now
by the way and so farewell, I never meant to please those that be ill, by
publishing in print any thing that is good.

To the wide world.
I Sing no Song to please the Formal Fool,
Nor lulle asleep, the vain Fantastic Gulle.
I have no skill, nor never went to school,
To pipe a dance to every Trickt up Trulle,
That pouders, paints, and periwigs her face:
I can not flatter these in any case.
I shoot at Sin, I tax none but the bad,
The Shifting Swain that heaps up pelf by fraud,
The Bribing Groom, the Drunken Swearing Swad,
The Shameless queen, the Harlot and the Bawd.
All these and more too many to be told,
Look in this Glass, it does them all unfold.
MY LADIES LOOKING GLASS.
TO be often prying, and beholding our selves in a Glass, it has been
thought rather to favor of vanity and pride than of godliness or piety: yet
we have been taught by a learned Philosopher to look in a Glass, and that
very often, but with resolution that if we do find our selves to be fair and
well formed, we should do fair and commendable actions: but if we do see our
selves in any thing imperfect, we should correct those defects of nature with
the beauty of good behauiours.

What one applies to vice, another may convert to virtue.
By this we may perceive that a looking Glass may be employed to a godly
purpose; and what one does employ to the supporting of vice, another may
convert to the exercise of virtue.

Looking Glasses have evermore been reputed amongst those necessaries
belonging to women; I have not heard of many men that have made any great use
of them unless in Barbers shops, or in Haberdashers shops; and yet in those
Glasses he that is too much prying and beholding of himself, shall oftener spy
out the picture of a Fool than the person of a Wiseman.

Caligula used to look in a glass
Caligula used many times to behold himself in a glass, to see how sternely
and how terribly he could frame and set his countenance.

The nicitie of young men in this age.
They are now as common and conversant to men as they be to women: And our young
gentlemen in this age are as curious to behold themselves in a glass, as
Dame-Folly her self when she is newly trickt up in the Attyremakers Trim.

Looking glasses flattering.
Amongst Looking glasses, there be some that be over much flattering, that will
make the beholders to seem more young, more smoth, and better favored than
they be; and these sorts of glasses are best of all esteemed, but especially
amongst women.

There is yet an other sort that does make defects Some make defects where none
are.
where none are, that will show the round and well formed visage to be long,
lean, and wrinkled; and these kind of Glasses are little set by either of men
or women.

The nature of this Glass.
I have endeavored the forming of this Glass, that I hope shall give a true
representation, as well of the perfections as of the defections either of men or
women that shall behold themselves in it.

Yet this Glass by me thus composed, it is not to view any exterior part of
the body, but first to grope the conscience, and then by a diligent observation
to survey the interior part of the soul: And as I have not fashioned any
smooth resemblance whereby to flatter, so I have not forged any deformities
thereby to slander.

I have pictured forth diverse representations, not aiming particularly at any
man's private person that has not a guilty conscience to accuse himself: yet I
have grasped at abuse, and have stricken at those sins that are so supported
and befriended, that I know, will rather become offensive than pleasing to the
world.

The loftiness of sins.
Iniquity, is grown proud, and nestles herself amongst the Cedars, and
towers aloft as high as the clouds.

The sins of this age are become so nice and so queasie that they cannot
digest any potion of reprofe: men Men are unwilling to hear their faults.
are more unwilling to have their sins ransackt, than to have these
inueterate and mortal wounds searched into.

And as the often taken potion never works, so the physic of Reproof
turns rather to the hardening of their hearts, than to the amendment of their
lives. Reprofes are but like Goades that do make beasts but to kick when they
be touched with them.

The world is become old, and now in this later age we have so far ouergrowne
the Rod, that we scorn any correction, or to be controuled either by the rule
of Gods word, or by any other advertisement, and therefore it is but to knock
at a deaf man's door.

No speaking against sins
They are the vicious only, that cannot endure to hear sin reproved: and who
are they but the impious that would bar the freedom of our tongues? these
gauld backed Iades, are those that are so afraid of rubbing: but what will become
of this world when we dare not speak against sin for offending of those,
that in truth are but the very Slaves of Sin?

Augustus thought it necessary for men to find fault.
That good Emperor Augustus was never angry with accusers, but thought it
necessary, that where there were stoore of vices there should likewise be many
to find fault: And the Lacedaemonians thought it a necessary point of policy
that there should be such Reproouers, whereby to reprove enormity in those for
fear of worldly shame, that otherwise neither remorse of conscience nor any
fear of their Gods could have reftrained or kept within compass.

Pasquils pillar why prohibibited.
And Pasquils pillar was tolerated in Rome to reprehend all sorts of sins
till they touched the Pope and his clergy: but they cannot endure now that
their Sodomicall sins should be reputed for faults, but will rather rejoice
in their abominations, making vaunts of their Adulteries, of their
Fornications, of their Blasphemies, and their Drunkenesse, taking as great
pleasure in the boasting of them as they did in the acting.

He that does auow Pride, Drunkenness, Adultery, Swearing, and Blasphemy to be
damned sins, is sooner derided than beloved.

Sin grown malipert.
The Iniquities of this age are not ashamed to show their faces, they walk the
streets more peartly and bold, than either Honesty or Innocence.

Sin was wont to walk in fear, but now men are so far from being ashamed,
that as they make no conscience to commit evil, so they boast of that evil
they have committed; And will again defend what they have boasted.

But as they do glory in their own shame, so their end is eternal damnation.

Though our own consciences will take no notice of our own iniquities, yet
our sins do cry out and complain in the Audience Court of Heaven, where
they prease into the presence Chamber of God: And to our confusions they cry
out for Justice. And he will not spare for ever, but as he is lust so he must
strike.

Our consciences are so deaf and dull, in these days of our lolitie, what
with the loud noise of Music, sometimes of Gaming, sometimes of Carowzing,
sometimes of Oaths, sometimes of Quarrelling, sometimes of Blaspheming, that
we cannot hear the Preacher cry out, That all flesh is grass.

The fearful condition of the time.
We see at this present hour, how Sin is lifted up: and what leagues and
conspiracies there are against those that be honest, that has the fear of God
before their eyes; and does reprehend the follies of the time. The Jews, that
had thought to have nailed Christ to the Cross, they proudly cried out, If he
be the Son of God, let him save himself. And how far has this voice escaped
us now in these later times? Are not those that does live in the fear of God,
reputed to be but the shame of men and the reproach of the people? have they not
said: Let them trust in the Everlasting: and let him deliver them, and take
them out of our hands, if he would their good? Is not God himself had in
derision and made a byword? do they not multiply their blasphemies against
his holy name? have they not said, Let us do it boldly, God does not see it,
the Almighty is asleep, he cannot hear it? at the least they do not let to
think God does not regard it, and some will not let to say, there is no God to
regard it; from whence else proceeds this swearing, this pride, this
blasphemy, this drunkenness, this adultery, but that they think the seat of
God is void, or that he is become regardles? But he that has made the ear,
shall he not hear? he that has framed the eye, shall he not see? and he that
judges the nations, shall he not convince?

Let them know, that the Everlasting neither sleeps nor slumbereth, but they
shall find in the winding up, that he will cause his Judgments to return in
Justice.

The Devils do tremble to think of the day of Judgment, these do but deride
it, when they be put in mind of it: the custom of sin, has so benumbed our
senses that we feel it not, but after the infection of sin, follows the
infliction of punishment. Security has no resting place but Hell.

Angry fault sinders.
It has been told me, that I have already incurred the displeasure of a great
number, for some lines by me formerly published, inueighing against pride,
against drunkenness, against adultery, but especially for writing against
popery.

But those that does tax and torture me with their tongues, they are not any
persons of any great account, What they be that are angry,
they are but drunkards, adulterers, and other vicious livers: the most of them
(indeed) poor ignorant papists, whom I do rather pity than any ways
despite: but as the Philosopher, that suspected the uprightness of his own
carriage, when he heard himself to be commended by a man that was noted to be
of a loose and a lewd conversation: so, understanding what they be, that does
thus detect and deprave me, I do hold my self to be better graced by their
discommendations, than if they would set open their throats, to publish forth
my praises. For amongst all the slaves of imperfections, the Liar and the
Slanderer, does least of all offend me, because I know, that a thousand I
mputations injuriously published by a thousand detracting slanderers, are not
half so grievous to a man of wisdom and judgment, as one matter of truth A
dangerous time.
avowed by him that is of honest life and reputation. But is not this a
fearful time, when iniquity does so reign and rage, that the wretches of
the world would still wallow in their wickedness, without impeachment or
contradiction, but especially the Papists, that are themselves so busy and so
repugnant to the laws, both of God and the 'Prince? first the Pope with his
Bulls, with his Indulgences, with his Pardons, with his Dispensations, with
his Absolutions, The holy works of Papists.
with his Priests, with his Jesuits, with his Ministers, of all sorts and of
all professions, that are still conspiring, that are still practicing, with
poisons, with pistoles, with stabbing knifes, with Gunpowder trains, that are
still repugning, that are still perverting, that are still seducing, and
drawing the hearts of the people, from that duty and obedience, they do owe
to their sovereigns; nay, that does draw so many poor souls to destruction:
for although all sorts of sins did never so much abound, as they do at this
hour, yet of my conscience, The Devil much bound to the Pope.
the Pope himself does send more Christian souls to the Devil; and Hell is
more beholding to the Popes Holiness alone, then to all the rest of those
ougly Monsters, that are called by the name of the seven deadly sins.

But what sinner so intemperate but will himself confess in general, that
all sorts of sins were never more inordinate, and that wickedness and
abomination were never more apparent, and I might say again never les
punished? The Adulterer will cry phough at the loathsome Vice deriding vice.
sin of Drunkenness, the Blasphemer will swear the usurer is a most damned
creature, the Extortioner will laugh at pride, and make himself merry with the
Folly of new fashions.

Thus every vicious liver can one deride an other, but they cannot endure to
hear themselves detected; and they will laugh at the very same imperfections
in an other, that they cannot see in themselves, neither will they believe any
other that should inform them of them.

But I tell thee thou man or woman, whatsoever thou be that disdainest to hear
thy wickedness reproved, thou art fallen into temptation, and thou art in
danger of a judgment: he that is fallen into that Lethargy of A dangerous
sickness.
sin that he neither feels himself nor will endure to be told of it, is in
a dangerous plight, he is past recovery.

There is no sickness so dangerous as that which is least felt: and as he
that feels not his sickness, never seeks the Physician, so he that feels
not his sin never cares for repentance; and he that has no remorse to
repent can never be forgiven: for how should Christ forgive him his sins that
will never acknowledge them? but if the sins of this age does not make work
for repentance, they will make a great deal of business for the Work for
the Devil.
Devil.

Forbear then thou captious Slave of sin, to complain against those that
do complain against thee: Pitiful spectacles.
when we cannot turn our eyes on neither side but we shall see some rouing
with boldness, some rauing with madness, some reeling with drunkenness, some
rioting in wantonness, some cursing with bitterness. They have made a sacrifice
of their souls to the Devil, they neither fear nor reverence God, but
esteem all godliness as a mockery; they do but play with religion, and do but
deride at Divinity it self: all will censure, none will amend, yet many will
cry out the days are evil, when they themselves do help to make them worse
and worse. If we have a little verbal devotion, be sure it is mixed with
actual abomination. But they will say, it only belongs to the preacher to
reprove sins, but not fit for every particular person to meddle with.

We cannot wear a garment in the new fashion, says one, we cannot drink a
pot with a good fellow, says another; we cannot fortify our words with the
credit of an oath, says a third: but every Fool will be shooting of his bolt:
every Critic companion will be girding at us: busiyng himself with that
which becomes him not to meddle with. It is truth, there are many will go to
Church, Religious in show.
they will not miss a Sermon, they have their Books carried after them, they
are very attentive, they turn over leaves, they consent to the preacher, they
say his doctrine is good, they pretend great love to the truth, they make many
signs and shows of zeal: but being once returned to their own homes: what
reformation or amendment of life? do they not live still as if Heaven and Hell,
were but the Fictions of Fools, and that the threatenings denounced by the
preacher against sin were but dreams and old wives tales?

The prophesies, pronouncing the punishment of sin, they are esteemed but as
Cassandrias Ryddles, they are not regarded: And what is it but the unbelief of
that doctrine, that the Prophets, the Apostles, and that Christ himself have
delivered, that thus armeth the wicked with boldness to sin?

Religion but made a staale.
The word of God is not regarded, and if sometimes they do take the Mask of
religion, it is but when piety becomes their advantage: virtue may now and
then be set forth to the show, but it is but as a Staale, to draw into the Net
of villainy.

The preachers of the word, which are the Fishers of Souls, they fish but now
introubled waters, they may fish perhaps, and catch a Frog, or peradventure
light upon a Cuttell, that will vent forth yncke; but if their Nets do
sometimes enclose, yet they are seldom seen to hold a Fish that is great and
mighty: he that sees this and can not sigh, is not a witness but an agent:
and he that can see this without compassion, is like a Nero, that can sit and
sing, whilst he sees Rome a burning.

We must exhort one another.
The Apostle wills us to exhort one an other, and not for once and so away,
but daily. Heb. 3. And in the 19. of Leuit. it is expressly set down: Thou
shall plainly rebuke thy Neighbor, and shall not suffer him to sin. And
there is none but a Cain, that will deny to be his brothers keeper.

But is not every man tied as well by the rule of Gods word, as by the laws of
every well governed common wealth, not only to reprehend, but also to inform
against any person, that either by word or deed shall seek to eclipse the
honor or dignity of his Prince? If we owe this duty to a King here upon the
earth, how much are we further obliged to the King of Kings, to the King of
Heaven? shall we see his laws despised, his name profaned, his Majesty
blasphemed, and shall we be silent and hold our peace? Qui tacet consentire
videtur, to hear and see and say nothing, is to make our selves a party.

But we dare not do our duties for displeasing of those that have already
bequeathed themselves to the Devil: for offending a Drunkard, for offending an
Adulterer, for offending a Blasphemer: for offending a Papist. From hence it is
that vice does now sleep in that The security of the time.
security, that Philips Boy that every day cloyed his master with the clamor of
mortality, is not able to awaken it: but thou that art so a sleep in sin
that nothing can awaken thee; assure thy self thou shall be so awakened that
nothing shall bring the a sleep.

I have hitherto spoken of the custom of sin, how it has weakened our
spirits and lulde us a sleep in the cradle of security: I do appeal from your
drowsy lusts to your awakened consciences whether I have spoken the truth or
nay. If I should now speak of the antiquity of sin, and should therewithal
take upon me to deliver the manifold afflictions that from time to time, and
from age to age she has drawn from the judgment seat of God, to punish the
enormity of wickedness here upon the earth, I might enter into such a
labyrinth, as Theseus clew would hardly suffice to wind me out.

The effects of sins.
It was sin that first secluded the Angels from the joys of heaven: it was
Sin that drove Adam out of Paradise. It was sin that caused the inundation
of the whole world, It was sin that drew on the tempest of Fire and Brimstone
on Sodom and Gomorrha, It was sin that brought destruction on that holy city
of Jerusalem, It is sin that at all times and in all ages has played the
Strumpet through all the parts of the world, and has filled the whole face of
the earth with her brood of bastards. And as the Armies of the Low countries
are compounded of English, of Scots, of French, of Spanish, The sins of all
nations brought into England.
of Italians, of Germans, and of all the nations of Christendom collected and
gathered together: so the sins of all those countries and of all the world
besides are every day engrossed and transported into England. We have stolen
away the pride and ambition of the Spaniard, the fraud and falsehood of the
French, the deceit and subtilty of the Italian, the drunkenness and swearing
of the German: we have robbed the Jew of his usury, the barbarous Sicilian of
his rage and cruelty, the Turk and Infidel of his infidelity and unbelief; we
have spoiled the Venetian Curtizans of their alluring vanities, to deck our
English women in the new fashion: and Rome that sometimes has been worthily
renowned, but now reputed to be the very synke of sin, we have brought from
them their idolatry, their superstition, their popery, their heresy; and we
have robbed the Pope himself and all his college of Cardinals, both of their
luxury, and their letchery; and all his whole rablement of Monks, Friars, and
Massing Priests, of their beastly Bawdery. This propagation of sin, that has
infected the whole world with their abominations thus transported into
England, are now there resident and all entertained, not like strangers, but as
natives that had been both borne and bred in the country.

The wantonness of sin in this age.
And that old hagge Sin herself, that a man would think should be so far
spent in years and ouerworne with age that she should be past trimming, is
more propagating at this present hour, then she was five thousand years ago;
and is become more wanton, nice, and toyish then ever she was before.

Sin a known Strumpet become a Lady.
And notwithstanding though from the beginning she has bin notoriously known
to be a most infamous stru^pet common to all, yet now within these very few
years one of these poor thread*bare knights Sir Nicholas New-fashions by
name, that had so wasted and consumed himself in foolish pride and
prodigality, that he was not worth the clothes that was belonging to his own
back; hoping by her means to support his vain glorious pride, has taken her
to be his wife, and has made her a Lady.

And although sin of her own nature and disposition be both proud and
presumptuous more then enough, yet now being dignified with a Ladyship and
being inrould in the Heralds book to march in the Ladies rank, she is
become more bold and insolent then ever she was, and who now but my Lady New
fashions that is had in esteem? she is almost every day troling in her Coach
about the streets, insinuating herself into every company; there is no
feasting, banquiting, reueling, nor any other merry meeting, but my Lady New
fashions is a principal guest.

When she meets and conuerseth with Ladies and Gentlewomen, some she
teaches to paint themselves, some to powder their periwigs, some she does
corrupt in manners, making them to be like her self, Bold, impudent, The Lady
New-fashions a Strumpet, a Bawd, and a VVitch
immodest, some she induces to play the Harlots.

For as she herself has bin a common Strumpet from the beginning, so she
has bin a notorious Bawd and a Witch, and those women, that she cannot
inchant with her Siren tongue, those she infameth by lying and slandering.

And who is it but this old Beldame Sin, now bearing Sin sets a work
all sorts of Tradesmen.
the name of the Lady new fashions, that sets a work these new fangled
Tailers, these Body-makers, these Perfumers, these Imbroderers, these
Attire-makers, and all the rest of these inuenters of vanities, that are the
instruments of sin, that does enforce their whole endeauours to fit her in
her follies, and to deck and adorn her in her pride and wantonness?

The number, is almost without number, that does both serve her, and will
likewise seek to defend her, Artificers, Tradesmen, Shopkeepers, Men, women
and children, are all depending upon her: and as Demetrius, the silver smith,
in the 19. of the Acts, incenced the people against Paul, telling the
Crafts-men, that he went about to diminish the dignity and reputation of their
great Goddess Diana, which if he should bring to pass, their gains would
likewise quaill that got their livings by those works belonging to her self
and to her great Temple in Ephesus: and as these persuasions stirred up the
multitude in those days, so he that in this age does but open his lips to
speak against sin, shall want no accusers, not only to reprove him, but
also to reproach him.

Sin does neither want Siluer-smithes nor Gold-smithes, to serve her with
plate and garnish her with jewels, that will call him Fool that will but
speak against her excess.

Sin has her Silkemen and Mercers, that does serve her of lace, silk,
satin, velvet, cloth of silver, cloth of gold, that will say he is a
Critic that will inueigh against her pride.

Sin has her Merchants, that will transport the commodities behoouefull for
the common wealth, into foreign countries, and will return back again toies
and trifles; that will say he is but a satyrist, that will detect her vanity.

Sin has her Lawyers, that will bring him into the Star Chamber for a
Libeller, that will speak against her Bribery.

Sin has her Procters, that will cite him to the Commissaries Court, and
make him do open penance, that will speak against her whooredome.

I might yet speak of women, whereof a great number that are not to be
detected with any bodily abuse, that would yet sharpen their tongues to chide
at any man that would reprehend those enormities, that sin by custom had
ingrafted in them.

A godly admonition to Ladies and Gentlewomen.
But I would I could now admonish Ladies and Gentlewomen, that amongst all the
creatures of Gods handie work, I do acknowledge to be most excellent, here
upon the earth: but as the finest cloth is most aptest to take a stain, so
their mild dispositions inclined to all compassionate love and courtesy, are
soonest led astray, and most easiest to be seduced. And this old Hagge of
Hell, this loathsome Lady Sin, with her glazed eyes, her painted cheeks, her
new-formed fashions, and her enchanting tongue, does so bewitch and blindfolde
their understandings, that when they think they converse with an Angel of
Light, they give entertainment to a Monster of Hell; but when Sin shall
present her self to their new awakened souls, in her true form and shape,
and begins once to play the makebate between God and them, and their own
consciences to testify between them and themselves; then they shall see to
their own sorrow, what Saint it is that they have served, they shall then
perceive to their great horror and grief, that this darling of theirs so dearly
esteemed and beloved, will then be most busy to affright and afflict them.

I would, I could wish therefore, (and with a reverent regard I do entreat
them) that they would bethink themselves of their own happiness whilst they
have time, and not to do as that foolish gentlewoman, that never remembered to
say her prayers till she heard it thunder.

Women more excellent by nature then men.
But some will say, And why women, more then men) because as women are more
flexible, and therefore more apt to be seduced to ill, so they are more
tractable again, and therefore more easy to be induced to virtue.

Men are composed of an uneven temperature of the elements, together with the
malicious influence of the planets, prefiguring them to be sturdie, stubborn,
froward and overthwart; but women are by nature of a more excellent metal,
their hearts are more soft and yielding, and themselves more pliable to all
virtue and goodness.

There is more possibility to reclaim ten ill living women, to a conformity
of a better life, then to reform one misliuing man.

Would they now bethink themselves, when they look in their Glasses, that
there is no Forehead heeld so graceful (amongst many women) as that which the
Prophet Jeremy terms to be graceless, the Forehead, that is past shame and
cannot blush: let them therefore fall a chiding at their own resemblances,
beginning first with I speak this but to those women that be wise and do
fear God* More then would serve ^o* good women that feared God.
the Forehead, and say, o thou proud and shameless Forehead, the very Chair
and Seat of pride: where thou should be decked with a Crown of Glory, thou
art clouded and ouershadowed with a monstrous Map of Hair, no less
offensive to the Majesty of God, then ougly and deformed in the sight of all
good men; be ashamed therefore of thy intolerable pride, and by thy humility,
and submissiue lowliness, reconcile thy self again to thy God, whom thou
have so highly offended.

VVandring Eyes.
Descending then a little, say yet again, o you wandering and lascivious Eyes,
the attracters and drawers on of lust and sinful thoughts; you that were first
created to be the Deemers of my Discretion, but now become the Dimners of the
insight of my Soul: forbear your wonted trains of light and wanton glances,
seek now with bitter tears, to bewail your former follies, and lifting up
your selves to Heaven, ask grace and mercy.

I hope all this will offend no women that are good.
Proceeding thus, you may yet reprove the Tongue that is more apt to speak
ill then good: the Ears again that are ever more set wide open to vanity,
but still shut up to good counsel or godly instruction: And so we may say of
all the rest of our necessary and natural members, that are displaced of
their ordinary courses: for being first created as the Ministers of the Soul,
are now become the Disturbers of our Innocence.

How women should use their glasses.
This external beauty of the body, so much esteemed of amongst women, when
they behold it in a Glass, it should stir them up a far off to display the
majesty of the Creator, and from thence should pass with the wings of their
cogitations to the contemplation of the highest Fair, which is the invisible
beauty of the Almighty God, from whence as from a Fountain, all smaller
Rivers derive their beauties.

It is said that Africa, brings forth every year a new Monster, the reason
is, that in the deserts of that country, the wild and savage beasts, that are
both diverse in nature, and contrary in kind, will yet engender the one with
the other: but England hatcheth up every month a new Monster, every week a
new Sin, and every day a Monstrous fashions every day hatched up.
new Fashion: our Monsters are not bred in the Deserts, as those in Africa, but
in every Town and City: where they are so chearely fostered, and so daintily
cherished that they multiply on heaps, by hundreds and by thousands. It were
not possible for me now to set down how this monstrous generation thus hatched
up by Sin, has been from time to time procreated and brought into the
world, one sin still begetting an other.

The genealogy of sin.
Pride the eldest daughter of Sin, was first Spaund in Heaven: she was from
thence expelled; but she drew after her a great dissolution of Angels. It was
pride, that begat Contempt in Paradise, where there was no Apple in the Garden
so well pleasing to Eve, as that which God had forbidden her.

It was Contempt that begot Malice, And Malice again begat Murder, when Cain
killed his brother Abell.

As the sons of men increased in the world, so Sin began to multiply so
fast, that God repented him that he had made man.

To purge the world of her abominations, the Deluge came, and all were
drowned, except eight persons. After the Flood, amongst the sons of Noah the
generation of the accursed Cham, became to be great and mighty upon the earth;
at which time Sin was grown again to that strength, that she began on the
sudden to play the Rebel, and with a tumultuous assembly gathered together in
the plains of Shinar, she began to fortify her self against Heaven.

Amongst those Giants, then reigning over the face of the earth, that greedy
Curre Covetousness, which the Apostle terms to be the root of all evils,
was (amongst a number of other monstrous sins) fostered up by Ambition.

Covetousness the parent of many sins.
Covetousness, was the first parent of Oppression, Extortion, Bribery, Usury,
Fraud, Deceit, Subtilty: and that common Strumpet Idolatry, was a bastard borne
of this brood.

Idolatry had issue, the Lady Lechery, who in process of time, became so
conversant with the Pope and his Cardinals, that they procreated amongst them
that loathsome sin of Buggery.

The varieties of Iniquities.
It would be a matter of impossibility for me to set down the varieties of
those sins that are hatched up in these days, when so many new fashioned
iniquities does swarm, both in City, Town, and Country; that were our
bodies but half so diseased with sicknesses as our souls be with sins, it
could not be avoided, but that some strange and unheard of mortality would
ensue. The time has been, men would mask their vices with cloaked
dissimulation from the eye of the world, but now iniquity is set forth bare
fast, without any mask of preteires to hide her ougly visage.

They sought to cover their sins from the open show, we have so little shame,
that we never seek to shelter them: our Ancestors were but bunglers at vice,
they had not the wit to grace a sin, nor to set it forth to the show; they
could but call a Spade a spade, a Green Goose a gosling, a professed Broker, a
crafty knave: we are become far more exquisite, we can make an Owl a Hawke,
a Jack Naaps, a sheep, an old Milne Horse, a palfry for a man of honor; we
can call Impudency, Audacitie, Rage, Courage, Wiliness, wit, Obstinacy,
Constancy; and Lewd Lust, Pure Love.

Our wits are become more capering then they were in times past, our conceits
more nimble, and ready to find out new tricks, new toies, and new inventions,
as well of follies as of fashions.

Sin thinks scorn to be reproved.
But what remedy? pride thinks scorn to be reproved or to be told of her
faults, she is grown so stubborn and so stately.

Swearing swaggers out admonition, and will not be reproved.

Whooredome and Drunkenness, has so hid themselves in the Maze of vanities,
that repentance can no where fiinde them out.

Rage and Fury are produced as arguments of valor, where the Lie shall be
given but upon the speaking of a word, and the Stab again returned, but for
the giving of the Lie: where not to pleadge a Health, is a ground good enough
for a Challenge, and the taking of wall, made a heinous matter, whereby many
times murder does ensue.

Three shrewd witnesses.
But sinners have three shrewd witnesses to testify against them, the Devil,
the Law, and their own Consciences: but if here upon the earth a man's own
conscience condemns him for his sin, how much greater shall be The glory
pride.
the judgment of God? The glory of pride as she passes through the streets
in this age, does so far exceed, that the eye of heaven is ashamed to behold
it. And those blessings which God has given us in great measure, we consume in
pride, and wantonness, and like Swine we beslauer the precious pearls of Gods
abundant plenty, converting them by our excessive pride, into dearth and
scarcity: and this wickedness arises not from Turks, Jesuits, Heretykes, and
Papists, but from the professors of true Christianity, and even now in the
hottest Sunshine of the Gospel: we have neglected Heaven, to dote upon the
vain pleasures of the earth, and have forsaken God, but to wrappe our selves
in the excrement of worms; a little guarded and garnished with the mineral of
Gold and Silver.

How many that are not able to pay honestly for homespunne cloth, will yet
wear silk, and will every day glister in Gold and Silver? the soul goes
every day in her working day clothes, whilst the body keeps perpetual
holy day, and iets up and down in her several suites.

The effects of pride.
How many again are so eager of superfluities, that all their racked rents in
the country are not able to discharge the Shop books in the City, when there
be that will spend as much as some knights be worth, but in a pair of Garters,
and a pair of Shooestrings?

It is pride that has banished Hospitality and good house keeping.

It is pride that raises the rents and rates of all things universally.

It is pride that breadeth our dearth and scarcities:

It is pride that impouerisheth City, Town and country.

It is pride that filles all the prisons in England, and brings a number to the
Gallows.

It is pride, (if it be not prevented in time) that will make a hangmans room
in reuersion, to be a good suit for a gentleman that has honestly served his
Prince and Country: for howsoever he may shift for meat and drink, he shall
be sure to want no clothes.

A happy age.
It was a happy age when a man might have wooed his wench, with a pair of
Kiddes lether Gloves, a Silver Thimble, or with a Tawdry Lace; but now a velvet
gown, a chain of pearl, or a coach with four horses, will scarcely serve
the turn; she that her mother would have been glad of a good Ambling Maare,
to have rode to Market on, will not now step out of her own doors, to
cross the other side of the street, but she must have her coache.

It was a merry world, when seven or eight yeards of velvet would have made a
gown for a Lady of honor; now eighteen will not suffice for her that is
scarce worthy to be a good Ladies laundresse: we are grown from a peticoate of
stamell to cloth of silver, cloth of gold, silk stockings, and not so much
as our shoes, but they must be imbrodered with silver, with gold, yea and
sometimes with pearls.

I have spoken of pride indifferently, how it inforceth a like both men and
women* it is pride that draws after it such a daily innovation of new
fashions, that I think they have found out whole Mines of new inventions, or
they have gotten the Philosophers stone to multiply, there is such a daily
multiplicity, both of follies and fashions.

Vitellius in his days searched far and near for the varieties of Nature,
but we have harrowed Hell in these days for the vanity of new fashions, and (I
think) we have found them out; for he that had as many Eyes as Argus, were
not able to look into the one half, that are now followed and embraced as well
by men as women. The Prophet Esaias in his 3. Chapt. makes mention of many
strange engines belongs to women: he speaks there of ointments for their
lips, of caules, and round attires for their heads, of sweet balls,
bracelets, and bonnets: of tabiletes, earrings, muffelers, wimples, vailes,
crisping pinnes, glasses, lawnes, and fine linen.

These and many other vanities belonging to women are there numbered up: but if
the Prophet had now lately, but walked one turn through the Royal Exchange in
London, he would have been put to his shifts to have Strange invented
vanities.
made a true repetition of the new invented vanities, that are there to be
seen; and this would more have troubled him more then all the restt, hat when
he had heard them called by their proper names, he could never have understood
whereunto they had belonged, without the help of a chamber maid.

The devils Ingeny.
Some will say that these new invented vanities came first from hell, and I
would be loath to excuse the devil himself in the matter, that I know is very
ingenious, and is every day devising of new ingines, and (I think) does keep
an attire-makers shops, whereby to attempt and allure Credible and true though
strange to be believed.
both men and women, to sin: but this I dare assure my self, that our Ladies
and Gentlewomen in these days are so exceeding in their attires, and so
deformed in their fashions, that all the Ladies and Gentlewomen that be in
hell* did never wear nor see the like.

There be many both men and women, that to follow the new fashion, has marde
that fashion that God himself has formed.

We mar that fashion that God has made to follow our own.
I protest I have many times been heartily sorry, to see some women, whom God
and Nature had adorned with beauty, with perfection, and with comeliness of
personage, that have disguised themselves in that sort, with the deformities of
fashions, that of amiable and lovely creatures, they have transformed
themselves to be most deformed and loathsome monsters.

There is a decorum to be kept (but especially amongst women) in attiring of
themselves; for that attire that is comely for a round well-formed visage is as
unseemly again in her that has a little, a lean, or a long face: but as
every shoe is not fit for every foot, nor every medicine to be applied to
every malady, so every fashion, does not befit every person, nor every color
agree with every complexion. The woman therefore that is wise, will fit her
self with such a fashion, as may add comeliness to her own proportion: but
mine intent is not here to instruct women how to adorn themselves to the show
of the world, when there is no ornament so precious wherewithal to beautify a
woman, as is the beauty of a good and godly behavior. This one instruction I
will yet leave to those that are desirous to follow the fashion: their is not a
greater enemy to all complexions, either in men or women, then is this found
fantasy of yellow starched bands, and therefore A most ridiculous folly.
as it is a certain argument of vanity, so there can not be a more ridiculous
folly. The woman shall not wear that which apperteineth to the man, neither
shall a man put on woman's raiment: for all that do so, are abomination to the
Lord thy God.

A precept from God neglected.
A precept left unto us by the Almighty, Deuteronom. 22. But the young man in
this age, that is not strumpet like attired, does think himself quite out of
fashion, and the young woman again, that as well in her behavior, as in the
manner of her apparel is most ruffian like, is accounted the most gallant
wench: and I know not what to say, or whether I should accuse men, for suting
themselves The little difference that is used between men and women in their
apparel.
in women's apparel, or whether I should accuse women for suting themselves in
men's apparel; but this is certain, that their hattes, their feathers, their
bands so bestitched, so beedged, so belaced, and in their ridiculous banbeles,
sir named picadillies, yea and in their gowns to, they are so suitable and like
in fashion, that there is no more difference to be seen, then is between a
horse shoe, and a Maares shoe.

We are better known the one of us to the other by our faces, then we are by
our virtues, and yet we are better known by our follies, then we are by our
faces: but if we did not look asquint at the matter, we should find, that as
we have provoked the wrath of God by our strange and new fangled fashions, so
he has in a sort requited us again, with as many strange and unknown
diseases, almost every year with a new kind of sickness, such as our
physicians are no less ignorant of the cure, then they be of the cause from
whence proceeding. And what is it The new found out folly of taking tobacco.
now, but the custom of new fashions, that has foisted in that Indian plant
Tobacco? that till now of late was never known but amongst Indians,
Barbarians, and such infidels as did every day adore and worship the devil,
but it is now so entertained amongst us both in England and Ireland, that all
the nations in Christendom besides do laugh at our folly.

If it were but half so precious as a number would persuade, I think the
people of other parts of Christendom could look into it as well as we,
neither amongst our selves could it be so much desired in such generality, for
the multitude was never inclined yet greatly to embrace virtue, or to like of
any thing that were good.

But some will say, I do want matter to quarrel with that will be finding
fault with the souereigntie of Tobacco, that is so much admired, and
therewithal, so generally received.

I confess it makes drunken every day in the week, the whole rablement of
panders, parasites, bawdes, Brokers, knights of the post, Hostlers, Tapsters,
Tinkers, Tailers, Cobblers, Costermongers, and the whole generation of
Drunkards, cut and long tail, one and other: and I do look that all these
will censure me from the Tribunal of their Alebench. Now for that old
proverb, sometimes avowed by them that will cry out The more the merrier, yet
let them know that the multitude of such guests, shall add to the horror of
miseries. But yet to blemish and to make dim this my Looking Glass, by
belching out their stinking vapor, they will speak of Knights, Gentlemen,
oldmen, young men, wise men, learned men that do all use to take it, and will
likewise defend it.

I know there be Knights and Gentlemen both, that do vent more smooke out of
their Nostrils, then they do out of their kitchen chimnies; and old men and
young men may be led astray, the one through dotage, the other too much
inclined to follow the fashion: but for those that are accounted to be so wise
and learned, that will stand so much in the defense of their Tobacco, Cardinal
Bellarmin will do as much in defense of the Pope, and in the approbation of
his Idolatrous Mass.

Shall we then deny the Physicians testimony, will not his authority suffice
in the matter?

Give me leave to answer Master Doctor thus; I will enforce against his
Philosophy, that which can not err, and that is the experience which many ages
has taught Experience much better then Master Doctors opinion.
us: that before Tobacco was ever known in England, we lived more free from
all manner of sicknesses, then we have done since: and let them look yet
again to the time now present, there be a number that never meddied with
Tobacco, in their lives, do they not live in more perfect health then those
that do take it fastest? if they do not see this, they are but blind Doctors,
and some will say that an ignorant Physician is the worst of all diseases, and
God bless me and my friends from his physic that will prefer his own skill
before a known experience.

But they say Tobacco is physical: the greater their folly that will then take
it too fast, when the best physic accouuted best indeed, is to take no
physic at all unless upon urgent occasion, but he that takes physic every
day, can never have a healthful body.

Well, yet they say Tobacco is of an excellent operation for the drying up of
Rheumes, Dropsies, and of all other moist humors whatsoever: as good a medicine
picked out for those diseases as he that poured on oil to quench the Tobacco
used but to draw dowue drink.
fire, when Tobacco is but made a shooing horn to draw down drink, when
every pipe must have his pot, and when both pipe and pot must still walk the
round, and march together arm in arm, as lovingly as the Whore and the Bawd.

But here is now a virtue picked out that cannot be denied, we see it with our
eyes what water and Rheum it brings up, and makes us to spit in that
abundance, as must be very wholesome to be so avoided; but if the virtue of
Tobacco be so precious because it will make a man to spit and to spaule, learn
this of me; thou that so much desire The loathsomeness of Tobacco.
to driuell and to slauer, take but one dragme of the abstract that is drawn
out of a Close-stoole; it shall go further for that purpose then a whole ounce
of the best Tobacco that ever came out of the West Indies, be it pudding or
leaf.

Let me entreat the gentle reader a little to pardon me, though I somewhat
stray from the bounds of modesty, it is but to express one loathsomeness by
another.

I cannot tell what reverent terms I might use to deliver their rude
inciuility, that whilst they are taking their Tobacco do so spit and spaule,
driuell and slauer, in that loathsome and unmannerly sort, as were enough to
make either man or woman to turn up their stomachs, especially if they were
such as had been trained up in ciuility, or had any regard of cleanliness. I
know not therefore The Tobacconist and the Drunkard fit companions.
whether of the twain I might condemn to be most loathsome and beastly,
whether the common Drunkard, or the Smoke taking Tobacconest, the one vomits
up his draffe when he is drunk, the other slauers out his driuell when he is
sober; a sight as unlovely to look on the one Tobacco sophisticated.
as the other: but if Gentlemen did know what sophisticated stuff it were that
they did buy at so dear a rate, I think some of them would be better advised;
we might else conclude that draffe were good enough for Swyne, and that a
Barley corn were fitter for Esops Cocks then a precious stone.

The Tobacconist yet has this special virtue, when he has bestirred himself
well to his Tobacco-pipe, he will be more thankful for a penny pot of drink
then he will for a two-penny loaf of bread.

It is not without some special cause that I do thus inueigh against Tobacco,
when for mine own part I am not so squemish but that I can as well endure the
loathsomeness of the sight, as the filthiness of the stink: but if it were
advisedly looked into and well considered of, we should find that the mass of
treasure that is yearly blown out of the Tobacco pipe, would suffice to give
royal pay to an army of forty thousand Soldiers, either for the A pitious
expense.
service of the King, or the defense of the country if need should so require:
or might rather be employed to many other charitable uses, now in this
miserable time, then to be so vainly consumed and spent as it is.

I refer it to the judgment of any man that has but the grace or fear of
God before his eyes.

Now to set down mine own conceit what I do assuredly believe, from whence it
should proceed that the English above all the nations in Christendom besides
are so much inclined to doat on this stinking smoaky vapor: I think it to be
an engine of the Devils own devising, who by his ministers has thus dispersed
this misty hellish fogge to stir up sin and wickedness, and in that place
above all the rest where true religion does shine most bright, and the word of
God has freest passage.

The inormities that be drawn in by Tobacco.
Let us but now a little look into the enormity: it is Tobacco that consumes
that wealth that might be employed to many godly uses.

It is Tobacco that in every Tauern, Inn, and Alehouse, is now as common as
any Curtizan.

It is Tobacco that Harlot like holds in society, the base and rascal sort
of people, and contains them as well in idleness, as in drunkennsse.

It is Tobacco that makes the poor Artificer to spend that at night, that he
has labored for all the whole day, whilst his wife and poor children do sit
at home without bread.

It is Tobacco that makes a rich man a poor man, a poor man a stark beggar,
a wise man a fool, an old man to dote, and a young man to admire his own
ignorance.

It is Tobacco that draws to drunkenness, from drunkenness to swearing,
from swearing to quarrelling, from quarrelling to stabbing, killing, and
murdering.

It is the excessive taking of Tobacco, that has hurt a great many, and of
mine own knowledge has killed some outright.

For him that will yet oppose me with his own experience, and will tell me what
himself has felt of the virtue of Tobacco: I will entreat him to pardon me,
though I give no better credit to his words then I do to the Papist, that will
protest in good earnest that he has found himself to be better assisted by
his prayers to our Lady, then he has been by the power of our Lord, and will
not let to swear that a Popes blessing is enough to preserve him from all the
Devils in Hell, that will not so much as protect him from the poor Hangman.

The Devil that has so many superstitious conceits wherewith to blindfold the
Papist, is not unfurnished of vain impressions wherewith to be sot the
Tobacconist: to conclude, he that can take Tobacco, drink Bottle-ale, play an
after game at Tables, and wear a Picadilly, is a complete man fit for the
time, and pleasing to all companies.

I have thus presented to your view, first the true picture of pride, together
with the folly of New-fashions, amongst the which this inordinate taking of
Tobacco, as it is the most vain, so it is the most loathsome. I would now give
you a little glimce of that accursed curre Covetousness, and of some one or
two of those whelps, that are crept out of his own kennell, namely Bribery
and Usury; for the rest that be of the same litter, as oppression, extortion,
exaction, and a number such other like, I may let them yet sleep till fitter
opportunity may serve to awaken them. They say it is not good to awake a
barking dog, but these be all biting curres, that sheepe-biter like, do
every day raven and worrie the whole Commonwealth.

Of covetousness.
Covetousness is the curre, that deuoureth his own Actaeon* it is the
Charybdis, that greedy gulf, that swalloweth up all without respect either of
friend or foe, either of virtuous or vicious: it is the Canker of the
Commonwealth, that eats up the gettings of the poor.

It is the viper that poisoneth the ears of Princes, teaching them to set
aside all just and honorable dealing.

It is Covetousness, that thinks nothing to be unlawful, where either gain
is to be begotten, or gold to be gathered.

It is Covetousness, that makes no conscience in gathering of gold, nor
spilling of blood, holding nothing to be unlawful that brings in gain.

It is Covetousness, that eats up the means, that the poor have to live
by, and that reaues the sweat from the Laborers brows.

The covetous wretch heapeth together abundance of wealth, with pain, with
travel, with perjury, with oppression, with usury, with extortion, with
wronging their neighbors, with the curse of the poor: which they leave again
to their unthrifty heirs, no less prodigal in spending, then their fathers
were miserable in gathering.

Covetous persons (amongst all other) are most pernicious to be admitted to the
administration of Justice; for by how much more they be advanced to greatness,
by so much the more they are accursed of the poor people, and daily vengeance
denounced against them* by as many as do but hear them spoken of.

The covetous miser is then most ready to devour, when he makes semblance of
greatest love and amity, and when he begins once to give precepts of good
counsel, his advise is then most dangerous, for if it bring not poison in the
mouth, be sure it brings a sting in the tail: o what pains the miser will
take, but to conjure a little money into the narrow circle of a canuas bag,
he thinks that the Angels of Heaven are not comparable to the Angels that be
in his purse.

I think if Hell were a place of return, and that either gold or gain were
there to be gotten, more triple headed dogs then one, were not able to defend
the entry.

Mammon is a great God, and he is honored by no base persons; he is served by
the rich and reverenced by Bribery in great estimation.
the mighty. Bribery is a bird of the same wing, though not so great a God as
Mammon, yet mightily befriended, defended and supported.

But as a man that has change of names, is seldom found to be honest, so a
Bribe that is sometimes great by the name of a gift, sometimes of a present,
sometimes of a Briberie disguised.
gratification, sometimes of a Benevolence, does so slily pass from hand to
hand under so many names and titles, that Bribery indeed, is hardly discerned.

Under these names and shows Bribery many times preiudiceth the service of the
Prince, peruerteth good Laws, and armeth all sorts of sinners with boldness
to offend.

Many sins boulstered out by briberie.
The laws and ordinances that are sometimes decreed in Cities and Towns
corporate, for the common good of the inhabitants, Briberie so dissolueth them,
as if they had been ordained to no other purpose but to bring in gifts and
rewards: and God forgive them their sins that will say, their be many
institutions, ordained (indeed) amongst Laws ordained but to bring in bribes*
these inferior sort of town magistrates, rather to bring in bribes, then to
punish abuse.

Bribery many times stands in the door of greatness, and sometimes helps
up injury to the place of audience; but he that has but a bad matter to
follow, briberie, is the man, that must first do his message: for he that has
art and skill, to know both how to give and take a bribe, he has the only
approved medicine, to pass through any affairs that are possible to be
effected.

There be many notes whereby thou may know a briber, for all his cunning
counterfeiting, but take these few for the most special: he loves still to be
near about a magistrate, or at the elbow of any other great person in place
and authority, and if you mark him well, he is ever more incroaching, to
creep into an office, and if you miss him in any of these places, you shall
lightly hit upon him amongst some of the Clerks, that are belonging to some of
the four Courts.

I would be glad now to present to your view, the true picture of usury, but
there has been question made of Usury.
usury what it is; some would have it to consist only in the letting of money:
but if we could as well understand What usury is.
the spiritual, as we do plod at the litterall, there was never more occasion
to exclaim against usury, then at this present.

But it is written, Thou shall not give thy money to usury: therefore to
extort, to exact, to oppress, to deceive, by false waights, by false measures,
by lying, by flattering, by perjury, or by any other manner of deceitful
villainy: they think it honest trade and traffic.

Whether all these be usurers or nay*
The Landlord, that racketh up his rents, the Farmer, that hoiseth up the
market, the Merchant that robs the Realm, the Shopkeeper, that buyeth by
one weight and sells by another; the Baker flatly cossineth the poor, in
every loaf of bread, that he buieth to fill his belly; the Bruer that is no
less deceitful in the measure of his caske, then in the price of his beer;
the crafty Tradesman, the deceitful Artificer: what are all these and many If
no usurers, then arrant thieves. A question demanded.
other more that might be here inserted, if they be not usurers, what are they
but arrant Thieves?

And I would here crave the censure of Divinity, whether he that will not sell
but for excessive gain, whether he that sells upon trust, and will therefore
hoise up his commodity to the higher prizes; whether he that will not lend
upon a pawn, unless he may buy it out right to the great hinderance of the
party that sells it; whether he that takes advantage of his neighbors
necessity either in buying or selling; whether he that purchases his
neighbors house or living out of his hands, whether he that buies an office
thereby to poule and pill, whether he that does take excessive gain, or
excessive fees, whether these or such other like are to be accounted usurers,
or nay, and whether all these things thus mentioned and spoken of are not as
fit to be reformed, as the usury in lending of money?

I speak now of Dubline.
There be some that have done their endeavors for the reforming of usury: but
now, as the Apostle says, The law speaks to them, that are under the law,
Romans 3. so I speak now of the place where my self was resident at the
writing of these lines, namely, at the city of Dubline in Ireland, where money
being scant, and where there be no lenders but upon good security, and profit
both together; yet in Dubline (as in all other places) men are driven upon
necessary occasions (that have not money of their own) to borrow of others
that have to lend, though they sometimes pay dearly for it; whereupon some
well disposed persons (stirred up by a godly zeal) began to inueigh against
usury, wherein without doubt, they honestly discharged their duties toward
God, but the usury that they so much reprehended, was only the use of lending
of money: when pretermitting now to speak of the excessive gain that is
incroached by shopkeepers, and by all other sorts of Tradesmen that do live by
buying and selling: I dare boldly avouch thus much, that all the Usury, and
Extortion, The extortion of Bakers and Brewers, pitious to be suffered.
or call it what you will, that is used by Bakers, and Brewers alone, is ten
times more grievous and especially to the poorer sort of people, then all the
interest that is taken for the letting out of money.

But they only denounced against the letting of money, and they did it no doubt
but according to the rule of Gods word, for the lending of money to use is
directly forbidden by Gods own mouth, and therefore sin; but the
inconvenience that I do find is this, Usury is reproved, Usury reproved, but
not truly defined
but it is not defined but according to the letter, whereupon the great Usurers
indeed, that do think that in their trade of buying, and selling, the gain of
one hundred pounds for an other a great deal too little, and that howsoever
they can defraud or exact by bargaining, they do think themselves to be very
honest and true dealing men; and that this prohibition: Thou shall not put thy
money to usury, does nothing at all concern them; and as they suppose, it
stretches no further then to the lending of money, when many great Divines have
given their opinions, that as in that petition give us this day our daily
bread: all our other necessaries are there comprehended; so in those words,
Thou shall not give thy money to usury: all other excessive gain, is likewise
included.

To this agrees the opinion of that ancient Father Saint Hierome, who writing
upon the Prophet Ezekiel, Usury defined
delivers these words, Some think that there is no usury but in money. This
did the holy Scriptures foresee, and therefore takes away all excessive
increase or gain in any thing.

What should I need to bring any further testimony in this case, when there is
no learned Divine that did ever deny it? I would not have men therefore to
flatter themselves too much, or to think themselves more honest then they be;
for he that takes excessive gain in any thing, is as great a usurer as he
that lends out money: but he that has the most corrupted Lungs himself, will
soonest complain of the unsavory breath of others. And who will be more ready
to exclaim against usury then he that is himself the greatest usurer?

Usury needs no more but the bare name to make it hateful: the Ribauld, the
Robber, the Thief, the Murderer, the Drunkard, the Whore-master, the Swearer,
the Blasphemer, they all cry out against usury; they that are of noreligion
will yet plead religion, and bitterly rail at him, that lends money to use:
he that has no conscience at all, will yet pretend a conscience, and will
exclaim against the usurer: when if he did but look into his own impiety, or
if his own faules were written in his forehead, he might pulle his cap over
his brows as low as his neighbors: but whilst they would bereave the usurer
of his interest, they themselves would rob him of his principal.

I would not have any man to think that what I have formerly spoken is in the
defense of usury, that I know at all times, in all places and by all good men,
has ever bin condemned.

I am now come to figure forth a sin that in a certain kind has some
affinity with usury, and that is that monstrous Of Murder.
sin of Murder: for as he that in bargianing, buying, and selling, can by
any fraudulent or deceitful means, circumuent, or so over reach his neighbor
to make him pay for a commodity three times more in value then it is worth, yet
this he accounts to be no usury, nor any manner of crack to his credit or
reputation; but does think it to be Merchant-like, or Tradseman-like
traffic, and will in no wise acknowledge himself to be an Usurer: so the
malicious wretch that by practice and by policy seeks the utter wrack and
ruin of his neighbor whom he does malign, so long as he lays no violent
hands on him, he thinks himself to be no Murderer at all.

Of Murder as it is determined by Christ.
When the High Priests by subtilty brought Christ to Pilate, and by false
accusations procured his death, they thought themselves to be clean and pure.

Pilate again, when he had delivered Christ to be crucified, washed his hands,
and pronounced himself to be innocent: but our Savior Christ in the fifth of
Matthew, has there determined the matter, both what Murder is; and who is a
Murderer; his words be these: Ye have heard how that it was said, to them of
old time, kill not, for whosoever kills shall be in danger of judgment. But I
say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of
judgment; and whosoever says to his brother Racha, shall be in danger of
council, but whosoever says to his brother, thou Fool, shall be in danger
of Hell fire.

The Pharisees that had corrupted the Scriptures with their false glosses,
interpreted this place: he that slays shall be guilty or in danger of
judgment, that is to say, if a man commit a Murder, his act is enough to
testifye against him, there needs no more but to pronounce the sentence of
death: this text did the Pharisees extend no further then to kill with the
hand, or to murder by stroke or dent of weapon; but our Savior Christ
restoring again the true sense, auowed flatly, that a man to be angry Who be
murderers by Gods Law
with his brother, is to murder him, and deserves death, for the Law is not
so much respecting to the hand, as to the heart.

But this is a hard saying says the malicious, but yet a true saying, as Saint
John in his first Epistle, and 3. Chap. plainly affirms, that he that hates
his brother is a Murderer.

But now actual Murder indeed finds friends, and to kill a man* though
sometimes cowardly, it is rather reputed for Manhood, then for Murder, or
will be found but Manslaughter or Chance-medly: and there be that Cowardly
Murderers.
can tell how to murder a man with a Pin, better then they know how to do
with a Pyke, and dare adventure to murder him with a word, that they never
durst look in the face with a sword; but these sorts of Murderers are not to
be taxed, when murder in former ages has been known sometimes to sit roabed
in Scarlet, and when Cruel Murderers
histories do make mention of some merciless Magistrates, that has murdered
more poor suitors with their Currish answers, then the Hangman of London did
ever strangle with his Hempen halter.

To conclude, as amongst Usurers, those that do offend by the letting out of
money, are the fewest in number, so amongst Murderers, the number is far more
greater of those that does both slay and slaughter by their merciles cruelty,
then are the other that do most bloudily commit murder with their hands.

But see here a monster in nature, that preaseth now to show himself in my
Glass, a common Drunkard, the very dregs of double Beer, and strong Ale:
amongst men a Beast, and amongst Beasts a very Swyne.

A Drunkard is called the King of good-fellowes, but it is but a drunken kind
of good-fellowship, when amongst all sorts of friends, a drunken friend is most
to be detested and abhorred.

A drunken friend is the worst friend that may be, for in his drunkenness he
discloseth all that he knows: the Drunkard dissolueth all his gettings into
the pot, and drowneth all his virtues in the Ale-Fat: he is not fit to be
employed in any good or godly exercise.

There are three things that are not to be credited, a Woman when she weeps, a
Merchant when he swears, nor a Drunkard when he prays.

But it is accounted now to proceed from a generous spirit, to be drunken once
a day, and they have gotten coniurations, and enchantments, whereby to draw on
drunkenness.

Charms to draw on drunkenness.
A health to the King, a health to the Queen, a health to my Lord, a health to
my Lady: And who dares deny to pledge one of these healthes? they will
scarcely auow him to be a good subject, that will deny to pledge the Kings
health: as though the king were honored by a company of drunken sots, that
will make themselves beasts, under the pretense to do the king honor. It is
like the honor the idolatrous papists do give to the virgin Marie, who in a
superstitious zeal do attribute that to her for honor, that being well
examined, is her greatest dishonor.

These Art-Magicke Charms, that do draw on men to power in more then they are
able to bear, if it be not vomited up again by the drunkard himself, it is
yet spewed out of the soul of him that does behold it with an honest
conscience. The Prophet Esaias in his third chap pronounces an endless woe unto
them that are mighty to draw down drink, and as their end is damnation, so
their damnation is without end.

But see, here comes in the adulterer, with his harlot in his hand; but they
must needs go (they say) that the Devil drives, and there is no hope to keep
out whoredom, where drunkenness her gentleman usher has free and quiet
passage to lead the way.

Whoredom has many friends and favorites.
Whoredom has many friends in these days, a number of favorites, that gives
her boldness whereby she insinuates her self into the world.

Solomon tells us, That the plague is in the house of the harlot, and that she
sits in the doors of her house on a seat in the high places of the city.

Whoredom scorns to be closed up in any obscure place, no, she has friends
to boulster her out, and to support her in the highest and most principal
places of the city.

Harlots now adays; do not lurk in by corners as thieves are wonted, nor in
secret chambers, as strumpets have bin accustomed, nor in close clossets as
conspiring Papists, when they be at their Mass; but she frequents the
principal places of the city, where she gives entertainment to those that
comes unto her, that are not of the basest sort, but many times of the best
reputed: but they do not know, says Solomon, that the dead are in her house,
and that her guests are in the depth of hell. And will thou yet enter her
house, that carries death and damnation about her? beware A true description of
a harlot.
of her, thou that art wise; she first inticeth, and then she kills, she
wooes thee with her eyes, for in these days eyes can both speak and
understand, and the harlot baits her desires, with a number of prostituted
countenances whereby to allure and entice.

Nothing more true*
As the harlot destroieth his soul that does frequent her, so she is a plague
to the flesh, more infectious to the body then the common pestilence, and
carries more diseases about her, then is in an hospital.

And as the known whoremonger, is but of a rotten reputation, A reward fit for
whoremongers.
so he is most commonly as full of loathsome diseases; or let it be that God
sometimes does suffer whoremongers to live, till they may stroke there gray and
hoarie hairs, yet they never escape the filthy diseases of botches, byles,
aches, inflammation, and of that loathed disease of the french pox, a little
gilded over by the name of the gowt, or sometimes of the sciatica: and besides
a corporal stroke of heavens heavy hand in this life, the whoremo^ger shall
feel the fearful addition of an eternal woe in the fire of hell.

The harlot is like a new play, that being thrice presented on the stage,
begins to grow staale. And the harlot that is These old antiquities are little
set by.
once past thirty five years, is fitter to furnish an Hospital, then to
garnish a bed chamber. The proverb is old, A Popes Bull, a dead man's skull,
and an old trull, are not all worth a pound of wool: marry there is some
comfort yet left to a harlot, when she comes to years, for an old whore will
make a spicke and span new bawd.

The best commendations, I can give to a harlot is this; she brings a man to
repentance in the end, though not for his sins, yet to curse the time that
ever he knew her.

Harlots of two sorts, the first a stain to good women.
Harlots be of two kinds, the one induced the rather unto it, by the currish
demeanure of an unkind husband: or sometimes enforced to play the strumpet to
relecue her want, o (perhaps) to uphold her pride: these kind of harlots are
very secret, in all their carriages, and will make choice of such friends (as
near as they can) as shall conceal all their escapes, and maintain their
reputations in the eye of the world.

The second a limme of the devil.
A second sort there be that setting aside all fear of God, or shame of the
world, does surrender themselves to whoredom, through the vicious heat of
there own intemperat desires: these be those that does live of the spoil of
all comers: they consume them in goods, in body, and in soul that does
frequent them. And these are desirous to make themselves known strumpets to
the world, thereby to get themselves to be hunted after and sought unto: for
these are ready for all that will come, and that they might be the rather noted
in their vocation, they do manifest themselves in there attire, in there
demeanure, in there audacious boldness and immodest behavior.

They will show themselves what they be, at maskes, at meetings, at banquets,
at feasts, which they will still frequent, but of purpose to seek
acquaintance, and to draw in customers.

The custom o^ good women pitiously neglected.
The time has bin when a woman that had bin once infamed, should have bin
shunned, nay she should have bin scorned of every good woman, and she that
had been honest (indeed) would never have endured her company that had been
tainted in her credit: but now every marked creature, that is notorious to the
world, will insinuate her self into the most principal places, and into the
company of those women that are not only regarded for their greatness, but
in like manner esteemed for their goodness.

But I will not take upon me to detect Ladies and Gentlewomen, what company
they shall keep, but the old proverb can no longer hold, That birds of a wing
will fly together: but alas poor virtue, sul little do thou know how much
thou wrongest thy self, by thy associating thy The practice of harlots to
slander good women.
self thus with vice, when the practice of a harlot is, that where she
knows a woman to be most worthily renowned, and most honorably esteemed for
her virtue; there she will intrude and prease to get admittance, not so much
to countenance her self, as to disgrace and discredit the other, bending all
her endeauours to diminish the reputation of every good woman, and to bring
them into a suspicious conjecture, to be birds all of one feather.

How many women, both good and honest, (and sometimes Many good women defamed
by conuersing with harlots.
honorable) that by this practice of insinuating harlots, has been betrayed
and infamed?

And as good women, by their over much kindness and affability, have sometimes
thus diminished their own credits: so men that be of place and authority, had
need be very wary and circumspect, how they give grace or entertainment to a
woman that has been noted to be of lewd life: for besides, it breeds
suspicion in as many as does behold it; so it is the rather confirmed, when
every harlot is desirous to slander her self with great personages, and the
greater a man is either in office or dignity, by so much the more she is
desirous to be slandered by him: for she is not ignorant, but that to be
accounted a paramour to him that is had in any regard at all, is available for
her advantage: and she makes use of it for several purposes: for first, she
prizes her self at the higher rate amongst her baser companions that does
frequent her, then otherwise she could do.

Again it shelters her from being called in question, for who dares detect her
that they think shall be supported and borne out by so mighty friends?

It yet again so armeth her with that audacious boldness, that she dares
insinuate her self into any company, be they never so honest, that otherwise
would spit at her.

Harlots better countenanced then those women that be good.
But what woman would be honest now adays, when the worse a woman lives, the
better she is thought on: if there be any that lives in want, it is poor
chastity, she finds fewest friends, and least countenance.

He that has a wife, if she be a little wanton, she is as good as
Comminseede, to draw home customers, and there has been husbands, that has
had discreetion to make use of it; as Phanlius the Argian, who to raise his
fortunes, A wittall the very shame of manhood.
offered his wife to King Philip: and as Galba, who seeing Mecenas to cast some
amarous glances on his wife, shrunk down upon his Cushion, as one oppressed
with sleep, thereby to give him the better scoope, whereby he might persist.

He that can thus tolerate, may keep his wife to ruffle it out amongst the
best, without any charge to his own purse, and she will win him many
friends, that will bring him in Caates, to the kitchen, fish, foul, wine
sugar, spice, The proverb is old, though to make up a Rhyme, it be a little
unmannerly: i. Blessed be the Hoole, that brings in both The proverb old,
though something unmannerly.
wood and cool: that helps to pay house-rent, and some money to the good man's
purse. Women are wise, and by their sleights they have Emperors idle, as
Amthoxy, strong men feeble as Sampson, valiant men effeminate as Hercules: wise
men dissolute, as Solomon: and eloquent men lascivious, as Aurelius.

But I hope all that I have said, cannot offend those women that be good, whom
I protest, I have ever reverenced, and do still esteem to be more precious
then silues or gold, and therefore to be honored of all good men; but as the
Apostle writing to the Corinthians: There must be Good women more precious then
silver or gold.
Heresies, that those that are proved may be known: so say I, Amongst women,
there must be some bad amongst the good; that those that are good indeed may be
the more With a reverent regard I do thus advise them.
glorious* but yet I would wish Ladies and Gentlewomen, that do tender their
own credits, to be well advised how they converse or give entertainment to
those women that be bad; because if the rules of Philosophy be true, there is
not a better mean to discern of men or women what they be, then to measure
them by the company that they are accustomed to keep.

But let us enter a little into consideration, how we might distinguish
between a good woman and a bad: we cannot do it by the outward show; for if we
should A hard matter to judge of women by their outward show.
aim our judgments but according to their looks, we might sometimes think
the old painted face of Proserpsna, to be the same that it was, when she first
became to be Plutoes wife.

If we should judge of them but by the show of their apparel, we might many
times presuppose the virtuous young woman, to be a lascivious Curtizan; they are
al alike attired in their colored silks, and they do so narrowly imitate the
one the other, both in form and fashion, as that they cannot be discerned but
only by behavior.

Precious things ordained by God to be used to his glory.
I am not ignorant, but that silk, silver, yea and gold it self, were created
by the almighty God: and not only for his own glory, but likewise for
necessities sake, and may well be used by good and godly persons, such as are
in degree, and of ability to pay for them. We have some presidents out of the
holy Scriptures: Isaac a godly man sent Bracelets, and other habiliments of
gold to Rebecca, a good and a virtuous woman: and we read of Hester, that
sometimes clad her self in rich and sumptuous apparel, protesting before God
that she did it to no other end, then to feed the liking of that great King
Assuerus, that had chosen her for his wife.

And Judith praised in the Scriptures for a godly woman, though after the death
of her husband, during the time of her widdow-hoode she suited herself in
sackcloth, yet whilst her husband lived, she had been both sumptuous in
apparel and rich in Jewels and other precious ornaments, wherewith she
afterward decked herself, but of purpose to free the City of Bethulia from
the power of Holofernus, that then had besiged the same.

A woman's garment no argument of incontinency.
It is not the Frocke that makes the Friar the more devout, nor the garments
of any woman, a true confirmation of incontinency of her body. This therefore
may well be auowed by the rule of Christian sobriety: that a woman What is fit
for good women to observe.
(neither exceeding the decency of fashion, nor going beyond the limits of her
own estate, nor surpassing the bounds of her husbands calling) but that such a
woman may wear any thing.

Silk, silver, and gold, are things iudifferent of themselves, the use is all
whereunto they are employed: yet as there is a conueniency to be used in
behauiours, so there is a decency to be followed in fashion; neither do I think
that all fashions that are now in use, are fit for every good woman to follow.

Gaudy attires by whom first devised.
I am persuaded, that a number of these new invented Gaudes that be now in use
and custom, were first devised to please the appetites of such women, as were
either of loose life or of little wit, and afterward becoming general, Why
taken up by good women.
were taken up and reputed for the new fashion: and that many women again,
that are both good and gracious, are the more inclined to follow them the
rather to avoid suspicion, either that they are not able to support it as other
women, be or otherwise to be accounted Hypocrites and contumelious despisers of
that which is received by all.

There is not a woman so vain or ungodly that can devise a toy (be it never so
fond and foolish) but it is taken up for a fashion, and then it is as good a
warrant as a Non omittas to an under sheriff, for every woman to follow. But
where chastity is joined with vanity, what commendations it may merit, I
will leave to good women themselves to be censured.

This I would infer, that the incontinent woman is no so easily coniectured
by the outward show, as by the inward disposition.

Things tolerable.
Do you see her that is sumptuous in apparel, that does shine in silk, in
silver, and in gold, that is decked with Gems, and lewels, that be rich and
precious? look into her ability, is she able to pay for them, does she not
exceed the limits of her degree and calling? she uses them then to the glory
of God, that has created them to that end and purpose, to deck and ornifie
such worthy persons.

See yet another that is gaudy to the show, garish to look upon, and new
fangled in all the manner of her attire: look yet again into her disposition,
is she sober, is she silent, is she bashful, is she modest? let us think
reverently of that woman, let us not judge of her by the outward show, she does
but follow the fashion.

Things not to be excused.
I would I could now frame a cleanely excuse for those women that be Painted,
that be Poudered, that be Periwigde; that do bend their whole endeauours but to
the adorning of their bodily beauties, as if they had been created of God, but
only to make themselves to appear to be gay and beautiful but I know not how
to do it, for she that is not ashamed to falsify those exterior parts of the
body, is much to be suspected that she will make little conscience to
adulterate the inward beauty of the mind. But amongst these women that do so
much affect this bodily beauty, tell one of them of some other woman that is
reputed to be more wise, more modest, or more virtuous then herself, alas it
is a matter of nothing, A matter of nothing.
the news does little offend her; but tell her of another that is reputed to
be more beautiful, more fair, or better favored then herself, this is a
heavy cross indeed, A matter intolerable.
enough to make her sick, and keep her chamber, and there is nothing that
does more grievously afflict her, then to see another woman's gown, more gaudy
then her own.

Marks whereby to know a good woman from a bad.
But my promise was to give rules how to distinguish between a good woman and
a bad, and promise is debt, but I must be well advised how I take the matter in
hand; for we were better to charge a woman with a thousand defects in her
soul, then with that one abuse of her body; and we must have two witnesses,
besides our own eyes, to testify, or we shall not be believed: but I have
bethought my self of a couple that I hope will carry credit.

The testimony of the Prophet Esaias.
The first is the Prophet Esaias, that in his days challenged the daughters of
Sion for their stretched out necks, their wandering eyes, at their mincing and
wan ton demeanure as they passed through the streets: these signs and shows
have been ever thought to be the especial marks whereby to know a harlot.
But Solomon in The testimony of Solomon.
a more particular manner does better furnish us with more assured notes, and
to the end that we might the better distinguish the good woman from the bad,
he delivers their several qualities, and wherein they are opposite: and
speaking of a good woman he says, She seeks out wool and flax, and
labors cheerfully with her The properties of a good woman.
hands: she ouerseeth the ways of her household, and eats not the bread of
idleness.

Solomon thinks that a good woman should be a home housewife, he points her
out her houseworke. she ouerseeth the ways of her household, she must look
to her children, her servants and family: but the paths of a harlot (he The
properties of a harlot.
says) are mooueabl, for now she is in the house, now in the streets, now
she lies in wait in every corner, she is still gadding from place to place,
from person to person, from company to company: from custom to custom, she
is ever more wandering; her feet are wandering, her eyes are wandering, her wits
are wandering, Her ways are like the ways of a serpent: hard to be found out.

A good woman (again) opens her mouth with wisdom, the Law of grace is in
her tongue: but a harlot is full of words, she is loud and babbling, says
Solomon.

She is bold, she is impudent, she is shameless, she can not blush: and
she that has lost all these virtues, has lost her evidence of honesty: for
the ornaments of a good woman is temperance in her mind, silence in her
tongue, and bashfulnesse in her countenance.

It is not she that can lift up her heels highest in the dancing of a
galliard, that is lavish of her lips or loose of her tongue.

Now if Salomons testimony be good, the woman that is impudent, immodest,
shamelesle, insolent, audacious, a night-walker, a company-keeper, a gadder
from place to place, a reueler, a ramper, a roister, a rioter: she that has
these properties, has the certain signs, and marks of a harlot, as Solomon
has avowed. Now what credit his words will carry in the Commissaries court, I
leave to those that be advocates, and procters in women's causes.

I have hitherto presented to your view the true resemblance of a harlot,
as well what she is, as how she might be discerned: I would now give you the
like notice of The whore of Babylon.
that notable strumpet, the whore of Babylon, that has made so many Kings and
Emperors drunk with the cup of abominations, by whom the nations of the
earth have so Of spiritual fornication.
defiled themselves by their spiritual fornication, called in the scripture by
the name of idolatry, (but now within these last 500. years, amongst
Christians) shadowed under the title of Popery. This harlot has heragents,
Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Monks, Friars, Jesuits, Priests, with a
number of other like, and all of them Factors and her Bands, the professed
enemies of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that do supersticiously adore the
Crucifixe, that are indeed enemies to the Cross of Christ, and do tread his
holy blood under their scornful feet: that do build up devotion with
ignorance, and do ring out their The doctrine of the Pope.
hot Alarums, in the ears of the unlearned, teaching that the light can be no
light, that the Scriptures can be no Scriptures, nor the truthcan be no truth,
but by their allowance, and if they will say, that high noone is midnight, we
must believe them, and make no more ado, but get us to bed.

These be they that can make God the creator that made both heaven and earth,
of a little piece of bread; this The God of the Papists.
doctrine they do teach, and this the poor ignorant Papists must believe, and
zealously say Amen to: but alas, their pretended holiness in zeal, is indeed
but the hollownesse in zeal, and the fulness of that zeal wherewith The
blindness of Papists.
they be so blinded, arises through the emptiness of that knowledge which
they will not see.

If blindness be a misery, what is ignorance, or if the duskinesse of the
night be uncomfortable, what is the darkness of superstitious Popery?

A Papist and a Tailor are of like affinity, they do both rely on their good
works: their faithes do hang on other A papist and a tailer of some affinity.
men's beleefes, they do exercise all their religion by an exorcising Mass,
accounting the old and new testaments, to be but books of controversies,
holding it to be a peremptory sacrilege for any layman to meddle with; they
think they may see more by a wax candle when it is lighted, then they may do
by the light of Gods word: they say they be good subjects dutiful and loyal,
and yet what a wrangling they do keep with the Prince for his supremacy?

Things impossible.
The hound that follows two hares at once can catch neither, and he that
serves two masters of contrary kinds, must be a traitor to the one. As much
possible to unite two contrary religions in one conscience, as to reconcile
fire and water, Christ and Beliall, God and the Devil.

If the Pope court in the conscience, and sit in the Throne of the heart, the
King can have there but a cold entertainment. He was wise therefore that
turned his A wise part.
guest out of doors, that could warm his cold hands with the same breath,
wherewith he cooled his hot pottage.

The double dealing of Papists.
The Papists have mouths for their Masses, tongues for their Prince, and
hearts for their Pope: but let them say what they list, and let them sometimes
bind it with an oath, the Pope has taught his vermin a new doctrine of
equivocation, and of mental reservation: and he has dispensations in store,
not only for infringing an oath to a King, but also for the murdering of a
King, if he be such a King as does profess the Gospel.

The Popes power.
If the Popes penance chamber were opened, we might find a rate of pardons for
all offenses that might be committed either against God or man, those only
excepted, that may be any ways prejudicial to him self; nay, you shall find
indulgences for future offenses, for sins that are not yet committed.

Christ forgiueth no sin, but upon hearty repentance: A happy thing for
richmen
the Pope forgiueth all sins only for ready money; a happy thing for rich
men that may buy heaven for money: but the devil in the mean time, is like to
be basely attended on in hell, with a company of poor beggars, that are not
able to buy pardons, nor to purchase dispensations.

The Pope shuts up all goodness into his own The Popes charity.
waare-house, God receives us now no more to mercy, but he receives us to
penance, to plunge us in purgatory, where we shall lie scorched and broiled,
till the Pope in his charitable disposition, will mercifully release us: which
he is ever ready to do if we have ready money to give him.

Angry Saints.
And for the Saints, they are become very tyrants, malicious and vengible, if
their Eues be not fasted, their images worshipped, and their Shrines visited,
with a Candell, or with some other offering; they will else wreake themselves
of us without any compassion, and will both punish and grievously afflict us:
so that there is no mercy remaining in God nor in his Saints, but all rests
in the Pope alone. Do not the poor Papists run mad in conceit, No mercy but
in the Pope.
to think that Indulgences for all sins, may be derived from the Popes
Exchequer; that if a man wants not money, The mad conceits of Papists.
he needs not want heaven: that the mere sign of the cross, can fray away
the devil; that priests should be licensed their concubines, and inhibited
there wives: that one Benefice, and one honest wife, should be unlawful, but
that two Benefices, and three whores should be tolerable?

The Popes votaries.
But let us a little consider of these holy votaries that have vowed obedience,
that have vowed poverty, that have vowed chastity: what is their vowed
obedience, but an exemption of all obedience, either to God or man, to serve
their Pope alone? what is their vowed poverty, but to enjoy the wealth of the
world, to live in ease and idleness, and to feed themselves fat? and now to
speak truly, what is their vowed chastity; but vowed Bawderie?

The grounds of Popery.
The efficient cause of Popery: it first springs from a blind zeal, it
does vaunt of true religion, and attributes a certain virtue unto things
without Gods ordinance.

The Pope himself steals his ceremonies, from Jews, from Turks, from
Pagans, some from Idolatry, all from Heresy.

Popery could never endure the preaching of the Gospel, and there is neither
Turk, Jew, nor Pagan, whatsoever, The hatred of Papists,
that the Papists do so much hate, as they do these Heretics that do seek
their salvation in the death and passion of Jesus Christ: we pity them, they
persecute us, we pray for them, they pursue us, we love them, they loath us, we
seek to convert them, they seek to confound us; they pursue us, not for that
we are sinners, but because we are zealous of the glory of God, and of sincere
and pure worship: they hate us not because of our offenses, but because of that
will and desire it has pleased God to give us, to serve him purely according
to his word; they seek us not out for our abominations and Idolatries, but
because we detest theirs.

Thus they hate us, but it is with a contrary hatred; for they hate us because
we do seek the glory of God according to his word, of the which they would
drepriue us.

The true picture of a Papist.
In a brief manner now to show you what a Papist is: he is blind in
knowledge, lame in judgment, self conceited, apt to believe lies, he is
wilful, obstinate, he is wise and holy in his own conceit, walking in the
steps of other men's opinions; he cannot believe that God understands any
prayers but those that are made in latin: he thinks there is no other high
way to heaven, but that which leads through purgatory. Amongst all the
Beasts in the field he loves a Popes Bull, but amongst all the Herbs in the
garden he cannot endure that which the Apothecaries do call Gratia Dei: his
eyes are dimmed, his ears are stopped, his heart is hardened, his senses are
benumbed, he is so afraid of rusting, that he does use to scour himself with
ashes and oil: he is so zealously inclined to the deeds of love and charity,
that he had rather murder a Protestant on Sunday, then eat an egg on Friday.

If I should still prosecute as I have begun, to present to your viewes the
true representations of vice and vanity, as they do offer themselves to open
show, I might compose such a Looking-glass as were fitter for a Barbers shop,
then a Ladies chamber: I will therefore give you but a little glimce of those
deformities, that are yet to follow.

The Flatterer
The Fatterer was never yet ashamed to show his face, yet in former ages
palpably to flatter, was accounted but the profession of a knave: but now vain
glory does so sway amongst us, that he that wants a knave to flatter him, can
play the Fool and flatter himself.

A Parasite seeing Dionisius in private discourse with certain Favorites of
his own, burst out into a great laughter, but being demanded by Dionisius why
he laughed so loud? answered, At your Majesty's pleasant conference: why (said
the Emperor) do thou hear our communicatio^? no (said the Parasite) I do
not hear your speeches, A notable Flattering Knave.
yet knowing your words to be always full of wit, and all your discourses so
pleasant and pithy, it produces me to laughter, but to see that speech, though
I hear not any thing what you say.

Flattery and Tobbaco two violent purgers.
Flattery and Tobacco, are but two smoaky vapors, yet as the time serves, the
one purges wise men of their wit, and the other Fools of their money.

The Flatterer is nearely alyed to the Cannyball, they do both feed on men;
the difference is, the Cannyball feeds on those that be dead, but the
Flatterer deuoureth those that be alive.

A dangerous Parasite.
The Court Parasite does more often subvert and overthrow the wealth of a
Kingdom, then an open enemy.

Iestmonger
But see here another bird of the same wing, a Iestmonger, a kind of creature
that a man would think, Nature had hatched up into the world, to be a scorn
to all wisemen:

Uncivil iestes
His most pleasant mirth is uncivil ieastes, and for want of better matter, he
will sometimes help it out with a bawdy song.

Stolen jests.
Some wanting conceits of their own, are driven to commit felony, and to
steal from other men, and putting them in execution, the effect may so well
fall out, as it did with Esops Ass, who counterfeiting the little Dog, would
play with his master, till he was surely banged.

There be some of them that will steal sentences, and phrases out of books,
which having once committed to memory, when they be amongst company, they will
deliver them as familiarly as if they were children of their own begettting,
both lawful and legitimate.

Odible iestes.
There be amongst them, that will break iestes upon Heaven and sometimes make
themselves merry with God that created Heaven: another will sport as pleasantly
with the word of God* as he will do with the fictons of the Poets one will auow
a villainy, a second will swear it, a third will defend it, and all the rest
will laugh at it.

No Jest without a Fool and a Flateter.
It is not worthy to be called a lest, where there is not a lester, and a
Parasite to cheer up the Guests, the one to rail and slander, the other to
smooth and flatter: for as the body must be balanced with excess, so the
mind must be recreated with slavish delights.

The Temporiser.
The next that now makes his appearance, is the Temporizer; a fellow that can
carrowse with Alexander, abstain with Romulus, eat with the Epicure, fast with
the Stoieke, sleep with Endymion, watch with Crisippus, laugh with Democitus,
weep with Heraclitus.

He is like a Winde-mill, that will still grind, let the wind blow where it
will: he never troubles himself about matters of Faith; for look how the
Prince believes, so believes he.

He has some pretty sight in music, and is very apt to play a base part, and
although sometimes he may fail in the Note, yet he will be sure to keep the
Time.

The Formalist.
Here comes now the Formalist, a fellow that is full of complements; one that
does use to frequent other men's tables, and can make sauce to every dish as it
comes to the board, with other men's discredits: he never drinks to any man,
but with some quick conceited sentence, and not a word but at your service
sir, at your command, at your pleasure; and in all his communication, so full
of Fustian phrases, that do many times lay open their Masters ignorance.

This over much affectation is more ridiculous then mere and simple ignorance,
the one is to be pitied, the other to be denied: but the Formalist takes great
pains to make himself to be mocked at* all that he endeavors, is to be
reputed a flower of courtesy* when by his demeanure he shows himself to be a
right spectacle of folly.

The Fantastic.
Here follows now an other, that one pair of couples might serve them both,
it is the fantastic, one that is so near a kin to the fool, that they
cannot marry without a license from the Pope: he has robbed a Jack Naapes of
his gesture, mark but his countenance how he mops, how he mowes, and how he
streines his looks: he has the French Conge, the Spanish Baselos Maines, the
Italian shrug, his countenance is the true description of the time.

The Ninihammer.
Will you see now, one that is new come from the dancing school, a Ninihammer,
that had rather tread you out a trick of one and twenty follies, then to
perform one action, tending either to virtue or wisdom.

His observation.
He thinks boldness to be a principal part of virtue, and that makes him to
become impudent: his greatest observation is about the New fashion: his
ambition is, to be highly commended, but especially by fools, fiddlers, and
His Ambition.
tapsters: his greatest dexterity is in the managing his Tobacco pipes: His
Dexterity.
and he has the gulpe, the whiffe, and the snuff very exactly and at his
fingers ends.

His skill in Astronomy.
He is very judicious, in censuring of plays and players, and is well seen in
the high Art of Astronomy, and without the help of an Ephemerides, he is able
to calculate the whole number of Bawdy houses, that be near about his own
lodging, in what temperature they be seated, and whether they stand in a hot or
a cold Climat.

Special notes whereby to know him.
You shall know him partly by his feather, partly by his long lock, that hangs
dangling by his ear, partly by his garters and his roses, but that which comes
nearest the mark indeed, is his yellow starched band. Will you now make a
little room for a fellow that perhaps can tell you The Newesmonger.
some News, and it is the Newesmonger himself, that can acquaint you with all
the occurrence, from Italy, from France, from Spain, from Germany, from the
East, from the Good news for Tyrones wel-willers in Ireland.
West, from the North, from the South: he can tell you news from the Pope, how
he means to give assistance to the Earl of Tyrone, of men, of money, of
munition, of shipping, and of all other r essaries, and to send him into
Ireland, new sanctified a^^ngst his friends, that has long looked for him, and
do daily wish for him, and alas are like to do so still, to their great
grief and sorrow.

These Newesmongers be those that from time to time do spread such reports, as
does sometimes arm the ill disposed, Papists are very credulous.
with vain and frivolous hopes, but especially the Papists* that are so strong
of faith, that they will believe any lie, be it never so vain or foolish, if
it does any ways serve their purpose.

And as the Newesmonger is not without Art sometimes to spread a lie, that is
of his own coining, so by some prery skill that he has in Arithmeticke, he
can both multiply and divide lies, that be of other men's making.

He uses to frequent faires, markets, and other places of aslembly: sometimes
he will stumble into a Barbers shop: but about ten of the clock in the
fore-noone, you may hitte upon him in the middle walk in Paul's: but from
aleauen to twelve, he will not miss the Exchange.

These be the places, from whence he makes his collections, and if there be any
news at all stirring, he pockets them up for his own provision, and he never
vents them but for his own advantage, for he knows that men are so well
inclined to have novelties, that they are as good payment for a dinner, or a
supper, as eighteen pence to go to an ordinary.

Here comes yet another, a fit companion to march in one rank with the news
monger, it is the state ape: a The state ape.
man that will take upon him to know more then he understands: he speaks of
nothing but of matters of state and what laws are fit to pass and repasse by
act of Parliament; and in the Parliament time, he makes himself as conversant
with all intents and plots, purposed for the Commonwealth, as if they had
been of his own begetting.

And what Ambassador can be sent from any foreign Prince or Potentate, but
before he has delivered his message, or before he has put his foot in at the
court A wonderful prescience.
gate, but he will tell you, both what his arrand is, and what shall be his
answer, if a man will believe, what himself will make vaunt of? there is not a
Court counsel holden, The malecontent.
but he will seem to know whereof they have consulted, and what they have
concluded.

I think I do but pester your eyesight with presenting to your viewes these
vain prospects; but a man may the better learn to eschew vanity, by learning
first to know it: here is yet one other of the same strain, a malecontent, a
right cornish Diamond, that although a counterfeit, would yet be set in gold.

He is singular in his own conceit, and will sometimes withdraw himself into
retired places, for bearing speech and conversation, reproouing the vanities of
the world but with a word, and the manners of the people with a shrug, or a
countenance, giving answers with signs and dumb shows, pacing his steps,
with sad and sober aspects, as if he would have it said, Lo, yonder goes the
melancholy gentleman: see there virtue and wisdom both despised and
neglected, this is the man that does carry a whole Commonwealth in his head,
that can manage the whole affairs of a state, and that is able to draw the
world about by the nose in a string.

His very gate, as he passes along the street, cries Look upon me: and
although to some men's thinking he is but a man, yet in his own opinion, the
wisest of men.

Swaggerers and quarrellers*
I will not trouble you with these angry fellows, that will swagger, and be
ready to give the stabbe, sometimes for the pleasure of a harlot sometimes for
the speaking of a word, sometimes for the taking of the wall: sometimes, for
the not pledging of a health. And what a Precedence*
stir we keep again about precedence? we strive with Zebed^us children, who
shall sit on the right hand, who on the left, we dispute of dignities, who shall
go before, and who shall come behind; and as this infection is common amongst
men, so it is become so violent amongst women, that they are ready to scratch
for their places, many of them, taking their rooms perforce, and will render
reasons whereby to maintain their causes: one makes her plea, my husband is an
Esquire, and I will give place to none but to my Lady; an other will allege,
my husband is a Doctor, and I will therefore march with the foremost: one
stands upon her pedigree, and deriues her self from some ancient family; an
other challenges precedence by her husbands office, an other by her wealth, by
her chains, by her Jewels, by her silken gowns, by her guarded peticoate; and
they are so eager, and so vehement in these incounters, that if their husbands
should once fall a dealing in these quarrels, they could not be determined,
without bloody noses.

But amongst all the spectacles of folly, that we have yet surueied, he now
presents himself that is best worthy to bear the Babble: look upon him, it
The Amorist.
is the amorist: see how gastfully he looks, his arms crossed, his eyes
blubbered, his hatte pulled over his brows, and all for love sir reverence. Alas
poor gentleman, I do pity him, and I think Dame folly his mistress, would
simper to see the fool her servant, how he is besotted.

I can not believe that ever virtue was known to be a dotarde, in that we call
love.

I have heard of some that have been mad for love, yet I never heard of any
that were wise in love: I have read of courageous men, that love have made
effeminate, yet I never read of any whom love has made truly valiant; I have
known where wise men has been besotted by fancy, but I never knew where
fancy made a wise man.

In love what sees the eye, lasciviousness, what hears the ear,
lasciviousness: what utters the tongue, lasciviousness: what thinks the
heart, lasciviousness: what incurreth the body lasciviousness: and call you
this love, no, it is filthy lust, that marches under the banner of love.

The folly of affection is wonderful, but the indiscretion of an Amorist is
more admirable, that will hang the whole estate of all his fortunes in a woman's
word, but in the yea or nay, of his light heeled mistress.

To conclude, I never heard of any of these loving worms, that was ever
besotted of any woman that was famed for her virtue, yet if the brains of my
Amorist be not barraine, they will sometimes hatch out Rimes, and learn to
indite amorous verses in the praise of his mistress The folly of Amorists.
(that is many times scarce worth the speaking of) and will borrow colors from
lillies and red roses to beautify her cheeks, her eyes shall be saphires, her
lips, coral, her teeth, pearl, her breath, balm, a Pallas for her wit, but
he never streines so far as to her honesty; women have ever been witty, but
now more wise then they have been in The wisdom of women in this age.
former ages, they ever knew well enough how to make use of one of these
amorous guls, that they saw did affect them (indeed) with an ardent desire:
for they would make him to hold the Candle, whilst they had an other, that
should offer to our Lady.

A new way to woo.
But now adays there is a newer way to woo, then for a man to spend a whole
month together in making of love: he that will win a wife now (though he be
but Sot, a Dolt, a Fool, an Ass, let him be never so silly, or never so
simply, if he has but so much wit, as to make a great and a large ioynter, he
shall speed, and he The next way to win.
shall get a wife when a wise man shall fail.

I could here find in my heart to blame some parents, that will bestow their
well nurtured daughters on such persons, they do little consider of the fault
they commit by bringing their children (sometimes) to a loathed bed.

But parents do seem to be very careful to provide for their children, and
very diligent they be to seek a stay for them; but they do not seek it as
they should do, in the hand of God, but in the wisdom of their own foolish
flesh.

She cannot want a husband that does not want a portion.
I think there is not a woman so unlovely, nor so unnurtured, but if she does
bring a large portion in her purse, she shall have a husband; neither is there
so silly a Clown, but if he be able to make a great ioynter, he may quickly
get a wife: I thank God I have never a daughter to marry, but if I had, and
that I were of ability to give bountifully with her, I would sooner bestow my
money to buy her a husband that had a little wit, then to buy her a lump of
flesh, that is but lapt together in a Fools skin. Now for my self, if I were
young, and were again to marry, I would bless my self from her that has
been brought up in pleasure, in pride, in idleness, or in audacious
boldness: from such a one as is called her fathers joy, his jewel, his
dearling: he that lights on such a wife, had need to light on a good portion
with her, for if she does not bring him a grief to vex his soul, I am sure
she will bring him The vanity of many young women*
a charge to empty his purse, her vanity will far exceed marriage good, and
for every hundred pounds in money, she brings him a thousand vanities, a
thousand fits, a thousand fancies, a thousand follies, and a thousand new
fangles.

To day she keeps her chamber, sick of a quotidian fit of Folly: to morrow
the Coach must be made ready, she must about the town to inquire after new
fashions, the next day she begins to breed child, and then for forty weeks
after, what queasinesse, what squeamishnes, what curiosity, what nicity, what
lustig after vanities? she longs for plumbes before they be ripe, for chickins
before they be hatched, for dainties that cannot be come by: she must have the
hen that sits next the cock, the apple with the red side* the calfe, vith
the white face: she longs for the fish, the foul, the fruit, that is but
spoken of: we must take heed how we speak of any thing in her hearing for
setting her into a vein of longing; she must have an eye to the temperature
of the air, the sun must not shine too hot, nor the wind blow too cold on
her.

To conclude, she must be more nice, more curious, and more dainty, then ever
was that blessed virgin that bare the Savior of the world.

I commend me yet to the women of Laconia, that to increase their strength and
vigor (where propagation The worthiness of the women of Laconia.
might become the more strong and sturdy) they used to exercise themselves to
running, to leaping to wrestling, to heauing and throwing of weights: these
were excellent wenches to breed upon, these were gallant girls to maintain a
race, of men, fit to make soldiers, fit to fight for their country; for what
does it avail to have a cock An excellent issue.
of the game, unless we have again a hen of the same? the whole streine will
be but of a crauen kind, and the brood a great deal fitter for the dunghill,
then the cock pit.

I would not be thought yet to be so derogating to the reputation of good
women, but that I do know there be a number amongst them, that during the time
whilst they were breeding of child, they are not free from fittes and qualmes:
and many of them subject to pain, sickness more This is allwaies to be
respected.
then enough* and therefore they are not only to be comforted and cherished,
but likewise to be pitied and commiserated: yet there be amongst them again,
that if they should not be more nice, then wise, they would think themselves
to be quite out of fashion; and the offspring of these (for the greatest number)
are fitter to follow a Taber and a Pipe, then to march after a Drum and a Fyfe,
and do know better how to give fire to a Tobacco pipe, then to buckle on an
Armor of proof.

A precious sight.
O what a precious sight it were to see a woman that is but young in years, to
be sober and modest, as the time now serves; glory and admiration attends on
her in all her actions; and it is good likewise in those that be aged, because
the contrary in an ancient woman were abominable.

Good women plenfull to be found.
And such there be, both old and young, and well considering the condition of
the time, in great plenty to be found, and the number of these would far
exceed, and be yet more abundant then they be, were they not not alienated from
their own proper natures by the seducements of men.

Women made worse by the ill example of men
Do you see a woman that is garish to look upon, that is new fangled, and
gaudy to the show? look amongst men, and you shall find ten men for one
woman, that are more vain, more nice, and more foolish then any woman you can
seek out, or that is most noted for her vanity: and Wise women and foolish
men an unfit match.
would you have so many women Saints, and men Devils? nay there must be vain
women, if it be but to satisfy the humors of foolish men: where men have
given themselves over to follow sensuality, they must have women that be of
their own element to encounter them, otherwise they would never sympathize,
for virtue and vice could never agree.

A woman that should bind herself apprentice to modesty, sobriety, and
bashfulnesse, might sit long enough without a husband in these days, when a
thousand crowns are more preciously esteemed amongst our Hermophrodites, then
two thousand good conditions: for so they may embrace the quantity, they never
look after the quality; virtue, wit, wisdom, nor honesty it self, is not
regarded: good women may say with Friar Bacons A pitiful saying.
Brazen head, Time is past.

Is it any marvel though women do become both vain and dissolute? it is but to
feed the humor of those men that are both lascivious and sensual.

It is the base disposition of men, that makes so many Harlots as there be at
this present, when there is not so common a Curtizan, but she shall be
supported by vicious men: and how many Prodigals are there that will spend
their stock, their store, their lands, their livings, and all to It is men
only that seeks the defamation of women.
maintain Harlots, and such other women as be loose and lewd of life? now
show me but the man, that will extend his bounty, his liberality, or almost his
good word, to her that is honest.

If women were not stayed, and mightily propped up by their own virtues, they
could not converse with men, but to their great perrill and danger; for if they
meet with one man that does present to their modest eyes, the example of
wisdom, they shall meet with ten for that one Dangerous for women to converse
with vicious men.
that does still carry about them, the badge of Folly; if they meet with one
man that will soberly advise them for their honest reputation, they shall meet
with ten for that one that will seek their defamation.

They are men therefore, yea most wicked and ungodly men that have thus sought
to overthrow (and do yet seek to diminish) the honor of women, the which I
know they are not able to do, for although they may wrest some few vicious
minded like themselves to their lewd allurements, yet as good women have
evermore defended their honors, so their virtues will still shine in that
wonted oriental brightness, as the malice of wicked men shall never be able to
extinguish nor eclipse.

I will speak no more of women, but will you now see the honesty of this age?
it is put in print, and there are none dishonest now, but those that are poor.

A foul fault to be poor and honest.
Poverty in this age is the greatest dishonesty that a man can fall into,
neither can there be a greater blemish to any manscredit, then to be reputed
poor and honest.

Rich men be all honest, and their honesties are accounted so much the more, or
so much the less, as they be rated in the Subsidy book.

The honesty of richmen.
A rich man's wealth, is his wisdom, his virtue and his honesty: and he that
is better able to give you white money for your gold, then to give you a wise
answer to your honest demand, may yet speak his opinion in dispite of
wisdom, and his words must carry credit and authority, when truth it self
shall not be believed, if it proceed from the Honesty is d^^d many years
since.
mouth of poverty. Plain dealing: honesty is dead, many years since, he
died of a consumption, but this is the mischief, he died without issue.

Knaucry in never better health then at this present.
Knaucry has taken physic, and is grown so strong and lusty, that he
walks the streets at pleasure, but yet disguised, sometimes like a promoter,
sometimes like a broker, sometimes like a scriuener, and many times like an
under sheriff.

In the Term time he will be sure to look into Westminster hall, sometimes
amongst the catchpoules, and otherwhile like a poor client, with a paper in
his hand, and will look so ruthfully that a man would sooner pity him, then
be able truly to discover him.

Virtue grown poor.
Virtue is grown poor, and has few or none to attend her, but that is no
great wonder, for who would follow a beggar?

A cold recompense.
Her best deserts are recompensed, perhaps by a balletmaker, or if they be
sometimes canonized on a stage amongst players, she is highly favored: alas
poor virtue, that have no better recompense then what thou thy self can
draw from vice; yet there are many that will speak of virtue, and tell of her
excellency, but they are few that will translate her truly out of words into
deeds.

Conscience exilde.
Conscience is exilde, and banished quite out of City, Town and Country.

My selse having some occasions, making inquiry where I might find him, I was
told he used sometimes to frequent faires and markets, whereupon I went to
Bartholmew-Fayre, and missing him there, I went to Sturbridge-Fayre, and
likewise lost my labor; whereupon I came to Romford market, where I could no
news at al of him: then coming back to London I made inquiry amongst
shopkeepers, tradesmen and Merchants: they told me they knew him not, but wished
me to inquire amongst the stationers, and those that sold books: to Paul's
Churchyard I went, and they showed me a book, that made mention of one that
was sometimes called by the name of Robin Conscience, but what was become of
him they could not tell, but willed me to ask amongst the Lawyers; but coming
to them, they began to laugh at me, and thought me to be out of my wits, that
would ask for Conscience amongst them: I was then in despair for ever to
find him, thinking to give over my guest, till a friend softly whispering in
mine ear, willed me to seek amongst the Papists that will make vaunts, that
they have gotten Conscience tied up in a string, and that Conscience and they
were as familiar the one with the other, as the Beggar and the Lowse; but when
I came amongst them, he that they stood so much upon, whom they called by the
name of Conscience, was a mere counterfeit hypocrite, no more like Conscience
then a traitor is like a true man: it was (indeed) wilful opinion, froward,
blind and obstinate, whom they imposed to carry the name of Conscience: and
leaving them where I found him, being out of hope for ever to find out
Conscience, it was my fortune yet in miraculous manner to hit upon him, but if
I should tell you where, and in what country, you would think it strange: but
to tell you Conscience found only amongst Soldiers.
the truth, I found him in Ireland, and would you know amongst whom, it was
amongst a company of poor and needy soldiers: when I had a while wondered at
the matter, I asked him what he meant to abandon better company, to associate
himself with these thread bear fellows, the very Abiects of this age, that
amongst all other professions were of the basest account and least esteemed:
his answer was, their fellowship was fittest for him, that now at this day,
took but eight pence a day pay, no more then they took many hundred years
ago, when they might buy more for their eight pence, then they can do now
for their eighteen, and therefore he knew not any profession more fitting for
him to associate himself of, then amongst Soldiers.

Having thus heard his reason and his resolution I dispatched my business, and
there I left him; but I see conscience will not stay amongst them, that a man
would think, were best able to support him, I mean amongst rich men. But some
will say, riches that are not honestly come by, will not long stay, but as they
are quickly gotten, so they are suddenly gone, but they are much deceived, Ill
gotten goods very kind to their master.
that are of that belief: for riches are as kind and loving to their master,
as the Body lowse, that will never leave his master, though he be going to the
gallows, but will there hang with him for company; and riches that are
unlawfully gathered together, will never leave their master till they have
brought him to hell, and there they will be a corrosiue to his Conscience
still world without end.

Riches but a tickle commodity.
But this worldly wealth I see is but a tickle commodity, for he that has
most, he has notynough, neither to keep his head from aching, nor his
conscience from despairing.

Who is to be accounted rich.
He is only to be accounted rich, that possesses, what he has gotten justly,
and uses what he possesses honestly* but for the ungodly, they may well be
reputed wealthy, but never rich.

An excellent Touchstone.
There cannot be a more excellent Touchstone, whereby to discover the
dispositions of men, then is the superfluity of wealth, and the extreamitie of
want, the spring tide of prosperity, and the low ebb of adversity; for
although the mattess of themselves are indifferent, yet the mannaging of them
is it that gives light.

Prosperity.
Prosperity, pampereth us up in pleasure, it makes us to forget God, and to
repose our greatest confidence in the vanities of the world.

Adversity*
Adversity, makes us contemptible in the Eye of the world, it is the means
whereby we are taught to know our selves, and to draw us to God.

Prosperity, so swells us in pride, that we forgette our selves, it so
blinds our understanding, that we are not able to discern a friend from a
flatterer, nor to judge whether those that do favvne upon us, be more in love
with our selves or with our fortunes.

Adversity, makes us humble, it cleereth the understanding, and gives us
Eyes to discern between Friendship and Flattery, and to make assured trial
between a Friend and a Foe. Adversity may be both Judge and Jury.

What have I said, may Adversity judge between a friend and a foe? I never
heard that poverty was cloied with many friend, and adversity, if he once
begins to want, shall never want a foe: they will say a friend is tried Of
friends and friendship.
in time of need* but I say, that need is it that makes a friend a foe, he is
a fool that wants friends, and if he wants not wealth.

But he that has poverty to cast up his accounts, and is become Needs
Ambassador, to beg or to borrow, if he find a friend to supply his wants, I
say such a friend is Strange to be found.
more precious, and more rare to be found, then Platos Common*wealth, Moors
Eutopia, Ciceroes orator, or Baldesers Courtier: he that is a friend to all can
be friend to none, but it is nothing so smarting to be called a Niggard or to
be reputed for a Miser, as to have it said, He is every man's A foolish
commendation.
friend but his own.

It were too great a presumption in me now to meddle with Divinity, the
dignity of the subject may suffice, for where the object is God, the ground
work is infallible, there needs no further demonstration.

Of Divinity.
Divinity is a heavenly Law, sealed by God the lawgiuer, written and set down
by the finger of God, and delivered by those that were inspired by his holy
spirit.

It has likewise pleased God from the beginning, to raise up Patriarchs and
Prophets, to teach and govern his people and after in the kingdom of our
Savior, he ordained the ministry of the Gospel, appointing it perpetual to
the end of the world, and has further taught us to pray, that Laborers might
be thrust into the Harvest.

The worthiness of the Divine.
Shall I then speak of the Divine, that is the Steward of God, appointed to
dispose his mysteries, that is, the Ambassadors of glad and joyful tidings,
that does bring unto us the word of our salvation, that is the light to shine
before us in all godly example, of Love, of Charity, of Humility, of
Temperance, of Chastity, of Sobriety, of integrity of life, of honest
conversation, and therefore worthy of double honor?

Our English Clergy what they are.
I think, of my conscience, our English Clergy at this present hour, are as
complete in learning in living, in doctrine, in wisdom, and in all manner of
godly knowledge, as although in some other parts in Christendom (perhaps) there
may be some found to second them, yet none to disprove, or exceed them.

But as amongst the twelve Disciples, there was a ludas, so amongst this
honorable function, there creepes in now and then a false Disciple, that
knows how to bait his A false Apostle*
book with gravity, till he has caught a Benefyce, and then the Surples must
serve to cover a most ungodly carcass: and he that should set up a light for
other men to follow, his Lamp does burn so dim, that he that were not well
sighted of himself, might sooner stumble, then hit the right tract.

Parson please time*
Another intruder there is, Parson please-time by name, that being vnbeneficed,
will therefore become a Chaplain, to some man of worth, and worthiness: he will
sometimes step up into the Pulpit, and he will preach against sin, but it shall
be done with half a lip, he dares not press it till it smarts; he knows it
is no time of year, to be too vehement against all sorts of sins, for
offending those that he would more willingly please.

An other Nathan hard to be found.
Where shall we find another Nathan, that dares tell his master to his face,
Thou art the man? 2. Sam. 12. Thou art the man that have sinned in Pride, thou
art the man that have sinned in Drunkenness, in Adultery, in Blasphemy; thou
art the man that have racked up thy rents that have oppressed thy tenants, that
have wronged thy poor neighbors: no, Parson please-time knows well enough,
this is not the ready way to get a fat Benefice.

To speak now in general, and to speak according to a truth, the Pulpits in
England, and in Ireland both, were never better supplied, with a more reverent,
and a more learned Ministry then at this present, for their sakes therefore that
be good, I will speak no more of those few that be ill.

Of Philosophy.
I shall not need to speak of Philosophy; the study of wisdom is now out of
season, and the natural part of Philosophy, but shows us what we have, and
the moral, how to use rightly what is our own, a burden too heavy for every
man's head to carry: I will leave it, and speak a little of Soldiers, Of
counterfelt Soldiers
or at the least of such as in these days, would feign be taken for soldiers,
and do march some of them under the title of Captains, that never spread
Ensign of their own before an enemy, nor never saw enemy march in the field:
yet he will relate of wars, of skirmishes and incounters, as brefly, as if
Their brauadoes.
he had bin an eye-witnes, when he has but pilferd them from report, or
(perhaps) stolnethem from some new printed ballade: and he that has but seen
the siege of Troy, pictured forth in a painted cloth, will speak of sallies,
of assaults, of incounters, of retraites, of palizados, of rauelins, of
parapites, all his speeches shall be nothing else but powder and shot.

He will spend a whole after noone, in relating his own valors, and this he
does to prevent quarrels, because he loves not every day to fight; he bears
down strangers with the story of his own actions, and will attribute the honor
of a victory to his own valor: now he that is but weak of faith, and will not
believe these wonders, must be terrified with the stab.

The title of a Captain. A good privilege for a Drunkard.
It is as good a warrant for him that would swagger, swear, and be every day
drunk, to be called a Captain, as for him that would become a Rebel both to
God and his Prince, to be called a Catholic.

Honor was wont to be the Adamant to draw the soldiers sword, but now the
instigation of a Harlot, or a pot of strong Ale.

A Soldiers virtue.
His virtue is this, if it be but for a matter of a thousand pounds, a
Soldiers word is as good as his band.

Of Knights.
I might now speak of Knights, that in former ages were had in honorable
reputation, and the order so remains honorable still, where the dignity is
bestowed upon worthy persons; but as amongst Captains and Soldiers, there be
a number that does march under those titles, that are but counterfeits, so
amongst Knights, what a number are crept into the order, that does but be-durty
the dignity, and are become a scandal to that honorable order?

The one a carpet Knight the other King Arthurs fool.
Knighthood was wont to be the reward of virtue, but now a common prey to the
betraiers of virtue, and we shall sooner meet Sir Dinadine, or Sir Dagonet, at
another man's table, the^ with Sir Tristrum de Lionis, or Sir Lancelot de lake
in the field.

Knights in former ages have been assistant unto Princes, and were the stays
of the Commonwealth; but now, they live by begging from the Prince, and are a
burden to the commonwealth.

Of a Courtier.
May we yet speak a little of the Courtier, I will speak but softly; the
first principles of a Courtier (I speak but of the meaner sort) he must learn
to creep to crouch, to flatter, and to climb up to immerited praise, by the
steps of others disgrace: and the ambitious sort, must not be without base
minds to attend them that will stoop to any villainy for preferment.

A right Courtier, is high in his own imagination, and his best complements,
are Pride, and Ignorance; he is more curious in his words, then constant in
his promises: the matter that he most admireth, is the beauty of his Mistress,
his greatest circumspection is about his apparel, how he may pinke it, how he
cut it, stitch it, and lace it: he is still inquisitiue after news, and in all
his discourses, he dares speak more then himself understands.

He spends his greatest time, in the contemplation of suits, and he will not
open his lips to salute any man, that is not clad in silk, and his apparel
made in the new fashion.

Of Lawyers.
Now I cannot tell what I should call the study of Law, whether I should term
it to be a profession, a science, or an art: a trade I cannot call it, yet
there be some that do think it to be a craft, because a Gentleman demanding of
a Lawyers servant, what crafts-man his master was? answered, Sir, my master is
a crafty Lawyer.

But I think it may rather be called an occupation, for they have those
amongst them, that they do call apprentises at Law, who by that time they have
served out their years, and that they are become journey men, they do trouble
Journey men Lawyers.
the whole commonwealth, with their practice, as they make it an ungracious
practice that does breed such disturbance.

There be three sorts of men, that they say may tell a lie by authority, and
those are, an old man, a Trauailer, and a Poet; but a Lawyer has both
authority and law to tell any lie, that his Clyent will inform.

The effect of the Law.
The office of the Law is to command things that be honest and virtuous, and
again, to countermand what is dishonest and vicious, and next after the
Gospel the Law is the greatest comfort that God has given to the sons of
men; it remedieth injuries, and gives to every man what is his: but by the
corruption of some Lawyers the Laws are made traps, and trains, whereby both
rich and poor are caught and spoiled; for they have such a number of subtle
The subtillty of Lawyers.
subtillties, that they do yet make more subtle by their subtle handling,
that they be able to set the Laws themselves together by the ears, and
utterly to overthrow one Law with another.

The Lawyer is more hated for his inconstancy, then loved for his learning,
when he will take money to defend a matter, that in his own conscience he
knows to be unjust.

Their tongues were wont to be tied to ten shillings, but they have raised
their market, and they think four for The charitable disposition of Lawyers.
one, now to be too little; yet they do show themselves to be of a charitable
disposition, they do love their enemies; they do love, and with an entire
affection, they do heartily embrace the Angels, that with fair shows
sometimes shining and glistering in their faces, do send a number of them to
the Devil.

Now to wind up all, and for a last farewell, I could find in my heart, to
praise Poetry, and to commend a great number of writers, which I do better know
by the excellency of their lines, then by their persons; but their own works
are a better commendation, then I am able to apply: but there are Bastard Poets
a number in these days, that make semblance, to be retaining to the Muses,
that do pester the Stationers stalles, with such unprofitable stuff, that
learning might seem to be the mistres of ungodliness, when our especial
endeavors consists but in the abuse of knowledge: and Poetry that has been
accustomed (under feined fictions) to discover Vice, is now become the Art of
Flattery.

Be there not printed lines, or to speak more truly, may be called printed
lies; for take away but so much of the matter as they have enforced but to
Lying and to Flattering, and there would nothing be left remaining that were
worth the Flattering and lying.
reading. How many Writers be there, that do labor with the Mountains, to
bring forth Myce, that do seek to draw the Lions skin upon Aesops Ass, and
Hercules Shoe upon a childs foot?

Some again conuerts all their Reason into Rhyme; and some will write a whole
Volume, neither in Rhyme nor Reason: and let their lines be never so vain and
frivolous, yet they must be fronted with the name of Excellent.

But they do well to suit the World with Books according to the time; for
rude limping lines, are best befitting a lame halting age. Writers are not so
vain, but Readers (for the most part) are three times more foolish, and a
vain glorious title, does better fit their appetites then a good book: the
Stationer dares hardly adventure to print a good book, if it tend to the
reprehending of vice or vanity. Idle toys tending to sensuality, or other
like lycencious folly, are set forth upon their Stalles, in bright and
glistering couers, when those Books that are either drawing to virtue or
godliness, are thrown into dustie corners.

Socrates admonishes, that if any man be careful of his honor, let him
foresee that he has not a poet to his enemy, because they have not so great a
grace in pray sing, as in ill speaking: but yet to blaze the praises of my
friend, I would wish a learned Poets pen, that with a drop of Ink can exalt
him whom they love, and leave him famed to posterity.

The travel of wit, but slightly regarded.
But this travel of wit, is the most thriftlesse and unprofitable exercise
that any man can endeavor: for where does it find recompense, or who is he
that does reward it? The Swain that follows his handy work, is paid at
night for his handy labor: the Cobbler that sits and cloutes a Shoe, receives
his penny for his patch: but he that digs the Mine of wit, and gives the world
new eyes to see into conceits beyond the common sense, what gains he, or what
is his reward? perhaps good words. A poor satisfaction: yet he that gets good
words from all, must have a strange Subject and a pleasing pen. But stay my
braynesick thoughts, whither The conclusion.
will you gallop, you have ridden a large circuit, and I fear me quite out of
the way, or at the least to little purpose. You have inueighed against sin, and
that is all one to roll Sisiphus Stone, or to fill Daneas Tubs. We must not
tax the times abuses; we may make a show to expel vice, and to shut it out at
the broad gate, but we may privily take it in again at the wicket: we may
desire to come to Christ, but it must be with Nicodemus; it must be in the
night when no body may see us. We may dance with Christ in the one hand, and
the world in an other; and so we inroule our selves in his Muster book, we
may march in Satan's camp, and fight under the Devils banner.

It is enough to cry Lord, Lord, but not to do any thing that is commanded by
the Lord: if we think of God, we think him to be a good man easy to be
pleased, and we know how to put him off with fair words, and dumb
shows, till our prime of pleasure be past: it is time enough to repent us of
our sins when we be well spent in years ready for the grave: but if we will
have our wills in sin, God will have his will in punishment, and our short
pleasures being ended, even then begins our everlasting pains: the pleasures
and delights of the world, as they are soon loved, so they are as quickly
ended, but they are long, yea very long lamented. My conclusion is, it is less
misery when we die to give up the ghost, then whilst we live, to give up the
holy Ghost.

I leave what I have written, to thy conscience, and leaving again thy
conscience to God, I rest.

FINIS.
EPILOGVS*
I Have here cast into a small volume, a large discourse of sin and wickedness,
the which I have endeavored rather by a diligent observation of the time, then
by any other shadow of complement. I have composed a Glass wherein to behold
the inconstant follies of this giddy headed age; a task that I know, will
rather produce hatred, then win love: the vicious sort does so hug their
sins, and does so bestroke and flatter their own abominations, that he that
should but detect there vice and villainy, he could not be accounted to be
Caesar's friend, they cry out, crucifige, crucifige* away with him, and deliver
unto us Baxabas.

Let us have him that can sing lullaby to folly, that can smooth up sin and
wincke at any manner of wickedness.

He that is too busy with his ve vobis, he must be brought coram nobis, he
must have his tongue charmed, and he must be taught to know to whom he speaks,
and how he dares presume to disturb their quietness that are so addicted to
follow their pleasure and delight, that they cannot endure to hear neither of
God nor the Devil, neither of heaven nor of hell, nor of any other motion,
that should either move them to repentance, or reprehend there sins.

When Lot went about to dissuade the Sodomites from their abominations, were
they not angry with him, did they not say unto him: What have thou to do, to
take upon thee, to correct and judge us?

He that should now speak against the pride of the time, where should he be
able to show his face, but that both men and women, would be ready to worrow
him? whoredom and adultery, has so many friends to support them, so many
favorites to uphold them, so many of all sorts, both old and young, rich and
poor: that does delight and follow the game, that he that should but open his
lips to reprehend it, the whole rablement of whoremasters, harlots, bawdes,
panders, and such vicious livers, they would say he were a critic, a
satirist, a precisian, a puritan, or a counterfeit hipocrite, but they would
not mend their lives.

Drunkenness again is grown into that generality that he is not accounted
to be an honest man that will not be drunken for good fellowship, but amongst
drunkards that be of diverse kinds, I hold those to be more dangerous ill,
that are drunken with vanity, then those other that are drunken with wine; for
the one, two hours sleep may restore him again to the use of his senses: but
the other, many hours, days, months nor years may suffice to make him to
look into his own folly. Amongst these I commend me to the drunken
Tobacconists, that does besot themselves in their own conceits, attributing
that sovereignty to a stinking Indian weed, that if they were not enemies to
their own discretions, daily experience would teach them that their excessive
sucking at their Tobacco pipe, is but a flat mockery; and would make that
favorite, that does think himself most wise to defend it, to confess his
own ignorance: neither can there be a stronger argument to prove it mere
vanity indeed, then to see it so much embraced by so many vain men, that does
so much dote and are so far in love with it, that some of them are more angry
with him that does but speak against their Tobacco, then they would be with him
that should take exceptions at the shalownesse of their wit.

But he that wears a silver or a golden Mine on his back, there is no
question to be made, neither of his wit nor of his honesty: he may praise or
dispraise, how or what he list, he is privileged, and he has a parcel of
scripture to avow in his own behalf, Dixit insipiens, Psalm. 14.

By this it may appear, Sin is grown to that statelines of Pride, that she
will not be controld. If we speak against sin, we must do it lispingly, we
must not speak it out too bitterly: but the follies of this age must be
seasoned with sugar, they must be made sweet; but those sins that do seem
sweet in the committing, will be found as bitter, when without repentance they
come to be accounted for.

Lo^ke upon the actions of this age, consider of the times abuses, and whose
eyes are so bleared with vice, that does not behold how sin and sensuality
did never so much abound? he is blind that sees not this, and too malicious
that will not acknowledge it. The sins of this age are become like old
festered soores, that are not to be cured but with biting corosiues; we can
not therefore too bitterly reprehend them. We are become like natural beasts
that do bring all things to trial but by the senses; but if we could carry
them to the inquisition of the soul, we should find it a fearful judgment
of God, for men to be given up so much to their own lusts, to have no sense
nor feeling of their sin: he that has this hardness of heart, that he
neither feels his own sin, nor will not be told of it by another, he is no
more of the race of Adam, who was ashamed of himself, but of Pharao, who
hardened his own heart, and whose heart God did harden.

If the head does but a little ache, our vrins must knock at the Physicians
door, and alas how inquisitiue we be about the state of our bodies? but let
our consciences cry out and exclaim how they list, our sickly famished souls
are never respected, we are so far in love with our sins, that we care not
for the losing of our souls.

Are these the works that faith affords, is this the life that God requires?
we go to Church (indeed) and we say, to seek the Lord* but we do not seek
him as if we meant to find him, we seek him not with humble and penitent
heart, but with proud and presumptuous spirits, decking and pranking up our
selves with those gaudy and ungodly attires as are more liker to poison our
prayers then to profit our souls, better fitting indeed for a Brothell house,
then for the house of God.

We go to Church, rather to show our pomp and our pride, then with any
zealous intent, to serve our God as we should do*

We go to the Church, as Judas went to the Supper of the Lord, we return home
in a worse case then when we first went thither.

With what faces can we make show to profess the Gospel* when we be so given
up to that monstrous pride, that we rather desire to follow our own voluptuous
pleasures, then to serve God? the world does see it, our consciences does
witness it, neither can we deny it.

They will make show by their speeches, as if they could not endure that God
should be dishonored: but look upon their actions, their pride, their vanity,
their drunkenness, their excess; and they do show them plainly what they
are: and he that should judge the^ by the rules of holy scriptures, might
boldly pronounce them to be far from everlasting life: our Savior Christ
has confidently avowed: The unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of
heaven: and the Apostle, 1. Cor. 6. Be not deceived, neither fornicator,
neither adulterer, nor drunkard, nor idolater, shall not inherit the kingdom
of God.

Let them flatter themselves therefore how they list, they are in a dangerous
plight, and we cannot be too plain to put them from that vain hope that thus
deludeth them, that will every day pollute themselves with these abominations,
and yet will trust or hope for salvation, they think it time soon enough to
repent, when their climacterical year is past, and then if they have but time
to say, Lord have mercy upon us, and for their executors to give penny dole
when they be dead, it will serve for a quietus est, for all their sins
forepassed: they may perhaps sometime dream of a dying time, and it is but a
dream, for being not thoroughly resolved, that this time draws every day
nearer then other, they never prepare themselves against the time, but are many
times taken suddenly in the fullness of their filthiness, and in the very
prime, when they be acting of the abominations.

I have little hope therefore to reform those by my writing, whom the
thundering voice of Gods word pronounced every day by the Preacher, can neither
conform, nor any thing at all terrifye: I know I shall rather procure hatred,
for speaking truth, then win love for wishing well: but I little fear the
Adulterat censure of a senceles multitude; the wicked are like an Ocean, that
cannot rest from raging: and a madness for him that will run amongst thorns,
and think scorn to be pricked; let them then rage and rail as they list, he
that is thoroughly settled and composed in himself, moves in so high an Orb,
and at so far a distant from the malicious and ill disposed, that their
unsavory belchings can never annoy him. It suffices me that I mask in the
true simplicities, of a loyal honesty, my conscience bearing me witness, I have
spoken those truths, that I am in nothing more agrieued, then in that they are
too true.

FINIS.

