THE REVENVE OF THE GOSPEL IS TITHES, Due to the Ministry of the word, by
that word.

Written by FOVLKE ROBARTES Batchelour of Divinity.



Vict^ma sacra Deo (...)
Hin^ aqu^^^, ^d ^ullo (...).
(...),
Sacrileg^que sacer de^^orat^gn^ (...).
Sic m^^uat^ qu^^ur^ de^^^ (...)
^t sa^^as aud^^ (...).
The sacred o^^^^ing bro^^e^^ ^he (...)*
A g^l^ ^he (...) to her (...)*
A spark (...),
Be^^^d her (...), and b^rnt up all her wealth.
^^ let him fear, who ^^e he be that (...)
(...) god^ (...) and ^he c^urch^^ s^^a^e.
Printed by CANTREL LEG Printer to the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1613.

REVERENDO in Christo Patri ac Domino, IOHANNI IEGONO, diuina prouidentia
Episcopo NORDOVICI vigilantissimo, Diocesano suo indulgentissimo. ET HONOR
ATISSIMO viro, EDVARDO COKO Militi, summo totius ANGLIAE Institiario,
Serenissimi Regiae Ma^^^a^i a Consi^us san^^^ribus, Do^^no suo singulari.
FOVLCO ROBARTESIVS diu indies in terris cumulatum honerem and gloriam in
coelis tandem sempi^ernam religiosissime precatur.

ARdua debilibus praestat quicunque lacertis,
Hic validis sulcris auxiliandus erit.
Debilis Herculeos ego pertentare labores
Ausus, sublicijs incubo marmoreis.
Anterides duo vos stabiles, ceu marmoris, est. (...):
Quique Atlantaeam far soletis ope^^.
TV. Pater, ^^ Pa^^^^ qu^ (...),
Sed^^o incumben^ (...),
Pastorum dec^^^^, qu^^ ^i^ula sa^ra v^rend^s
Re^d^^, qui Pe^^^ more tuentur o^es.
Ampla dem^^^ (...) Pra^i^^ ga^^^^:
Dum (...) e^^peranter (...).
TV (...)
(...).
In (...) Terras (...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
TV, PATER INDVLGENS, IT TV, VEN^RANDE V^R^RVM,
In fortes humeros excipiatis onus.
Excipiatis onus. tremula grauitate reclinans,
Auxilium ^imide, suppl^^^terque petens
Supplicat^en) vobis* in FOR^A PAVPERIS, ipse
Christus, opem vestram subs^diumque rogans.
Supplicat, vt verbi Dominus quas sort ministris
S^ncut aetern^, neraptantur opes.
Noru^ci Antistes, ius spirituale ministras:
Quod u^let auxilij spirituale ferat.
Temporeumque (Pater legum) ius (COKE) gubernas:
Quod valet auxilij temporeumque ferat.
Ipse, Leuitarum pateres (IEGONE) Sedetque
In mensa and gremto (COKE) Leuitatuo,
Ergo patrocinium Christi praebete ministris.
Ne Domino sacrae diripiantur opes.
Sistite vesanos h^minum rabidosque furores,
Qui sitiunt sacras despoliare domos.
Diuino decimas sancitas iure ministris,
Et vos humano cogite iure dari.
Ter-faelixisto, diuino munere, mundo
Praesenti, vestrum viuat vterque diu,
Fataque quando olim mutabitis ista, supersit
Virique in caelis anteparata domus.
ROB. HILL, Theol. Profess.
Vox populi.
Quid dabimus? Vitulum? Grauis est iactura. Vel agnum^
Velleporem? nim^s est. Satis est gallina vel anser.
Vox dei.
Damthi primitias Cereris, floraeque Liaei
Po^^n^: pri^^genitum primasque laborum
Da^^hi: subque noua verbi da lege ministro.
Sic tibi pro decimis summam pr^stabo salutem.
Ista canit mystes. Dices (ingrate popelle)
Cantabit vacuns coram grege diui^e pastor.
Euge, sedingratus coram love, iudice surdo,
Clamabit populus tandem vacuusque peribit.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP FVLL SENATE AND SOCIETY OF THE MAYOR, SHERIFES, AND
COMmons of that Religious and well-gouerned City and County of NORWICH,
increase of piety, true fame, and all prosperity.
RIght Worshipful and religious) while Popery prevailed in former times like
a thick fogg, though it quenched nothing, yet it smothered for a time, almost
all points of sacred truth. But Popery now vanishing, as mist before the
sun, all points of truth do shine clear again, to the praise of God and
our comfort; And yet has not that duskie veil been foulded up all at once,
but by degrees; so that some points appeared more timely, others have been the
longer vnperceaued. The Schoolmen, Alexander Alexand. ^e Ales^ (...) ^ulo^
(...) and (...). and Gul^^lm. G^^^^r. quos om^^s (...) subtilita^ibus
pro^st^b^i^^^d^ Ant^chri^^^ r^gno ^rmauit. Cent. 13. cap. 10.
and his Scholars 1200. years after Christ, were the first that taught that
tithes were not due by the Moral law. And this they did, to justify the
exorbitant practices of the Pope. It is therefore a Popish doctrine. Diverse
yet, no small adversaries unto Rome, have received that for truth, which is
mere Popery. But the son is now up in such brightness, as that none shall
be deceived but only the wilful. Therefore amongst others, who happily
labored to fling away the uttermost skirts of the Romish mantle, that it no
longer shadow this part of truth, I have adventured to stretch forth mine
hand. What God enabled me to perform, I humbly offer to your favorable
acceptance, unto whom by peculiar bonds, both of civility and conscience, I am
obliged. The point is a case of conscience, and of great consequence, and
therefore would be thoroughly considered. Ye are wise to judge as religious
Magistrates, ye are favorable to religion as zealous Protestants. God
Almighty bless both your public state with increase of Worship, and your
several persons with daily augmentation of his special grace. Cambridge.
Nouemb. 1613.

Your Worships in all love and service, FOVLKE ROBARTES.

In librum Foulconis Robartesij de reditibus Euangelij.
EIa homo! number totum Christus totus tibi lucrum?
Parsque Dei tua pars? pars tua, Dextra Dei?
Detrahit and lucrum partis, partemve lucellj
A Christi mysta Dextera christicola?
Quin docto potius, pand^nti numine dextro
Rectaque suadenti, creed Robertesio.
Dat merit o decimas Christo, quicunque meretur,
Quam rem cunque facit, dummodo rem faciat.
Sunt habitus abitusque homini varij, Deus idem
Vnde habet, huic Reditus, vnde abit, huc Reditus.
R. Per. Bac. Theol. C. C. C.

In love to the Author and Cause.
WHilome the Church was rich, Justice her due,
Devotion gave her plenty: her full chest
With treasure swelled, which Piety did accrue,
And Charity dispense; this time was blessed,
Till lawless Sacrilege with maine despoile
Seaz'd on the holy Goods, possessed her land;
As hostile rage preuailes in conquered soil,
So warred the Christian against the Church, her hand
(Mean while) was on the common so, which wreaks
Both her and them: a sad-reioycing day:
The peoples gain, with Churches loss, thus speaks,
Whilst one obtain's such conquest, both decay.
W. R. Mag. Art. C. C. C.

De decimarum debitione, etc.
SEe (Learned Leuite) what will be the end
Of this thy powerful writ, thou do intend,
The Ox his corn vnmusled now shall tread,
And Leui's tribe may eat their own schew-bread;
But here thou fail'st, where Tithes were due before,
All will be paid, Tithes shall be due no more.
Suam cuique.
DAme Natures twylight clearly shows this true
That who gave all, may claim tithes (for his) due.
Yet can the Prince of darkness lightly see
To lead leowd-men to this forbidden tree.
But let the Eagle, though of plumes most fair,
And great commanding Empress of the air,
Not dare to fat her Eaglets with the right
And sacrifice done to a heavenly might.
"Fire will consume a sacrilegious nest:
"No baser bird can holy bitts digest.
Deo posui and Leuitis Iurisia Gu. Bonswell Iesuanus. Cant.

THE REVENVE OF THE GOSPEL.
CHAP. I. The labourer is worthy of his hire.
THat man of God, and choice Apostle the blessed Paul, who being
extraordinarily enabled with knowledge, zeal, and utterance, could preach
soundly and effectually without study, had more experience of labor and
misery in the world, then either desire or need of worldly hire: and yet he
enacteth it as the law of God in more then Mede and Persian irrevocabilitie,
that the Labourer is worthy of his hire. This is a breife 1. Ephesians. 5. 18.
statute, yet is it so full, not only determining, but also yielding such an
imperious reason, as if any man should deny maintenance to the ministry of
the Gospel, that man should have even his plough-boy or kitchin-drudge to arise
against him to his condemnation in his conscience here, and in the judgment of
God hereafter: for, if these so mean and so silly, are not to be unrewarded,
except men will have the Courts of heaven to be possessed with their cruelty;
then how much more heinous and barbarous is the injustice of him, who
withdraws earthly food from that mouth, from which himself receives
heavenly nourishment? who depriueth him of his due clothing, by whom himself
is adorned with the glorious robe of the righteousness of Christ? who causes
penury in the family of that man, by whom himself is made the child of God
of the family of Saints? So that the force and power partly of shame without,
and partly of the conscience within, does enforce that to be granted, which
the devil himself cannot devise how to deny, viz. It is good reason that
Ministers have maintenance: for, the labourer is worthy of his hire.

But as it falls out with many wholesome humane laws, so fares it with this
divine constitution, viz. Evil manners make them, and evil minds do mar
them with perverse interpretations. The hire is granted to be due, but while
questions are moved about the quantity and quality thereof, it is made an
indiuiduum vagum without determination: and then, hoc aliquid nihil est. Some
where this hire is just nothing, and in many where is as good as nothing, and in
most places (where Ministers are maintained at the courtesy of their people)
it is a scant share, fit to protract a sordid life, dishonorable to the
ministry, which is indeed a kind of something: but for the smalnesse and
uncertainty thereof, it is a near thing to a mere nothing.

But while the Apostle does mention this laborers worthiness, he does intimate
that he ought to be had in a more honorable regard: and in the possessiue
pronowne, calling it his hire, he does insinuate a due propriety, and
therefore that it depends not upon the pleasure of men, but that all men have
their consciences burdened to the performance thereof, not withholding the
good from the owner thereof: for it is not thy goods, but it is his hire
whereof he is worthy.

CHAP. II. The due hire of the Ministry is neither men's courtesy, nor that
new devised competencie.
WHile sometimes the laziness and luxury of that degenerate clergy, and
sometimes the bastards of their Pope himself, under the name of his nephews,
and cosins, devoured the tithes of men's increase, whose untaught souls were
devoured by ignorance, superstition, and impiety; some godly men perceiving
this, and not advisedly distinguishing between the thing, and the abuse
thereof, have grown to that extremity of indignation, as to disclaim all
right which any minister might have in the goods of any man, further then men
should be pleased to extend unto them of their mere benevolence. Thus thought
the Waldenses, Wicklife, Husse, and Carlet. tyth. cap. 1.
them the Anabaptists of these days do follow.

Others inordinately affecting the praise of contentment, and neglect of the
world, have soothed up the minds of such men as are either ambitious,
covetous, or voluptuous, and submitted themselves to men's courtesy. And men
again perceiving what praise they may purchase, and what reproves they may
prevent, by feeding their ministers in this servile sort, have and do applaud
those for the only true apostolical pastors and teachers, who (say they)
seek men's souls, and not their riches. This was at the first the subtlety of
the Friars, to undermine the incumbents and beneficed curates, and it is now
the practice both of them and of others.

Against this dangerous conceit, among the many volumes of replies and answers
which might be framed, I v^^^ use only one of each kind. And first for reply,
I urge that 1. Tim. 5. 17. The Elders that rule well are worthy of d^uble
honor. Ho^our, there is maintenance, as all expositors, and the scope of the
text does show. The Elder is the Minister without question, howsoever some of
late have thought, not only the Minister. So the sense is, Mininisters of the
gospel are worthy to receive honorable maintenance. If they be worthy to
receive, then it is not in the pleasure of man to pay as he list. If the
maintenance must be honorable, then must it not be of benevolence: for that is
commonly both scant and uncertain; which is a thing miserable, not honorable.

Then secondly for answer, I say that where almighty God has as well allowed
me mine honor, as allotted me my labor, I may demand the one, while I
perform the other, without imputation of coffeehouse. Who takes the
fleece, not feeding the flock, is indeed a base hireling; but the true
shepherd does eat the milk, and sheare the wool, where he takes care and
bestows pasture, 1. Cor. 9. 7.

Some show of reason does this conceit pretend, because it seems to have
been the Apostolical practice: but I have overthrown it by apostolical
doctrine. For the Apostles practice it was what it might be under persecution,
when either the poverty of the Church, spending all in common, could lay out
no tithes, (which Zanchie yet thinks were then gathered by the Deacons) ^^
redemp. in 4. praecep.
or, the foule-wide mouths of false Apostles were feign to be stopped, with
refusing all allowance from the Church: but the Apostles doctrine is a
perpetual direction, and therefore both allows Ministers to receive, expect,
and require, as also inioyneth both people to perform, and Magistrates to see
performed that which is due, and must be honorable. The doctrine of the
Apostles is not yet contrary to their practice, but our times God be thanked
do differ from theirs, and they from v^. They could preach without study, but
all our studies are little enough to find out the truth: and therefore they
might make tents to earne money, when we must be reading, Act. 18. 3.
hearing, praying, or meditating, to attain to knowledge. They could maintain
themselves, and therefore sometimes received neither tithes, nor benevolence:
our times of earning money must needs be spent in turning over, and pooring
upon ink and paper, and therefore we have need not to forbear all, as they
might, but to require liberal and certain maintenance, without which our
hearts may break for just grief, that in an vnafflicted estate, we our
selves, being the Ministers of God, must be afflicted with dishonorable
scantnesse, and slavish depending upon the uncertain and miserable pleasure of
worldly men. If it were laid to the Apostles charge, that they did preach only
to gain wealth by their preaching, and to feed their bellies, then had they
no readier way to repel this calumny, then by refusing maintenance where they
were so slandered, as Paul was among the Corinthians. But if the Minister under
the Christian Magistrate be so traduced, he has an other way to be relieved,
while the Magistrate does make the back of the slanderer to smart, or his
purse to pay, until his false tongue be reformed, and justly compelled with
his own shame to reclaim the disgrace of the Minister. And so still the case
is differing. We claim our certain maintenance in honorable sort by the
Apostles doctrine, being not tied unto their examples in this case, seeing the
goodness of God has made our times better then theirs in Christian
Magistrates, as he had made their qualifications to exceed ours in their
abounding and extraordinary measure of spiritual graces.

And whatsoever good work men either pretend or imagine to effect, by
neglecting the revenues which God gives to his Ministers, as if this were the
way to win souls; let them take heed and assure themselves they do much
harm, for they betraie the estate that God has passed over unto his
Ministers, they give men advantage to withdraw the due from the Church, and
they prejudice the Ministry of all other men, who follow not their exorbitant
example. It is lawful for ministers, it is necessary for all Christians both
to be and to seem regardlesse of worldly things: yet must we not be either so
superstitious, as to fling away, and abhor, or so careless as to despise, or
specially so bad as to betraie that fair portion wherewith God has endowed
our callings. Honor the Lord with thy riches in careful and godly use of
them, and not in a contemptuous refusal of thy just inheritance. I make no
question but that this neglect of the Churches patrimony, has been caused in
many good men, from a good intent, but certainly it tends to an evil end,
which will be in time (if the goodness of God prevent it not) a great decaie
to true religion. Will not poverty and depending upon men's courtesy, weaken
the zeal of some, and diminish the authority and strength of others, and make
all to be under contempt, as we see too much already? Will not contempt
discourage men from coming into the ministry, and quail those who are in
already, as we show more fully in the answer to the fifth objection, cap. 13?
God of (...). 4^ 4^.
his mercy who has given us right to his holy tithes, Leu. 27. maintain our
possession in what we hold, and in his good time restore us into that again
which is detained, if it be his pleasure.

Others thinking themselves better advised, (though in truth they have less
show of probability when their opinion is examined) have held it for
divinity, that it is (...)
unfitting and dangerous for ministers to depend upon private benevolence,
least Ministers being men subject to infirmity, should by this means be
brought into the state of Calchas in Homer, who knew the truth, but was (...).
afraid to speak it, least he should anger the hearers, and hurt himself.
They have therefore invented an other course, vz. that Ministers are to be
maintained by stip^ds, which are to be made certain unto them, and competent for
them, by authority. This devise had his first hammering in the forge of
mischief the Church, or rather the apostacy of Popery, and the conceit
thereof we justly disclaim, because it is none of Gods ordinance, but a
plausible bane to true religion.

Yet worthy men of clearer understanding, and pu^er sincerity, have since
received this be witching illusion in stead of soundness, not that they wanted
either will, or ability to seek and find so clear a truth, but because they
were so continually and wholly taken up with the chiefer points of religion,
defending the true meaning of the substantial Articles, against the peevish
underminings, and violent intrusions of popish heresies: therefore they have
the less intended those outward things and smaller matters; so that supposing
tithes to have expired with the priesthood of Leui, they have been content to
acknowledge the maintenance of the ministry to be at the appointment of the
governors, and so pleaded for no other then this supposed competencie in
general terms. Exceeding great was the service which they did unto true
religion, defending and redeeming the truth from such thick fogges of palpable
darkness: the Lords name be blessed, and the Lords grace make us thankful
for their most blessed and euer-renowned labors: yet neither did they, nor
could any man or men, being neither Prophets nor Apostles in special sense,
perfect all in so short a space:

(...) Hom. Ilia^ ^


(...).

Potent Achilles brought not all his sayings to perfect pass:

But finished some, and half'd the rest as valiant as he was. But now, the
maine points of Christianity being by those blessed late Saints so cleared,
as that he who runs may read, others of the laborers in the same vineyard
succeeding the former, no whit defacing any plant which their fathers had
bewtified, they have by the direction of the same spirit, proceeded in the
work where their elders left it, and so endeavoring to hedge and sense the
outside of that exact and rich husbandry of the others plantation, they have
made it plain, that neither private beneuolences, nor the late devised
competencie, but tithes and offerings, according to Gods most holy ordinance,
is the tribute of the religious, to be faithfully performed by every Christian
to Almighty God for the honorable maintenance of the Evangelical Ministry.

To relieve Ministers with private beneuolences may have some color from the
practice of the most Primitive times, and yet be now inexpedient: but as for
this conceit of supposed competencie, it has neither warrant in Carlet. tyth.
cap. 1.
Scripture, nor any See the answe^ to ^he 8. ^^b. Cap. ^3.
president in all the practice of the Primitive Church, either before or under
the best Emperors.

CHAP. III. The tenth part of the increase of every man's goods is Gods part by
especial right.
THat the Ministers of the Gospel be honorably maintained, it is Gods
ordinance, as the Apostle calls it, 1. Cor. 9. 14.

That neither private benevolence, nor yet any assigned competencie is his
ordinance, I have already showed.

What it is, I am now to define, and prove, by the help of Almighty God.

The maintenance which the Ministers of the Gospel are to receive and require
is the tenth part of the increase of the goods of their brethren, who do live
under their Ministry.

For the auouching of this truth, we must consider two things, I us, and
Factum: that is, right, and practice.

The right is twofold, 1. original, which is Gods. 2. deputed, which is man's.

The first and original right unto tithes, is the Lord Original^ right to
tithes.
Gods own right, Leu. 27. 30. 32. All tithes of the land, of the seed of the
ground, of the fruit of the trees is the Lords, holy to the Lord. And every
tithe of bullock, and of sheep, and of all that goes under the rod, the
tenth shall be holy unto the Lord. Hereupon it is that when the Israelites be
slack in payments of their tithes, God does say, not that the Levites, but
that he himself is robbed, Mal. 3. 8, 9. and the barn or store house of the
Levites, God calls it, bethi, my house.

It is in vain to say, that tithes are the Lords only in a general sense, as
all other things are the Lords; as the cattle upon a thousand hills: for it is
manifest that this is spoken Psalm. 50. 10 Carlet. tyth. cap 3. Eburn. p 65.
discriminatim, by way of distinction, insinuating that tithes are the Lords by
a special propriety; the Lord having allowed unto men the nine parts, and
reserved the tenth unto himself. For except it were understood in this
special sense, and not in the general, then not the tenth part, but all the
ten parts are the Lords: and then it will follow, that God gives all to the
Leuite. For when God says concerning the Levites, I am their inheritance,
Ezech. 44. 28. I am thy part, and thine inheritance, Number. 18. 20. does he not
plainly mean, that they having none inheritance among their brethren, shall
have that which is the Lords part? If they shall have that which is the Lords
part in a general sense, they shall have all: for in that sense all is the
Lords. But they must have only a tenth part (besides their offerings) which
they have under the name of the Lords part, the Lords possession, the Lords
inheritance; therefore the tenth is the Lords part in another sense and meaning
then as all the rest is his. He has a common right in the rest in regard of
his creation and providence, so as all are held of him, and at his good
pleasure: but he has a special right to tithes, as his own demeanes, or
reserved estate.

Hereupon it is that M. Calvin writing upon these ^e^te^.
words, Leuit. 27. 30. calls tithes proprium Dei ius and regal^ vectigal:
that is, Gods proper right, and royal tribute. And in the same place of his
Pen^et. upon the words of Deuteronomy. 14. 22. says, Deo vendicat omnium frugum
decimas, quibus autem soluendae sint non statim exprimit: that is, Moses does
challenge for God the tenthes of all fruits, but he does not presently express
to whom they shall be paid. For whereas Moses does proclaim Gods challenge in
Sinai (where all the book of Leuiticus was delivered, Leuit. 27. 34.) the
assigning of tithes unto the Levites is not mentioned until the 18. chapter of
Number. which was long time after: for between the departure of the Israelites
from Sinai, and the things written, Number. 18. there were many accidents, as the
lusting for flesh, and the punishment thereof, the murmuring of A^ron and
Miriam, the espying of the Land of Canaan, the rebellion of Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, the confirming of Aarons priesthood by the budding of his rod, and
diverse other notable occurrences: Yea, where they departed from Sinai in the
second month of the second year, Number. 10. 11. they receive not the precepts
mentioned, cap. 18. until the 30. year. So that Perkins. digest. page 1^
the proper right unto tithes, is Gods independantly, they being proclaimed to
be his about thirty years before they were assigned unto the Levites: so as,
though God had not ordained the tithes to be the portion of the Levites, yet
had the tithes been still due unto God: for he does not say, they shall be the
Lords when he appoints them for the Levites, but, they are his already what
soever he shall think good to do with them. And to that effect are the words
of Mr. Calvin pregnant; Cum decimas In ^eb. 7. ^
populus quasi sacrum vectigal offerret deo Leuitae eas recipiebant, quia in
locum suum deus cos quoda^modo surrogabat. that is, when the people were to
offer the tithes unto God as a sacred tribute, the Levites did receive them,
because God had substituted them after a sort in his place. And by and by after
in the same place he adds, quod debebat Abraham deo soluit in manum
Melchisedech: that is, what Abraham ought unto God, he paid into the hands of
Melchisedech. So that even then before the priesthood of Leui, the tenth was
Gods special portion.

What share soever of any estate any man enjoys, he has the same as a Farmer
or Coppyholder from the Lord God, and therefore he owes unto God not only his
service of obedience unto the commandments, but also some rent or
acknowledgment whereby he may testify that he holds his estate of the Lord
God: And therefore says Solomon, honor the Lord with thy riches. Goulartius
P^o. ^. 9. ^pist ^^. no^. 11.
in his notes upon Cyprian has these words, Vsus decimarum tribus in rebu^
cernitur, id est, agnoscere omnia quae tum e terra eduntur tum ab animantibus
procreantur diuina bonitate ad vsum nostrum gigni, quod testabantur pendentes
decimas deo eo tanquam principe and gubernator^ agni^o a quo omni^bona in nos
proficiscerentur, etc. that is, there is to be discerned a threefold use of
tithes: 1. to acknowledge all things both of the fruits of the earth, and also
of the increase of cattle to be by the goodness of God produced for our use;
which thing they testified by paying their tithes to God, acknowledging him for
the King and Governor from whom all good things are derived unto us, etc.
Whereunto agrees that testimony of Doctor Iunius: Velnatura test beneficia
dei prositerioportet (...). 31.
eos qui acceperunt ^quemadmodum and gentes ipsae decimas Herculi praebuerunt
solenni more: that is, Nature it self bears witness, that they who have
received benefits from God, ought to acknowledge them, as the very heathen
performed tithes unto Hercules in a solemn manner. To the same effect further
are the words of Mr. Calvin, (...). 18. 20.
Deus tanquam Rex decimas sibi suo iure vendicat: that is, God as a King
challenges the tithes to himself by his own right. And so says Augustine,
non rogat tuum, sed suum, rogat decimas: that is, he does not ask thine,
(...) 219.
but his own: he does ask the tenthes. Where Augustine makes a manifest
difference between that which is Gods part, and that which is man's parts,
making the nine parts to be the Lords grant unto man, and the tenth part to be
the Lords own reservation.

Caine and Abel did at the first offer unto God of the goods which God had
given unto them. What shall we think of that their fact? was it a work of
supererogation, or of duty? Of supererogation it was not: for if they had not
been bound both to offer, and in some sort also to the measure and manner of
their offering, how could Cain have been misliked for the leanness or
scantnesse of his sacrifice, when he was not bound to the performance of any?
It was therefore a duty whereunto they were bound, for the acknowledgement of
their Lord, by the true payment of their rent and tribute, and therefore all
others are in them admonished of this: vz. that there is a reserved rent, and
an imposed tribute unto Almighty God upon every part of their worldly estate,
as God by his blessing shall cause the same to be increased. And although it be
not precisely set down, that the portion which Abel did, and Caine either did
or should have willingly offered was the tenth, yet it is likely that it was
the tenth rather then any other, if we compare their practice with other
Scriptures, which concern payments from man to God, as (God willing) shall
appear. Manifest it is, that God has a peculiar right to some special part
of every man's increase. And if then the question be, how great, or how little
that part is? certainly we must answer, the tenth: for this is the only part
which ever God challenged, as peculiar and certain.

And as thus in the old Testament, so also in the New we find tithes challenged
to be the Lords, though not by the very name of tithes, yet under the general
name of the Lords due: as, Matthew. 22. 21. Give. unto God that which is Gods.
The question is there, concerning worldly things, whereof their tribute unto
the Emperor consisted. The answer is, that both unto Caesar they must perform
his due impost, which is his tribute, and also unto God they must pay their due
acknowledgment (...). 22. 21. (...). 21.
out of these earthly things: and that is by tithes and offerings, but
specially tithes, because they are determinatiuely set down in their
particular sum.

But peradventure some body will say, that though this place cited out of
Saint Matt. be of the new Testament, yet it concerns the state of the
Israelites under the Leuiticall priesthood: and therefore that I have all this
while only proved that tithes were Gods special due in the old Testament,
but not that they are so now in the new Testament.

I answer, that if God had a special interest in some part of our goods in the
old testament, he has the same interest still: for we do not any where find
that God has resigned this right. And whereas further the Lord having formerly
both challenged and received under the law, and before the law, not only
apart, but specially and by name a tenth part, it is our duty still to
acknowledge and perform for Gods due, not only a part (we know not which)
but even this known particularly determined part, except the Lord had in the
new testament either wholly disclaimed this right, or else removed it to a
new rate: which he has not done, either directly, or indirectly. And where it
is pretended that tithes were properly appertaining to the Leuiticall
priesthood, I have already in part, and shall hereafter (by Gods help) cap.
6. more fully confute that imagination: concluding now, that the Lord has an
original and primary right unto tithes.

CHAP. IIII. Tithes by a deputed or assigned right, are due to those who are
Gods ministers in holy things.
While we do consider the deputation of tithes, we find therein a twofold
end or cause of that deputation.

The first and principal, which is to maintain Gods public worship. (...).


The secondarie end, is to maintain those persons who are the chief actors
in this worship.

The principal end of assigning tithes, is to maintain the worship of God.
In the 16. chap. of Numb. ver. 21. (...).
where God made the first assignation of tithes unto the Levites, this is added
in plain words, for their service which they serve in the tabernacle of the
congregation: the like is Deuteronomy. 18. where the Lord showing first in the four
first (...) page ^^.
verses, that the portion of the whole tribe of Leui shall be the tithes,
offerings, and certain shares of the sacrifices, he yields the cause in the
first verse. for the Lord thy God has chosen him out of all thy tribes to stand
and minister in the name of the Lord, him and his sons for ever. And by the
Prophet Ezekiel the Lord says, that the Ezech 44. 28.
priesthood shall be the Priests inheritance, the Lord will be his possession,
meaning that the tithes and offerings had not been the part of the Leuite more
then of any of the rest of his brethren, if God had not chosen him from the
rest to the ministry. If either Ruben, or Simeon, or anyelse had been
ordained the Priest, to him should also the tithes have been assigned: for they
being Gods own special part, he conuerteth them to the maintenance of his
own special service: and therefore before the priesthood of Leui many years,
does Jacob vow his tithes to maintain Gods worship, Genesis 28. 22. whereof more
shall be spoken hereafter, cap. 6.

In the new Testament though the assignation be not by express name of
tithes, yet in effect the same thing is ordained to the same end: if we
consider how the Apostle (...). 69.
S. Paul does join together the 13. and 14. verses of the 9. chap. of the 1.
Epistle to the Corinth. by a note of similitude: wherein while he sets down
the practice of the old Testament for a president unto the new, we see that
what was ordained in the old Testament concerning t^^hes, is not abrogated but
renewed in the new testame^^ They which wait at the altar, are partakers with
the altar^^ren so also has God ordained that they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel. Where the Apostle does not only set down as a
matter of equity, that the Ministers of the Gospel should be provided for, but
also that it be in the same manner as it was in the old testament; even so,
that is, by tithes and offerings: for so was the ministry of the altar
maintained. Also in the 6. cap. and 6. v. of the epistle to the Gal. there is a
full and plain assignation of a part of every man's goods unto the ministry:
Let him that has been taught in the word, make him which has taught him
partaker of all his goods. A word of explication is wanting in this p^ecept,
for it is not set down what part the disciple must bestow upon the teacher
for his works sake. But if we may expound Scripture by Scripture, then it will
appear, that the word tenth is here to be supplied, for that was the part and
no other which God assigned to the ministry of his worship. He who shall thus
expound it shall have the tenure of the Scripture to avouch his interpretation:
but whosoever shall expound it otherwise, either he expounds not at all, or
at least he but gives his own b^re guess without ground. If thou say he
must give a part, that is, he must give something; this if it be not obscurum
per obscurius, certainly it is not ignotum perno^^us: for I must ask thee
again, what is that something? And so if any shall oppose against the evidence
of the aforenamed simily, and say that it only imports equity, but sets
not down any particular form or determinate quantity. I answer, that there
must be a particular determination Carlet. tyth. cap 4.
before any thing be done. Will any man now say, as some whom we mentioned in
the second chapter have said, that every man shall give what himself shall
please? Surely the worldly man would smile in his sleeue to see his elbow
vnderlaid with such a cushion: it is a pleasing doctrine, and gently claweth
flesh and blood: but where is the ground of this construction? Does any
Scripture teach us to appoint God to stand to man's courtesy, without so much as
any law to reprove them by when they become negligent? Is this any other but
an humane conceit without warrant? Will any man in his right wits let out his
ground to a tenant to pay merely what the tenant himself pleases? No sure;
He that is a Lord will have this privilege to impose a rent upon his own
ground. Many Lords have been bountiful to well deserving tenants, (...). p.
6^.
nants, and have accepted of a very easy rent, yet they have determined it by
their own mouths, though they have made it never so small; even so Almighty
God, who gives to every man all that be inioyeth, as a tenant at will, has
made the rent to be small indeed, when it is but the tenth, yet he has not
left it to the courtesy of his tenant; but as he shows his bounty in making
the rent easy, so he shows sovereignty in naming the rent at his pleasure,
and making it certain.

If any shall expound this part to be at the determination of the magistrate,
this is again a humane conjecture, and howsoever it may seem to nestle in the
rock, and to strengthen it self with great authority, having betaken it
self to shroud under the wing of the Magistrate, yet we shall easily retriue
it from that covert without the least offensive touch to the uttermost hemme of
the Magistrates garment.

We most gladly acknowledge the Magistrate, that he is (...), Gods lively
image, Gods own lawful Menand.
surrogate, yea, no less then a God on earth, Psalm. 82. who being godly,
assumeth to himself as he is allowed by God, authority and power to make
laws to order men, but not to stint Almighty God in any of his required
duties. The godly Magistrate does provide, that God may receive what he has
required, but does not appoint him what he shall require. God himself has set
down his own worship, and himself has particularized the special parts
thereof. That which is his own worship, he refers not to man's invention. And
as it stands with gods worship, so does it also with gods impost, rent, or
tribute: it is his own, he has imposed it his own self, and has not left
it at man's appointment.

Object. But it may be objected; The Magistrate may make laws concerning the
worship of God, commanding or forbidding, as he sees cause for order and
comeliness: as what part of time, what place, what manner of vestiments he
will have for diverse religious exercises: why then may not the Magistrate have
as much to do with Gods tribute as with his worship?

Resp. I answer, that he has fully as much to do with the one as with the
other: vz. in those things which circumstantially concern either of them, and
where the word of God also is silent, leaving things so to the Magistrates
discretion. But as for the substance of those things which the Lord God
requires for his own, no man may either diminish, or alter.

Object. Numbers, weights, and measures are circumstances, and therefore
because they are circumstances they should seem to be referred to the
discretion of the Magistrate, to increase or lessen them as cause may require.

Answ. He that in matter of payments permits number, weight, and measure to
the pleasure of the payer, has bound him to nothing: Secondly, all
circumstances are not in the power of the Magistrate to appoint, but only such
circumstances as the word of God has not particularly determined: for
circumstances set down, or appointed by God, may not be altered without his
leave. God does not say concerning the time, which is a circumstance of his
worship, You shall set apart for my worship and service some time, as you shall
see cause, or as the Magistrate shall appoint: but he says peremptorily, and
precisely, Remember that thou keep holy the seventh day: which number of
Seven may not be deminished: altered it is from the Seventh to a Scauenth,
the number still retained, and that little alteration which was made proceeding
from the direction of the spirit of God: for it began when Christ himself
was upon the earth, and continued in the time of the Apostles. So where God
does not only say indefinitely, honor the Lord with thy riches, but also
determines the tenth part for his own special due, it is not in the power of
any man to enforce the D. (...). v. v^ew. of (...). and (...). law. page 163.
164.
diminishing of this number.

The Christian Magistrate may appoint days besides the Saboath, and command
solemn worship unto God upon the same days as occasion of humiliation, by
prayer and fasting, or of tryumphing, by praise and feasting may require, but
with this caveat; First, that man appoint no day under the name of the Lords
seventh and Saboath day: Secondly, that no day of man's appointment, do cause
the Sabbath to be quenched and put down, but that the saboath do still hold
his own course, notwithstanding the dedicating of other days besides. Even so
also, the Magistrate may, as occasion requires, cause some thing else besides
the tithes to be dedicated unto the service of the Lord, and maintenance of his
ministry, but with the like caveat: First, that man appoint nothing in this
case by the name of Gods tyth, or of that tribute which God himself has
determinatiuely enjoined. Secondly, that no share of man's appointing do
smoother or drown the tithes, but that the tithes be still duly paid what
addition or supply soever besides is caused.

That God has required the tenth, that is plain, but Carlet. tyth. cap. 1.
where or when did he ever give any man leave to alter that number? He has
required the tenth, he has not remitted it, nor given any man leave to alter
it: therefore the tenth is still his special due: Gods worship and Gods due
being once established, they are perpetual, until God shall cause any
alteration. The worship of God, in regard of the manner thereof is ceased since
the passion of Christ: but God has caused the ceasing of so much as is ceased,
Ephesians. 2. 15. Coloss. 2. 14. what was not abrogated by Christ, that still
remains. So also of Gods right or portion, which he had in the time of the
law, some parts are ceased, vz. those fragments of the sacrifices which were
the share of the Priests, as appears at large in the book of Leuiticus, and
is expressed in the 6. cap. of this treatise; for the sacrifices themselves
being types of Christ to come, they are fulfilled and abolished in and by
Christ being come: but Tithes were no types of Christ, neither in their
substance, nor in their circumstance, but were only the maintenance of Gods
worship, which being perpetual they also are perpetual. They did belong to
the worship of God before there was a Leuiticall worship, as shall appear more
fully: and when they were assigned to the Levites, they did but follow Gods
worship, whereunto they served both before and since.

The persons to whom tithes have been and are deputed, (...) end of (...).
be those who minister unto God in holy things, as in praying, preaching,
administering sacraments, or sacrifices, as the times required.

The persons who for some 2500. years ministered in the priesthood, were the
first borne, into whose room the Levites were taken under Moses, Number. 3. 13.
41. 45. and therefore the first that received tithes, were the first borne, as
appears more fully hereafter in the example of Melchisedech.

From the time of Moses unto Christ, the space of some 1500. years, the tithes
were paid unto the Levites, not as they were Levites: for Leui himself was a
tythe-payer Heb. 7. 9. but as they were in the room of the first borne, to
administer in holy things.

Since the passion of Christ, these tithes are due to the Preachers of the
Gospel: for the tithes being due principally to the service, and not to the
men but for the service sake, and that now the Preachers of the Gospel have
succeeded the Levites, as the Levites succeeded the first borne in the same
service for substance; therefore the same stipend which the former had is due
also to the latter; seeing it is due principally to the service, and
secondarily, but certainly unto the persons who perform the service: and to
this effect also writes the Apostle, 1. Cor. 9. 13. 14. Gal. 6. 6. where he
does plainly assign something to the Minister of the Gospel, which something
I have in this chapter showed to be tithes: for in things contained both in the
old and new Testament, so as they are more distinct in the one then in the
other, the rule is, that the distinct phrase of the one must expound the
obscure, or undetermined speech of the other. The same Ministers maintenance
which Saint Paul in the places rehearsed does mention, can not by any Scripture
be interpreted to be any other but the very tenth part, but this does the
Apostle assign by the very name of Gods Ordinance unto the Minister of the
Gospel. And so you see the deputed right of tithes to be principally to the
service of God, and consequently to the servants of God, vz. his special
servants or Ministers in that special service of praying, preaching, and the
Sacraments.

CHAP. V. It is most agreeable unto equity, that Ministers have this deputed
right in tithes.
THe equity of yielding tithes unto the Minister of the Gospel, is to be
declared by these two reasons among diverse others very weighty.

First, if the Minister of the Gospel has succeeded the Leuite in the
ministry, why is he not to succeed him also in the revenue or stipend? Is he
less worthy? certainly no^ for he is a Minister of a better Testament. And
therefore is his calling more worthy then the calling of the Leuite. Amongst
men borne of women arose there not a greater (...) 11. 11.
then John the Baptist, yet he that is the least in the kingdom of heaven, is
greater then he. What is that? It is thus interpreted most agreeable unto the
scope of that Scripture, That (...) c (...)
for so much as John Baptist was nearer Christ in time, being the very next
unto him of all the Prophets that ever went before him, he was therefore both
more happy then the rest: for he saw what they desired to see, and saw not;
and also of a more worthy calling, as pointing out Christ with the finger,
which the rest only descried a far off. So also they who succeed John in this
ministry, as the Apostles of Christ, and their successors, to the end of the
world, should be more happy, and of a more worthy calling then John the
Baptist: If the ministration of condemnation were glorious, much more must the
minstration 2. Co^ 3. 9.
of righteousness exceed in glory. Now both equity of reason, and also the
words of holy Scripture will allow the more honorable salarie to the more
worthy calling: 1. Tim. 5. 17. The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double
honor, especially they that labor in the word and doctrine. If then the
Leuite had so much, why shall the Minister of the Gospel expect any less? And
if the doctrine of Aquinas in this point be any thing worth, then the people
(...) 87. ^^. 1.
of the new Testament must pay to their minister more then the tenth, because
their righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees: neither yet was this first the invention of Aquinas, but long before
him the observation of Augustine, and before him also Aug (...). O^ig (...).
ho^. ^^.
of Origin.

It may be, some body may grant that the Minister of the Gospel is worthy of
his hire as well as the Leuite, but deny that this proves that the hire must
be the tithes: for some other course may be taken for his relief in competent
sort.

But I answer, first, if thou offer him less, thou do dishonor him,
implying that he is not worthy of so much: secondly, if thou grant the
Minister of the Gospel as large an allowance as the Leuite had, but not by
tithes, but as the Magistrate shall see cause to ordain, yet I say that herein
the worthier calling of the minister of the Gospel, is made inferior to the
calling of the Leuite, in that, what the Leuite might claim honorably,
certainly, and determinatiuely by the law of God, the Minister of the Gospel
must crave miserably and basely, at the uncertain pleasure of humane courtesy.
Here the condition of the Minister of the Gospel is made more dishonorable,
then the condition of the Leuite, and how can that be equity?

Or will some flowter say, that true honor does not consist in these things,
but in the reverend regard that is to be had unto Ministers. I then ask him,
wherein does this reverence consist? in the cappe and knee, and in saying, good
Sir, and the like superficial complements? Be Gal ^^. (...). ^3 9
not deceived, God is not mocked: Honor the Lord with thy riches; Honoring
does partly and greatly consist in contributing so to the Ministers
maintenance, as it be neither scant nor uncertain, both which are
dishonorable. The verbal or gesturall honor which many men (if not the most)
perform to Ministers, is the very same which the Jews or Judas did to Christ;
Fair words and foul deeds, a kiss and a knock: they put a scepter in his
hand, but pull his garment from his back: and so do men make fair faces upon
the minister, and verbally acknowledge him to have the rule and authority over
their consciences, but in the mean time they take from him, or keep from him
his apparel and victual, by not paying their true tenthes. If the Ministers
calling be honorable, let not his means be miserable, either in scarcity or
in uncertainty.

The second rule of equity or reason is this. That whereas the evangelical
minister is not the minister of men, but of God properly and principally, he is
also to be paid his wages not from men but from God, he is the special servant
or steward of God; the work he does is peculiarly the work of the Lord: men
have benefit by it but as servants in a great house have benefit by the
stewards pains: wherein the steward is indeed the servant of the family
accidentally, and in a secondarie sense, but he is truly and properly the
special servant of his Lord: and therefore he is not paid his wages out of the
wages of the rest of his fellow servants, but out of his Lords own revenues:
even so the Minister of the Gospel, Gods steward, is not to live of the estate
or portion of his brethren, but to be paid out of Gods own special revenues,
which are tithes and offerings, that men may not have occasion to say, as
oftentimes unadvisedly, and rudely they do, Nabal-like, the Minister is
maintained with my bread, my drink, my money, not remembering that God has a
share, and does challenge his special tribute upon their goods, which he does
assign unto the minister of his word.

Gods service by the ministry of the word and sacrament, is his own, and of
his own appointment, not of man's pleasure or devising. Gods servants for this
special work, are also of his own choice: for both in the old Testament, and
also in the new, he shows in express (...). 17. 5. 1. T^^. 3.
terms what parties he accepts of for this service. Is it not also equal
and likely; that he would have special revenues (...). 5 4.
of his own, where with to maintain his special servants in his special
service, without referring them to the courtesy of men? All men are the
servants of God, ^s all the cattle upon a thousand hills are the goods of God,
vz. in a large sense and common right, but the Ministers of the word, whether
Leuiticall or Evangelical, are the servants of God, as tithes and offerings
are the goods of God, viz. after a special manner; the one does perform to
God that service which is his service (...), after a special manner, the other
does belong to God special^ proprietate, as his reserved rent, as I have showed
in the third chapter.

So then the Lord does allow their hire unto his ministers Carlet. tyt^
out of his own reserved rents and revenues, and not maintain his own
service with that which he has (...). page 95. and 98. ^^
passed away unto others, as indeed he has done all that a man conscionably
inioyeth, tithes and offerings being set apart. Offerings he requires as
presents not as rents, referring the performance of them unto men's
considerations, these, Gods Ministers are to receive as an advancement; but the
tithes God requires determinatiuely for the certain maintenance of his own
special service, and servants. And therefore it is that the Lord does not say,
I have appointed the Levites to serve you, and you shall give them of yours,
but, I the Lord separated the tribe of Deuteronomy. 10* 8.
Leui to bear the arc of the covenant of the Lord, to stand before the Lord,
to minister unto him, and to bless in his name. So, I have given the children
of Leui all the tenthes: I have Numb. 18. 21. 24.
given the tithes to the Levites for an inheritance. And yet more fully
speaks the Prophet Ezekiel, I am their inheritance, Ezech. 44. ^8.
you shall give them no possession: for any achuzatham, I am their possession:
as if he should say, I will not have them to stand beholding unto you for their
maintenance, for seeing they administer unto me in my service, and not in
yours, I will maintain them with mine own reserved revenues, and not with
that which I have passed over unto you, but with the tithes and offerings which
I have reserved for my self in express terms. Hereto tend the words of
Philo Iudaeus, Ne quis ex conferentibus exprobret De p^^m. and honor. sacerd
accipienti beneficium suum i^betur prius in templa defer munera vt tum demum
inde desumant sacerdotes. Least any of those who do contribute, should vpbraid
the receiver by his benevolence, he is commanded first to bring the oblations
into the temple, that the Priests may thence receive them. Another says, Nec
sane dix^t vt ex oblationibus ederent sed esacrario, ne vel eos qui aliquid
caperent puderet The (...). 11^. (...)
accepti proinde ac si ab hominibus alerentur: vel qui imp^rt^rentur his sua,
insol^scerent: that is, He has not said, that they should eat of the
offerings, but of the tabernacle, least either they who received should be
ashamed as being fed by men; or else those should grow proud who did
contribute of their goods unto them. Also he adds, Manducandum asserit non
exdiscipulorum facultatibus sed de euangelio, ne forte superbiant quod
Apostolos sustentarent, neque enim inquit tu his alimonium subministras, sed
propria quaedam industria, hoc est euangelij enuntiatio ipsos alit: that is, he
says that they ought to live not upon the wealth of the disciples, but of the
Gospel, least men should wax proud, because they maintained Apostles: for
neither does he say, thou do minister food unto them, but, a certain
industry of their own, namely the preaching of the Gospel, does nourish them.
To the same effect also are the words of Augustine, which Gratian also cites,
Decimae ex debito requirantur, and qui eas dare noluerint res al^enas inuadunt:
Se^m ^dom. 1^. post. T^^. ca^s. 16 9 1.
Tithes are required as a due debt, and they which will not pay them, do
invade or take away other men's goods.

So then whether we consider the dignity of the Minister of the Gospel,
compared with the Leuite: o^ that the special service and servants of God are
to be maintained by Gods special revenues, it will appear most agreeable unto
reason and equity, that the Minister of the Gospel ought to live upon tithes
received in the name of God, at the hands of their brethren. And so much shall
suffice concerning the right of Tithes both original and assigned: we come now
to consider what has been practiced.

CHAP. VI. The practice of paying tithes in the old Testament, both before and
under the law.
THe first practice of performing tribute unto God, is that of Cain and Abel,
which because it appears Genesis 4.
not in plain terms that it was by tithes, I will not dwell upon it, though
there want not probable conjectures that what they brought was the tithe of
their increase, as I have already intimated in the third chapter.

I come therefore as there I promised, to compare that practice with other
examples to the like effect, vz. of men ^end^ing part of their goods, as a rent
or tribute unto Almighty God.

The second instance therefore is that of Abraham paying tithes to
Melchisedech: And he gave him tithe of all. Ge^. 14. 20.
In the whole book of Genesis hitherto there is not a word of any priest of
God: this is the first place where the priesthood is mentioned, howsoever there
are before found some priestly practices of Noah and Abraham, yet the name of a
priest is not found until now; which I observe, to the end that it might be
noted, that even where there is the very first mention of the priest, there
also is mention of paying tithes unto that priest by reason of his priesthood;
yea such a mention, as that it shows these tithes to be not any either
voluntary fact, or such transient action as was no more to be renewed, but
rather both a permanent practice, and also proceeding from bounden duties: for
the words are manifest, He paid him tithes miccol of all.

Some do restrain that All, to the spoils which Abraham had taken from the
four kings before mentioned. And that thought seems to be favored by diverse
translations reading in the Epistle to the Heb. cap. 7. v. 4. Unto whom the
Patriarch Abraham gave tithe of the spo^les; but I say, first, under
correction, as learned men are also of judgment (for I durst not be the first
censurer of that ^^^let. tyth. cap 4.
translation) that the Greek word (...), does not signify spoil, nor is it
so to be Englished. The word is a compound of (...) does properly signify the
uppermost or uttermost end of any thing, as (...), with the fingers ends:
tropically the word (...), does signify the best, or the chief. The word
(...), does signify an heap, and then the meaning of the compounde word
(...), is either the uttermost or uppermost of the heap, according to the
natural meaning of the word (...), or else the best or chief of the heap,
according to the metaphorical signification of the same word: And hereupon
first fruits are usually termed (...), because they were the uttermost, or that
which first came to hand: or if there was any choice, then they were the best
and principal. And not only the first fruits of corn and cattle, but of the
first fruits also of spoils, have bin termed (...). But that the spoils
themselves have ever been called by that name, is denied by those who are
learned, but not avouched by any, so much as by one parallel place, either of
holy or seculer writing.

So that where the Apostle says, Abraham paid tithes, (...), the meaning is,
both by the natural sense, and also by the figurative use of the word, that
Abraham ever paid his tithes of the very best of all his increase, after the
example of Abel, who brought of the first fruits, and of the fattest of them,
(and so does Jerome translate the place, saying, de praecipuis, that is, of the
principal.) And hereupon it should seem that the word Decumanus, the tenth,
became prouerbially to signify any thing bigger then the rest of his kind, as
decumanus sluctus, a huge wave: Ovid describing a fearful great wave, faith of
it, posterior nono est vndecimoque prior, that is, it is after ^ist. 1.
the ninth, and before the eleventh: as if he should have said, it is the
tenth, or a very great one: so decumana oua, E^urn. p. 94.
great eggs, decumana porta, a great gate, decumanus limes, a great boundmarke,
because common practice ever taught, that the tenthes which were offered either
to the true God, or to the Idols, were no shrimplings, but the goodliest and
the fairest. And so Abraham paying (...), did pay of the best of his increase,
and paying miccol, of all, did make these payments either yearly, o^ oftener,
or seldomer, but usually and certainly as God blessed him.

Secondly, if we duly examine the very text of Genesis, in that place we shall
find great reasons to induce v^ to think, that it was not of the spoils, but
of his other estate and increase, that Abraham tythed to Melchisedech. For
first, Abraham, v. 22. 23. had lift up his hand unto the most high God, that
he would not take of all that appertained to the King of Sodom, so much as a
third, or shoe latchet. If it be answered, he would not take to himself any
thing, but that does not conclude that he offered no part of those spoils to
God. We must consider farther the text, which adds the reason of Abraham's
refusal, vz. Least the King of Sodom should say, I have made Abraham rich.
Abraham depending upon God, and having experience of Gods bounty in so
wonderfully increasing him, as that he maintained in his own family 3^8.
fighting men, would have all the world to take notice, that the service of the
true God, and not any fortunate accidents, which are adored by the foolish
heathen, brought him his abundance: least therefore when Abraham at any time
hereafter, ascrihing his wealth to the providence of God, should praise his God
for the same, the King of Sodom, or any for him should say, whatsoever he
talks in boast of his God, yet the truth is, he may thank his good fortune
in conquering the four Kings, and he may thank the King of Sodom for so
bountifully rewarding that piece of service. To eschew therefore this calumny,
does Abraham refuse the wealth of the King of Sodom. Now if Abraham were
l^able to the like imputation from the envious grudging Heathen, by offering a
sacrifice of their goods unto his God, as well as by appropriating the same
unto his own self, then we must think that Abraham was also careful not to
offer any sacrifice unto God of the goods of the Heathen. For howsoever they
might have seemed cheerfully contented for a time, while their deliverance was
fresh, yet afterward the memorial of the benefit received from Abraham would
have decayed, his goodness would have been extenuated, and his sacrifice
blasphemed. For to this effect, in time unthankfulness might have taught them
to speak. Indeed, Abraham was very liberal to his God, in offering so great a
sacrifice, as the tenth part of all the spoils, but he was francke at other
men's charges, for they were our goods which he offered so abundantly. When as
then, thus might they have blasphemed his sacrifice as well as slaundered his
estate, it is alike requisite for him to shun calumny in the one reg^rd as
well as in the other: and as not to enrich himself, so also not to sacrifice
unto the Lord of the goods of the Heathen.

It is not untrue that these spoils were now Abraham's own goods, iure belli,
by the law of arms, and therefore he might conscionably have offered of them
unto God, what part he pleased, without any just imputation of doing any wrong
unto the Heathen, but so he might also (...) taken them to his own private
enriching: yea the King of Sodom does yield them most freely, v. 21. But
Abraham's intent is to shun all occasion of opening the mouths of the
heathen, either justly or unjustly to speak evil of his profession: and
therefore as he will accept of no wealth for himself, but such as God gives
him freely without being any way beholding to the heathen for them, as you may
see in the burial of Satah, so, Genesis (...)
he is also of the mind of David, who will not offer unto his God that which
cost him nothing, nor that which the heathen might have any color to say had
cost him nothing, 2. (...). 24. ^^.
therefore the tithes there mentioned, were not of the spoils, but of Abraham's
own estate.

If any body shall say, that howsoever Abraham might resign his own right
unto the king of Sodom, yet he could not resign Gods part, but must perform
that unto God in his priest Melchisedech: I answer, that howsoever this
conjecture is not so agreeable to the circumstances of the text, yet it
favors the cause altogether: for if of necessity he must offer unto God his
part, then it is granted that there is a part, and this tenth part (for of
other determined parts we have neither rule nor practice) due unto God, and to
be received by his minister out of every man's increase: for if the tithes be
due in spoils of war, which are obtained with such charge of army, (...).
such toil and hazard of so many lives, how much more in other things, corn,
wine, cattle, merchandise, gain of handicraft, which are neither so
chargeable, nor so dangerous, but peaceably and plentifully arise by the
blessing of God upon honest employments.

But there is yet in the text another inducement, to move us to think that
Abraham paid no tithes out of those spoils. For where Abraham in the ^4. verse.
does capitulate those things, which though he would not have yet were to be
deducted out of the spoils, namely, the parts of Aner, Eschol, and Mamre, and
that which the (...) men had eaten: the catalogue seems most exact, though in
general terms: for, first he does therein mention both the main matters which
were to be deducted, as the parts of Aner, Eschol, and Mamre, and also that
which was of the least moment, as those pittances of victual wherewith the
soldiers had refreshed their hunger and thirst: certainly if he had given or
meant to give unto God any such share as the tenth part of all those spoils,
we must think it had been worth the naming in the catalogue, specially when
the same is not only an indefinite enumeration, which might endure addition or
diminution, but an enumeration with a negative, or excluding determination,
when he says, bidgnadairach, saving only that which is eaten, and the parts of
those men. So that these words do apparently deny, that Abraham gave any part
of those spoils unto Melchisedech.

That Abraham did pay unto Melchisedech the tithes of all, that is most
manifest, but that he paid tithes out of the spoils that is against the tenure
of that Scripture: the word acrothinion, in Hebr. 7. imports no such matter.
Therefore it remains clear that he paid of all his own increase: as God did
bless him freely, so he blessed God again in bounden duty and thankfulness.

I showed before cap. 4. that before the law, the first born did receive the
tithes, because they were the priests. And therefore whosoever this
Melchisedech was, it is probable that he was the first borne in the family of
Abraham: the Scripture says, that he was without father, without mother,
having neither beginning of days nor end, which is not spoken simply and
absolutely, but by a figure; first, because the Scripture mentions not who
were his Parents. Secondly, because he being a type of Christ, has that
eternity ascribed unto him by reason of Christ, who as he is man, has no
father, and as he is god has no mother, and as he is the eternal God has no
beginning of days, etc. yet is it not unlikely that this Melchisedech was Sem
the eldest son of Noah, as some learned men do think, for Sem was living
when Isaac Carlet tyth. cap. 2.
was 50. years old, and therefore almost all the days of Abraham. As
Melchisedech therefore being by his birthright to have the care and charge of
Abraham, came to gratulate his victory, and to pray to God to bless him: so
Abraham in acknowledgement of the Priesthood of Melchisedech, does pay unto him
his tithes, which were his due in regard of his calling. As for the distance
between the dwelling of Abraham and Melchisedech, it could not be great, when
Abraham dwelt in Hebron, and Melchisedech in Jerusalem, as it has since been
called. And Melchisedechs so ready visiting of Abraham in his return from
overthrowing the kings, does show that they were not far a sunder, so that
it was possible for Melchisedech to receive Abraham's tithes from time to time;
and so the rule is observed, that before the Law, the first borne both did the
duty, and received the due of the priesthood.

The third practice which the Scripture mentions of paying tribute unto God,
is Genes. 28. 22. Of all that thou shall give me, I will give the tenth unto
thee. Though this be but a promise of a practice for the time to come, yet I
hence prove manifestly, that Iaacob did practice paying of tithes. For, first,
the good Patriarch is not here rapt with a fit of shipmens holiness, to
promise that he never performed. Secondly, considering that he was blessed of
God in his journey, and did come again, and according to his promise did build
the house in Bethel, he did also there pay the tithes of all that God gave Gen
35. 7.
unto him.

But some think, that they have exception enough against this practice of
Jacob, because it was (say they) merely voluntary, and not any thing
whereunto he was absolutely bound: for he does bind himself unto it by a vow,
if god bless him and bring him again in safety: whereas if it had been a
necessary duty, he must have performed it without condition, whether God had
performed his desire or not.

I answer that it is true, that Iaacob was bound to pay his tithes unto God
without condition, and though he had not vowed; but it will not follow, that
because he vowed to pay tithes, therefore the thing in it self is arbitrarie:
for, men may vow necessary and moral duties, as it is most evident in this
very vow of Jacob, if it be duly considered as it is set down at large. If God
will be (...). ^0. (...).
with me, and will keep me in this journey which I go, and will give me
bread to eat, and apparel to put on, so that I return again unto my fathers
house in safety. These words are the condition of the vow, or that which
Iaacob desires of God in his vow, exprimit Moses orationem Jacobs performam
voti, says Musculus. Then follows the vow it self, or that which Iaacob
binds himself to perform unto God; Then the Lord shall be my God, and this
stone which I have set up a^ a pillar, shall be Gods house: and of all that
thou shall give me, I will give the tenth unto thee. The vow it self is in
three parts, or three several promises, 1. the Lord shall be my God. 2. this
stone shall be Gods house. 3. I will pay unto God the tithe of all mine
increase. Mark now the true nature and meaning of each one of these promises,
and their necessary dependence one upon another. First for the meaning.

1. The Lord shall be my God. ^. I will worship the only true God, his verbis
se obstringit Jacob ne vnquam a puro (...).
vnius dei cul^^ desciscat: 1. In these words Jacob does bind himself least he
should at any time swerve from the true worship of the one God.

2. This stone shall be Gods house: that is, Here will I build a place to
worship God therein.

3. I will pay to God the tithe of all mine increase: that ^s, I will maintain
the worship of God in this place, according as God shall enable me: Dominum eo
loco expecudibus and frugibus suis offerendo coluit: that is, he did worship
(...)
God in that place, by offering of his corn and cattle.

Now mark the dependence of these one upon an other, and it shall thereby
appear that it was not a thing merely consisting in the pleasure of Jacob,
either to pay or not to pay his tithes, though he had not vowed: for none of
these can be separated one from another: I will (...). page ^3.
worship God, this is not arbitrarie, but necessary: I will build a place for
Gods worship, this is also necessary; for the solemn worship of God must be
in public Conuocations every seventh day: Leuit. 23. 3. I will give unto thee
my tithes, this can not be arbitrary: for if it be necessary that God be
worshipped, and necessary also that there be a set place for his worship,
then is it also necessary that there be a set provision to maintain that
worship.

Then let not the name of a vow be thought sufficient to prove, that it was in
the pleasure of Jacob, whether Rich. (...). sent^^die^. xxxviij. ^^^. iij.
he would have paid tithes or no before he vowed, for he voweth not according
to that old and lame definition, votum est propositi supererogantis promissio,
that is, a vow is a promise of a needless intent; but he voweth things merely
necessary, specially in the first part, and also in the second; therefore the
making of this vow excludes not tithes from being merely necessary.

If any think it needless to vow that which is already necessary, he is
deceived: for, by the vow does a man bind himself more strictly, and becomes
more careful in the performance of Moral duties: Infirmitati suae consulit
Calv. 11. Genesis 28. Carlet. tyth. cap. 2.
Jacob vt se magis stimularet ad pietatis officium: that is, Jacob made this
vow to help his own weakness, and the rather to stir up himself to the
duty of godliness: so that to vow even moral duties, is both lawful, and
profitable.

Yea further, such is the nature of a vow, that we ought not to vow any thing
but that which is agreeable unto the will of God, according to that definition
which is in Aquinas, Votum est testificatio quaeda^ promissionis spontaneae
(...).
quae debet fieri deo de his quae dei sunt secundum eundem: that is, A vow is a
certain testification of a voluntary promise made unto God of those things
which are Gods according unto God. Where the promise is called voluntary, but
the thing promised must be agreeable to the will of God, for else in stead of
worshipping God by our vows, we only perform will worship, if we vow any
thing unto God before we know the thing which we promise be a thing which God
requires: Hereunto serve the words of Culvin, when he says of this vow of
Jacob, non quod suo arbitrio deum coluerit, that is, not that he would worship
God after his own fancy: where he further admonishes, ne quid voueant nisi
quod per se Deo probatur, and illis dedit in manum: that is, men ought not to
vow any thing but that which of it self is allowed of God, and which he has
given into their hands. If we may vow or offer nothing unto God, but that which
God requires, then it follows necessarily, that tithes were required by God,
because they were vowed by Jacob.

But all this while an adversary may think, that he may grant unto me all
that yet I have spoken concerning this vow of Jacob, and yet deny that any
conclusion to my purpose can be inferred thereupon: for in this vow of Jacob,
even the former part thereof which is necessary, is not yet so necessary, but
that something in it is arbitrarie and not necessary it self, but only in
regard of the vow: for where it is said, this stone shall be Gods house, it may
seem necessary to have a set place for the ordinary and solemn worship of
God, but that the place must be this very Bethel, this seems not necessary;
for it may seem to be in the power of Jacob, to build his altar either here or
in some other place where he think good; so that howsoever in the general,
it is necessary that there be a place for Gods worship, yet in the particular,
it might have been in another place as well as in this. So in the last part of
the vow concerning payment of tithes, to maintain Gods worship, it may be
granted necessary in the general, that there be an allowance, but that this
allowance must be precisely and simply the very tenth, that may seem
ambiguous: for as the one a circumstance of place, so the other a circumstance
of quantity, may seem to be left to men's discretion.

Answ. It is true as we showed, cap. 4. that diverse circumstances are diverse
times permitted to the discretion of godly men: but in matters so serious and
weighty, as the worship of God, and their holy vows, they are ever most wary
not to determine any of the least circumstances but upon special cause, as may
appear in this vow of Jacob.

One might think that for this circumstance of place, an other place might
have served as well as this, but we shall find, if we duly examine it, that
Jacob does not assume this place only upon his own pleasure, but upon such
weighty reasons as did tie Jacob to this place before any other. For,

First, In this place God did both reveal Christ with his benefits unto Jacob
under the figure of that ladder which appeared unto him in his dream, and also
make promise unto him both of a safe return into his country, and also of the
inioying of the whole land of Canaan for a possession and inheritance to him
and to his seed In this place did God promise unto Jacob that his seed should
multiply as the dust of the earth all the world over, and that the propitiator
Jesus Christ, who should procure the eternal happiness unto the world, should
proceed also from the very loins of Jacob, as is plain from the beginning of
v. 11. unto the end of the 15. v.

Secondly, Jacob does not vow to make this place the house of God of his own
head, but God has first made the place to be his house, and then Jacob does
but accept of the place which God had chosen: for so the text is plain, This
is no other but even the house of God: so that Jacob has no more liberty for
building unto God an altar in this place, then Solomon had for building the
Temple in Jerusalem, vz. in the place which God himself had 1. Reg. 8. 29.
chosen.

So that whether we consider the first reason, namely, that in this place Jacob
found so much favor, and received so many fair and sure promises at the hands
of God: or the second reason, vz. that this is Gods house already, God himself
having already chosen it; we shall see plainly that this was the only place
for Jacob to build an altar for God in: for first no place so fit and
beneficial for Jacobs devotions, as the place which could put him in mind of
so many large heavenly favors: and secondly a necessity is laid upon Jacob
to make this the house of God, for God himself had made it his own house
already.

Thus far then it is very plain, that every whit of this vow of Jacob is a
matter necessary, yea the least circumstance thereof has a most due regard to
the aforegoing will of God, in precise and particular determination, vowing no
more to God then what God himself already required.

Then for the last part of the vow, which concerns provision to maintain
Gods worship, we must also acknowledge that it is grounded upon special cause,
not only in general, that it must be something, but also in particular, that
it must be this determined something, the very tenth: for if the particular
place of the altar was not assigned without special cause, then assuredly
Jacob, so godly a man, so well instructed, so deeply affected in his mind
with reverence, as appears v. 17. so advised and serious in the whole
carriage, so faithfully regarding to fly his own fantasies, and to follow
carefully the very will of God in the least circumstance of the rest of his
vow, does not now in extremo deficere, and in the last point swerve from Gods
direction to his own devise: but as in the former points, so also in this he
has a regard to the known will of Almighty God, vowing unto God the tenth,
because he knew this to be the portion which God would accept of. For, if the
eight, ninth, (...) page 64.
or twelfth, or any other part had been the part which god would have
accepted, then assuredly had Jacob vowed that and not this. Yea further, it is
not likely that Jacob durst have determined any part, if he had not either
known aforehand, or been presently informed that that was the share which God
has reserved for his own portion. As Bethel is not Beth-El, or Gods house,
because Carlet (...) cap. ^.
Jacob vowed it should be so, but Jacob vowed he would so esteem it, because
it is Gods house already: Even so the tenth part becomes not Gods part,
because Jacob does vow that it shall be Gods, but Jacob does vow that he will
faithfully perform the tenth to God, because he knows it to be the Lords
own part already. And herein Jacob does no more (his act of vowing only
excepted) then had bin practiced by his forefathers, as has bin showed in the
former instance of his grandfather Abraham.

The fourth practice concerning payments of tithes, is that of the Israelites,
from the time of Moses, unto the coming of Christ in the flesh, which is the
space of some 1500. years, all which time tithes were paid unto the Levites by
Gods assignation or appointment: who taking the Levites into his special
service in the stead of the first borne, assigned unto them his special
revenues of tithes and offerings for their service, so long as the same should
endure, as has been showed, cap. 4.

But here now I think it sit, to show something more fully, that howsoever the
Levites had the use of the tithes while they administered at the altar, and in
the temple, and tabernacle; yet tithes were not any such Leuiticall matter, as
was to cease when the children of Leui gave over their Priesthood. Indeed that
is the common error, vz. that tithes were merely Leuiticall, and therefore now
cease to be due by the word of God: but I shall by the help of God, show the
contrary by good reason. Thus therefore I argue.

That which is neither ceremonial, nor judicial, is not merely Leuiticall:
Payment of tithes, is neither ceremonial, nor judicial: therefore payment of
tithes is not mere Leuiticall.

The Proposition is manifestly true; for the whole law of God, being either
Moral, Judicial, or Ceremonial, it follows evidently, that what is neither
Ceremonial, nor Judicial is Moral, and therefore not Leuiticall: for
howsoever the moral Law was of force in the time of the Leuiticall Priesthood,
yet the moral Law was not Leuiticall: for that is called Leuiticall which
began and ended with the Priesthood of Leui: the Moral law was before, and
continues still to the end of the world: therefore the moral law is not
Leuiticall; no more are tithes, for they are also moral, because they are
neither ceremonial, nor Judicial. And first I will prove, that they are not
ceremonial.

First, that cannot be a Leuiticall ceremony, which is (...). 2.
performed contrary to the Leuiticall order: but payment of tithes is found
performed contrary to the Leuiticall order: for Leui who by the Leuiticall
order is to receive tithes, did before the institution of his order pay tithes,
Heb. 7. 9. Therefore payment of tithes is not a Leuiticall ceremony.

Secondly, all Leuiticall ceremonies were types of heavenly Heb. 9. 2^.
things: 1. every Ceremony did shadow out, and signify either Christ
himself, or some benefit redounding Carlet. tyth. cap 3.
unto us from Christ; that God who ordained them, did not appoint any of them
to be a cipher, an idle shadow, but they were all most certain gospells,
preaching unto the Jews, (though more obscurely) their spiritual cleansings,
and their eternal glory and happiness in their Messiah which was to come. But
tithes had no such signification, but did only serve to maintain the
Ministry, among the Israelites, in the tribe of Leui, which it had maintained
before in the first borne: therefore tithes are not ceremonial.

Thirdly, it is unlawful to retain now any ceremony 1. 2 qu. 103. a^. 4.
Aug. tom. 2. epist. 19.
that was Leuiticall, specially to the same use and end whereto it served in
the Leuiticall priesthood. For the ceremonies being types of things to come,
they were to cease when the thing signified should be accomplished, and
therefore it is said by the Apostle, that they were to endure to the time of
reformation; which reformation Heb. 9. 10.
being performed by Christ, the ceremonies do so far forth cease, as that
who so now uses them, does with the Jews, deny Christ to be incarnate,
dead, and buried, and risen again: and maintain, that he is yet to be
expected. But tithes not only have been paid long after A^^ conti. (...). 1^.
c 16. tom. 6.
the death of Christ, and the burial of all Leuiticall ceremonies, but also
do still continue to the same end and use whereto they served in the
priesthood of Leui, namely, to maintain the ministry. Neither is this
practice accused of unlawfulness by any, excepting the giddie Anabaptists, and
those whom we mentioned in the second Chapter, who in indignation against the
abuse of tithes in Popery, have also disclaimed the use thereof altogether:
these few only excepted, none have ever heid it unlawful to pay and receive
tithes, howsoever some think them not to be due by the law of God, but by an
humane constitution. Therefore we must either condemue the Church of God for
so many ages past of grievous transgression against the cross of Christ, or
else grant that tithes were no Leuiticall ceremony.

Origin discourses this point at large, and determines (...)
that tithes* were no such legal ceremonies as were to cease upon the coming
of Christ, but such an eternal ordinance or Commandment as was to continue
for ever: of the like nature with these moral preceps, as he for example does
produce, Non occides, non facies adulterium, non furaberis: thou shall not
kill, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not steal: so Origin does
hold tithes to be directly moral: more of his judgment in this point is set
down in the 9. chapter.

But some, when they see that they cannot make tithes leuiticall ceremonies,
think yet that they have a sure refuge, when they remember that some
ceremonies which were not leuiticall, but of a more ancient original, have
notwithstanding ceased, and been abrogated in the death of Christ: as for
example; sacrifices, which though they were ancienter then Leui, yet have they
ceased with the Leuiticall priesthood, and why (say they) might not tithes do
the like?

It is an casie thing to say that tithes have ceased as well as sacrifices, but
I do not see the least likelihood that ever (...). 23. ^3. (...).
it will be proved by any reason that shall have in it the least show of
probabilie: and therefore howsoever such a miserable evasion might become those
which are ignorant, yet I cannot think it possible that any man of learning,
will make any comparison between tithes and sacrifices in this regard: For the
sacrifices were manifest types of Christ the true Paschall Lamb, slain in
Gods decree before the beginning of the world, figured in the (...). Dan. 9 27
old sacrifices since the beginning of the world, and in fullness of time
exhibited to cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease. So that there is a
necessary cause why the Sacrifices should cease, because they were types;
whereas in ty^^es there is no such matter. Tithes were no types nor figures of
any thing to come, therefore they are not abolished by the death of Christ, as
are the sacrifices. Neither let any body say, that peradventure tithes were a
type, and so strain his invention to wring out a signification for them, as
Aquinas does in diverse places ^ 2. q 82. ^^ 1. and 3. p^^ q. ^1. a^ ^. and q
^5. a^^. 1. and 7.
of his Sums, where he presupposes ten to be a number of perfection, and
then makes it a type of Christ. Diverse numbers, as three, scauen, and nine,
are called each Gloss o^^^. in Number. 18.
of them a perfect number in their several respects, as well as ten: but what
of that? shall every one of these be a type of Christ? or if ten be a perfect
number, what perfection is in an hundredth, which is ten tens perfect
perfectness? this had been the only type in Aquinas his construction. This
is more subtle then sound, for Thomas thus to sport with tithes as the
Papists do with the rest of the Scripture, accounting it like a nose of wax
to be wrung this way and that way; one while he says tithes are moral,
because of their general equity, an other while holds them judicials, for
their determinate quantity: and now he will have them ceremonial, because of
a devised signification: so they are quidlibet ex quolibet, what he will, to
whet his wit withal. What may not the wit of man colourably imagine? His wit
was great, and his learning exquisite, yet when his conceits want ground they
must be left unto him as his own devises. And as for this devise himself does
sufficiently bewray the weakness of it, while he calls ten, a number,
quodammodo perfectus and quasi perfectus, that is, after a sort perfect, and as
it were perfect: this is fere, sed non fit, almost, but not altogether, some
thing like it, but not it. Types must have a more true resemblance then thus;
As the killing of a beast to signify the death of Christ, must not be, as it
were the killing of a thing like a beast, for that would type such a seeming
Christ and such a iuggling sacrifice as the Manichies imagined: but that which
signifies the perfection of Christ, must be indeed perfect in his kind, as the
male without blemish, and not the number of ten, which is but quasi and
quodammodo, quasi typus, is non typus, as it were a type, and a thing like a
type, is indeed no type at all; but as has been observed by that worthy
Bishop of Elie, this and the like is the common iugling (...) ^ames (...).
of Popery, yea and of all Heretics as has been latelier noted by our most
gracious Sovereign, against Vorstius.

If you will make tithes types, and assign them a signification, then you must
show the same in the Scripture, and not dream thereof in your mere fancies.
For, when the case is in question between God and men's consciences, Gods word
does manifestly challenge tithes; men answer that peradventure God did not
mean to have tithes of the Gentiles, or peradventure they were types, and are
abrogated in the death of Christ. What a woeful slight shift is this, to
aleadge ungrounded peraduentures, and conceited May-bees, against Gods
peremptory challendge. God says, all tithes are his; thou say, all tithes
until Christ's incarnation; where is thy warrant or ground for this exception?
assure thy self, thou have not one foot, nor inch of any such ground in all
the Scripture, to put thee into any hope that tithes were either Leuiticall
ceremonies, as were the arc, the table, and the candlestick, or ceremonies at
all of any auncienter original, as were the sacrifices. Thou may dream of
that which will not be found when thou art awaked. That tithes were ordained
for the maintenance of the ministry, that is Scripture; but that they were
types, can never be proved.

Thus have we proved that tithes were not ceremonialls. It now remains, that
we make plain against the Papists and Schoolmen, that they are not
iudicialls. But first let us consider their reasons, whereby they would
persuade us to acknowledge tyths to be iudicialls, which when we have answered,
we will prove the contrary.

Until the year 1250. no man ever held tithes to have been due to the
Israelites by the judicial law: the first that ever ventered upon that
defense, was Alexander Hales an English man, student of Paris, a begging Friar,
T^^^en. A^b. (...).
who writ at the commandment of Pope Innocent the fourth. Innocent was a great
favorer to the four orders of Friars, and mulus mulum scabit, one good turn
requires an other; the Friars in requital (among whom Alexander was a
principal man) strained their inventions to the uttermost, to justify the
facts of the Pope in alienating tithes from their own parishes. And so to that
end among other devises, Alexander hatched this conceit, 3. pa^ q 5^. ^.
and thought it a fair one, and therefore avouched it, that tithes had been
due to the Israelites by the judicial law: and therefore now remain at the
Popes pleasure: Judicial precepts being now mortua, but not mortifera, 1. 2.
q. ^04. a^ 3.
that is, dead in themselves, but not so deadly unto us, but that we may use
the like politic laws, if need require.

What Alexander began, Aquinas seconded, and him follow the rest of the
Schoolmen. Aquinas his maine disputation upon this point is 2. 2. q. 87. and
what principally concerns this question is in the first article, wherein he
labors to infer two things; First, that the precise determination of the
very tenth, is not moral. Secondly, that this determinate quantity among the
Israelites, was Judicial.

Concerning the first, vz. that a determining of a tenth part can not be
moral, I refer it to the thirteenth chapter of this treatise, to come in
among other objections, and there to receive full answer.

As for the other, vz. that the determining of a tenth part to be paid unto the
Levites by the Israelites was by the Judicial, the Schoolmen would prove
thus: The people of Israel were divided into 12. Tribes; the Levites were the
twelfth part of the people: if they had been the tenth part of the people,
then the tenth part of every man's increase truly paid, does make unto the
Leuite a share equal with the rest of his brethren, when he had else none
inheritance among them: but for so much as God foresaw that many of the people
would be slack in payments of what they were enjoined, therefore God appointed
unto them the tenth, that so, though there were some slackenesse and default,
yet the Leuite should be sure of a competent estate, and such as should hold
proportion with the other Tribes.

This conceit does much please the rest of the Schoolmen, and is now the best
plea that the Papists have to clear their holy Father the Pope from the
imputation of sacrilege and Church-robberie; it is Bellarmines only help.

Hereto we answer diverse ways. First, if this hold proportion ^^ cle^^c^^. l.
1. cap. 25.
in Israel, whose Priests and Levites were (as they say) almost or about the
tenth part of the people, where was that proportion before the taking of the
Levites to the Priesthood? It cannot be showed that the Priests before the
Law were also the tenth part of the people. The Priests before the Law had
not the tenthes, because they were the tenth part of the people, but in regard
of their Priesthood, as is showed, chap. 7. no more had the Levites the tithes
in regard of their number, but in regard of their service in the tabernacle, as
has been showed in the fourth Chapter.

Secondly, the Leuite is not the tenth, nor the twelfth part of the people, but
the thirteenth: for howsoever the children of Joseph are reckoned as one tribe,
yet they were two mighty tribes, Ephraim and Manasses, the least of them being
three times at the least as many as the Levites: so that if the people be
reckoned but only in gross by their tribes, yet are the Levites but the
thirteenth part of the people.

Thirdly, they that make the Levites to be either the tenth, twelfth, or
thirteenth, or twentieth, or fortieth, or fiftieth part of the people truly
numbered, they are greatly deceived, and do much misreckon. For if we consider
the number of the Israelites and Levites, as it was soon after that the tithes
were assigned unto the Levites, the Number. ^^.
number of the eleven tribes is six hundredth and one thousand, seven hundredth
and thirty, Numb. 26. 51. the number of the Levites is three and twenty
thousand, verse. 62. (...) and Le^^tes (...) tenth pa^^ of this ^^^ber (...).
num^^^ of the (...).
the two sums cast together, do make six hundredth, twenty four thousand,
seven hundred and thirty. The just tenth part of this number, is sixty two
thousand, four hundredth, seauentie three: but the whole number of the Levites
is not much more then the third part of this tenth part. And yet there is an
other matter to be considered, which will much lessen the number of the
Levites, for whereas in the numbering of the rest of the tribes, none comes
into the number but such as were twenty year old, and also fit for war,
ver. 2. the Levites are numbered from a month old, ver. 62. who are not yet to
execute any office in the tabernacle, until they be five and twenty year old,
Number. 8. 24. and after the age of fifty, they were to cease and to execute that
office no longer, v. 25. Now let a man esteem by guess how many in those three
and twenty thousand Levites were not only under the age of five and twenty,
but also under the age of twenty, under which age none of the other tribes are
numbered; let him also esteem how many of that whole number of Levites might be
above fifty, and I make no question but that he must deduct the one half at
least, and so the number of the Levites shall not be much above eleven thousand,
which does not greatly exceed the sixth part of the tenth. So that by this true
account, the Levites are so far from being the tenth part, that indeed they
prove to be the threescore or sixtieth part of the people of Israel, when they
were numbered in the wilderness, a little before their entrance into the land
of Canaan, and soon after that the Lord had assigned the tithes to be the
portion of the Levites.

Afterward the Levites are reckoned from thirty year old, and their number is
increased to 38000. 1. Chr. 23. 3. but the people are also increased
accordingly, as appears, 1. Chron. 21. 5. to be almost sixteen hundred
thousand men of war in Israel and Judah, besides the men of Benjamin, who are
not in the number, v. 6. who in all likelihood could not be less then two
hundredth thousand, considering that 400. years past in the account, Numb. 26.
they were no less then five and forty thousand and six hundredth: and also the
city Jerusalem, and the most populous places of the country was in the land
of Benjamin. So that still it is most plain, that the schoolmen, and their
followers, do roaue very wide, and come nothing near the mark, while they
make the Levites to be the tenth part of the people of Israel: and so their
reason to prove that the tithes had been due to the Levites by a judicial
law, falls to the ground, for the foundation thereof is found to be
deceitful.

Neither only the schoolmen in their acuteness have thus thought the tithes
an equal portion for the Levites, whom they unadvisedly reputed to be about
the tenth part of the people, but also diverse others waying the matter in
common equity, and considering the Levites to be a populous tribe, have
thought that the tithes might be but a competencie for them among the
Israelites, and yet be too much for the Ministers of other countries, which
should not need to be so many for the like proportion of people.

But when this also shall have been duly considered, which I have made
plain, vz. that of Levites fit for service, there was not above one Leuite to
threescore men, of the other tribes, being all men of war, and either being
or fit to be Masters of families, it will appear that the number of Ministers
now a days in other countries, proportionable for multitude to the land of
Canaan, had not need be any less then was the number of Levites: for may not
every threescore, yea every fifty or forty households be accounted ordinarily
a competent charge for one Minister? If then other countries proportionable to
the Land of Canaan, have need of as many Ministers, as the Israelites had
Priests and Levites, then are the tithes of other countries no more a
superfluous maintenance for the Ministers thereof, then the tithes of Canaan
were to the Priests and Levites of Canaan, specially considering the exceeding
fruitfulness of Canaan above all other countries, as appears, Numb. 13. 24.
and verse. 28. where the grapes were so goodly, that one cluster thereof is
carried between two upon a soa-staffe, as if one cluster of those grapes were a
load for two men. Consider also the great exceedings and advantages of the
first fruits, offerings, and shares of sacrifices, which were daily added unto
the portion of the priests in plentiful abundance; as all the meat offerings,
except a little of each sort ^euit. 2. ^. and ve^. 1^ 1^.
which was offered up by fire unto the Lord for a memorial: also the whole
peace offering, whether of sheep, goat, or bullock: The whole sin offering
of the governor, or private Leu^t. 3. etc 4 and cap. 7.
person: the whole trespass offering, saving that of each of these some few
small fragments, as the kidneys, the caul covering the liver, the rumpe, the
fat covering the i^^^al^s, slancke, and kidneys, which were to be burnt for a
sweet savor: all the rest was the portion of the priests, as appears also,
Number. 18. 9. where all these offerings are rehearsed, and assigned to the Priests
by god himself; where presently follows a farther grant, v. 11. This also
shall be thine; the heave offering of their gift, with all the shake offerings
of the children of Israel. All the fat of the oil: All the fat of the wine
and of the wheat which they offer unto God for first fruits, and the first
ripe of all that ^^ in their land which they shall bring unto the Lord, every
thing separate from common use shall be thine. And this was a great wealth,
for every male must bring an offering thrice every year, Exodus 23. 15. 17.
also all ground and houses dedicated unto the Lord was the priests, Leu. 27.
But the grant before named in the 18. of Numb. is still enlarged, v. 15. All
that first opens the womb of man or beast shall be thine; the first borne of
man, and the first that opens the womb of the unclean beast shall thou
redeem for five shekles after the shekell of the Sanctuary. And yet also the
priests had diverse advantages for the increase of their maintenance, besides
their tithes, as all things to be restored when there was known no right Numb.
5. 8.
owner: also they had their share both in the second sort of tithes which were
to be spent in feasting in Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 14. 23. and also in the third kind
of tithes which were laid aside every three years for the Leuite and the
poor, Deuteronomy. 14. 29. So that though a less company o^ Ministers by the one
half might sufficiently administer unto as populous a nation as were the
Israelits, yet ought not the tithes of that nation be thought any greater
maintenance for them, then the tithes of the Israelites were for the Levites,
considering both the extraordinary fruitfulness of the Land of Canaan, and
also the large ^ees, by which as we have showed the portions of the Priests
were abundantly increased.

Neither can it be said, that we have an advantage beyond the Levites in our
gleab lands, which the devotion of godly forefathers have added to our
benefices, considering that the Levites had their cities eight and forty Numb
(...).
in number, and their fair suburbs, namely, two thousand cubits from the walls
on every side of every city; I^sh (...).
so that not in regard of an equity respecting the multitude of the Levites,
but in regard of their service ^n the tabernacle, which they serve in the
tabernacle of the congregation, Numb. 18 ^1.
were the tithes assigned unto them, in which regard they are also now due to
the Ministers of the Lord, though our service be of another fashion, it is in
substance the same service, to the same master, and therefore justly
challenges the same allowance.

And thus having showed, that the arguments of our adversaries do not prove,
that the Israelites paid their tithes to the Levites by a judicial equity, I
will now proceed to our reason whereby we conclude strongly that tithes did
not belong to the Judicial law.

The Judicial law of Moses was, as it is usually termed ^ra I^^. polit. (...).
by Divines, Lexhumana Mosis, lex politica Iudaeorum, ius civil Israelitarum:
that is, the humane law of Moses, the politic law of the Jews: the civil
law of the Israelites: so that a learned man defines it to be, praeceptio
Buc^^^^ 19.
de externis actionibus quibus regi ciuilem Israelitarum societatem oportuit,
that is, it was an ordinance concerning outward actions, whereby the civil
society of the Israelites ought to be governed. But tithes did not concern
outward government, but the religious worship of almighty God: for they are
not the revenue of the Magistrate for governing in the throne, but the portion
of the Leuite for his service in the tabernacle. Again, when we consider more
particularly those things about which the Judicial law was occupied, as
dominions, inheritances, contracts, wars, distinction between Jew and
Gentile, punishment of manifold offenses; we shall still observe, that the
Judicial law medleth only in things appertaining unto men, and which are in
common use: but tithes belong unto God, and are holy unto the Lord. Man has
nothing to do with them, but only in the right of God: and howsoever man does
use them, as his allowance or wages, yet consider of what work, as they be the
wages, not of any work of nature, nor of any work of common civility, but as
of a work of religion, and of Gods special and solemn worship: and therefore
tithes be not things in common use, but such as not man but God himself has
separated from common (...).
use.

Lastly, as we showed that tithes were no part of the Leuiticall ceremonies,
because they were before the order of Leui, so also we do now conclude, that
they are no part of the Iudicialls of Moses: for they were before the time of
Moses. Seeing therefore they were before the time of Moses, they are also to
continue after Moses, except it can be proved, that either they were types, or
that God himself did reuerse them: for, what God himself has once enacted
without express limitation of any time, that remains a decree for ever,
until the same God who made it, do repeal it.

All the time of the priesthood of Leui, the tithes were paid unto the Levites,
not as any matter Leuiticall, but as a matter holy unto the Lord, and due unto
his service: what was Leuiticall, is ended, but the service of the Lord
continues: and therefore the tithes which are the reward of the service, do
still continue with the service.

CHAP. VII. The practice of tything mentioned and confirmed by the new
Testament.
FIrst, it is a thing not of no moment that our Savior Christ in the new
Testament, speaking of the exact (...)
payment of tithes, which the Phatisies used, tells them directly, that this
they ought to do, and adds not the least intimation, either here or any
where else, either in (...)
his own words, or in the writings of his Apostles, that this practice of
paying tithes ought to cease, or might cease.

The Apostle Paul says plainly, that the Disciple ought to administer unto
his teacher of all his goods, and that the Minister of the Gospel is to be
maintained even so as was the Minister at the altar, and that was by tithes, as
we have showed, cap. 4.

But yet more plainly even by the very name of tenths does the new Testament
affirm, that this practice of paying tithes is to continue among Christians;
for Christ himself in the plain testimony of the new Testament receaueth
tithes, which will manifestly appear, if we duly consider the seventh
chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews: where the scope of the Apostle is, to
show the excellency of the preisthood of Christ above the (...) 37.
preisthood of Aaron, to the which end he brings in Christ under the person
of Melchisedech, who was a type of Christ, in that he was both King and Priest,
without father or mother, etc. That Melchisedech was priest, the Apostle
proves by two arguments; first, from the effect, v. 1. he blessed him:
secondly, from the adiunct, v. 2. he received tithes of Abraham of all things.
Whereby it is evident, that Abraham did did pay those tithes unto
Melchisedech, not by chance, nor in courtesy, or bounty, but in bounden duty,
and necessarily; for to receive a parcel of goods be it the ninth, tenth, or
eleventh, more or less, at a man's hands, by way of chance, benevolence, or
bounty, is no proof of any preisthood in the receiver, but of bounty and
liberality in the bestower; but the Apostle does prove that Melchisedech was
priest even by this argument, because he did receive tithes of Abraham, which
also the active word used, ver. 6. (...), does imply: for it is not said, that
Abrahamus decimauit seipsum, but Melchisedech decimauit Abrahamum, that is,
took his own part, not received a voluntary gift. And therefore Abraham was
bound to pay his tithes to Melchisedech: and tithes are due to the Priesthood
wheresoever that be either in Melchisech or in Leui, as has been showed in
chap. 3. and 4.

When the Apostle had demonstrated the Priesthood of Melchisedech, he begins
then verse. 4. to compare the same with the Priesthood of the Levites; so as by
Melchisedech he understands Christ, and says of him, ver. 8. that he
receives tithes: here men that die, receive tithes; but there he receives
them, of whom it is written, that he lives. Some would here restrain these
words to Melchisedech the type, as if he of whom it is written, that he
lives, must be referred to Melchisedech, and not to Christ: but we must
know what the text speaks most plainly, that these things are spoken of
Christ by the name of Melchisedech: for so are the words, ver. 13. 14. He of
whom these things are spoken pertains to an other tribe, whereof no man
served at the altar: for it is evident, that OUR LORD sprung out of Judah. So
then, He, that is, our Lord, that is, Christ, receives tithes, and tithes
belong to the Priesthood of Christ by the testimony of the new Testament. For
as under the Law it was not so much the Levites, as gods in the Levites, they
receiving Gods tithes as receivers of his sacred tribute, as worthy Calvin does
call them: even so before the law, not so much Melchisedech, as the Lord in
Melchisedech, did receive tithes: and now under the Gospel, not so much the
Ministers of the Gospel, as He, that is, our Lord Jesus Christ, does receive
the tithes, if men will not defraud him.

But suppose that the new testament did not so plainly avouch the tithes to be
due to Christ, yet I trust there is no color to deny that they are even by
the new testament affirmed to be due to the Priesthood of Melchisedech: for he
of whom it is written that he lives, must be either Christ or Melchisedech: an
other thing is plain also, that the Priesthood there spoken of, is an eternal
priesthood, a Priest for ever: If the order of Priesthood there spoken of be an
eternal order, and yet such an order as to whom the tithes are due, then be
the Priest, either Melchisedech the type, or Christ the antitype, yet the same
thing is still euinced, namely, that tithes being the due of an eternal
Priesthood, must also be themselves eternal, that is, to continue to the end
of the world: for that is the eternity of the longest priesthood. Hereunto are
the words of M. Calvin upon this place very clear and full, the testimony is
large, yet I will rehearse it at large: His (...). in Heb. 7. ^
verbis contendit Apostolus dignitatem sacerdoti Melchisedech perpetuam esse,
Leuitici vero temporalem. Sic enim ratiocinatur, hi^, quibus decimas lex
assignat, homines sunt n^^tales, quo indicatum fitit abrogandum fuisse
aliquando ^^ sacerdotij quemadmodum finem habebat corum^uta. Scriptura autem
nullam commemorat mortem Melchisedich cum ^^ rat folutas illi fuisse decimas,
ita ius sacerdotij illiu nullo terporis spat to terminat, qum potius subindicat
eternae esse d^rationis; Hoc autem ideo additum est ne videatur posterior lex
(vt moris est) priori quiequam derogasse, excipi enim alioqum poterat, ius
illud que potitus vlim erat Melchisidech esse tam absoletum, quia aliam legem
deus per Mosem iulisset qua illud transferebat ad Leuitas: sed occurrit
Apostolus cum dicit, ad tempus decimas Leuitas solut as fuisse, quia non semper
viuerent, Melchisedech vero quia immortalis sit retinere vsque in finem quod a
deo semel illi datum est: that is, In these words the Apostle avouches that
the dignity of the Priesthood of Melchisedech is perpetual, and that the
dignity of the Priesthood of Leui was but temporal: for so he reasons,
These to whom the Law assigns tithes are men that die, whereby was
intimated, that the right of the Priesthood was one day to be abolished, even
as the life's of the men should expire; but no Scripture mentions the death of
Melchisedech, when it reports that tithes have been paid unto him, so the
right of that Priesthood ends not in any space of time, but rather shows it
self to be of eternal continuance. Now this was added, least the latter law
should seem to have derogated (as the manner is) any thing from the former:
for else it might be expected, that the right which Melchisedech enjoyed of
old, is now repealed, because God has given an other law by Moses, whereby he
translated that right unto the Levites. But the Apostle does prevent that when
he says, that tithes were paid unto the Levites, but for a time, because they
lived not perpetually: but that Melchisedech, because he is immortal, does
retain unto the end that which was once given unto him by God. Now what is
that perpetual right which Melchisedech once received from God, but right to
be the Priest, to do the durie of the Priesthood, which was to teach, to
bless, to sacrifice, and to receive the due of the Priesthood, assigned
thereunto by God, as the words of M. Calvin formerly cited do import. Quod
debebat Abraham deo, soluit in manum Melchisedech: that is, that which Abraham
ought to God, he paid into the hands of Melchisedech: this right perished not
in the translation of the Priesthood unto the Levites, but continues eternal
unto the end of the world; and therefore does the Apostle speak so plainly,
that, he of whom it is written, that be lives, our Lord of the tribe of Judah,
does receive tithes; and so tithes in the new Testament, even by the
testimony of the new testament, are due to the ministers of the Gospel. And
this, and no other practice, concerning tithes, do the Apostles mention,
approve, and commend unto the Churches.

CHAP. VIII. The practice of tything in the times next succeeding the Apostles.
WE are now come to the times next succeeding the Apostles, whose practice was
as the times would bear; for they had no Christian Magistrate to order things
aright, but lived under tyrants, and among heathen, who hated the religion,
persecuted the men, and confiscated their goods, and hindered all good courses
what they could to the uttermost; so that those who were backward and covetous
would do what they listed, and those who were truly willing, either they paid
nothing, but received alms, being utterly impouerished, or else if they had
any thing, they gave all into the common stock, and lived in common with the
rest of the Church. And yet it is thought of some, both godly and learned, that
tithes were paid in those Primitive times to the use of the Ministry. This
has been observed and testified by that learned Zanchius, whose words are
these, In nouo De redemp. in 4 praecep. cap. 18. lib 5^
testamento post ascensum Christi in coelum, per totum illud te^pus quo nullum
ecclesia habuit principem and magistratum politicum, qui curam ecclesia
patrociniumque susciperet, primum penes Apostolos omnium pauperum erat cura,
deinde translata ad diacon^s, vt est in act is, eoque deinceps eorum erat
colligere a fid^^ibus tum decimas more Leuitarum, tum alias el^^mosinas quae
tum ad ministrorum, tum ad reliquorum pauperum rerumque ecclesiasticarum
necessitatem pertinebant, sed non sine Episcopi consensu distribuebantur,
quemadmodum liquet in ecclesiasticas historijs, and apud Cyprianum in
epistolis: that is, In the new Testament, after the ascension of Christ into
heaven, all the time that the Church had no Prince and civil magistrate to
undertake the care and defense of the Church, the care for the poor la^e at
first upon the Apostles, afterward it was transferred unto the Deacons, as it
is in the Acts, and then it was their duty to gather from the faithful both
tithes after the manner of the Levites, and also other alms which appertained
to the necessity both of the Ministers, and also of the poor, and other
Church affairs, but they were not distributed without the consent of the
Bishop, as appears in Ecclesiastic^ll stories, and in Cyprians epistles. This
testimony of Zanchie shows, that provision was made for the Ministers of the
Primitive Church two ways, partly by tithes, which were paid unto them, more
Leuitarum, after the same manner that they were paid unto the Levites; and
partly by the bounty of such men as in consideration of the poverty of the
Church, bestowed from time to time, more or less, of their goods, or lands, as
an offering unto God, and an addition unto the maintenance of the Ministry.

Secondly, here Zanchius testifies that which is plentifully to be found in
ancient writers, vz. that these revenues both of tithes and offerings, were
wont to be brought unto the Bishop of each diocese, at whose direction the
distribution was made amongst the presbiters, or Ministers, who were employed
in his diocese: (...). 1^ q 1. (...). l. ^ c. ^^.
and this does Zanchius speak according as is extant in Gratian, and the first
tome of the Counsels.

And hereby is discovered the error of those, who think that before there were
distinction of parishes, which, (say they, and therein also they are deceived,
was Ann. Dom. 1180.
not until the counsel of Lateran) every man mig^t pay his tithes to whom
himself thought good.

But do they think indeed that before the counsel of Lateran, men might pay
their tithes to whom they listed? then I ask of them, by what law were they
bound to such payments? by a humane constitution? nothing less: for howsoever
the simplier hearted world heretofore enacted all statutes in shorter lines and
fewer words then now they do, yet find we no laws of so great antiquity as
that they had not then learned to include so necessary circumstances of
paiments, as the party to whom the payment be made. If it be then answered,
that not any humane laws, but mere conscience, did move men to pay tithes in
those former times, and therefore did every man bestow his tithes then upon
that or those parties to whom in conscience he thought them most due, then the
question is yielded, vz. that tithes are due by the law of God without any
humane decree; for if the conscience be tied, and not by any law of man, then
certainly there is the direct law of God.

But the truth is, that ever since the Church had a Christian Magistrate, and
that things could be thoroughly settled, there have been humane laws to enforce
the payment of tithes, which were formerly due by the law of God: for tithes
being long acknowledged, and paid in the Church, before there were any humane
laws concerning payments of tithes which were formerly due by the law of God,
it follows plainly, that they were held due in the Primitive Church by the
law of God: and as for that which is surmised of the choice of their teacher,
unto whom they would pay, it is a very dream: for as we have showed, the
tithes before distinction of parishes were to be brought into the common
treasury, and distribution to be made thereof by the consent of the Bishop.

I doubt not but some precedents may be shown of men paying their tithes, some
to one, some to an other, as each man best fancied: but then it was either by
special license, obtained for that purpose, or done by such men, as either for
their greatness could not be ruled, or for their meanness, or looseness of
the times were not regarded, and then factum est, sed non oportuit, that is,
that was done, which ought to have been undone: it being contrary both to
the godly custom of the Primitive times, and the wholesome laws of succeeding
Churches, according to the words of that Palentine Council, Anno 1322.
Parochiarum diuisio a sanctis patribus instituta certitudinem (...). Pal^^t
anno 1^22 cap. de parochi^^.
parochianorum and decimarum debitam solutionem inducit, cum vero libertas
mutandi parochiam per abusum qui in quibusdam patribus in^leuit parochianis
indifferenter conceditur, tum parochianis ipsis subtrahendi decimas praebetur
occasio, and ecclesijs iniuria in decimarum, primitiarum, oblationum, and
aliorum iurium subtractione damnabile irrogatur, that is, The division of
parishes, which the holy Fathers ordained, brings in both a certentie of
parishioners, and a due payment of tithes, but when liberty of changing
parishes is indifferently granted unto parishioners, through an abuse which
grew into fashion in some of the Fathers, then occasion is affoarded unto
parishioners to withdraw their tithes, and also (which is a damnable thing) an
injury is done to the Churches in the detaining of tithes, first-fruites,
offerings, and other rights. And therefore it was in that counsel decreed, as
appears in the same Chapter, that those people who betake themselves to the
communion of other Ministers, and pay their tithes from their own parish
Minister, and also the minister so receiving any, do incur the sentence of
excommunication.

Again, further mark, that in the Primitive Church the Bishop and the
Ministers did for the most part live in common in each diocese, clericorum vt
plurimum communis erat vita and conuersatio: so says Duarenus out of Gratian,
Dua^ l. 2 c 1. (...) 12. q^. 5. D. (...).
which same thing a learned man of our own age and country observes upon
Act. 20. 28. vz. that the whole clergy did in common attend the whole flock.

But in process of time, parishes began to be limited in each diocese, in
some sooner, in others later, and then upon the limiting of distinct parishes,
Singulis ministerijs certi reditus adiuncti and assignati, quibus ministri Dua^
(...).
tanquam re propria fruantur eosque ipsi arbitrio suo dispensent atque
administrent: that is, Unto each ministry were assigned and adjoined certain
revenues, which the ministers enjoyed as their own goods, and which themselves
did administer and dispense at their own pleasure.

And hence we have an answer ready to the objection of some, who say, that if
we will have tithes now, as the Levites had, then we must have as they had,
common barnes and storehouses, into the which the tithes must be first
gathered, and then distributed. But the answer I say is ready, to so frivolous
a cavil, vz. that so it was whiles the Ministers did live in common, as the
Levites used; but when the state of the Church did require an other course, and
that parishes were limited, and several men assigned unto several cures, to
reside among their own several parishioners, to ouersee the^, to preach
publicly, to admonish, exhort and comfort privately, then every Minister has
the tithes and oblations of his own parish, and so his own private barn and
storehouse where to lay up the revenues of his own ministry, wherewith
himself and his family are to be maintained, hospitality is ot be vpheld,
and the poor to be relieved, as their need, and the ministers ability, do
hold proportion.

And whereas some do make themselves so skillful in the Councels, as to
ascribe the first distinguished parishes to the Council of Lateran, certainly
nihil habent praeter auditum, they have but a little hearsay from some, that
say either they know not, or they care not what: for they never advisedly
examined the Councels, and other records of the state of the Church in former
times: for as it is in the writings of Leo in the fifth Lateran Council,
Primitiua Se^^. 11.
ecclesia vbi primum per orbem lacertos mouere cepit, provide attendens quantum
oneris humeris impositum haberet, diuino consilio parochias instituit,
diaeceses distinxit: that is, The Primitive Church so soon as it began to
stretch out her arms over the world, prouidently considering how great a
burden she had upon her shoulders, did by divine counsel ordain parishes,
and distinguish diocesses. And as for those, who make such use of the council
of Lateran against this point, I would know of them what they say to these
words of this council of Lateran? but because I have named this to be the fifth
council of Lateran, it may be that the limiting of parishes was by some of the
former councels. It is marvel then, that this council should be so much
ouerseene, in a matter of fact specially, as to say that parishes began to be
distinguished in the Primitive Church, if that distinction had begun at any of
the Lateran Councels, the eldest whereof was eleven hundredth of years after
that the Primitive Church began to dispread it self over all the world. And
yet to reveal this error something further, and to make it most plain, that
the distinction of parishes cannot be showed to have taken beginning at any of
the Lateran Councels, consider that of the first and second Lateran Council,
act a non extant, their decrees and canons are not to be found. And as for the
third Lateran council, by that time we have examined it, we shall be so
sufficiently staid with full satisfaction, that we shall not proceed to look
upon the fourth for this matter: for in that third we find that there were
distinct parishes before the time of that Council. Council (...). Part 1. c. 13.
The words thereof are, Nonnulli modum auaritiae non ponentes plures eclesias
parochial^s n^^untur adquirere: that is, Some men being immoderately covetous,
do labor to get more parish churches. The decrees of that council reckon it a
fault to be reformed: therefore certainly there were distinctio^s of parishes;
for could men desire to have, or not be contented with the benefits of one
parish, when there were no distinctio^s of parishes? therefore before this
council of Lateran, there were distinctions of parishes. Indeed in this Council
there is a Canon for some subdivisions of such parishes as were too large, as
it seems, and afterward in the time of the Palentine Council aforenamed,
(...) 1. c. 16
it seems that some places pleaded freedom and exemption from being of the
society of any constituted parish, and therefore was it there decreed, that
parishes should be instituted in cinitatibus, castris, municipijs; In cities,
castles, fortes, and all other places, in quibus parochie limitatae non sunt,
wherein parishes are not yet bounded: not that before now there were no
distinct parishes, but that now some abuses or defects were redressed, or
supplied.

But what talk ^e of yesterday, when we have record of the most ancient ages:
for in the Cabilon: council, paying (...).
tithes to new founded Churches is forbidden: and in the Council of Chalcedon,
we are taught that then the^e (...) 15. cap. 17.
were distinctions of Bishopprickes and parishes: for so are the words,
Singularum ecclesiarum parochias rusti^as manner episcopis qui eas retinere
noscuntur: that is, We decree, that the country parishes of each Church, or
diocese, remain unto the Bishops, which are known to retain them under their
government. And no marvel, seeing that even a general division of Churches
into parishes was made about the year, 266. when Dionisius Inter decret.
(...). and cause 13. q ^
was Bishop of Rome. Neither yet was this the first time that ever parishes
began first to be constituted (though this be long enough before the
pretended Council of Lateran) for in Alexandria about the year 180. Eusebius
Eusebius l. 5. c. 9
reports, that there were the Churches of Alexandria: what means the word
in the plural number? it does not import, more Catholic Churches then one,
for there is but one, nor does he mean more diocesan churches, for Alexandria
then was but one diocese: therefore by Churches, he means the several
parishes, or congregations. Yea and yet sooner in Rome even before the Platin.
ex (...). On p^^de epi^^. and tit.
death of John the Evangelist, histories do intimate that the Church had her
several and distinct limitations.

Thus have we made it manifest, that neither were parishes first divided by the
decrees of the council of Lateran, neither before the limiting of parishes
might men lawfully pay their tithes where they listed, but that tithes were
ever due to the Church, and to the Ministers of Gods word in the Church: In
general or jointly, whiles the ant^peristasis of persecution did contract or
enforce the Church into a narrow room, so that the whole ministry of a
large country lived together in narrow commo^s; but seeing the mercy of God
has dissolved this clowd, by causing the sunshine of his comfortable Gospel
to increase in heat and brightness, inflaming men's hearts with godly zeal,
and enlightening their understandings with sound knowledge, so that the number
is increased, and that Christian Magistrates are become nursing fathers, and
nursing mothers unto the Church, and do cause peaceable and orderly
government, so that for the more ease of the ministers, and far more
advantage and ease of the people, parishes are in all countries, provinces, and
diocesses distinguished: each parish is faithfuly to pay the due tithes to it
own Minister.

CHAP. IX. The judgment of the ancient Fathers concerning tithes.
Well said Elihu, The dares shall speak, and the Job. 32.
multitude of years shall teach wisdom. The very heathen may cause just shame
unto many in these impudent days, wherein the antiquity of our godly
forefathers is reputed but as dotage, by those whose unsown wild-oates and
giddie presumptions, have not yet learned the definition of sobriety. Heathen
Agame^non, who knew not God, had yet so much manners as to reverence the speech
of aged Nestor;

(...). Illiad. ^.


O man of age, thy speech is sage, and grounded on good reason.

Graceless Rehoboam has known to his smart, what it is 1. Kin. 12.
to despise his ancients.

Next unto that ancient of days, Almighty God speaking in the old and new
Testament, in the writings of Prophets and Apostles, the ancient Fathers both
Greek and Latin, who lived nearest the Apostles times, can best inform us in
the truth of that divinity, which is most consonant to the will of God. For
howsoever diverse, or every one of those ancients are sometimes suspected to
be, and also sometimes indeed are in error, some in one point, some in an
other (as who erreth not, being neither Prophet nor Apostle?) Yet are they not
combined therein like Simeon and Leui, brethren in evil: they uphold not any
error with general consent, but what is either mistaken, or scarce soundly
avouched by one, is better interpreted, and more purely taught by an other; so
that what point soever the fathers do harmonically and with consent of all,
agreeingly maintain, that point rightly understood according unto their true
meaning, is ever certainly orthodoxall truth.

I will not stuff up a volume with multitude either of Authors, or of
testimonies, but only produce a few of the most ancient and best esteemed
Fathers, and of each man's writings but a few of their most pregnant assertions.

The youngest that I will cite is no babe nor infant, but a Father indeed of
twelve hundred years standing and antiquity, who is plain and copious for
his judgment in this point, in one place these are his words, Maiores nostri
ideo copijs omnibus abundabant, quia deo decimas Aug. l^b ^0. homiliar. hom. ^8.
dabant, and Caesari censum reddebant: modo autem quia discessit deuotio dei,
accessit indictio fisci: that is, Our ancestors did abound therefore with
plenty of all things, because they did give tithes unto God, and perform
tribute unto Caesar; but of late because that devotion of God is gone, the
imposition of the Excheaquer is come upon you. The plain testimony of
Augustine therefore is, that in the times before him, tithes were wont to be
paid unto God, as Gods due; which thing caused God also to bless those which
paid them: and least it might be deemed, that in the time of Augustine, which
was four hundredth years after the incarnation, tithes were grown out of due
date, he adds, that the means of impouerishing men by the heavy exactions
of the Emperors officers in his time, were a judgment of God upon men for
want of devotion in tythe-paying; whereupon is that saying, dabis impio militi
quod non dabis sacerdoti: that is, thou shall be constrained to give that to
the profane Soldiour, which thou will not give to the Priest. And in an other
place the same Father says, exim^ partem aliquam (...)
redituum tuorum. Decimas vis? Decimas accipe, quanquam parum sit, dictum est
enim nisi abundauerit inflicia vestra plus quam Scribarum and Pharis^oru^ non
(...) in regnum eaelorum: that is, Lay out some part of thy revenues* Will thou
have it to be the tenth part? take out the tenths though that be a small
matter, for it is said, except your righteousness exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. So
also Sermon. de temp. 219. Deus non eget tuis bonis, non postulat munus sed
honorem: non rogat tuum, sed suum: dignatur rogare decimas and primitias, quid
faceres si nouem parts vendicaret tibi relicta decima? that is, God has no
need of thy goods; he demands not a reward, but honor at thine hands: he
does not ask thine, but his own: he vouchsafes to demand tithes and first
fruits: what would thou do if he should challenge the nine parts, leaving
unto thee only the tenth? In all which sayings, and many more, Augustine does
claim tithes not by any humane constitution, but in Gods behalf as Gods right
or due.

Of the same time with Augustine, and of the same judgment in this point was
Hierom, whose words are these, Quod de decimis diximus quae oli^ a populo
dabantur In Mal. 3. ^.
sacerdotibus and Louitis, in ecclesiae quoque populis intelligo: that is, what
we have said concerning tithes, which in old time were given to the Priests and
Levites, I do mean it also in the people of the Church. Where he plainly
expounds that double honor, whereby Paul terms the 1. Tim. ^. 1^.
exhibition of the Ministers, to be tithes, which he maintains to be as due
now to the Ministers of the Gospel, as ever they were unto the Levites in the
Tabernacle.

Chrysostom says, Iusticiam, fidem, and misericordiam Deus Hom. in Matthew. 4^.
mandauit propter suam gloriam, sed decimas in sustentationem suorum
ministrorum: that is, God has commanded justice, faith, and mercy for his
glory, but tithes for the maintenance of his ministers. Likewise in his
Homilies Hom. 1^. Act.
upon the Acts of the Apostles, stirring up men to pay their due to the
Ministers of the Gospel, he tells them that howsoever they are but mean
men, yet they may do good works, though they be not able to build Churches,
nor to perform any such great matters, if they will but truly pay their tithes,
parumne est deum ex omnibus fructibus prius partem ac decimas accipere? that
is, Is it a small matter that God does first take a part and tithes of all
increase? not intimating that God does impose any heavy burden in asking the
tenth, but stirring up the poor man not to be discouraged, seeing that in
paying to Gods Ministers no less then the tenth part of all his increase he
does therein such a work as God accepts at his hands in good part. So
Chrysostom affirms plainly, that tithes are due to the ministry by the
word or commandment of God, mandauit Deus, are his words, that is, God has
commanded.

Ambrose swarueth not in this point from those aforenamed, (...).
but requires at the hands of men true and exact payment of their tithes,
imputing that for a capital sin unto any man wherein he has failed in true
tything; Quicunque recognouerit in se quod fideliter non dederit decimas
^mendet quod minus secit: that is, whosoever shall be think himself that he
has not faithfully paid his tithes, let him amend that wherein he has
failed. So Ambrose speaks of tithes as matters due, and also in use and
practi^e, so far forth as the non payments of tithes, yea the imperfect or
vnfull payment of them, was a greiuous sin to be repented of: but more of
Ambrose his mind in this point is to be seen hereafter in the 12. chapter in
the distinction of tithes into praediall and personal.

These four so reverend Fathers for learning and holiness, living in the same
age by their consenting judgment in this point (wherein they neither
contradict one an other, not are contradicted by any either of their own times,
or of the times before them, or of the times which followed them for the space
of eight hundred years) do both sufficiently testify what was the doctrine
of the Church, in their most happy times, concerning tithes, and also confirm
that that doctrine was the truth. And that it may yet further appear that this
doctrine which Ambrose, Chrysostom, Jerome, and Augustine taught about tithes,
was no new invention of their own; I will yet show that they held no otherwise
in this point then they had learned from their learned predecessors: for
Cyprian and Origin who were above an hundred years before these aforenamed,
taught also the same and no other doctrine concerning tithes.

Cyprian his words are, debere presbyteros tanquam decimas (...)
accipientes ex fructu, non recedere ab altari, sed nocte dieque spiritualibus
inseruire: that is, That ministers as being receivers of tithes of the
increase, ought not to retire from the altar, but night and day to attend upon
spiritual things. The word altar is here to be taken tropically for the
ministry of the Gospel, which (says Cyprian) the Minister may never neglect,
by incumbering himself, or intermedling in seculer affairs, because that the
maintenance of the ministry does arise out of the tithes of men's increase,
without intangling the ministers mind with worldly care.

Origin was something before Cyprian in time, but differed (...).
nothing from him in this point: for thus he speaks, Quomodo iusticia nostra
abundat plus qu^m (...) Scribarum and Pharisaeorum, si illi de frugibus terrae
non aud^^t gustare priusquam primi^ias offerant sacerdotibus, and decimas
Leuitis separauerint, nos autem nihil horum, etc. that is, How does our
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, if they
dare not taste of their fruits, before they have offered the first fruits to
the Priests, and laid apart the tenths for the Levites, wh^^ we shall do no
such matter? But what may one say is this to the purpose? I answer, that Origin
having in that place spoken of the right of tithes among the Israelites, he
then adds as follows, Hanc ego legem obseruari e^iam secundum literam puto:
that is, I hold that this law ought to be observed even according to the
letter: which words he oftentimes repeateth in that homily, and is very
copious and carnest in the point, affirming fully, that tithes are due by
moral precept, which is perpetual, as we have showed before, cap. 6. Also,
Origin expounding that place, Matthew. 23. 23. these things, vz. paying the least
tithes, ought ye to have done, and not to have left the other undone, says,
that this is a precept, non minus in vsum Christ^anorum qu^m Iudaeorum, no
less for the use of Christians then of Jews.

These of the most ancient and excellent of the Fathers, some of them so near
the times of the Apostles, and others so long after, for the space of 400.
years, knew no other doctrine concerning tithes, but that they are due still
according to the letter: and that it is a heinous offense against God, either
not to pay tithes at all, or to pay them fraudulently and unfaithfully.

More of the judgment of the ancient Fathers, together with the manifold
decrees of councels to this effect, who will may see in the treatises of M.
Carlton, and M. C^rl^t cap (...).
Eburne, and also in the decrees of Gratian.

CHAP. X. The judgment and practice of heathen concerning tithes.
BEsides all this which I have showed to have been the judgment and practice
of men fearing the true God, we have also arguments to be drawn to this
purpose Carle^. t^^h. cap. ^^ ^burn. cap ^ page ^1 62 * ^^.
from the heathen, which knew not God, yet by their practice have declared the
payment of tithes to be a moral duty. For even Heathen writers do witness
that this, even this very portion of the tenth part, has been accustomably
and religiously paid unto the heathen Gods, with this observation thereupon,
that by such payments they became rich and prospered. Plutarch says of
Lucullus, (...).
that he became rich because he paid tithes to Hercules. And Diodorus Siculus
reports, that many of the (...).
Romans both mean and wealthy, did vow and practice the like paiments of
tithes unto Hercules, and prospered thereby. Macrobius proves as much out of
Varro, and (...) l. ^. cap. ^^.
that it was the common custom of the ancients to vow tithes unto Hercules
Xenophon writes of some, who paid (...). 3.
tithes to Apollo. To the same effect are the words of ^estus, decima quaeque
veteres dijs suis offerebant: that is, The ancients did offer their gods all
manner of tithes: for among the Sabaeans and Aethiopians as Pliny writes, the
(...) l. 12. cap. 1^. and ^^
merchants may not meddle with their spices until the Priests have laid out
the tenths for their gods. So also in He^c^^. (...).
spoils of war, they did pay their tenths, and offered tithes of all unto
Jupiter. Pausanias a Grecian general, ^a^^l. (...) 3. l. 2. p^g. ^3^.
having obtained great victory against the Persians, laid aside the tithes of
all his spoils to be divided between Jupiter, Apollo, and Neptune. The
Carthagmians paid ^au^l. page ^0^.
tithes of the pray unto Hercules, when they had spoiled the Scicilians.
Camillus going against the Veians vowed to pay tithes unto the goddess Matuta,
if he should overcome. Plu^ ^n Ca^^l.
And Linie says concerning that expedition, that when the Veians had been
overcome by the Romans, Dea^^* ^1. l. ^.
the tithes were paid, howsoever he names the party to whom they were paid
to be not Matuta, but Apollo.

Now whereas the Heathen so usually, so long time, in so many places have
accustomed the payment of tithes to their gods, what shall we think of it, but
that the Heathen by the light of nature, perceiving all prosperi^ie to come
from God, and to depend upon his good pleasure, have thought themselves bound
to honor God with their riches: and this they have learned by tradition from
the sons of Noah, spread and continued among all nations, that the tenth is
gods special part, neither is this my pri^ate fancy, but the opinion of those
learned men who so lately have labored in this point: and also the judgment of
the learned Brentius, before their times, whose words are, Dare decimas ad
conseruanda sacra, non fuit recens a Leuiticis In Le^^t. ^7 ^0.
sacrificulis excogitatum, sed erat iam ante patriarchis vsitatum. Abraham cum
reuerteretur a caede quatuor regum dedit decimam spoliorum sacerdoti
Melchisedecho: and lacob cum fugeret saeuitiam fratris sui, vouit si
reuerteretur incolumis ad patriam, se daturum decimam omnium facult atum
suarum, ad constituenda sacra in Bethel. Gentes etiam dederunt aliquoties
decimam dijs suis, quod haud dubie sicut and mos sacrificandi a Patriarcharum
exemplo desumptum est: that is, To give tithes to maintain Gods worship, was
no new invention of the Leuiticall Priests, but a thing long before accustomed
among the Patriarchs. When Abraham returned from the slaughter of the four
kings, he gave tithe of the spoils to Melchisedech the Priest: and when Jacob
sled from the rage of his brother, he did vow that if he returned in safety
into his country, he would give the tithes of all his substance to maintain
worship for God in Bethel. Also the Gentiles have sometimes given their tithes
unto their gods, which practice no doubt as the custom of sacrificing was
taken from the example of the Patriarchs. And to this effect is that saying of
Iunius, decimae ture omni post hominum memoriam deo fuerunt sacrae: (...) l. 3
c. 7.
that is, Tithes have time out of mind been holy unto the Lord by all laws.

Hereupon it is, as some are of opinion, that Church goods or revenues, have
been aunciently distinguished Duar de benef. l. 2. c. ^.
into temporal and spiritual, by spiritual, understanding tithes and
offerings, and by temporal, such gleab and other possessions as men of their
devotion and charity have bestowed upon the Church to increase the maintenance
of the Ministers; because tithes being due to the Church by the law of God,
which is perpetual, they are of perpetual continuance also, but those things
which come from men, they are caduca, fluxa, temporaria, that is, fading,
transitory, and temporary. For howsoever many additions have by the bounty
of men much augmented the estate of the Church, yet tithes are not of men, but
of Gods institution, holy to the Lord, assigned to his Ministers, iure omni, by
all law or right, under the law, under the Gospel, and before both, and so
acknowledged by the very consciences of Heathen men.

CHAP. XI. How Lay men became owners and possessours of tithes.
FOr the space of six hundred years after the incarnation of Christ, and of
four thousand years before the incarnation, which is from the beginning of
the world, no profane hand ever dared to violate these holy things of God: but
about the year six hundred, (which was a time fatal to the world for the
birth of many monsters, as of impious Turcisme in wretched Mahomet; proud
Antichristianisme in ambitious Boniface, unnatural and outrageous parricide in
disloyal Phocas) did arise also that sacrilegious monster Carolus Martellus,
in the realm of France, of whom we may say not much otherwise then the
Scripture speaks of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin:
Charles Martell made Christian Princes to sin, in drawing them on to spoil
the Church by his cursed example. For when those barbarous people the Hunnes,
Goths, and Vandales, were become Lords of Italy, and had miserably wasted the
Churches, specially in Lumbardie, they began to set themselves against
France: Carolus Martellus being Gag. ^^. hist. (...) l. 4.
the only man in France, in regard both of courage, and of countenance fit to
lead the army against the Infidells, D. ^idle^. ^^ew of ^^v. and c^l law. page
14^.
could not be persuaded to undertake that charge, until he had gotten the
Clergy of France to resign their tithes into his hands to maintain the
watre; the Church and Clergy, (being much affrighted with fear of becoming
a pray to the Barbarous, and also drawn on with the fair promises of
Martellus, who solemnly protested unto the Clergy, that so soon as the wars
should be ended, he would restore unto them their own again with advantage of
recompense) yielded unto his demands; who went against the enemy, and
overcame, and when upon his victory he should have been thankful unto God,
and true of his promises to the Churchmen, he showed himself a sacrilegious
spoiler, so as where the tithes of the Church had been in trust committed into
his hands for the needful aid of the present wars, he divided them among
such of his soldiers as he thought good to reward, and so alienated them from
the Church for ever; leaving unto the Clergy some such poor reuersions and
fragments as they had reserved for their bare sustenance vngranted at the first
to Martellus.

And thus became Laymen first of all to be owners of tithes, vz. by fraud and
violence; but in process of time, this presumptuous fact became a precedent to
be wretchedly imitated in all the parts of the Christian world. Krantzius
reports, that the Christian Saxons K^^nt. l. ^ metrop. c. ^
were feign with their tithes to maintain soldiers for their defense: and that
Popes to gain the good wills of Princes, did bestow much of the tithes upon
them for fear of being dispoiled of all.

Hereunto is to be added, an immoderate admiration Hosp^^. ^ ^^g. Mo^.
wherewith the whole world has doated upon diverse orders of Munkes, and
Friars, building them houses, and Colleges, appropriating unto them the tithes
of many large and fruitful parrishes, exempting such lands as they held in any
place from being tytheable to the incumbents of the parishes; for the
subtlety of the Devil whispering into men's conceits, that the preaching of the
Gospel bredde heresies, schisms, and contentions, and that the only way
beneficial to men's souls was the prayers, fastings, and other obseruances of
these Munkes and Friars; not only the common people, but even Kings and
Princes, Bishops and Popes, and all sorts, degrees, and sexes, did so strive to
establish and encourage them, as that besides many fair possessions of lands,
much also of the tithes of the church, became their patrimony, partly Catalog.
testium. ver^^. tom. 2. l. ^5.
by annexation, partly by exemption, and so they sucked the best tithes into
their cloisters.

Furthermore, the Popes to advance their favorites, sometimes their Cosins,
and sometime their bastards, under the name of their nephews, even while they
were children, would send their commandments unto Bishops, to convert the
tithes of the fattest benefices in their several diocesses, to become
provisions and pensions to maintain such as the Popes pleasure would appoint.
An example whereof Matthew Paris reports, Math. Paris Hen. 3. 37. Ann. 125^.
saying, that their was an attempt in the diocese of Lyncolne in England,
though rejected by that worthy Grosthead, who was there then Bishop, a very
learned man, and a stout adversary unto the Popes usurpations.

In imitation of the aforenamed Martellus, diverse as in other Countries, so in
England took upon them to alienate the tithes from their parish Churches,
insomuch that not only the Kings, but also Noble men, and Bishops, would
either assign unto their favorites pensions, or grant unto them exemptions
from the tithes of such parrishes as did belong unto their patronages: for
restraint D Rid. view
of which ungodly practice, a statute was made under (...). cap 10
Edward the third.

And yet all this while did the Pope by his Bulls and Legates, still
appropriate parsonages unto Abbeys and Nunneries, and in that blind world this
was reputed no wrong, because this was thought to be done to a good end to
maintain prayer and devotion, as we said before in this chapter.

At last, when King Henry the eight became a defender of the faith (in another
meaning then the Pope had, when he first gave him that title) that is, In
banishing the Idolatry and tyrannic of Antichrist, which is the Pope, whom he
happily avoided out of this blessed Island: King Henry (I say) finding the
stolen goods, vz. the tithes of the Church in the cells and cloisters of
Munks, Nuns, and Friars, like the precious gold and goodly garment in the
tent of Achan, did not either conscionably restore the good to the owner
thereof, or religiously dedicate it, as a hallowed thing unto the Lord, but
swaied with the error of the time, became himself receiver of the Friars
theeuerie, and shared the same among his favorites, for love or for money, as
himself thought good; and still the patrimony of the Lord, is detained in the
unjust hands of those, who can have no true interest therein. Many do think
with themselves, that because they have bought out parsonages with their money,
or have them by the bequest of their parents, that they may wash their hands in
innocence, and plead themselves to be no usurpers. But bethink thy self,
whosoever thou art, who eatest the milk, and wearest the wool of the sheep,
having neither ability, nor calling to feed the flock; bethink thy self (I
say) that if thy fathers, either bought for money, or received as a gift, the
goods of the Church, and the portion of the Lord, from those who had no
authority, either to give, or to sell them, the gift or sale can not be good
in law before the exact and fearful bar of the judgment seat of Almighty
God, who is Lord of Lords, King of Kings, and Judge of Judges, and a party in
the case. For it is he that receives the injury, and will refer it to
fearful trial.

In that King Henry did thus dispose the tithes which he found in the Abbyes,
he did more then he had warrant for. And if thou, or thy Father, have bought
the revenues of the Church from those, who had no right to sell them, assure
thy self, that thou have no true right to enjoy them; thou art in danger, if
thou repent not seriously, and in time prevent the Lord by restitution, to have
thy plea of bargain to be answered peromptorily with a caveat emptor, that is,
thou should have been better advised, to consider what, and of whom thou
were in buying. Do thou not know that an entayled estate, cannot be sold?
if it be bought, the estate is not good unto the buyer. The Lord has entailed
his portion of tithes to the maintenance of his service, as we have formerly
(...)
showed, and then who can cut off an entaile of Gods making? Tithes are not
temporal goods, to fleet up and down from one to an other, and never to
continue in one stay, but are given by the Lord a perpetual ordinance, whether
at the altar in the tabernacle, or at the font and pulpit under the Gospel. To
these we find them given in plain and plentiful terms, but never to any
other body by any show either of holy Scripture, or of ancient Fathers.

Did King Henry give away the tithes from the church to laymen? I would to god
so worthy a Prince had not been prejudiced with so foul a blemish: I am
persuaded in my soul, that if he had been aware of what he did, he would
sooner have given away his crown from his head, then the tithes from the
Churches: and if self-loue and covetousness did not ouerblind and entangle the
men of this age, they durst not detain what was at the first so unjustly
gotten, as that it is impossible for them ever to have a good ^ight thereunto,
except God from heaven should reuerse his grant, and enact that laymen may
have right unto tithes.

It is not always easy to set down in particular, either what the judgments
of God will be, while men are yet in their sins, or what was the very cause
which provoked the judgment, when we see it executed; yet is it not to be
passed over without consideration, and fear of the Lord, which diverse have
already observed, as no small token of Gods anger against that man (though for
many excellent things, a King of worthy memory) who having at his death a
fair and hopeful issue, likely for long time to continue his blood in the
throne of the kingdom; yet in the next generation his name is clean put out:
and specially, D. R^dle^. view of c^v. and col. l^w page 170.
this is the more to be considered with seriousness, because Edward, and
Elizabeth, were the beloved of the Lord, defenders of the true faith, zealous
of the glory and the name of God; yea Elizabeth a faithful Confessor in the
fiery trial of persecution she endured in the days of Queen Marie, yet for
all this, that King who lived himself within these few years, left behind
him so fair a progeny, of so great hope to have his name continued, is not
only himself gathered to his Fathers, but also has already his whole
posterity gathered to himself: so as there remains not so much as one of
his seed to stand in the congregation.

This does seem to be a judgment, and howsoever we know not the cause in
particular, yet we are sure that it was not without cause; and of all causes
known to the world, what liker to anger God so grievously as the wasting of
his church? Be it said that he left it no worse then he found it, when he
wrought the reformation. But he should have been advised to have done justice
in restoring the good to the owner, the known owner thereof: and have reformed
the injury, where he reformed the religion, and banished robbery by
restitution, as well as banished Popery by just suppression: for the part of
the civil Magistrate, is not only to stint a theife that he steal no more,
but also to cause restitution, when the owner is known, and the goods found.

As therefore, men can see that they have no right unto their tithes, but from
King Henry, or from some other, by as crasie a title; so let them consider in
time, least they repent it too late, what a testimony of anger the Lord may
show upon them; and be as much afraid with the remembrance of his
indignation, as they are encouraged with their grant, and practice, which is
not good.

What if we should make a catalogue of all those courtiers, and others, who in
the dissolution of the Abbyes were much enriched by the spoil of the Church,
how few of so great estates are not already ruinated? It is true that there
is an enterchange of things in this world, and that it is a vain thing for men
to think that their names, lands, Psalm. 4^. ^1.
and houses shall continue for ever; but yet, that in so short a space, so
great a change should be of so many families, so likely to have continued for
longer space, must needs make men see, if they be not wilfully blind, that
the fact was displeasing unto almighty God, and that It is destruction for a
man to denoure that which is holy, Prou. 20. 25.

Is it possible for a man that is a detainer of tithes (if there be not
extreme hardness in his heart) to hear or read that saying of Malachie,
without compunction and trembling? Ye have spoiled me in tithes, and in
offerings; ye ^sal. ^. 8, 9.
are cursed with a curse, because ye have spoiled me. It is a poor case that
any man can have to his conscience, by saying, I was not the spoyler, it came
to me by the means of others, when as whosoever has been the theife, thou
have been the receiver, and art still the detainer: Decimas Cause. 1^ q 7.
(...). quas ^n.
sieve ab episcopis, vel regibus, vel quibuslib^t personis laic^ acceperint,
nisiecclesiae reddiderint, sctant se sacrilegij crimen committere, and aternae
damnationis periculum incurrere: that is, Whether men have received the tithes
from Bishops, or Kings, or any other persons, (except they will restore them to
the Church) let them know, that they do commit the sin of sacrilege, and
incur the danger of eternal damnation. To the same effect was that decree
of Constantine, Contrasacrosanctas ecclesias nihil dicere audeat, Eusebius de vit.
Constable l ^. cap. 39.
and quas res ad tempus per iniuriam possederit, eas ecclesijs iure restituat:
that is, let not a man dare to allege any thing against the holy churches,
but what he has for a time unjustly possessed, let him justly restore the
same to the Churches. It is in vain for Adam to say it was the woman, or for
the woman to say it was the serpent; for as the serpent has no excuse, so the
excuse of the rest can do them no service to defend them against the wrath of
God. Even so lay thou the fault upon thy father, thy father upon King Henry,
King Henry upon the Pope, as upon the young spawne of the old serpent: yet as
serpent, man, and woman are all accursed, whosoever was the chief or first in
the business: even so thou, thy father, and whosoever else wrongeth the Church,
wittingly and willingly, are all cursed with the curse, further then you can
decline by true repentance: (which when the sin is revealed, to the
conscience, divinity acknowledges not without restitution, so far as a man
is able.)

And therefore to conclude this point, I say no more but this, vz. Let men take
heed how they obstinately detain what was at the first unadvisedly and
unjustly laid hold upon; for greater is his sin, who will not by admonition
be persuaded to desist, then his who has been ouercarried by oversight. Our
forefathers were ouerseen: take you heed that you be not hardened to choke
your selves with the undigested juice of those fair grapes which they have
swallowed, and would now most readily vngorge, if they might be allowed but one
hours respite upon this earth again.

Possessors indeed lay men are, and long have been, and reputed owners of
tithes, but without just title in the Court of conscience, by the which all men
must be one day adjudged: sacrilegij culpa non vacabit, qui aliquid horum ausus
fuerit negare aut subtrahere: He cannot be free from sacrilege, who shall dare
to deny or withdraw any of Gualterin Mat. 23. 23.
these things: how much more then are they sacrilegious who pull them from the
Churches possession?

CHAP. XII. The distinction of tithes into prediall and personal: the
injurious customs of these times; the diduction of expenses in personal
tithes.
THere is acknowledged now adays a distinction of tithes into prediall and
personal: Prediall tithes, are those called, quae enascuntur e praedijs, that
is, which arise out of the grounds by use and employments of lands to tylth,
pasture, garden, or the like. Of these prediall tithes we have a catalogue,
Leuit. 27. 30. All tithes of the land, of the seed of the land, and of all the
fruit of the trees; and verse. 31. every tyth of bullock and of sheep. Of
these there is yet an other subdiuision into great, and small tithes. Of small
tithes Christ may seem to speak, saying, ye tyth mint, and annise, and rue;
intimating that whereas (...). 23. 23
the providence of God does order and bring forth as well the least branch of
mynt, or slife of rue, or annise, as the whole vallyes of corn, and whole
herds of cattle; so it is good reason that the Lord be paid his tribute, or
tenth, out of these smaller and slenderor croppes, as well as out of those more
plentiful encreasings. Yea, so exactly does the Lord require his tithes, (for
they are his tribute) as he cannot in any case endure any diminishing thereof:
whereupon it came to pass, that Abel offered his offering unto God of the best
and fattest: Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedech, (...), that is, of the chief
and principal of the heap: and God himself gave strict charge to the people
of Israel, that no man should exchange, or make composition for his tithes,
except he would give for it the fifth part more then the price thereof; If any
man will redeem any of his tithes, he shall add the fifth (...). ^1
part thereunto: that so there might be an abundant wariness, that God should
not be presented with any less then his due.

I would that men, who so eagerly press upon us, and maintain against us, the
customs of these times, would duly consider this, and not dare so to rob
God, and oppress his Ministers, as usually they do, being so far from
adding a fifth part to the price they give, as that oftentimes they do not
perform the fifth part of the tithe for the whole tithe. But what should I
speak of the fifth part, when many customs do scarce pay the twentieth part
of the tithe for the whole? As in the case of Lactage in most places; some pay
a penny, where the true tenth is worth twenty, thirty, or forty shillings,
as in the case of the smoke penny, or harth silver: yea, diverse tithes are
utterly denied, and yet nothing allowed in the liewe thereof, as of timber.

And yet it is thought that herein is offered no wrong, because they can plead
Custom. Indeed here we see the saying true, Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum
peccati, that is, men have gotten such a custom of robbing the poor Church,
as that they think it now to be no sin: the antiquity of an evil custom
should not bear it out with authority, but make it to appear the more
loathsome, and call for the more speedy reformation. It is and has been an
old custom, for men to rob upon the high ways, to coosen in shoppes, and to
forswear themselves before Judges; but seeing these customs are as wicked as
they are old, their gray hairs cannot credit them; but as there are good
laws, and faithful care to abolish those, so there should be also means to
reform those, which as armed thieves do rob the Ministry, and enthrall
the souls of those which practice them unto condemnation, if repentance
prevent not.

Can any man deny that any evil Custom should be abolished? and what
goodness in the world can be, yea what wickedness is not in customs, wherein
there is no conformity with the word of God, nor any one inch of conscionable
equity? The word of God will have the tithe, that is compounded for, to be
redeemed with more then the true value, equity would allow as much price as
the thing priced is worth, these customs do oftentimes allow nothing, and
oftentimes as good as nothing: the word of God, and equity would have men to
deal as they would be dealt with: men would be loath to take sometimes a
crown, and sometimes four crowns for that for which they will scarcely allow
the Lords Minister four pence: is this equity, or can any custom make this
conscionable?

The plea is, that when any custom first began, the things so compounded
for, were estimated to be worth no more then is now performed by custom: but
what is this to avouch the equity of the custom? will any body now afford
the Minister for his groat, yea for his shilling, so much of any thing
necessary for food, lodging, or clothing, as at the beginning^ of diverse
customs he might have had for his single penny, or peradventure for his half
penny? what then is the custom but oppression, when it so disableth the poor
Minister, and enforces him in many places to a for did and miserable life,
far unseeming the honor of his calling, or the revenues of his place, if he
had his due?

That things have been at a smaller ^a^e, does show that there was some
equity in those customs, wherein now there is none; and justify the
tolerable compositions of our forefathers, to the utter condemning of the
unreasonable hardness used against Ministers in the customs of these times.
If a Minister shall reason with his parishioner now, and say unto him, the time
was some hundredth or two hundredth years ago, when twelve pen^worth of corn
might have sufficed your family a whole seauenight, both for bread and for
beer, therefore it is equity that you be now allowed no more: will not the
good neighbor here think that his Pastor wants either charity, or
discretion, in this divinity, when the world does see and seele, that in so
long a space, pri^^^ have been raised as often again as Jacobs wages have
been changed, ten and ten times? and yet it is thought that the Ministers
mouth is stopped with sufficiency of reason, and fullness of equity, when men
can tell him that neither they nor their ancestors never paid any more this
hundred years and upwards.

Alas, alas, the less has been paid under the true value, the more art
thou in arerages; so that thou should rather with speed make satisfaction
for the wrong, either by performing restitution, or by begging remission, then
plead an old injury to maintain a daily trespass. An ungodly custom can
never become a wholesome law, the older it is, the worse it is, when it is
unlawful.

Shall we plead, or should the first reformers have pleaded, that time out of
mind, you were wont to have in most parishes no preaching, but service mumbled
in mangled Latin, and the pictures on the walls, and the garishnesse of the
Church windows to preach unto you, for, more then you could fish out of those
dumb shows, you might not know of any Scripture. Shall we plead that it has
been a custom, time out of mind, (scarce (alas) yet broken in many places)
to have no sermons? will you not redily tell us that this was a wicked custom,
to defraud men's souls of spiritual food, and that if we do so we can not
answer God at the day of judgment, because he commands us to seed the
flock? and in (...).
all this you speak the truth, which we do freely acknowledge, not daring to
plead any custom against it; for we prefer the discharging of a good
conscience in the duties of our calling, before that ease which we might find
in obserning of the old custom. Consider you therefore that if custom can
not excuse our negligence, if we shiuer not out unto you the food of life as
God has enjoined us; so no custom will serve to excuse you, for not obeying
the rule of the Apostle, who commands him that is taught in the word, to make
him who has taught him, partaker of all his goods. Do you think to answer
God in this case with a iugling pretense of an unconscionable custom? when God
says do none of those abominable customs which have been before (...)
you.

It is a fearful and horrible sin for the Pastor to deny unto his flock
the spiritual food; Vae mihi, Woe is me, if I preach not the Gospel; and let
men assure themselves, 1. C^r. 9.
that although something a lesser sin, yet no less is it then a crying
sin, to withdraw from the Minister his corporal maintenance. If it be so
gr^euous an offense, that he who ploweth thy ground, or threshed thy corn to
feed thy body, be not answerably considered, then be thou undoubtedly
persuaded, that it is no trisling offense to pinch and rob thy Pastor, who
does feed thy soul with the word of God, and watch and pray for thy
salvation. And therefore be more careful to discharge a good conscience, in
paying unto the Lord, and his Minister, his due tithes, and obeying that law of
God which under grievous penalty requires it at thy hands, then by presuming
upon the advantage of an injurious custom, to rob God, and defraud thy
Pastor: All tithes of the Land of the seed of the land, and the fruit of the
trees, are the Lords, holy unto the Lord: also all tithes of bullock, and of
sheep, if a man will redeem any of his tithes, he must add a fifth part:
therefore transgress not the commandments of God by your tradition, or
custom.

Personal tithes are those called which arise of a man's personal employment,
or industry, in any mystery, art, or science, in any course of trade,
traffic, handiework, or occupation whatsoever.

Many are the several callings, wherein men by the blessing of God upon their
endeauours do reap much profit, and therefore do owe tenths and tribute unto
almighty God, by whose providence they do prosper. The heathen people as they
did fondly imagine that there were many Gods for several purposes, and that
nothing could be brought to good pass without the help of some deity; so when
any course did prosper in their hands, to their good content, they ever used to
make an oblation of some part of their gain, and usually also (as we showed in
the tenth chapter) of the very tenth part unto that god or Idol by whom they
imagined themselves to have been furthered. If they had successful sailing,
or benefit from the sea, they sacrificed to Neptune: If the harvest were
plentiful, they were thankful to Ceres: (...).
For the fruitfulness of the vine they made their offerings unto Bacchus: when
their flock did thrive, they paid their vows to Pan and Faunus: upon
recovery of health, they remembered to gratify Aesculapius; for nature it
self did teach the heathen, that upon receite of every benefit, we owe a
tribute unto God for his blessing.

But the Christian man knows, that all these gods of the Heathen, were but
either the corruptible work of men's hands, or the vain imaginations of men's
foolish heads, and that all benefits of what nature soever they be comes from
the gracious blessing of that only God, who as he is infinite in nature, so is
he manifold in his blessings: for he is the God of the mountains, and the
vallyes, a God near hand, and a God afar off, the God of heaven, and the God
of earth, the God of the cloud, and the God of the sea, the God of men, and the
God of cattle; so as what increase or benefit soever any man receives, by any
whatsoever lawful means, he has the same from the bounty and goodness of
almighty God; Remember the Lord thy God, it is he which gives thee power
(...). ^ ^8.
to get riches.

If any man say, that God may well challenge tithes of the husbandman and
shepherd, because the grounds by endeavor, tillage, and tendance, do yield a
natural increase; but of Citizens, or tradesmen, who have nothing but thereir
stock or handie-labour, he cannot challenge after the like reason. I pray you
consider, that if all men in all estates and conditions, are to depend alike
upon the providence of God, then are all men alike obliged to pay unto God his
required and due tribute, according to the measure of his blessing upon their
estates and employments. Aquinas proves this by those words of Paul, If we
have sown unto you spiritual things, is it any (...).
great matter if we reap your carnal? Whereupon says the schoolmen, Omnia
quaecunque homo possidet sub carnalibus continentur, and ideo de omnibus
possessis decimae sunt soluendae: that is, All that a man has are contained
under carnal things, and therefore are tithes to be paid of all that a man
has.

There were among the people of Israel, not only shepherds and husbandmen,
but also tradesmen, handicrafts, and merchants, and yet we find not that any
sort of them were exempted from paying tithes, in so much, that the Pharisees
themselves though they were Doctors of the Law and sat in Moses chair, though
by their sect (...). p ^5.
they were the Monks and Friars of those times, yet while the Lords inheritance
(which is the tithes) was assigned unto the tribe of Leui, the Pharisees did
pay their tithes exactly and duly, (...), I give Luke 18 12.
tithes of all that I possess; so the Lord by the Prophet Mal. ^ 10. (...). 27
32.
Malachie says, Habiueth col hammagnaser: bring every tyth and all that
passes under the rod: that is, all things that can be numbered: for it is a
speech alluding to a sashio^ of numbering then in use, by pointing at things
with a rod or wand in the numbering of them. Consideret (says Augustine) quod
omnia dei sunt, per quae viui^, sieve terra, sieve flumina, sieve semina: that is,
let a man consider that all things whereby he lives whether it be the earth,
or the floods, or the seeds, they are all the Lords: and therefore upon all
kind of increase, out of whatsoever it arises lawfully, (...) p. ^^.
there is a tribute of tyth due unto the Lord.

But the question in these days is not whether Personal tithes be due or not,
but whether they be due after the same manner that the prediall tithes are,
that is, whether a man must out of his trade or occupation separate and lay
aside for the Lords Minister the very tenth part of all his increase as holy
unto the Lord? or whether he may not by deducting certain expenses content God
and his Minister with a lesser portion?

Whenever the distinction of tithes into prediall and personal was first
devised, certainly non sic ab initio, it was not so from the beginning, nor
near the beginning, there is not the least mention or likelihood thereof in
all the Scripture, it was unknown unto the Fathers of most note and antiquity.

The first mention or appearance of any such distinction so far as I can
trace the same, is in the Decretalls of (...). cap. past (...)
Gregory the ninth, which were set out in the year 1231. where diduction of
expenses is allowed unto some men. And for the further assuring of us that this
was not extant in any written constitution before that time, the gloss upon
that place does freely confess it saying, Nullo iure scripto sed tantu^modo
hic inuenitur, and non alias, sed consuetudine approbata: that is, this is not
found in any written law but only here and no where else saving that it is
allowed by custom. The decrees, which though abridged by Gratian, yet first
compiled by an vz Bu^cha^du^ Munke of Lob. ann. 1005 state of the Church. page
282 or by (...) b^s^. of ^arnat. as others report ^vo lived in the days of
Urban the 2. anno. 1088. cent 11.
other, are far auncienter then those decretalls, allow no such diduction of
expenses in any one case more then other, but inioyneth tithes to be paid out
of all increase of all kind of trade or dealing. The gloss which is upon the
decrees does mention such a distinction, yet so as he does deny and disclaim
it as unsound: for speaking of personal tithes he adds presently, Cause. 16 q
7. cap. Quic^^que recog^oue^^t
Certe^stae and illae similiter lege diuina debentur: that is, Verily these,
that is, the personal tithes: and those, that is, the prediall tithes, are due
both alike by the law of God: and as for that custom which the gloss of the
decretalls does speak of when it began, himself does not declare, nor can I
tell where to seek; only this I am sure of, that for the space of more then
three hundred years after Christ it was not acknowledged: the words of Ambrose
are plain, Quid est See (...)
fideliter dare decimas, nisi vt nec minus nec peius aliquis offerat de grano,
aut v^^o, aut de fructibus arboru^, atque pecoribus, ant de horto, aut de
negocio, aut de ipsa venatione sua? that is, what is the faithful paying of
tithes, but that a man offer neither less nor more of his seed, or of his
wine, or of the fruits of the trees, and cattle, or of the garden, or of
trafique, or of his very hunting? So then Ambrose makes no difference.

No more does Augustine take any notice of any such distinction, but rather
plainly speaks to the contrary, as may appear in his words above cited,
exime partem redituum tuorum, etc. lay aside or take out a part of thy revenues
howsoever arising; what part? the tenth, of what? of all. Consider that all is
the Lords, the seed, the fruit, the flood: he does not say some are of the
Lord and therefore owe tithes, some are not of the Lord and therefore owe not
any tithes; neither does he say some things are of the Lord after one manner
and some after another, and therefore all owe not tithes alike; but let a man
consider that all are of the Lord: and then to take away all doubt he
descends to particular, Do militia, de negotio and artificio read decimas:
that is, pay tithes of thy warfare, 1. Sermon 1^. (...). po^t. (...)
of thy trade, and of thy handicraft: and yet more fully, quod si decimas non
habeas fructuum, quod habet agricola, quodcunque te pascit urgenium, dei est,
and indedecimas expeti^ un le viuis: that is, if thou have not tithes of fruit,
which thing the husbandman has, what devise soever does maintain thee it is
the Lords, and thence he requires tithes whereupon thou live: and then
follow those particulars aforenamed, de militia, de negotio, etc. Unto these
Fathers therefore, nor unto their forefathers there was known no such
diversity of tything, much loss is it allowed by any of them as reasonable,
as may appear by their writings at large, a taste whereof is given in the ninth
chapter, in those few fragments there briefly, but yet faithfully, rehearsed.

In process of time as is seen in the Decretalls, the indulgence and
conniuence of the Church, for the greater encouraging of men in some
professions and courses (considering either the casualties whereunto such
trades are subject, or the greatness of the charge wherewith they must be
followed) has permitted unto them a diduction of their expenses, requiring
tithes only of that portion of increase, which does remain as a clear gain
or advantage. Where we have advisedly to consider both what parties may take
benefit by this toleration, and also what must be accounted clear gains, and
what may bear the name of expenses, least either some without any cause, or
others beyond the justness of their cause, be bold to plead (without
contradiction) either exemption from all, or mittigation in part.

Of such parties as by any color of equity may crave diduction of expenses,
there are three sorts, the first is the husbandman in some causes; as for
example, if a ground which has been formerly so barren that it was utterly
unprofitable nor could be made soysonable without great expense, is at last,
with long and large labor and cost of the occupier, made good and fruitful;
here it seems that a man should be allowed all his charges before he pay any
tithe, because that until a man has received all he has laid out, he
seems to be rather diminished then increased, but tithes are due of increase,
therefore they seem not due in these cases.

Some color of reason this has, and yet no such absolute force as is without
strong resistance; for first, that is not a certain rule that tithes are not
due, but where the stock is increased; for let a man buy a thousand cattle,
all big with young, and nine hundred of them not only fail to bring forth,
but also perrish utterly in a little space, yet is the tithes paid of the
increase of the residue: likewise, though the ground tilled yield not the
charge of the seed and husbandry bestowed upon it, yet is the tenth cast out
as it is, better or worse without regard of expenses. Secondly, in the case of
improouing grounds, though the charge be great, yet is it not so necessarily to
be allowed before the tithes be paid, for it is much in the nature of a
purchase to the owner: if a man has made a purchase he is not to say, I will
pay no tithes out of ground purchased until I have received from it so much
profit as it cost me, because that until then I am not increased but
diminished, even so in this case, the charge of improouement has raised the
estate of the improouer, in that his yearly revenues are increased, and
therefore why should not tithes be due out of such an improuement as well as
out of a purchase?

Indeed in regard of benefiting the common wealth, there is a great difference
between a purchase and an improouement, because that in a purchase a property
only is altered, but the common wealth not enriched, but in such an
improouement the very soil is amended and so the common wealth is aduantaged,
and the church also (whose estate of benefit is to rise o^ to fall with the
common wealth) is also made a gainer, and therefore has there been granted
unto improouers this favor of having their charges diducted, rather to
encourage men to be so aduantageable to the Church and Commonwealth, then in
regard of the charge it self, whereby the party is but made a purchaser.

A second sort of men allowed their expense before ^hey tithe are Merchants;
that is, such men as by sending ^orth, or fetching home commodities, over Seas,
or by long and tedious iournies, are liable, as to great expense, so to many
dangers of shipwreck, Pirates, robbers by land, and many other casualties,
unto these kind of men the conniuencie of the Church (for their greater
encouragement) and not any other necessary force of reason, has allowed their
expenses.

For, if these men plead their reasons, there are answers for them in all
readiness: as, If they say, we are at great charge, and under many dangers,
what we now gain, we may loose again upon the next adventure: The answer is,
that God is the God of the sea and land, so that what gain soever is lawfully
compassed, either by sea or land, that comes by the good and free blessing of
Almighty God, and therefore owes unto god that tribute which himself
imposes, and that is his tithe: even as the tribute of impost is paid to the
King absolutely, without respect of the merchants charges or dangers. And as
for the dangers either of body or goods wherein the merchant does exceed the
husbandman, first they are voluntary; no course of life comes by compulsion:
secondly, their gains under the ordinary blessing of God with good discretion
and husbandry, are far greater then are the increase of tilling grounds,
feeding cattle, and the like; witness daily experience, what husbandman
ordinarily is able to compare with a merchant of the like estate and beginning
with himself: therefore for all that reason, the merchant is still to pay his
tithes, as well as the country husbandman; yea further, the more the merchant
is to depend upon gods providence and protection, the more careful ought he to
be in the faithful and (...).
cheerful paying of his tithes to God, that so he may the better by this
honoring God with his riches, expect his blessing according to his promise,
Prou. 3. 10.

A third sort of people allowed diduction of expenses, are such as are usually
called tradesmen, whose condition is not much unlike the merchants, for these
do buy and sell commodities, sometimes in the same place or market, sometimes
conuaying them from one place to an other, whether nearer hand or further off,
yet so as they are nothing so much in danger of storms and spoylers, as the
merchants are: These men as their charge and adventure falls out to, after
the like manner with the merchants, so they are allowed their expenses
proportionably.

But before I come to define the charge diducible, I cannot but take notice of
two sorts of people, who though they be not either in their charge of their
trade, or usual losses to compare with either the merchant, tradesman, or
husbandman, yet do they reap a certain and competent gain, and yet for
tithes either they pay none at all, or they are allowed to have their expenses
diducted: these are either handicraft men, or usurers.

Handicraft men, if they be not unthrifty, do with a little stock, small
charge, and no hazard comparable to the merchant, or tradesman, or husbandman,
make so good earnings usually as both to maintain them and theirs in
comeliness, and also to increase their stocks, and oftentimes to purchase
fair estates: therefore as they do came money by the blessing of God in some
large quantity and much certainty, with small stock and no great charge, so
they not only owe the tenth to God, (who enableth their joints, and directs
their fingers to work, and also occasioneth profitable utterance to their ware
or employments) but also by that time the case has been well examined, they
will be sound to have no more, if not less cause to require diduction of
expenses then the very husbandman, and yet unto these artificers also has the
Church in her indulgence allowed their charges to be abated before they tithe.

Usurers also are men that make a certain gain and not small, whose charge is
oftentimes the least of all other men, their hearts the hardest, their charity
the coldes^, their alms the scantest, their families the least: for what man
of an ingennous disposition can so me we up himself in a corner, so abridge
his household, air so many harths with so few sparks, feed so few mouths
with so few and courser morsels, bar his portalls so close, or stop his
ears so resolutely against the cry of the poor, as can and does the
professed Usurer? (let no body mistake me, for I speak not of all usurers or
lenders of money but only of such) He cannot deny but that his gain is
certain, he cannot plead that the charge of his trade is great, for the which
his expenses should be diducted, what can be then allege why he should not
pay his tenthes of so clear and so easy so sure and great gains?

It will peradventure be alleged that Preachers do condemn usury for
unlawful, and by that means do exclude themselves from receiving tithes of
the hire of money: for what is gained unlawfully may not be offered unto that
God, who will not receive either the price of a (...).
d^gge, or the hire of a harl^t.

I answer, first, there is an allowance upon the loan of money which may
lawfully be received, as when the lender stands wholly to the courtesy of the
borrower, without assurance to bind the borrower to any thing besides the
true: epayment of the borrowed principal: secondly, there is an other kind of
usury, which is the usual usury of England, when the borrower is bound to
bring unto the lender the sum which he has borrowed with a certain gain by
a time prefixed: this is generally condemned by divines: thirdly, there is yet
an usury or biting as the Hebrews call it, or rather yet fleaing, gnawing, or
devouring, as the poor borrower often finds and feels i^, when for the break
of days unreasonable forfeitures are exacted, or when men in extremity are
constrained to take money and moneys worth, and bribe brokers under most cruel
conditions. This is not only condemned by divinity, but also abhorred by all
humanity, and applauded only by those whom covetousness has so enchaunted, as
that they are not men of reason and civility, but metamorphised wolves, dogs,
and tygres. Concerning all these I answer briefly.

So far as the practice is lawful, so far the tithes are due of all thine
increase, and where the tithes are not to be received, the practice is not to
be endured: so then, or pay thy tithes, or leave thy practice. If thou find
in thy conscience that thou take no course of gaining but that which God
allows, then pay thy tithes as his due tribute unto God, whose providence
has blessed thee: or if thou find that thy practice is such, as that thou
dare not offer the tenth of thy gain thereof unto God, then repent in time,
and take some such course of life, as may bring thee such gain as thou may
enjoy with a good and quiet conscience.

And so much concerning such parties as may by any color crave, and to whom is
allowed diduction of expenses; we come now to define what we call these expenses.

What is to be allowed for expenses and what to be reputed clear games seems
hard to determine because no writer that we can meet withal has in this
point entered into so particular terms as were to be wished, yet if the cause
be duly considered in these four circumstances, 1. conscionable equity or
reason. 2. the conjecture that may be made upon the writings of learned men. 3.
the aged monuments of former practices. 4. the exchequer valuation of benefices
in Cities and great towns: I trust, the judicious will be satisfied.

Some would have clear gains to signify only so much as is remaining when
all charges both of the trade, and also of house keeping have bin abated at the
years end, when men cast up their accounts. But this is against equity as
appears four manner of ways, for by that The (...).
means,

First, the Minister shall have nothing where the gains

Secondly, this shall cause great inequality, when of

Thirdly, it abolisheth all proportion between personal (...)
is nothing diducted toward the great charge of seed, ploughing, harrowing,
weeding, reaping, and gathering. If in personal tithes not only the charge of
the trade, but also all expense of housekeeping should be diducted, the
husbandman tytheth of that he does eat and wear, but the citizen would not
tyth saving only of that which he does or may lay up.

Fourthly, a Minister dwelling among men whose trades be guided by Gods word
and not by courtesy which is at m^ns pleasure: and further that the Ministers
part is due unto him not only where men can earne or gain more then they
spend, but also where God does so bless men as that they can earne so much as
ordinarily they need and do spend. Why pays a man tithes but in
acknowledgment that what he gains is by the blessing of the Lord? if then
that which thou earnest toward the maintenance of thy charge and family be
thine own earning, proceeding either merely or principally from thine own
endeavor and providence, and that only the overplus, which thou cansts spare
above thy needful expense, proceeds from the blessing of God, then indeed
thou art to pay tithes only of that surplusage or remainder, and not of that
wherewith thou do feed and cloth thy household. But if all be of God, why
owe thou not tithes of all thine increase, whether it increase toward
purchasing, or toward housekeeping? howsoever it increases it is by Gods
blessing, and therefore owes unto God his tribute. Does God say any where that
only then he will have tithe when the parties increase is more then enough
for that years expense? God never gave any hint or occasion of any such
conceit, and therefore it is but an ungrounded fancy, conceived by error,
brought forth by covetousness, and maintained by violent and wilful
prejudice, for it is against equity.

In the next place we have reverently to consider what (...) of the Learned.
learned men have determined, who have written in this point as in their own
element; I mean the Canon lawyers, who though (by reason that the monstrous
encroachments of these times were in their days unheard and vndreamed of) they
have not entered into so particular terms, as may quiet those who are disposed
to cavil, and resolute to resist, whatsoever shall be spoken against that
which they have already partially conceited; yet have they written in such
terms and manner, as that it is not hard to conjecture what in their times and
judgments was allowed for expenses.

The Gloss upon the Gregorian decretalls speaks thus, De (...) past^^ (...)
expensas factas in eundo, and redeundo, and negotia^do, and saciendo meltorem:
that is, expenses in going, and coming, and trading, and bettering the stock.
Where we see an allowance of the charges of the trade, whereby through the
travel and providence of man furthered and prospered by the blessing of God,
the stock increases, but that housekeeping shall be diducted out of this
increase together with all other charges before tithes be paid, here is no
mention.

If it be alleged that the stock is not increased until housekeeping
charges be defraied: I answer that it is an untrue allegation, for the stock
is increased when by any return or use thereof there is any thing added unto
it, as when ten pounds or ten pounds worth is made eleven pounds, here is an
increase, and the use whereto it is converted does not take away either the
name or the nature thereof, but that it is an increase, and therefore tytheable.

Henricus Bohic in his Commentary upon that place of Hen^^ Bohic.
the decretalls distinguishes expenses into three sorts, 1. in re, vt pretium
rei. 2. circarem, vt reparationes, 3. extra rem, vt salarium proxenetis de
vecturis, vectigal and gabellas. that is, Expenses are 1. in the stock, as the
value of the stock. 2. about the stock, as reparations. 3. without the
stock, as wages for brokers, expense of cariages, tribute and custom: to the
same effect also write others of the same learned men, and by name Lyndewood in
the same Lyndw. l 3. p. 59.
words.

The stock first is to be diducted, for until that be entire at the end of
the year or voyage, no tithe is due, and herein is no favor, for as well must
the husbandman give the tenth of the very land it self, as the tradesman of
his stock. But the indulgence of the Church has in favor allowed didu^^ions
o^ reparatio^s where they happen, as in ships; also of carriage, factorage,
impost and custom, and such like: but that housekeeping should be in like
manner diducted, never any learned man's writings have in the least show
allowed. And surely one would think that a reasonable man would rest content
with this allowance to have all the charge of the trade consisting of the
stock, tools, factorage, custom, and impost diducted, without asking to have
also the whole expense of housekeeping to be exempt from tything. But here the
old proverb is truly verified, Licentia deteriores sumus omnes: that is,
give an inch and men will take an ^ll, the inconsionableness of men is not
satisfied with the large favor of the Church, but incroacheth so far as to
pull away all by force, because a bountiful allowance was granted freely: for
even unto that pass is our world now grown, that tradesemen do utterly deny
to pay any thing in the name of a tithe, for many be, not only the men, but
even the towns and Cities in England in my knowledge, who affoard nothing
unto their Ministers, but what themselves please in courtesy: yea many of great
wealth and worldly ability pay nothing at all either in duty or in
benevolence; but only the miserable lean Easter offerings, and the fees of
marriages, Church goings, and burialls: here not only duty, but even humanity
also is forgotten, and neither fear of God, nor regard of man is before the
eyes of such people; for even the statutes of the land do inioyne paiements
(...) cap 1^.
of tithes to be made to their Ministers, by tradesmen and artificers, their
expenses being diducted. So that not only in courtesy, but even in conscience
(if men will think the Kings laws to be a matter of conscience, as the
Apostle teaches) something is to be paid under the name of a tithe by
tradesmen and artificers. Indeed that something is not determined by that law
of the land which does inioyne it, and that is the misery: for, certainly at
the time of the making thereof, there was a meaning to do the Church good,
howsoever that statute is now, thorough the hardness of men's hearts, become
insufficient. If that that statute (when in plain terms it does not allow
diduction of housekeeping) shall be so interpreted by any, let them assure
themselves that as it is unreasonable, so also is it an interpretation which
has not the judgment of the ancients to uphold it.

The third means of evidence in this point, is the remaining (...).
monuments of the conscionable practice of our Forefathers: by those monuments
I mean the records of incumbents, though in most places by this time smothered
that they tell no tales, yet in some places still extant to vpbraid that world,
which has banished Popery to practice sacrilege.

In those records, the tithes of particular men in Cities and towns of
trading, are found to be (as I d^e hear) of some three, of some four, of some
t^nne and twen^ie pounds per a mum. Hostiensis a Canonist r^pe^teth that in his
time, certain honest lawyers did (...) by their ^i^es certain purses, which
they called tyth^^ purses, wherein they put the tenth-shilling of then (...)
for the^^ Priests. There is no probability theref^^^ (...) both the charge of
trade, and also of house-k^e^^^g was diducted, where the tithes amount to so
(...) sum.

And lastly, when men consider how benefice^ of little parishes in cities and
towns of trade, are valued in the Kings books, some ten, some twenty pounds
and more per annum, we must needs think^ that they had (...) tithes, when they
were so deeply rated.

Where are those tithes now? were they due only in time of Popery? are the
Ministers of the Gospel debarred from them? is this the reward of discovering
popery, and revealing the truth, that we must loose our tithes for our
labors? Or does this world confess that a tithe is due, and yet under color
of diducting expenses, leave no tyth to be recovered? Is it acknowledged to be
due, and that it ought truly to be performed (as in that statute of Edward the
6.) and yet there is no way to obtain it, but what covetousness does
withold, that either sinister interpretation shall bear out and justify, or
for want of sufficient law, it cannot be obtained. I would to God we could
persuade with men, that they would not give so great scandal, and so just
cause to open the mouth of the Papist, to call our profession a religion of
liberty, when as what they paid duly, as they were justly bound, that our
reformed people should so dissolutely neglect, and so injuriously withold
from God and his ministers, that full fitly may a Papist say to many a thousand
amongst us in the words of Paul, Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou
sacrilege? Romans 2. 22.

CHAP. XIII. Objections against the doctrine of tithes propounded and answered.
Objection. 1.
THere is no Commandment in all the new Testament to inioyne payment of
tithes: therefore they are not due by the word of God in the time of the Gospel.

Answer.
To this objection there are in readiness three answers.

1. There is in the new testament Commandment to this effect, Gal. 6. 6. Let
him that is taught in the word, make him that has taught him partaker of his
goods: though there be in these words no express mention of a tenth part, yet
there is mention and iniunction of a part, which ought to be performed unto the
Minister or Teacher, out of every man's goods. What part is that? if Scripture
may be expounded by Scripture, then that part is the tenth part; for that and
no other does the Scripture assign determinatiuely unto the Ministers of God
for their service, as has been already showed.

2. What if there were no Commandment for tithes in the new Testament? yet
the constant practice of the Church from time to time never ceasing (except
when perfecution put all things out of frame) is a sufficient rule unto us, and
of necessicie to be observed, as in the case of the Sabbath, not only observed
once in every week, but also changed from one day unto an other, this is not
commanded in all the new Testament, and yet are we bound unto this
observation, because of the constant practice of the Church, which is unto us a
necessary president to be imitated.

3. What has been once commanded in the old Testament, does remain a law for
ever, except it has since at one time or other been repealed: but God has
on^e and twice challenged the tithes for his own, and e^acted that they be
paid faithfully and gladly unto him, therefore must men either show that God
has abrogated this his decree, and relinquished this challenge, or else hold
themselves still bound in conscience to obey God in that commandment, and to
perform unto him that which he does challenge.

If any body will now say, that tithes were an appendant of the tabernacle and
temple, belonging only thereunto as a ceremony thereof; I have already
proved the contrary, cap. 6. and if I had not proved it, yet were not a man's
conscience ever the more discharged; for in this case, the tyth-payer is to be
put unto his proof, it is enough for the receiver to show that they were once
made his: this holds strong until the tyth-payer can show, either that the
grant was made but for a limited time, or else that since the making, that
grant has been by some act disanulled: As for example; If it be once enacted
that the tenth part of every man's living be paid unto the King, the subject
is bound accordingly to make ^is payment, except he can expressly show that
that act has been either by some other later act repealed, or by some
inserted prouiso expired and avoided. The King sufficiently proves his due,
when he cites the act or statute: the subject therefore is bound to his
obedience, until he show a sufficient dispensation.

But thou think that thou have a sufficient discharge, because thou caust
say, the tithes have ceased with the sacrifices and ceremonies; alas, alas,
segging is no good ^oping, thou must show and prove it: Is it enough to say
to the King, your tenth and task is out, and to be paid no longer, because we
have done paying the last granted subsidy? No, no, except that thou can
prove that the taskes or tenths were to continue no longer then those
subsidies should be in paying: So it is not enough for thee to say, the tithes
have ceased with the ceremonies and sacrifices, except thou can prove by
some Scripture, that either tithes were ceremonies or sacrifices, or that they
were to be paid but only so long as the ceremonies and sacrifices lasted; if
thou can prove this, then keep thy tithes, we will not ask them; we will
refuse them

The precept concerning the Sabbath day once given, was to continue an eternal
commandment, never to be neglected, because God never repealed it. Changed
indeed it was, but by the spirit of god, upon just and weighty cause; so
tithes once enjoined by God, are still due till God remit them.

If a man shall say, that though it cannot be showed expressly with pregnant
proof from the Scripture, when and upon what cause tithes have been repealed,
yet it may be that there is some guess, and peradventure God may have repealed
tithes upon some sufficient cause, let him remember himself that a man must
live by faith, and not by peraduentures: Faith dares not depart from the
revealed will of God, upon hope that peradventure God has otherwise
determined, seeing that the revealed will of God which is the Scripture, must
be our direction.

Therefore though payment of tithes were not enjoined in the new Testament,
yet it ought still to be performed, because that what the old Testament has
so plentifully required in this behalf, the same is not reuoaked in any
Scripture, either of old or new Testament. The continuance of a law needs
not a repetition or second mention: indeed no law is abrogated except it be
mentioned, but a law once made (without any limitation of time) is continued
still, in that it is not at all named.

Objection. 2.
Payment of the exact tenth cannot be included in the moral law, because the
law of nature, which is also the ^. 2. (...).
moral law, does not so precisely regard a certain number, the instinct of
nature regards not one number more then an other.

Answer.
The moral law is of larger extent then the law of nature: the law of
nature in strict signification is only that common equity whose principles
are engraven in our nature, so as by the very instinct of nature we do
discern the same in some measure: of which sort are these, Thou shall worship
one God: Thou shall honor thy father and mother: Thou shall not kill, etc. But
the moral law comprehends all these natural precepts, and also some other
positive commandments given by God to continue, not for a time, as the
ceremonialls, and iudicialls, but for ever: of this kind is the fourth
commandment, for a set day in every week, to be consecrated to the solemn
worship of Almighty God: such also was the prohibition of cating the forbidden
fruit, and such is this law of tithes: Moral, because ordained of God without
limitation, to continue to the end of the world: but not natural in that
st^^ctnesse of signification, because the light of nature does not discover it
in this determined number.

Objection. 3.
There were three sorts of tithes in the old Testament, one tenth to maintain
the Leuite and Priest, who had his tenth out of the tenth of the Leuite: (Numb.
18. v. 24. and 26.) an other tithe to be eaten in the place which the Lord
should ch^^se, Dent. 14. 23.) and a third tithe every third year^ for the
L^uite and poor (Deuteronomy. 14. ^9.) Now, the second and third tithes are ceased,
therefore why are not the first also ceased?

Answer.
God commanded in the law diverse sorts of Saboaths, as, the Saboath of days;
(Exodus ^0. 10.) the Saboath of weeks, (Leuit. 23. 15.) the Saboath of years,
(Leuit. 25. 4.) and they had also the great Saboath, (Ioh. 19. 31.) But now
that great Saboath, the saboath of years, and the saboath of weeks have
ceased, and yet the saboath of days remains: So in the several kinds of
tithes the two latter sorts ceasing, do not also infer a nullitie of the
first.

Secondly, Aquinas answers this objection, saying, 2. ^. q 8^ ^^. ^
that the second sort of tithes were in the old law reserved to serve at the
offering of the sacrifices, and therefore have now ceased, because the
sacrifices have ceased, and a^ for the third sort of tithes which were for the
poor, they are not ceased, but augmented in the new Testament, in that we are
commanded to give alms of all that we can spare for so he reads that
place, Luke 11. 41.

Thirdly, there is an answer to be framed to this objection (...). De^^ 14. ^8.
out of the words of M. Calvin; who is of judgment that the Israelites did not
upon the third year separate a tithe for the poor, besides that which they
ordinarily separated for the Levites, but only that the tithes which other
years were wholly separated for the priests and Levites alone, were the third
year to be so set apart, as that the poor also must have a share in them, and
then the same remains still in the new Testament, for so we do acknowledge
both in word and practice, that we are not to convert the tithes wholly to our
own uses without affoarding a share unto the poor out of them, not Ro^ (...),
^o^ (...).
only every three years, but also every year and every day, as their need
requires and as our ability does extend.

Objection. 4.
If the Ministers of the new Testament must have like tithes as the Levites
had, then they may not own any other estats, whether purchased with money, or
descending unto them by inheritance; for the Levites were allowed no other part
among their brethren saving only the tithes, Numb. 18. 20.

Answer.
The courses that are taken in abridging Ministers of their tithes together
with other charges which are continual upon them, and the hospitality and
charity expected at their hands beyond others of much better ability, will
easily take order that Ministers be no great purchasers. And to prevent
Ministers that they become not great heirs, there is a reasonable sure
practice, when few or none prefer any of their sons to the ministry, but
those for whom they have, or to whom they will give none other inheritance; to
the poor is the Gospel preach^d says our Savior, and by the poor is the
Gospel also preached, may we affirm, when for the most part heirs and
gentlemen repute the Ministry too base a calling for their employment. But
suppose that the private possessions and inheritances of Ministers were
greater, then they are, ten times doubled, yet notwithstanding it does not
follow that their tithes, gleab, and offerings, should deprive them of their
private estates. For, the case of the Levites is herein no president for us:
because the Levites were to take no further care for their wives and children,
then to leave them in the common estate of the Church, as they were before: the
children did always succeed their parents in administering unto the Lord and
receiving tithes and offerings: for the preisthood and Leuiticall
administration was peculiar to that tribe, therefore they needed no other
inheritance but their tithes, off^rings, and Cities. But the Ministry of the
Gospel is not tied to any one family, but in all degrees and kinreds those are
to be employed in this service, whom God has endued with zeal and wisdom
suitable for the calling; so that when the father is dead the children are
utterly destitute further then provision has been made for them, by the
carfulness of their parents while they lived. Therefore though the Levites
had no other portion but the inheritance of their public Ministry; yet the
Preachers of the Gospel may be owners of private lands and riches, because that
the wifes and children of the Ministers of the Gospel do not live sustained
by the tithes when their fathers and husbands are dead.

Objection. 5.
This maintaining of Ministers by tithes seems not to hold any good
proportion, because that in some places the exact tithe is too much to be
allowed unto the Ministers of those places; and in other places the country
may be so poor, as that the tithes thereof though fully paid are too scant a
maintenance, therefore in some places the ninth, eight, or seventh part had
need be affoarded to the Ministers maintenance, and in other places the
eleventh, twelfth or twentieth part may be fully sufficient.

Answer.
Here is great care for a golden mean between too much, and too little, how
to put the Ministers meat and apparel in a pair of balance. The Ministers
too much is indeed the eye-soare unto most men, while they surviewe every
desolate and mangled vicaridge through the dimmest spectacles of envy and
grudging. And therefore the abating still of this supposed too much, is the
very mark that is so earnestly eyed, and continually aimed at and not missed,
while the worlds too little truth of conscience, religion and devotion, is the
heart-soare of the poor ministry, who feel the cold wind through their
ruined and crasie walies, fare with thin diet, and crouch under the decayed
threads of their ouerworne apparel; which so manifest, and so common
extremities, the world more scornfully smileth to behold, then compassionately
cares to red^esse. If the poor ministry were as able to avoid this real
and afflicting too little, as men are wary to prevent it from furfetting upon
too much, we should soon find out the mediocritie: But I come to a directer
answer, vz.

In no country peaceably possessed, and ciuilly inhabited, can the true tithes
of the increase of the land, and of the peoples ende^uour, be either too much
or too little, for the honorable maintenance of so many Ministers, as are
ordinarily competent to attend the spiritual charge of that country.

For the clearing and further strengthening of this answer, it is not
altogether impertinent to consider, that diverse learned men (whereof some have
published their (...).
judgment in print, others have discovered their opinions unto me in
conference) though they did not so resolutely hold the tithes to be due unto us
by the word of God, do notwithstanding think no course so indifferent for the
maintenance of the Ministry, as by tithes; and their reason is, because
every politic law is to be held the more indifferent and equal, the more
near it is to the law which God enacted of the same kind among the
Israelites. But among the Israelites this was the Law of God, that the tithes
should be the inheritance of the Ministers, who ministered in holy things as
well in one place of the country as in an other, therefore the tithes are not
so unproportionable a maintenance for the Ministry, as that for the
barrenness or fertility of any place this number of tenthes should be altered.

Furthermore, the fruitfulness of one country, and the barrennes of an other,
does not infer any such disproportion as men do imagine; for proportion must
be, not so much between the estate of one Minister and another, all the world
over, as between the estate of every Minister, and the estate of that people
unto whom he does administer; that so where the people are rich, the ministers
estate may be the more abundant, and where the people are poor, the Ministers
revenues are to be the smaller; and yet is here admitted neither too much
superfluity for one place, nor too much penury in an other, if there be any
reasonable hand held in the limiting of parishes, which is a thing appertaining
to the care of the governors or magistrates.

He that is a Minister in the richest city in the world, in the choicest
place, among the wealthiest people thereof if his parish be but small, and his
people sewe, then though all manner of tithes be never so saithfully paid unto
him, yet snal he have no such unreasonable living, but that may well without
envy or grudging be allowed unto him.

But what if the parish be great, among a very rich people? if it be
unreasonably great, it is easy for the Magistrate to lessen it: if it be but
tolerably great (for to make all parishes of the same bigness, and all
benefices of the same greatness of reuenewe, were in seeking proportion, to
overthrow all true proportion and reason) then are the tithes thereof no
larger then are fit to be affoarded to such a man, as is fit to undertake so
great a charge: for what was written upon the golden apple sent to the marriage
of Peleus, that is the inscription and ought to (...)
be obeyed as the true suiteable most of every fairer benefice, vz. Detur
digniori: let it be bestowed upon the worthier. It is too true and lamentable,
that the common sort of prowling and graceless patrones (for had they grace,
they durst not make merchandise of the Church of God) are of the mind of the
Grecians in Homer: (...) (...)
(...) that is, that the priest ought to be reverenced, and that his fair
gifts ought to be received: so they do bestow indeed their preferments upon
those, whom they find to be of the greatest worth and best desert in their
carnal construction; but the ^^^e worthiness, which those sewe patrones that
fear God, do regard accordingly, is the excellency and abundance of a man's
learning, the soundness of his faith, the uprightness of his conscience, the
integrity of his conversation, the meckenesse of his spirit, the discreetnes
of his behavior, the efficacy of his preaching, and such heavenly
worthinesses, wherewith Almighty God does vouchsafe to qualify his servants
and Ministers, for the glory of his name, and edification of his Church and
children. These worthinesses as they do abound in any one man, so crescat
honos vt meritum, that man is to be rewarded in this life with the greater
honor and more liberal means of maintaining this life, for diverse causes:

1. That the worthiest men should not receive discouragement, while the self
conceited worldling does behold and ^lowt that learning wants reward: but that
as the things of this world are gods good blessings unto his children; so both
the world may see, and the godly minister may feel, that even in these things,
and in this world also, there is areward for the righteous, whilst, that full
reward and eternal weight of glory is faithfully expected.

2. That others may be allured and encouraged both to the study of divinity,
and also to seek to excel in that course: for, honos alit arts: reward
breeds industry. But the flow^er will very quaintly object, that these
things, wealth and preferment are carnal matters, which the man of God which is
spiritual, should not look after: To a scornful objection we give yet a
sober answer, that it is lawful for the man of God to expect and demand his
due allowance of worldly things: for our Savior Christ himself has said,
that the blessed me^k^ shall inherit the earth: (...) ^. 5. (...).
and that these things shall be cast upon those, who seek the kingdom of God
and his righteousness: and that the labourer ^^ worthy of his hyre. And
further, seeing there are diverse ^^des of life, which are honest and lawefull,
besides the hol^ ministry, which is so labourious, and proposed to the
contempt of the world beyond all other callings, it is (...)
very requisite that there be in the ministry some eminent rewards, whereby
men may from their very youth be allured to deuote themselves to this calling.
It is true (by the grace of God) that those who are already in the Ministry,
whose hearts God has made zealous of his glory, and of the salvation of his
people, will not be found so unfaithful, as to neglect their work, for the
scantning of their temporary hire, but what is this to that justice, wherein
they are to be rewarded, or to the alluring of others in their very youth to a
function so unpleasing to flesh and blood, when those younger years have not
usually so high sanctified resolutions?

3. The more any man excels in learning holiness, and other gracious
qualifications of the Ministry, the more is the concurse both of acquaintance
and strangers flocking unto him, who are to be entertained by him, not sordidly
and penuriously, as if they were with some desolate wretched man in his
misery, but comelily and liberally as with an happy man whom God has
blessed.

4. As the greatest cures are to be committed to the ablest men of ministerial
abilities; so, in so great congregations it is not unusual, that they need
assistants and coadiutors, under so great a burden, and therefore their
revenues need be the ampler, that they may be able to entertain such helpers.
Again the healthfullest bodies, specially of crazie stadents, are subject unto
daily ailements and diseases, the time of sickness is chargeable, in
physique, diet, attendance, and many expenses within doors, besides the
extraordinary help which must then be used in the work of the Ministry. If
a man has not such a full handed estate, as that in time of health he may lay
up against these times of sickenesses, he must either beg or want. To want
is to perish, to beggo is not honorable, shall men of worldly employment be
enabled by their trades to buy what they need, and to command what is
requisite, by the power of the purse, and shall Gods Minister in a case of
extremity stand to courtesy, being otherwise unable to relieve himself? if
it be allowed that in reason the function of the Ministry should furnish the
Minister sufficiently for these occasions, then why should he not be allowed a
bountiful revenue? Is it nothing again that Ministers not employing
themselves in secular affairs, have no other patrimony for their children,
nor dower for their wives, but what they reserve out of their annual means,
whether the same be tithes or other exhibitions? what can be spared for the
morrow where there is not enough for the present day?

5. The greater is a man's parish; the greater is the number of the poor, which
do daily depend upon him for relief; the greater also is the number of his
parishioners, among whom he is to exercise hospitality, to maintain love and
familiarity with them, thereby to observe their several dispositions, and to
gain their affections. Who knows not, how contemptible that Minister is, in
the account of the world, who is only fit to receive kindness without
ability to requite the same, but rather depends like a beggar, upon the
courtesy of his people, then is able with his purse to relieve a beggar? It is
a great joy to many men, to see their Ministers estate such, as that he must
acknowledge and account himself beholden unto them for a meals meat, ab
misery! Has any (...). v. ^6. 27.
man ever seen a poor aged man live at courtesy, in the house of his son,
with his daughter in law? does not the good father in a short time, either by
his coughing or spitting or teastinesse or some sooneseene untowardness or
other, become troublesome, either to his own son, or to his nice daughter in
law, with continuing so long chargeable, and so much waited on, or to the
children, with taking up their room at the fire, or at the table, or to the
servants, while his slow eating does scant their reuersions? But, if the old
man has estate of his own, to maintain himself, and to pleasure his
children (oh then) he is had in estimation; his age is honored, his person is
reverenced, his counsel is sought, his voice is obeyed. Even so (without
offense be that speech which intends not to offend with reproachful words
but only to affect with a clear truth) a poor Minister though a spiritual
father, yet if he must live upon benevolence, he had need look well to
himself, when he comes among his people, that not one sharp word, not one
sower look, no one discontenting gesture be observed toward either the Master
or mistress of the house, toward any of the children, or toward the servants
which be in any favor and request; yea or toward any provoking parasite that
with unseemly mirth begettes ungodly laughter. A poor minister, who depends
upon courtesy in a needy estate, shall have holes enough either found, or made
in his coat, that he shall be quickly reputed but a troublesome and
unsuitable guest. If he be affable and familiar, parit contemptum, he is
trodden under foot, if he exercise more gravity, Catone rigidior, he is too
austere, they can use no mirth in his company: the faults which he observes,
he must either ouersee without taking notice, or smooth them up with
euphemismes and good constructions, he must suffer every fantastical idiot,
to bear himself like a young Duke, to say what he will, and to do what he
will, or else be assured to be either frowned on to his face, or flowted to his
back for being too busy: on the other side, where a Minister competently
qualified with learning, zeal, and a blameless conversation, has also that
competencie of outward estate, as that he is able to pleasure his neighbors,
with worldly kindnesses, living upon his own lawful revenues of the altar,
without depending upon man's good pleasure, this man shall speak with
authority; for this is the common error of the carnal man, that he
naturally thinks that the more (...), the more wise and honest is any man.

M^n are men of flesh and blood, and though they be endowed with many excellent
graces, yet they may be tempted through present need to endure much dishonor
to God, and to permit men to behave themselves many ways ungodly, which
otherwise they would prevent, if the feeling of their poverty did not
restrain their zeal; And therefore, howsoever the holding of Ministers in
poverty be a thing pleasing to the covetousness, pride, and voluptuousness of
the carnal man, yet (^ead ^s not into temptation) it is very disaduantageable
to the glory of God and salvation of men.

Therefore grudge not at the sufficiency of the maintenance, which in any
place is affoarded to the Minister by the tithes of his peoples increase, but
rather be thankful to God, that some yet have so good encouragement, and wish
well to the rest by your hearty and charitable prayers, pi^^ying those who
sweat at the kill to square and harden brick, but are not allowed sufficient
straw: perform every man what is his duty at least, in the true payment of
the Lords demand, say not of this or of that benefice that it is too much to
maintain a Minister, (...) ^s i^ ^hou have or could have the like and
larger (...) for thine own expense, thou will not account them any more then
sufficient. And so to the first part of the objection, vz. that in some places
the true tithes (...) too much for the Ministry: I have answered enough.

As for the other part of the objection, vz. In some bar^en countries the
tithes are too little; I shall easily answer (...) more succinctly: for
howsouer this be brought in to make a stir withal, yet this is not the maine
rub, and I make no doubt but that I shall full quickly persuade, that the
tithes of the earth, cattle, and trading, are not (in any cruill and peaceable
country) too little to maintain so many Ministers, as are competently
requisite for that people.

The reason of mine answer is this, vz. if one man be sufficient to be the
pastor over a parish of twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty familyes, then are
the tithes of that parish (i^ being in differe^tly limited) a sufficient
maintenance for the Minister thereof: for if one man have the tenth part of the
increase of the corn, fruit, and cattle of forty familyes, then that one
man has four times as much of such commodities for the maintenance of his
family, as any one family of the other forty has, if you suppose the parish
equally divided into forty parts. It is true that no parish is so euenly
divided, but that some one man may have twenty parts of the forty in some
ample Lordship, w^^ the next neighbor has scantly half a part, but the ty^h^
do equally though arise unto the incumbent in the whole sum, whether every
man's part be of the some quantity, or that some have more, and others less,
that makes no variance, but that the tithes of any parish of reasonable
limits, may be a sufficient honorable maintenance for the pastor thereof: for
if thirty, or forty f^m^lies can be maintained competently each of them with
their own nine parts, then may the incumbent or minis^^r live honorably and
bountifully with the tenthes of all these; especially considering, that what
may be adjudged but a scant maintenance in one place, is a liberal allowance
in an other: As for example, an hundred powndes per annum in some parts of
Wales, or Scotland, is a greater revenue then eight or nine score pounds in the
heart, or Southern part of England. And as I said before, that the estate of
the Minister is to hold proportion with the people among whom he administreth;
so as where they are richer, he ought the more to abound; so now I say again,
that where the estate of the people is the meaner, there the revenues also of
the Minister are of necessity suiteable unto the people, except his portion be
accidentally increased by gleab, or some such advantage, wherewith devout men
have enlarged the original allowance.

If the place be extremely poor, then in that case both Minister and people
must be relieved by the charity of neighbor Churches as they shall be able,
but this an extraordinary case, which seldom or never happens in a civil
and peaceable inhabited country: And therefore (notwithstanding this
objection.)

Ministers of the gospel are to be maintained by tithes, which as they are due
unto them by the word of God. so where parishes are any thing indifferently
divided, there the tithes are competent, neither too great nor too small to
maintain the ministry.

Objection. 6.
Tithes have been both taken away, and alienated from the Church by Kings and
Princes, and also at other times given and confirmed thereunto by their acts
and edicts; therefore they are not due by the word, but to be disposed by the
pleasure of Kings and Princes.

Answer.
It is true indeed that Kings and Princes, as we have formerly rehearsed,
cap. 11. have taken much from the Church, but a facto ad ius non valet
consequentia: that is, it follows not, that because they did it, therefore it
was well done; no more then it will be proved that we may worship Ashtaroth,
and Milcom, because this was wickedly done by Solomon and other Princes.

Magistrates (we confess also) have made laws to compel men to pay tithes,
but yet herein have they not enacted any new law of their own, but renewed
the law of God, or rather taken order to cause Gods ancient law in this
behalf to be put in execution among their subjects, as they do the like in
other cases: as for example, a murderer is to die by the law of man, but this
proves not, that a murderer is not to be avenged with death by the word of
God, but only that the good Magistrate does carefully provide that sin may be
punished as God has appointed: even so, though kings and Princes have made
laws for payment of tithes to the ministry, yet are they due by the law of
God which is far more ancient.

Objection. 7.
There are many men in towns and cities of trade and occupation, who though
they give either nothing at all, or very little unto their Ministers; yet they
do either live very poorly, or at least they save nothing at the yeare^ end:
How should these men do if they must pay their tithes exactly out of all their
gains and carnings?

Answer.
This same very allegation might the country man also make, but it avails
him not any more then if he made the same plea to debar his landlord of his
rent; therefore as the like plea helps not the country man, so no more can
the citizen find any benefit thereby; yet I answer otherwise, and that three
ways.

First, they who truly pay their tithes, may faue something though not so much
as if they paid them not, yet that which they may enjoy with a quiet and good
conference, wherewith one penny is more to be regarded then thousands of gold
and silver without it, what men spare or spend without tithing cannot be
sanctified unto them, because they detain the good from the owner thereof; and
devour that which is holy.

Secondly, many men, yea most, if not all men, may pay their tithes truly, and
yet reserve as much at the years end as if they had not paid one penny of
tithe, if they will be more sparing in diverse other superfluous and less
needful expenses of feasting, banqueting, apparelling, gaming, building, or
some other of like nature, which are maintained by many men in cities and
towns of trading with the ministers money, while he is not paid his due
tenthes.

Thirdly, men might pay their true tenthes, and yet both continue the bounty
of their liberal expenses, and also increase their estates never the less;
for not man, but God has spoken by the Prophet, Bring all the tithes into ^al.
^. 10* ^1.
my storehouse, that there may be meat in my house, and try me now herewith
says the Lord of hosts, If I will not open the windows of heaven unto you,
and poor you out a blessing without measure, I will rebuke the deuourer for
your sake, etc. I would to God that men professing the name of God, would
learn and know what it is to depend upon his providence. The heathen shall
stand up in judgment against Christians, for the very heathen as has bin
showed, reputed themselves not undone or hindered, but to be the more
plentifully enriched by paying their tithes.

We often do hear men complain that though they follow their trades
diligently and carefully, with a good competent stock, yet they put all into a
bottomless bag: either they decaie and go backward, or at least they go
not forward, they are not increased. May I not speak here, after the same
fashion as the Apostle speaks unto the Corinthians in an other case, for this
cause (...). 11. ^.
(...) and weak amongst you, and many sleep. So, for thi^ cause, vz. for
defrauding God and his Ministers many are poor and needy among you, and
diverse are undone by one casualtie or other.

If my speech may seem too peremptory to them whom self love and
covetousness has bewitched: then hear again the word of the Lord by the
same Prophet; Ye are cursed with a curse, because ye have spoiled me. Mal 3.
^.
To the like effect are the sayings of the ancient Fathers most vehement, as
specially of Augustine, Nolite de cuncta Aug (...). com^^s.
substantia vestra fraudare decimam, ne vobis nouem parts auferantur and sola
decima remaneat: that is, with hold not the tithe of any of your substance,
least God take from you the nine parts and leave you only the tenth. To the
same effect also he speaks in his sermon. de tempor. Dom. 12. sermon. 1.
where speaking of a barrennes then present and so grievous upon the field and
the vine that year, when he made that sermon, as that they had not passing
the ^enth part of the wonted increase of other years, he assigns the cause
thereof, in these words, Nouem tibi parts retractae sunt quia decimam dare
noluisti: that is, the nine parts are withdrawn from thee, because thou
would not give the tenth. Where he further shows plentifully, that for so
much as man himself is the Lords, the earth is the Lords, the cattle
wherewith man ploweth are the Lords, the dewes and showers wherewith the earth
and seeds are watered, are the Lords: therefore the Lord might justly
challenge nine parts, if he would and assign unto man the tenth part only
for his labor, but whereas God deals otherwise in so great bounty, he is
justly offended and provoked to send upon men oppression to their undoing, and
sickness also and death, to their utter destruction, when they refuse to pay
their tenthes. This is the doctrine of Augustine, and all of it grounded upon
Gods word as they may more fully see, who will read Augustine his own text at
large, which for brevity I have thus abridged: and if men will yet see a
shorter epitomie, let them read, consider and fear, what the Lord speaks by
Solomon, It is destruction for a Prou. 20. 25.
man to devour that which is holy. When the people of Israel were to pray unto
God for his blessing upon them, and their land, they were so to crave the
goodness at the hands of the Lord, as themselves had dealt truly with the
Lord in his tithes, yea they must in their prayers (...), 15
men^ion that they had tythed truly, and neither kept back in their own
stock, nor wasted in their feasting any of Gods tithes: and not unlike but
this was the cause why the Pharisie in his thanksgiving, Luke 18. 12. s^id in
the Temple that he paid tithe of all that he possessed: knowing that the
more truly tithes are paid, the more abundantly may men expect the blessing
of God upon the rest of their estate, and therefore that is but a plea
proceeding from want of faith, when a man says, because I can save nothing at
the years end, or because I have much ado to maintain my self, therefore I
will pay no tithes, where the unadvised foolish man does argue against all
sense and reason: for if he be needy and beggarly, this is come upon him
because of not paying tithes truly, and the more ado any man has to live by
his endeauours, the more need has he to tithe truly, that he may obtain Gods
blessing the more effectually: for it is the favor of God that blesses a man
to make him rich, and it is the anger of God that crosses a man to make him
poor.

In the common excuse which the Citizen makes, one thing there is which
cannot but seem unto me something admirable, vz. that when the countriman
having with great charge and labor, tylled his field, he pays the tenth part
of that which grows without diducting any kind of charges: yet the tradesman
or handicraft thinks himself deeply taxed: if he be urged to pay the tenth
part of the tenth, which is the hundredth, as for example: The husbandman, with
the charge of his seed, cattle and servants, and his own endeavor also
employed upon a farm or tenement, reapeth at the years end as much corn as
is worth fifty pounds: presently he separateth out of the same the worth of
five pounds being the tenth part holy unto the Lord. And howsoever the ungodly
man, which considers not the providence of God does lay out his tyth with
hearts grief and grudging, yet that man, who in the godliness and faith of
his heart, knows that all proceeds from Gods blessing, he does lay out his
tenth with gladness and readiness, expecting that the blessing of God will be
the more plentiful upon his nine parts the more faithfully he does perform
the tenth to God as his sacred tribute. But take a tradesman or handicraft,
which with less charge and toil every way earneth by his own and his
servants labor fifty pounds in the year, and this man thinks himself very
bountiful, if there come out of his purse ten shillings to the Ministers
maintenance that year, wherein he has earned fifty pounds; now here is but
the hundredth part paid where the tenth is due, suppose (...).
that the exact tenth were not due by the word of God, but the eleventh twelfth
or twentieth, yet sure there must be some proportion, something near or about
the tenth: but where it is not within twenty or thirty, but the very hundredth
part in stead of the tenth, can any man say that here is any conscionable
proportion? Is the Jew in this case so far differing from the Gentile, and
the Ministry of the Gospel so far inferior to the Ministry of the
Levites, as men would infer by this unreasonable abridging of the Minister of
the Gospells exhibition? And shall no proportion be held between the Citizen
and the countriman in paying of tithes?

If you compare together a Citizen and a Countriman being both of the like
ability of wealth. The citizen does disdain that the countriman should
exceed him, or come near him in any kind of expense; he will have a (...)
133. page.
house of greater price then the Countrimans, he will have deerer
household-stuffe then the countrimans, he will have richer apparel, then the
countrimans, be will have cos^^er victuals then the countrimans, only he will
have a Minister that shall cost him less then the Countrimans, the ci^tizen
will be at far less charge with his minister, then the countriman is with
his. Now what does this argue, but that such men have religion in the meanest
account of all other things, seeing they bestow more upon their pride and other
inordinate affections then they do upon religion: seeing they, who exceed all
other men, in all other yea vain and humorous expenses, will be behind all
other men in that expense, which is to maintain the Gospel? So that Ministers
in towns and cities (whose labors are the greatest in regard both of the
multitude of their people, and also of their knowledge and iudiciousnesse,
requiring the more study and pains at their Ministers hands to give them
satisfaction) have lesser and vncertainer revenues, because that the Citizen
does hold no proportion in tithing with the countriman.

But come we yet something nearer to consider the Citizen (in that which
concerns this point, and the matter objected) without comparing him with the
countriman, and so weigh advisedly whether it be justly orno that the Citizen
will give no greater allowance to his Minister, seeing he usually alleges
that he does perform in this duty according to his ability? And here once
again good Reader be patient and charitable. I do not aim at the rebuke of
any one particular, but labor to effect that all men may be brought to
acknowledge (as it does concern them) how they confute themselves with their
own practice, I knowing I speak an undeniable truth (I thank God) I am
resolute, then when thou find evidently that what I speak thou can not
deny, be not of the mind of the Jews, who were enraged against Christ when
they could not contradict him: but show thy self a true Israelite and
acknowledge with Nathaniel the things that are manifest, and reform with
Zacheus what has been unjust.

It is the common custom of citizens and inhabitants of great corporations, to
celebrate christinings, churchgoings, marriages, burialls, and such other
solemnities, with very large expense, and yet never to complain, nor think
themselves grieved. Though one man upon one meal, or upon a very banquet does
lay out either five, ten, or twenty powndes, or yet more, according as he
feels himself able or disposed, yet every penny hereof is cheerfully
dispended, but if in regard of the ministers work upon those occasions either
ordinarily employed, or extrrordinarily toyled, either law or courtesy does
admonish them to perform an oblation to the Lord, and to reward his minister,
then (behold the inclination I will not say of all men, God forbid: but of most
men, and that is enough.) Some with a smooth face and sweet words, will give
him an ouerly kind of thanks, and it may be place him at a spare end of one of
their second tables, but as for any other consideration, either it is none at
all, or else the offering of a grudging heart, and a withered hand, which is
very miserable that when they cast the bills of their lavish ostentation, the
ministers share is sure one of the least of many Items.

Again, when men speak of any of these their great triumphs, they will
cheerfully look up without discouragement, and say, It was but five pounds, it
was but ten powndes, it was but twenty powndes, etc. It comes but once a
year, I hope to recover it by the grace of God. Thus diminutiuely and
hopefully men mention any great charge, suitable to their own humors. But if
they speak of that small allowance which they make to the Minister, then they
are even ready to groan out their words, and they sound out every syllable
at the full length, with heavy accents and capital great letters, I ALOVVE
HIM FIFTEEN SHILLINGS, TWENTY SHILLINGS, FORTY SHILLINGS a year. Neither
yet is this spoken in disdain of any man's benevolence or contribution be it
more or less, but only in a true desire to touch men's hearts, and to stir
them up to consider, that in these charges which concern the maintenance of the
minister, one shilling does seem as much, and affect men's very hearts as much
as two or three crowns or nobles laid out upon such other occasions as I have
mentioned.

Of their own humorous expenses men will say, that they hope to recover them,
but the charges of maintaining the Gospel seem to be utterly cast into a
bottomless bag.

Or we hear men say, that those and the like mentioned occasions, they must
needs furnish bountifully for their credit sake, and least they should be
suspected to decay or be less able in their worldly estates, whereby their
reputation might be impaired, and themselves the less trusted. But then is it
not as much for a man's credit to be liberal to his Minister, as to be lavish
to the butcher, (...).
powlter, vintener, grocer, and the like? May not a man be suspected to be
weak when he is niggardly to his Minister as well as when he is sparing in
feasting? or are men more to regard the fashion of others, then the estate of
their Minister? or in truth do they regard their credit more then they do
their relligion? they are afraid to be undone if their contribution to their
ministers should be answerable to their other expenses. They are not able they
say to maintain the Minister as they do maintain their own vanities. Where
is faith? where is religion? It is in the words, in the face, and in the
gesture; ^ut it is not in the work, specially if upon warning and
consideration of these things men will not be reformed. Many sins of
ignorance, weakness, and unadvisedness, may be in men without depriving them of
being religious: but when men upon information to the conuicting of their
consciences, remain still obstinate, there sin not dwells only but
reigns also, and denies the party to be truly religious. Be it that in the
point of tyth I give not that fullness of satisfaction, which Idesire to al,
and confidently expect by Gods help to perform to some at the least, yet in
these matters he that runs may read, and every common capacity may
perceive plainly, that (if there be no further regard had to the Ministers of
the Gospel, by men who are able enough to bear out themselves in liberality
and bounty of other expenses) the religion of such men is vain, and their
faith of none effect: Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Gal. 6^.


We seek not to deny but that when we write or speak to this effect, we do
respect our selves and seek our own good and advantage, yet I trust in God
that we do respect our selves and our own good in this and all other courses
moderately, and ordinately in the second, yea in the third place, having
learned to want and to abound, and Philip. ^. 1^*
in all estates to be contented; howsoever suspicious heads shall please to
censure us. What we principally intend in our whole endeavor is, that God may
be glorified in the obedience gained to his holy will, and in this particular
labor, that is the maine mask. The next is the good of Gods people, in
consideration whereof we say in this point as the Apostle does to his
Philippians, Not that I Philip. 4^
desire a gift, but I desire the fruit which may further your reckoning: we
desire not your money (we may safely say comparatively) in regard of the far
greater and most longing desire we have by the grace of God to indowe your
judgments with right understanding of that truth which does directly concern
your consciences, and to see evident testimonies of the truth and soundnes of
your religion. If it were possible for you to have Gods Ministers in so small
esteem without prejudice to your religion, I doubt not but that we could (by
the help of God) be the better content with any condition: but when your
miserable contributions to the Ministers (which your other expenses and fashion
of living do inexcuseably condemn) cannot but call the sincerity of your
devotions into question, and indeed shamefully blemish the same: This, this is
it that is the corasiue to our hearts, thorns and pricks unto our sides and
souls, whilst we are out-braued by the insulting Papists, who tauntingly
demand of us, whether the fruit of the religion which we teach our people, be
the impouerishing of the Ministers by withdrawing their maintenance?

Objection. 8.
If it be granted that ministers ought honorably and sufficiently to be
provided for, what needs this contending for the quotity or determinate
tenth? but it is acknowledged by all men of sober wits, that there ought to be
sufficient provision every where, for the Ministers of the Gospel, and
therefore this exact determinate tenth needs not be so strictly urged.

Answer.
So may men as well ask or cavil, what needed Abraham to pay to Melchisedech
the very tenth? what needed Jacob to vow the very tenth? what needed God to
require the very tenth? Had it not been enough for God to say to the
Israelites, See that ye maintain my Levites and Priests sufficiently, though
he had not shared out their allowance so particularly? But almighty God
knowing man, and what is in man, and how unfitting a judge he is to determine
what condign stipend is to be affoarded to Gods ministers, has not referred
them unto man's courtesy, either public or private: but has himself allotted
unto them their determinate portion, under which rate none should dare to make
them any proffer.

Secondly, if Ministers should forgo their tithes, and go seek up that
sufficient provision which men talk of, whether should they wander? or how
far should they travel, before they find the country where it grows?

I have something carefully, both by conference with others, and also in mine
own private meditations, descried and suruaied diverse parts of the Christian
world, and this is all which to this purpose I have observed, vz that
wheresoever, generally, Ministers have not their due tithes, but are left to be
provided for by some other means, as their Churches do think fit, there the
condition of such Ministers, is very lamentable, I will be judged herein by the
present experience, of the manifest practice of all reformed Churches, which
are in this condition, either further off, and beyond the seas, or nearer hand
within our own Britain, in the realm of Scotland, or yet nearer in our own
streets of England, in many of our great Towns and Corporations, which when
they are very populous and rich, do yet allow unto their Ministers but a very
miserable and dishonorable maintenance.

I will spare to name either men or places, I will propound such a case as is
general, and can not but be lamented by any heart that has in it any
religious compassion.

In diverse very great Corporations, there are entertained in some two, in some
(it may be) three or four ministers all Preachers, whereof the meanest are
competently qualified with gifts of knowledge, utterance and godliness, very
behoofefull to the edification of the Church of God; others of them commonly
very choice men, eminent and famous, rarely furnished. And as these men have
their several measures of spiritual endowments, so they have diversely their
several exhibitions. Yet so as that which is usually the stipend of the best,
is with the least, if not too little for the meanest: and the allowance which
commonly is afforded to those who are entertained to the inferior or
secondarie ministration (as men unadvisedly esteem it) is merely
dishonorable for any Preacher of indifferent parts, or for any man at all who
is worthily admitted into sacred orders, specially while men live (blessed be
God) in a plentiful and good land, and are rich and in peace, under a
Christian government. And that I may further clear what I have avouched: Let
us consider particularly what these stipends are which I so extenuate.

Forty marks or thirty pounds a year, are the ordinary stipends of such
Ministers, as in such places as I mentioned, are accounted the inferior.
Forty, fifty, or threescore pounds at the most is usually the most bountiful
entertainment of such Preachers, as are the choice and fought out, one of an
hundred. And do men accounte this to be so honorable and sufficient a revenue?

If men duly consider the dearness of living in Corporations, and great
Towns (by reason that there, all things must be bought with the penny (as
they say) and that unto such eminent men in such places, there is great resort
and continual concourse of acquaintance) they shall readily find, that by such
time as ^ll necessary particulars for meat, drink, apparel, siring,
education of children, servants wages, and w^st of needful vtensills or
household stuff, be reckoned and paid for, there remains little over plus, to
purchase so much as a good book: yea, must there not be much pennurious
sparing, and fordid hardness used, to make the stipend to defraie the expense?
Is this then to be accounted so bountiful an allowance? and is this the
competent maintenance?

Indeed fifty or threescore pounds does make a loud sound in a man's care: and
yet it is but the maintenance of a mean man in Towns and Cities as this
world requires: for does not the handicraftman who paneth the street,
planchereth the house, or shapeth the garment, employing but a man and a boy
under him, if they may be continually set on work (as good workmen need not
loyter much) earne in the year as fair a stipend, as the greatest usually
allowed unto the best Preachers who are maintained by their Churches courtesy?
It is casie to cast, what four shillings a day is in the end of the week, and
what four and twenty shillings a week is, in the end of the year: and yet
this is but the earning of a handicraft man, as I have mentioned, and we find
by experience, when we have occasion to use them: which I no way speak, as
grudging at the wages, for which the true labourer does take pains, and earne
it decrely with the sweat of his brows, but therefore do I instance in these
men's earnings, because they be so parallel to those ordinary stipends which
are assigned as competent for the worthiest Preachers: that men may see how
they value the Gospel.

Surely, he has but a mean conceit of the calling of the Ministry, who
thinks that a Preacher (though of the best desert) is competently and
sufficiently provided for, when his maintenance is but comparable to such
handie earnings as I have named. Is this the competent maintenance? is this
that double honor, 1. Tim. 5. 17? And yet this is all, that is any where to be
heard of, as an ordinary allowance, but this is not either honorable or
competent, as I have made manifest. And therefore, if we be denied our tithes,
we may hear men talk of a competent maintenance, but we know not where to
seek it, with any hope to find it: so meanly do men esteem our labors.

And as we know not where in this present age, so neither can we, either read
or hear of, at what time or in which of the former centuries of times past,
this voiced competencie was ever established, either by law or by practice: in
all the ages before us, all Ministers generally, either they enjoyed their
tithes, gleab, and offerings in the times of peace, as has been proved, or
else they lived poorly and lamentably as in the miserable days of
persecution. We find in (...). C^nst ^. 2 (...). 3^ ^9 (...)
Eusebius, (...)
Theodoret, and c Sozom, that Constantine and Theodosius have at times bestowed
bountiful rewards upon Ministers in their need, and also enlarged their
possessions, but that was their private bounty for the time, but it does not
infer the stablishing of maintenance for Gods Ministers by that imaginary
competencie, so talked of, when the contrary is plain by the testimonies of
the Fathers before cited, and other Histories, that the tithes were paid in
those former ages. So the^ this competencie is that which no where is and never
was, and therefore we are persuaded never will be, any otherwise then while we
have our tithes in some conscionable fashion.

Again, if Ministers should be referred to their stipends, the question is,
who shall determine what is competent? what parties are they ^t whose hands the
Ministers might hope for equal and respective dealing in this matter?
certainly, (as it is not fit) so it will never be granted, that Ministers
themselves shall define a competencie, and so be their own caruers. Who then
shall do it? shall the Civil Magistrate? if we duly consider the whole
continuance of time, and succession of ages, from the happy incarnation of our
blessed Savior, to the present comfortable feel of this our Halcion season,
we shall not find it very usual, to find Emperors, Princes, and Potentates,
so sincerely religious in performing the parts of noursing Fathers, as that the
Ministers of the Gospel might expect such honorable revenues, by being
always referred unto their pleasure. It is most apparently true, that in
respect of all these outward things, and of life it self, both ministers and
all subjects are at the pleasure of their Sovereigns; for if they should take
from us never so much, yet we dare not resist any further then per preces and
lachrimas, that is, by tears and entreaty as A^br speaks. But yet, it is one
thing to be at the pleasure of the Magistrate, so as the magistrate himself
has a particular law from God for the justice that he is to do to his
subject: and it is an other thing to be so at the appointment of the
Magistrate, as that howsoever a man be dealt with he has no rule whereby to
show wherein he is injured, but that when the party grieved shall intimate by
his humble petition that he is wronged, the magistrate shall presently answer
that he thinks otherwise, and that his mere discretion is to determine that
matter. It is true that upright and wise magistrates can and will judge
accordingly, but when it is a case so nearly concerning religion, as the
assigning of due allowance unto the ministers of the Gospel, then besides
common equity and discretion, there is special need of great feruen^ie and
sou^dnesse in religion. There was of old a Dania and a Solomon, and some more
such among the Israelites; ther^ was a Constantine, a Theodosius, and very
few more such in the former times of the Christian Church: but what a^^ they
among so many defective either in uprightness o^ in wisdom, or specially in
religion? and this God foreseeing he left not the estate of the Leuite to be
competented at the pleasure of the Kings of Israel; and therefore let no body
blame us, who crave the benefit of gods ordinance, having small hope of any due
respect to the ministry, if our maintenance should at all times wholly dep^nd
upon the determination or stint of the magistrate. Blessed be the God of
England, the true Ie^ouah; we lately had a religious Queen, who was zealously
favorable to the state of the church, and ministers thereof, and (which is yet
greater happiness) we have now (long O lord may we enjoy him) such a King as is
studious and careful ^o repress and reform the injuries, which former impiety
in some, and unadvisedness in others, has miserably exercised, to make havoc
of the Churches inheritance: but it is not an age since we had some, who after
the example of Martellus, took more away from the Church in a short time, then
is like to be restored in many generations. And therefore, all things
considered, we can expect but little good by referring our maintenance to be
always determined by the discretion of the Magistrate. Sometimes and from some
Princes we might be sure to find condign favor, but then with every change
the ministry is a new to seek, and therefore there is need of an other
rule, which may be more general and certain, then the civil magistrate
should have the determining of the ministers allowance.

But then shall this matter be referred to the people, that the greater part of
the parishioners in each parish, shall conclude by their suffrages what shall be
their pastors maintenance.

So the children indeed shall stint their Father, and the sheep appoint unto
their shepherd what shall be his diet. Alas, the greater part is usually the
worse part, and then woe be to the poor Minister whose case must be so
determined, as that those who hate, or scorn, or neglect him, may measure out
his living at their ungodly pleasure. And howsoever I have for mine own part
less cause to complain then have diverse hundreds of my brethren, yet whilst
I hear from others how the people of this age are generally affected, I see
plainly that they are no competent judges to determine their Ministers
maintenance.

Many men are very covetous, and allow not unto themselves that which is
convenient, hardly therefore ^burn page 58.
will these agree to affoard liberally unto their Ministers, God bless me from
being to be fed by him who starues himself. Others are very prodigal and
unthrifty, and these will be glad to scant the Minister, that they may have the
more for their own luxury, they cannot spare for the Minister for their
spending upon their own wild humors. Others are of the mind of those in the
Gospel, who say, nolumus hunc regnare: that is, we will not have this man Luke
19 14.
to reign over us: they think that Ministers take too much upon them, as the
rebellious vpbraided Moses and N^mb. 1^. ^
Aaron; and therefore, these not enduring that their consciences should be
ruled by the ministry of the word, will be glad to make small the Ministers
maintenance, that by that means they may keep him under. Others have one
sin or other so foul and so guilty, as that either the minister cannot but
intend purposely some reproof against it, or else they feel themselves smart,
when he meant not to touch them, these as they conceive anger, so they will
also watch a time to be revenged. So that howsoever (God be thanked, and God
increase the number and faith of them) our land at this day, and specially
cities and corporations do abound with many worthy Christians, yet if we
duly consider the many ways whereby the most conscionable Ministers become
usually offensive to the greater number, there will quickly appear just cause
of exception against the people, why they are not competent either for Judge or
Jury in this trial.

If any body will surmise, that howsoever it is not fit to refer the maintenance
of the ministry to the democraticall assignment of the boisterous multitude
of the common people, yet might Ministers be respectively provided for, by some
selected or choice me^ of the best sort of every parish, to whose determination
in this point, both the ministers and also the rest of the people should stand
to be ordered. I answer that we are never the nearer; for first, there will be
somewhat ado to sever out those best ones; who will not fluster to be one? If
the better sort be the richer, then I answer, that religion and conscience is
most requisite in men that should handle this business. If the better sort be
the godlier, then who will be left out? will you make a temper and appoint to
this errand those which are the better sort in both respects of wealth and
godliness also? here becomes the greater difficulty of constituting the
Judges, the more several complements are required in them: but to leave this
roauing, let us come to a certain mark, and see what might be gained if we
should hitt^ it.

What one man in forty of those which are termed patrones are not ready to
pull from the Minister all they can, whereas no coppie-hold is in that
thraldom wherein most patrones do hold the benefices whereto they do present?
None usually are patrons but the better sort (as you call them) better in
wealth, and therefore need the less withdraw from the Minister: better also
in regard of education, and therefore know the better what belongs unto
learning and religion: And yet if a jury of patrones (though I know some
gentlemen so worshipful and religious, as that for their integrity in their
presentations I durst pawn my life) should in every parrish assign the
maintenance of the Minister, we may easily judge by what they do now, what they
would do then: what they do now is to grate and oppress the poor minister
to the uttermost where they do present, and therefore that which they would
do, if they should assign stipends, would be no better. And if this be the
courtesy that we may expect from the better sorr, ab, metuo a vulgo, what
should we find from the common people? Nostri seculi hominum genus est
ingratissimum, in o sacrilegum: that is, a most unthankful, yea a
sacrilegious Artop. in Genesis ^8 22.
generation is the people of our age, says Artopius, and Artopius his age is
not yet expired.

So then, what hope can we ever conceive of enjoying any such competencie as is
noised, without our tithe, when as we can not find either where it is, or where
or when ever it was, or by what party or parties it should be appointed and
determined?

And lastly, where set stipends are appointed unto Ministers, Carle^. tyth.
cap. ^.
there is not due regard had to the prices of things which continually from
time to time are much enhaunced, and in a very little time doubled. The
husbandman, the tradesman, and artificer, may and do raise their prices, as
occasion requires, when the stipended Minister is at his stint, and can get no
further: as both the customs of the country, and fashions of the towns do
plainly testify. It is not a hard thing to observe diverse men, who contribute
now to their ministers maintenance no more then they did twenty years ago,
whereas within these twenty years, both those parties are greatly increased,
in their own estates, and also the prices of things needful for this life are
almost, if not altogether, doubled. But where Ministers have due tithes, there,
their estates do always hold correspondencie and proportion, both with the
estates of their people, and also with the occasions* and necessities of all
times. And therefore, why should so reasonable a course, of Gods own most wise
ordaining, be laid aside, to seek up such new devises as have no Scripture, no
president past or present, nor any equity of reason, to avouch them?

Objection. 9.
Diverse Divines do think otherwise, namely, that though the word of God does
require that the Ministers of the Gospel be plentifully and honorably provided
for yet men are not now tied to the exact payment of the very tenth.

Answer.
But I have already showed, Cap. 9. that the ancient Fathers both Greek and
Latin, do with one consent teach that tithes are due unto the Ministers of
the Gospel, by the word of God, secundum literam, literally and precisely, as
they were in the old Testament. And until the times of Alexander de Hales, who
was the master of Aquinas, which was about the year 1240. after Christ
(howsoever there was much wrong and sacrilege practiced) there was not other
doctrine taught concerning tithes. But from that time, as we showed ^^pra cap.
6.
before, have the Schoolmen, in the steps of Alexander, trampled down this
truth: and yet, not with out resistance from time to time. For in the time of
Clement Carlet. tyth. cap. 5.
the eight, Pope of Rome, about the year 1266. lived Johannes Semeca author of
the Gloss upon Gratian. The opinion of this Semeca as we cited before in the
12. Chapter, is plain that both prediall and personal tithes are alike due by
the law of God. And M. Carleton in the fifth Chapter of his book of Tithes
cites out of Krantzius how this Semeca withstood the Pope Clement, exacting
The ^amest^^^ of Semeca called also (...) is cited out of the sea of histories.
State of the Cha^. p. 303.
acting tithes out of Germany, and was thereupon deposed by the Pope from the
government or prouostship of Halberstade. And some fourscore years after
Semeca, lived Nicholaus Lyra, who howsoever he be corrupt in diverse points,
according to the errors of the time: yet he taught this point of tithes not
after the corrupt doctrine of the Schoolmen, but after the Fathers as we do
now. Strabus also is plain. In vtroque testament^ Ministris altaris decimae
and oblationes ad necessaria tribuuntur: (...) Numb 1^.
that is, In both the Testaments tithes and offerings are given to the
Ministers of the altar for their needful maintenance. But the truth is, that
in those corrupt midnight times of Popery, they were very few (though always
some thorough Gods goodness) who did maintain any point of truth then
suppressed or oppressed, the greater number, yea almost all betook themselves
to sooth the Pope in his sacrilege, and amongst many other gross falsehoods
this one point of Popery also prevailed, vz. that tithes were not due by the
word of God. Indeed as we said before, Cap. 2. this point was not so fully
discovered to be Popery by all our late blessed reformers, but that diverse of
them being busied with waightier matters, more needful for the time, they
either passed by this point, as wanting time to examine it, or else they took
it as they found it, without any great scanning, yet not so as they were all
deceived in it, for the Lord did not suffer all of them to let slip a truth so
needful for his Church, but would needs that some of them should plainly
avouch it. Gualter that godly and learned doctor of Tigurie, in his Gualt. in
Matthew. 23. 23.
homilies upon Matt. having showed both the original of tithes before the law,
and also the use of them under the law, at last he adds, Debent hac ad
ecclesiam noui testamenti transferri, e^si enim Leuiticum sacerdotium abolitum
si^ and sacra legalia cessarint, manet tamen Ministerium euangelij, etc. that
is, These tithes ought to be translated unto the Church of the new Testament,
for though the Leuiticall preisthood be abolished, and the legal rites ceased,
yet the Ministry of the Gospel remains, etc. and by and by he says further
in the same place: At quae iustior ratio excogitari potest alendi ministros,
quam vt ex decimis viuant? that is, what more equal course can be devised for
the maintenance of Ministers, then that they should live of their tithes? Of
the same opinion also is Zepperus Zeppe^. d^ l^g Mos. l. ^ cap 40.
a late and learned German writer, Decimae, pars sunt illius stipendij quod
ministris pro officij sui laboribus diuino and naturali iure debetur; that is,
tithes are a part of the stipend which by the law of God and of nature, is due
to the Ministers, for the labors of their calling. And now further, by the
good endeauours of our own learned Countrymen who have labored in this point,
the matter has been more thoroughly examined and the clear truth is come to
light, so as many, who have bin otherwise minded, do now acknowledge that
doctrine, which the word of God, and the ancient Fathers, and reason it self
do so fully importe and avouch, vz. that true payment of tithes is due to the
Ministers of the word of God, by that word whereof they are Ministers: and,
quia magna est veritas praeualebit, because great is the truth it will
prevail, by the blessing of God which makes it powerful.

Objection. 10.
Yet, hereby do you but bewray your covetousness, while you contend and
strive so much for worldly maintenance.

Answer.
I have in part prevented this cavil in mine answer to the eight objection,
but because I am desirous what I can to remove all rubbes, I will here add
something more fully, and say. First, our strife herein is no way blameable,
whilst we do but modestly demand, by an orderly proceeding, that thing which
the word of God assigns unto us.

Secondly, he is not covetous who asks his own, but he is covetous and
injurious also, who detaineth the good from the owner thereof.

Thirdly, it is not riches, but the truth that we strive for, God the searcher
of the hearts, does know our hearts, if it were not more for desire to bring the
truth to light, (as much as we can) then for any hope of gain by so
unthankful a work, we should not once go about either to write or to speak
one word in this argument.

And so for mine own part, I give thanks to God upon the knees of mine heart,
that I have not undertaken this labor, either at the first in preaching, or
since in preparing this treatise for the press, either of a mind desirous to
oppose any, who is as yet of differing judgment from me in this matter, nor
yet urged by extreamitie of need, or coffeehouse at my portion (such as it
is by the bounty of God) for naked I came, and so I shall re^u^^: But only I
am willing to declare unto others so much as I can of this truth, as the
goodness of God has revealed the same unto me, upon my mean industry in the
search thereof, and according to my poor faith and judgment to give my voice
and suffrage (as weak as it is) in the cause, with those who have pleaded the
same before me with greater dexterity.

So far forth as shall please almighty God to open men's eyes, and to incline
their hearts to see and acknowledge this doctrine, we shall have cause with
reverend thankfulness to praise his name, and gladly to enjoy the fruit of our
labors. And whereas otherwise, any body shall repute our arguments sleighter
then to be yielded unto, yet nevertheless we shall by the grace of God go on
chearefully and faithfully in the work of our calling, knowing assuredly that
while we labor sincerely to glorify the Lord, and to edify his Church, in
all needful knowledge; our reward may a while be deferred and denied by man
in this world, but it will be heaped upon us with the greater measure of true
happiness in the kingdom of heaven by almighty God. And therefore in regard of
these wordly things I say unto my brethren, and to my self as the Apostle
speaks to servants: Art thou called being a servant? care not for it, but ^f
thou may be 1. Co^. 7. 21. 22
free, use it rather: for he that is called in the Lord being a servant is the
Lord* freeman: likewise also, he that is called being free, is Christ's
servant. So if we must continue still in this more servile condition, to be
provided for a^ the courtesy of our Churches, let us not care for it, but if we
can happily obtain the more free estate, to receive the tithes which are our
due, let us use it ^ather: for he that ministers in meanness and needinesse,
he is rich and eminent in the Lord, for great is his reward in heaven: and he
that abounds in the riches of this world, is in Christ but all one with the
meanest of his brethren. Wherefore I conclude with this earnest supplicationn
unto all men of reason and civility: namely, Whatsoever you shall think of
tithes, yet for Gods sake we beseech you, and for his sake who bledde and dyed
for you, in inconceivable tortures upon the accursed and yet most blessed
cross, that as you do profess his name, so you would have his ministers in
due account, profess not by neglecting and contemning them, that the religion
of Christ which you magnify in word, you repute indeed, to be little worth,
and so meanly to be maintained: Let us find that our preaching has, as
delivered you from the superstition and myserie of Popery, so also seasoned
you with true powerful Christianity: Let us find, that whilst we have
informed your understanding, the enemy has not perverted your affections,
with irreuerence and neglect of religion. We refer the cause to be scanned by
your discretion, and your discretion to be directed by the grace of God: AMEN.

MATTHEW. 22. 21. Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto God, that
which is Gods. FINIS.
TO THE READER.
Who faulteth not, lives not; who mendeth faults is commended: The Printer
has faulted a little: it may be the author ouersighted more. Thy pain
(Reader) is the least; then err not thou most by misconstruing or sharp
censuring; least thou be more uncharitable, then either of them has been
heedlesse: God amend and guide us all.

Page lin. 12. 30 when he was not bound if he had not been bound. 32. 11.
bidgnadha^ rach hilgnadhai rak. 56. 1. absoletum read absoletum. 79. 5. as
then. 83. 18. those these. 134. 18. then the civil then that the civil. 28.
21. blotte of. 53. 35. did.

Marg. page 1. for Ephesians. read Tim.


