AN EXPOSITION UPON THE 130. PSALM. Gathered out of some of the An cient fathers
and later writers.

A Song of Degrees.

PSALM, 130. 1. OVt of the deep places have I called unto thee O Lord.

2. Lord hear my voice, let thine ears attend to the voice of my prayers.

3. If thou Lord straightly markest Iniquities, O Lord who shall stand?

4. But mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared.

5. I have waited on the Lord, my soul has waited, and I have trusted in his
word.

6. My soul waits on the Lord, more then the morning watch watches for the
morning.

7. Let Israel wait on the Lord, for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is
great Redemption.

8. And he shall redeem Israel, from all his Iniquities.

The Argument.
THIS Psalm is a lively, and express picture, representing a soul
discouraged at the sight of his sins, troubled at the fear of the wrath of
God, and looking for the due stroke of vengeance. And therefore, upon bended
knees lifts up the hands for mercy. Now because, in the greatest Saints,
living upon earth, a valley of tears, a place of temptation, there is the
flesh and the spirit, and those contrary one to another, Galath. 5. 17. this
is not effected without great strife, wherefore the holy Ghost, lays out
here, two opposite passions, most plainly; Fear in respect of euill-deseruing
sins, and hope in regard of undeserved mercies: for the Treatise it self, it
is mixed, partly a Prayer, partly an Exhortation. In the prayer the Prophet
shows his faith and hope. Faith, in that striving against despair, he
puts up his supplication and complaint, Generally, expressing his distressed
estate. Out of the deep places I have called upon thee O Lord: particularly,
desiring release of punishmen Lord hear my voice. And discharge of his sin.
Let thing ears attend to the voice of my prayers, (suitors for pardon and
mercy,) for so the word signifies. Amplified by the causes, man's sin
deserving, expressed by way of confession. If thou O Lord markest iniquites,
who can stand? of Gods undeserved mercy, But mercy is with thee. Illustrated by
the end: that thou may be feared. This for his faith, for his hope, being
persuaded that God will be merciful: he first lays it down absolutely, I
have waited on the Lord. And this is enlarged from the efficient, that it is
not a formal protestation of the tongue, but a sincere resolution of the
heart. My soul has waited, from the object. I have trusted in thy word, that
is, in the sweet promises of pardon of sins from the constancy and
continuance thereof, comparatively expressed in a lively picture, and excelling
in a higher degree, that whereunto it is resembled, More then the morning watch
watches for the morning. Hitherto the prayer. The second General part is an
Exhortation to the whole Church, in which there is (...), what it must do, and
the (...), wherefore do so, for the first the duty expounded, or matter
subject of the Exhortation, it is waiting. Wait? wherein, be considerable, the
person who must wait? Israel? and upon whom? The Lord. For the second,
wherefore, in it two reasons motive, one General for with the Lord is mercy,
amplified by the quantity Great, and by the quality Redemption. The other
particular by way of application, wherein the Act, and he shall redeem
Israel, and the extent, from all his iniquities. And this is the resolution and
sum of the whole Psalm, the specialties are farther laid out in the
Exposition of every part by it self.

A Song of Degrees.
CONcerning the title of Inscription of this Psalm. In it are considerable,
the author, the form, the matter. For the Author Principal, the holy Ggost.
Secondarie as the pen man thereof, either David or some Prophet of that time,
for all Scripture is given by Divine inspiration. 2. Tim. 3. 16. and the holy
men did not speak of themselves, but as they were moved by the holy Ghost. 2.
Pet. 1. 21. For the form, A song, an especial manner of indighting, and that
both for help of memory, and also to cause a deeper impression in the mind:
for musical numbers do wonderfully affect the soul. (...). Alex. Aphrodisl,
1. Problem. 121. Atheneus Dipno sophiston. l. 14. c. 5 and Casanbonus in suis
adeundent, l. commentarijs. Cassiedorus l. 2. variarum Epist. 40. Librus
Giraldus de historiae poctarum Dialog. 9. Plutarchus, l. de musica.
As in Elisha. 2. Kin. 3. 15. so David playing upon his harp refreshed Saul,
when he was troubled with an evil spirit. 1. Sam. 16. 23. And the Physicians
attribute much unto them, as forceable to cure the maladies of the body.
Agellius noct. atticarum. l. 4. cap 13. Alexander ab Alexandro dierum
Genialium, lib. 2. cap 16. Vide Johan. Langium, lib. 2. Epist. 46.
S. Augustine reports of himself, that the Harmony and melody of the
Psalms sung in the Church, did cause the tears to trickle from his eyes,
proceeding from joy wrought in his heart. Confessionum, lib. 9. cap. 6.
For the matter a Psalm of Degrees, concerning the interpretation of which
word, there is so great variety of judgment among the learned, that it is
impossible what to determine thereof as undoubtedly true. Pelargus in hunc,
Psalm and Gesnerum in titulum, Ps. 120.
The conceits of the Rabbis are idle and mere fabulous, of a deep and
bottomless gulf which so swelled when the foundation of the temple was laid,
that it threatened the ouerflowing of the whole world, but by the name of God
which they call Shem-Hamphoras, De nomine Shemhamphoras Petrus Galatinus de
arcanis catholicae veritatis, l. 2. c. 10. Johan Drusius de Tetragammato, c. 6.
was restrained: this opinion contradicts the express promise. Genesis 9. 11.
or of their return from that dispersion, (by which they are now scattered
abroad in the world) when with Messiah, whom they yet look for, hope to go up
to Jerusalem: Pelarg^^ (...) hunc Psal^^.
a vain imagination. Others and among them, some of the ancient fathers, and
latter writers have their sondrie opinions, gessing rather, then resolving,
what might be the certain signification thereof. As first, That this Psalm
and the rest of the same title in number fifteen, be called Psalms of
Degrees, Artus (...) in Antiquita libus Iudaicis de Templi fabrica Buntingus in
prima part Iteneraril sacro. Nicholaus Lyranus.
from those steps, by which the Priests and Levites ascended, from that place
of the temple, which is called the great court. 2. Chron. 4. 9. And in the
Gospel Salomons Porch. John 10. 23. where the people did pray, into a higher
room named the inward court of the house of the Lord. 2. Chron. 24. 21. and in
solemn feast days sung these Psalms, upon every stayer once. And this might
be an outward Ceremony, admonishing all who serve God, to do it with lifted
up hearts, so Cyprian observes that in the Liturgy of his times, the Deacon
called upon the people to lift up their hearts to the De oratione dominica
sext. 22 Sacerdos ante orationem, praef. premissa fratrum animos paret. dic
endo sursum corda, vt dum respondet populus habemus ad deum, admoneatur nihil
aliud se quam domum cogitare debere.
Lord.

2. Others Sindas in voce (...). and Theodoretus in Psalm. 120.
think they were composed for thanksgiving, in their return from the
Captivity of Babylon, Jerusalem being so situated upon Hills, that from
whence-soeuer men come they must ascend unto it, and so as in a Type did
presigne our ascending from beneath out of this Vale of tears, unto heaven
which is A Valle plorationis. Augustinus in primum Psalm. graduum.
above.

3. Some Allegorise so many degrees, by which we ascend to perfection, the
first whereof is affliction. (I cried unto the Lord when I was in tronble,) the
last continual praising of God (Praise ye the Lord, all ye the servants of the
Nazianzenus in oratione post redltum habita and in cum locum Elias Cretensis
Hilarus in praefatione ad Psalm. Graduum: Genebrardus in Psalm. 120. (...).
Apolinarius in sua Psalterii Metaphrasi.
Lord.

4. There be who suppose that here is signified a certain kind of Harmony,
to which they were sung, or an higher note, or strain in lifting up the voice
in these then in other Caluinus in primum Psalm. Graduum.
Psalms.

5. To pass over in silence other likelihoods or coniecturals some of the
Latest expositors, think that nothing is meant but a certain (...) Iunius in
Psalm. 132.
in these above the rest, as being choice and heavenly Epigrames, and therefore
called Psalms of Degrees, by a Hebraisme or propriety of the holy tongue, and
translate it Psalms of Excellency, or most excellent for the Hebrews, do
express the superlatiue degree, by substantives of the plural number, as the
song of songs. Cant. 1. 1. a man of desires. Dan. 9. 23. the God of Gods. Deuteronomy.
10. 17. the Lord of Lords. Reu. 19. 16. which be exceeding without comparison,
and the like phrase is also to be found in other languages and among profane
writers: Apud Homeru^ odyss. 14 Eumeus ad Vl^ssem. (...). Eustathius Interpret
Sophocles in Electra. (...). and apud Scoliastem in eundem Locum. (...).
so some great Divines Apop^^^gma Lutheri apud (...) An^^^^ in ^^^^^tione, ad
Psalmum 16.
have termed the ten commandments the doctrine of of doctrines, the Creed, the
history of histories, the Lords prayer, the prayer of prayers, the two
Sacraments of the new testament, the ceremony of ceremonies, in which are
comprehended the principles of Christianity far exceeding the reach of
humane understanding, and teaching such mysteries as no wit of man could
attain unto, except God had revealed the same. 1. Cor. 1. 24. (...) in
Epistola ad Paulmum.
Learned Plato knew not this: Eloquent Demoshenes was ignorant of it: the
wisdom not of this world, nor the Princes of this world, but the wisdom of
God hidden in a mystery, etc.

To conclude therefore, howsoever, these Psalms being part of the Canonical
Scriptures, written for our learning, that, we through patience, and comfort of
the same might have hope. Romans 15. 4. we are not to be too inquisitiue and
curious in searching out the reason of every particular. For a good Christian
and a learned Divine, Quadam ignorare non tantum est (...) Grammaticised (...)
etiam Christian, and Docti. Theologi.
may without disparagement to his profession, be ignorant of some things.

ANTONIUS FLAMINIVS his Judgment concerning the inscription of the Psalms of
Degrees.
TER quinque Hymni, -- qui cantica
Gradum vocantur, istiusque nominis
Quae vis in isto sit Loco, iam plurimi
Interpretantes protulere plurima,
Sed ille sic incerta, fabulosaque
vt ipse malim confiteri libere,
Nescire me quod nescio: tu Candide
Lector, Quid istis continetur Canticis,
Attentum animum adhibe, tametsi in scripto,
Quid ipse sibi velit, explicare non datur.
Nam tot tantaque poteris cognoscere,
In his Poetae versibus sanctissimi,
Vitam beatam maxim attingentia.
Vt curiosus sis licet, animo tamen
Aequo ferendum sit, Quod vnum hoc nescias.
EXPOSITION UPON THE HUNDRED AND THIRTY PSALM.

Gathered out of some of the Ancient Fathers and later writers.

BY ALEXANDER ROBERTS Bachelour in Divinity, and Preacher of the word of God at
Kings Linne in NORFOLK.



LONDON, Printed by John Windet for Richard Banckworth, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Sun.

ANNO DOMINI 1610.

(...).
CLARISSIMO, ET HONORATISSIMO VIRO, DOMINO EDOVARDO COKO MILITI, MVSARVM
GRATIARVMQVE ALVMNO, SACRAE THEMIDOS, ET IVSTITIAE HYEROPHANTAE, COMMVNIVM
PLACITORVM CAPITALI IVSTITIARIO, QVA VIRTVTEM, QVA PRVDENTIAM, QVA DOCTRINAM,
PRAECLARISSIMARVMQVE RERVM SCIENTIAM LONG PRAESTANTISSIMO, DOMINO SVO
SVBMISSIME COLENDO,

ALEXANDER ROBERTS, HANC SEXTI PSALMI POENITENTIALIS EXPOSITIONEM, FIDEI ET
SPEI SCHOLAM, DEVOTAE OBSERVANTIAE TESTIMONIVM LVBENS MERITOQVE D. D. D.

To the Christian Reader.
ALthough I might truly protest, my deep recusancy, for publishing any thing
to the view of the world, and that upon good ground, privy to my own defects,
as one always resolved, that the safest life is (...).
the obscurest: yet will I make no Apology for my self at this present, lest
happily some quicke-witted censurer might conceive that humor to be in me,
wherewith Cato charged Nae tu Aule Albine nimium nugator et, qui maluisti
culpam deprecari, quam carere. Cato apud A -- Gellium lib. 11. cap. 8.
Albinus, as rather taking occasion to excuse fault committed, then careful to
prevent it. Wherefore (Christian Reader) this exposition such as it is, I
offer unto the treasury of God: others can of their abundance enrich it with
many talents, I only cast thereinto of my poverty, but two Gazephylacium Dei,
sunt qui talentis ^^rant: mihi nihil suppetit amplius duobus his minutis, and
ipses ab alio commodatis. Iunilius in Epistola ad Primasium praefixa duobus
suis libris, de partibus divine Legis.
mites; and both of them borrowed the testimonies of ancient and modern
writers. And for this I refer my self to thy judgment, and in secret shall
listen after the same, willing and ready to correct, what thou think fit to
be amended, to supply what is wanting, to detract what is superfluous, and
change what is to be altered. Thou can desire no more, and I ask nothing of
thee, but to stand indifferent. Farewell in Christ Jesus.

Thine ever in the Lord, A. R.

The names of the cheifest of such Authors, out of whom this Exposition was
collected. Or upon some just occasion mentioned in the same.
A
ADrianus Papa, A-Gellius, Albertus Magnus, Alexander Aphrodisius, Alexander ab
Alexandro, Alcuinus, Ambrosius, Ammianus Marcellinus, Angelus Canintus,
Anselmus, Antonius Flaminius, Antiquitates Britannicae, Apollinarij Periphrasis
Psalmorum, Aquinas, Arias Montanus, Aristoteles, Athanasius, Athenaeus,
Augustinus.
B
BAlduinus in Psalm. Poenitentiales, Baronius, Basilius Magnus, Basilius
Isauriensis, Bellarminus, Bellonius, his observations. Bernardus, Bertramus,
Bonauentura, Buntingus.
C
CAluinus, Cauus, Cassander, Cassianus, Cassiodorus, Coelius Secundus,
Codranus, Chaldaica Periphrasis, Chemnitius, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Chrysostomus, Cyprianus, Cyrillus, Concilium Tridentinum, Cuiacius.
D
DAmascenus, Danaeus, Didimus, Dionysius Areopagita, his supposed works,
Discursus conti^^^^^ de rebus Gallicis, Donatus Grammaticus, Dorotheus.
E
ELias Cretensis, Epiphanius, Euagrius, Eusebius, Eustathius.
F
FAber, Flaminius, Fulgentius.
G
GAlatinus, Genebrardus, Georgius Princeps Anhaltinus, Georgius Wirth, Gerson,
Gyraldus Cambrensis, Gregorius Magnus, Grinaus, Gentiletus.
H
Hilarious, Hieronymus, Historiae de statu religionis in Gallia, Homerus, Hugo
de S. Victore.
I
Johannes Iezlerus, Innocentius tertius Papa, Johannes Drusius, Johannes
Langius, Johannes Reinoldus, Josephus Iudans, Josephus Acosta, Isaacus
Causabonus, Isadorus Hispalensis, Isengrenius, Isodorus Pelusista, Iunilius,
Iunius, Justinius Martyr.
K
KImedontius.
L
LEoprimus Papa, Lilius Giraldus, Liuius, Lutherus, Lyra, Laurentius Humfredus.
M
MIchaelis Glica Annals. Manassis
N
NAzianzenus, Nicephorus, Nicholaus de Clemangijs, Nilus, Nissonus.
O
ORigines, Orosius.
P
PAulus Phagius, Pelargus, Perkei Abbots, sieve capitula Patrum, Philo Iudaus,
Philastrius, Pierij Hieroglyphica, Plinius, Pindarus and eius Scholiastes,
Polanus, Polybius, Prosper, Petrus Rauonnus, dictus Chrysologus, Petrus
Lombardus.
R
REinerij Summa.
S
SAluianus, Scotus, Seneca, Sleidanus, Socratis Historiae Ecclesiastica,
Sophocles and cius Scholiastes, Strabo, Suetonius, Synodus Syrmiensis,
Strigelius.
T
TErtullianus, Tractatus de Purgatorio, Grace scriptus ab certo Authore.
Tremelius.
V
VErgerius, Virgilius, Vitellius, Vrsinus.
Z
ZAuchius, Zonaras, Zozomeni Historiae Ecclesiastica.
Plinius in Praesatione naturalis Historiae.

Authorum nomina praetexui; est enim benigni and ingenui pudoris, profiteri per
quem profeceris.

VOTVM, Ex Fulgentij ad Monimam, lib. 1. cap. 4.
ATe vero Domino and Magistro nostro, postulo, vt in propositionibus, and
assertionibus meis, veritati (quae nec fallit noc fallitur) semper inhaercam,
semper obediens consentiensque reperiar. Quoniam vt veritati, obedire and
consentire valeam, ipsa veritas illuminat, ipsa adiuuat, ipsa confirmat; ab
ipso postulo doceri multa plura quae nescio, a quo accepi pauca quae felo.
Ipsum rogo, vt praeueniente, ac subsequente misericordia, quae cunque
salubriter scienda nescio, doceat me; in his quae (...), custodiat me; in
quibus vt homo fallor, (...) me: in quibus vero titubo, confirmet me, and a
falsis and (...) exipiatine: vt in cogitationibus and sermonibus meis, quod
salubriter donat (...), and ea faciat de (...) procedere, quae sunt coram ipso
salubriter grata. Et sic fiant fidellbus cunctis accepta.

Amen.
AN EXPOSITION UPON THE HUNDRED AND THIRTY PSALM.
PSALM. 130. VERSE. 1. Out of the deep places have I called upon thee, O Lord,
etc.
THAT Emblem or poesy of (...). Lib. de Mystica Theologia cap. 1. Vide and in
eum locu^ Pachymerae Paraphrasm. Sic Euangelium vocat breue verbum, de verbo
adbreuiato, sed caelesti suauitate refertum, Bernardus sermon. 1. in Vigilia
Natiuitatis Domini.
S. Bartholomew which Diomsius Areopagita reports: that the knowledge of
heavenly things is short and long; short in words, and sentences, and long in
matter and power, appears in this Psalm to be most true, wherein the holy
Ghost does set down briefly sundry excellent and large common places of the
Cross, of Prayer, of Sin, and the effect thereof: of Gods mercy in Christ,
of faith, and his nature, of hope, of the patience of the faithful and the
eternal deliverance of the Church: A rich treasury contained in a small room
written for our instruction and comfort. Under the name of deep places the
Prophet does by an elegant metaphor or borrowed figurative speech, signify
great affliction and distress, which often in Scripture Often in the Psalms,
as Ps. 69. 2. 17. and 124. 4. 5. and 144. 7. and Job 27. 20.
are resembled to deep waters, as 2. Sam. 22. 17. and Job. 22. 11. and the
Jews having upon them the perfection of misery, do not find how to express
their woeful condition but by that title. Lament. 3. 54. therefore the
Egyptians in their Hieroglyphics or sacred and mystical Characters put the
Sea for Pierius Hieroglyphicon, l. 38.
destruction. And God himself threatening desolation both to the people of Judah
and the Kingdoms of Israel and Syria, by whose power they supposed to have
been defended, uses no other manner of speech. Esaias 8. v. 7. and this phrase
is found likewise in the same sense among Heathen writers Diluuio ex illo tot
vasta per aequora vectus. Aeneidum 7. Vbi Donatusaio^ dixit ex bello, sed
diluuio, bello confecto, aliquid superest, quod superioris temporis initia
mostrando testatur, post diluutu^ nihil remanes, sed quicquid inuenit tollit.
as Aeneas escaping the danger of war and other manifold troubles, is said
to be delivered from the deluge or ouer-flowing of waters, and Pindarus
calls the great battle of Salamis between Xerxes King of Persia and the
Grecians, Jupiters many-destroying (...), In Isthmijs, Ode 5. (...).
Scholiastes in eu^ locum. De hoc bello Herodotus in Urania.
shower. And the reason of this translation is: first, because other dangers
do assault the body only upon one part, but water in respect of his liquid
nature, even in a moment compasses on all sides and leaves no means of
escape, Psalm. 88. v. 17. Secondly, God by water once drowned the whole world,
and destroyed every creature upon the face of the earth, the greatness of
which judgment cannot in words be expressed, Genes. 17. 21. Quis cladem
illius noctis? quis funera fando explicet?
an evident testimony of Gods wrath against sin, and of his power in
punishing, wherein was neither hope of escape, nor comfort of help, but every
one beheld other swallowed up in that gulf, wherein presently himself was to
be buried. Thirdly, the Israelites Inter mare and hosts, inter vndas, and
gladios inclusi era^t, hinc mare spumabat inde arma coruscabant.
when they came out of Egypt, walking in the midst of the Sea between the
heaps of waters on either side, and behind the armed troops of their
pursuing enemies felt the terrors of death. Exodus 14. 22. 23. The word depth
implies two things: first, the greatness of the distress. Secondly, the
impossibility of avoiding it. From hence we may observe for instruction.

Doctrine.
God, many of whose judgments are secret, none unjust, does often suffer his
children to be plunged, in the deepest extremity of miseries, inward, outward,
of soul and body, so that they feel terrors within, and fighting without. 2.
Cor. 7. 5. and this is their portion, general to all without exception, and
necessary, not to be avoided: 2. Tim. 3. 1^. so that if there were not another
life after this, they of all other were the most miserable. 1. Cor. 15. 19. for
many were the trials, by contempt and torment, of those of whom the world was
unworthy: Hebr. 11. 36. but thus did Christ our head dedicate the way to
heaven, who first suffered and entered into glory Vnicus qui intrauit mundum
fry peccato, non exiuit sine slagello.
Luc. 24. 26. and we the members must tread in the same steps. Act. 14. 22.
Take a view of the Saints of God: Who lived in delight? Just Abel is murdered,
Genes. 4. 8. dedicat Ecclesiam sanguine, he watered the field, of the future
Church, with his blood, the first Martyr in the world. An example, which all
the righteous following are to look for. Great Eliah whose tongue (...),
Basilius Isauriensis, homilia de Elia.
was the bridle of heaven, bewaileth himself, persecuted by Iesabel, sitting
under his Iunyper tree, 1. King. 19. 4. John Baptist the second Eliah in Sic
Spiritus sanctus interpretatur. Luc. 1. 17.
spirit, not in person, has his head made a price for a dancing wanton, Math.
14. 11. A pleasant spectacle in satisfaction of revenge, to her incestuous
Mother. Who more miserable then Lazarus Chrysostom. sermon. 1. de Lazaro.
, extreme poor, a beggar, pyned with hunger, not obtaining a few crummes for
his relief, full of running soars, an extreme and loathsome disease of body, a
living carcass forsaken of all, cast (...) etc.
at the rich Gluttons door, and finding there no mercy, but of the dogs
alone, not having another Lazarus to look upon, where community of condition,
might have yielded some content? yet who more loved of God? for being dead he
is attended of Angels, and placed in Abraham's bosom, Sic non Lazarus sed
miseria mortua est.
Luc. 16. 22. Not to stand in rehearsal of more particulers, which are
infinite, this estate of Gods dear children, has been so general and so
dangerous, that the temptation thereof, had almost shaken the faith even of the
strongest, for Jeremy sanctified from the womb complains, and cannot found
the depth of this judgment. Ier. 12. 1. 2. and David acknowledges that his
feet had almost fallen, and that he could not obtain the understanding of
this point, so that he thought, that in vain he had washed his hands in
innocence, Psalm. 73. 2. 13. and Abacuc. 1. 3. 4. expostulateth the matter with
God, why it should be so. Yet with him, the most holy, there is no
unrighteousness: for first, there is in the purest, the sullage of Adams clay
(...).
, and that must be purged, and they add daily more uncleanness, by actual
sins, therefore, for the (...).
amendment of offenders, and example of others, God does wash the best with the
bitter waters of Marah, in the Sea of affliction, as in David. 2. Sam. 12. 14.
and in Josias. 2. Chro. 35. 22. therefore Micah. 7. 9. consesseth, I will bear
the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, for all our
sufferings they be rods of a Father for chastisement, not swords of a Judge
to destruction (...). Nam disciplina patris non est ira iudieis, sed amor
corrige^tis Greg. Moral. 31.
, 1. Cor. 11. 32. Secondly, the hatred of the Devil is implacable, he will be
always bruising of the heel, Genes. 3. 15. and ready at every turn, to
accuse, and get leave that he may meddle with the righteous. Job 1. 6. so he
prosecuteth the Woman in the wilderness, Apoc. 12. 17. and he is diligent
seeking opportunity to execute his cruelty, 1. Pet. 5. 8. Thirdly, God turns
all to the good of those who be his: for these troubles do exercise their
patience, try their faith, kindle their prayers, and provoke to the practice
of all holy duties. Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Esaias 26, 16. 1. Pet. 1. 7. The Roman Scipio.
Captain would say of his people, that their estate stood in the worst
terms, when in peace. And Hierome Epistola ad Eustachium.
observes well, concerning religious professors, only Solomon fell so foully,
for he alone lived in delights, for prosperity is the stepmother of al holy
virtues. Number. 25. 1. 2. Sam. 11. 4. 2. Chron. 32. 25. the stars show
brightest in the dark night, sweet odours smell most pleasantly when they are
beaten, and Christian virtues are more apparent under the Cross, therefore we
rejoice in tribulation says the Apostle, Romans 5. 3. 4. etc.

Fourthly, God will have us, his Sons by grace of adoption, conformed to
Christ his Son by right of nature, Romans 8. 29. so that if we suffer for him,
we shall be glorified with him. 2. Tim. 2. 12. therefore, we are to run
with patience the race that is set before us, looking to Christ, Hebr. 12. 1. 2.

Fifthly, God has a respective care of his own glory herein, for by the
deliverance of his children from hopeless dangers, he does plainly testify
his presence in the Church, so Moses Vbi egreditur natura, ingreditur gratia.
Ibi incipit diuinum vbi desinit humanti auxilium. Philo Iudaeus, ipud Eusebiu
lib. 2. hystor. Ecclesiast. cap. 5.
bids the Israelites, who had no passage forward for the Sea, no return
backward, for their armed enemies, no escape on either hand, for the enclosing
mountains, stand still and see the salvation of the Lord (such as he only can
work) Exodus 14. 13. and thus was it with Ezechiah, Esaias 37. 20. Herodotus in
musis in Euterpe. lib. 2. qu^modo and in quibus o^ rauit ostendit. Bertramus in
lucubrationibus franctallensibus. cap. 3.
which History is famous amongst the Heathens, though somewhat misreported,
and that this is Gods dealing toward his, the profane King acknowledges, Dan.
3. 28. And Isreal's oppressors, Psalm. 126. 2. And from hence to make application
and use unto our selves;

First, hereby is expressed, the faucy and malepert censures Use.
of flesh and blood, who condemn those as guilty of some great sin, whom
they see afflicted. So foretold of Christ, Esaias 53. 4. and Jobs friends
beholding his distress, pronounced that peremptory doom of him, that all his
former profession was but hypocrisy, now manifested by the event, Job 8. 4.
and it should seem that this is a natural ingrafted conceit, for from hence
arose that question of the Apostles, concerning the man borne blind, whether
he or his parents had sinned, Ioh. 9. 2. And that sentence of the Ilanders of
Malta, when they saw a Viper hang upon S. Paulos hand, which came out of the
fire, he must needs be a murderer, and therefore (...).
vengeance pursued him, Act. 28. 4. But it is far otherwise: for the Cross
is the precious Gemma annulatis.
stone of that ring, wherewith Christ espouseth his Church, wherefore, if any
will be my Disciple, says he, let him take up his Cross and follow me, Matthew.
16. 24. for whom he loves he does chastise, Hebr. 12. 6. and this is to no
other end, but for their trial in this spiritual warfare, that when they have
fought the good fight, they may receive the crown of righteousness, 2. Tim.
4. 7. Therefore let the wicked know that their case is fearful, when God
begins judgment at his own house, 1. Pet. 4. 17. and take Christ's
admonition to repent in time, Luc. 13. 3. for he that bears with sinners in
patience, will punish contemners Tolerat pecca^tes, punit contemnentes.
in justice, and Valerius Maximus, lib. 1. c. 2.
recompenceth the slacknesse of his striking with the greatness of the wound
they are no more but repriued for a while, as in former time among the
Egyptians Plutarchus de sera numims vindicta. (...), etc.
(now a received custom of all nations) women with child convicted, kept
until they be delivered, then put to execution: so God stayed the Amorites
until their sin was at the full, Genes. 15. 16. Therefore let none say I
have sinned a hundred times, and no evil is come unto me, for the Lord is a
patient rewarder: Ecclesiast. 5. 4. and they who contemn this his long
sufferance, do but heap (...).
up to themselves wrath as men do treasure, unto the day of wrath and of the
judgment of God, Romans 2. 5. treasures of vengeance, in steed of treasures of
mercy.

Secondly, this may serve to reach every one in particular, to retain a
charitable opinion of our brethren under any of these, which are called Gods
soar judgments, Ezech. 14. 21. and to comfort our selves if they do take
hold upon us, and not conceive that either they or we are out of Gods favor,
though the (...). Nazianzen. in Carminibus.
rod be sharp, yet the hand that strikes is sweet, and therewithal as some
motives to a more quiet suffering to remember that: First, there be in all, the
relics of sin, for which cause all are subject to the common August. de
ciuit. Dei. l. 1. c. 9. De hac materia erudite and plene disputat.
calamity: there perished in the floode, as well part of the religious posterity
of Seth, as the wicked offspring of Came, Genesis 7. 23. and the same day, on the
same place, by the same means, Jonathan and reprobate Saul ended their lives,
1. Sam. 31. 6.

Secondly, death is not only the stipend of sin, but remedy also, for by it
we are translated into the security of not sinning Fulge^tius Epistola ad
Gallam. No^ quantu^ vixerit quisque sed qualiter, intuendum, etc.
Wisdom 4. 11. Esaias 57. 1. 2.

Thirdly, the manifesting of the difference between the Sheep and the Goats,
the Godly and the wicked, is reserved to the day of separation in the last
judgment, Matthew. 25. 32. Now, things fall alike to both, Eccles. 9. 2.

Fourthly, let it be the sword, or famine, or pestilence: as Cyprian Libro de
Mortalitate.
said of one, so it is true of al, they be but mortality, to which all are
subject, there is no dispensation can be purchased for any. The penal statute
vnrepealable is. Statutum est omnibus mori, Hebr. 9. 27. It is decreed for all
men to die, that we in both may be the Lords Sieve viuimus sieve morimur Domini
sumus and in nominatiuo, and in geuitiuo. Apoc. 1. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
, Romans 14. 8. so our death shall be the end of this mortal life, and the
beginning of an endless immortality, Ioh. 11. 25. 26. Wherefore let us have
our conversation now in heaven, from whence we look our Savior Christ shall
come, that at his coming he may make these our corruptible bodies like unto
his glorious body. Philippians 3. 20.

Out of the deep places have I called or cried upon thee, O Lord, Lord hear
my voice, let thine ears attend to the voice of my prayers.
THese three words: of crying, voice, and prayers, do express three
especial attributes of our supplications made unto God, for the first shows
that they must be earnest, the second no confused murmur, but a speech
expressing our necessity, the third being in the plural number, enforces a
continuance and perseverance in asking. Now therefore, the word here used in
the original, signifies not only to call, but also to cry out, and differs
from all other of the same sort, for it has a special reference both to the
person to whom we make request, and the matter for which we do sue, and here
in this place very aptly used: for the Prophet now being in the bottom of the
Sea of miseries, that he may be heard lifts up his voice, and to God on high,
that he who only can, whose power is infinite, and will, whose mercy is
endless, would pull him out from thence: the cause of his cry is the depth of
his distress, a low voice cannot ascend to be heard above, and the
Philosophers Aristotels problem. sect. 11. problemat. 45.
in nature give a reason thereof, for the voice being formed of air, which is
mixed with moisture does descend, and therefore more audible beneath, then from
above, it must then be forced that it may go upward and be heard.

Affliction therefore and the sensible feeling thereof, does Doctrine.
not only make men performers of religious duties, but also ready, and earnest
in the same. And you shall observe that usually prayers, in time of trouble,
are styled in Scripture by the title of cries, as that of Moses at the brincke
of the red Sea, inter mare and hosts, inter gladios and vndas, having before
him the raging waves, and behind the murdering sword, he cries to the Lord.
Exodus 14. 15. De hoc clamore fider and cordis August. and Hilarious in psalm. 118.
Chrysostom. de Muliere Chana^ea. Bernardus saper psalm. 91.
Clamorem magnum, Magnitudo necessitatis extorsit, great necessity enforced a
loud cry. So when Israel was exceedingly impouerished by the Midianites, they
cried unto the Lord, Judge. 6. 6. and Judah in a dangerous war, when by reason
of an ambushment laid, he did behold the battle before and behind.
Complurima mortis imago, the text says they cried: 2. Chron. 13. 14. and he
who being sent to Niniue on Gods message, would needs go to Tharsis upon his
own errand, when he was committed to close prison in the Whales belly, he
could cry, and cry Clamaui, vociferatus sum.
out then, to be enlarged, Jonas 2. 2. And therefore God himself, when he had
threatened to his people fearful judgments, to be executed by the King of
Assure, and Nabuchanetzer, and to withdraw his help also and comfort, then
adds, they will seek me in their affliction, and seek me diligently. Ose.
15. 14. 15. So Manasses who forgate the Lord at liberty in his Palace, could
pray to him in prison and humble himself greatly, 2. Chron. 33. 10. 13. and in
deed it was this lively sense of misery, which made the woman of Canaan
earnest in praying, and importunate until she had obtained, Math. 25. 28. and
not to stand upon more proofs, this indeed is it, which will be effectual
and bring man to a knowledge of himself: therefore Ahaz is noted for a
monster, and with a special Item (this is Ahaz.) who in the time of his
tribulation did trespass more, 2. Chro. 28. 22. The relation therefore of
Liuie Liuius Decadis primae, lib. primo.
which he makes of Tullus Hostilius is memorable, who pined with long
sickness, when as well the fearcenesse of his stomach, as the strength of his
body, was abated, then upon the sudden yielded himself, to all, great and
small superstitions, and filled the peoples heads with multitudes of
religions, whereas before he thought nothing less fitting a King, then to
yield to ceremonies and sacrifices, as Numa his predecessor did, who devised a
set order of service to their Heathen Gods, and possessed the people with it.
And we our selves know by our own experience, that many in health and
prosperity wantonly forget themselves, but if trouble come or sickness, then
what tears, what confession, what promises, what desires! changed into Saints
Grauame^ corporale est medicameaspirituale. Vtilius est frangi languoribus
adsalutem, quam remanere incolumes ad damnationem. Hugo l. 2. de anima. Use.
, then nothing but Cupto dissolui and esse cum Christo, desire to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ. Philip. 1. 23.

Although it were to be wished that men could so live, as they might continue
in a flourishing estate, yet because (illa Marcellinus hystoriae suae, lib. 5.
qualitas vitae non tantum habet sensum) that condition is somewhat dull, and
that there is in the Cross, an adamantine and attentive virtue, and a
medicinable power against many soul -- infirmities, therefore let us submit
our selves unto Gods hand. 1. Pet. 5. 6. for David of his own experience
acknowledges a sovereign benefit Afflictio est Medicina, (...) and. (...). 2. Corinthians. 12. 2. 2. Chro. 33. 11. 12
in it, when he said. It is good for me, O Lord, that I was afflicted. For now
have I kept thy Commandments. Psalm. 119. 67. 71. Without this it is not
possible for the hard hearted man, to take out the lesson of repentance, S.
Chrysostom In Psalm. 114.
uses a pretty similitude to this purpose. Quontam nos valde amat Deus, sinit
affligi, etc. Mothers do use by visards and bugbeares, to fright their unruly
children, that so for fear they might run to shroude them into their lappes,
not willing hereby to hurt by discouraging the Infants, but to make them more
willing to seek their defense: so God desiring to win us fast unto himself
(being a true A lover of men's souls. Wisdom. 11. 23.
lover of us) does permit that often times we be brought to some extremity,
that thereby we might be enforced to continual prayer, and so leaving all
other things, repose our selves upon him alone. Therefore Eliphas gave Job good
advise in his great trial, to think the man blessed that was corrected? Job
5. 17. for where no correction is of a father, there no adoption to be sons,
Hebr. 12. 7. therefore, 1. Pet. 4. 13. Think it not strange says the Apostle
for the fiery trouble, not strange for Gods children to have trouble, for the
Cross is their legacy. Math. 16. 24. and all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer afflictions, where there is a generality without exception,
(all) a necessity without dispensation, (must suffer) a number without
diminution (afflictions.) And a fitter word could not have been devised, then
to term it fire, to express the wholesome and medicinable Nicholaus de
Clemangijs, libro de fructu rerum aduersarum.
effects thereof, for first fire of it nature is light, and ascending, and he
never thought of rising to be at the table, who by hunger was not stirred up
from crouching at the troughe. Luc. 15. 16. Secondly, fire heateth, and
affliction makes hot suitors for relief. Aduersitas magis auget desiderium
in Deu^: sic semina messium gelu cooperta fertilius germinant: sic ignis flatu
premiturvt crescat. Gregor. lib. 20. Moral. cap. 15.
Ionat 3. 8. Thirdly, fire shines to give light, and trouble opens the eyes,
as in Nabuchadnetzer. Dan. 4. 31. Fourthly, fire softneth the hardest iron. No
heart can but yield to be melted by tribulation, in this Pharao yielded though
but for a time. Yet yielded, Exodus 9. 27. Fifthly, fire deuideth things of a
contrary essence, and separateth the dross from the pure Sub eoae^ tormento
non est i would virtus and vitium sub vno igne rutilat aurum, palea sumat, etc.
tantum interest non qualia sed quales quisque patimur. August. de Ciuitat. Dei.
lib. 1. cap. 8.
metal: calamity is as great an artificer. For in similitudine passionum,
there is dissimilitudo patientium, the wicked murmur and seek to help
themselves. 1. Sam. 28. 8. The godly are patiently obedient, as Job 1. 21.
Therefore let us rejoice, though now for a season, if need require, we are in
heaviness, etc. 1. Pet. 1. 6. 7. 8. 9.

Out of the deep have I called or cried unto thee, O Lord.
I Noted before that the holy Ghost did purposely use a choice word, to
express both the action which is prayer, and the person to whom it was to be
directed, for hearing and helping. Now the Prophet himself the petitioner,
does plainly express the same. Naming from whom he expects relief: unto
thee O Lord.

God only therefore is in all distresses to be called upon. Doctrine.
The sacrificing of our souls, the bending of our knees. The lifting up of our
hands, the bedewing of our cheeks. The compunction of our hearts is only due
to him, appealing from the Throne of his justice, to his mercy seat. And this
is a golden chain, not the counterfeit, which is imagined of Lucianus in (...)
sieve (...).
Hercules. But pure and true, one end whereof is fastened to Gods ear. the
other to our tongue, if we pluck he will hear. Math. 7. 7. And he alone, for,

First, he only knows the hearts of all the children of men, and this Solomon
makes a^ the ground of his prayer. 1. King. 8. 39. And the Apostles. Acts. 1.
24.

Secondly, Invocation is the chief part of his worship, therefore it is only
to be performed to him, due by commandment, call upon me in the time of
trouble, and I will hear thee. Psalm. 50. 15. and of this Libro ae Spir.
sancto. cap. 12.
Ambrose truly, we must worship nothing but God, and him only shall thou
serve. Math. 4. 10.

Thirdly, he only knows all, and has mercy upon all, therefore in every
place he hears the petitions of his children, and will help them, for which
cause the Church adds this as a motive of their prayer. And a reason of their
hope. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel know us not, yet thou O Lord, art our Father and our Redeemer, thy name
is for ever. Esaias 63. 16. Ecclesiastes 9. 5. and it is a worthy saying of De
cura pro mortuis agenda. lib. ad Paulinum cap. 13. 14. 15.
Augustine concerning the Saints departed. They do not intermeddle, either in
taking knowledge of the matters or deeds of the living, or in helping them:
the unquiet life of the living, does not disquiet them being at rest.

Fourthly, we must believe in God alone, therefore we must pray to him alone,
so the Apostle reasons. Romans 10. 14 how shall they call upon him on whom they
have not believed? for none does desire either favor or help, but of those in
whom he reposeth trust to obtain his request, As the blind man in the
Gospel prays unto Christ to have his eyes opened, because he was
undoubtedly resolved of his mercy and power. Mark 10. 51. 52. for faith is
requisite and necessary to true prayer, as the cause unto the effect, for that
prayer only is pleasing unto God, which proceeds from faith, and that
Nazienzene proves by this argument the holy Ghost to be God. (...). Oration
de Spiritu sancto. Vide in eum locum Elia scholia.
faith which is joined with prayer, therefore religious invocation is due to
none but to God: one in essence three in persons. The Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, in whom we do believe.

Fifthly, there is no example in all the Scripture, of the Saints, who have made
any prayer, either petitorie for obtaining of good things, or deprecatorie for
the avoiding of evil, but only to God, so Jacob fearing Esau and his
threatenings. Genesis 32. 10. 11. Ezechias in his distress. 2. Kings 19. 15.
Iehosophat. 2. Chron. 20. 12. Paul. 2. Cor. 12. 8. The Apostles. Acts. 4. 24.

Therefore for conclusion for Hilarious.
this point. It is sufficient that he does hear our prayers, who is in nature
most merciful, in power Almighty: in helping most ready, and present in
every place, yet will be prayed unto of us, that he might hear and do
according to our petitions, yea far exceeding above that either we can ask
or think. Ephesians. 3. 20.

Use.
From hence appears the error of Popish doctrine, which sends us Bellar. de
Ecclesia triumpha^te l. 1. c 15. Council. Trid. Sess. vltima quae fuit. Anno
1563. Gentiletus. Lombardus. l. 4. Distinct. 45.
unto the dead Saints, to obtain by them all things necessary, not as the
principal authors of benefits, but as secondarie Mediators and helpers with
God, and has no other foundation whereupon it is builded, being contrary to
the written word, and unknown in the pure times of the Church, and unheard off
for many years; but from the perverse imitation of the Heathen, who had their
chief God whose majesty they feigned to be so great, that he could not attend
the business of all men, or unto whom the baser sort might have immediate
access, and therefore had two other sorts of under Mediators Eusebius de
praeparatione Ruangelica. l. 12. etc. August. de ciuit. Dei. l. 8. c. 18. and
in eum Viues.
Damones spiritual substances, and Heroes souls departed, who while they were
alive deserved well of men, and therefore now would have a special regard of
them and their suits. Or from the prluate surmises and opinions of men. As that
of Origin. in Epist. ad Romans lib. 2.
Origin. If the Saints separate from the body, and are with Christ, do any
thing for us and labor in our behalf, as the Angels are ministering spirits
for their sakes, that be heirs of salvation, this is a mystery to be laid up
among the secrets of God, not committed to writing. Or the wonder of miracles,
for when God did at the Monuments of the Martyrs work sometimes miracles, to
testify the glory into which they were taken, against the contempt and reproach
of the world, and also to strenghthen others in their holic profession: after
the storms of persecution were calmed, some applied this to the making of
prayers unto them, and whereas yearly especially in the day of their suffering
Dionisius Areopagit. Hier arch. Ecclesiast. cap. 3. Epistola Ecclesie
Smyrnensis, apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15.
their names were publicly read, that the present age might be moved by their
example, amongst other things to live godly and die constantly: upon this
occasion while the instructers slept, the envious man sowed his tares, they
were afterward frequented to obtain their Hinc apud veteres Authors Graecos
(...), and (...) pro rodemsumuntur.
Patronage. Or Nazianz. de laudibus Gorgoniae (...). Orat. 1. cont Iulianum de
Constantino. (...) de Basilio (...). Hieronimus in Epitaphijs Paulae and
Nepolia^i. etc.
from the Rhethoricall excursions of some of the Fathers in their Sermons, who
had been brought up in the University, and schools of Eloquence, but with a
clause of uncertainty. Or bastard writings laid to the charge of the Fathers,
which were never theirs, and the just sentence passed against Vt Nazian. lib.
de paenitentia. Cypr. vide Gratian distinct. 15. c. Sanct Roman. Missa
Chrysostom. August. sermones ad fratres in Eremo. etc.
them. Or from the probability of humane reason, as men have access to
Princes, and great Personages, by means, therefore so must it be with God, for
we so base ought not to thrust our selves into his presence: but In primum
caput Epist. ad Romanos.
S. Ambrose calls this miseram excusationem, a pitiful excuse, and a non
sequitur, the comparison will not hold. For Princes are men, and know not of
themselves, to whom they may commit the commonwealth: their power, and
presence, and understanding, is limited, and they therefore must be helped by
the information of others. But in God there is no defects, our best Spokesman
unto him, is a devout soul, therefore that is a true confession of De
visitatione infirmorum. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Augustine: Tutius and iucundius loquor ad meuns Iesum, quam ad aliquem
sanctorum Spirituum Dei. I speak with more safety and comfort unto my Savior,
then to any of the holy Spirits of God. Therefore unto him alone, and by him,
we must Ipse est Os nostrum, per quod Patri loquimur, est oculus noster, per
quem patrem videmus, est dextra nostra, per quam nos patri offerimus. Quo nisi
intercedente, nec nobis, nec sactis, quicqua^ est cum Deo. Ambros. lib. de.
Isaac. cap. 8.
put up our petitions, he is that Angel with the golden Censer, and much
odours, that offers up the prayers of all Saints. Apoc. 8. 3. for there is
one God and one Mediator between God and Man, even the man Jesus Christ. 1.
Tim. 2. 5. Therefore, since there is no precept in Scripture, commaundes prayer
to Saints, no promise that God does allow thereof, no example to warrant the
practice, it is not to be Non fuit co^suetum in veteri testamento, vt diceretur
Sa^cte Abrahame, ora pronobis, sed solum. orabant homines illius te^poris Deu^.
Bellar. l. 1. de sact bealit. c. 19. Salmeron in Tim. 2. disp. 8.. non est,
expressu^ in nouo testamento, de inuocatione Sanctorum, quia durum id esset
Iudaeis praecipere, Gentibus periculosum.
received.

Further, these Saints either they be Gods or they be not. If they be Gods, who
will deny them that honor? but Gods they cannot be, for there is one God
Jehovah, and beside him no other else. Esaias 45. 5. therefore, the worship that
is due and proper unto God, must not be given unto them. Esaias 42. 8.

Again, it is most evident that many are put into the roll, and registered for
Saints, to be called upon, whose life was infamous, and their blessedness
doubtful. So that according to the old saying, their Relics were worshipped
on earth, whose souls did burn in hell: or never extant in nature, and of
this sort were, S. Hippolitus, Longinus, George, Christopher, Katharine,
Dominicke, Medarde, and other of the like stamp. Whose Legendes were written
by Infidels, or by Heretics as that of George, of Quiricus, and Iulitta his
mother. Even by the confession of the Papists Melchior Canus loc. com. l. 11 c.
6 Vugerius apud Balaeum de vitis Pontificum in Marcello 2. Cassander lib.
consultationis. 1. c. 21. Baronius in notationibus ad Martyrolog. de
Christophor. Aprilis 3. Vide Johan. Reinoldum de Romans Eccles. Idolatria lib. 1.
c. 5. sect. 22. 23. and seq.
themselves, wherefore to conclude this point, that is a memorable place of S.
Augustine, where Lib. 10. Confess. cap. 42.
betaking himself unto God, he reasons in this sort: Whom shall I find who
may reconcile me unto thee? must I go unto the Angels? with what prayer? with
what assurance? many indeauouring to return unto thee, and not able by
themselves (as I hear) have attempted these things and so fallen into the
love of curious visions, and deserved to be deceived, for the Devil did change
himself into an Angel of light. But he must be the Mediator between God and
Man, who had some thing like to God, something like to man, otherwise no
Mediator. From which place these Correlaryes do necessarily follow. First,
that none can be Mediator between God and us, but Christ alone, because none
is both God and Man, but he. Secondly, such as seek by Angels to be reconciled
unto God, or have their prayers heard of God, may easily be deceived by the
Devil, who being a fiende of darkness, can transform himself into an Angel
of light. Thirdly, we are not to come unto God by Angels, or the spirits or
souls of men: But immediately by Christ, and by him to offer up our prayers
unto the Father: Wherefore not to add more testimonies of the Fathers, as
Contra Colliridianos lib. 2. tom. 3. haeres. 79.
Epiphanius, Apolog. cap. 30.
Tertullian, Iustine In Dialog. co^t. Triph.
Martyr, Chrysostom Hom. 10. de paenitent. and in 15. Mat. de Cananae.
and others. I end with that of the Apostle: Seeing that we have a great high
Priest, which is entered into heaven, even Jesus the Son of God, let us hold
fast our profession, for we have not a high Priest which cannot be touched with
the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted like unto us,
yet without sin. Let us therefore go boldly unto the Throne of grace, that
we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Hebr. 4. 14.
15. 16.

Out of the deep places have I cried unto thee, O Lord: O Lord hear my voice,
let thine ears attend unto the voice of my prayers.
THere be in the original two several words, Jehovah, and Adonai. Jehovah is
the proper name of the divine essence, which always (...).
was, is, and shall be. Apoc. 1. 4. and it signifies the immutability and
constancy of God, and therefore purposing to fulfill his promise made to
Abraham, of delivering his seed and posterity out of bondage. Genesis 15. 16. he
thus speaks to Moses, whom he had called to that work. I appeared to Shaddai
Genesis 17. 1. Genesis 28. 3. and 53. 11. Graeci vertunt. (...). De nomine Iehouae.
Vide Galatinum de arcanis Catholicae veritatis. l. 2. cap. 10. Angelum Caniniu^
de locis Hebraicis cap. 2. Fabrum Dodecamenon c. 1. Zanch. de attribut. l. 1.
c. 13. Drusium de nomine Tetragrammato.
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, by the name of Almighty God, but by my name
Jehovah was I not known to them. Exodus 6. 3. 8. the meaning whereof is, as if
he should have said, I did manifest my self to be Almighty and
All-sufficient, but in my name Jehovah was I not known, that is, I did not in
deed perform that which in word I had promised, for I said that I would bring
them out into the land of Canaan, they did not see this, but thou shall see it,
and this title shall be a memorial unto you, even of my truth and my
constancy: And hereof it is that so often in the Prophets, when either some
especial mercy is promised, or extraordinary judgment threatened, there is
added to it this name Jehovah, the Lord has spoken it, as Ezech. 5. 17.
Jeremy 31. 33. In which chapter being wholly promissorie concerning the new
covenant of grace and free pardon of sins, which the Church obtayneth through
Christ, it is repeated three and thirty times. And so speaking of Cyrus before
he was borne, whom he had appointed to be the instrument of freeing his
people, and sending them home again after seauentie years captivity he,
assures it in this form of words: And his victory over the King of Babylon.
That thou may know I am Jehovah: Esaias 43. 1. 2. 3. Adonai another name of
God, importing his Rule and Dominion over all, and his sustayning power, that
he is the vpholder of his, as Malach. 1. 6. craving his due honor, and in
assurance of mercy unto his people. Esaias 51. 22. And the Prophet here being so
deeply distressed, does not unfitly use these titles, relying for his
deliverance upon the undoubted certainety of Gods truth, and all-sufficient
strength of his power.

Let thine ears attend, etc.
This is uttered to the capacity of our understanding, for in God, being a
spirit. John 4. 24. there be neither the parts of a humane body, as the
Anthropomorphits fondly imagined, neither is he subject to the passion of man's
mind, but according to the rule of Dialeg. de sancta Trinitate. (...). Sic
insinuatur Deus paruulis audientibus. August. de Genes. ad literam cont.
Manich. l. 1. cap. 17. and in psalm. 9. Hilarious de Trinitat. lib. 6. and in
hunc locum. Damas. l. 1. Orthod. fidei c. 14. (...), Cyrillus de Trinitat. c.
12.
Athanasius, such speeches be uttered after the manner of men, but to be
understood as is beseeming God, who in his word teaches us spiritual things
in bodily terms, and shows us invisible things by those which be visible.
As his oath signifies the immutability of his counsel. Genesis 22. 16. his
anger and wrath, the hatred of evil and just revenge thereof. Psalm. 2. 12. his
forgetfulness or sleep, the deferring either of help or punishment. Psalm.
13. 1. and Psalm. 78. 65. so when eyes are attributed unto him, we are to
understand his favor. Deuter. 32. 10. his mouth and speech are declarations
unto us of his will. Number. 12. 8. Esaias 40. 5. and so of the like: and in this
place his ears attending, do teach his merciful willingness to grant our
requests, who seems as one Non audientia tantum Dei, sed obedientia quasi
designatur: Saluianus de prudentia lib 2.
speaks, not only to yield audience to the prayers of his children, but to
perform a kind of obedience in waiting, to attend their supplications, as
Psalm. 34. 15. the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are
open to their cry.

Doctrine.
Therefore, since the Prophet does so carefully, in so many words, so often
iterated, urge this one thing, his desire of being accepted in prayer, we are
to learn that: It is the greatest evil, which can befall a man in this life,
if God shall refuse to hear his prayers. Wherefore as a token, yea, a
threatening of his wrath, when his admonitions are rejected it is said, he will
not hear, when petitions are put up unto him. Prouer. 1. 28. and the like.
Iere. 14. 11. 12. for so long as God does not refuse our prayer, he does not
deny his Cum videris, non a te amotam deprecationem tuam, securus esto, quia
non est, a te amota misericordia eius. Aug. in psalm. 66.
mercy. Therefore, David breaks forth in great joy: praised be God who has
not put back my prayer, nor his mercy from me. Psalm. 66. 20. For when man's
petitions ascends, Gods blessings descends, he is readier to give then we to
ask. And this is it which so discouraged the Israelites in their captivity,
and of which they complain, and for which they mourn, that their prayers in
this distressed estate, had no acceptance. Lam. 3. 44. for we have no help but
from God, if he destroy who can save? And this is the reason that made David of
his three offers to make the choice to fall into the hands of the Lord, who
when he had wounded, could in his power, and would in his mercy, heal again.
1. Chro. 21. 13.

Use.
From this we may learn and understand the folly of men, who put off their
repentance from day to day, as though God were bound to wait, when they would
call for mercy, and must condescend if they can but say, Lord have mercy. As
the thief. Luc. 23. 42. Lord remember me Confessio breuis vitam atque sinit
longam.
; indeed this is an example of receiving at the last, and memorable of one,
that none should despair; for at what time a sinner does repent, there is a
promise of pardon. Ezech. 18. 21. and but of one, that none should presume, for
he that Lege creationis, vespera and mane dies est. at multis ex peccati
grauitate dies est sine vespera, vt Sodomitis Genes. 19. 24. multis sine
aurora, vt diuiti. Luc. 12. 20.
has promised that at what time so ever a man does return, he shall be
received, has not assured the time wherein he shall return, for it may be
that either God will not hear when thou do cry for Vide de bis Scotum in
4. sententiaru^ did. 20.
mercy, and that lege talionis by a just law of requital, because thou did
not listen to him, calling for repentance, as Zach. 7. 13. and an example in
Antiochus. 2. Machab. 9. 13. or thou shall have no list to pray, but die
sottishly, as Nabal. 1. Sam. 25. 37. or no Punitur hac animaduersione peccator,
vt morie^s obliuiscatur sui, qui viuens oblitus est Dei. August. in festo
Innocent. ser. 3.
mind being oppressed with extremity of pain, or fear of death, as 1. Sam.
4. 20. he that does ouer-slippe the opportunity of timely repentance, shall
come to late, with the foolish Virgins, to crave aperi nobis Domine, open to us
O Lord. Math. 25. 11. therefore let us seek the Lord while he may be found,
call upon him while he is near. Esaias 55. 6. and while it is called to day
return. Hebr. 3. 12. 13. and live soberly and justly and godly in this (...),
Lutherus in psalm. 90. Quid habemus de tempore? praeteritum abijt, nec potest
reuocari, futuru^ nondum est, and est incertum. Quid ergo restat nobis nisi
praese^s, quod est momentum subito euanescens.
now world. Tit. 2. 11. 12. For no man has more, then the very present: for
that which is passed, is not to be called again, and that which is to come,
uncertain to us, whether ever it shall be ours: therefore now, now must be our
care, and our charge, knowing that we all shall appear before the tribunal
seat of Jesus Christ, and there receive according to that we have done in this
body, whether it be good or evil. 2. Cor. 5. 10.

Out of the deepes have I called upon thee, O Lord: O Lord hear my voice, let
thine ears attend to the voice of my prayers.
THe doubling of these Geminatio clamoris est sign ficatio intimae
deprecationis. Alcunuis in hunc psalm.
words, O Lord, O Lord, and the gradation of speech, hear my voice, and let
thine ears attend, is not slenderly to be passed over: for in these is
bewrayed the passionate affection of a distressed soul, striving against the
temptations of the Devil, and the corruption of weak flesh, which in
afflictions, and under the weight and burden of the Cross, murmureth against
God, like Jobs wife. Job 2. 9. and intermitteth prayer, as though it were to no
purpose, to call upon God to appease him being displeased. And in truth the
holy Saints do oftentimes find in the extremities of trials, that their
temptations are not only not lessened, but rather increased and more sharper,
when they have made petition for deliverance or mitigation, and then every
moment of differring comfort, seems a denial of help, as in David's
complaints, how long? how long? Psalm. 13. 1. 2. and some learned do think,
that Elias did then strive with the like temptation, when he said, hear me O
Lord, O Lord hear me, 1. Kings 18. 37.

Such as do feel Gods heavy hand pressing them, sometimes Doctrine.
persuade themselves, that he neither sees their miseries, nor hears their
complaints, nor remembers to show mercy, and send deliverance. So Job 16. 17.
If I cry, and he answer me, yet would I not believe that he heard my voice,
for he destroys me with a tempest, and wounds me without a cause: for
the bitterness of the present suffering distafleth the sweetness of the
comfort, and the whole Church of Judah in that great desolation, mentioned 2.
King. 25. 4. when I cry and shoute, he shuts out my prayer. Lament. 5. 8.
and Psalm. 77. 8. 9. is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail
for evermore? has God forgotten to be merciful? has he shut up his tender
mercies in displeasure? And truly of all temptations, this is one of the
greatest: therefore the Wiseman Pro. 18. 14. makes this question which is
equivalent unto it, and in effect, a negation, A wounded soul, who can bear?
it is too heavy a burden for the strongest shoulders. Under this, Cain
dispaired, Genesis 4. 13. And Judas oppressed with grief, did hang himself,
Math. 27. 5. and became a dreadful spectacle to the world. Acts 1. 18. And not
long since Totam illam historiam Epistolis aliquot co^plexus est: Caelius
Secundus.
Francis Spira, after he had for fear denied the truth, was so deeply wounded
in his conscience, that he dyed in great discomfort, interpreting all the
sweet promises of Gods mercy against himself: for a soul thus touched
(without especial grace) is skillful in the own accusation.

For the use of this doctrine, none can be more profitable, Use.
then to consider what medicines God has provided against such a wound, in his
word, which is the sovereign healing balm, as Psalm. 107. 20. necessary to be
known: for oftentimes in great sickness, and other extraordinary crosses,
weak and sinful men, privy to their own offenses, and fearing the just
desert of them, come to this plunge. Therefore, for help in this case, first
take hold of Gods general promises of mercy, as, If thy sins be as red as
Scarlet, I will make them as white as wool; if they were as blood, they shall be
as snow. Esaias 1. 18. Further, As I live, says the Lord, I will not the death
of the wicked, but that he should turn from his way and live. Ezech. 33. 11.
Thus God has promised mercy, and if it be not enough, has O faelices quorum
causa jurat. Deus, O miseros sinec iuranti eredimus. Tertull. de patientia.
sworn it, that so by two things immutable, in which it is impossible he
should lie, we might have strong consolation. Heb. 6. 18. Thus did Paul receive
comfort, by applying the general particular to himself, and has left an
example of that heavenly Art, to the faithful for ever, in that notable
speech: This is a true saying, and worthy by all means to be received, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the greatest;
notwithstanding for this cause was I received to mercy, that Jesus Christ
should first show on Paulus ex persecutore Christianoru^, Christi annunciator
factus est: vtilitas huius rei gesta haec est, quanc ipse co^memorat, dicit
enim ab hoc sibi veniam datam, etc. vt nemo de se desperet qui suerit magnis
peccatis inuolutus. etc. August. sermon. de co^uersione Pauli. Vide illius insig
nem de hac materid tractatum in sermon. 10. de bis ipsis verbis Apost.

Sic Tantus Deus. Tantum vt da ^et filium. Tantillos mundu^
Tales Gratis. quare
Dilexit.


me all long suffering unto the example of them, which shall in time to come
believe in him unto eternal life. 1. Tim. 1. 15. 16. for indeed he came to
seek and to save that which was lost. Luc. 19. 10. and calls us with an
assurance of relief. Math. 11. 28. therefore let us go with boldness unto
the Throne of grace, not doubting to obtain favor in the time of need. Hebr.
4. 16.

Secondly, consider the price by which you are redeemed, it is not gold or
silver, but the precious blood of Jesus Christ, a Lamb immaculate, and without
spot. 1. Pet. 1. 18. whom God of especial favor gave for us, and therefore
the Evangelist k utters this with a note of admiration and wonder, So God
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that all that believe
in him should not perish, but have life everlasting. Ioh. 3. 16. and here in
appeared his love, not in that we loved him, but he loved us first, and gave
himself a reconciliation for our sins. 1. John 4. 10. for then we were weak
sinners and his enemies. Romans 5. 7. 10. he will not lose them, Hic est feuctus
orationis Christi pro crucifixoribus, Luc. 23. 34. Aug. in psalm. 93. and
sanguine^ que^ fuderunt saeuientes, biberunt credentes, and facti sunt
seque^tes, qui erant persequentes. Idem de S. Stephano ser. 4. Hae sunt
primitiae quas Petrus Deo obsulit.
whom he has so dearly bought; for even those are washed with that blood of
Christ, which they shed, l as Acts 2. 37. and therefore every Christian must
grow to that resolution, that he be persuaded that neither death nor life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creatures shall be able to separate
him from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans 8. 38. 39.

Thirdly, set before your eyes the examples of sinners, whom God has received
into favor, as Adam resisting, and laying the imputation of his transgression
upon God (...) peccati in Deum: haec vna nobiscum nata est Rhetorica.
himself. The (...). Dorotheus doctrina prima in Orthodoxographia.
woman whom thou gave, has deceived me: yet unto him never asking was
preached the Gospel, that the seed of the woman should break the head of the
Serpent. Genesis 3. 15. David obtaining pardon after his adultery and murder. 2.
Sam. 12. 13. Manasses prayer heard, who had filled Jerusalem with innocent
blood, and done evil above the abominations of the Gentiles, and to anger the
Lord Non horruisti confitentem latronem, non Cananeam supplicantem, non
lachryma^tem peccatricem, non deprehensam in adulterio, non sede^tem in Telonia
non supplicantem Publicanum, non negantem Discipulum, non persecutorem
Discipulorum, non ipsos crucifixores tuos. In odore^ horum currimus. Bern.
sermon. 23. in Cantic. sol.
withal. 2. Chron. 33. 6. 10. 13. And Peter converted by the gracious eye of
Christ looking upon him: whom he had denied, sorsworne, and banned, and cursed,
that he knew him not. Luc. 22. 61. so that he went out and wept bitterly. Math.
26. 75. and so watered the dried root of faith, with a shower of Oculus
misericordiae, beatus oculus, calefecit cor frigidu^, accendit in amorem,
illuminauit, vt videat homo, seruatorem and errorem suum, Gelicidium pectoris
liquesecit, and in aquas amaritudines and deuotionis conuertit. Georgius Wirts
in Harmonia Euangelij.
tears, and this acceptance of sinners is notably laid out in the Parable,
where the Father, even the God of heaven, receives his prodigal Son, our
elder brother Velociter, amanter, honorifice, laetanter. Vide Nicholaum de
Clemengijs, sermon. de filio prodigo.
returning (as the Divines observe) speedily; for when he was a far off he
ran unto him lovingly, he embraced and kissed him honorably, he put the best
garment upon his back, a ring upon his finger, and shoes upon his feet, and
joyfully; for then he called to eat and to be merry. Luc. 15. 20. 21. 22. 23.
And these things are written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Romans 15. 4.

Out of the deep places have I called unto thee, O Lord: O Lord hear my
voice, let thine ears attend to the voice of my prayers.
THere be two words, here which the Fathers Gregorius Magnus in hunc locum.
have diligently examined, the one the Verb of the Preterperfect Tense, I have
called. Wherein is commended unto us perseverance, that we leave not off, if at
the first we be not heard; for God will be entreated, he will be compelled, he
will be overcome by importunity: and this forceable Tertull. in Apologetico. c.
39. Grata Deovis.
means he likes well, when he is as it were besieged and driven into a
straight by our petitions, and therefore he says, that the Kingdom of God
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. Math. 11. 12. The other
is prayers, in the plural number, not one, but many: for if God hear not at
the first, the second, or third time, yet at the last he will come gratior, quo
tardior: Recompensing his slacknesse with the increase of his comfort.

Therefore, we must not appoint God his time to help us, Doctrine.
as he in the Gospel who must needs have Christ go down now, and heal his
(...) The Lieftena^t or President, for the Romayne Emperor who kept his
gariso^ in Capernaum: Cuiacius in Nonell. primum.
Son. Ioh. 4. 47. but continue in prayer, Luc. 18. 2. A memorable example in
the woman of Canaan, who would take no nay, who withstood those two great
expulses and temptations, of indignity, the bread must be given to the
children, not to Vera fides (...). Chrysostom. homil. 2. in Epist. ad Heb.
dogs, and of particularity, (he was sent to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, not to the Gentiles,) and at last obtained more (even a commendation of
her faith,) then she desired, and her Magna est fidei virtus, vincit
inuincibilem, ligat omnipotente^, deprehendit ignota comprehe^dit immania.
Leuatur ad mensam, quae se sub mensa laudabili, et prouida humilitate deiecit.
Chrysologus sermon 100.
request. Math. 15. 28. And this is it which the Apostle calls striving in
prayers with God. Romans 15. 30. for if we will have the blessing, we must
wrestle as Jacob did, and never leave our hold until we obtain. Genesis 32. 26.
which is expounded by the Prophet to be with prayer and tears: one moves, and
the other compels. Osea 12. 4. for oftentimes he does not give present
comfort to his dear children, and that either because he would keep them in
spiritual health, as Paul after his taking up into the third heaven, had a
minister of Satan to buffet him, and though he prayed thrice often and
earnestly to be delivered, yet could not obtain, but only had this answer, My
grace is August. tract. 73. in Euang. Iohannis.
sufficient. 2. Cor. 12. 9. Non facit voluntatem, vt faciat sanit atem, or that
when it comes we might know, and so acknowledge that it is not ours, but his,
as the Israelites do. Psalm. 124. 1. or to make trial of their constancy, as
he did Abraham, when he was even at the very act of sacrificing his Son
Isaac, before the Lord showed any the least suspicion of his Mortuus videbatur
pater quodammodo, mortuus iam filius, vterque vita^ voce Angeli recipit:
Nissenus in oratione habita in funere Pulcheriae.
deliverance. Genesis 22. 11. 12. or to kindle their zeal in prayer, as it was
with Moses at the brincke of the red Sea, inter gladios and fructus. Exodus 14.
9. oftentimes the door is shut, that we might be enforced to knock the
Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 7. Matthew.
louder. Math. 7. 7. or to increase their joy, so was it more for the honor of
the three children, to be kept in the fire, then to have been kept from it.
Dan. 3. 27. Therefore to conclude, a Qui vult Deo seruire, oportet eum credere
inuisibilia, sperare dilata, amare Deum se contrarium ostendente^, and in finem
perseuerare Lutherus.
Christian must believe things unseen, hope for things delayed, love God
although he seem to deal as an enemy, and persevere unto the end. For the
afflictions which God sends, they be the rods of a father correcting, not
the sword of a Judge punishing. 1. Cor. 11. 32.

Use.
Seeing such is the comfortable issue, and prevailing power of constant prayer,
and we so weak to continue in the same, for even he that made offer to die for
Christ, could not watch with him one hour. Math. 26. 40. 43. and most men in
all holy actions are not unlike the new moon, which shines in the first part
of the night, and leaves the rest in darkness, make fair onsets at the
first, but soon glue over: therefore the best use of this doctrine is to
consider a few motives which may strengthen our fainting spirits in the
performance of this duty: as amongst many, these.

First, the Commandment, as that to the Church of Thiatira, commended for her
love, and service, and faith, and works, yet hold fast till I come, says
Christ. Apoc. 2. 25. and in particular, Pray continually. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. for
in deferring, God does not deny but commend his gifts, that we should ask
great things Si non statim exaudit Deus, ad horam, non contemnit querente, sed
excitat petentem. Aug. tract. 6. in 1. Epist. Johan.
earnestly.

Secondly, the practice of the faithful, who at the last finds desired
success, as Joseph after many years is delivered out of prison. Genesis 41. 14.
even in his appointed time. Psalm. 105. 19. Israel long groneth under the
burden of Egypt 430. years, cries unto the Lord and obtains freedom.
Exodus 12. 41. therefore as the eyes of a servant wait upon his Master, and the
eyes of a maiden upon her Mistress, so let our souls wait until the Lord will
have mercy. Psalm. 123. 2.

Thirdly, and lastly, the reward is to be considered, of which it is said, that
he that continues unto the end shall be saved. Math. 10. 22. and this
obtayneth the desire. Luc. 11. 8. so Marie Magdalena while she stands
weeping Magdalena cursu and recursis voce and ciulatis Dominum suum, quem
sublatuins credidit, ardentissime quarit, and inuenit que^ quaesiuit anima
cius. Quaeramus and nos Christum ex fide, astabit nobis, licet non illico euni
agnouerimus, praesentissimus. Georgius Wirth in Harmon. Euangel. A monume^to
domini recedentibus Discipulis non recedebat, ergo sola vidit, quae rema^serat,
vt quaereret, quia nimirum virtus boni operis est perseuerantia. Gregorias
Magnus hom. in Euang. 25.
at the sepulcher, and continues, finds that which she sought. John 20. 11.
and in deed without this perseverance, no virtue is crowned. Many run, but
one gets the garland, he that continues and comes to the Goal:
therefore, let us take the rule of the Apostle, so to run that we may S. Paul
alludeth to those Games, which were yearly celebrated no the neck of (...)
or Isthmos, where upon Corinth was situated, and therefore well known to this
people.
obtain. 1. Cor. 9. 24. and never despair of mercy; for he that commands
the duty, has promised the reward. Therefore are they conjoined, seek and
ye shall find, ask and ye shall have, knock and it shall be opened unto
you. Math. cap. 7. verse. 7.

Let thine ears attend unto the voice of my prayer.
The word here translated prayer, is of special force, for it does not
signify simply a prayer, but a prayer for grace, for pardon, and forgiveness
of sin, as in the supplication of Solomon. 1. Kings 8. 30. Iere. 3. 21. and
else where; so that it concludes a secret confessing and acknowledging, that
it was sin which had plunged him in this depth.

It is man's wickedness, therefore which procures Gods judgments. It is said
of Sodom that their sin cried to heaven. Then the Lord rained from the Lord
from heaven, fire and brimstone. Genesis 19. 24. a strange punishment for a
strange offense, and yet answerable unto the same, as the Fathers have
observed. Heat of fire revenging the heat, and the stinch of Cum carnis
scelera punire decreuit Deus, in ipsa quatitate vltionis, notauit maculam
criminis, qui itaque ad peruersa desideria, ex carnis faetore arserant, dignum
fuit vt simul igne and sulphur perirent. Sulphur quippe faetorem, and ignis
ardorem. Gregor. Magnus Moral. lib. 14. cap. 10. and Alcuinus in quaestionibus
in Genesin.
brimstone, the filthiness of their lust. God made Siloh desolate, but shows
the reason, it was for the sins of the inhabitants. Iere. 7. 12.

God threatened the house of Elie, in most fearful manner; it was caused, for
that he saw his sons ran into a slander, and he stayed them not. 1. Sam. 3.
13. The Gentiles were delivered up into a reprobate mind, to do those things
that Doctrine.
were not convenient, not to regard themselves; a due revenge, for they
regarded not to know (...), etc.
God. Romans 1. 28. And not to stand longer in confirmation of a point so
apparent, for none is ignorant, that the evil of sin brings the evil of
punishment, and as the one increases, so does the other: and therefore, in the
dreadful Catalogue after the enumeration of many and great judgments, if men
go on so stubbornely, the Lord has in store his four seauens of plagues, and
after them an endless number, to power upon the disobedient. Leuit. 26. 21.
24. and never cease until they be destroyed, and clean rooted out. Deuteronomy. 28.
45. 63. therefore. Psalm. 32. 10. many sorrows shall come to the wicked, where
it is worthy the noting, that the punishment is in the plural number, the
Multa flagella sunt improbo. Use.
person in the singular.

First, let this be an admonition unto us, carefully to avoid sin: for such
is the subtlety of our adversary in seducing, such is our weakness in
resisting, that he will soon bring us from one offense, to many, from the
lighter (if any can be light, which is committed against the infinite and
eternal God) unto the greater. And this is apparent, not only in the wicked,
as Cain, in whom when the grief of the acceptance of his brothers Which he
perceived by a visible sign, of fire descending from heaven up on it. Paulus
Phagius in Paraphrasi Chaldaica super Genesin. And this God used as a token of
acceptance. 1. Chron. 21. 26. And hence is that form of prayer used by the
proverb, Psalm. 20. 3. Odoretur omnia munera tua, and holocaustum tuum in
cinerem redigat.
sacrifice was settled in his heart, it brought forth wrath: wrath desire of
revenge: this desire a plotting of means how to effect it, and so never
ceased, until he had imbrued his hands in innocent blood. Genesis 4. 4. 18. but
even in Gods dear children.

For David walking daily upon the top of his house, his eyes (the first
instruments of lusts) behold the beauty of a woman, his heart desires, his
tongue craves, and his body commits uncleanness. 2. Sam. 11. 2. 3. 4. Sic
venit, vidit, victus est. If such a Cedar were so soon shaken, how shall the
Reeds be able to stand against the tempest? Wherefore let us take that caveat
of the Apostle: Be sober and watch, for your adversary the Devil goes about
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may Deseribitur Diabolus a potentia quod
Leo, ab odio and ira quod rugiens, a (...), obambulat, a saeuitia, quaerit quem
diuoret. Stigelius in 3. part. locorum com. Melanch. titulo de cruce and
calamitatibus.
devour, 1. Pet. 5. 7. 8. And withstand him at the first. Ephesians. 4. 17. and
avoid all occasions: for blessed is the man that has not walked in the
counsel of the wicked, nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat
Est bic Psalmus quasi Epistola dedicatoria Spirit. Sanct. ad lectionem
Scripturae hortantis.
of the scornful. Psalm. 1. 1. 2.

Secondly, by this also we are taught what a fearful thing it is, to fall
into the hands of God by displeasing him, for he is slow to anger, but great
in power, and who can stand before his wrath? Nahum. 1. 3. 6. the fierceness
whereof appears; In the generality of his punishment; for so all flesh
perished in the floode, because all flesh had corrupted their ways. Genesis 7.
23. In the sharpness and extremity thereof; so Iohoram who would by no means
be reformed, was at the last strooken incurably, so that after the end of two
years, his guts fell out, and he dyed of sore diseases. 2. Chron. 21. 19.

In the speedy and swift execution: so while the word was in Nebucadnezars
mouth, vaunting of himself, he was deprived of understanding, thrust out to
live among the beasts. Dan. 4. 30. and (...) Amens and insanus factus, non
conuersus in bestiam, sed bestiarum socius. Vide Pierium in Hieroglyphicis l.
9. Hunc Strabo vocat. lib. 15. Geographiae suae, (...). Hunc Regem e Graecis
praeter Strabonem nulbis nominat Casaubonus in Strabonem.
in the multitude of his instruments, by which he takes vengeance of the
disobedient. Angels Psalm. 78. 49. Men. Ier. 13. 14. Brute beasts. 2. Kings 17.
25. The elements of the world: water choked Pharao. Exodus 14. 28. the air
fought against the Cananits. Joshua 10. 11. The fire consumed Ahazias
messengers. 2. Kings 1. 10. The earth swalloweth up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.
Number. 16. 32. Besides sickness wasted Herod. Acts 12. 23. Hunger pined the
rebellious Israelites, so that the tender woman eat her children of a spanne
long. Lament. 4. 5. 10. The sword is the revenger of the covenant. Leuit. 25.
26. And these or the like judgments, none can escape. Psalm. 139. 15. Therefore
let us take the admonition from the Lords own mouth. O consider this, you that
forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none that can Piae matris
haec verba sunt, nam nos non tradit iudicio Deus, sed tanquam suasione and
admonitione corrigi debent, metu coercet and continet. Chrysostom. in illum locum.
deliver you. Psalm. 50. 22.

If thou, O Lord, straightly markest iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand? but
mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared.
IN these words are set down two reasons of David's earnest prayer, the first
taken from the consideration of sin in him self and others: the second from
the respect of Gods mercy. In the sin the points: first, the quality of it,
(Iniquity.) Secondly, the subject (all:) therefore who shall stand by way of
interrogation, including a negative, that none can stand. Thirdly, the effect,
even the revenging wrath of God, If he should mark it straightly. In the mercy
also there be three branches: first, a free gift without desert (mercy:)
second, where it is, not in man but God (with thee:) the third, the end thereof
why it is bestowed, that thou may be feared.

If thou, O Lord, straightly markest iniquity.
There is in this place a secret preoccupation, for either God who knows all
our secrets, or else our own conscience might object in this sort, Thou art a
sinner, and therefore deservedly cast into these extremities, how therefore
should God hear thee? nay, why rather should he not consume thee in his
displeasure? for this marking here spoken off, is to be understood according to
the rule of Gods justice, and that both in respect of the judgment, and the
punishment. Of judgment, wherein our sins and offenses are examined
according to the prescript of the law, to which no flesh, in regard of natural
corruption, can be answerable: of punishment, when God does lay men's sins to
their charge, and according to his justice afflict them; for before him all men
are offenders and guilty, and bound to suffer the punishment of their
transgressions. To this the Prophet answers, first, by a concession,
acknowledging, if God would deal summo iure, according to rigor and strictly,
that then none could be saved; if thou straightly markest iuiquitie, O Lord who
can stand? Secondly, by a correction of speech; but with thee is mercy: that
is, thou do not in extremity weigh our sins, but pardon them, for thy
rich mercy in Christ. For never any of the Fathers or Patriarchs, found Gods
favor, but in the promised seed. Genesis 3. 75. and therefore Daniel entreats
it for the Lords Messiam promissum, quem fecit Deus Dominu^ and Christum Act.
2. 36. codem argumento vtitur Ecclesia psalm. 80. 15. 16. Polanus in illum locum
Danielis.
sake, in the distressed time of captivity. Dan. 9. 17.

Doctrine.
Sin, and the conscience of sin, hinders our prayers: conscience of sin,
that knowing our own guiltiness, we dare not present our selves before God,
for as Bernard truly Duobus modis impeditur oration peccatoris, vel nulla, vel
nimia luce, nulla luce illustratur, qui peccata sua nec videt, nec confitetur:
nimia luce obruitur, qui ea tanta videt, vt de indulgetia desperet, horum
neuter orat, etc. Iusententijs.
speaks, the prayers of a sinner, are hindered two ways, vel nulla, vel nimia
luce, by too much light, when he is overwhelmed and dusted with the sight of
his offenses, and beholds them so great, that he despaireth of mercy and
pardon: so was it with Cain, when arraigned and convicted, he cries out, My
sin is greater then can be forgiven. Genesis 4. 13. And with Judas, when he saw
what he had done in betraying of innocent blood, he went and hanged himself.
Math. 27. 5. By no light, when a man does neither know nor acknowledge his
sins, and therefore is not a suter for favor. Such a one was the Pharisie in
the Gospel, blinded with the love of himself, who begins with his gloria
patri, in fleede of a miserere: and sees no faults in himself, but thinks
that God was beholden (...). Basilius Isauriensis sermon. de Pharisaeo and
Publicano.
to him. Luc. 18. verse. 13. and such call not upon God. Psalm. 53. 4. Sin,
when men guilty to themselves do imagine that the Lord will not respect them,
for he hears not sinners. John 9. 31. such as be profane, and run into all
kind of wickedness without remorse, and indeed their prayers are
abomination. Proverb. 28. 9. and of such does God speak: When you shall
stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, and though ye make
many prayers, I will not hear: adding the reason, For your hands are full of
blood. Esaias 1. 15. Therefore shall you observe it in the Scripture, that the
faithful always before they power forth their hearts unto God in petitions,
they humbly confess their sins and unworthiness, as Jacob. Genesis 32. 11. I
am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and all the truth which thou
have showed unto thy servant, etc. then, I pray thee, deliver me from the hand
of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for I fear him. And Daniel the 9. 5. we
have sinned, we have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea we have
rebelled and departed from thy precepts, and from thy judgments. And Verse. 8.
O Lord, unto us appertains open shame, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to
our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee. Then afterward Ver. 16. 17.
the request: O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee let
thine anger and thy wrath be turned away, and now hear the prayer of thy
servant, and his supplication, and cause thy face to shine upon the sanctuary,
that lies waste for the Lords sake, etc. And Ezra in most passionate manner
expressed in action and speech, rent his garments, fell upon his knees, and
spread his hands unto the Lord, and said, O my God, I am confounded and ashamed
to lift up mine eyes to thee, for our iniquities are increased on our head, and
our trespass is grown up unto the heavens. Ezra 9. 5. 6.

Therefore let us draw near (unto God) with true hearts, Use.
in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and
washed in our bodies with pure water. Hebr. 10. 22. Now there be, as we heard,
two hindrances of our prayers, no light, no feeling, hardness: and to (...)
light, over great tenderness, both dangerous, therefore the best application
of this doctrine is to know the remedy of them. Wherefore against hardness
and insensiblenesse, as most Bernardus de (...) duobus Discipulis euntibus in
Emaus.
effectual, First, instance and earnestness in prayer: so the Disciples
constrained Christ, Abide with us, for it is toward night, and the day is
far spent, and he went in to tarry with them. Luc. 24. 29. Thus David after
(...). Dydimus.
his fall, Create in me a clean heart, renew a right spirit, restore to me the
joy of thy salvation. Psalm. 51. 10. 11. 12.

Secondly, ready obedience to the first motions of God in thee, of which the
Apostle, Quench not the spirit. 1. These. 5. 19.

Thirdly, the reading of the Scriptures, and in this exercise add an often
lifting up of the eyes, of thy body and mind, with a humble sight unto God,
desiring his inlightning grace: which kind of prayers, the fathers
Eiaculationes de his Augustinus in Epistola 121. ad Probam.
called dartings: for being sent from a religious soul, they fly swiftly, and
pierce Gods heart, that he may show mercy, as in Iostah. 2. Chron. 34. 27.

Fourthly, the reverent attendance to the public ministry, for this is Gods
ordinance, to bring men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto himself. Acts 26. 18. and his power to salvation. Romans 1. 16. So at John's
sermons, the Publicans, the People, the Soldiers, (three sorts at once,
hardest to be converted) when they heard of the Axe laid to the root of the
trees, and of hewing down and casting into the fire, they cried out, What
shall we do then? Luc. 3. 10. and while Peter preached, the hearts of those
Jews were wounded, who before were so hard, that they crucified the Lord of
life; and three thousand of them were added Nunquam caret suo fructu verbi
predicatio, vis co^punctionis poros cordis aperit, and pe^nas virtutu^ fundit
cumque se studiosa meus, de pigra vetustate redarguit, alacri mouitate
iuuenescit. Gregor. Mor. l. 31. c. 18.
to the Church. Acts 2. 37. 41.

Fifthly, the meditation of the sweetness of Gods mercies, and the sharpness
of his judgments; for as the yellowest wax by lying long in the Sun and the
Air, is turned white: so that soul which is ever set, as in the sight of God,
can not but be altered. This effect had it in David. 1. Chron. 17. 16. and with
Ezra 9. 2. And Nazianzene Orat. de Pace.
reports, that when he found himself carried away with the delight of the
world, then he took into his hands and red the doleful and heavy mournings
of Jeremy: and protests that his eyes did gush out with tears, his tongue
was stayed from speech: he lamented with the distressed Jews, and beheld their
calamities, as present before his eyes, and so became settled to his former
estate again.

Sixthly, add to all these repentant tears, let thy eyes be as the fish ponds
of Hesbon, ever full with water: this inforceth God to mercy, and it is that
violence which he well likes. So the Father in the Gospel weeping, obtained.
Mar. 9. 24. 25. 27. And at Ezechias tears, when the sobs of his heart brake
off the words of his mouth, and left his prayers imperfect, the sentence of
death was reuersed, certain life and number of years granted, and more
bestowed then was demanded. Esaias 58. 5. For our God is faithful and will never
suffer us to be tempted above that it will please him to make us able to bear,
and with the temptation grant a comfortable issue. 1. Cor. 10. 13.

Against the second, nimia lux, which is discouragement and despair, if the
greatness of thy sins do affright thee, know where sin abounds, grace
superaboundeth. Romans 5. 20. If they be as red as crimson, and like unto blood,
they shall be made as white as wool and snow. Esaias 1. 18. If thou fear the
multitude thereof, oppose the number of Gods mercies, to the number of thy
transgressions? have you wickedness, sins and iniquities? he has
forgiveness, covering and not imputing. Psalm. 32. 1. 2. And the blood of
Christ his Son, does purge us from all sin. 1. John 1. 7. And therefore, it
pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, to reconcile to
himself, and set at peace by the blood of his Cross, the things in heaven,
and the things in earth. Coloss. 1. 19. What wound is there, that the Almighty
cannot heal? Sic misericors est, and bonus Deus vt omnipotens and infinitus,
God is Fulgentius Epist. 7. ad Venantiam.
so good and merciful, as he is Almighty and infinite: but the mercy of the
Almighty cannot be overcome, and the goodness of the infinite has no end.
Do thou stand in doubt of his gracious will toward thee? why, his will is
that all men might come to the knowledge of the truth, that so they might be
saved. 1. Tim. 2. 4. neither will he the death of a sinner, but rather that
they should return and so live; and this has he assured by his oath. Ezech.
33. 11. And when he is enforced and strikes, yet does he not deal with us
according to our sins, neither reward us according to our offenses, but as a
father does pity his children, so does he us. Psalm. 103. 10. 13. whetting the
sword of his justice, in the oil of (...). Euagrius lib. 4. cap. 6. Nicephorus
l. 17. c. 3
his mercy.

And further, set before thy eyes as visible testimonies, the examples of the
greatest sinners, obtaining the greatest mercies at Gods hands: he made Matthew
a Publican an Evangelist: Marie Magdalene a harlot, an Apostle to the Apostles:
the thief upon the Cross, a possessor of Paradise: Paul a persecutor, a
preacher, and he confirmed Peter, denying him, forswearing, banning, and
cursing, that he knew him not most lovingly in his Apostleship, and all these
and the like, they are examples to all for time to come, that shall believe in
Christ. 1. Tim. 1. 17. Lastly, if the weight of the Cross and afflictions do
press thee down, and thereby thou conceiuest God to be angry with thee: well
know that so he has exercised his dearest Saints. Job is disposlessed of all,
children, servants, goods, health, comfort, and complayneth that the Lord had
written bitter things against him, and pursued him like an enemy. Job 10. 17.
18. Great Eliah is so distressed, that he wishes death, complayining under his
Juniper tree. 1. Kings 19. 9. And David a man according to Gods own heart,
finds a heap of miseries in his house, good mementoes of his sin. 1. Sam.
12. 10. etc. and this made him confess, that it was profitable for him that he
was afflicted: for before he was troubled, he went wrong, but after, he kept
Gods commandments. Psalm. 119. v. 71. Why then as the Prophet speaks, is the
living man sorrowful, in suffering for his sins? Lament. 3. 39. Our corrupt
flesh stands in need of such salt to abate the rancknesse thereof, and these
things are written for our learning, that we through patience and hope of the
Scriptures might have comfort. Romans 15. 4.

Secondly, the second use is general, Let us therefore have grace, whereby we
may so serve God, that we may please him with reverence and fear. Hebr. 12.
28. For as S. Austen Tractatu 9. in primam Iohannis Epistolam.
partly said, fear is like the needle which makes the entrance and draws
after it the thread of all other virtues. Joseph makes it a reason of his
equity. Genesis 42. 18. and it is the cause of that mercy, which the midwiues
showed to the children of the Israelites. Exodus 1. 17. Therefore godliness and
fear go together, as it is said of Job, Cap. 1. 1. that he was just, feared
God, and eschewed evil: and the same noted in (...).
Simeon. Luc. 2. 25. And as motives hereunto, set God always before thine
eyes, unto whom all things are naked. Hebr. 4. 13. and beholds thy thoughts,
and hears thy words. Psalm. 139. 3. If this will not serve, then consider him
judging, rewarding, and punishing. Therefore it is the Wisemans inference,
Fear God and keep his commandments; for he shall call every work, and
every secret thing to judgment, whether it be good or evil. Eccl. 12. 14.
And the Apostles confession, We covet that both dwelling at home, and remoouing
from home, we may be acceptable unto him: for we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the things in his body,
according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. 2. Cor. 5. 10.

If thou Lord markest iniquity?
The holy Ghost uses here very significant words; for the original
translated, to mark, is to keep carefully and with diligence, that nothing
escape: as in that speech of our Savior Christ, Blessed are they that hear
the word of God and keep it. Luc. 11. 28. That is, do not suffer it to slip
from them. So it is said of Jacob, that he marked Joseph's sayings concerning
his dreams. Genesis 37. 11. Therefore it includes thus much, that God does not
only behold and know our evil deeds, but keep them in mind, and will in
his time also take vengeance of them, as he tells the hypocrite, who took
the advantage of his patience, and misinterpreted his long suffering, when he
was partaker with the adulterer, ran with the thief, slandered his own
mothers son, and thought God like himself, because he held his peace: but I
will set all these things in order before the. Psalm. 50. 21. And the word
Englished, iniquity, being of the plural number, implies both the greatness
and the number of sins.

So this being David's confession, whereby he is moved to Doctrine.
sue for pardon and forgiveness, teaches us,

That the most holy in earth compassed with flesh and blood, living in this
vale of misery, and place of temptation, are not only infected with the
stains of infirmity, but overtaken even with many and great offenses, with
gross transgressions. Righteous Lot is twice drunk, committed incest with his
own daughters: and after those facts the holy Ghost never makes mention of
him, as of the other Patriarks, but buryeth Lutherus in 19. caput Genescos.
him in his tears. Genesis 19. 35.

Aaron who had seen Gods wonders in Egypt, of mercy and justice, who walked
through the red Sea, heard the Lord speak from heaven, not many days after
makes a moulten Calfe, builds an Altar before it, and proclaims a holy
day, and offers sacrifice as unto Quinto die mensis tertij, data lex, decimo
septimo quarti adorant vitulum Israelitae.
the Lord. Exodus 32. 5. 6. which one example lively expresses our inbred
corruption, and pronenesse to all sin: Moses that great Prophet distrusteth,
at the waters of strife, Number. 20. 12. Solomon in age, after so long experience
of Gods mercies, and endued with so many benefits of admirable wisdom,
infinite riches, exceeding honor falls away, and builds high places for
the abominations of his strange wives, and burnt incense, and offered to their
Gods. 1. Kings 11. 4. 7. 8. Ezechias whose praise is so honorable in
Scripture, in stead of being thankful waxes proud, and rendereth not
according to the reward. 2. Chron. 32. 25. These and a thousand such like
examples, are evident and pregnant testimonies, conuincing how easy we are to
be seduced, weak to work, and unable to resist; for Generalis est humano
generi triplex miseria, etc. Nam and faciles sumus ad seducendum, debiles ad
opera^dum, frogiles ad resistendum, etc. Bernard. sermon. 7. de Aduentu.
if we would discern between good and evil, we are deceived; if we endeavor
to do good, we faint; if to resist evil, we are overcome: for the frame of
man's heart is only evil continually. Genesis 6. 5. and therefore it is not in him
to direct his own ways. Iere. 10. 23. But in many things as the Apostle
says (not excepting himself) we sin all, James 3. 2. neither are we fit to
think a good thought, much less to do a good deed. 2. Cor. 3. 5. But if
there be any, it is God who works both the will and the deed, according to
his good pleasure. Philip. 2. 13.

First, therefore no man is to be taken for an absolute pattern Use.
of life, for there is none just in the earth that does good, and sins not.
Eccles. 7. 21. That Zachary who is said to walk in all the commandments of
God, distrusteth the promise, and hat his In ipso tempore placationis offendit:
Voce^ cum vocem percipit, amittit. Tacult pater vocis. Chrysologus, sermon. 86.
and 88.
mouth closed up until the time of performance. Luke 1. 20. None is wise
without error, Eliah is deceived and reproved, he was not alone, there was
seven thousand in Israel, who had not bowed their knees to Baal. 1. Kings 19.
10. Therefore, in the case of imitation, the great Apostle speaks of
himself, conditionally with an exception: be ye followers of me, as I am of
Christ. 1. Cor. 11. 2. of Christ absolutely, be ye followers of Christ as
beloved children. Ephesians. 5. 1. for as he was the perfect price of our
redemption, so is he the unspotted example of our life: therefore, we must
listen to that his speech, Discite a me, learn of me. Math. 11. 29.

Secondly, Quia patres instruunt non modo cum docent, sed and cum errant, as
Ambrose speaks, lib. 1. de Abrahamo c. 6. The Fathers are our instructors,
not only by their doctrines, but also by their errors: and Justi supplantatio
mihi cautela. Iusti naufragium, sit peccatori stabilior portus. Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 51.
the fall of the great ones, is the fear of the lesser. Let us learn hereby
humility and wariness, to keep our hearts diligently. Prouer. 4. 23. that an
evil thought lodge not with us all night. Jeremy 4. 14. And set a watch
before our lips. Psalm. 41. 3. That no corrupt speech come from our mouths.
Coloss. 3. 8. And in the whole course of our lives walk warily, redeeming the
time. Ephesians. 5. 15. and so work forth our salvation in fear and trembling.
Philip. 2. 12. For as Austen Homilia. 23.
truly speaks, there is no sin that any man has committed, which every
man may not fall into, if he do not direct and govern, of whom man was first
made; therefore we have ever need of that prayer, Teach me thy ways O Lord,
and I will walk in thy truth, knit my heart unto thee that I may fear thy
name. Psalm. 86. 11.

Thirdly, let us not murmur or be impatient under the rod of afflictions: but
acknowledge that our crooked nature requires such corrections. This Daniel
confessed, we have sinned, we have transgressed, and to us belongs nothing
but shame and confusion of face. Dan. 9. 8. I will bear, says Micah, cap. 7.
9. the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. And this made Eli
so patient at the dreadful news, concerning his house and posterity, when he
said it is the Lord, let him do what pleases him. 1. Sam. 3. 18. And that of
Mauritius the Emperor Zonaras Annalium tom. 3. Cedrenus and Glycas Annalium.
lib. 4.
is memorable, who when he was dispossessed of his Throne, by his servant
Phocas, at the death of his five Sons who might have succeeded, and his self
ready to follow in the same way, in humble submission to the divine
providence, uttered that of the Prophet. Psalm. 119. 37. Just art thou O Lord,
and righteous are all thy judgments: and thus ought we to learn to submit our
selves under Gods hand. 1. Pet. 5. 6. for we have had the fathers of our
bodies, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: should we not much
rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, that we might live? Hebr.
12. 9. Therefore, let us apply that to our selves, that Eliphas does advise Job
in all his extremities; Blessed is the man whom God corrects, therefore
refuse not thou the chastising of the Almighty. Job 5. 17. Who shall stand?
This interrogation is equivalent to a negation, that none can stand; but this
manner of speech is more forceable, it is a kind of arraignement, it works
vehement passions in the mind, therefore so often used in Scripture.

As God unto Adam, vbi es? where art thou? what have thou done? have thou eaten
of the forbidden fruit? Genes. 3. 9. 10. 11. And to the wicked one, Why take
thou my words in thy mouth, whereas thou hate to be reformed? Psalm. 50. 16.
And it is noted by Plutarch, that In Ciceronem.
when Tullie made his Oration for Ligarius, who had taken arms against Caesar,
and urged the matter with his often and continual interrogations, that he
changed his color, as often as the other his speech; and was so affected that
the supplications which he held, sell out of his hand, and he pardoned his
enemy, though before he was otherwise resolved.

But what should I seek proofs? It is most excellent of Paul, that when he
pleaded for himself, and challenged King Agrippa, with this question:
Beleeuest thou the Prophets? he so wrought upon his affections, that he could
not contain, but acknowledged that he was almost persuaded to Ta^tam ex
Spirit. Sanct. victrice^ sapientiae gratiam habe^at, vt ipse iam Iudaeorum Rex
Agrippa diceret, parum ab est quin me fecetis Christianum. Cyrillus Cateches.
17.
be a Christian. Acts 26. 27. 28. And so in this place it is more to say, Who
can stand? then, none can stand, though all one in sense and meaning: for it is
a challenge to all men generally, and to every one in particular, if any dare
stand forth and plead not guilty. Wherefore it is thus much as if he should
have said, O Lord I have sued unto thee for mercy and pardon; for all men are
defiled with sin, and can bring nothing into thy sight but their
uncleanness: and therefore if thou should execute thy wrath in justice, as
thou might, none could undergo the same, but must needs be consumed. And
indeed it is one thing to please our selves, either in our own conceit, or
through the bewitching flatteries of other men; and another to stand at Gods
judgment seat. So it is reported of Arsenius, that lying upon his deathbed
three days together, much cast down and affrighted, he answered his friends,
who loved him for his comfort, that he needs not to fear, since he had led
such a holy and unspotted life: In truth I fear, for Lutherus in hunc Psalmum.
Gods judgments are not as men's.

Then let us learn from hence, That all are sinners and do Doctrine.
stand in state of condemnation, if God should deal with us according to his
justice: it is the acknowledgment of the great King, there is no man that
sins not. 1. Kings 8. 46. And of the great Apostle concerning himself as
well as others, And we also were children of wrath by nature. Ephe. 2. 1. 2. 3.
And the great Prophet, To us belongs nothing but shame and confusion of face.
Dan. 9. 8. Therefore, Enoch taken up to heaven, Abraham the father of the
faithful, David a man according to Gods own heart, and the rest of the holy
and great Patriarks, obtain no mercy, but from grace, and are no otherwise
saved then the thief upon the Cross, apprehending Christ by faith. Hebr. 11.
5. Romans 4. 3. Psalm. 32. 1. 2. Wherefore the Apostle sets down Scalam coeli,
the ladder by which we ascend to heaven in this sort, that our salvation
comes from Gods mercy, his mercy from his love, his love from his goodness.
Tit. 3. 5. all this positiuelie, and exclusiuelie, not from our works: and
therefore says the beloved Disciple. 1. John 2. 1. If any man sin, as S.
Augustine Tractatu primo. In 1. Epistol. Johannis.
does very religiously weigh his words, we have, including himself as well as
the meanest Christian; not ye have, and him, not me: an advocate; and both
himself and all others, him: for there is none other name under heaven given
unto men, whereby they can be saved, but only the name of JESUS. Acts 4. 12.

First, this is an admonition unto humility; for as the Use.
Moon receives from the Sun Vitellius lib. 4. Problem. 69. 70.
her light, according to her sundry aspects unto it, and so appears unto us
increasing, full, and waining: so we from Christ do receive al blessings, of
his fullness. Ioh. 1. 16. His is, plenitudo fontis, always giving: we, plenitudo
vasis, always from him receiving, for he is made unto us sinful,
Justification; Condemned, Redemption; Foolish, Wisdom; unclean and corrupt,
Sanctification, that whosoever will rejoice, may rejoice in the Lord. 1. Cor.
1. 30. 31. and ever stand aloof, and with a cast down countenance, pray for
mercy and pardon. Luc. 18. 13.

Secondly, let this teach us with patience, to submit our selves to the hand of
God, for he does chastise to correct us, and correct to save us, not dealing
according to our sins, nor rewarding according to our iniquity. Psalm. 103.
10. Therefore Micah, 7. 9. acknowledges, he will bear the wrath of the Lord,
because he had sinned against him: and when Zedechias the last bough of the
goodly tree was cut off, to which the Kingdom of Judah was resembled, and
nothing left but a stub. Esaias 53. 2. the Church acknowledges in respect of all
the calamities, then ouerflowing, that the Lord was righteous, for she had
rebelled. Lam. 1. 18. God never punishes the evil, but justly, nor
chastises his children but in mercy. 1. Cor. 11. 31. And therefore let us
rely upon his love, from which nothing can separate us Romans 8. 36.

But mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared.
Now the Prophet shows the remedy of the former wound, a comfort against
that mournful complaint, for fear of deserved punishment. Therefore this
aduersatiue word, (but) makes an opposition between mercy and misery; for
man considered in himself, even the most holy, can not stand, and therefore
has need of supporting mercy, that he be not utterly cast down: so the
Church acknowledges it is the Lords mercy, that we are not consumed, for his
mercies fail not. Lam. 3. 22. And the Hebrew word here used, properly
signifies pardon and forgiveness, as in Moses prayer. Exodus 24. 9. and Iere.
33. 8. and Psalm. 103. 3. And the Apostle having a reference to these and the
like places, speaking of the benefits of Christ, purchased unto the faithful,
by his obedience does translate it, (...) freely pardoning. (...).
Coloss. 2. 13. And hereof it is that God among many other titles full of
comfort, is styled (if we should English it, word for word) the God of
forgiuenesses. Nehemiah 9. 17. As in the second of the Corinthes, cap. 1. 3.
the Father of mercies: where in both places the plural number signifies
abundance. And the form and manner of speech used, is remarkable; for having
said before, if thou O Lord should mark what is done amiss, who shall
stand? he does not now add, thou do not mark, but with thee is mercy. For
there may be found Magistrates and Governors, who do not mark the offenses
of the people; but this comes from some disease of the mind, when they
neither have a hatred to sin, nor a love of virtue, to repress the one, or
advance the other. And this was in Eli. 1. Sam. 3. 11. 12. 13. For the wrath of
God is turned away, when the offendour is punished, as the charge is given.
When the Israelites had defiled themselves with the Moabites, both by corporal
fornication in the body, and spiritual committing Idolatry. Number. 25. 4. The
meaning of which place is not the same, which is commonly received, but that
Moses should call together the Heads and Governors of the people, and after
due examination and conviction, punish those who should appear to have
transgressed, as the Chaldee Paraphrase Toll omnes Principes and iudica, and
occide cum qui reus est. etc. Vide Paulum Phagium in cum locum.
does expound it: so that David here does not mean either such an oversight,
or corruption, as is incident to man, but acknowledges an undeserved mercy in
God, whose property is to have pity. Wisdom 11. 22. So that it is not so
natural to the Sun to (...). Nilus.
shine, as to God to pardon. From hence then we may observe a doctrine worth
our remembrance: for the Scripture as Chrysostom Hom. 21. in Genesin.
speaks, contains in it great treasure, so there be any that will search
and can find it out; and therefore no word or circumstance in the same is to
be neglected.

The godly neither do, nor can look to avoid destruction Doctrine.
by any other means, but only by the free and undeserved favor of God,
appealing from his justice unto his mercy, craving pardon; for herein is
perfect deliverance. So Daniel. 9. 5. 6. 7. 8. acknowledges, We have sinned,
we have transgressed, and to us therefore belongs nothing but shame and
confusion of face: But with thee O Lord is mercy and forgiveness, For in many
things we offend all. James 3. 2. No man but sins. 1. Kings 8. 46. Yea, the
just man in his best actions. Eccles. 7. 21. Therefore if man should take upon
him to dispute with God, he cannot answer one for a thousand. Job 9. 3. And
this made David to confess his sins to be more then he knew, and being
privy to the weakness and corruption which is in man, to pray for power to
be kept from presumptuous wickedness. Psalm. 19. 12. And it is sin that
provoke Gods anger. Psalm. 78. 17. and therefore be there so many threatenings,
as Leuit. 26. 28. 2. Chron. 36. 16. For men by doing and continuing in evil,
do treasure up unto themselves wrath, against the day of wrath, and the
revelation of the just judgment of God. Romans 2. 5. and when the Apostle had
reckoned some particulars, he adds, that for such things sake the wrath of
God comes upon the children of disobedience. Ephesians 5. 6. which is so great as
he is, who is offended, even infinite: and therefore is said to burn unto the
bottom of hell, and consume the earth with his increase, and set on fire the
foundations of the mountains. Deuteronomy. 32. 22. Wherefore to conclude, Augustine
spoke truly, that if men here live wickedly, one deep calls upon another:
for they pass from darkness to darkness, from torment to torment, from
punishment to punishment, from the heat of lust, to the fire of hell.

First hence is manifested the folly of those, who trust to Use.
the power of freewill as the August. de Haeresibus cap. 88.
Pelagians, who suppose that they can purchase grace by their own works and
salvation: Semipelagians who attribute their conversion, partly to grace,
partly to their own power; The Schoolmen Aquinas 1. 2. q. 114. art. 3.
Reinerius in sum. in verbo Meritu^.
who teach that man by doing what lies in him, may deserve further grace, Ex
congruo, of congruitie, For the soul with his faculties, the understanding and
will, in respect of their essence, did after the fall remain perfect; but the
power of these faculties to any spiritual good, was wholly lost; so that the
understanding was full of darkness in heavenly things, wanting the true
knowledge of God, and the saving understanding of his word. Psalm. 14. 5. 1.
Cor. 14. Romans 8. 7. And therefore we are exhorted to be renewed in the spirit
of our mind. Ephesians. 4. 23. The will and affections were altogether froward and
rebellious, for all the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart, are only
evil continually. Genesis 6. 5. And there is none that requires after God and
does good. Psalm. 53. 3. And our endeavor unto any holy duty, is not only
weakened and restrained, as the late Council of Trent Sess. 5. Canone 6.
has determined, but utterly abolished; for we are not fit of our selves to
think a good thought, much less to do a good deed. 2. Cor. 3. 5. But it is
God that works the will and the deed, and both according to his good
pleasure. Philip. 2. 13. For man using his free will euillie, did lose both
himself Libero Arbitrio male vtens homo, and se perdidit and ipsum. August. in
Enchiridio, cap. 30.
and it, so that none comes unto Christ, except the Father does draw him.
Ioh. 6. 44. For all are in themselves, and by nature darkened in their
cogitations, strangers from the life of God through ignorance. Ephesians. 4. 18. Of
corrupt minds. 2. Tim. 3. 8. Unwise, disobedient, deceived, etc. Tit. 3. 3.
Having hardened hearts. Mar. 6. 52. Wicked above all things. Iere. 17. 9.
Therefore that many do perish, it is the due merit and desert of their sins;
that many be saved, it is the free gift of the Savior. For that the guilty
person should be condemned, it is Gods unblameable justice, that he should be
justified, it is his unspeakable August. lib. 20. co^tra Iulianum.
grace. Wherefore not to stand longer upon this point, that one testimony of
Fulgentius, may stand in steed of all, God does freely bestow grace upon the
unworthy thereof, by which the wicked being justified, he is enlightened with
the gift of a good desire, enabled with the power of well doing, so that by his
mercy preventing, he begins to will that which is good, and his mercy
following, he performs that which he wills. Therefore Fulgentius ad
Macrinum, l. 1. cap. 7. 8 9. 10. 11. etc.
the Apostle speaks excellently, that when we were dead in our sins and
trespasses, and by nature the children of wrath, God rich in mercy, according
to his great love has quickened us altogether in Christ, by whose grace we are
saved, and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in the heavenly
places in Christ JESUS. Ephesians. 2 4. 5. 6. who is made to us of the Father,
justification, wisdom, redemption, and sanctification, that whosoever does
rejoice, should rejoice in the Lord. 1. Cor. 1. 30.

Secondly, this should work in us a fear to sin, and an earnest endeavor
to seek for the obtaining of Gods mercy, esteeming it above our lives, and
all earthly things. This is that which David's soul paused after, when he had
fallen by adultery and murder, (for commonly one sin tolleth on another)
Psalm. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me O God, according to thy loving kindness. And
for it is the treasury containing all other blessings, where that is, nothing
is wanting. Therefore Joseph wishes nothing to Beniamine, whom he so entirely
loved, but, God be merciful unto thee. Genesis 43. 29. And in that solemn
blessing of Aaron the high Priest upon the people, the Lord make his face shine
upon thee, and be merciful unto thee. Number. 6. 25. For upon this depends our
felicity, by this we are preserved from sinning. Genesis 20. 6. received when we
have offended. Wisdom 11. 20. provoked to repentance, (so when Christ looked
upon Peter, he went Oculo misericordia: oculi Domini erant vt flamma ignis,
Petri vt glacies; ergo intuitus Domini resoluit eu^, non potuit Petrus in
negationis tenebris manner, quom lux mundi respexit. Georgius Wirts in Harmonia
Euangel.
forth and wept. Luc. 22. 61.) and accepted when we do return. Luc. 15. 7.

Therefore, we are to break forth into thanksgiving with, Praise the Lord, O
my soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy name; who forgiueth all
thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities, etc. Psalm. 103. 1. 2.

But mercy is with thee.
Further, the Prophet here shows where this mercy is to be sought, where it
may be found, when he says (with thee) with the Lord: and this manner of
speech is more effectual, and more comfortable, then if he should have said,
But thou have forgiven. For sometime a Tyrant may pardon an offense, as
Tiberius, did whose nature Suetonius in Tyberio, cap. 28.
notwithstanding was cruel and bloody, yet regarded not infamous libels, which
were cast out against him, and revenged not those contumelies, nor the
Authors, but put them off with that: In a free City men must have free
tongues. And Julian, when a Christian, to whom he in scorn obiecting his
blindness, asked if his Master the Carpenters Son (meaning Christ) could not
give him sight: answered him, That he thanked God, he had not the means to
behold so wicked an Apostata: passed Socrates histor. lib. 3. cap. 12.
by that speech.

But here is expressed unto us the benefit, and the fountain, from whence the
benefit springs, With thee is mercy, even with thee Lord. Dan. 9. 9. Iere.
31. 34.

The mercy of God, which he shows unto us, does not Doctrine.
proceed from any other cause, but from his own goodness and gracious will,
therefore his goodness in that memorable gradation of the Apostle, is set the
step to his love, and 1 (...), 2 (...) 3 (...), 4 (...).
his love to his mercy, and his mercy, (with the exclusive of merit) to man's
salvation. Tit. 3. 5. For he commended his love, that when we were sinners,
weak, and enemies, he sent his Son. Romans 5. 6. And being rich in mercy,
according to his great love, has quickened us dead in our sins, in him.
Ephesians. 2. 4. and shows this greatness of love and vndeseruednesse, not that
we loved him, but he loved us first. 1. Ioh. 4. 10. And this is represented in
a lively picture. Ezech. 16. 1. 2. 3. etc. Therefore this mercy is the
fountain of all blessings, which the godly do confess, in that so often
remembered clause, For his mercy endures for ever: which is no unnecessary
repetition, but a dutiful acknowledgment. Psalm. 136. And this God confirms,
when he says, that for his own sake, he puts away all our sins. Esaias 43.
25.

First, from hence arises unto us the assuredness of our Use.
salvation, and pardon of our sins, for it depends on God who in his nature
is unchangeable. Malach. 3. 6. And so be his graces. Romans 11. 29. And it is a
faithful saying, worthy by all means to be received, that Christ Jesus came
into the world to receive sinners. 1. Tim. 1. 15. And this saying is confirmed
by oath. Ezech. 18. 21. That so by two things which be immutable, the elect
might have the stronger comfort. Hebr. 6. 17. 18. This caused S. Paul's
triumph, that he was persuaded, that neither life nor death, Angels nor
Dominations, nor Powers, etc. could separate him from the love of God in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Romans 8. 29. And of this assurance Bernard Tria considero in
quibus tota mea spes consistit, charitatem adoptio nis, veritaie^ promissionis,
potestatem redditionis: murmuret iam quantu^cumque volet cogitatio mea etc. Ego
fiducialiter respondebo: scio cui credidi, etc. Bernardus sermon. 3. de
fragmentis septem misericordiatum.
religiously applies: the comfort to his own soul thus. In three things
consists my hope. In the love of the adoption of God, in the truth of his
promise, and in the power of his performance, for the father so loved us that
he gave his Son for us. Job. 3. 16. And he will not lose them whom he has
bought so dear, the Son gave himself. Ephesians. 5. 2. And therefore to him who
has loved us, and washed us from our sins, etc. be praise for ever and ever.
Apoc. 1. 5.

Secondly, this is a doctrine of humility, for what have we that we have not
received? 1. Cor. 4. 7. And that we have is of grace, that none should boast.
Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. Of evil servants God has accepted us for good children: for
we were as the Apostle has expressed in many particularities, none righteous,
none understanding, none seeking after God, all gone out of the way, altogether
unprofitable, etc. our throat an open-sepulcher, tongues used to deceit,
having under the lips poison of Aspes, mouths full of cursing and bitterness,
feet swift to shed blood, destruction and calamity in their ways, not
knowing the way of peace, and no fear of God before their eyes. Romans 3. 10.
11. etc. And in general taken alive of the Devil in his snare at his will. 2.
Tim. 2. 26. But Christ came to dissolve the works of the Devil. 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
And by death to overcome him, that had the power of death. Hebr. 2. 14. And
therefore let every one consider, how much God loved him, that so he may not
despair: and how unworthy he then was of love, that he do not presume: for by
grace, we, by nature children of wrath, are saved, and not of works. Ephesians. 2.
9. Therefore blessed be God the Father of our Lord JESUS Christ, who by the
resurrection of his Son has begotten us to an inheritance immortal, that
fades not, reserved in heaven for us. 1. Pet. 1. 3.

But with thee is mercy.
The word (is) of the present tense, is not to be slightly passed over: for he
says not, there was mercy with thee, though we have offended, but there is,
that it continues, even as he himself is, therefore, I am, is his name. Exodus
3. 14. Where it is observed of the Paulus Phagius in Paraphrasi Chaldaica.
learned, that the original word includes in it the difference of three
times, that which is past, present, and to come, and does signify the perfect
and unalterable constancy of God, and this is expressed by S. John Apoc. 1. 4.
by Franciscus Iunius in illu^ locu^. Doctrine.
who is, who was, and who is to come.

From hence then we may gather a very comfortable instruction, that God is
always, and as gracious now to those that call upon him as formerlie he has
been to the holy Patriarks and Prophets: therefore, Psalm. 100. 5. his mercy
(...) redditur in nouo Testame^to per verbum (...) vt Mat. 20. 34. etc. Et
(...). Luc. 1. 78.
is said to be everlasting. And no marvel, for it is his essence, and so he
proclaims himself, the Lord, the Lord: (in the doubling of the word)
importing a twofold mercy, preserving man from sin, and pardoning when he
has sinned (strong) able to help his, howsoever oppressed (merciful)
affecting his in the bowels of compassion, and gracious, receiving those into
favor, who are fallen, healing the broken in heart, and binding up their
sores. Psalm. 147. 3. (slow to anger) more willing to spare then punish, waiting
for our repentance. 2. Pet. 3. 9. (abundant in goodness) toward the
offenders, (and truth) in performing of his promises, reserving mercy for
thousands, for the whole earth is full thereof. Psalm. 33. 5. (forguing
iniquity, transgression, and sin) all sorts of offenses, voluntary,
rebellious, and Paulus Phagius ad eum locum in Paraphrasi Chaldaica. Pelargus
in Exodus 34 and Lutherus de vltimis verbis Dauidis.
daily committed. Exodus 34. 6. So by these attributes of God, sinful man
has always been raised up to good hope: so Moses comfort the Israelites,
that they despair not, The Lord thy God is a merciful God. Deuteronomy. 4. 31. Joel
the people of his time. Joel 2. 13. and Ose 14. 5. Israel fallen by iniquity:
for the Lord waits, says Esaias 30. 18. that he may have mercy upon his people.

Hereby we are admonished how to read the Scriptures Use.
aright, which is to make particular application unto our selves: so every
example of Gods justice should work fear. 2. Pet. 2. 4. and be remembrancers
unto us, as S. Jude speaks in his Epistle Verse. 5. And after an enumeration
of many particulars, S. Paul tells us that former punishments are to admonish
(...) Cleme^s Alexandrinus Padagogi lib 1. c. 10. vocat (...) and (...) dictam
putat quasi (...).
us upon whom the ends of the world are come. 1. Cor. 10. 11. And this is that
which our Savior Christ says, concerning the Galileans, whose blood Pilate
mingled with their sacrifices, and those upon whom the tower of Siloh fell and
destroyed; that the judgment of those few should be the motive to repentance
in all. Luc. 13. 3. And again, all examples of Gods mercy showed to others,
ought to be encouragements of hope in us: so David sets this down as a
ruled case, that he confessing against himself his wickedness, the Lord
forgave the punishment of his sin. Therefore should every one that is godly
pray unto him, etc. Psalm. 32. 6. appeal from justice to mercy, in assurance of
obtaining favor: and S. Paul being a persecutor, a blasphemer, an oppressor,
and obtaining mercy, would have all that do repent, to take him for an Dicit
Paulus vnic uique agreto, and dese desperare volenti, qui curauit me, misit ad
te, and dixit mihi, illi despera^ti vade and dic, quid habuisti, quid in te
sanaui, quam cito de coelo vocaui: vna voce percussi and deieci; altera, erexi
and elegi; tertia impleui and misi; quarta liberaui and coronaui, vade dic
aegrotis, clama desperatis, fidelis sermo est, and omnium acceptione dignus;
etc. August. sermon. decimo de verbis Apostoli, etc.
example, and a demonstration of the like. 1. Tim. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And
these things are written for our comfort. Romans 15. 4.

But with thee is mercy that thou may be feared.
The mistaking of one letter in the original, has caused some Vide Hieronimum
in Epist. ad Suniam and Fretiaeam.
corruption, both in the Greek and old Latin translation especially, (yet that
only made Authentical by the late Tridentine Sestio. quarta.
Council) whereof can be gathered no convenient sense, as is apparent in the
interpretations of the Fathers, who have labored much to make some fitting
exposition Augustinus. Gregorius Magnus Innocentius 3. in hunc Psalmu^.
: wherefore to let these pass; the Prophet here does amplify the mercy of
God, by the final cause, (that thou may be feared.) Now this fear by a
property of the Hebrew tongue, signifies the whole worship of God, as Romans 11.
20. Luc. 1. 50. Act. 10. 35. 2. Kings 17. 32. Esaias 29. 13. and in infinite
other places. And this is that fear which the Schoolmen Aquinas 2. 2. q. 19.
art. 2. Reinerius insumma. Compend. Alberti lib. 5. cap. 39. (...) Paedagog.
lib. 1. cap. 9.
call filial, joined with reverence, as Clemens Alexandrinus speaks, under
which is comprehended the true knowledge of justice and mercy in God, obedience
to his will, in the works of the first and second Table: and those holy
duties cannot be performed of any, but of those who do acknowledge themselves
sinners, and God merciful; whose mercy is purchased by the obedience of Jesus
Christ, and offered by the preaching of the Gospel, to those that do believe:
for others they either exalt themselves, puffed up with the windy conceits of
their own works and merits, as the Pharisee, who counterfaiting fullness
departed empty. Luc. 18. 14. or sly from God and imagine him to be only an
inexorable and severe judge, and so despair, as Cain. Genesis 4. 3. Saul, 1. Sam.
31. 4. Judas, Math. 27. 2. and such like: but the godly they come in humility,
and being privy to their own wants crave mercy, as Abraham, I am ashes. Genesis
18. 27. And the Publican Vim faciebat regno caelorum Publicanus ille, qui dum
non audet oculos ad cilum leuare, ipsum caelum ad se potuit melinare. Bernard.
sermon. de multipl. vtilitate verbi Dei.
stands a far off, not daring to approach nigh unto the holy place, nor to
lift up his eyes, as ashamed for his offenses; but knocking his breast, the
secret closet of many sins unknown to others, and makes his confession that
he is a sinner, and puts up his suite, Lord be merciful unto me. Luc. 18.
13. Therefore, not to stand longer upon this point, where it is said, that with
God is mercy, that he may be feared; here is expressed the end of his mercy and
pardoning, even his worship and reverence: for none can truly serve him, but
such as feel the benefit of the remission of their sins; none does glorify
him who is not first glorified of him; and none is glorified, but he who is
justified. Wherefore, the first effect of the forgiveness of sin, is
sanctification or our glorification, for which we must again glorify God; not
in that he stands in need to receive any honor from us, but that out duty
requires it: for because we are not our own, but bought with a price,
therefore must we glorify God in our body, and in our spirit, for they are
Gods. 1. Cor. 6. 20.

The doctrine of grace does not give the reine to licentiousness Doctrine.
of life, nay, the due consideration thereof is the streightest bridle to
withold all sin: for therefore are we delivered from the hand of our
enemies, that we might serve God in holiness and righteousness, all the days
of our life. Luc. 1. 74. And the Apostle of purpose handling that Treatise of
Gods mercy, does from it enforce new obedience, and the practice of all
religious carriage toward God, our brethren, and our selves: for the grace of
God that brings salvation to all men has shined forth, and teaches us to
deny (...).
ungodliness, and worldly lusts; and to live soberly, justly, and godly, in
this present world, looking for the blessed hope, and waighting for the
glorious appearance of Christ Jesus; who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of
good works. Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. and having laid down the ground of our
salvation, in the riches of Gods mercy, and greatness of his love, he builds
thereupon the necessity of holy life: for we are his workmanship created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained, that we should walk in
them. Ephesians. 2. 10. For they be the way to the Kingdom, though not Via regni,
non causa regnondi: Bernardus de gratia, and libero arbitrio.
the cause of obtaining the same, which is not purchased by our good doings,
but prepared of Gods goodness for us, from the foundations of the world. Math.
25. 34. And from hence are those vehement, and so often repeated exhortations
in Scripture, to be blameless and pure, and the Sons of God without rebuke,
in the midst of a naughty and crooked generation, and to shine as light in
the world. Phil. 2. 15. To walk in the spirit, if we live in the spirit.
Galat. 5. 25. To mortify the members that are upon earth, to put off the old
man with his works: to put on the new man which is renewed, in knowledge after
the image of him that created us. Coloss. 3. 5. And because Christ has given
himself an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God:
therefore fornication and all uncleanness, and covetousness should not once
be named amongst us, as becomes Saints. Ephesians. 5. 3. For this is the will of
God, our holiness. 1. These. 4. 3. And a (...), Socrates Histor. lib. 1. c. 8.
Christians life is faith and good works, and a resemblance (...). Basilius
Homil. 10. in Hexam.
of God, so far forth as is incident to humane infirmity. Therefore the
foundation of God stands sure; he knows who are his, and all that call upon
the name of the Lord Jesus, must depart from evil. 2. Tim. 2. 19. For we must
not now live according to our own will, but his who once has dyed for us all.
2. Cor. 5. And this was the care of the ancient Christians, their enemies and
persecutors being witnesses. For so much Plinte Epist. lib. decimo. Epist. 97.
Summa haec vel culpae ve erroris, stato die ante lucem conuenire, carmenque
Christo quasi Deo dicere, se Sacrame^to no^ in scelus aliquod obstringere sedne
furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ac fidem fallerent. Vide
Tertullian. Apologia, cap. 2.
writes of them, unto the Emperor Traian: and Tertullian Innoce^tia^ perfect
nouimus vt a perfecto Magistro reuelatam etc. Apologet. cap. 39. and 45.
reports of his times, that they were known by their innocence; for in
deed a holy profession without answerable conversation, is no better then a
gold Saluianus l. 4: de prouidetia vtta a professione discordans, abrogat
illustris tituli honorem, per indignorum actuum vilitatem.
ring upon a Swines snowt, and outward shows of godliness, where there is no
inward reformation, is player-like to represent upon the stage one person, and
yet to be another, and the object of laughter unto Jsidorus Pelusiota, lib. 1.
Epist. 427.
the beholders.

Use.
This taxes all Libertines and Epicures, Qui Christum simulant and Satanalia
viuunt: who will have the show of godliness, but deny the power thereof, the
2. Tim. 3. 5. have Christ rise in their words, but express the Devil in
their Hippocentauri. Nyssenus ad Olympium de perfecti Christiani forma.
works. To such belongs that both detecting reproof, and dreadful
threatenings of God: What have thou to do to declare my ordinances, that thou
should take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and
have cast my words behind thee? for when thou see a thief, thou runnest
with him, and thou art partaker with the adulterers; thou give thy mouth to
evil, and with thy tongue thou forgest deceit: these things have thou done,
and I held my tongue: therefore, thou thoughtest that I was like thee, but I
will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee. O consider this, you that
forget God. Psalm. 50. 16, 17, 18. For dumb shows will Christiani a Christo
nome^ acceperunt, and operaepretium est, vt sicut sunt baredes nominis: ita
sint imitatores sanctitatis: Bernard. in sente^tijs.
not always dazell the eyes, but the masked hypocrites shall be uncased: so
was Ananias and Saphyra, which seemed as religious to the Reperti nouae
transgressionis praesumptores, de buerunt praehere caeteris, vt peccati, ita
and p^^^^ and terroris exe^plum, Ioh. Cassianus Collect. and. cap. 11.
world, as any in those times, until by a sudden (but deserved death) they
were detected. Acts 5. 5. Pharisaicall washing of the outside of the platter;
clear enough, cannot make it fit to be used at Gods table. Math. 23. 23.
Therefore let not any deceive himself, for God is not mocked. Galat. 6. 7.
And (...). Isidor. Pelus. lib. 4. Epist. 34. Vide Basil. hom. 1. de Baptis.
Nyssen. (...).
none can walk in the ways of death, and yet go to life: therefore, as the
Apostle admonishes, let your conversation be now in heaven. Phil. 3. 20. and
keep faith and a good conscience. 1. Tim. 1. 19. For this is the will of God,
our sanctification. 1. These. 4. 3. without which none shall ever see him. Hebr.
12. 14.

I have waited upon the Lord, my soul has waited, and I have trusted in his
word.
THe Prophet evidently in this part of his prayer, shows his faith and
confidence in God, which he lays out in this sort: First, by his patient
abiding, he murmureth not, nor gives back in his trials, (I have waited upon
the Lord.) Secondly, by the sincerity thereof, (my soul has waited.) Thirdly,
by the object or ground, whereupon he rested; for in this Weakness of ours,
we had need of supporting, and that is in the merciful promises of God, (I
have trusted in his word.) Fourthly, by the constancy, and that is laid out by
a comparison, wherein it excels; My soul waits on the Lord, more then the
morning watch.

I have waited on the Lord.
The word of the preterperfect tense, is obserueable; for by the comparison of
his former deed, and bypast waiting, he does profess the continuance of the
same: now upon the promise of God, who has felt before the comfortable
experience of his favor and deliverance; for tribulations bring patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope. Romans 5. 3. 4. Tribulations, not of
their own nature, but as they are sanctified, work in the believers patience,
and so must be restrained to the proper subject: and patience trial, whereby
true faith is discerned from counterfeit, even as by fire the dross is
separated from gold. Psalm. 66. 10. And trial hope; hope of future comforts
never to be wanting, for God is no changeling. Before he said generally, that
God was exorable and showing mercy unto sinners, which do fly unto him, and
shroude themselves under his grace and favor. Therefore, from hence he
concludes, that as to others and to himself formerlie he has been gracious;
so now also he will not be wanting.

From the former benefits of God bestowed upon others Doctrine.
of his children, or upon our selves, we may gather undoubted assurance of
future blessings to be continued, for as in the sickness of the body, we
willingly commit our selves to the hand of that Physician, who once has cured
us of some dangerous disease: so cannot he doubt of comfort for his soul, who
has found relief from God in his distresses heretofore. Therefore the Prophet
even then when his calamities, inward and outward were so importable, that his
soul refused comfort, and so great that his spirit was full of anguish,
considered the days of old, and the years of ancient time. Psalm. 77. 5. So
when David was to fight with Goliath, the victory against the Lion and the
Bear, were persuasions to induce him to hope for Triumph over the Philistine.
1. Sam. 17. 34, 35, 37. And when Absolon rebelled, drove him out of his
Kingdom, and so executed that sentence pronounced for his sin. 2. Sam. 12.
11. 12. which no doubt was no small temptation: nevertheless he despaired not,
but says, though hotly pursued: I laid me down and slept, and rose again,
not waked by the sound of the trumpet, or trampling of the horse, nor rattling
of the armed men. And so promises to himself assurance of peace in this
dangerous conspiracy, from this, that God had before smitten all his enemies
upon the check bone. Psalm. 3. 7. And this is that wherewith Joshua encourages
his people, when he caused them to set their feet upon the necks of five
Kings: so the Lord had brought down their enemies now; so he would do
hereafter. Joshua 10. 25. And from that one act of bringing the Israelites out
of Egypt, both Solomon groundeth his petition for general blessings, and
Jeremy for particular. 1. Kings 8. 51, 52, 53. Iere. 32. 21. And not to stand
longer upon this point; Paul's only comfort was in his transcendent (...).
suffering, that God had delivered him, that he did, and trusted that hereafter
he would deliver him; the past, and present help, assurances for time to come.
2. Cor. 1. 10. And in another place, God saved me from the mouth of the Lion,
(meaning (...) Eusebius. hist. Ecclesiast. l. 2. c. 22. Use.
Nero.) From this antecedent he concludes; and the Lord will deliver me from
every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom. 2. Tim. 4.
verse. 17. 18.

First, from hence we are led into a due and religious consideration of Gods
unmeasurable and boundless mercy, who makes one mercy the earnest of
another: for he is the Non vnius misericordiae, sed misericordiarum non vnius
consolationis Deus, sed totius consolationis, qui conselatur nos, non modo in
hac vel illa tribulatione, sed in omni. Multae misericordiae Domini. Thre^. 3.
22. 32. Bernard in Natali Domini, sermon. 5.
Father of mercies. 2. Cor. 1. 3. And therefore if a mother could forget her
child, and a woman the fruit of her womb, yet he cannot forget those who be
his. Esaias 49. 15. That in nature is unusual: for Hagar could not abide to see
the death of her Ismael. Genesis 21. 16. and the Harlots compassions were moved
when her child should have been divided. 1. Kings 3. 26. yet possible; for the
women have made the womb that bare them, the grave to bury them, as 2. Kings
6. 29. and Lam. 4. 10. But this impossible therefore. And David upon his own
experience: Though my father and mother forsake me, yet the Lord will gather me
up. Psalm. 27. 10.

Secondly, in this is comfort against the dangerous assault of the Devil our
adversary, diligent 1 (...) 2 (...). 3 (...).
to hurt, strong in power, and cruel in purpose. 1. Pet. 5. 8. And therefore
seeks to persuade men, that God having once forgiven, will no more be
entreated for relapsed offenders: yet he has promised acceptance at our
return. Ezech. 18. 21. he has performed so much, receiving David after
adultery and murder. 2. Sam. 12. 13. Peter after thrice denial. Ioh. 21. 15.
For therefore it pleased the Father, that in Christ should all fulness dwell,
to reconcile to himself and set at peace by the blood of his Cross, the
things in heaven, and the things in earth. Coloss. 1. 19. Where the spirit of
God sets down the help for three the deepest wounds of a Christian soul:
for against the greatness of sin, there is in Christ fullness of redemption:
against the number, all fullness: against the continuance in them, the dwelling
of this all fullness: which signifies an immovable setlednesse: and therefore
without exception of offense or offender, (repentance presupposed) our Savior
calls and promises, come unto me all you that travail and are heavy
laden, I will Tu times deficere vbi se veritas te reficere promittit. Bernard.
Epist. 106. Vide Ioh. Gerson part 2. in tract. de his verbis, venite ad me
omnes.
refresh you. Math. 11. 28. and 1. Ioh. 2. 1. If any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, and he is the propitation for our
sins: wherefore, let us come with boldness unto the Throne of grace, not
doubting to obtain favor in the time of need. Hebr. 4. 16.

Thirdly, this should admonish and put us in mind, to keep a register and
memorial of Gods mercies received, that thereby in time of trial we might
strengthen our fainting souls. This old Jacob did, and so assures his Sons,
that God would visit them, and bring them into the promised Canaan. Genesis 48.
16. And such an one was the 136. Psalm amongst the ancient Israelites: where
at the end of every verse is an acknowledgment of Gods mercy, not as a vain
Tautologie or idle repetition, but a dutiful confession of mercy received: for
as God is in his nature unchangeable, and the same always, Malach. 3. 6. so is
he in his gifts. Romans 11. 29. for where he loves once, he loves ever. Ioh.
13. 1. and therefore let us cast our care upon him, for he cares for us. 1.
Pet. 5. 7.

My soul has waited.
These words, I have waited, and, my soul has waited, are very Emphaticall,
signifying that he is not out of heart, nor discouraged, in that God delayeth
to send help, neither does he murmur at the same. But with a reposed mind
sustayneth himself in the greatest extremity upon the assured hope of his
mercies. And in this (my soul has waited) is a degree more added to the
former, and signifies first his earnest desire, as Psalm. 103. 1. Secondly, his
steadfast faith, in that he does not only bridle his tongue from words of
impatiencie, but his heart from murmuring, a hard point; for Cain could not
contain but break out, that his sin was greater then could be forgiven, and
the punishment greater then could be borne. Genesis 4. 13. Thirdly, his
uprightness and sincerity, according to the great Commandment, thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. Math. 22. 37. And from hence we may
learn.

That every religious action which we are to perform unto Doctrine.
God, must proceed from the heart, as a type whereof the inwards were offered
in sacrifice. Leuit. 3. 3. Wherefore for repentance rent your hearts, and not
your garments. Joel 2. 12. For obedience, offer up your souls and bodies. Romans
12. 1. For prayer, babble not much as the Gentiles, nor be as the Hypocrites, to
stand in the Synagogues and corners of the streets; but enter into thy chamber,
and shut the door. Math. 6. 5. 6. For knowledge, know the God of thy Fathers,
and serve him with an upright heart. 1. Chron. 28. 9. And this is that which
God requires: My Son give me thy heart. Proverb. 23. 26. and the reasons
thereof be:

First, as the heart is the beginning (...) Arist. lib. de. sensu. de partibus
animae, lib. 3.
of life, sense, and motion; and therefore is seated in the midst of the
body, as the Lady moderating the rest of the members; and hereof it is that
men speaking of themselves, do by the guidance Et Judi occidentales, dum sacra
faciunt, demisso in guttur bacillo, vomitum cient, vt Idolo ostenda^t nihil se
in pectore mali occultum gerere. Benzo in historiae noui orbis, lib. 1. cap. 26.
of nature, lay their hand upon their breast, acknowledging the same: so is it
the fountain and original of all actions, therefore a good man out of the
good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things. Math. 12. 35.

Secondly, God the searcher of the heart, desires the same; for he is a
spirit, and those who worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. Ioh.
4. 24. And this made David to confess, behold thou love truth in the inward
affections. Psalm. 51. 6.

Thirdly, nothing is acceptable unto him, except it do come from a sanctified
heart: therefore he complains that the people did draw near unto him with
their lips, but their hearts were far from him. Esaias 29. 13. Fair shows will
not prevail, therefore the great boasts are sent away with a discredit: Depart
from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not. Math. 7. 23. Wherefore, though
the heart of man be deceitful and wicked above al things, and none can know it;
yet the Lord he searches the heart, and tries the reins, even to give every
man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his works. Iere. 17.
9. 10.

Therefore keep the heart with all diligence, for thereout Use.
comes life. Prouer. 4. 23. But it is a thing very unconstant: Omni mobili
mobilius, says Bernard: never In Meditationibus, cap. 9.
continuing in one estate; and therefore resembled to a mil that is going,
which grindeth whatsoever is put into it, and if there be nothing, consumes
and wears it self: wherefore for the stay thereof, these means amongst many.

First, use earnest prayer; so David: knit my heart unto thee O Lord, that I may
fear thy name. Psalm. 86. 11. And that not without cause, for the flesh
corrupted wise Solomon, and in his age his heart was turned after other Gods.
1. Kings 11. 4. The Devil deceived Judas, though an Apostle, and he betrayed
his Master. Ioh. 13. 27. The world seduced Demas, so that he forsook Paul,
whom he had followed. 2. Tim. 4. verse. 10.

Thirdly, add to prayer meditation, fifth thine Hugo lib. 3. de Anima.
own soul diligently, and consider from whence thou come, whether thou
go, how thou live, what thou do, in what sort thou either go forward
or backward, what thoughts do most assault thy mind, what affections move thy
heart: wherefore the man is pronounced blessed that does meditate in the law of
God, day and night. Psalm. 1. 3. This is an holy means to keep us from
walking in the counsel of the wicked, standing in the way of sinners, and
sitting in the seat of the scornful; and necessary, for there is this
difference between spiritual and carnal affections; carnal affections are
deeply settled in man, and hardly removed, as Hamans malice against the Jews.
Ester. 3. 7. Gehezies desire of gain. 2. Kings 5. 20. Absolons wrathful
revenge, and his aspiring ambition, never ceasing until he had effected the
same. 2. Sam. 13. 23. 29. and cap. 15. 12. and so of the like, which experience
teaches, is an hard thing to shake them off. But spiritual affections in
carnal men do soon vanish and are quickly abated. Agrippa when he heard
Paul, had a good motion, but imperfect. Act. 26. 30. The Galathians could have
been content to have put out their eyes, and bestow them upon him, and they
embraced his doctrine; but he complayneth of their speedy backe-sliding, that
tam cito, so soon. Galat. 1. 6. The Israelites when they felt the earth
tremble under their feet, saw the smoke ascending from the mount, and heard
the noise of the thunder, and the voice of God speaking, then Moses must
receive the message from the Lord, and they will obey; but in a few days after
all was forgotten: they made a moulten Calfe, and that was the Jehovah which
brought them out of the land of Egypt. Exodus 32. 4. and this God knowing well,
even then when they made so large promises bewrayed their frailty. Oh that
there were such a heart in them, to fear me, and keep all my commandments
always. Deuteronomy. 5. 27. 28. Peter, who was so inflamed in love toward his Christ,
that he would rather die then forsake him, as Mat. 26. 35. yet denied,
forsware, banned, and cursed, that he knew him. Mar. 14. 68. Sic medici
completa est praedictio, and agroti conuicta est praesumptio, and August.
tract. 113. in Iohanne.
that which he was denying Christ, the same is every man, not sustained by
especial grace. Wherefore, as it is required, that the mass of the inferior
world should be conjoined with the superior, that so it may receive the
influence of (...). Aust. lib. 1. Meteorolog. cap. 2.
the same and of the stars, thereby to be made fruitful: so is it necessary
that we should by prayer and meditation be united to God, that being comforted
with the beams of his grace, we may bring forth fruit to everlasting life.
Therefore, blessed is the man that does meditate honest things by wisdom,
exercises himself in justice, and reasons of holy things by his
understanding. Eccles. 14. 21.

Thirdly, keep under and repress the first beginning motions of evil, let no
brood of Babylon come to growth, choke it in the Nihil in te Babylonicum,
nihil confusionis adolescat, du^ paruus hostis interfice nequitia^, ne zizania
crescant elida^tur in semine, etc. Hieron. Epist. ad Eustochium de virginitate
seruanda.
cradle. Evil thoughts while they delight, they Dum ludunt, illudunt.
deceive, and are the Devils harbengers which take up his lodging. No man at
the first nor at once comes to the height of sin, but by degrees: so the
Israelites sit idle in Sittim, they frequent the banquets of the Moabites,
behold the beauty of their maidens, (Balaams Vide Iosephi Antiquitata^, lib.
4. cap. 6.
stumbling blocks) are allured to commit fornication, and fall to Idolatry.
Number. 25. 1. 2. 3. David rises from his bed in the evening, walks upon the
top of his house, sees a woman who is fair, he is ensnared, desires Venit,
vidit, victus est, vt vidit, vt perijt, etc.
her, sends for her, lies with her, kills her husband. For one sin
tolleth on another, and thinks to cover uncleanness in blood. 2. Sam. 11.
4. While Cain gives place to his conceived grief, it goes on to murder, and
ends in despair. Genesis 4. 13. Therefore, wash thy heart, O Jerusalem, says
the Prophet, let not an evil thought lodge with thee all night. Iere. 4. 14.
for a thought Catena infernalis, mali spiritus, velociter malas cogitationes
excitant, and per eas fortiter nos impugnant. Gregorius in lib. 1. Regum cap.
13.
begets delight, delight desire, desire consent, consent the deed, the
deed custom, custom defense, defense despair, despair boasting, and thence
follows damnation. Therefore as the Apostle admonishes, be angry, but sin
not: let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the
Devil. Ephesians. 4. 26. 27. resist him and he will fly from you. James 4. 7.
Wherefore let us strive to enter in at the narrow gate. Luc. 13. 24. and put on
the whole armor of God that we may be able to stand against the assaults of
the Devil, for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, and against the worldly governors, the Princes
of darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are in the
high places, Ephesians. 6. 11. 12. And avoid the occasions of evil. The devoted
Nazarite is not only forbidden wine, but whatsoever is belonging to it, the
grape fresh and dried, the cornell and husk thereof. Number. 6. 3. 4. the
Christian, the appearance of evil. 1. These. 5. 22. the naming thereof. Ephesians.
5. 3. For as the fire which lies covered in the veins of the flint, if it be
stricken breaks forth: so the contagion of sin, which is in our corrupt
nature, by offered occasions is stirred up. Wherefore let us mortify our
members, which are on the earth: fornication, uncleanness, inordinate
affection, evil concupiscence, for which things sake the wrath of God comes
upon the children of disobedience. Coloss. 3. 5. 6.

I have waited on the Lord, my soul has waited, and I have trusted in his
word.
IN all these words there is an Apostrophe, or a turning of his speech from
God, whom he entreated for comfort, unto the faithful, and sets down unto
them, what was the stay of his hope amids so many, and so great trials; even
the Lords word. For now we walk by faith, not by sight: we depend upon the
word, in it we see God as in a glass, and behold him not face to face. 1. Cor.
13. 12. Now this word is the promise of grace and mercy, the object of our hope
and faith: for by this we learn that the holy Ghost is effectual in our
hearts, and so are strengthened against all griefs and terrors whatsoever.

No true comfort is to be found in time of trouble, but in Doctrine.
the word of God, in which he has opened his merciful favor unto mankind.
Therefore David: It is my comfort in my trouble, thy promise has quickened me.
Psalm. 119. 50. And this it does in a twofold respect, in the tempest of
temptations, and in the calm of our souls. In the calm of our souls, and
time of quiet, filling our hearts with joy and gladness: and therefore is
reckoned amongst the fruits of the spirit. Galat. 5. 22. and the attributes of
the Kingdom of God, which arises from the assurance of our reconciliation,
and forgiveness of sins, and peace of conscience. Romans 14. 17. A memorable
example of this we have in the Eunuch, who being taught by Phillip of Christ,
of the merit of his death, endued with faith, and feeling the power of that
doctrine sealed up in his soul, by the working of the holy Ghost, went on his
way rejoicing. Act. 8. 39. And therefore, the Statutes of the Lord, as their
proper effects are said to rejoice the heart. Psalm. 19. 8. And hence it is that
Ambros. lib. Epist. 6. Epist. 41 Damascen. Orthodoxae fidei l. 4. cap. 18.
Gregor. lib. 1. Moral. cap. 21.
Ambrose and Damascene, following the more ancient Divines, compare the word
of God to Paradise the Garden of Eden, of delight, in which is the tree of
knowledge, not forbidden but ordained for the Elect; in the midst hereof
Christ, the tree of life, to which through the guidance of the spirit, and the
light of the Gospel we have free access. There be rivers of the living
waters, refreshing the hearts of the believers; therein the souls of the godly
are decked with gold and precious stones, abundance of heavenly graces: there
is that cool wind, the inspiration of the holy Ghost, sweetly comforting and
refreshing such as be conversant in it: there is the voice of God, not citing
man with Adam, where art thou? but calling all unto him, teaching the ignorant,
provoking the sinner to repentance, seeking the wandering, comforting the
distressed, raising those that be fallen, reconciling the enemies, easing the
burdened, and giving rest to those that be weary in the tempest of temptations:
for such as cry in their trouble, the Lord delivers them from distress, he
sends his word and heals them. Psalm. 107. 20. And that whether these
distresses be outward and corporal, or inward and spiritual. Concerning the
inward which be temptations, for our life is a continual warfare, and we stand
amongst the Devils Inter Diaboli gladios stamus. Cyprianus de mortalitate.
pikes: Wherefore, if he suggest unto thee, that thou art a castaway, There is
no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 1. If that thou have
many sins, and those odious unto God, The blood of Jesus Christ his Son
does purge us from all sin. 1. Io. 1. 7. for he was sent into the world, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. Ioh.
3. 16. But thy says is weak: He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench
the smoking flax. Math. 12. 20. But thou art not in the number of them, whom
he will vouchsafe favor: Yea, it is a faithful saying, and worthy by all
means to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.
1. Tim. 1. 15. And the grace of God bringing salvation unto all men, has
appeared. Tit. 2. 11. thou have offended above the rest: where sin abounded,
grace superabounded. Romans 5. 20. Thou do not in any part perform the
obedience which the lawrequireth, and therefore accursed: but Christ has freed
us from the curse. Galat. 3. 13. Yea, but therefore he lays upon the manyfold
afflictions, as testimonies of his wrath, and remembrances of thy wickedness;
No, whom the Lord loves, he does chastise. Prouer. 3. 10. And not to stand in
reckoning all particulars which are infinite: Christ our Savior repelled the
Devil tempting, with scriptumest, it is written. Math. 4. 7. So must we by it
withstand his assaults, which is the sword of the spirit, and hold forth the
shield of faith thereby to quench his fiery darts. Ephesians. 6. 16.

Concerning corporal and outward tribulations, that we be not discouraged by
them; we have in the Scriptures sufficient comfort, for they be to the
faithful no tokens of his displeasure, but assurances of our adoption: Hebr.
12. 5. 7. and less then our deserts; for he deals not with us, according to
our sins, neither rewards us according to our iniquities. Psalm. 103. 10.
and whatsoever he does inflict, it is for our good, we are now chastised with a
rod, that we be not cut off with the sword: 1. Cor. 11. 32. We (...). Virga
patris non gladius Iudicis.
are made conformable to the image of Christ. Romans 8. 29. who though he were
the only son, and came into the world without sin, yet he went not from
thence without the Cross, but Vnicus qui intrauit sine peccato non exiuit sine
flagello.
first suffered, and so entered into glory. Luc. 24. 26. And so has he always
dealt with his beloved. Just Abel dedicated the church with his blood. Genesis 4.
8. Chaste Joseph is imprisoned until the iron pierced his soul. Psalm. 105. 19.
Great Elias so distressed, that he is weary of his soul, and desires death:
1. Kings 19. 4. John the Baptist more then a Prophet, beheaded in prison. Math.
14. 10. And by these few we may judge the condition of all, for in that golden
Legend of Saints, those are said to be tried by mockings and scourgeings, by
bonds and imprisonment, to be stoned, hewed asunder, tempted, slain with the
sword, wander up and down in sheep skinners, and in goat skins, to be
destituted, afflicted, and tormented: yet such of whom the world was not
worthy. Hebr. 11. 36, 37, 38. And such though God prove by these means, yet
will not leave them for ever. Lament. 3. 31. But they shall at last know that
this light and momentary affliction does work an eternal weight of glory. 2.
Cor. 4. 17. And not to insist longer upon this point, that is a memorable and
examplary testimony of Chrysostom, how he comforted himself when Eudocia the
Empress in all extremity persecuted him De hac concione Socrates hist.
Ecclesiast. lib. 6. cap. 18. Zozomenus, l. 8. c. 20.
for a Sermon he made, writing thereof unto Epistola ad Cyriacum.
Cyriacus. If she will banish me, the earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof. Psalm. 24. 1. If she will saw me in pieces, Esaias suffered Lyra in 6.
caput Esaiae.
the like. Hebr. 11. 37. If cast me into the Sea, I will remember Jonas. Cap.
1. 19. If throw me into the fiery furnace, the three children suffered the
same. Dan. 3. 23. If stone me to death, I have Stephen a fellow Martyr. Act. 7.
58. If cut off my head, John the Baptist endured the same. Math. 14. 10. If
strippe me of my goods, naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
return again. Job 1. 21. Thus from the Scripture in every estate he has
direction: so that it is truly styled by (...). Basilius in Psalmum primum.
vide and Chrysostom. in homil. 29. in Genesm. Use.
S. Basil, The common medicine of our souls.

First, the due consideration of this, may be a strength unto us, against all
the contemners of the word; as the August. de haeres. cap. 57 cum Danaei
commentarijs. Pelargus in Damascen. de fide Orthodoxa. lib. 4. cap. 18.
ancient Euchites, Euthousiastes, and Nouel-Anabaptists, and such like: for it
is the greatest treasure of the world, therefore the Prophet calls us unto
it, To the law and to the testimony. Esaias 8. 20. Christ commands, Search the
Scriptures. Ioh. 5. 39. The Apostle exhorts, let the word of God dwell
plentifully in you. Coloss. 3. 16. And let none then after all this presume to
be wise above that which is written: 1. Cor. 4. 6. For whatsoever things are
written before, are written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Romans 15. 4.

Secondly, this ought to kindle in us a zeal, to hear, read and know the
word: for this David prayed. Psalm. 119. 18. To this Paul exhorted his Scholar.
1. Tim. 4. 16. And by this that great (...) the Chronicler of the world. Daniel
received comfort in reading of Jeremy. Dan. 9. 1. 2. and thereupon grounded
his devout and compassionate prayer. For what is the Scripture, but the Epistle
of God? The Epistola Dei Creatoris, ad homines creaturas. Gregorius.
Creator sent from his Court and Palace in heaven, unto his creatures men
upon earth: therefore it were fit that every Christian should set himself a
task, as Epistola ad Furiam.
S. Hierome advises to read part thereof daily; for the holy Scriptures are
able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus. 2. Tim. 3.
15.

My soul waits more upon the Lord, then the morning watch watches for the
morning.
NOw the Prophet expresses his constancy in God, and expectation of comfort,
in these his trials, and that by way of comparison; wherein is a lively picture
representing the same, and seems to be taken from military profession. For
the better understanding whereof, we are to know that the night was divided
into four equal parts, and in one place our Savior Christ makes distinct
mention thereof, exhorting his Apostles unto watchfulness. Mar. 13. 35. 36.
And every oue of these Vegetius, lib. 4. cap. 8.
consisted of three hours, divided by the glass: the manner whereof was, that
Polybius in fragmentis.
the Captains of every company received from the General of the field,
direction before the Sun went down, and they accordingly were to appoint the
watches, who stood armed, and might not so much as lean upon their Seneca
Epist. 36.
spears, lest sleep should overtake them for that time, which was allotted
them: and when they were discharged, the next who should succeed were called
either by loud crying of the Ambrosius Hexame. lib. 5. c. 15. Frontinus lib.
1. cap. 7. Liuius Decad. 1. lib. 7. and 3. lib. 6.
voice, or sound of the trumpet: and at the break of the day, as joyful for
the light when they were freed to take their rest and refresh their bodies,
they would signify the Bellonius Obseruationum, lib. 3. cap. 18. and ad illum
Carolus Clusius.
same. And to this custom the Prophet has reference in this place, so that
the meaning is; that the Sentinel did not so much (for the comparison is made
from the lesser to the greater) desire the approach of the day, when he was to
end his charge (having endured the darkness and other inconveniences of the
night,) as he did the help of God in these his temptations and trials, that at
the last he might find comfort, having Flaminius in hunc locum, ex Rabbi
Abrahamo.
the bright beams of the Sun of righteousness, to shine in his soul.

The hope of Gods children, represented by a watch, Doctrine.
teaches, that as the morning is in no man's power to bring it, before the
appointed time thereof. Job 9. 7. yet the trouble is to be suffered until the
dawning of the day, which will at the last break forth, and discharge the
watching and wearied Soldier: so are crosses and afflictions, of what sort
soever, patiently to be undergone until the Son of Gods favor do arise;
for sorrow may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Psalm. 30. 5.
So liberty and honorable adornement succeeded the bondage and imprisonment of
Joseph. Genesis 41. 42. The furnace of the three children was the path to their
dignity. Dan. 3. 30. The Israelites sustained a long night of troubles, four
hundred and thirty years in Egypt. But when the day of promised deliverance
came, in the same departed all the hosts of the Lord out of the land of Egypt:
Exodus 12. 41. For a while there was great sorrow amongst the Jews in Susan,
and fasting, and weeping, and mourning, and many lay in sackcloth; but not
long after, there arose unto them light and joy, and gladness, and honor.
Ester 4. 3. etc. 8. 6.

Therefore commit thy ways unto the Lord, and trust in Use.
him, and he shall bring it to pass, and he shall bring forth thy right
cousnesse as the light, and thy judgment as the noone day. Psalm. 37. 5. 6. for
in a moment may he hide his face, but with everlasting mercy will he have
compassion. Esaias 54. 8. And oftentimes he works by contraries, whom Facit
prius Deus, alienum opus, vt faciat suum. Dei opera sunt in medij; co^trarijs.
Lutherus.
he will honor, he first humbles; whom he will comfort, he first
discourageth. The Sun and the Moon, and the eleauen stars, must worship
Joseph; but he is first in close prison, where he can neither see Sun, Moon,
nor Stars. Genesis 39. 20. He is sold of his brethren, that he should not be
worshipped: but therefore worshipped because sold; so Gods counsel is
fulfilled when it is Greg. Moral. lib. 6. c. 12. Diuinum consilium dum
deuitatur, impletur: humana sapientia dam reluctatur, comprehenditur.
declined, and man's wisdom when it resists, is defeated. David is anointed
King over Israel, and must sit in the Throne; but for many years together he
has neither house nor home, but is constrained to keep the wilderness fot
his safety. 1. Sam. 22. 1. Job is stripped of all, that he may have more
bestowed. Job 1. 20. and 42. 10. Thus God will be wonderful in his Saints, and
it is that which Anna speaks, He kills and makes alive, brings down to
the grave, and rayseth up: 1. Sam. 2. 6. Wherefore let us cast our care upon
God, for he cares for us. 1. Pet. 5. 7.

My soul waits more upon the Lord, then the morning watch watches for the
morning.
THese words diligently weighed, seem to discover two, if not contrary, yet
diverse affections; for therein is a signification of impatiency, in respect of
delay, in that the thick darkness of trouble and temptation endures so
long; and of constant enduring while it shall please God to shine forth, and
disperse those mistie clouds. So the flesh strives against the spirit; but
the latter part overcomes the worse, and from hence be obseruable sundry
instructions.

As those who keep watch in the night, what with the 1. Doctrine.
discomfortablenesse of the time, and weariness of the labor, do think long
till the approach of the day: Even so a Christians life is full of labor and
grief, until that appointed time of deliverance come, which all creatures
wait for with a careful and longing desire. Romans 8. 19. that so we may rest
in the house of the Lord. Psalm. 23. 6. For Christianity stands not in
flourish of words, or an outward counterfeit show: holy profession admits
no sluggishnesse of spirit, therefore if any will be Christ's Disciple, he must
take up his Cross. Math. 16. 24. and strive to enter in at the narrow gate.
Luc. 13. 24. And S. Paul commending the Thessalonians, adds to every virtue
his proper attribute, that their faith was effectual, their love diligent,
their hope patient, and the receiving of the word with affliction. x. These. 3.
6 Wherefore to be a Christian is not an idle man's occupation, as Pharao
thought. Exodus 5. 4. Nay, whosoever will set himself in such a course as he
ought, shall find his life to be a continual Martyrdom, sustayning terrors
within, and fightings without. 2. Cor. 7. 5. And hereof I take it that it is
called a crucifying, as Romans 6. 6. and Galat. 6. 14. which is of all other
besides the ignominy thereof, the most sensible torment: and hereof Christ has
left us an example. 1. Pet. 4. 1 Sub spinoso capite non sunt delicata membra.
Wanton members under a head crowned with thorns, are not suitable.

Therefore, every one must work forth his salvation with Use.
fear and trembling. Philip. 2. 12. and so serve the Lord. Psalm. 2. 10. And
this service is not a naked title, but implies in it many other duties, as
willingness to undergo whatsoever 1 Willingness.
the Lord will: so David is content with Shemies cursing. 2. Sam. 16. 10. and
Moses at the commandment goes up to the Mountain and dies. Deuteronomy. 34. 5.
Simplicity, not 2 Simplicity.
becoming a questionist, with what, and how, and Quaeristie and Curristae.
Lutherus in 19. caput Genescos.
wherefore. This was Abraham's obedience, who when he had received the charge,
rose early in the morning and took Isaac, and made preparation of all things
necessary, and went to the place which God had told him. Genesis 22. 3. showing a
great faith. Hebr. 11. 17. and performing a great work. James 2. 21.
Cheerfulness, as of the Prophet, I will run 3 Cheerfulness.
the way of thy commandments. Psalm. 119. 32. and the Apostle was content, not
only to be bound, but suffer, so that he might fulfill his course with joy, and
the ministration he had received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel; of
the grace of God. Acts 20. 14. Humility, acknowledging that 4 Humility.
when we have done all we can; we are but unprofitable servants. Luc. 17. 10.
for vae nisi fecissemus: it is duty; the neglect deserves a woe. Constancy,
so Job 13. 15. after loss 5 Constancy.
of servants, children, goods, health, yet protests that he will trust in the
Lord, though he should kill him: and those who walk after this rule, the peace
of God is upon them. Galat. 6. 16.

My soul waits more upon the Lord, then the morning watch watches for the
morning; And yet continues his standing until he be discharged, sustaining
the mean while all inconveniences.
THerefore in all holy and religious duties, perseverance is 2. Doctrine.
required; for it is said of the godly, that they go from strength to
strength, until every one appear before God in Sion. Psalm. 84. 7. where in
the original, the manner of speech is borrowed from warfare, wherein the
Soldier keeps his rank; notwithstanding, any either confronting of the
enemy, or difficulty of the way. So the Apostle taking a resemblance from a
race, where he only gets the garland that runs to the goal, exhorts to
continuance, that we may obtain. 1. Cor. 9. 24. and affirms of himself,
that he forgets that which is behind, and endeavors to that which is
before, and follows hard toward the mark for the price of the high calling
of God in Vide Fabrum in Agonistico, lib. 2. cap. 7.
Christ Jesus. Phil. 3. 13, 14. For as S. Hierome Non quaeruntur in Christianis
principia, sed fines. Hieronymus Epist. ad Furiam, etc.
speaks truly, not the beginnings, but the endings in Christians are
commended, faith not Fides non accepta sed custodita viuificat. Cyprianus lib.
1. Epist. 7.
once received, but always kept does profit. Rehoboams three religious years
were no benefit unto him, when afterward he forsook the Lord. 2. Chron. 12. 1.
9. Judas was an Apostle in Christ's school, he taught the word, wrought
miracles as the rest, but the Devil entered into his heart, he became a
traitor. Ioh. 13. 27. and a terrible spectacle in his death. Acts 1. 18. What
auailed it Lots wife to come out of Sodom, when looking back she was turned
into a pillar of salt? Genesis 19. 20. In exemplum and August. de Ciuitate Dei,
lib. 16. cap 30.
condimentum, to season us by her example: therefore our Savior Christ has
lest us the use of that judgment; Remember Lots wife. Luc. 17. verse. 32.

Because many be like Daniels Image, whose head was Use.
gold and his feet dirt. Dan. 2. 32. 33. and make some fair show at the
first, continually decreasing, as that Balduinus: de hoc vide Geraldum
Cambrenseni in Itineratio Cambriae, lib. 2. cap. 1. and 14. and Antiquitates
Britannicas in vita Balduini.
Prelate to whom Pope Urban writ, taunting his inconstancy: Monacho feruido,
Abbati calido, Episcopo tepido, Archicpiscopo frigido. Who was for zeal a
burning Monk, an hot Abbot, a luke warm Bishop, and a stone cold Archbishop,
always declining; And that he only shall be saved that continues, for
perseverance is Sola perseuerantia meretur viris gloriam coronari virtutibus,
etc. Bernardus, Epist. 129.
the crown of all virtues. Math. 10. 22. the best use is to consider of the
motives, which may further to the obtaining and keeping of this virtue, the
perfection of all other, and among many those most especial.

First prayer, for this is clauis coeli, man's petitions ascend, Gods blessings
descend, and every good gift proceeds from the Father of light. James 1. 17.
Therefore Annas Burgeus a Historia Gallica de statu religionis sub Henrico 2.
Anno Domini, 1559.
man of undaunted courage, in the times of the troubles in France under Henry
the second, being condemned for the profession of the Gospel, when he came to
the stake where he was to be executed, privy to man's weakness, and the Devils
subtle temptations, presenting the dreadfulnesse of massacring torments, and
the delights of smiling pleasure; then betook him to prayer. Ne me desere
Domine, ne ego te deseram; forsake me not Lord, that I forsake not thee: and
indeed now was the trial.

Secondly consideration, that things of small continuance are of as small
respect as the former. Spectaculi Tertullianus de Resurrectione.
and spiraculi res: matters only of sight and sent we can be content to carry
them in our hands for a while, when they be once withered, cast them to the
dunghill; and God makes as little account of fainters in his service, who have
no lasting in them, like summer fruit soon rotten: Amos 8. 2.

Thirdly, the danger of recidiuation, for a relapse in corporal sickness is
very dangerous, because the body weakened with the former disease, is neither
well able to bear a second assault, nor a new course of remedy in Physic:
and not unlike is the case of the soul spiritually, and so it is laid out in
the Parable, that the Devil being once driven out, wandreth in dry places, and
bethinketh of return, and brings with him seven spirits more, worse then
himself, and enters into a man again, and his estate is worse then before.
Math. 10. verse. 43. 2. Pet. 2. verse. 20. 21.

Fourthly, a wayning of our selves in time, from the enticing delights of the
world, and our own affections, casting before hand the hardest, and what our
profession may cost us. And this is the counsel of our Savior Christ by two
similitudes: the one taken from joining battle with the enemy; the other from
building of an house: where our ability for the one must be first reckoned in
disbursing the expenses, and power of the other considered, for possibility to
obtain victory, lost either we leave a hare foundation with shame, or be
constrained to sly with dishonor. Luc. 14. 28.

Fifthly, having our eyes fixed upon the reward, and this will put heart into us.
Thus Christ encouraged the Church of Smyrna: Be faithful unto the death, and I
will give thee the crown of life. Revel. 2. 10. And it is said of Moses, that
he refused to be called Pharaos daughters son, and did rather choose to
suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches, then the treasure
of Egypt: the reason of all this, for he had a respect unto the recompense of
the reward: Hebr. 11. 24, 25, 26. And so let us go forward in all holy
actions, not regarding what lets or hindrances may be cast in Aut deficiam,
aut efficiam: est Emblema Christianorum.
the way, knowing that to those that continue in well doing, is glory and
honor, and unmortality and everlasting life. Romans 2. 7.

Let Israel wait on the Lord: for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is
great redemption; and he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
THis is the conclusion of the Psalm, and exhortation to the whole Church, in
which are considerable these particulars. First, the exhortation it self: Let
Israel wait on the Lord; and in it there is the matter of the exhortation,
(wait;) the persons who must wait, Israel; on whom, the Lord. Secondly, the
reason, for with him is mercy; and this mercy is amplified: first by the
quantity, it is great. Secondly, by the subject, in him. Thirdly, by the
object, Israel. Fourthly, by the perfection or extent, to redeem Israel from
all his sins. From the offense and guilt, a malo culpae and poenae: for so
much that word in the original signifies.

Let Israel wait on the Lord. The Prophet now comes from a particular in
himself, to a general in all the faithful. By Israel he understands the
whole Church, the number of the Elect, as oftentimes in Scripture elsewhere.
Esaias 19. 25. Ose. 14. 6. Psalm. 125. 5. Gal. 6. 16.

The particular examples of Gods mercy are to be applied Doctrine.
unto all, and every one is to make use thereof. And so God himself teaches
us, speaking of Abraham, and the manner of his justification, not of merit, but
mercy, through the obedience of Christ, apprehended by faith: It was not
written for him only. Romans 4. 23. Thus every example of favor showed, and
registered in the Scripture, should be unto us a demonstration (...).
of Gods long suffering, and a picture of his mercy, as was S. Paul's
wonderful and gracious conversion. 1. Tim. 1. 16. And David having confessed
his sin, and found assurance of pardon, as Nathan told him. 2. Sam. 12. 12. and
peace of conscience, propounds the same comfort to others, Therefore shall
every one that is godly, make his prayer unto thee in a time when thou may
be found. Psalm. 32. 5. 6. for the false and risings of the Saints are written to
confirm the hope of salvation unto others, that none should despair
Scribuntur Sanctorum ruinae and reparationes vt spem faciant humanae salutis,
vt nemo post lapsum poenitendo desperet veniam, etc. Isodorus Hispalensis de
summo bono, lib. 2. cap. 11. Chrysologus homil. 90.
repenting after his offense. And this is that use which Christ would have
Peter communicate after he had obtained pardon for his denials, When thou art
converted, confirm thy brethren. Luc. 22. 31. 32. That is, confirm them that
they despair not of forgiveness of their sins, and so perish in them; let
thy example be unto them a book case, wherein they may see their own estate,
for where sin abounded, there grace has superbounded. Romans 5. 20.

This may serve us for a profitable rule of direction, how to Use.
read the Scriptures, not as other histories for delight, or increase of
speculatiue knowledge: but to make comfortable use to thy self; and for to
that end were they written, therefore these rules are to be followed.

First, before reading, pray for Gods inlighting spirit. Iam. 1. 5. for the
natural man does not know nor comprehend the things that are of God. 1. Cor.
2. 14. Therefore David, open mine eyes, O Lord, that I may understand the
wonders of thy law. Psalm. 119. 18. for none can behold the Sun but by the
light thereof; none can see Gods will, except Sine Deo non cognoscitur Deus,
Ireneus, l. 4. c. 14.
he receive it.

Secondly, renounce thy own Lex data est in igne and fumo, illuminet humiles,
obscuret superbos Gregor. Moral. lib. 2. cap. 27.
wit and reason, and seek not to be wise above that which is written. 1. Cor.
4. 6. for the holy Scriptures are able to make us wise to salvation through
faith in Christ Jesus. 2. Tim. 3. 15. And therefore God does hide his mysteries
from the prudent, and reveal them to babes and sucklings, for so it is his
pleasure. Math. 11. 25.

Thirdly, let us bring converted souls and repenting hearts: to such the ways
of the Lord are plain. Ose. 14. 10. Into a wicked sold wisdom cannot enter:
Wisdom 1. 4. Therefore Christ ioynes these two, repent and believe the Gospel.
Mark 1. 15.

Fourthly, let there be in us a desire to learn, that we may live accordingly:
for the grace of God that brings salvation to all men, has shined forth, and
teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lust: and to live soberly,
justly, and godly, in this present world. Tit. 2. 13. For the scripture ought
to be unto us a glass, wherein Scriptura speculum est, foeda ostendeus, and
corrigi docens: Hieron. Epist. ad Demetriadem Gregor. lib. 2. Moral. cap. 1.
we may behold our blemishes and amend them, he learneth most by them, that
does most. Therefore let the word of God dwell in us plentifully in all
wisdom. Coloss. 3. 16. Wisdom speculatiue for increase of saving knowledge,
and wisdom practique for performance of holy obedience; then shall it be unto
us the immortal seed of regeneration. 1. Pet. 1. 23. for the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and a good understanding have they that do
hereafter, and the praise of it endures for ever. Psalm. 111. 11.

Let Israel wait on the Lord.
By Israel, we are to understand the Church of God, as has been showed: now
it is certain that Jacob was so called, and his former name changed into this,
and that by God himself who does nothing but to a Philo Iudaeus in libello
quare quorundam nomina sunt in sacris literis mutata.
special end, and it is not amiss, a little to consider, why the Church is
signified under this title. Besides some other respects gathered by later Vide
Vrsinum in 11. cap. Esaiae.
Divines.

First, before Jacobs name was changed, in his return out of Mesopotamia, he
was in great fear and perplexity of mind lest Esau his brother should destroy
him with his, in revenge of the birthright which he had gotten. Genesis 32. 7.

Secondly, being in this danger, he betaketh himself to prayer: a means by
which he was sure he should prevail, for he had the promise of God. Genesis 32. 9.

Thirdly, after his prayer he goes forward in his intended journey, and all
night wrastleth with an Synodus Syrmiensis, Socrates lib. histor. Eccles. 2.
cap 30. Justinius Martyr Dialog. cum Triphone.
Angel, which was Christ, and does not let him go until he obtain a
blessing: and then in stead of Jacob, prevailing with man, he is called (...):
Israel, having power with God. Genesis 32. 24. 28.

Jacob therefore, a type of the Church, is perplexed, prays, Doctrine.
wrastleth, overcomes: so the Church, so long as she is in pilgrimage in
this world, is vexed with afflictions, prays, strives, and at the last
obtayneth victory. So Christ Nazianz. Orat. 2. de Theologia.
speaks to such as will be his, they must take up their cross every Author
pictatis in cruce pendens, Testamentum condidit, singulis pietatis opera
distribuens, Apostolis persecutionem, Iudaeis corpus, Patri spiritum, Virgini
Paranymphum, Latroni Paradisum, Christianis crucem. Ambrosius a Selneccoro
citatus, part 2. postillae.
day, and so laden follow him. Luc. 9. 23. for it is a necessity unavoidable,
and a general, admitting no exception: that all that will live godly, must
suffer afflictions. 3. Tim. 3. 12. Therefore they are tried with scorning,
racked, stoned, hewed, of whom the world was unworthy. Hebr. 11. 36. for here
the Church is a Lilly among thorns, oftentimes Lilium inter spinas.
died in her own blood: a stranger Scit se peregrinam in terris agere, inter
extraneos facile inimicos inuenire. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 1.
and so finds but hard entertainment. Yet at the last she shall enjoy rest,
for hell gates cannot prevail against her. Math. 16. 18. Iesabel persecuteth
Eliah; when he can have no safety upon earth, he is translated into heaven. 2.
Kings 2. 11. Pharao so oppresses the Israelites in Egypt, that they are weary
of their lives, he is choked in the sea, and they sing a song of triumph.
Exodus 15. 2. Herod makes havoc of the Church, puts James to death,
imprisoneth Peter, he is strooken of an Angel, strangled with Vide Iosepham
Antiquitatum lib. 19. and Eusebius. lib. Histor. Eccles. 2. cap. 10.
worms, and the word of God grew and multiplied. Acts 3. 23. for God is
faithful and will never suffer any of his to be tempted above that they shall
be able to bear: but with the temptation give a comfortable issue. 1. Cor. 10.
13. Wherefore to end this, it is a memorable speech of one concerning the
Church, and the estate thereof. It is Co^tinuatio discursus de rebus Gallicis,
Anno 1588.
Gods field, ploughed up with the share of torment, compassed with the contempt
of the world, sowed with ashes, watered with tears: the fire is to her as the
Sun, blood as the dew; flourishes in the Autumn of calamities, and brings
fruit in the deepest water of tribulation, all her enemies Hilarious de
Trinitate, lib. 7.
further her good.

Therefore we are not to account either outward tribulations, Use.
or inward temptations, to be tokens of Gods displeasure. No he sends them
for another end.

First, to teach us, not to trust in our selves. Psalm. 30. 7.

Secondly, to keep us from waxing wanton in earthly prosperity. Deuteronomy. 8. 1. 2.

Thirdly, for trial of our faith and patience: for what the furnace is to
gold, separating it from the dross, and Augustinus in Psalm. 60.
the flaile to the corn, beating it from the chafe, the same is affliction to
a godly man, tending to make their virtues apparent. 1. Pet. 1. 6. 7.

Fourthly, by this means the old man is crucified, and the body of sin
destroyed. Romans 6. 6.

Fifthly, thus we are fitted for a better life, for by many tribulations we must
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Acts 14. 22. for sinners are therefore
undoubtedly miserable, because left without Gregorius in primum caput
Ezechielis.
chastisement. But so much for this, being sufficient to have touched it in
this place, being before more fully handled.

For with the Lord is mercy, and with him is great redemption.
In these words, for with the Lord is mercy; a reason is set down why Israel
should wait on the Lord, and therein be two comforts against two especial
temptations, affrighting a distressed soul, and such an one as is touched with
the sense of deserved judgment, for sin; for howsoever worldly men may sport
themselves, and put off the evil day, yet can it not be avoided, but either
the greatness of man's sin, will discourage him; and this made Cain despair,
when he conceived it to be greater then Gods mercy. Genesis 4. 13. but against
this. With the Lord is mercy: or else the number, and this does astonish the
most righteous. Therefore I am confounded, says Ezra, and ashamed to lift up
my eyes unto thee my God, for our iniquities are increased over our head, and
our trespasses are gone up to heaven. Ezra 9. 6. So David, Mine iniquities are
gone over my head: therefore I am bowed and crooked very sore, I go mourning
all the day long, I am weakened and sore broken. I roar for the very grief of
my heart: my heart pants, my strength fails, and the light of mine eyes
even they are not my own. Psalm. 38. 46. 8. 10. Against this, With him is great
redemption.

Neither the greatness nor multitude of sins, must discourage Doctrine.
a penitent soul, for where sin abounded, there grace superabounded. Romans 5.
20. Christ calls them to come unto him; and promises rest to those, who are
laden and travail under the burden of their sins. Math. 11. 28. and his
blood is said to purge us from all sin. 1. Ioh. 1. 7. and the promise is,
that if they be as red as blood, they shall be made as white as wool; and if
scarlet, like unto snow. Esaias 1. 18. and this mercy is confirmed by oath.
Ezech. 33. 11. that so by two things, by which it is impossible, that God
should fail; the Elect might have sure consolation. Hebr. 6. 18. And as
sensible testimonies hereof, he received Manasses into favor, who committed
more abominations then the Gentiles, and did evil to anger the Lord withal.
2. Chron. 33. 7. 8. 13. He accepted of David an adulterer, a murderer. 2. Sam.
12. 12. He admitted denying Peter, and most lovingly conuersed with him. Ioh.
21. 15. He made the Thief upon the Cross an inheritor of Paradise. Luc. 23.
43. and Marie Magdalen the sinner, a messenger of his resurrection. Math. 28.
7. At one time three thousand of those are washed with Christ's blood, who shed
his blood. Act. 2. 23. 41. For there is no malady of the sold incurable, to
the almighty Acque potest excitare Christus I azarum e Sepulchro, ac Iairi
filiam adhuc in domo, aut viduae filium iam elatum: Vide August de verbis
Apostoli, hom. 44. in Ruang. secundum Iohannem.
physician; therefore when Cain cried out, his sin was greater then could be
forgiven. Genesis 4. 13. he did wrong to God, whose mercy is greater then man's
misery can be. It was not the greatness of the offense, but the want of
repentance, that shut Judas out of heaven, who despairing became Ambrosius lib.
1. de poenitentia. Nyssenus in orat. cont. eos qui alios acerbius iudica^t.
August. lib. 50. homiliar. hom. 27
his own executioner.

Use.
Let none therefore despair of the mercy of God, for he Tanta est benignitas
omnipotentiae, and omnipotentia benignitatis in Deo, vt nihil sit quod nolit,
aut non possit relaxare conuerso. Fulge^tius Epist. 7. cap. 4.
is so good and merciful, as he is Almighty and infinite: wherefore, let us
take words with us and turn to the Lord, and say unto him; Take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously, then he will heal our rebellions, and
love us freely. Ose. 14. 3. 5. Compassion and forgiveness is with him, because
we have rebelled. Dan. 9. 9. and because our rebellions are many, he is the God
of Deus condonationum: Vide Prosperum in hunc Psalmum.
forgiuenesses. Nehem. 9. 14. And therefore he commended his love unto us, that
when we were weak sinners and his enemies, he gave himself for us; much more
then being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath by him. Romans 5.
5. 8. 9. and therefore he was partaker of our nature, that by death he might
destroy him, that had the power of death, that is the Devil. Hebr. 2. 14. And
as the Israelites stong of the fiery Serpents, looked up to the brazen Serpent,
set up by Moses, and were healed of their wounds, so let us cast up our eyes
to Christ Jesus, who bare our sins upon his body on the tree, that we may be
safe. Ioh. 3. 14. 15. 1. Pet. 2. 24. for it pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell, to reconcile to himself, and set at peace by the
blood of his Cross, the things in heaven, and the things earth. Coloss. 1. 19.
Wherefore, if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the propitiator for our sins. 1. Ioh. 2. 1.
Therefore, let us now go boldly unto the Throne of grace, that we may receive
mercy, and find grace in the time of need. Hebr. 4. 16.

For with him is mercy and great redemption.
Flesh and blood in the sharpness of the fit of temptation, is persuaded that
God is nothing but wrath against sin. So Ezechias complayneth, Thou have
crushed my bones like a Lion. Esaias 38. 13. and the whole Church in the day of
her visitation. Thou have utterly rejected us, thou art exceedingly angry with
us. Lament. 5. 22. The holy Ghost therefore to take out of our minds this
conceit, says, with him is mercy and plentiful redemption; so that we are
not always to judge of Gods favor according to the present feeling, for then
we must complain with Job: Thou renuest thy plagues against me, and thou
increasest thy wrath against me. Job 10. 17. but repose our selves upon the
sweet promises of God, for in due time we shall be comforted. Esaias 54. 7. 8.

If we had not assurance of life, the enemy would not persecute us unto death,
if God did not love he would not hate, for he is our adversary, and goes about
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may dououre: 1. Pet. 5. 8.

Therefore, when we believe in Christ, and have our sins Doctrine.
pardoned through his obedience, then there is nothing proceeding from God
toward us, but goodness, he cannot but love us; and thus he himself assures,
that though a woman could forget her child, and have no compassion on the son
of her womb, yet the Lord cannot forget us, for we are graued upon the palm
of his hands. Esaias 49. 15. and indeed how can he but love those, for whom he
gave his beloved. Job. 3. 16. Therefore, there is no condemnation to these,
that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 1. He says not, there is no sin, for there
is none but sins. 1. Kings 8. 46. and the best works of the best Saints
Quotidie super pa^uum bonae vitae, quem teximus operibus Iustitiae, stillamus
sanicus diuersorum criminum: Adrianus Papa in Magistrum sententiarum.
are stained; our righteousness, says the Prophet, are as a polluted cloth.
Esaias 64. 6. but there is no damnation, for he has taken away the handwriting
that was against us, and fastened it unto his Cross. Coloss. 2. 14. for whom
the father has given the son to death, that they might live. Romans 8. 32.
Therefore, being covered with the wool, and washed with the blood of the
Lamb, which takes away the sins of the world. Ioh. 1. 29. b Ambrosius de
Iacobo and vita Beata, lib. 2. c. 2.
we cannot but be safe, and clothed with the garments of that our elder
brother. We shall be sure to obtain the blessing. Galat. 3. 8.

Therefore, does Satan persecute, does the world set it Use.
self against thee, does thine own conscience trouble thee? yet despair not,
remember that Christ has borne thy sins upon the Jdeirco lignum aduersus
lignum, and manus aduersus manum illae fortiter extensae contra inco^tinenter
extensam, illae clauis confixae, aduersus solutam and remissam, illae orbis
siues coniunctos, aduersus eam quae Adamu^ Paradiso exturbauit, etc. Nazianz.
Orat. 21. Apologes. fugae. Per extensionem manule in cruce duos populos, ad
vnum Deum co^gregauit vt resert ex senioribus, Iraneus l. 5.
tree, and by his wounds thou art healed: 1. Pet. 2. 24. and that he is made
unto thee of his father; justification and wisdom, and redemption, and
sanctification: 1. Cor. 1. 30. for he came to seek and save that which was
lost. Luc. 19. 10. and for this cause before he was conceived in the womb, to
take flesh for our sakes, he was named Nil canitur suae uius, nil auditur
iucundius, nil cogitatur dulcius, quam Jesus Dei sillus. Vetus Hymnus
Ecclesiae: nulla speeles peccati tanta vt non sit superior Jesus, Origines in
15. c. Iusuae Vide de hoc domine, Bernardum sermon. 15. super Cantico
Canticorum. Augustinum and Anselmum in Meditationibus.
JESUS a Savior, who should save his people from their sins. Math. 1. 21.
Cain was deceived when he thought his offense unpardonable. Genesis 4. 13. But non
erat de membris Christi, quia ad eum non pertinebat de meritis Christi; he was
no member of Christ, and therefore no partaker of his merits; and this
fearful distrust proceeds first from the ignorance of God, supposing him
only just and punishing, where as a father pittyeth his children, so does he
us. Psalm. 103. 13. is gracious merciful, slow to anger of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil. Joel 2. 13. Rich in mercy. Ephesians. 2. 5. Nay, he is
mercy it Augustinus in Psalm. 58.
self, therefore David; O God my mercy. Psalm. 59. 17. Nomen sub quo nemins
desperandum. Secondly, from the ignorance of sin, not knowing that it is
pardoned to the believing, so that they shall no more be remembered. Iere. 31.
34. That God will take away iniquity, pass by the transgression of the remnant
of his heritage, and retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases
him, will have compassion, and subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins
into the bottom of the Quantum scintilla ad mare habet, tantum hominis malitia
ad Dei clemensiam, immo vero non tantum, sed long supra inam pelagus, etse
magnum sit, mensuram recipit, Dei vero clementia nullam habet. Chrysostom, sermon.
3. de ^^^tentia.
Sea. Micah. 7. 18. 19. Thirdly, from the ignorance of true repentance which
God accepts, and obtayneth pardon. After that short, but sharp Sermon of the
Prophet, the Ninevites return from the evil of their ways, and God repents
of the evil he had said. Ion. 3. 10. Then forty days, and they should be
destroyed: for if the wicked turn from his sins, all the transgressions that
he has committed, shall not be mentioned Tam pius nemo, tam pater nemo.
Tertull. de poenitentia.
unto him. Ezech. 18. 21. Nay, there is more joy in heaven over one sinner that
repents, then for ninety nine just men that need no amendment of life. Luo.
15. 7. Therefore well spoke Bernard, I consider three things Sermon tertio de
fragmentis septem misericordiarum.
in which all my hope rests; the love of the adoption, the truth of the
promise, the power of the performance: Now let my foolish thought murmur, and
say; who art thou? how great is thy glory? what are thy deserts, by which thou
may hope to obtain it? I will answer confidently; I know whom I have
believed, and will answer confidently; I am assured thereof, because in his
exceeding love he has adopted me, who is true in his promise, and able to make
performance, for it is lawful for him to do what he will. This is the
threefold cord, hardly to be broken; which let down from heaven our Country,
unto this prison where we now dwell; let us take fast hold thereof, that it may
draw and pull us up into the sight of the glory of the great God, who is
blessed for ever, AMEN.

And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.
The conclusion of this Psalm is a promise, wherein the Prophet shows what
cause he had to pray, and what in the like case might be our encouragement, and
it is here most comfortably to be considered, that God does not only give us
natural life, govern and preserve the same. Acts 17. 28. but spiritual in
pardoning sin and destroying death: for this only is that which sweeteneth
all other his blessings unto us, (else the grief of conscience for sin, and
the terror of death, the Kings of fears. Job 18. 14. would utterly discomfort
us,) now that after the complaint of his afflictions, wherewith he began, he
mentions redemption from sins, and so ends with it.

When God afflicts, we are not to hope for any deliverance, Doctrine.
until he do pardon our sins: therefore, in all their troubles this is the
first suite that the faithful make: so Daniel; O Lord according to all thy
righteousness, let thy anger and thy wrath be turned away from thy City
Jerusalem, thine holy mountain, for because of our sins, and the iniquities
of our fathers. Jerusalem and thy people are a reproach to all that are about
us; O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider and do it. Dan. 9. 16. 19.
And David when the judgment was threatened against him, for his manifold
offenses, he craves many mercies. Psalm. 51. 1. Ezachias acknowledges that
when he had received assurance of life, that then God had cast all his sins
behind his back. Esaias 38. 17. And the reason of this is, for malum culpa
trahit malum poenae, the course of justice requires, that evil should befall
the evil man, It was the floode of sin that brought the floode of water.
Genesis 6. 7. Jerusalem sinned grievously, therefore she is in derision. Lam. 1.
8. And as man's (...). Herodot. lib. 1.
offenses provoking do increase, so Gods judgments punishing. Leuit. 26. 21,
24, 28. In all calamities, therefore let us have recourse to God, that he who
has wounded may bind up. The precept, Turn unto the Lord. Joel 2. 12. The
practice in the Ninevites who humbling them selves, obtained mercy. Iona 3. 10.
A shower of tears is the best water to quench the fire of Gods wrath, so does
he testify himself unto Iesiah. 2. Kings 22. 17, 19. Therefore, the man is
blessed who confesses his sins, and forsakes them, for he shall obtain
mercy. Proverb. 28. 13.

Let us avoid all sin, and the first inticements thereunto Use.
for ever, for those things sake, which the world makes small account of, the
wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience. Ephesians. 5. 6. the drops
of the water are small, yet they fill the Sea. What can be less then Noli
contemnere peccata quo tidiana, quia minora, sed time quia plura sint: non est
bestia sicut Leo, vt vno morsu guttur fra^gat, sed bestiae plerunque minutae
multae neca^t, etc Augustinus de december chordis, cap. vndecimo.
the sand upon the shore? yet with it the greatest vessels may be suncke; one
sparkell of fire neglected, is sufficient to consume a whole City: and the
least sins in our estimate, may so far kindle Gods wrath, that it will not
be quenched, as he spoke to Eli: that the wickedness of his house should not
be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever. 1. Sam. 3. 14. Therefore, let
us serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling. Psalm. 2.
11. and while it is called to day turn unto him, least we be hardened by the
deceitfulness of sin. Hebr. 3. 13. For we shall one day appear all before
the Tribunal seat of Christ Jesus, and receive according to that we have done
in this body, whether it be evil or good. 2. Cor. 5. 10. happy that man, that
makes that one day the subject of his meditation every day.

And he shall deliver Israel from all his iniquities.
What is to be understood by the name of Israel, has been showed, even the
Church, the whole number of the faithful. Here is set down unto us these
particulars, a benefit, redemption; the subject, Israel; the extent, from all
his iniquities. Now to Redemptionis vocabulum admonet nos.

1. De prima nostra integritate and liberate.

2. De poenis amissae libertatis style peccatis, de ira Dei, de captiuitate.

3. De charitate Dei erga nos and intercessione pro nobis.

4. De liberatione nostra.

5. De pretio soluto.


redeem, is properly to free one captiued, by paying a price for him to
ransom; so whereas before he said that with God was mercy, now he sets
down how this mercy is manifested, and so leads us to the consideration of a
mediator, by whom we are freed, and that is Christ Jesus, for we were taken
alive of the (...). Doctrine.
Devil. 2. Tim. 2. and he has redeemed us from him. Hebr. 2. 14. from sin.
Romans 3. 14, 25, 26. from the curse of the law. Gal. 3. 13. from death and
condemnation. 1. Cor. 15. 55. and that not with gold or silver, but with his
own precious blood. 1. Pet. 1. 18. And this word (he) is very Emphaticall, and
put here exclusiuely, he alone, that Redeemer. Job 19. 25. who speaks of
himself, I will redeem thee from the power of the grave, I will deliver thee
from death. Ose. 13. 14. Expounded, of Christ by the Apostle. 1. Cor. 15. 55,
56, 57.

Our sins are taken away, only by that sacrifice which Christ offered upon
the Cross, the Altar of Immolatus est Christus nouum and verum se Patri
offerens sacrificium, non in templo, cuius iam finita erat reuerentia, nec
intra septa ciuitatis ob meritum sui sceleris diruendae, sed foris and extra
castra. Vt veterum victimarum cessante mysterio, noua hostia, nouo Altari
impoueretur, and Crux Christi, non templi esset Ara sed mundi. Leo primus sermon.
8. de Passione Domini.
the world, for there is one God and one Mediator between God and Man, even
the man Jesus Christ, who gave himself a ransom for all men. 1. Tim. 2. 5. 6.
where the word in the original Englished a ransom, is used in the whole
Scripture, but in this place only as of special note, and may well be
translated a counter ransom, for the exposition includes (...).
an opposition between him and Adam, the author of our bondage, by whom sin
entered, and by sin death, and therewithal shows that he is more strong and
powerful to deliver, then the other was to enthrall us, as Romans 5. 15, 16, 17.
For it pleased the father that in him should all fullness dwell, to reconcile
to himself, and set at peace by the blood of his Cross, the things in heaven
and the things on earth. Coloss. 1. 19. Neither is there any other name under
heaven given unto men, whereby they can be saved, but only the name of Jesus.
Acts 4. 12. and he is as he witnesses of himself, the way, the truth, and the
Non est qua eas nisi per eum, non est qu^ eas nisi ad eum, non facilius per eum
quam per alios, sed non omnino nisi per eum. August. tractat. 22. in Johan.
Adam. Christ. Use.
life, and no man comes to the father, but by him. Ioh. 14. 6. therefore, no
man can obtain pardon of sins, but by that man, who also was God, and by his
death reconciled man to God: for as by the offense of one the fault came upon
all men to condemnation, so by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded
toward all men, to the justification of life; for as by the disobedience of one
man many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, many shall be made
righteous. Romans 5. 18. 19.

Therefore the ancient Fathers, Patriarks, Prophets, and holy men, obtained
salvation by one, and the self same means that we do, even by Christ
apprehended through faith; therefore is he called the (...). Chrysostom. in
Parabola^ de filio prodigo.
Lamb, killed from the beginning of the world. Revel. 13. 8. In respect of
Gods eternal decree, who had so appointed to save mankind. Ephesians. 1. v. 4. of
his promise to our first parents in Paradise. Genesis 3. 15. of the Types
signifying, as Isaac offered. Genesis 22. 18. and the Serpent lifted up in the
wilderness. Number. 21. 9. and the sacrifices shadowing. Exodus 29. 38. and the
effect and power of his death, which profuit antequam fuit, was profitable and
effectual, before it was actually performed on earth: therefore Abraham is
said to see his day and to rejoice. Ioh. 8. 56. for he is the same yesterday,
to day, and for ever. Hebr. 13. 8. yesterday from Adam, those four thousand
years, until the fullness of time came, that God sent his son, made of a
woman. Gal. 4. 4. to day to us, now: and for ever, to the generations which
shall follow, until the dissolution of all things, not only in regard of his
person and Deity, but of his office and benefits; and therefore it is
delightful to consider, how in all ages by degrees God did manifest him, first
in general, the seed of the woman. Genesis 3. 15. Secondly, more particularly of
what people he should come, of the Jews: so Paul. Gal. 3. 16. expounds that.
Genesis 22. 18. Thirdly, of what Tribe, of that people, of Judah. Genesis 49. 10.
Fourthly, of what house, of that Tribe, of the family of David. 2. Sam. 7. 13.
And as the time of his incarnation drew nearer, so plainelier: for fifthly, his
mother is expressed, a Virgin, and his name set down, Emanuel. Esaias 7. 17.
Sixthly, the very place of his birth mentioned, Bethleem. Micah. 5. 2. And so
accordingly fulfilled. Math. 1. 23. Luc. 2. 4. 7. And between them and us no
difference, but they believed he should come, we that he is come: to them he
was more darkely signified, to us plainly manifested. 1. Pet. 1. 11. 12. and
this is that which is spoken by the Apostle. Ephesians. 3. 4. 5.

Secondly, this overthrows al other means of salvation, devised without
Christ, and condemns that fancy of Phylastrius in Catologo Haereticorum.
Augustinus de haeresibus, cap. 72.
Rhetorius, who thought that a man might obtain eternal life, by the
profession of any religion, and taxed them all: so the error of some of the
Fathers, who have taught that the Gentiles were saved by the law Justinius Martyr
in defensione Christianorum ad Senatum. Cleme^s Alexand. lib. 5. and 6.
Stromatum.
of nature, and therefore are to be read with judgment: which dangerous
opinion is maintained by Papists, of great note amongst them; As Andradius in
the defense of the Tridentine Council, in the time whereof Sleidanus is Anno
1552.
a Franciscan Friar delivered that doctrine publicly; And Isingrenius
Dominicae septuagesimae concione 2. Olim Gentiles, per illam cognitionem quam
de Deo habebant, cultum and operationem, iustificabantar, sicut vos modo per
fidem nostram, nostrum cultum and operationem, etc.
in his Postill, gathered out of the Catholic writers (so styled by him)
approves. But is confuted by some of their Josephus Acosta de procuranda
Iadorum salute, lib. 5. cap. 3.
own, as an opinion unworthy to be held by any Divine, which has no ground in
the Scriptures, nor soundest Fathers, but was only builded upon the suspicion
of man. And therefore by them censured (though some Catholics defend the same)
to be so apparently heretical, that nothing can be more contrary to faith,
then to teach that without faith any can be saved, etc. And indeed the
Scripture in this point is plain; as that without faith it is impossible to
please God. Hebr. 11. 6. and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Romans 14. 23.
and he that believes in the son of God, has everlasting life, and he that
obeys not, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Ioh. 3.
36. Therefore, when the world by wisdom knew not God, in the wisdom of God
(in the creatures (...), Basilius Homilia. 1. in Hexaenieron.
whose being shows the creator; their greatness his power, their variety his
wisdom, their use his mercy: for the invisible things of him, that is, his
eternal power, and Godhead are seen, by the creation of the world, being
considered in his works, to the intent that they should be without Vide
Hagonis Tractatum de operibus trium dierum in hunc locum.
excuse. Romans 1. 20.) it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, (so
called by way of concession, as the world accounted thereof) to save them that
believe. 1. Cor. 1. 21. Therefore are we sent to search the Scriptures, for
they bear witness of Christ, and in them we think to have everlasting life.
Ioh. 5. 39. This point is fully handled by Lib. 2. de Gratia, de ciuitate Dei,
lib. 18. cap. 47. etc.
S. Austen, and the sounder Aquinas in 3. Lectura, ad caput decimum, Epist. ad
Romans
Schoolmen.

Thirdly, here is confuted the opinion of humane merits; If any suppose to make
a step to heaven by them, we may answer as Constantine (...) Socrates lib.
hist. Ecclesiast. 1. cap. 10.
did to Acesius a Bishop of the Nouatians; Set to the ladder and climb up
alone. For woe to the best life, if it be censured in justice. Therefore the
Saints pray; Enter not into Judgment with thy servants O Lord; and confess,
for no flesh is righteous in thy sight. Psalm. 143. 2 for our works be prebrum
and pudor, shame and reproach, and our righteousness consists not in
perfection of holiness, but pardon of sins: therefore blessed is the man
whose wickedness is forgiven, etc. Romans 4. 6. For when we were dead in our
sins and trespasses, and by nature the children of wrath, God rich in mercy,
according to his great love, wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead by
sins, has he quickened us, and raised us up together, and made us to sit
together in the heavenly places with Christ Jesus, that he might show in the
ages to come, the exceeding riches of his grace, through his kindness toward
us in Christ: for by grace are ye saved through faith, not of your selves, it
is the gift of God; not of works, least any man should boast Alias non esset
salus munus largientis, sed merces operantis. Ambrosius de vocat. Gent. lib. 1.
cap. 5.
himself. Ephesians. 2. 1. 2. 3. etc. Nostra merita Christi misericordiae, we must
make, as Bernard Sermon 43. super Cantica.
says, was his use pro aceruo meritorum fasciculum ex amaritudinibus Christi,
for a heap of our merits, a bundle of Christ's sufferings, and lay them
between our breasts, for by his blood he has purchased us to be a people
peculiar to himself. Tit. 2. 14. Wherefore, blessed be God even the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in all spiritual blessings, in
heavenly things in him, etc. by whom we have redemption, through his blood,
even the forgiveness of sins, according to his rich grace. Ephesians. 1. 3. 7. 8.

And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
Of the Author of this redemption, we have heard. Now the subject redeemed, is
Israel; that is the number of the faithful, to whom this benefit does belong.

Hereof it necessarily follows, that Christ has paid unto Doctrine.
his Father, the price for the sins of man. The virtue whereof albeit in
respect of the merit and power be infinite, and so sufficient, for the
redeeming of ten thousand worlds (if there were so many) yet in respect of the
counsel of God, and the event, is effectual only unto Israel, to the Elect.
And in appears: thus,

First, for whom the son of God did not pray, for them he did not offer
himself. These two can not be severed, parts of his Sacerdotall office; but he
prayed only for the Elect, and for them offered him self, and reconciled them
to the father. John 17. 9. 19. Ephesians. 5. 25. Therefore, to them alone, not to
others, does salvation appertain, which he has purchased.

Secondly, if it be true that he paid the ransom, and dyed for all
indifferently, and effectually; then should not his death be beneficial to
them, for whom he dyed. For it does not profit the reprobate, who shall be
punished with eternal perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the
glory of his power. 2. These. 1. 9. whose doom is pronounced by Christ: Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Math. 25. 41.

Thirdly, put this as granted, that all men, none excepted, before and after
that Christ dyed, be through his blood truly and undoubtedly received into the
favor of God. Then hereof will follow many dangerous consequents, which do
overthrow the grounds of Christian religion. For then no original sin, nor
guilt thereof: the whole offspring of Turks, Infidels, and Pagans, should be
borne in favor and acceptance with God, and those saved who are not in the
covenant of grace. But the Scripture teaches us, that by the offense of one,
the fault came upon all to condemnation. Romans 5. 18. and are by nature the
children of wrath. Ephesians. 2. 3. taken alive of the Devil to do his will: 2.
Tim. 2. 26. already condemned, because they believe not in the name of the only
begotten son of God. Ioh. 3. 18. Aliants from the common wealth of Israel,
strangers from the covenants of promise, and have no hope, etc. Ephesians. 2. 12.
Therefore all, and only the faithful are partakers of the fruits and benefits
of Christ's death and resurrection (of free justification with God, of quickening
from the death of sin and the body, and at the last, of immortal life and
endless glory.) For these alone hear the word of Christ, and believe. Ioh.
10. 28. are justified by faith, are reconciled to God, and have peace through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 5. 1. are regenerate by the holy Ghost, are raised
up to a new life in Chist, and have their hearts purified by faith. Romans 6. 4.
Acts 15. 9. And lastly, these be they who sleeping in the Lord Jesus, God shall
raise from death, and bring with him, that they may enjoy life and glory
eternally in heaven. 1. These. 4. 14. Math. 25. 31. Ioh. 3. 16.

Secondly, this is that truth which the Ancient Fathers have taught and
constantly professed. So Chrysostom In 9. caput Epist. ad Hebraeos, homilia 17.
expounding that of the Apostle. Hebr. 9. 28. Christ was once offered to take
away the sins of many; propounds the question, Why of many, not of all? and
answers: (...): because all believed not. If thou do not believe, Christ
did not descend, Christ did not suffer for thee, As Ambrose Lib. 4. de fide ad
Gratianum, cap. 1.
instructs the Emperor Gratian. The author of life gave himself to death,
for the life of the Elect. Gregory Pro electorum vila vsque ad mortem tradidit
se author vitae. Homil. 2. in Ezechielem.
so teaches the people. Infinite are the authorities of Augustine, but that of
all other is most pregnant, where handling that demonstratiue proof of the
free and inestimable mercy of God Tractatu 45. in Euangelium Iohannis.
toward us. Romans 8. 32. in that he spared not his own son; but gave him for
us all: demands, which all? and satisfies his own doubt: Even for us, whom
he has soreknowne, whom he has predestinate, whom he has justified, whom he
has glorified. Of whom it follows, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect? And this was the confession of the whole Church of Passus est
Christo (...). Eusebius lib. 4. Histor. Ecclesiast. cap. 15.
Smyrna, in the primitive and purer times thereof, as we read in the
Ecclesiastical histories. The evidence of this point is so great, that the
Schoolmen Lumbardus lib. 3. Distinct. 18.
also have acknowledged the same, though living in the days of more darkness
and corruption, distinguishing Innocentius 3. lib. 2. de officio Missae, cap.
41. Aquinas in 1. ad Tim. 2. Lectione 1. in fine, pro aliquibus efficaciter,
pro omnibus sufficienter, and in 5. cap. Apocalypseos. Anselmus lib. 2. Cur
Deus homo, cap. 14 15.
de sufficientia, and efficientia mortis Christi, the sufficiency reaches unto
al, the effect to the Elect only: and they give a reason of this Aquinas summa
contra Gentes, lib. 4. cap. 55. sect. 26. Vide and Galatinum de arcanis Cathol.
religionis exponentem Esaiae cap. 53. lib. 8. cap. 14.
distinction. For the death of Christ is as an universal cause of salvation,
as the sin of Adam an universal cause of damnation. Now, an universal cause
must be applied in special to every one, that they may receive the effect
thereof. The effect of the sin of the first man, comes unto all by carnal
generation, the effect of the death of Christ, must be conveyed by spiritual
regeneration, whereby man in a sort is conjoined, and incorporated with him. It
were very easy to add to these few, greater number of De hac materia Vrsinus
in oratione habita, de quaestione ad quos feuctus mortis, and resurrectionis
Christi pertineat. Grinaeus Theologicorum Theorematum part 3. de fidelibus,
quorum causa Christus Jesus mortnus est and resurrexit: and sunt de ea integri
Tractatus. Vt Iohannis Iezleri de fructu mortis Dominicae libri quinque; Iacobi
Kimedoncij de redemptione gene, is humani libritres (...). Amandi Polani
Syntagmate lib. 6. cap. 18.
proofs, but needless.

Use. First therefore, for application; let this teach us to pray for faith; so
the Apostles: Lord increase our faith, Luc. 17. 5. for as in that first Sermon
preached to the Gentiles in Cornelius house, which was confirmed by a visible
sign, the holy Ghost descending upon them that were present, S. Peter said, To
him (that is Christ) all the Prophets give witness, that through his name all
that believe in him, shall receive forgiveness of sins, Act. 10. 43. And
prayer is the keye of heaven, opening unto us the treasury of Gods blessings:
it ascends, graces descends: among them is this faith, donum infusum, Aquinas
2. 2. q 6. art. 1. So an example in Austin, when he went to Millan to hear S.
Ambrose eloquence. Veniebant in mentem meam (ait) simul cum verbis quae
diligeba^, res etia^ qua^ negligebam cumcor aperitem ad excipiendum, quam
diserte diceret, pariter intrabat, and quam vere diceret, etc. Confess. l. 5.
c. 14.
a gift infused; therefore to you it is given, says the Apostle, that you
should believe, Phil. 1. 29.

Secondly, let us be thankful to God for the blessing vouchsafed us: so S.
Paul, being converted after the rehearsal of his former estate, and of his
calling, and mercy obtained, breaks forth thus: Therefore to the King
immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be glory for ever and ever, 1.
Timoth. 1. 17.

Thirdly, this may be an admonition to examine our selves, whether we be in
Christ, or no, 1. Cor. 13. 5. which will be apparent by the holy fruits, as
faith, love, hope, receiving the word with joy, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3, 4, 5.
obedience, Ioh. 10. 28. prayer and newness of life, 2. Tim. 2. 19. strife
against sin, and victory over the same, Romans 7. 23, 24, 25. and such like. So
that we live not now according to our own wills, but the will of him (Christ
Jesus) who has died once for us all, 2. Cor. 5. 17.

And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
The original word here translated Iniquities, signifies Malum peccatorium,
and malum vltorium Tertul. aduersus Marcionem. l. 2.
two things, the material, and the formal of sin, as the Schoolmen call
it: that is, the corruption, disorder, defect, and inclination, repugnant to
the law of God: the inherent disease, the evil of offense; and also the guilt
binding unto punishment, temporal and eternal, according to the order of
divine justice, the evil of punishment: and so it is used for both these
oftentimes in Scripture, as Genesis 4. 13. Lament. 4. 3 Psalm. 32. 5. Esaias 53. 11.
and elsewhere.

The Prophet having a reference to that which he said before, Doctrine.
viz. That with the Lord was great redemption; now by way of Exposition,
adding, For he shall redeem Israel from all his sins, teaches; that God in
Christ does perfectly free all the faithful, both from their sins, and from
the punishment due unto them; for he is that (...), a word but once used in the
new Testament.
all-sufficient ransom, 1. Tim. 2. 5. and therefore those that die in the Lord
do rest from their labors, Revel. 14. 13. for Suscipiendo paenam, and non
culpam, and culpam deleuit and paena^. Augustinus de verbis domini. Ser. 37.
Christ taking upon him the punishment, not the sin, has put away both the
sin and the punishment: so that there is now no condemnation to those that
are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. The truth of which position appears thus:

First, the immediate Causa proxima sublata tollitur effectus nam omnis causa
proxima cum suo essectu reciprocatur.
cause being taken away, the effect must needs cease; as when corrupt humors
from whence distemperature and sickness come be purged, the body recouereth
former health. Now what respect there is of the cause Paena est effectus
peccati, paena simpliciter vt habet rationem paenae semper habet ordinem ad
culpam. Aquinas 1. 2. q. 87. art. (...). and 7.
to the effect, the same is between the offense and the punishment: therefore
if the offense be pardoned, the punishment is released; for all punishment is
inslicted in regard of a fault committed. And the reason thereof is that
irreuocable decree of God, when he forbad to eat of the fruit of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, under that penalty, What day soever thou eat
thereof, thou shall die, Genesis 2. 17. for even then he was in a sort Mortuus est
Adam peccans. r. Quoad reatu^. 2. quoad moriendi necessitatem. 3. quoad initia
mortis corporalis per morbos, etc.
dead, in respect of the guilt; as a man condemned is accounted but dead,
though the execution be deferred, of the necessity of dying, which he cannot
escape. Of the beginnings of death; for even then, so soon as he had offended,
his body was deprived of immortality, and he begun by little and little, and by
degrees, to be corrupted, and return to earth, whereof he was made.

Secondly, If God should punish man, and yet pardon his sin; this were
contrary both to his justice and his mercy: to his justice, for he has
accepted of the satisfaction made by Christ, who has paid the debt, and
acquitted us, when he bare our sins upon the tree; and we were healed by his
wounds. 1. Pet. 2. 24. and therefore assured that he would remember our
offenses no more. Ezech. 18. 22. To his mercy; for it were cruelty to punish
the innocent: but so we are through the obedience of Christ, his righteousness
being imputed unto us, 2. Cor. 5. 20. Wherefore to resolve us, that this his
mercy is no half mercy, speaking of our pardon and reconciliation, he uses
words of the plural number, as Forgiuenesses, Deus condonationum. Vide
Wolphium in eum locum.
Nehem. 9. 17. Mercies, Romans 12. 1. Bowels of mercy, Luc. 1. 78. And that our
assurance might be the stronger, he does in a sort open unto us the treasures
of his favor, that where sin abounded, there grace superabounded, Romans 5. 20.
and therefore the Prophet lays out the several parts of our redemption;
where he says not only that Christ was wounded for our sins, and broken for
our transgressions, but adds also, that the chastisement of our peace was
laid upon him, Esaias 53. 5.

Thirdly, in the time of Zedekiah it displeased God, that when according to the
covenant made, the Jews had set free their servants, they repented of that
deed, and compelled them to return, and held them in subjection; and
therefore threatened a judgment, Ierem. 34. 11. 17. And then shall we think
that there is unrighteousness with God, and that he will promise pardon of
sins, and liberty unto the faithful, and yet impose upon them punishment as
a new enthrallment? Nothing less; and therefore when he offers forgiveness
of sins, he uses such words as do include both the one and the other; as
to blot them out, to wash them away, Psa. 51. 2. to remove them so far out of
his sight as the East is from the West, Psalm. 103. 12. to cast them behind his
back, Esaias 38. 17. not to impute or lay them to our charge, Psalm. 32. 2. In
which form of speech is a similitude borrowed from creditors, who cannot
comence suite or enter action against their debtors, if the Obligation be once
cancelled, and the debt satisfied by whomsoever. But Christ has taken out of
the way the handwriting that was against us, Coloss. 2. 14. we therefore have
obtained a quietus est, and are freed.

Fourthly, when we are commanded to forgive one another injuries offered, it
is urged by this reason: As God has forgiven us, Colos. 3. 12. Ephe. 4. 32.
and so in the parable, Mat. 18. 23. 35. Now this forgiveness must not be with a
retention of revenge in us, but absolute, as that of Joseph's to his brethren.
Genesis 50. 21. Therefore much more is perfect in God, whose forgiveness is the
rule of ours; ours not an equality, but animitation of his. As for those
Temporaliter hominem detinet paena, ad demonstrationem miseriae, ad
emendationem labilis vitae, ad exercitationem necessariae patientiae.
Augustinus tractat. 124. in Iohannis Euangelium.
afflictions, which God lays upon his children, whose sins he has
pardoned, and accepted into favor, they be no satisfactory punishments, but
admonitory chastisements, and medicinal corrections. First, to put them in
mind of the corruption of nature, and the desert of sin, as 2. Sam. 12. ver.
10. Secondly, to make them more careful in the ordering of their lives, and to
watch over their ways: and this preservative virtue David acknowledges with a
bonum est: It is good for me O Lord, that I have been in affliction, for
before I was troubled, I went wrong, but now have I kept thy commandments,
Psalm. 119. 71. Thirdly, for the exercise of many holy virtues: Patience, Job 1.
12. Prayer, 2. Chron. 20. 12. Obedience, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. and such like. Fourthly,
they be examples to the wicked; for if God begin judgment at his own house,
what then shall be the end of those that do not obey the Gospel? 1. Pet. 4.
17. Therefore not unaptly did (...), etc. lib. 2. de orthodoxa fide cap. 29.
Dispensatiua seu correctiuaest qua Deus descrit, salutis and correctionis
causa, and in gloriam sui nominis; perfecta, cum Deo, vniuersa ad salutem
faciente, incorrigibilis manet home and Iusto Iudicio deseritur a superna
Gratia. Vide Pelargum in Damascenum and Clictoneu^ vetere^ commentatorem.
Corripit Deus vt emendot, emendat vt seruet. Cyprianus. li. 4. Epist. 4.
Damascene call them instructing Desertions, teaching man to know both God and
himself: for even Israel when he is fat will forget God, Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
Therefore God does correct those who be his, in the world, that they might not
be condemned with the world, 1. Cor. 11 32. Before pardon they be punishments,
after they be exercises: for God does not deal with us according to our
sins, neither reward us according to our iniquities, Psalm. 103. 10.

Use. There is no place therefore left for humane satisfaction: first, for our
works, if they be good, they are not of us, but Gods, who works both the will,
and the Deus inspirat and assectum and essectum, Augustinus Epist. 105. vide
praetcrea illum in Enchiridio. cap. 32. et Ambrosium lib. 1. de vocat. Gentium.
cap 2.
deed, according to his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. His preventing mercy
preparing the will, and his following mercy effecting the work; Secondly, as
they proceed from us, they are defiled; for there is none that does good and
sins not, Eccles. 7. 21. and our righteousness is as the defiled cloth of
a menstruous woman, Esaias. 64. 6. Thirdly, they are duty; for we are Gods
workmanship, created of him unto good works, that we should walk in them,
Ephesians. 2. 10. And come short of that, which we ought to perform: and therefore
must acknowledge that we are unprofitable Et in veritate and humilitate nam
vae nisi secissemus. Bernardus in Psalm. Qui habitat, sermon. 4. and ser. de
triplici custodia manus linguae and cordis.
servants, Luc. 17. 10. and pray with David, Enter not into judgment with thy
servants, O Lord, for no flesh can be justified in thy sight, Psalm. 143. 2.
Wherefore we must appeal from justice to mercy, that we may be found, not in
our selves but in Christ, not having our own righteousness, but his, Philip.
3. 9. whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of sins, Romans 3. 25.
and is made unto us of the Father, Wisdom (in the manifestation of the
Gospel) Righteousness (in absoluing us from our sins) Sanctification (by
his conuersing with sinners) Redemption (in his passion, which he sustained for
sinners) 1. Cor. 30. 31. Sapie^tiae in praedication, Iustitia in absolutione
peccatorum, sanctificatio in conuersatione quam habuit cum peccatoribus,
redemptio in passione quam sustinuit pro peccatoribus. Bernardus in Cantic a
sermon. 23
that whosoever does rejoice, should rejoice in the Lord; and by once offering
himself has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14.
Consummatum est, It is finished; there needs no more.

Secondly, by this is overthrown that idle conceit of Purgatory: whereof we
may truly say, as Non procul ab initio: vide Erasmum in Chiliadibus
adprouerbiu^ Lamiae turres.
Tertullian did of the monstrous opinions of the Valentinian heretics, that if
one be admitted to hear the whole tale thereof, it would be suitable to those
which old women use to tell of Bugges and Fayries, and goodly wonders, and such
like, to scare and make children afraid, and get them sleep when they be
froward: for it is now, Admiranda canunt, sed non credenda Papistae, As well
Papists as Poets can tell of wonders and incredibilities: for they say (but
very Bellarminus de Purgat. l. 2. cap. 7 and 14. Greg. Mag. Dial. lib. 4.
nounulli in quada^ terrae part Infernum esse putauerunt, alij sub terra esse
existimant, ego aute^ hac de re temere definire non audeo. Quo modo dici potest
inferno contiguum Purgatorium, cum infecni locus ijs sit incognitus?
inconstantly) that it is a place wherein the souls of the faithful, after
they be dead, which be yet charged with the guiltiness of some temporal
punishment, or departed the body in some venial sin, according to the rule
of Gods justice, be tormented until they being fully purged from the same, may
obtain the blessedness and joy of heaven: And this they tell us is twofold,
the one exceeding mild, the other extremely grievous: this is next unto hell,
that in a beautiful and pleasant g meadow, as if an offender, were committed to
prison, in some noble man's house. It were labor evil spent, to stand to
confute such a folly. Therefore, but a reason or two to manifest De hoc igne
Purgatorio, vide Apolog. Graecoru^. (...), a Bonauentura Vulcanio edita^, and
Latin redditam. Et Gentiletum de examine Co^cilij Tridentini, lib. 4. Sessione
25.
the error.

First, every man does either believe or not believe. He that believes and
continues in faith, is freed from the wrath of God, and the curse, and does
not come into judgment, but has everlasting life: he that believes not, the
wrath of God abides upon him. Ioh. 3. 36. There be then no newtrals, who may
in Purgatory be cleansed from those sins, whereof in this life, they have not
obtained pardon.

Secondly, the punishment of sin belongs as well to the body, as the soul:
but Purgatory fire is no punishment for the body, for that rests in the
grave. Therefore, there can be no Purgatory after death, before the last day,
when the soul and body shall be conjoined together, and both either eternally
tormented, or eternally blessed.

Thirdly, the living come not into Purgatory. But it is certain that many in
the last day shall be alive upon the earth. 1. These. 4. 17. 1. Cor. 15. 51. And
what hope then, if their doctrine be true, for those that cannot be purged?
Therefore it appears to be but an idle fancy of curious brains, a monkish
imagination, and a fiction; having part of the original from Vide Homerum
Odyss. lib. 11. Virgilium Aenead. lib. 6. Platone^ in Phaedone and Gorgia, and
lib. 10. de Republica.
Poets fables, and Heathenish Philosophers discourses; who are not unaptly
termed of some of the Fathers, Philosophi haereticorum Patriarchae:
Tertullianus, lib. contra Hermogenem.
Patriarchs of heresies.

Fourthly, the souls departed from the body, do either go immediately Duae
solum viae, duae portae, arcta and lata illa ad salutem, haec ad interitum: duo
hominum status vel ouiu^ ad dextram, vel haedoru^ ad sinistram: duo solum
praemia post ha^c migrationc^, vel corona, vel condemnatio: duo loca tantum,
vel sinus Abrahae pro Lazaris, vel infernus pro abiectis epulonibus, nihil
medium, nihil est tertium. D. Humfredus contra Campiarum, ratione prima.
into Abraham's bosom, or the dungeon of hell. Luc. 16. 22. 23. Now Purgatory
is neither in the one nor the other: therefore none at all. For there is only
two ways, two gates, the broad and the straight; one leading to life, the
other to death. Mat. 7. 13. Two conditions of men, sheep at the right hand,
goats at the left. Mat. 25. 33. Two rewards after this life, either endless
glory, or eternal shame, Romans 2. 78. Two places, heaven or hell; no middle
between both, that he Non est vllus medius locus vt possit esse, nisi cum
Diabolo, qui non est cum Christo, August. lib. 1. de peccatoru^meritis and
remiss. cap. 28. Tertium locum ignoramus nec esse in Scripturis, inuenimus.
August. lib. 5. Hypognosticum.
cannot be elsewhere, but with the Devil, who is not with Christ. Justinius
Martyr 9. 75. For after the departure of the soul from the body, there is
presently a distinction of the good and the evil. The good are carried of the
Angels into rest. Apoc. 14. 13. The evil are sent to torment, Luc. 16. 23. And
when we are once gone from hence, there is no Quando istinc excessum fuerit,
nullus iam poenitentiae locus, nullus satisfactionis effectus, bis vita aut
amittitur, aut tenetur, Cyprianus ad Demet.
benefit of satisfaction, no repentance: here life is lost, or kept. For look
in what state we be when Christ does Modo quaerat Domini misericordiam, qui non
vult pati sine fine miseriam: Vide Fulgentium toto lib. 2. de remissione
peccatorum, praesertim a cap. 7 ad finem vsque libri illius.
call us out of this world, in the same shall he Sententia Doctrinae Christi,
(...). Justinius Martyr in Triphonem, and Cyprianus de Mortalitate. Qualem te
inuenit Deus cum de hoc mundo euocat, and accersit, talem and iudicat.
judge us. Wherefore, let us seek the Lord while he may be found; let us call
upon him while he is near: now is the acceptable time, behold the day of
salvation, 2. Cor. 6. 2 For it is impossible that the lightest sins (if any
may be of that estimate) can be washed away, and we saved, but by Christ,
whose blood does purge us from all sin. 1. Ioh. 1. 7.

AMEN.
The conclusion out of S. Augustine. Augustinus, lib. 15. de Trinitate.
COram te est firmitas and infirmitas mea Domine; illam serua, istam sana:
coram te est scientia and ignorantia mea, vbi mihi aporuisti suscipe intrantem,
vbi clausisti aperi pulsanti: meminorim tui, intelligam te, diligam te, auge in
me ista donec me reformes ad integrum. Scio scriptum esse, in multiloquio non
effugictur peccatum, sed vtinam praedicando verbum tuum and laudando te,
tantummodo loquerer; non solum fugerem peccatum, sed meritum bonum acquirerem,
quamlibet multum sic loquerer: neque enim homo de te beatus, peccatum
praeciperet, germano in fide filio suo, cui scripsit, dicens: Praedica verbum,
insta, oportune, importune. Nunquid dicendum est, istum non multa loquutum quod
non solum oportune, verum etiam importune verbum tuum, Domine, non tacebat? sed
ideo non erat multum quia tantum necessarium.

FINIS.

