A JUSTIFICATION OF SEPARATION from the Church of England.

Against Mr Richard Bernard his invective, INTITVLED; The Separatists schism.

By* John Robinson.

And God saw that the light was good, and God separated between the light, and
between the darkness. Genesis 1. 4. What communion has light with darkness? 2 Cor.
6. 14.

Anno D. 1610.

To the Christian reader.
TWo several treatises (good reader) have been formerly published by several
men in answer to Mr Bernards book, yet have I thought it meet to add a third,
not as able to speak more then they, but intending something further: namely,
an examination of the particulars one by one, that so in all points the salve
might be answerable unto the soar; applying my self therein to such a familiar
and popular kind of defense, as Mr B. has chosen for his accusations, where
the former answers only intended a summary discovery of the insufficiency of
his probabilities to dissuade from, and reasons to disprove the things he
opposes.

The zeal Mr. B. manifests here and every where both in word and writing is
exceeding great, as all men know. And surely fervent zeal in Gods cause is a
temper well befitting Gods servants: neither is there any more bastardly
disposition to be found in a Christian, then indifferency in religion. It makes
no matter of what religion the man is that is indifferent in it: for Christ
will spue out of his mouth (as loathsome) the lukevvarm, Rev. 3. 16.
whether wine, or water.

Yet as the case of religion is most weighty, so is the affection of zeal in
it most dangerous, if it be either pretended only, and not in truth; or
preposterous and not according to knowledge.

And therefore as there is singular use of this fyery zeal for these frozen
times of ours, so are we to take great heed that our fire be kindled at the
Levit. 9. 24. 1 King. 18. 38.
fire of the altar which came from heaven. For as Luke. Act. 2. 23. speaks of
fyery tongues which came from heaven, so does James, 3. 6. speak of a tongue
which is set on fire of hell.

And this we are the more carefully to mind, not only because almost all men
have taught their tongues in the general to speak goodly words, and that
zealously also for advantage, but more specially and with respect to the
business in hand, for that many of the weaker sort have their tender hearts
rather affrighted from the truth of the Lord by the deep protestations and
obtestations of their guids, then any way stablished in those perplexed paths
(wherein they walk) with them, by sound reasons.

Now as the Lord is to be entreated for those people, that he would vouchsafe
them wise and stable hearts, that they may ^ These. 5. ^1.
try all things and hold that which is good, and neither suffer themselves to
be withheld nor withdrawn from the truth by any such semblances of zeal, or
other passion, though never so solemn and seeming never so sincere, so for
their better direction herein I have thought it not amiss to commend unto
their godly hearts two or three considerations, by way of caution, in this case.

First therefore it must be considered that there are some I.
of that hoysterous and tempestuous disposition that they can do nothing
calmly or a little, their unruly affections which should follow after leysurely
do force on so violently their understanding will, and whole man, as there is no
stay with them, but in all their motions they are like unto those beasts, which
for the unequal length of their hinder legs cannot possibly go but by
leapes. Such a stormy nature, with a very little zeal amongst, may make a great
stir in the world, but is justly to be suspected. And that especially (which is
the 2. caution) in such men, as are suddaynly II.
carried, and as it were transformed from one contrary to another without either
competent time or means. A suspicious course; for all thing ordinarily whither
in grace, or nature, are wrought by degrees, and the passage from one extreme
to another without due means, as it can hardly be sound, so can it not possibly
be unsuspected. Now there are many men to be found which are violent in all
things but constant in none. And though all things be with the^ as the figs in
Ieremyes Ier. 24. ^. 2. 3. two baskets
two baskets, the good very good and the evil very evil, yet are they ever
shifting hands out of the one basket into the other. Today they will lift up
and advance a cause and person to heaven, and to morrow they will throw down
both it and him to the lowest hell. It is good to have such men in a godly
iealousy, and there zeal with them. And that chiefly (which I desire may be
observed in the third III.
place) when this their zeal rises and falls as the times serve. Almost all
men will at times manifest zeal, but the most have this gift withal, that they
will be sure to take the strongest side, or that part at least, which has some
hope of prevayling. And so whylst there remaynes hope of bearing things over at
the breast, they are very forward and fervent in there courses; but when that
hope shakes, their edg is of, and they turn their backs shamefully upon the
truth, yea and often times their faces against it.

And hereupon it comes to pass that many (formerly great advauncers of the
cause of reformation) have of late times not only foully forsaken, but
violently opposed the same both in us and them also amongst themselves, which
do in any measure desyer it, publishing their books unto the world so filled
with empty words and swelling vanities, as they not only bewray the weakness of
their cause, but the evil and corrupt disposition of their hearts, as rather
striving to manifest their servil^ affections for insinuations into the favors
of the mighty; then to bring any thing of weight for the conviction of the
adversary. The application of this I leave to the godly and wise reader, as he
shall see just cause.

And so leaving those things which are more general, I desire in particular,
and for the present purpose that the christian reader take knowledge of this one
thing, that as the pretense of zeal in the forward Ministers against all
corruptions is as a thick mist, holding the eyes of many well minded from seeing
the truth; so the person with whom I now particularly deal, trusts to this
insinuation above all others, conveyghing himself under this color into the
hearts of the simple, and hereby making way most effectually, not only for his
sage-seeming counsels and advertisements, for the quenching of their affections
toward the truth: but also for his idle guesses and likelyhoods, with such
personal comparisons, and imputations, as wherewith his book is stored, to
alienate men's hearts from it.

But the godly reader is to consider that Prove. 24. 23.
to accept the person in judgment is not good, especially in the cause of the
Lord, and that ^^m. 2. 1.
the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus is not to be held in respect of persons:
but that the naked and simple truth is to be inquired after, with an impartial
affection. And then the Lord which gives a single heart to seek after it, will
give a wise heart to find it out. Math. 7. 7. Only let men take heed they be
not as Pilate, asking Ioh. 18. 38
what is truth? and turning their backs upon it when they have done: nor
having found it as Orpah did to Naomi, forsaking her weeping. Ruth 1. 14.


And for my self as I could much rather have desired to have built up my self
and that poor stock over which the holy Ghost has set me in holy peace, (as
becomes the house of God, wherein 1 King. 6. 7
no sound of axe or hammer or other tool of iron is to be heard,) then thus to
enter the lists of contention, so being justly called to contend for the
defense of that truth upon which this man amongst others lays violent hands, I
will endeavor in all good conscience (as before God) so to free the same, as I
will be nothing-lesse then contentious in contention, but will count it a victory
to be overcome in odious provocations, and reproaches both by him and others.

And so desiring as earnestly the Christian reader into whose hands this my
defense shall come, to manifest unto me such errors in the same (if by the word
of God they may so be found) as to receive from me such truths, as are therein
co^t^yned, I leave the due trial to that alone touchstone, and commit the
blessing to the Lord who alone gives wisdom, and is able to make wise to
salvation.

CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS upon the Epistle dedicatory: and Preface to the Reader.
FIrst I desire it may be observed by the reader how Mr Bern^^ileth the
worshipful personages, under the wing of whose protection he shrowdeth his
papers Christian Professors. A title peculiar to some few in the land, which
favor the forward preachers, frequent their sermons and advance the cause of
reformation. Such persons are commonly called amongst themselves professors,
virtuous and religious, and thereby distinguished fro the body of the land,
which make no such profession, and are therefore accounted (and justly)
profane, and without religion, and that as roundly by Mr. B. as by any other
in the Land. But it seems he had forgot both his Epistle and whom both he in
it, and others every where, call Professors for distinction sake, when he wrote
his book; for in it Page 112. 113.
he makes all the kingdom professors at a venture, and Christian professors I
hope he means.

Thus those whom he severeth in the Epistle, he confounds in the book. And let
him well consider how he can quit himself either from flattery in the one, or
from untruth in the other.

And where (Mr Ber.) in the body of the Epistle, you seat your self in the
midst between the schismatical Brownist (as you charitably term him) and the
Antichristian Papist, the one snatching on the right hand, and the other on the
left, it is something which you say, and more belike then you are aware of.

Fitly may you be seated in the midst betwixt both, being indeed a minglement
and compound of both, and well may both snatch at you, and yet neither do you
wrong, if neither require more then their own. Justly may the Papists
challenge from you that stinted service book, devised Ministry, Antichristian
Hierarchy, and Babylonish confusion which you have stolen away from them, as
Genesis 31. 19. 34.
Rahel did her Fathers idols though she covered them never so close. And justly
also may we challenge from you such godly people as you fraudulently deteyn, and
such truths of doctrine as you teach, as being the peculiars of the true
Church: as the holy vessels were of the temple Ier. 52. 17* 18.
though violently with the people carried to Babylon and there kept.

But if you will still hault betwixt both, as 1 King. 18 21.
Israel did betwixt God and Baal, and carry in your right hand many
Evangelicall truths with us, and in your left many Antichristian devises with
the Papists, no marvel though both parties remain unsatisfied; neither must
you be offended, though the Papists for the truths you hold with us account
you heretics, nor though we for the devises you reteyn with them call you
Antichristian. And so you see your middle standing betwixt them and us more
ways then one.

And thus much of the Epistle dedicatory. In the next place I come to the
preface: where amongst other just complaynts of the iniquityes of the times,
you reckon (and that worthily) as the most dangerous Atheistical security and
carnal living under a general profession, to which purpose you alledg 2 Timothy
3. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and so instance in your English people: This place of Timothy
alone had you well weyed, and thoroughly improved especially the fifth verse,
where separation from such persons (as having a show of godliness do deny the
power thereof, as you confess the English people do) is expressly commanded,
it would either have stopped your mouth from reproching us as you do for
separation, or else have opened the mouth of the most simple reader to reprove
your vanity, as God did the mouth of the ass to reprove Balaam.

The next thing I observe is how vauntingly you bring as chalengers into the
lists Mr. Gyshop, Mr Bradshaw, D. Allison and other vn-named Ministers, all
which you say are unanswered by us. And no marveil, for sundry of their
writings never came to our hands, and besides it were a more equal and
compendious way for these men to take up the defense of their Churches cause,
where their fellows have forsaken it, and left it desolate, then thus to make
new chalenges, though in truth with the same weapons (it may be new frubbished
over) wherewith the other have lost the field. Yet are their books and (by the
grace of God assisting) shall be answered in particular as they come to our
hands, and are thought worthy answering: though in truth it were no hard thing
for our adversaries to oppress us with the multitude of books considering both
how few and how feeble we are in comparison (besides other outward
difficultyes) if the truth we hold which is stronger then all, did not support
it self.

The difference you lay down in the next place touching the proper subject of
the power of Christ is true in it self being rightly understood, and only
yours wherein it is corruptly related, and specially in the particular
concerning us, as, that where the Papists plant the ruling power of Christ in
the Pope; the Protestants in the Bishops; the Puritants, as you term the
reformed Churches and those of their mind in the Presbytery; we (whom you
name Brownists) put it in the body of the Congregation, the multitude called
the Church: odiously insinuating against us that we do exclude the Elders in
the case of government, where on the contrary we profess the Bishops or Elders,
to be the only ordinary governors in the Church, as in all other actions of
the Churches communion, so also in the censures. Only we may not acknowledge
them for 1 Pet. 5 3
Lords over Gods heritage, as you would make them, page 10 1.
controuling all, but to be controuled by none; much less essential unto the
Church, as though it could not be without them; least of all the Church it
self, as you and others expound Math. 18: But we hold the Eldership, as other
ordinances given unto the Church for her service, and so the Elders or officers
2 Cor. 4. 5 Col. 1. 25.
the servants and ministers of the Church the wife, under Christ her husband,
a^ the scriptures expressly affirm. Of which more hereafter.

And where further you advise the reader to take from the Iay other birds
feathers, that is, as you expound your self, to set us before him as we differ
from all other Churches. Therein you make a most inconsiderate and unreasonable
motion.

If a man should set the Church of England before his eyes, as it differs but
from the reformed Churches, it would be no very beautiful bird. Yea what could
it in that color afforde, but Egyptian bondage; Babylonish confusion; carnal
pomp; and a company of Jewish; Heathenish, and Popish ceremonies? Whatsoever
truth is in the world it is from God, and from him we have it, by what hand
soever it be reached unto us 1 Cor. 14. 36.
Came the word of God unto you only? and unto it we have good right as the
Israel of God, unto whom he has committed his oracles. Romans 3. 2.

Toward the end of the Preface you do render two reasons upon which you do
adventure to deal against us as you do, the one confidence in your cause, the
other the spiritual injury which some of late have done you, in taking away
part of the seal of the Ministry. Touching the first: as it is to us that
know you well, no new thing to see you confident in all enterprises; so does it
much behoove you to consider, how long and by what means you have been
possessed of this your confident persuasion. I could name the person of good
credit and note, to whom upon occasion you confessed (and that since you spoke
the same things, which here you write as confidently as now you write them)
that you had much a do to keep a good conscience in dealing against this
cause, as you did.

But a speech of your own uttered to my self (ever to be remembered with fear
and trembling) can not I forget, when after the conference passing betwixt Mr
H. and me, you uttered these words, Well, I will return home, and preach as I
have done, and I must say as Naaman did, the Lord be merciful unto me in this
thing: and thereupon you further promised with out any provocation by me or any
other, that you would never deal against this cause, nor withold any fro^it:
though the very next Lords day, or next but one, you taught publikli^ against
it, and so broke your v^w, the Lord grant, not you conscience.

And for the seal of your Ministry, deceive not yourself and others; if you
had not a more authentic seal in your black box to show for your Ministry at
your Bishops visitation, then the converting of men to God, (which is the seal
you mean,) this seal would stand you in as little stead, as it does many
others which can show as ^^^re this way as you, and yet are put from their
Ministry notwithstanding. And will you charge your Bishops and Church
representative to deal so trecherously with the Lord, as to put down his
Ministers and Officers which have his broad seal to show for their Office and
Ministry? What greater contumely do these vipers, these schismatic
Brownists lay upon your Church then you do herein.

The Church of England acknowledges no such seal as this is. The Bishops
ordination and license, conformity unto their ceremonies, subscription to
their articles, devout singing and saying their service book is that which will
bear a man out though he be far enough either from converting, or from
preaching conversion unto any.

And here I desire the reader to observe this one thing with me. When the
ministers are called in quaestion by the Bishops, they allege unto them their
former subscription conformity in some measure, at least their peaceable
carriage in their places, but when they would justify their ministry against
us, then their usual plea is, they have converted men to God, herein
acknowledging (to let pass their unsound dealing) that we respect the work of
Gods grace in any, at which they know the Bishops and their substitutes, if
they should plead the same with them, would make a mock for the most part.

I do most freely acknowledge the singular blessing of God upon many truths
taught by many in the Land, and do and always shall so far honor those persons
as the Lord has honored them herein. But that the simple conversion of
sinners, (yea though the most perfect that ever was wrought) should argue a
true office of Ministry; the scriptures no where teach; neither shall I ever
believe without them.

This scripture 1 Cor. 9. 1. 2. is most frequently alleged for this purpose.
But as unsoundly as commonly. For if simple conversion should argue an
Apostleship, then should a common effect argue a proper cause, an ordinary
work, an extraordinary office: for the conversion of men is a work common to
extraordinary and to ordinary officers, yea to true and false officers, yea
to such as are in no office at all, as hereafter shall appear.

And what could be more weakly alleged by Paul to prove himself no ordinary
but an extraordinary officer, an Apostle, (which was the thing he intended)
then that which is common to ordinary officers with him? Might not the
Corinthians easily have replied! Nay Paul it follows not that you are an
Apostle immediately called and sent by Christ, because you have begotten us to
the Lord, and have been the instrument of our co^versio^, for ordinary
Ministers Pastors and Teachers called by men, do beget to the Lord as well as
you.

The bare conversion of the Corinthians then is not the seal Paul speaks of,
but together with it their establishment into a true visible Church, and that
with such power and authority Apostolical, as wherewith Paul was furnished by
the Lord. Of which more hereafter.

But the father of these children (you say) you are which thus unnaturally fly
from you, and whereof we so injuriously have deprived you, in which respect
also you make this your hue and cry after us and them, for through the gospel
you have begotten them.

And have you begotten them unto the faith, as Paul did the Corinthians? and
are you their father, as Paul was the father of the Corinthians? then it must
needs follow that before you preached the gospel unto them, and thereby begot
them to the Lord, they were in the same estate wherein the Corinthians were
before Paul preached unto them, that is unbeleevers, and without faith, and so
were to be reputed. And how then true matter of the Church, for which you so
much contend?

Besides, these your begotten children were baptized long before you saw their
faces, some twenty, some thirty, some forty years. Now this their baptism
was true baptism, and so the true seal of their forgivenes of sins, and new
birth as you affirm and prove, page 119. and this their seal of the new birth
has stood good upon them all this while visibly and externally, and yet after
all this you preach unto them and beget the^ a new visibly and externally (for
only God knows that which is true within.) You have begot them through the
Gospel.

Behold a minstrous generation, a man begetting children twenty, or thirty,
or forty years after they be borne. If Nichodemus had heard of this, he
might well have said, how can th^se things be.

Lastly, if you be by your office the father of these children, as Paul was of
the Corinthians by his, where is then that your rod of correction which Paul
shakes at his children 1 Cor. 4. 21.
? does any law either divine or humane deny a father liberty to correct his own
children? Or are you one of these simple fathers of who^ your self speak page
33.
that can beget children but not bring them up? This ^od is seems apperteynes
to both their and your reverend fathers the Bishops, who only know how to use
it.

To conclude the preface. In acknowledging (as you do in the end of it) that
some things in the book may seem to the Christian reader to be written in the
gall of bitterness, and yet suffering them so to pass, with an excuse of your
intent, as herein you manifest no good conscience, choosing rather to excuse so
great an evil then to reform it: so neither take you any likely course for
the good of them with whom you deal, whose recovery (if they be fallen) you
should rather have attempted in the bowels of mercy the^ in the gall of
bitterness.

And so I come to the parts of your book as they ly in order.

Of the Authors Advertisements, called by him Christian, and counsels of peace.
THe subject whereof Mr Bern. treats in this place (being peace) is very
plausible, the name amiable, the thing both pleasant and profitable. And as 2.
Cor. 13 ^ These. 5. 13
God is the God of peace, so are not they Gods children, nor borne of him,
which desire it not; yea even in the midst of their contentions.

But as all vices use to cloth themselves with the habites of virtues, that
under those liveries they may get countenance and find the more free passage
in the world, so especially in the Church all tyranny and confusion do present
themselves under this color, taking up the politic pretense of peace, as a
weapon of mere advantage wherewith the stronger, and greater party uses to
beat the weaker. The Papists press the protestants with the peace of the
Church and for the rent which they have made in it, condemn them beyond the
heathenish soldiers, which forbear to devide Christ's garment; as deeply do
the Bishops charge the Ministers refusing conformity and subscription, and both
of them us. But the godly wise must not be affrighted either from seeking or
embracing the truth with such buggs as these are, but seeing Iam. 3. 17.
the wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, he must make
it a great part of his Christian wisdom to discern betwixt godly and gracious
peace, and that which is either pretended for advantage, or mistaken by error,
and so to labor to hold peace in purity. Let it then be manifested unto us that
the Communion which the Church of England has with all the wicked in the Land,
without separation, is a pure communion, that their service book devised and
prescribed in so many words and letters to be read over and over with all the
appurtenances, is a pure worship, that their government by National Provincial
and diocesan Bishops according to their Canons, is a pure government, and then
let us be blamed if we hold not peace with them in word and deed; otherwise
though they spoke unto us never so often both by messengers and mouth of peace,
and again of peace, *as Iehoram did to Iehu, yet must 2 King. 9.
we answer them in effect, as Iehu did Iehoram, what peace whilst the
whoredoms of the mother of fornicatio^s the Iezebel of Rome do remayn in so
great number amongst them?

And I doubt not but Mr Bern. and 1000 more Ministers in the land, (were they
secure of the Magistrates sword, and might they go on with his good license)
would wholly shake of their canonical obedience to their Ordinaries, and
neglect their citations and censures and refuse to sue in their Courts, for all
the peace of the Church which they commend to us for so sacred a thing. Could
they but obteyn license from the Magistrate to use the liberty which they are
persuaded Christ has given them, they would soon shake off the Prelates yoke,
and draw no longer under the same in spiritual communion with all the profane
in the land, but would break those bonds of iniquity, as easily as Sampson did
the cords wherewith Dalilah tied him, and give good reasons also from the word
of God for their so doing. And yet the approbation of men and angels, makes the
ways of God and works of religion never a whit the more lawful, but only
the more free from bodily danger. Whereupon we (the weakest of all others)
have been persuaded to embrace this truth of our Lord Jesus Christ, though in
great and manifold afflictions, and to hold out his testimony as we do, though
without approbation of our Sovereigne, knowing that as his approbation in such
points of Gods worship, as his word warranteth not, cannot make them lawful; so
neither can his disallowance make unlawful such duties of religion, as the word
of God approves, nor can he give dispensation to any person to forbear the
fame, Dan* 3. 18. Act. 5. 29.

These things I thought good to commend to the reader that he may be the more
cautelous of this and the like colorable pretenses, wishing him also well to
remember, that peace in disobedience is that old theme of the false Prophets,
whereby they flattered the mighty, and deceaved the simple, Ier. 6. 14. and 8.
11.

Let us now come to consideration of the counsels themselves so fr^ndly given,
and so sagely set down. And therein to approve what is good and wholesome, to
interpret in the best sense what is doubtful, and to pass by unrequited such
contumelies as wherewith Mr B. reprocheth us, as in all places, so here in his
rhyming Rhetoric, wherein he labors to roll ^s even as may be, betwixt the
Atheistical Securitant, and Anabaptisticall Puritant, the careless
Conformitant, and the preposterous Reformitant, and so forth, Rules for peace.
as the rhyme runs, I will come to those ten Rules or Canons praescribed by
him, page 3. 4. 5. for the praeservation of peace in the Church or state
ecclesiastical, for that alone we oppose, humbling our selves under the hand
of the Magistrate as much, and more truly then himself.

1. Uphold the manifest good therein. Mr Ber.


A man vpholds that which is good most naturally, by his personal Answ.
practice of it, and actual communion in it: and thus we ought to mainteyn
every good thing in our places, if sin ly not in the way betwixt us and it.
But since by the confusion which is upon the face of the earth, good and evil
are ought times so intermingled, as that men cannot touch that which is good,
but some evil will cleave unto their fingers, when this so falls out, then have
we a dispensation from the Lord to forbear even that good which without syn
can not be practiced. Romans 3. 8. And yet then also we must acknowledge that
good thing to be as it is, in what person or estate soever, and so uphold it.

And lastly so far as possibly we can we must sever and select the good from
the evil, and so even in our practice also uphold and mainteyn that good being
so severed, whereof whilst it was commingled with the evil, we could have no
lawful use.

And all these ways we uphold whatsoever manifest good we know in the Church
of England: whether doctrine, ordinance, or personal grace, to our utmost.

We do acknowledge in it many excellent truths of doctrine, which we also
teach without commixture of error, many Christian ordinances which we also
practice being purged from the pollution of Antichrist, and for the godly
persons in it (could we possibly separate them from the profane) we would
gladly embrace them with both arms.

But being taught by the Apostle speaking but of one wicked person, and of one
Jewish ordinance 1 Cor. 5. 6 Gal. 5. 2. 9.
that a little leven leveneth the whole lump, we cannot be ignorant how sour the
English Assemblies must needs be: neither may we justly be blamed though we
dare not dip in their meal, least we be soured by their leven.

The second and third Rules follow, which for order-sake I will invert, setting
the latter in the former place.

2. Bear with lighter faults for a time, til fit occasion be offered to Mr.
B^rn.
have them amended.

1. No sin is light in it self, but being continued in, and countenanced Answ.
destroys the sinner. Matthew. 5. 19. 2. It is the property of a profane and
hardened heart evermore to extenuate and lessen sins. 3. Though the bearing
and forbearing not only of small but even of great sins also must be for at
time, yet it must be but for a time, and that is whilst reformation be orderly
sought, and procured, Lev. 19. 17. But what time has wrought in the Church of
England all men see, growing daily by the just judgment of God, from evil to
worse, and being never before time so impatient either of reformation, or other
good, as at this day. 4. A man must so bear an evil, as he be no way accessory
unto it, by forbearing any means appointed by Christ for the amending it.
3. The manifest evil, labor in thy place by the best ^^anes to have Mr. Bern.
them amended peaceably.

This is not sufficient, nor enough, except our places be such and Answ.
we in such Churches, as wherein we may use the ordinary means Christ has
left for the amendeme^t of things: otherwise our places and standing themselves
are unwarrantable, and must be forsaken. And this I desire may be well
considered by all such whether Ministers or people, as know and acknowledge
that Christ requires of them further duties for the amendment of evils, then
their very places will give them liberty to perform.

The fourth and fifth and sixth Canon may be received with out danger, the
seventh not so.

7. Let the corruption of the person, and his lawful place be distinguished:
Mr. Ber^
and where person and places are not so lawful, and in the proposed end not
against thee, wisely labor to make them for thee: and make that good of the^
thou can, and wholly condemn not that Ministry which a godly man may make
for good.

We may not communicate at all in that Ministry which is Ans.
excercised by an unlawful person or in an unlawful place, though God may
bring good out of it, least we do evil that good may come thereof, which is
damnable. Romans 3. 8.

And if that be true which the most forvvard profess and do hold, that the
approbation and acceptance of the people gives being to the Ministry, it
concerns the people carefully to see unto it, that they accept not of, nor
communicate with any unlawful person in an unlawful place, least thereby they
set up, or give being unto his Ministry, and so be deep in his transgression.

The eight and ninth rule, I pass over as being without exception. Only I see
not upon what occasion the author should thus disorderly shuffle into this
controversy (which is merely ecclesiastical) such considerations as in the
former of these two rules and in many other places he does concerning the frame
and alteration of civil states, except he would either insinuate against us
that we went about to alter the civil state of the kingdom; or at least, that
the alteration of the state ecclesiastical, must needs draw with it, the
alteration of the civil state; with which ^^te the Prelates have a long time
bleared the eyes of the Magistrates. But how deceiptfully, has been
sufficiently manifested, and offer made further The Assertion.
to manifest the same by solemn disputation.

And the truth is, that all states and policies which are of God, Christian
offer.
whether Monarchycall, Aristocraticall or Democraticall, or how mixed soever,
are capable of Christ's government. Neither does the nature of the state, but the
corruption of the persons hinder the same in one or other.

10. Refuse not to obey authority in any thing wherein there is not t^ Mr B.
thee manifestly known a sin to be committed against God: let fantasyes pass:
be more loath to offend a lawful Magistrate, then many private persons. Where
thou can not yield, there humbly crave pardon; where thou can not be
tolerated, be content with correction for safety of conscience.

Authority indeed is to be obeyed in all things; if they be good, Ans.
actively, and by doing them, if evil and unlawful, passively and by
suffering with meeknes for righteousness sake: if pardon cannot be obtained, as
is well advised. But where counsel is given to ob^y in any thing whrein a
manifest known sin is not committed against God, this morsel must not be
swallowed down till it be well chewed.

For a man may commit a sin against God, in doing a thing wherein there is no
sin. The sin may be in the person doing, and not in the thing done: as when
a man does a good thing against his conscience or doubtingly, and without
faith. 1 John. 3. 20. Romans 14. 23.

And where Mr. Bern. further advises rather to offend many private persons
then one lawful Magistrate, I doubt not he gives no worse counsel then he
himself follows, who (except I be much deceaved in him) had rather offend half
the private persons in the diocese, then one Archbishop though he be an
unlawful Magistrate.

But of the case of offense hereafter. In the mean while, let us remember our
care be not to offend the Lord, and if with the offense of a private person
(though never so base) be joined the offense of the Lord, better offend all the
both lawful and unlawful Magistrates in the world, then such a little one.
Mat. 18. 6.

Lastly where Mr. Ber. concludes this decade of counsayl with that which is
written Romans 14. 17. 18. he misinterprets the Apostles words if he put them
down (as it seems he does) for a reason of that which goes before. For the
Apostles in that place has no reference at all to the authority of the
Magistrate, whose kingdom indeed does stand in meat and drink and the like
bodily things, wherein he may command civilly, and is to be obeyed in the Lord:
but the Apostles purpose is to admonish the strong in faith to take heed of
abusing their Christian liberty in the vnseaso^able use of meats and drinks and
the like (to the offense of the weak brethren) as though the kingdom of God
stood in the pere^ptory use of those things, and that they were therein to show
the liberty of the gospel.

Furthermore howsoever the kingdom of God be not meat and drink, yet is the
kingdom of God much advanced or hindered both in a man's self and in others, in
the seasonable or unseasonable use of them. A man in using them (or rather
abusing them) with offense to a weak brother, may destroy both him, and himself
also in breaking the law of charity. Romans 14. 15. 20.

It remaynes now we come to the second rank of counsayls, as they are divided
by the author, for what cause I know not, neither will I curiously enquire. but
will take them as I find them.

1. Omit no evident and certain commandment imposed of God. Mr Ber.
If there be nothing but probability of sinning in obeying the precepts of
men, s^t not opinion before judgment.

Woeful counsel, God knows, and in deed such as directs a Answ.
course to harden the heart of him that follows it in all impiety. For he that
will at the first do that by man's precept, which is like or which he thinks to
be sin; will in time do that upon the like regard which he knows to be sin:
and so fall into all presumption against God. Men are rather to be admonished
(especially in the case of religion about which we deal) that if the Lord
shall touch their tender hearts with fear and iealousy of the things they do,
they rather suspend in doubtful things, (except they can in some measure
overcome their doubting by faith,) till in the use of all good means, the God
of wisdom and father of lights give to discern more plainly of things that
differ, least being headstrong and hardmouthed against the check of
conscience, which the Lord like a bit puts into their mouths, they provoke the
Highest to withdraw his hand, and to lay the reyn on their necks, and so they
even run head long upon those evils without fear, upon which at the first they
have adventured with fearful and troubled consciences, which is often times the
just recompense of such errors from the Lord. Romans 1. 27. 28.

2. Let ancient probability of truth be praeferred before new conjectures Mr B.
of error against it.

As this rule shows by what tenure Mr B. holds his religion, Ans.
namely, by probabilities and likelihoods of truth; so if he mean that this way
(wherein we by Gods mercy walk) is any new way, or our rules conjectures, I do
hope (by the good hand of God herein assisting me) to make it manifest, that
this way is Ier. 6. 16.
that old and good way, after which all men ought to ask and to walk therein,
that so they may find rest unto their souls. And that we are not guided in it
by conjectures neither go by guesses, but by the infallible rule of Christ's
Testament.

3. Mark and hold a difference between these things; the equity of Mr B.
law and exequution: between established truths generally, and personal errors
of some: between soundnes of doctrine, and erroneous application: between
substance, and circumstance: the manner, and the matter: between the very being
of a thing, and the well being thereof: between worship, and convenience:
between a commandment, and a commandment to thee: between lawfulnes, and
expediency: and between that which is given absolutely, or in some respect.
Answ.


The sixth and 7. rule in the former rank (being the same in substance) might
well have been bound up in the same bundle with this, had not the author
labored to supply that in the number of his counsayls, which is wanting in
their weight.

But to the point. There is a difference indeed to be held betwixt the laws of
the Church of England, with the ordinances and doctrines by law established,
and the personal exequutions, excercises, and applicatio^s of the^; and the
difference is betwixt evil, and worse: and the worse of the twain by far I
deem the laws and ordinances with sundry of the doctrines. For though the
whole carriage of the courts miscalled-spirituall, be most corrupt, and
abominable, and though the pulpits be made by very many (especially in the
greatest places (the stages of vanity, falsehood, and slander, so that as the
Prophet said, Mich. 1. 5.
what is the wickedness of Jacob? Is not Samaria? And what ar the high places of
Judah? Is not Jerusalem? so may we say what is the sink of all brybery, and
extortion? Is not the Consistory? What is the theater of carnal vanity? Is not
the pulpit? Yet in truth the the laws are worse then those which exequute
them, and the ordinances by them established then those which minister them.

Let but the last Canons (which are as well the laws and doctrine of the
Church of England, as the Canons of the counsel of Trent are the laws and
doctrine of the Church of Rome) be severely and sincerely exequuted as becomes
the laws of the kingdom of Christ, the Church all in the land having any fear
of God, would find and complain that their bondage were increased, as was the
bondage of the Israelites under the Egyptians. Exo. 5.

But what though there were neither Statute nor Canon law enacted, for the
confusion in the assemblyes collected and consisting of all the parish
inhabitants, be they Atheists, adulterers, blasphemers and how evil not? what
though no law ecclesiastical or civil did co^firm the transcendent power of
the Bishops and Archbishops for the placing and displacing of Ministers, for
the thrusting out and receiving in, both of Ministers and people, and so f^r
innumerable other corruptions? Yet these things being universally practiced in
the land, the Church were nothing at all the more pure, only it had the more
liberty of reformation, which now by the laws and cannons, as by iron bars,
is shut out.

What Statute or Canon was there that the Corinthians should suffer amongst
them the incestuous person unreformed? And yet for so doing this Cor. 5. 6.
little leven levens the whole lump.

What Parliament or Convocation-house amongst the Galathians had decreed the
mingling of circumcision with the gospel? And yet for so doing they are
charged by the Apostle to be Gal. 1. 6.
removed or turned away to another gospel.

By what law was the mystery of iniquity confirmed? Or Antichrists coming into
the world agreed upon in the Apostles time? And yet 2 Ths. 2. 7.
the mystery of iniquity then wrought; and many Antichrists were then 1 Ioh. 2.
1^
come into the world. And yet these mischeifs being found in the Churches in
the Apostles times, were as well imputed unto the^, as if a thousand Parliaments
and Convocations had ratified them.

To proceed. It is also true which is further counsayled, that a difference
must be held betwixt substance and circumstance; betwixt the manner and the
matter; betwixt the being and well being of a thing; and so of the rest: but
withal it must be observed that the Lord has in his word, as well appointed
the manner how he will have things done, as the things themselves, and that even
circumstances prescribed and determined by the Lord, are of that force, not
only to deface the welbeing, but to overturn the true being of Gods worship.

The Lord commanded the Israelites by Moses to bring they^ sacrifices and
oblations to the place which for that purpose he would choose and there to offer
them, Deuteronomy. 12. 5. 6.

And did not all offerings brought to any other place (without special
dispensation) stink in his nostrels? And yet this was but a circumstance of
place.

And wherein stands the breach of the fourth commandment but in a
circumstance of time? Lastly, what was the transgression of Vzziah the King,
for which God stroke him with leprosy, but a personal aberratio^, a sin in
the circumstance of person, for that he being no Priest, would adventure to
offer incense at the Altar. 2. Chr. 26. 16. 17. 18. 19.

Of the same nature was the sin of Corah Dathan and Abiram, merely
circumstantiall: Dathan and Abiram being of a wrong tribe, and Corah of a wrong
family and yet for that their rebellion, the earth by Gods judgment opened her
mouth, and swallowed up both them and theyrs. Numb. 16. 1. 2. 32.

And for the well being and right ordering of good things, the Lord as well
requires it, as the things themselves. He has not left in the hands of the
Church a rude matter to frame after her own fashion, but with the matter he
has also appointed the manner and form wherein all things must be done.

When Moses under the law was to make the Tabernacle, the Lord did not set him
out the matter and stuff whereon to make it, and so left the manner and form^
to his pleasure and discretion, but appointed the one as well as the other; and
if he had framed it, or any thing about it after any other fashion then
according to the pattern showed him in the mount, he had done abhominably in
the sight of the Lord. Exo. 25. 3-40. etc. and 26. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. etc. Hebr. 8.
5. When the Ark of God was to be removed upon occasion, the Priests were to
cover it, that no hand might touch it, and so to carry it upon their shoulders
to the place of rest. Numb. 4. 11. 15. Deuteronomy. 3. 19.

Now this order of the Lord was violated, in the bringing of it out of the
house of Abinadab uncovered and upon a cart, after the fashion of the
Egyptians, 1 Samuel 8. 7. 8. And the breach of this order the Lord punished very
severely, making a breach upon Vzzah the Priest for touching the Ark, which was
his personal sin, and for carrying it upon the cart, which sin was common
to the rest of the Priests with him; he was stricken dead by the hand of God in
the same place. 2 Samuel 6.

Now both this and the former examples are left to warn us to take he^d, that
we presume not against the Lord in the least ceremony or circumsta^ce, neither
make any transgression small in our eyes, or the eyes of others, as the manner
of too many is. But let us rather learn to fear before the Highest whose eyes
are pure, and can endure none iniquity; and let us labor to keep our hearts
tender against all sin, even against that which seems the least; knowing
that if the Lord should let Satan loose upon us, to press our consciences, and
should withdraw his comforts from us in our temptations, the least sin would
prove a burden intolerable.

4 Use the present good which thou may enjoy to the utmost, and Mr B.
an experienced good before thou do trouble thyselfe to seek for a supposed
better good, untried, which thou enioyest not.

We must so enjoy experienced good things, as we stock not our Answ.
selves in respect of other things, as yet untried. We may not stint or
circumscribe either our knowledge, or faith, or obedience, within streyter
bounds then the whole revealed will of God, in the knowledge, and obedience
whereof we must daily increase and edify our selves; much less must we suffer
our selves to be stripped of any liberty which Christ our Lord has purchased
for us, and given us to use for our good; Gal 5. 1.

And here (as I take it) comes in the ^ase of many hundreds in the Church of
England, who what good they may enjoy (that is safely enjoy or without any
great bodily danger,) that they use very fully. Where the ways of Christ ly
open for them, by the authority of men, and where they may walk safely with
good leave, there they walk very uprightly, and that a round pace; but when the
commandments of Christ are as it were hedged up with Cant. 1. 6.
thrones, by men's prohibitions, there they fowly step a side, and pitch their
tents by the flocks of his fellows.

There are many in the land very zealous and severe in all the d^ties of the
second table, and in the private and personal duties of the first table, and in
such public duties also as the times will bear, and in those respects may say
as Iehu did to Iehonadab, 2 King. ^0. 15.
see the ze^^ which I have for the house of the Lord: but consider the same
persons i^ their Communion, Leyturgy, Ministry and government, and there
seems a most monstrous composition. These things in the same men do agree as
ill as the Ark of God and Dagon in the same house. We ought in no case to share
our service betwixt Christ and Antichrist, nor to stock ourselves in any the
least parts of the revealed will of God, but must grow and increase in the
whole body of obedience, and all the parts thereof; otherwise (as in the
natural body if one part grow and not an other) the effect will be monstrous.
Ezekiel. 18. 11. 12. Iam. 2. 10. Deuteronomy. 8. 1.

The 5. 6. and 7. precept I pretermit: the 8. follows.

8. Never praesume to reform others, before thou have w^^^ Mr Ber.
ordered thy self. etc.

True zeal, it is certain, ever begins at home, and gives more Answ.
liberty unto other men then it dares assume unto it self. And there is
nothing more true or necessary to be considered, then that every man ought to
order himself and his own stepps first. That is good and the best, but not all.
For if by Gods commandment we ought to Exodus 23. ^.
bring back our enemies ox or ass that strayeth, how much more to bring into
order our brothers soul and body wandering in by paths?

And here Mr Bernard brings to mind a practice usual with many of the
preachers in their sermons. They will advance prayer, viz, their service book;
that they may extenuate preaching; commend peace, that they may smother truth;
plead much for censures due to be given him, that they may deteyne from God his
due; and every where send men back into themselves, that they may keep the^
from looking upon others, and so make them careless of such duties toward
their brethren, as Gods word binds them unto. Levi^. 19. 17. 1 These. 5. 14. As
though the commandments of God were opposite one to another, and could not
stand together, whereas they are all most holy and good, and all helpful one to
another, and all to be practiced in their places; whether they concern our
selves or our brethren. They of the one sort ought to be done, and they of the
other not to be left undone.

The 9. 10. and 11. Rule I acknowledge without exception.

12. Whomsoever thou do see to do a miss, judge it not to be Mr. Bern.
of wilfulnes, but either of ignorance, and so offer to inform them; or of
infirmity, and so pity them, and pray for them. Be charitable, etc.

This Rule as it is not universally true, for we may often times discern Answ.
in men's both words and actions, wilful and wayward obstinacy, and so may
judge of them, 1 Timothy 6. 5. Tit. 3. 10. 11: so is it ill practiced by him that
gives it. For amongst other sins wherewith he loadeth he Separists in his
book, Page 65.
wilful obstinacy in their schism^, is one.

Here full charitably he advertiseth to judge no man, wilful in his ^inn, and
yet there he himself so judges us: either excluding us from the common
libertyes of mankind, as worms and no men; or himself following the steps of
his forefathers, in Mat. 23* 4.
laying heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, which himself will not touch
with the least finger.

Against the 13. direction, I have not to oppose, and therefore pass to the
14. and last, touching things indifferent; by which this author makes way into
many an impertinent, and indigested consideration. The rule follows.

14. In things indifferent make no question for conscience sake, so Mr. Bern.
be that neither holiness, meri^e nor necessity be put therein: nor they used
for any part of Gods worship, but for decency, order and aedification.

For answer of this, sundry things are to be considered. Answ.


And first, that which the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 10. 25. 27. of the common
conversation of Christians in the world, and of their liberty that way, Mr.
Bern. misapplieth to the case of religion, and matters of Gods worship, as
though men might use as great liberty in the matters of religion or about the
same, as in their worldly affairs.

Secondly, where the Apostle, ver. 25. 27. directs the faithful to make no
conscience of eating, he further adds, ver. 28. 29. that for the offense of a
weak brother scandalizing at the eating of Idolothites, they ought to make
conscience and to forbear. This latter part which is the very drift of the
scripture, Mr. Bern. concealeth, and so maymeth the sense, and frustrateth the
reader; and whether to thi^ and he leaves not the words vnquoted, his own
heart knows best.

3. Howsoever you labor to cover your Popish ceremonies (for th^se you mean
though you name them not,) under the title of things indifferent, of to^es
tris^es and the like, (champing them small, that they may the easilyer be
swallowed,) denying that either holiness, or necessity is put in them, or that
they are made parts of Gods worship, yet has the contrary been sufficiently
manyfested by your own men, to whose large treatises to this purpose, I refer
the reader. Notwithstanding since Mr. B. casts this consideration, as a stone
in the way to other matters of importance, I may not altogether overstryde it,
but will turn it over as I go, that the reader as he passes by, may see what
worms and other vermin, lies under it.

First then to let pass the holiness which thousands in the land put in the
cross, surplice, kneeling at the communion, without which they think no
service or sacrament so acceptable to God, for which cause alone they ought not
only to be forborne, but to be abolished much rather then the brazen serpent,
2. King. 18. it is evident that the same special uses and ends are ascribed
unto them, and to the principal parts of Gods worship: and so agreeing in
their ends they agree in their natures.

One mayn end and use of the word of God, is to teach and signify unto us the
good will of God, and our duty mutually toward him and toward our brethren,
and to stir up our mynds to the remembrance and performance of t^^ same, 2 Timothy
3. 16. And what less is attributed to the ceremonies, when Tre^tise of
Ceremonies
they are neither dark nor dumb, but ap^ to stir up the dull mind of man to the
remembrance of his duty to God.

The proper ends and uses of baptism are to initiate the parties baptized into
the Church of Christ, and to consecrate them to his service, and so to serve
for badges of Christianity, by which it is distinguished from all other
professio^s, Mat. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 12. 13. And for what meaner use serves the
sign of the cross in baptism, by or with which, service book, Ca^^. 30.
the child is r^ceaved into the congregation of Christ's flock, and by it as by
an honorable badge of Christian profesion dedicated to the service of Christ?

And so those ceremonies supposed indifferent, agreing with the mayn parts of
Gods worship in their ends, must agree also in their natures with them, since
fines rerum sunte formis, and so consequently must have holiness in them, or else
your worship Mr. B. is very unholy.

And what necessity is put in them, all men see when the purest preaching in
the land without them is thought not only vnnessary, but even intolerable.
And if 1 Cor. 9. 16.
necessity be laid upon the Ministers to preach the Gospel, then that to which
the preaching of the Gospel must give place, is more necessary, and so made.

Moreover, to make a thing indifferent, and yet to serve for decency, order and
edification, includes a contradiction: For it is not an indifferent thing to
minister the ordinances of Christ decently orderly and to edification, but a
matter of simple necessity, 1 Cor. 14. 26. 40.

Yea I add, if the Ceremonies make the worship of God the more comely,
orderly, and edificative, they ought continually and diligently to be used, yea
though they were forbidden by the Highest power upon earth: as on the contrary,
if they advantage not the worship of God for those purposes, they are vayn and
frivolous, and to be forborne in or about the worship of God, which abhorrs all
such vanity.

Lastly, as we live in a very indifferent age for religion, wherein the most
are indifferent of what religion they are; yea whither they be of any or none;
so no mervayl though men stand stis^y for indifferency of things. And when they
have amongst them such devises, as they neither can approve for good, nor will
condemn as evil, they baptize them into the name of indifferent things. But the
truth is, there is nothing simply indifferent in the use: but be it never so
base or mean a ceremony, circumstance or appurtenance to any solemn action, it
is either good or evil according to the furtherance or hinderance which it
affoardeth to the mayn* If it give furtherance to a natural action, it is
naturally good; if to a civil action, civily good; if to a religious action,
religiously good; and so to be reputed: otherwise it is vain at the least: and
vanity as it is every where evil, so is it in the matters of religion the
taking of Gods name in vayn.

The next thing which Mr. Bern. undertakes, is to set down how scrupulosity of
conscience arises in men: for which disease (if it arise) surely he shows
himself a physitio^ of no value for the healing of it: but either smothereth
the same under the authority of the Magistrate, or dispenses with it upon good
meanings, or forces it on without assurance, or entangleth it with new doubts.

In the first enquiry which he wills men to make into themselves, touching
scrupulosity of conscience amongst other things he speaks thus.

If the ground, vz. of doubting be not a judgment enlightened, and Mr. Bern.
convinced, it is not trouble of conscunce, but a dislike working
coffeehouse upon some other ground.

And this in the margent he wills the reader to note well, as in Answ.
deed he may note it and brand it, too for il and unadvised counsayl.

For howsoever no man's conscience ought to scandalize or be troubled at the use
of lawful things (for the larger conscience the better in that which is
lawful) and that such doubts in the heart do arise from weakness of faith; and
weakness of faith from want of knowledge: yet since we all 1 Cor. 13. ^^.
know but in part, and that our faith is according to our knowledge, and our
conscience according to our faith, when a doubt or scruple arises in our
hearts touching the lawfullnes of things, yea though it be of very ignorance,
we must not pass it over lightly without trouble, least it prove as a thorn in
the heel and rankle inwardly. Neither are such scruples always so easily
removed, as Mr. Bern. maks account. Weak and tender consciences do often times
stick at a very straw, and there must they stand, til the Lord give strength
to step over.

The thing intended and promised by Mr. Bern. in the next place, is
satisfaction to the perplexed conscience, and direction in that case: which he
is so far from performing by sound and resolved counsayl (as were meet) as in
stead thereof, he propounds sundry doubts and quaeries of his own, which he
leaves unsatisfied, to the further entangling of his perplexed patient: abusing
also his reader too much in performing questions, where he promises answers.

Well, howsoevr it be an easier thing to ty knotts then to loose them, and that
a simple man may cast a stone into a ditch, which a wise man cannot get out
again: yet are not those questions which Mr. Bern. propounds and so leaves
unanswered, so dark and doubtful, that a man needs take so long a jorney as
the Queen of Sheba did, for resolution.

The first quaere of weight being the 4. in order, I vvil set down word for
word, though it be large, because it is of special consideration. The
question then is.

Why a man should be more scrupulous to seek to have warrant plainly M. Ber.
for every thing he does in ecclesiastical causes, even about things
indifferent, more then about matters pollitick in civil affairs. Men in these
things know not the ground nor end of many things, which they do yield unto
upon a general command to obey authority, and knowing them not to be directly
against Gods will: and yet every particular obedience in civil matters must be
1. of conscience, 2. as serving the Lord (so must every servant his master)
which cannot be without knowledge and persuasion that we do well even in that
particular which we obey in. Which m^n usually for conscience sake enquir^ not
into, but do rest themselves with a general commandment of obeying lawful
authority, so it be not against a plain commandment of God. What therefore
does let but that a man may so satisfy himself in matters Ecclesiastical?

Though as plain a vvarrant must be had from Gods word, Answ.
for the things we do in matters politic, as in causes cclesiastical; and
that obedience in the one as well as in the other must be of conscience: yet
notvvithstanding the same word of God vvarranteth unto us clean and an other
and different course of obedience in things civil, and in things
ecclesiastical.

And the gross ignorance or ungodly concealment of this difference, is the
cause of great confusion. It must therefore be considered that this difference
stands in two points, 1. the nature of the things and their proper ends. 2.
the power immediate by which they are imposed; from which two arises
necessarily a third difference to be made in the conscience of obedience unto
them.

First then it cannot be denied, but matters civil and politic do come under
the general administration and government of the world, and do respect the
outward man for this present life. On the other side, matters ecclesiastical
come under the special administration of the Church, and serve for the
edification and building up of the inward man to life eternal.

Secondly, Magistrates and men in authority, do enact and impose their civil
decrees and ordinances upon their subjects, by a Kingly and Lordly power, as
being Kings and Lords civilly over the outward man, and his outward estate;
Math. 20. 25. and may by their Kingly and Lordly power command in their own
names, and that upon occasion to the civil hurt and hinderance of many of
their people, and are therein to be obeyed notwithstanding, Romans 13. 1. 2. 3.
etc. Mat. 22. 21.

But in causes ecclesiastical not so. There is no King of the Church but
Christ, who is Rev. 15. 3 Isa. 62. 11.
the King of Saints and Savior of Syon, no Lord but Jesus, who is the only
Ephe. 4. 5 Iam. 4. 12.
Lord and Lawgiver of his Church. And all his laws and statutes tend to the
furtherance and advanceme^t of every one of his subjects in their spiritual
estate, and neither King nor Kezar may or ought to impose any law to the least
praeju dice of the same, neither ar they therein (if they should) to be obeyed.
Our civil liberty we may loose without syn, and without syn undergo bodily
domages, Math. 22. 21. but we are bidden Gal. 5. 1.
stand for the liberty wherewith Christ has freed us, and that is the whole
liberty of the Church; and to Col 2. 16.
let no man judge us (that is, ecclesiastically,) no not in mea^s and drinks,
though civilly men may command and judge us in them. And upon these grounds
truly laid by the word of God, an answer may be framed on this manner.

In civil affairs we may and ought to obey for the authority of the
commander, yea though we know not any good, but on the contrary much harm to
our bodily estate, coming unto us by the same: but in matters ecclesiastical
which are subordinate to the souls good, we must obey only for the ends of the
things commanded, and as they tend to the edification of our selves and
others, 1 Cor. 14. 26.

To conclude this point, since the Apostles expressly commands, that all things
in the Church be done to the edificatio^ of the same, I would demand of Mr. B.
with what faith or good conscience he or any other man, can do or enterprise
any one thing in the Church, which he or they are not persuaded by the word of
God (which is the rule of faith) tends to edification.

These things being thus, there is no cause why Mr. B. should account it
curiosity to search particularly into every thing for satisfaction: (the
differences formerly laid down being observed) neither does this holy care of
Gods servants (as he further adds) work upon men's wits to bring
distinctions, but on the contrary men of corrupt mynds and unfaithful least
they should be reformed by the word of God, do get distinctions, like excuses
after their own hearts. Much less is it either truly or christianly affirmed
which follows, that the more men seek in doubts for resolution, the further
they are from it. For howsoever it may be thus with M. B. and many others,
which seek the truth as cowards do their enemies, with a fear to find it, least
it trouble their carnal peace; yet have other men better issue of their
labors, and by Mat. 7. 7 and 13. 44.
seeking have found that hydden treasure for the purchase whereof they are
content to sell all they have, and to buy it. In the next place come in six
rules of directions how to settle the cons^ience to prevent scrupulosity, and
perplexity.

1. Keep all mayn truths in the word which are most plainly Mr Ber.
set down, and are by law of nature engraven in every man.

First, you are much mistaken Master Bern. if you imagine Answer.
that all mayn truths in the word are engraven in every man by the law of
nature. For the gospel is the more principal part of the word, which
notwithstanding is wholly supernatural and above the created knowledge of man
or Angel, Mat. 11. 27. Ephe. 3. 10.

Secondly, if in commending mayn truths and such as ar^ plainly set down,
you do insinuate that there are any truths so mean which we may either
neglect to search, or (having found them) to obey, therein you should deceive by
promising liberty, and make your self wiser then God, and cross his ordinance
and appointment. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Deuteronomy. 4. 1. 2.

And for things left more dark in the Scriptures, they must be unto us matter
of humiliation in our natural blyndenes, and of more earnest meditation and
prayer with all good conscience.

2. Believe every collection truly and necessarely gathered by an immediate
Mr. Bern.
consequence from the text.

This is good but not sufficient. For collections truly made Answ.
(though by mediate consequences one after another) are to be received, though
the fewer the better, and the less subject to danger. And we must not curtall
the discourse of reason soberly used and sanctified by the word, so short as
Mr. B. would have us. When the Lord Jesus was to deal with the Saduces about
the resurrection he took his proof from that which is written, Exo. 3. 6. I am
the God of Abraham, etc. which words do no way conclude the Math. 22. 23 -- 32.
resurrection of the body (which was the question) by any immediate
consequence, and yet the collection was good and necessary.

The 3. and 4. direction I omit as questionles, and come to the 5. in order.

5. Enterteyn true antiquity, and follow the general practice of the Church
Mr. Bern.
of God in all ages, where they have not erred from the evident truth of God.

It cannot be denied but that is best which is most ancient, Answ.
and that truth and righteousness were in the world before syn and error; but
neither the one nor the other did continue long either amongst men or Angels.
And he that but considers what monstrous errors and corruptions sprang up in
the Church of the new Testament, whylest the Apostles lived which planted them,
will not think it strange though almost all were overgrown with such briars and
thorns in a few ages following.

And what not only unsoundness in doctrine, but uncertainty in story is to be
found in the most ancient writers, no man though but even meanly exercised in
them, can be ignorant. And yet if we would take up these weapons, it were easy
to make good our part against the Church of England in the main differences.
But we have the word of God which is to us a sure testimony: and if he be only
to be heard of whom God from heaven has testified Mat. 3* 17. and 23. 10.
Act. 1. 22*
, as the only Prophet and Doctor of his Church, we are not then so much to
regard what any man has practiced before us, as what Christ has commanded
which is before all. And we must in the first labor to have our hearts seasoned
with the word of God and according to that taste must all men's both persuasions
and practices be savored by us: taking heed of those preposterous courses
commonly held; some at the first corrupting their hearts with the thorny
subtilties of the schoolmen, and more witty then sound sayings of the fathers,
and others prejudicing and forestalling themselves by the present and sensible
state of things before their eyes, or by the general and partial practice of
times past; and so coming in the last place to the word of God, haling that
in, to back and support their exalted forestalled imaginations.

6. If thou suffer, let it be for known truth, and against known wickedness,
M. B.
for which thou have examples in the word, or of holy martyrs in story,
suffering for the same or the like. But beware of far fetched consequences, etc.

We are to forbear evils not only known, but suspected and Romans 14* 22. 23.
Ans.
doubted of. And he that knows what a heart means truly softened and made
tender with the blood of Christ, had rather suffer all extremityes then approve
that as good, either by word, writing, or practice, which he but doubts to be
evil, and to displease God, except by faith he can overcome that doubt in some
measure.

And for us, though we had no example either in the word of God, or other story
of any martyrs suffering in the same or the like particulars with us, yet since
the things we suffer for, are parts of the general truth of the gospel, which
others before us have witnessed, we must expose and give our bodies to the
smyters, and our Isa. 50. 6*
cheeks unto the nippers, and must not hide our faces from reproaches and
spitting rather then we deny the least part of it: How much more then
considering how many witnesses the Lord has raised up, which having finished
their testimony against the Apostasy and usurpation of the man of sin, some
in one degree and some in an other, have been killed by the beast, some of old
and others of late times, Rev. 11. 3. 7.

Lastly, where mention is made of things only seeming unto men just and holy:
it must be considered, that it is all one to the conscience of the doer,
whither the thing done be so in truth, or but in appearance. And he that either
does that which seems unto him unjust and unholy, or passes by that which
seems just and holy, sins against his own heart, Ioh. 3. 20
and if his own heart condemn him, God which is greater then his heart will
much more condemn him.

If yet thou do judge a thing commanded a sin, and not to be Mr B.
obeyed; for thy help herein, enquire whether that which is wrongfully or
sinfully commanded, may not yet nevertheless be without sin obeyed as Ioab
obeyed David in numbering the people.

This is as much as if in plain terms you should counsel a Ans.
man, to consider whether he may not sin without syn: for what else is it to
obey that commandment, which a man judges not to be obeyed? A cold comforter
are you to a perplexed conscience and an ill counseler, thus to advise men to
be bold against the Lord, and to try whether, they can blind their
consciences, and harden their hearts, that they may sin without feeling, or
fear.

The example of Ioab in obeying David, is impertinent. The case was civil, and
in civil affairs many things may lawfully be undergone, which are unlawfully
imposed. For example: If the King merely for his pleasure should enjoin Mr B.
upon some great penalty to come into the field souldierlike, to draw a sword,
shoot, march or the like, the Magistrate might do evil in thus commanding,
and yet not Mr B. in obeying: but thus to do in the Church or pulpit in the
time of Gods worship, were as finfull obedience as were the commandment
sinful. All actions ecclesiastical, in or about Gods worship, are subordinate
to the edification of the Church and to good order; if they tend thereto they
are lawful in the commander, if not they are unlawful in him that obeys.

Besides, David's commandment for numbering the people, was no way unlawful in
it self, but upon occasion both lawful and necessary. Numb. 1. 2. and 26. 4.
It was only the curiosity or pride, or infidelity of David's heart made the
sin, which might hurt himself, but not Ioab. But had Ioab judged the thing
commanded sin, and not to have been obeyed, he had sinned in obeying, as
well as David in commanding.

That which Mr B. calls next into quaestion, is, whether the recusant Mr B.
Ministers may not for the free preaching of the gospel, yield so far to the
evil disposition of the Prelates as to subscribe, and conform unto their
ceremonies though they cannot approve of them, nor judge them lawful. For this
is the thing M. B. aims at, though he carry the matter something covertly,
because he would offend neither party. And to persuade unto this he brings in
Paul, checking himself for reviling the high Priest, and observing the legal
ceremonies after abolishment, to procure free liberty to preach the gospel,
and after Moses granting a bill of divorcement (countrary to the law of
marriage) for the very hardness of the peoples hearts.

To this I answer sundry things, as, first to preach the gospel Ans.
upon condition of obedience in that wherein a man either judges or suspecteth
himself to sin, is nothing less then to preach the gospel freely: though
this be in truth that free preaching of the gospel in the Church of England
whereof we hear so many loud boasts. And to persuade a man unto this, is, to
persuade him to do evil that good may come thereof, as though the Lord stood*
need of man's sin, for the publishing of his truth, or saving of his elect.

The preaching of the gospel is a most excellent thing, and the fruits of it
far better then those of Eden (and oh how happy were we, if with exchange of
half the days of our lives we might freely publish it to our own nation, for
the converting of sinners) yet must no man be so far possessed with the
excellency of the object, (as were our first parents with the goodness, bewty,
and supposed benefit of the forbidden fruit) as to press unto it by unlawful
ways: and for a man to go about to persuade to the practice of a thing by the
casual fruits and effects of it, and not in the mean while to clear the way
of fear and scruple of sin in the means of attayning the proposed good, is
to go about to deceive him whom he persuades, and by a bayt (as it were) to
til his conscience, as a byrd into a snare, into most fearful intanglements.

And for Paul, as it is a very ungodly suspicion cast upon him, that he should
do any thing which he doubted to be syn, or which he did not most assuredly
know was pleasing unto God, so is it very untruly affirmed that he did that he
did, either as yielding to the evil disposition of men, or to procure free
liberty to preach the gospel. He did all things most freely and without any
respect to humane authority, fulfilling the royal law of love in tendering the
weakness of the brethren newly converted from Judaism, observing with them the
legal rytes, and those also made a part of Gods worship by them, and that
without all probability of sinning, whereof you impeach him.

Now for Moses he did not grant, that is, approve of the bill of divorcement,
but only permitted it for the avoiding of a greater evil, which civil
Magistrates may do in some cases, which notwithstanding no man used without
sin. And what does this better your popish ceremonies?

The last thing in quaestion is the case of offense, touching which you make
many doubts, where the holy ghost makes none; forgetting your own good
admonition, that men should take heed of g^^^ing distinctions, and other
evasion through policy or fear of trouble to loose sincerity, where the word
is plain.

There is not a case in the whole Bible more clear, then that the things
called indifferent* may and ought to be forborne, for the weak conscience of a
brother. Romans 14 15. 20. 21. 1 Cor. 9. 19. 20. 21. 22. and 10. 23. 24* 28. 29.
And yet this clear truth you labor to darken by the mist of man's authority,
pretense of good effects, surmises of partiality, humor, and folly in the
parties offended, raised out of your own heart. But let us hear your advise.

Quaere, Whether it be an offense justly given by thee, or taken without Mr B.
just reason of others: thou not offending and they displeased, the fault is
their own and thou not chargeable therewith.

But you must understand Mr B. that in the unseasonable use of Answer.
things in themselves indifferent, there is an offense both given and taken,
and so a double sin committed: he that gives the offense sins through want of
charity, and he that takes it through want or weakness of faith. And so where
actions simply good, do only hurt him that takes offense; and actions simply
evil, him that gives it; the use of things indifferent against expediency,
hurts and harms and destroys both. Romans 14. 15.

Now the parts of your second enquiry, viz. whether men be offended Mr B.
in respect of what themselves know, or butled by affection, disliking of other
men's dislike, are insufficient. For men do often times take offense at things
done, and yet neither in respect of their own knowledge Ans.
nor of other men's dislike, but merely through want of knowledge and upon
ignorance of their christian liberty. And such were the weak brethren spoken
of, Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8. and 9. which how they were to be tendered in their
weakness, let the places judge.

And for persons partially affectionate, or foolishly froward, which is the
mayn point in the 3. Quaere, they are no way to be regarded as weak, but on the
contrary to be reproved as wayward and contentious, that folly and sin may
not rest upon them. Only let men take heed they judge not uncharitably of
their brethren, because they would practice uncharitably toward them, as 1 Samuel 2^.
Nabal reviled David and his men as runnagates, because he would deal
churlishly with them, and would show them no mercy.

In the forth place it is demanded.

What authority may do in things external for outward rule in the Mr B.
circumstances of things.

How colourably you carry all the abominations in your Church Ans.
under the shadow of circumstances, and of how great moment even circumstances
are in the case of religion I have formerly spoken: let me only ad thus much.

If a subject should vsurp the crown, and exercise regal authority, the
difference were but in the circumstance of person, which notwithstanding made
the action high treason. Or if a Priest coming to say his evensong should fall
a sleep on his desk, it were but a matter of circumstance in respect of time
and place, it might lawfully be done in another place, and at another time, yet
there and then it were a great profaning of the service book. What sway
authority has in the Church of England, appears in the laws of the land,
which make the government of the Church alterable at the Magistrates pleasure:
and so the Clergy in their submission to K. Henry 8. do derive, as they
pretend, their ecclesiastical jurisdiction from him, and so exercise it.
Indeed many of the late Bishops and their Procters, seeing how monstrous the
ministration is of divine things, by an humane authority and calling; and
growing bold upon the present disposition of the Magistrate, have disclaimed
that former title, and do professedly hold their eclesiasticall power and
jurisdiction de jure divino, and so consequent^y by Gods word unalterable. Of
whom I would demand this one quaestion.

What if the King should discharge and expel the present ecclesiastical
government, and plant in stead of it the Presbytery or Eldership, would they
submit unto the government of the Elders, yea or no? if yea, then were they
traitors to the Lord Jesus submitting to a government, overthrowing his
government, as does the Praesbyterian government, that which is Episcopal; if
no, then how could they free themselves from such imputations of disloyalty to
Princes, and disturbance of States, as wherewith they load us and others
opposing them. But to the quaestion it self.

As the Ioh. 18. 36
kingdom of Christ is not of this world, but spiritual, and he a spiritual
King: so must the government of this spiritual kingdom under this spiritual
King needs be spiritual, and all the laws of it And as Christ Jesus has by
the merits of his Preisthood 1 Cor. 6: 20.
redeemed as well the body as the soul; so is he also by the scepter of his
Kingdom to rule and reign over both: unto which Christian Magistrates as well
as meaner persons, ought to submit themselves, and the more Christian they are,
the more meekly to take the yoke of Christ upon them, and the greater authority
they have, the more effectually to advance his scepter over themselves, and
their people by all good means. Neither can there be any reason given, why the
merits of saints, may not as well be mingled with the merits of Christ for the
saving of his Church, as the laws of men with his laws, for the ruling and
guiding of it. He is as absolute and as entire a King as he is a Priest, and
his people must be as careful to praeserve the dignity of the one, as to enjoy
the benefit of the other.

The next Quaere, is. Whether authority commanding does not Mr B.
take away the offense which might otherwise be given in a voluntary act.

This question is answered affirmatively, by the Bishops and their Ans.
adhaerents, and so with one voice they affirm in their books, pulpits and
other publik determinations: but herein as palpably flattering the Magistrate,
as ever Canonist did the Pope. What more was ever given to the Pope, then that
he might dispense with the moral law. And what less is given to the King when
by his authority I use things indifferent with offense to my weak brother? Is
not love Romans 13. 2.
the fulfilling of the law? And is it not Romans 14. 13.
against the law of love to use things indifferent with offense? which must the
more carefully be avoided, considering the effects it draws with it, which are
not only the grief (which were too much) but even the destruction of him for
whom Christ dyed, ver. 5. 20. 1 Cor. 8. 11.

Only he which can strengthen the weak faith (which is the cause of the
offense) can take away the offense, and stablish him that is weak, Romans 14. 4.
Men may and must use means for that purpose, and not nourish the weak in their
weakness, but bear them they must in love, and much love will have much
patience.

Lastly, (for I pass over the 5. Quaere as comprehended in those which go
before) where you advise me^ to study, and again to study to be quiet, and to
follow those things which concern peace: it is needful counsel and again
needful, considering what unquiet spirits are to be found in all places. Only
let men in their counsayls (which you leave out) join with peace Romans 14. 19.
Heb. 12 14.
aedification, and holiness as the scriptures teach, and so Ier. 15. 19 Pro. 12.
20. Mat. 5. 9.
separating the precious from the vile, they shall be to us as Gods mouth: and
let their peace be in the word of righteousness, and the joy of the counselers
of peace shall be upon them, and the blessing of peacemakers upon their heads.

Of Mr B. disswasive probabilities.
THe next thing that comes into consideration, is, certain probabilities and
likelyhoods, as the author calls them, consisting for the most part of
personal imputations, and di graceful calumniations, whereby he labors to
withdraw the hearts of the simple from the truth of God, unto disobedience, as
Absalom did the people into rebellion against the K. by slandering his
government. 2 Sa^. 15.

But if Mr Bern. followed his sound judgment in this boo^, as he professes in
the Preface, and so labored to lead others, he would neither go himself, nor
send them by unstable guesses and likelyhoods, as he does.

The truth of God goes not by peradventures, neither needs it any such
paper-shot as likelyhoods are to assault the adversary withal. The word of God
which is 2 Ti^. 3. 16. 17.
profitabl^ to teach, to reprov^, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness,
is sufficient to furnish the man of God with weapons spiritual, and those 2
Cor. 10. ^ ^.
mighty through God to cast down strong holds, and whatsoever high thing is
exalted against the knowledge of God. And if M. B. speak according to the Law
and Prophets, his words are solid arguments, if not, there is neither light in
him, nor truth in them: and so where truth is wanting must some like-truthes,
or images of truth be laid in the place, like the image in David's bed to
deceive them that sought after him, when he himself was wanting. 1 Sa^. 19. 13.

The first probability that our way is not good, is.

The noveltie thereof differing from all the best reformed Churches ^^ ^.
Likelihood.
Christendom.

It is no noveltie to hear men plead custom, when they want Answ^r.
truth. So the heathen Philosophers reproched Paul as Act. 17. 19.
a bringer of new doctrine: so do the Papists discountenance the doctrine and
profession of the Church of England, yea even at this day, very many of the
people in the Land, use to call Popery the old law, and the profession there
made, the new law.

But we for our parts, as we do believe by the word of God, that the things we
teach are not new, but old truths renewed: so are we no less fully persuaded,
that the Church constitution in which we are set, is cast in the Apostolical
and primitive mould, and not one day nor hour younger in the nature and form
of it, then the first Church of the new Testament. And whether a people all of
them separated, and sanctified (so far as men by their fruits can, or ought to
judge) or a mingled generation of the seed of the woman and seed of the serpent
be more ancient; the government of sundry Elders or Bishops with joint
authority over one Church, or of one National, Provincial, or Diocesan Bishop
over many hundred or thousand Churches; the spiritual prayers conceived in the
heart of the Ministers according to the present occasions, or necessityes of
the Church, or the English service book; the simple administration of the
Sacraments, according to the words of institution, or pompous and carnal
complements of cap, coap, surplice, cross, godfathers, kneeling and the like
mingled withal; I do even refer it to the report of Mr B. own conscience, be
it never so partial.

Now for the differences betwixt the best reformed Churches (as Mr B. calls
them, granting thereby his own to be the worst) and us, they are extant in
print, being few in number, and those none of the greatest weight. But what a
volume would these differences make betwixt those reformed Churches, and the
unreformed Churches of England, if they were exactly set down. And yet for the
corruptions reproved by us in the reformed Church where we live, I do
understand by them of good knowledge, and sincerity, that the most or greatest
of them are rather in the exequution then in the constitution of the Church.

Our differences from the reformed Churches, Mr B. aggravates by two reasons.
1. The first is our separation from them, 2. the 2. certain terms of disgrace
uttered by Mr Barrow and Mr Greenwood against the Eldership: which Mr Bernard
will have us disclayme.

For the first, it is not truly affirmed that we separate from them. What our
judgment is of them, our confessions of faith and other wrytings do testify;
and for our practice, as we cannot possibly ioyn unto them, would we never so
feign, being utterly ignorant of their language; so neither do we separate
from them, save in such particulars as we esteem evil; which we also shall
endeavor to manifest unto them so to be, as occasion and means shall be offered.

And secondly, for the taxations laid by Mr B. and Mr G. upon the Eldership, or
other practice in the reformed Churches, wherein they were any way excessive we
both have disclaimed, and always are and shall be ready to disclayme the same.
Only I entreat the godly reader to consider, that those things were not spoken
by them otherwise, then in respect of those corruptions in the Eldership and
else where, which they deemed Antichristian, and evil. Of which respective
phrase of speech more hereafter.

Lastly if it be likely that our way is not good for the difference it has
from the reformed Churches, and that the greatne^ of the difference appears by
the hard terms given by some of us against the government there used, th^n
sur^ly i^ is much more Against Scotizing and Genevating Ministers.
likely, that the way of the unreformed Church of England is not good, which
differs far more from the reformed Chu^ches: which difference appears not
only in most reproachful terms used by the Praelates and their adhaerents
against the seekers of reformation comparing them to all vile haeretiques, and
seditious persons, O. O. his picture of a Puritan.
but in cruel persequutions raised against them, and greater then against
Papists or Atheists.

The second mark by which Mr B. guesseth our way not good is, for that it
agrees so much with the ancient schismatiques condemned 2 Likelihood.
in former ages by holy and learned men, Luciferians, Donatists, Novattans and
Audians.

Can our way both be a novelty and new devise, and yet agree so Answ.
well with the ancient schismatiques condemned in former ages? Contradictions
cannot be both true, but may both be false, as these are.

The parties to whom Mr B. likeneth us were condemned not only for schism
but for heresy also, as appears in Epiphanius, Austine, Eusebius and others.
And as we have nothing, no not in s^ew like unto some of them, nor in truth
unto any of them in the things blame worthy in them, so if Mr B. were put to
justify by the word of God the condemnation of some of them, it would put him
to more trouble then he is aware of.

The Audians dissented from the Nicene Council about their Easter time. The
Luciferians held the soul of man to be ex traduce, and were therefore
accounted Haeretiques, as indeed it was too usual a thing in those days to
reject men for haeretiques upon too light causes.

And for the Donatists unto whom Mr Gifford and others would so fayn fashion
us, Mr B. and all others may see the dissimilitude betwixt them and us in the
refutation of that supposed consimilitude. 3. Likelihood.


A third evil for which Mr B. would bring our cause into suspicion is.

The matter of defending our opinions, and proving our assertions by Mr B.
strange and forced expositions of scriptures.

Where he also notes in the margent that, the truth needs no such ill means to
mainteyne it. Answ.


What the means are by which the Prelacy against which we witness is mainteyned,
all men know. The flattering of superiors, the oppressing of inferiors, the
scoffing, reviling, imprisoning, and persequuting unto banishment and death of
such as oppose it, are the weapons of the Prelates warfare, by which they
defend their tottering Babel. And were it not for the arm of ^lesh by which
they hold, and to which they trust, they and their pomp would vanish away like
smoke before the wind, so little weight have they or theyrs in the consciences
of any.

But let us see wherein we mislead the reader by deceiptful allegations of
scriptures.

1. In quoting scriptures by the way that is for things coming in upon
occasion, Mr B.
but nothing to the main point, etc. Answ.


And wherefore is this deceiptfull dealing thus to allege the scriptures?
Because the simple reader is hereby made beleve, that all is spoken for the
question controverted.

He is simple and careless also that will not search the scriptures before he
beleve that they are brought to prove, if he any way suspect it, which who so
does can not be deceived, as is here insinuated.

It were to be wished we both Isa. 19. 18.
spoke and wrote the language of Canaan and none other, and not only to use,
but even to note the scripture phrase soberly may be to the information and
edification of the reader.

2. By urging commandments, admonitio^s, exhortations, dehortations, Mr B.
reprehensions, and godly examples to prove a falsity.

What is falsity but that which is contrary to truth? and so Ioh. 17. 17
the Answ.
word of God being truth, whatsoever is contrary unto any part of it whither
commandment, admonition, exhortation etc. is false, so far forth as it is
contrary.

The similitude you take from a natural child who for his disobedience is not
to be reputed a false child but no good child, is like the rest of the your
similitudes. The proportion holds not. Men may have such children as ever were,
are and will be disobedient to their dying day, and yet they remayn their
children whether they will or no: but if any of Gods child^en prove
disobedient, and will not be disclaymed, he can dischilde them for bastards as
they are, and the true children of the Divil. Ioh. 8. 44.

3. In alleging Scriptures not to prove that for which to the simple Mr. Ber.
it seems to be alleged but that which is without controversy, taking the
thing in question for granted. For this I take to be his meaning, though he
express it ill.

The instance he brings of one of us cyting Act. 20. 21. to prove Answ
that all truth is not taught in the Church of England, is, I am persuaded (if
not worse) mistaken by him. For who would bring Paul's example to show what the
Ministers of England do, and not rather what they should do? what they do is
known well enough, and how both they in preaching the will of God, and the
people in obeying it, are stinted at the Bishops pleasure.

4 By bringing in places setting forth the invisible Church and holiness of
the members, to set forth the visible Church by, as being proper thereto, as 1
Pet. 2. 9. 10.

That the Apostle here speaks not of the invisible, but of the visible
Church, appears not by our bare affirmation, which we might set gaynst Mr B.
naked contradiction, yea though he bring in D. Allison in the margent to
countenance the matter, but by these reasons.

1. Peter being Gal. 2. 7.
the Apostle of the Jews wrote unto them whose Apostle he was, and whom he
knew dispersed through Pontus, Galatia, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 1. But Peter was not the
Apostle of the invisible, but of the visible Church which he knew so dispersed,
where the invisible Church is only known unto God, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

2. The Apostle uses the words of Moses to the visible Church of the Jews,
Ex. 19. 6. which do therefore well agree to the visible Church under the
gospel, whose excellency, graces and holiness, do surmount the former by many
degrees.

3. Peter wrytes to a Church wherein were Elders and a flock depending upon
them, to be fed and governed by them, 1 Pet ^. 1. 2. 3. which to affirm of the
invisible Church is not only a visible, but even a palpable error.

4. The Apostle wrytes to them which had the word preached amongst them, Chap.
1. 25. And this Mr B. himself, page 118. 119. makes a note and testimony of
the visible Church, and to that pupose quotes the former chap. v. 23. as he
does also this very chap. ver. 5. which is the same with v. 9. 10. to prove the
form of the visible Church. And thus I hope it appears to all men upon what
good grounds this man thus boldly leads us with deceiptfull dealing in the
scriptures. And this instance, I desire the reader the more diligently to
observe as being singled out by Mr B. as a picked witness against us, and
countenanced by D. Allisons concurring testimony, but especially because it
points out the Apostolic Churches, clean in contrary colors to the English
Synagogues, being unholy and profane; and this is the cause why Mr B. and
others are so loath to have this Scripture meant of the visible Church.

5. By inferences, and references, as if this be one this must follow, and Mr B.
this Mr B. calls a deceiveable and crooked way for the intangling of the
simple.

To this I have page 20.
answered formerly, and do again answer, that Answ.
necessary consequences and inferences are both lawful and necessary.

If Mr B. had to deal with a Papist against Purgatory or with an Anabaptist
for the baptizing of Infants, he should be compelled (except I be deceived) to
draw his arrows out of this quiver. And what are consequences regulated by the
word (which 1 Timothy 4 4. 5.
sanctifies all creatures) but that sanctified use of reason? and will any
reasonable man deny the use and discourse of reason? Ioh. 20* 23.
If all the things which Jesus did had been written, the world could not have
contained the books: and if all the duties which ly upon the Church to perform
had been written in express terms, (as Mr B. requires) a world of worlds
could not contain the books which should have been written. Neither are
inferences and references justly made, any way to be accounted wyndings, but
plain passages to the truth, trodden before us by the Lord Jesus and all his
holy Apostles, which scarce allege one scripture of three out of Moses and the
Prophets but by way of inference, as all that will, may see.

But the truth is Mr Bern. has so many times been driven to so gross
absurdities by a consequence or two about this cause, as he utterly abhorrs the
very memory of all co^sequences, and it seems would have it enacted, that never
consequence should be more urged.

To conclude, whatsoever it pleases this man to suggest, the main grounds,
for which we stand touching the communion, government, ministry, and worship
of the visible Church, are expressly contained in the scriptures and that (as we
are persuaded) so plainly, that as like Habbakuks vision, he Hab. 2. 2
that runs may read them.

The 4. guess against us is.

That we have not the approbation of any of the reformed Churches for ou^ The
4. Likelihood
course, and that where our Confession of faith is without allowance by them,
they give on the contrary the right hand of fellowship to the Church of
England.

This is the same in substance with the first instance of probability, Ans.
and that which follows in the next place the same with them both. And Mr
Bern. by his so ordinary pressing us with humane testimonies shows himself to
be very barren of divine authority: as has been truly noted by another.
Nature teaches every creature, in all danger to fly first and oftenest to the
chief instruments either of offense, or defense, wherein it trusts, as the But
to his horn, the Bore to his tusk, and the byrd unto her wing: right so this
man shows wherein his strength lies, and wherein he trusts most, by his so
frequent and usual shaking the horn and whetting the tusk of mortal man's
authority against us.

But for the reformed Churches the truth ^s they neither do imagine, no nor will
easily be brought to believe that the frame of the Church of England stands as
it does: neither have they any mind to take knowledge of those things, or to
enter into examination of them. The approbation which they give of you (as Mr
A. has observed) as indeed it is of special observation) is in respect of
such general truths of doctrine, as wherein we also for the most part
acknowledge you: which notwithstanding you deny in a great measure in the
particulars, and practice. But touching the gathering, and governing of the
Church, which are the mayn heads co^troverted betwixt you and us; they give you
not so much as the left hand of fellowship, but do on the contrary turn their
backs upon you.

The difference betwixt you and them in the gathering and constituting of
Churches is as great as betwixt copulsive conformity unto the service book and
ceremonies, which is your estate, and voluntary submission unto the gospel by
which all and every member of them is joined to the Church, and as is betwixt
the reign of one Lord Bishop over many Churches, and the government of a
Presbytery or company of Elders over one.

And if you would take view of this difference nearer home, do but cast your
eyes to your next neighbors of Scotland and there you shall see the most
zealous Christians choosing rather to loose liberty, country, and life then to
stoop to a far more easy yoke then you bear. Yea what need I send you out of
your own horizon? The implacable and mortal hatred the Prelates bear unto the
Ministers and people wishing the government and Ministry received in the
reformed Churches proclaymes aloud the utter emnity betwixt them, and your
unreformed Church of England, of which I pray you hear with patience what some
of your own have testified. Those that will needs be our Pastors and spiritual
fathers Answer to D. Bancrofts slanders.
are become beasts as the Prophet Jeremy says. And if we should open our
mouths, to sue for the true shepherds and overseers indeed unto whose
direction we ought to be committed, the rage of these wolves is such as this
endeavor would almost be the price of our lives. And do these Churches like
sisters go hand in hand together as is pretended?

Now for us, where Mr B. affirms that we published our confession but
without allowance, if I saw not his frowardnes in the things he knows, I
should marvayl at his bouldnes in the things whereof he is ignorant, we
published the confession of our faith to the Christian Vniversityes in the low
countries and else where, entreating them in the Lord, either to convince our
errors by the word of God (if so any might be found,) or if our testimony in
their judgments agreed with the same word, to approve it either by writing, or
silence, as they thought good. Now what University, Church, or person amongst
them has once enterprized our conviction? which without doubt some would have
done (as with such haeretiques or schismatiques as arise amongst them) had they
found cause?

Thus much of the learned abroad: in the next place Mr B. draws us to the
learned at home, from whose dislike of us he takes his fifth Likelihood, which
he thus frames.

The condemnation of this way by our divin^s both living and dead, The 5.
Likelihood
against whom either for godlynes of life, or truth of doctrine, otherwise the^
for being their opposites, they can take no exception.

No mervayl: we may not admit of parties for judges: how is it possible we
should be approved of them in the things wherein we witness against them? And if
this Argument be good or likely, then is it likely that neither the reformists
have the truth in the Church of England, nor the Prelates, for there are many
and those both godly and learned, which in their differences do oppose, and
that very vehemently the one the other.

Now, as for mine own part, I do willingly acknowledge the learning and
godlynes of most of the persons named by Mr B. and do honor the very memory of
some of them, so do I neither think the^ so learned, but they might err; nor
so godly, but in their error they might reproach the truth they saw not. I do
indeed confess to the glory of God, and mine own shame, that a long time
before I entered this way, I took some taste of the truth in it by some
treatises published in justification of it, which (the L. knows were sweet as
honey unto my mouth; and the very principal thing, which for the time quenched
all further appetite in me, was the overvaluation which I made of the learning
and holiness of these, and the like persons, blushing in my self to have a
thought of pressing one hayr breadth before them in this thing, behind whom I
knew my self to come so many miles in all other things; yea and even of late
times, when I had entered into a more serious consideration of these things and
(according to the measure of grace received) serched the scriptures, whether
they were so or no, and by searching found much light of truth, yet was the
same so dimmed and overclouded with the contradictions of these men and others
of ^he like note, that had not the truth been in my heart as a burning fire
shut up in my bones Ier. 20. 9. had never broken those bonds of ^lesh and
blood, wherein I was so streytly tied, but had suffered the light of God to
have been put out in mine own unthankful heart by other men's darkness.

This reverence every man stands bound to give to the graces of God in other
men, that in his differences from them, he be not suddaynly nor easily
persuaded, but that being jealous of his own heart, he undertake the
examination of things and so proceed, with fear, and trembling, and so having
tried all things, keep that which is good. 1. These. 5. 21. So shall he neither
wrong the graces of God in himself, not in others. But on the othersyde for a
man so far to suffer his thoughts to be conjured into the circle of any
mortal man or men's judgment, as either to fear to try what is offered to the
contrary, in the balance of the sanctuary, or fynding it to bear weight, to
fear to give sentence on the Lords side, yea though it be against the mighty,
this is to honor men above God, and to advance a throne above the throne of
Christ, who is Lord and King for ever.

And to speak that in this case which by doleful experience I my self have
found, many of the most forward professors in the kingdom are well nigh as
superstitiously addicted to the determinations of their guids and teachers, as
the ignorant Papists unto theyrs, accounting it not only needles curiosity,
but even intolerable arrogance to call into question the things received from
them by tradition.

But how much better were it for all men to lay aside these and the like
prejudices, that so they might understand the things which concern their peace,
and seeing with their own eyes, might live by their own faith.

And for these famous men here named by Mr B. (with whose oppositio^s as with
Zidkijahs horns of iron he would push us here and every where); as we do bear
their reproofs with patience, and acknowledge their worthes without envy, or
detraction, so do we know they were but men, and so through humayn fraylty
might be abused as well (or rather as ill) to support Antichrist in a measure,
as others before them have been, (though godly, and learned, as they.) It will
not be denied but the fathers (as they are called) Ignatius, Irenaeus,
Tertullian* Ciprian, Ambrose, Ierom, Austin, and the rest were both godly and
learned; yet no man (if he have but even saluted them) can be ignorant, what
way (though unwittingly) they made for the advauncement of Antichrist which
followed after them: And if they notwithstanding their learning and godliness
thus vshered him into the world, why might not others (and that more likely)
though learned and godly as the former, help to bear up his train? espcially
considering, that as his rising was not, so neither could his fall be perfected
at once. And for us, what do we more or otherwise for the most part, then walk
in those ways into which diverse of the persons by Mr B. named, have directed
us by the word of God, in manifesting unto us by the light thereof what the
ministry, government, worship, and fellowship of the Gospel ought to be? we
then being taught, and believing, that the word of God is a light and a
lantern not only to our eyes, but to our feet and paths (as the psalmist
speaks) Psalm. 119. 105. cannot possibly conceave how we should justly be
blamed by these men for observing the ordinances which themselves not only
acknowledged, but contended for, as appointed by Christ's testament to be kept
inviolable till his appearing, as some of them have expressly testified.

To conclude, let not the Christian reader cast our persons, and the persons of
our opposites whither these or others, in the balla^ce together, but rather our
cause, and reasons with their oppositions and the grounds of them, and so with
a steady hand, and impartial ^y wey and poyze cause with cause, that so the
truth of God may not be prejudiced by men's persons, nor held in respect of them.

And to your marginall note, viz. that ^^ne of us whom you call guids did fall
to this course before we were in trouble and could not enjoy our liberty as we
desired, I do only answer this one thing, that all and every one of us might
have inioyed both our liberty, and peace at the same woeful rate with you and
your fellows.

The Lords judgment giving sentence with him and his 6. Likelihood.
Church against us. But wherein appears that Mr B?

^. By the blessing of God (you tell us) upon your ministry, by which people
Mr B.
are won truly to sanctification of life, and that we (on ^^e contrary) work
but upon the labors of other men.

1. Considering the multitude of Ministers in the kingdom Answer*
and their long continuance in their Ministry, there is in the most parts of
the land no such cause of so loud boasts as are h^re made.

There is nothing more common both in the sermons and wrytings of the forwarder
sort, then their complaints how little good their preaching has done,
howsoever with us for advantage they plead the contrary.

But let it be as Mr B. says that they win men to sanctification of life, and
that we work but upon their labors, his own words shall judge him, wherein he
does directly overthrow that he would establish, and establish that he would so
fayn overthrow.

The Ministers of the Church of England do win men to true sanctification of
life, then the people over whom they are set are not truly sanctified, then
not true saints, then no true members of the Church: and therefore that no true
body of Christ consisting of such members.

We work upon other men's labors: and so true ordinary Elders do: whose office
stands in feeding, and not in begetting. The Elders which the Apostles ordained
were set over them which Act. 14. 23.
believed in the Lord; and* the overseers or Bishops made by the holy Ghost
were over such a ^lock, as all whereof were purchased with the blood of Christ,
(so far as men could judge.) We do not despise Act. 20. 28*
the conversion of a sinner (as Mr B. odionsly traduceth us,) but do with men
and Angels bless the Lord for that mercy upon our selves and others, only
weedare not stand Ministers to an unconverted people nor dispense unto the^ the
holy things of God, to which we know they have no right, how bold soever Mr B.
and his brethren make with the Lord and his ordinances this way. And so I
pass to the second proof.

2 The blessing of God assisting us walking in our way with the reformed Mr B.
Churches has from Luthers time made prosperous our way by him, and other
glorious instruments, and in few years spread the truth to many nations, etc.

He that would not in the words before going work upon the Answer.
labors of other men, will now make boast of them: but in stead of proving his
likelyhoods by this dealing, he is justly to be reproved of two falsehoods.

The one is, that he will bear the world in hand that his way, and the way of
the reformed Churches are one, whereas the ways of the Church of England
wherein we forsake her, do directly and ex diametro, cross and thwart the
ways of the reformed Churches: as appears in these three main heads.

1. The reformed Churches are gathered of a free people joined together by
voluntary profession without compulsion of humane laws. On the contrary the
Church of England consists of a people forced together violently by the laws
of men into their Provincial, Diocesan and Parishionall Churches (as their
houses stand) be they never so unwilling or unfit. 2. The reformed Churches do
renounce the Ministry of the Church of Engl: as she does theirs: not admitting
of any by virtue of it to charge of souls: (as they speak) where on the
contrary all the masse-preists made in Queen Maryes days, which would say
their book-service in English, were continued Ministers by the same ordination
which they received from the Popish Prelates. 3. The government by Archbishops,
Lord Bishops, and their substitutes in the Church of England is abhor^ed and
disclaymed in the reformed Churches as Antichristian: as is on the contrary the
Presbyterian government (in use there) by the Church of England refused, as
Anabaptisticall, and seditious.
Now if Mr B. can at once walk in so many and so contrary ways, he had need
have as many feet as the Polypus has.

Secondly, understanding by his Churches way such doctrines and ordinances as
wherein we oppose it it is an empty boast to affirm that the same is spread
into other nations. Which are the nations, or what may be their names, which
either do reteyn or have received the Prelacy, Ministry, service book, canons
and confused co^mixture of all sorts now in use in the Church of England?

But Mr B. having (as he boasts) God, Angels, and men on his side proceeds in
the next place to plead against us Gods judgments, who seems (as he says)
from the first beginning to be offended with our course.

And intending principally in this whole discourse to oppress us with
contumelyes, and by them to alienate all men's affections from us, he ra^eth
together into this place, as into a dung-hil of sla^der and misreport
whatsoever he thinks may make us and our cause stink in the nostrels of the
reader. And so forging some things in his own brain, and enforcing other
things (true in themselves) with most odious aggrevations, he presents us to
the view of the world, with such personal infirmities, and humayn fraylties
written in our foreheads, as the Lord has le^t upon the sons of men for
their humbling. And the world wanting spiritual eyes and beholding the Church
of Christ with the eyes of flesh and blood, and seeing it compassed about with
so many infirmities, and falling into so many and manyfold trials and
temptations, is greatly offended, and passes unrighteous judgment upon the
servants of God, and blasphemeth their most holy profession.

But let all men learn not to behold the Church of Christ with carnal eyes,
which like fearful spies will discourage the people, but with the eyes of
faith and good conscience, which like Joshua and Caleb will speak good of the
promised Land, the spiritual Canaan, the Church of God. But to the point.

That Mr B. may make sure work he strikes at the head, and whetteth his tongue
like a sword, and shoots bitter words like arrows at such principal men, as
God has raised up in this cause, whereof some have persevered, and stood fast
unto death, others have fallen away in the day of temptation, whose end has
been worse ^hen their beginning.

The first person in whom he instanceth is one Boulton, touching who^ he
writes thus: that he being the first broacher of this way Mr B.
came to as fearful an end as Judas did: adding thereupon, that God suffers
not his special instruments called forth otherwise then after a common course
to come to such ends.

To this I do first answer, that neither this man was nor any other Answ.
of us is called forth by the Lord otherwise then after a common course: even
that which is common to all Gods people, which is to come out of Babylon, and
to bring their best gifts to Syon for the buylding of the Lords temple there.

It is true that Boulton was (though not the first in this way) an Elder of a
separated Church in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's days, and falling away
from his holy profession recanted the same at Paul's Cross, and afterward hung
himself as Judas did* And what marvayl if he which had betrayed Christ in his
truth, as Judas did in his person, came to the same fearful end which Judas
did?

Nay rather the patience and long suffering of God is to be mervayled at that
others also, who either have embraced this truth and after fallen from it, or
refused to submit unto it when they have both seen and approved it, have not
been pursued by the same revengefull hand of God. And for the promise of Gods
presence with his, Genesis 12. 3. Math. 28. 20. Ios. 1. 9. it must ever be taken
conditionally, viz. whylest they are with him and do his work faithfully as
they ought, and no further.

Now touching Brown it is true which Mr B. affirms that as he forsook the
Lord so the Lord forsook him in his way: and so he did his own people Israel
many a time. And if the Lord had not forsaken him he had never so returned back
into Egypt as he did to live of the spoils of it, as is said he speaks.

And for the wicked things (which Mr B. affirms) he did in this way, it may
well be as he says* and the more wicked things he committed in this course,
the ^esse like he was to continue long in it, and the more like to return
again to his proper center the Church of England where he should be sure to
find companions enough in any wickedness, as it came to pass.

Lastly to let pass the universal Apostasy of all the Bishops, Ministers,
students in the Vniversityes, yea and of the whole Church of England in Queen
Maryes time (a handful only excepted in comparison) which the Papists might
more colourably vrg against Mr B. the^ he some few insta^ces against us) the
fall of Mat. 26. 14. 19. and 47. 48. 49. and 27. 3. 4. 5.
Judas an Apostle, of Act. 6. 5. with Rev. ^ 15.
Nicholas one of the first 7 Deaco^s, of 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Demas one of Paul's special companions in the Ministry, do sufficiently teach
us that there is no cause so holy, nor calling so excellent, which is not
subject to the invasion of painted, and deceiptfull hyppocrites, whose service
the Lord notwithstanding may use for a time till their whyting be worn of, and
then leave them to their own deceavable ^usts, which will work their most
woeful downfall: thereby warning his people not to repose too much upon any
mortal man in whom there is no stedfastnes, but to cast their eyes upon him
a^one and upon his truth which changes not.

Of Mr Barrow and Mr Greenwoods spirit of railing (as this man rayleth against
them) in another place. Only let the indifferent reader judge whither Mr B. in
blazing abroad the personal infirmityes of his adversaries without any
occasion, neither sparing the living nor the dead, have not come to the very
highest pitch of the most natural railing that may be. A practice which all
sober minded men do abhor from.

The next that comes in Mr B. way are the two brethren Mr Francis and Mr George
Johnson, whose contentions he exagge^ateth what he can to make both their
persons and cause odious. True it is that George Johnson together with his
father taking his part, were excommunicated by the Church for contention
arising ^t the first upon no great occasion, whereupon many bitter and
^eprochful terms were uttered both in word and writing, George ^eco^ming (as
Mr B. charge him) a disgraceful libeller.

It is to us just cause of humiliation all the days of our lives, that we have
given and do give by our differences such advantages ^o them which seek
occasion against us to blaspheme the truth: though this may be a just judgment
of God upon others which ^^ek offenses, that seeking they may find them to the
hardening of ^heyr hearts in evil. But let men turn their eyes which way
soever ^hey will, and they shall see the same scandalls. Look to the first and
best Churches planted by the Apostles themselves, and be^old Romans 16. 17. 1
Cor. 1. 11. and 3. 3. G^l. 5. 1^.
dissentions, scandal, strise, biting one of another.

About two hundred years after Christ, what a styrr was there about
moone-shyne in water (as we speak) betwixt the East and West Churches, when
Victor Bishop of Rome excommunicated the Churches in Asia for not keeping the
Jewish feast of Easter at the same time with the Church of Rome? And to come
nearer our own times, how bitter was Luther against Swinglius and Calvin in the
matter of the Sacrament? and how implacable is the hatred at this day of them
whom they call Lutherans against the followers of the other parties?

Take yet one instance more and in it a view of the very height of humayne
fraylty this way. The exiled Church at Frankford in Queen Maryes days bred and
nourished within it self such contentious, as that one accused another to the
Magistrate of treason, whereupon Mr Knox was compelled to fly for fear of
trouble.

I could also allege to the present purpose the state of the reformed Churches
amongst which we live, whose violent oppositions, and fiery co^tentio^s do far
exceed all ours: but I take no delight in writing these things, neither do I
think the needles dissentions which have been amongst us the less evil
because they are so common to us with others, but these things I have laid
down to make it appear, that Mr B. here uses none other weapon against us
then Jews, and Pagans might have done against Christians, and Papists against
such as held the truth against them, yea and then Atheists and men of no
religion might take up against all the professions and religions in the world.

And (to go no further) the irreco^ciliable emnity betwixt the Prelates and
reformists about cap, surplice, cross and the like, (which the patrons of them
acknowledge trifles) might well have stopped Mr B. mouth from vpbrayding any
with fyery contentions upon small occasions.

And touching the heavy sentence of excommunication, by which the father and
brother were dilivered up to the Divill, as Mr B. speaks, I desire the reader
to consider, that, if excommunication be (as indeed it is) so heavy a sentence
and that by it the party sentenced be delivered over to the Divill, the Church
of England is in heavy case which plays with excommunications as children do
with rattles. And to allude to the word Mr B. uses, in what a divelish case
are either* the Prelates and convocation house which have Can. 4. 6. 7. 8.
ipso facto excommunicated all that speak or deal against their State,
Ceremonies and servise book, since the curse caus^es falls upon the head of him
from whom it comes, or the reformists, (whereof M. B. would be one by fits) and
such as seek for and interprise reformation? And for the particular in hand,
howsoever it may seem an odious thing unto the natural man, which savors not
the things of God, nor the impartial ordinances of the Lord Jesus, and would
be a matter of wonder that a man should censure, or consent to the censuring of
his father or brother, in the Church of England, where a good word of a friend
or a small bribe may stay the excommunication of the grossest offender, yet if
there be just cause (though with extraordinary sorrow for the occasion) 'Math.
10 37.
Christ in his ordinance must be preferred before father and brother, yea and
mother and sister also. Yea and it shall be the seal of his ministry upon that
son which in the observance of the word of the Lord, and in the keeping Deuteronomy.
33 8. 9.
of his covenant says unto his father, mother, brother, yea and own children,
I know you not.

The next Mr. B. obiecteth is Mr Burnet, who, died of the plague in prison,
whether he was committed by the Archprelate.

And so did Mr Holland and Mr Parker in the same City at the same time, as I
remember: and so did Iunius and Trel^atius the two divinity professors at
Leyden at an other time upon the same infection. And was the plague Gods
fearful correcting rod upon these men because their religion was false, or
rather would any man knowing the scriptures and the Lords dispensations toward
his Church argue as this man does? * If judgment thus begin at Gods house, what
shall "1 Pet. 4. 17.
the end of them be which obey not the gospel of God?

But if Mr B. will bring against us all the persons which the Bishops have
killed in their prisons by this and the like means (as David did Vrijah by the
sword of the Amonites) he may overthwelm us with witnesses: but his argument
shall be much what of the same nature with that of the Caian haeretiques, which
affirm that Cain was a good man, and conceaved by a superior power unto Abel,
because he prevayled against him, and slew him.

Lastly for Mr Smyth, as his instability and wantonness of wit is his syn, and
our cross, so let M. B. and all others take heed that it be not their hardening
in evil.

Mr B. in proceeding to point out the hand of God writing heavy things against
us, charge us (by Mr Whytes testimony) with such notable crimes, and
detestable uncleannesses, as from which they in the Mr B.
Church of England either truly fearing God, or but making an apparent show
thereof are so praeserved by God, as they cannot be taynted with such evils, as
some of us often times fall into.

As the witness well ^its the cause and person alleging him, who (according to
the Proverb) may ask his fellow, etc. so have his slanders been answered as Mr
Bernard knows, whereof it seems the party himself is ashamed, and so might Mr
B. have been, had he not been shameless in accusing the brethren.

Now for the things objected, it is first to be noted how Mr B. affirms, that
none with them either truly fearing God, o^ making an apparent show thereof,
falls into such notable crimes, etc. wherein he acknowledges that a great part
of the Church of Engl: neither truly fears God, not makes apparent show of it.
How then are all of them saints by calling, and where is that profession of
faith for which they are to be held true members of the Church? And what
detestable crimes the members of the Church of England fall into, (if there
were none other testimony) the very gallows, and gibbets in every country
declare sufficiently, upon which for treason, witchcraft, incest, buggery,
rape, murders and the like, the members of that Church (so living and dying) do
receive condign punishment: Where with us if any such enormities arise (as
what temptations have befallen any we are subject unto the same) those monsters
(without their answerable repentance) are by the power of Christ cut of from
the body, and do for the most part return to their proper element the English
synagogue.

But what if all were true which Mr B. avoucheth, what advantage has he more
against us then the heathen Corinthians had against the Church there, where 1
Cor. 5. 1.
such fornication was found, as was not once named among the Gentiles?

Mr B. having thus handled (as you see) some particular, and principal
persons, proceeds to set upon the whole body in general, as if with the accuser
of the brethren he had obtained liberty to strike the same from the crown of
the head to the sole of the foot with the boyles and borches of reproach: and
therefore writes that Mr B.
If men be but inclinable to this way, they judge the Minister to have lost the
power of his Ministry, wherein the fault is in the alteration of their own
affections, and if they be once entered into it, they are then so bewitched, as
that where before they were humble and tractable, they then become proud and
wilful, where before they could with understanding discern betwixt cause and
cause, they then lick up all that comes from themselves as Oracles though never
so absurd, where before they could feel in themselves lively marks of the
children of God, and so judge of others, they then are persuaded against former
faith to think that neither themselves had, nor others have any outward marks
of the children of God.

Let the reader here observe in the first place that Mr B. accounts Ans.
all them inclinable to this way which dislike comformity and subscription in
the Ministers; for them only D. Downame (whose Epistle before his second
sermon he quotes in the margent) entendeth, and they only are the men which
judge the co^firming Ministers to have lost the power of their Ministry. And
that their judgment is most sound generally of such Ministers as having
formerly refused ceremonies and subscription do afterward bow unto the same,
all men of understanding do discern.

To the challenge of pride and wilfulnes upon them in this way though before
they were humble and tractable I do answer, that as true humility is ever
commendable so is there also a sinful subjection and submission of mind, by
which spiritual tyrants according to their fleshly wisdom in volu^tary
religion would rule over the consciences of the simple, of which the Apostle
warns us, Col. 2. 18. which superstitious humility or humble superstition if
the servants of God begin to shake of and to stand for that liberty so dearly
bought by Christ, and so highly commended by the Apostles of Christ, then begin
these imperious Masters to rage, thinking by reproaches to compel them again
under that subjection, in which by former delusions they could not conteyn
them. Thus dealt the bloody Bishops with the servants of God in Queen Mary's
days, calling them proud, wilful, conceyted, and what evil not? and very
well do the like accusations become Mr B. mouth in the like case.

Whether our opinions (which we are charged by Mr B. to lick up as Oracles) be
absurd or no, will appear in the discussing of them in the sequel of the
book: in the mean while this is most true and undeniable, that a great part of
the spleen uttered against us in this invective grew from this very cause, that
sundry of his hea^ers would not lick up whatsoever he powered out unto them
though bitter as gall: as that Ministers were not brethren properly, that the
Church had some power to excommunicate because the Minister (as the officials
exequutioner) might read the sentence, that the Churchwardens were Elders, the
midwyves widows, and many the like, which to reckon up is to confute
sufficiently.

Lastly it is a great wrong which Mr B. offers us in affirming, that if we be
once in this fraternity (as he scoffeth at our holy covenant) we then dislike
our former graces, and ar content to be persuaded against our Mr B.
former faith and feeling in our selves of the lively marks of the children of
God, and all because we were as a dear without the compass of our Park, as he
speaks.

We do with all thankfulness to our God acknowledge, and with Answ.
much comfort remember those lively feelings of Gods love, and former graces
wrought in us, and that one special grace amongst the rest by which we have
been enabled to draw ourselves into visible Covenant, and holy communion. Yea
with such comfort and assurance do we call to mind the Lords work of old this
way in us, as we doubt not but our salvation was sealed up unto our consciences
by most infallible marks and testimonies (which could not deceave) before we
conceaved the least thought of separation; and so we hope it is with many
others in the Church of Engl. yea and of Rome too.

And the more ample measure of grace, and fullnes of assurance that any man
has received of the Lord, the more carefully is he to endeavor in all good
conscience the knowledge and obedience of all and every one of the holy
commandments of God, and not to satisfy himself in his present feelings,
thinking his salvation sure enough, and so his obedience full enough (for this
were to serve God for wages as hypocrytes do) but rather with the Apostle Phi.
3. 13. 14.
forgetting those things which are behynd, and forcing to those things which
are before, let him follow hard to the mark for the price of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus. And whatsoever Mr B. judges of a deer without the
Park pale wherein he should be, sure it is that he is none of Christ's sheep
(visibly or in respect of men) which is without Christ's sheepfold. For Ioh. 10.
1^
there is one sheepsould, and one shepherd.

The last conjecture gathered against our cause is, 7. Likelihood.


The ill success it has had these very many years, being no more increased,
where the encreasings of God are great, etc.

As it is always safer to proceed by the causes and reasons of things Answ.
then by their events and success, so especially is this rule of use in "
Math. 7. 14.
the case of religion, whose way as it is in it self narrow and found by few,
how much more being streytned by the fyery persequutions of the wicked world.

Indeed the Church of England has advantage of us and (as I suppose) of all
the Churches in the world for monstrous speedy growth, and increase, for that
of a Synagogue of Satan consisting of Popish Idolaters, and cruel murderers of
the saints, it grew fro top to toe into a true and entire body of Christ of a
suddayn, and before the greatest part of it so much as heard the gospel
preached in any measure for their conversion.

But consider herein M. B. dealing: He spares no ungodly means in this his
book, and otherwise, by slaundering our persons, by falsyfying our opinions,
by exaggerating our infirmities, by incensing the Magistrate against us, to
suppress us, and yet reprocheth us because we grow no faster: dealing with us
much what as the Jews did with Christ when they blindfolded him first, and
then bad him prophecy who smote him, Luke 22. 64.

But let it be as Mr B. would have it, that the cause of religion is to be
measured by the multitude of them that profess it, yet must it further be
considered, that religion is not always ^own and reaped in one age: Ioh. 4. 37.
One sows and another reapeth. John Husse and Ierom of Prage finished their
testimony in Bohemia, and at Constance a hundred years before Luther, and
Wickliffe in England well nigh as long before them, and yet neither the one nor
the other with the like success unto Luther.

And the many that are already gathered by the mercy of God into the kingdom
of his son Jesus, and the nearnes of many more through the whole land ( for
the regions are white unto the harvest) do promise within less then an hundred
years (if our sins and theirs make not us and them unworthy of this mercy) a
very plenteous harvest.

That we have been here and there up and down without sure footing, is our
portion in this present evil world common to us with the more worthy servants
of God going before us, who* have wandered in wildernesses Heb. 11. 38
and mountains and dens and caves of the earth.

The sa^ne answer may serve for that other approbation of us, That, we only
have toleration in a place, where the enemies of Christ may be as well as we.
Yea though we were not so much as tolerated, but on the contrary persecuted to
the death, where the enemies of Christ were not only tolerated but even
approved yea the persequuters of us, for the cause of Christ, what were this
but to partake in the fellowship of his afflictions with the holy Prophets and
Apostles, and other his most faithful servants. And I will tell you Mr B. in the
presence of God what my persuasion is in this case, that as we have only
toleration in the City where we live, where the enemies of Christ are tolerated
with us, so all that truly fear God whether Ministers or private people have
only toleration in your Church, and no approbation by the canons and
constitutions of it.

And for the leading of the people out of one nation into another of a strange
language, it is our great cross (but no syn at all) and should rather move you
and others to compassion toward us, then thus to insult over us in our exile.
But your addition, that we do this without compulsion is most shameless, you
your self both beholding and furthering our most violent persecution. But see
your equal dealing with us, whilst we tarried in the kingdom you blamed us
because we got us not gone, now we are gone you find fault we tarry not.

For your marginall note that, Israel left not Egypt without Pharaohs leave,
nor the Jews Babylon without Cyrus his consent. To let pass the leave which
Pharaoh gave the Israelites to depart, when to reduce them back, he and his
people followed them into the sea; they could not depart sooner (though they
would) being held in bondage by their enemies, yet when Moses was in danger of
his life as we are, he fled as we do. Exodus 2. 15.

Besides, the Israelites had the certain known time of their captivities
limited and prescribed by God, which they were to tarry. Genesis 15. 13. 14. Exodus
12. 40. 41 Ier. 25. 11. 12. Dan. 9. 2. Ezra 1. 1. which is no way our cafe.

And what other do we in flying then the holy Prophets Exodus 2. 15 1 Samuel 18.
10. and 27. 1. 2. 1 King. 9. 3. Act. 9. 25.
and Apostles have done before us, and then the Protestants did in Queen Mary's
reign, that fled to Frankford, Geneva, and other places, where they understood
not the language of other nations? yea then the Lord Jesus himself has
sanctified not only Mat. 10. 23.
by his commandment, or license at the least, but also in his own person
Mat. 2. 13. 14.
flying into a Egypt in his mothers arms?

Reason see I none why this man should thus blame us for our flying, except
with the Montanists he thought flight in the time of persecution unlawful.

Lastly, Mr B. concludes his likelihoods with a cursed farewell, which (says
he) we leave in all places, like a scorching flame swinging where it comes, so
as the growth of all things are hindered by it.

And this observation he fathers upon me though in truth it be his own
bastard. I affirmed in deed that where this truth came, it left the places
barrayn of good things in taking away the best sort of people, but this I spoke
to no such purpose as is here insinuated.

The scorching flame which hinders all things in the Church of England is the
Prelacy, to which (by universal and infallible observation) no man applies
himself, no nor enclynes, but with a sensible decay of the former graces which
he seemed to have. He that but once enters into the High priests hall to warm
himself at the fire there, shall scarce return without a scorched conscience.

Having formerly viewed Mr B. his bare probabilities, we will now come to
debate his reasons against separation. The first sort whereof are grounded upon
the entrance into this cause, which he makes very sinful, and cursed, because
of the great evils, which (says he) ensue thereupon. And the first of these
imputed evils is,

That we not only disclayme and conde^n^ the corruptions and notorious Mr Bern.
wicked, but withal forsake all Christian profession amongst them, casting off
the word by which we were made alive, the ministers our fathers which have
begot us, yea and all fellowship of the godly with them, and so account them
ever false Christians, and Idolaters, having a false faith, false repentance,
and false baptism.

And from these evils thus suggested he both disswades the reader with some
passionate Rhyme in the margent, and deterrs him by sundry bitter curses cast
out against us both in the margent and text. Answer.


There is no truth of doctrine, nor ordinance of Christ taught or practiced in
the Church of England which we enjoy not, with far more liberty, better
right, and greater purity then any person in England does or can, as Mr Ber.
knows right well; and for the good graces of God in many, we do both know,
and acknowledge them, and it is our great grief (though their own fault) that
we cannot have communion with the persons in whom so eminent graces of God are:
and if there be any of them which are sorry for our departure from the
assemblies, we are much more sorry (and so have more cause) for their
continuance in the same. In which their estate whilst we withdraw ourselves
from them, we do in no sort condemn their persons, (which stand or fall to the
Lord) much less any good thing in them, or truth amongst them. It is one thing
simply to condemn that which is good for evil, and another thing to forbear
the use of it in the concrete, for the commixture of evil, from which in that
use it is inseparable.

When Paul forbad the Corinthians to eat and drink in the Idol temples, 1 Cor.
10. 20. ^1. he did not condemn meat, and drink. Neither did the same Apostle
when he directed the same Corinthians to excommunicate the incestuous person,
and so to have no fellowship with him, 1 Cor. 5. enjoyne them to renounce the
faith which that person professed, or the baptism which they with him had
received.

And as a Church excommunicating an offender for some one scandalous sin and so
refusing all communion with him, cannot be challenged for renouncing or
rejecting the faith which that person professes, or any other personal good
thing appearing in him; so neither may any person or persons forsaking a Church
and all fellowship with it for some one or few just causes, justly be accused
as renouncing or disclayming the other good things there remaining.

Lastly let me ask Mr B. whether he disclayme one God sub^^sting in three
persons, and one Lord Jesus God and man, and withal, the Christian virtues of
zeal, patience, temperance, humility* meeknes, and the like. And why not he as
well in refusing communion with the Church of Rome where these things are to be
found, as we in disclayming the Church of Engl. where the same and other the
like good things are known to be?

Thus when a man's eyes are blinded, by partiality toward himself, and his
mouth opened by malice against his adversary, it is mervaylous to see what
unequal judgment he will pass.

But least Mr B. in charging our beginning (as he does) as accursed,
uncharitable, unnatural, and ungodly, might seem to curse where God curses
not, he annexeth certain portions of scripture, which he also sets down at
large, as though they made largely against us, and our separation, and the end
why he alleges them is to prove that there is cause of rejoicing in the
Church of England. The scriptures are these. Romans 15. 17. 18. Act. 10. 34. 35.
Romans 14. 17. 18. To which I do answer first in general.

There may be and often times is cause of rejoicing in the events and issues of
things by a special hand of God determining them, though the secundary means
and instruments which the Lord uses for the producing, and bringing forth of
these issues and events (as of light out of darkness) be most accursed. Wherein
more, or else, has a christian heart cause of rejoicing then in the death of
Christ? And yet what can be imagined more abominable then the means and
instruments of working it.

But to speak nearer Mr B. purpose. If some Jesuit, or other, sent by the Pope
into America amongst the Pagans and Infidels, should there persuade any to
believe and confess one God, and his son Jesus Christ made man for the
redemption of the world, and that they should also give up their lives for
these truths, there were cause of rejoicing in their testimony, and yet I
suppose Mr B. (knowing as he does) would be loath to have communion in the
Jesuits Ministry. More particularly. The Apostle Romans 15. 17 18. in
commendation of his Apostleship lays down the effects of it and how great
cause of rejoicing he had, that God by his ministry had planted the Churches
of the Gentiles whom he further describes by their obedience in word and deed.

And how serves this for the Church of England? Thus. It serves first to
exclude all those word Saints for whom Mr B. pleads so much in his book.

Secondly it serves to show what small cause there is of reioying for the
English Churches being planted of such universally and so still continuing as
are indeed abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.

The second Scripture is Act. 10. 34. 35. Of a truth I perceave that God is no
accepter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works
righteousness is accepted of him. And is it so?

What sacrilegious presumption then is it in the Church of Enland to compel
God to accept of persons, and to accept for his people and servants such as
neither fear him, nor work righteousness but the contrary? to offer up their
persons and sacrifices to him in the name of Christ in whom they have no
portion? to seal up the covenant of his grace and peace unto them in the
sacraments with whom it never came into his heart to strike hand, neither has
he peace with them?

The third Scripture is Romans 14. 17. 18. The kingdom of God is not meat, not
drink, but righteousness, and peace and joy in the Holy G. for whosoever in
those things serves Christ is acceptable to God, etc.

Hence (to let pass the drift of the Apostle in this place else where opened)
thus much must necessarily follow, that where righteousness, and peace, and joy
in the Holy Ghost are not, nor men in those things serving Christ, there the
kingdom of God is not, nor these men his subjects. And where Gods kingdom is
not, there is the kingdom of Satan, and they that are not the subjects of the
one, are the slaves of the other. And so I leave it to the godly reader to
judge whither the assemblyes in England gathered at the first, and at this day
consisting of such persons for the most part as do not thus nor in these things
viz: righteousness peace and joy in the Holy Ghost serve Christ, but the
contrary, can be rightly and by the word of God accounted the kingdom of God
and Church of Christ. Thus the 3. Scriptures which Mr B. stretched out like a
threfold coard to hold men in the assemblies, are in truth and in their right
meaning as a three stringed whip to scourge those that fear God out of them.

With such a renunciation of the truth must be interteyned much untruth Mr B.
(says Mr Ber.) as first thou must believe their way to be the truth of God,
then condemn our Church as a false Church: when themselves have published that
the differences betwixt us and them are but corruptions. N^w corruptions, do
not make a false Church but a corrupt Church, a^ corruptions in a man make but
a corrupt, but no false man.

If we bear witness of our selves our witness is not true, Answ.
but if the word of God bear witness with us, and against you, it must stand.
And for the advauntage which you suppose you have gained at us, where we
acknowledge our differences to be only your corruptions, it will nothing at
all enrich you, or better your Church: For there are corruptions essential,
and in the very causes constitutive, matter, and form as well as else where:
there are corruptions which eat out the very heart of a thing, as well as such
as hinder the working only, or steyn the work. And we may truly say of all
the abominable doctrines and devises in Rome, that they are but so many
corruptions of those pure truths, and holy ordinances which that Church at the
first received from Christ the Lord.

And for your similitude of a man, whom you say corruptions make not a false
man, but a corrupt man, you are deceived in it, whether you consider a man
naturally or morally. Naturally, what is death but the corruption of the man?
as generatio and corruption are opposed. And what is rottennes but the
corruption of the body? Now these do more then make a corrupt man, or corrupt
body, they do destroy the very being. But consider a man morally (as in the
case of religion he must be considered) and then moral corruptions and vices
do either make a false man, or else a traitor, a theif, a cousener is a true
man, which patronage I hope Mr B. will not undertake.

The second rank of reasons which Mr B. brings against us are certain grievous
sins wherewith (he says) all in our way are polluted, for Mr B.
which according to our own principle no man may ioyn himself unto us.

The sins he names are, a renunciation of Gods mercy, and of all good things,
and men with them, unthankfulness to God, and the Church, spiritual
uncharitableness, audacious censuring, a desire to hinder, yea to extinguish all
the spiritual good they publicly enjoy, and a wish of destruction unto the
people, and the like.

Grievous accusations certainly, but if to accuse be to convince Answ.
who shall be innocent? not the Lord Jesus himself, nor his holy Apostles: whose
examples in undergoing the like reproaches, and in patient bearing of the same
at the hands of wicked men, if we had not before our eyes, either our hearts
would break in us for sorrow, or we should be provoked to render reproach for
reproach, and so Mr B.
sin against God.

Our first supposed sin is that woeful entrance before named, for which I refer
the reader to that which has been before answered.

But they in England (says Mr B.) enter by baptism renouncing Ans.
the Divill and sin. So do the Papists as loud as they, and with as many
godfathers and godmothers, crossing and blessing themselves against the Divill,
and all his works as much as they do. And for the renunciation of Gods mercy
and all good men, and good things in them in the Church of England: because we
refuse communion there, it is a foul charge laid upon us, but to which we are
no more liable, then were the Levites when they forsook Ieroboams Church and
repaired to Jerusalem 2 Ca. ^1. 13. 14.
the place which the Lord had chosen. For in Israel which they forsook were to
be found both good persons and things. 1 King. 14. 13. and 19. 18.

Now where in the last place Mr B. charge us not to make unclean what God
has cleansed Act. 10. 1^. we on the contrary advise him not to account that
clean, which sin and Antichrist does defyle.

Let him or any other man on earth show unto us by the word of God that a
Church gathered and consisting of persons for the most part defiled with all
manner of impiety, is cleansed by God, or that the daily sacrifice the service
book is as a lamb without spot, or that the spiritual courts so miscalled, are
sanctified of God for the government of his kingdom on earth, or that the
Court keepers the Archflamins and Flamins the Provincial and Diocesan Bishops
with their Chauncelers Commissaryes Archdeacons and other officers are his holy
ones upon whom he has put his Vrim and Thummim, and then let us bear our
rebuke if we do not return to the Church of England and humble ourselves under
her hand, as Hagar did her self under the hand of her mistress, Genesis 16. 9.

The second sin wherewith Mr B. charge us is our great unthankfulness, 1. to
God that begat us by his word, either by denying our conversion ^r Mr B.
else accounting it a false conversion, 2. toward the Church of England our
mother whom we desire to make a whore before Christ her husband, condemn ^^r
etc. And this accusation he shuts up with most bitter execrations against us
as unworthy to breath in the air.

For the thankfulness of our hearts unto the Lord our God for his Answ.
unspeakable mercies we leave it unto him that knows the heart, and for the
manifestation of it unto men, we referr them to our entyre (though weak)
obedience to the whole revealed will of God, and ordinances of Christ Jesus,
which we take to be the most acceptable sacrifice of thankfulness which by man
can be offered to the Lord.

And for our personal conversion in the Church of England we deny it not but
do (and always have so done) judge and profess it true there: and so was
Luthers conversion true in the Church of Rome, else could not his separation
from Rome have been of faith or accepted of God.

The same may be said of all the persons and Churches in the world which have
forsaken Rome.

Our third imagined, sin is spiritual uncharitableness appearing in our M. B.
deep censures upon all at least not inclinable unto us, condemning such as
know not our way as blinded by the God of this world the Devil: such as se^
it, and yield not unto it, as worldlings, fearful, convinced in conscience,
and going on in presumptuous sin: such as forsake it having formerly enclyned
unto it, Apostates, and if they oppose it, godles persequuters, hunters after
souls, such as shall certainly grow worse and worse, so as men shall say, God
is revenged on them, etc.

If any one man have thus peremptorily defined either in word or writing, as Mr
B. witnesses, it was that one man's fault, and is not to be imputed to the rest
of us, more then Mr B. most malicious and hateful accusatio^s in this book to
all the Ministers, and people in the Church of Engl. whereof I doubt not but
thowsa^ds are ashamed, and to which they would be more unwilling to subscribe,
then he to the Bishops canons.

I for mine own part only exhort all men in all places, as they look to be
approved at that day when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, that they
deal faithfully in the Lords business, and take heed they neither forbear
through partial praejudice, or fleshly fear to inquire after the truth nor
with hold it in unrighteousness, if they have found it, especially that they
oppose it not, either in hatred or contempt of the persons professing it, or in
flattery of the Prelates and others of their train, whom most directly it
impugneth. And for the rest whose hearts ar upright before the Lord, mine hearty
prayer is that according to their integrity their comforts may be, and that
together with my self they may find mercy with the Lord for all those
ignorances, and infirmityes wherewith the sonns of men ar compassed about in
the days of their flesh.

And for you Mr B. where you take God to witness, and the Lord to judge, that
you do not oppose us of hatred or malice, nor of purpose to vex us, or to
increase our afflictions knowing as you do the terrors of the judgments of
the Lord, I would seriously advise you, considering what you have spoken and
threatened upon some personal provocations, to take heed you be not to bold
with such deep protestations as these are nor please your self too much in
them, because you find them sometimes profitable to serve your turn upon
simple people.

The second point of our uncharitableness spiritual Mr B. makes, Mr B.
a most ungodly desire (as ever was heard of) to have the word utterly
extintinguished amongst them, and Egiptian darkness to come over them, rather
then it should be preached by such as do not favor our course.

And thereupon he inters into a large commendation of preaching the gospel, as
though we either despised or undervalued it: and on the other side into a most
base extenuation of the constitution of the Church and of orderly proceeding in
preaching, as things little or nothing regarded by the Prophets, Apostles, and
other holy men of God.

For this man thus to accuse us as if we desired that the light of Answ.
the gospel might be put out in the land, and that darkness might cover all, is
a most ungodly and impious slander (as ever was heard of) and in truth one
drop of that gall of bitterness which the Christian reader he confesses in the
preface is like to find in his book.

We are glad and do rejoice for every spark of knowledge kindled in the heart
of any person in the land, beseeching him which is both the author and
finisher of all grace, that the same may break out into a perfect flame. But
because we are taught, that the least evil may not be practiced for the
greatest good: Romans 3. 8. nor aly told for God. Job. 13. 9. (who needs not man's
sin for the accomplishment of his righteousness) we advise all men to take heed
how they adventure to tread the maze of their own good meanings without
warrant of Gods word, or to do that which is good in it self without a lawful
calling unto it, pleasing themselves in the uncertain events of things, which
are only in the hands of God: and rather to turn their feet from every evil
way into the steps of righteousness commending by faith the issues, and events
of things unto the Lord, whom alone they concern, and rather to choose neither
to buy nor sell, then to receive the character or mark of the beast, or the
number of his name, Rev. 13. 17. knowing that he which worshippeth the beast
and his image, and receaves his character in his forhead or in his hand, shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God, of the pure wine powered into the cup of
his wrath, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the sight of the
holy Angels, and before the presence of the Lamb. Rev. 4. 9. 10.

And for the concluding of this point, I would only demand of Mr B. whether
those godly ministers whom he brings in page 130 to bear down all before them,
be not of that company which rather choose to be silenced by the Prelates, yea
and so persuade others also, then to submit to their ceremonies, and
subscription. I think he will not deny it, if he be asked the question. And do
these godly Ministers there, or other in Engl. minded as I speak desire that
the word may utterly be extinguished in the land, and that Egyptian darkness may
come over all? Indeed the Prelates so charge them as the cause of all Papisme,
and Atheism in the land; but Mr B. (I know) judges otherwise of them: and so
would he do of us, if the beam of malice did not blind his right ey, when he
looked toward us.

Now for the preaching of the word and gospel of salvation, as Mr B. does but
worthily and according to the excellency of it, magnify and advance the same,
so does he most injuriously, and deceiptfully oppose it unto the holy order
within which the Lord has rainged it, and to the true constitution of the
Church and other the ordinances thereof, with which it consorteth necessarily
by the Lords appointment, and so they make together a most heavenly harmony.
And thus to set the ordinances of Christ at jar amongst themselves, and in
the commendation of one principal to bury the rest as vile, and unnecessary,
is a most effectual delusion, and deep deceit, by which the mystery of
iniquity is much advantaged in the false assemblyes, and the hearts of the
simple fast held in the snares of error, and impiety.

The Bishops and those of their sect do in their sermons and writings extol
prayer. But to what end? That they may depresse preaching, and oppress
preachers, and so establish their service-saying Priests in the Ministry.

Mr. B. here, and so the forward sort commonly will magnify preaching: but as
he here, so they often times with an evil ey to the right gathering, lawful
government, and orderly administration of the holy things of and in the church.
Well, the Lord sees this haulting on both sides and will avenge the quarrel of
his very meanest ordinance, and Math. 5. 19.
least commandment upon all these deceiptful workers. Who is wise that he may
understand these things, and prudent that he may take knowledge of them? for
the ways of Jehovah are righteous, and the just shall walk in them, but the
rebels shall fall in them.

And for the preaching of the gospel would Mr B. but turn his eye a little upon
himself, and his national Church, he might find that every text brought by
him for the advancement of preaching* is as a sworn evide^ce both against
himself, and the Church for which he pleads.

The more needful vision is, for which he quotes in the first place Prove. 29.
18. where vision is not, the people perishes, or is made naked, the more
desperate is the estate of the Church of England wherein the greatest part of
the Parishes by far have dark midnight for vision: the more unlawful and
ungodly is the ministry of that Church, to which preaching is but an accident,
and no way essential or necessary; the more accursed is the Prelacy of the
same Church which for indifferent things and so not necessary (as themselves
acknowledge) blind the eyes and stop the mouths of the best seers, and
paynefullest preachers in all places. And if the order which Christ has left
in his Church be so vile in Mr B. eyes in comparison of his unorderly
preaching, what can he say for his Lords the Bishops which for the orders
devised by themselves and by their forefathers of Rome thrust out of so many
Churches the ordinance of preaching? A man would think Mr B. zeal should find
room enough at home and in his own Church, and not thus pursue beyond the ^^as
a poor company of despised, and dispersed people.

But to the very point which Mr B. drives at. There is not one scripture
alleged by him which iustifyes the preaching of the gospel out of a true
(much less in a false) constitution. They do all and every one of them
necessarily presuppose the same, howsoever he would separate the things which
God has joined together. Take one for example and that such a one, as he makes
a pillar in his building. It is written and so by him alleged, Psa. 147. 19.
20. He showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel:
He has not so dealt with every nation, etc.

Here (says Mr B.) the Lord preferrs his word before a constitution, as a
testimony of his special love. But untruly. For in this very place the Lord
prefers a constitution before his word, statutes, and judgments as the cause
why he gave them. For wherefore did the Lord show his word unto Iaakob, his
statutes and judgments unto Israel, but because of their constitution? that is,
because Israel was the Lords peculiar people separated from all other nations,
and received by the Lord into covenant, as no other nation was. Lev. 26. ^4.
14. Exodus 19. 5. 6. Deuteronomy. 19. 10. 11. 12. etc. with Ro^* 3. 2. and 9. 4. Act.
2. 39. and 3. 23. how profanely soever this man does debase and vilify the true
constitution of the Church which he is like never to enjoy, as Esau did the
by^thright, wherewith the Lord never meant to honor him. Genesis 2^. 32. 33.

And amongst other debasements of the constitution of the Church he affirms
page: 55. that though an orderly proceeding ought to be had, yet that at no hand
for want thereof preaching ought to be left of, and to this end page 53. and 54.
he violently haleth into the same guilt with himself the brethren of the
dispersion Act. 8. 1. 4. 12. whom he charge in preaching the word, not to
have stood vp^n every special point in entering so orderly unto the work.

But as their entrance was most orderly for that being of a true constituted
Church at Jerusalem and dispersed by persequution, they published the gospel in
every place where they came, as any member of the Church may do, (as grace is
ministered, and occasion offered), so is it on the otherside a Babylonish
presumption for any man under any praetence whatsoever, to enterprise the
preaching of the gospel or any other work disorderly. 1 Co. 14. 40.


The Apostle (speaking especially of prophesying) expressly commands, that all
things be done according to order: how then dare any petty Pope, or proctor of
Babylon dispense with or plead for disorder in this or any other ministration
in the Church? Mr B.


The last and highest degree of our uncharitableness he reckons this that we are
sorry and envious that the good things of God do prosper with them, and that
the more religious men be in their way the more are we greived, and to this end
he pretends Mr Barrowes abusing and scoffing at the graces of God, and holy
exercises in such persons. Ans.


As we hold our selves bound to acknowledge all good things in all men and to
honor them accordingly, 1 Pet. 2. 17. So must I here demand of Mr B. as
another has done before me, what those good things are which so prosper; Only
the Prelates prosper in the kingdom who with their ceremonious horns and
canons beat and batter down all that stands in their way. Of their prosperity
against the truth we are sorry, but not envious, being taught not to envy the
works of iniquity, considering what suddayn, and certain desolation shall fall
upon them. Psalm. 37. 9. 10.

And (by the way) where Mr B. takes it for granted, that the reformists are
the most religious in the way of the Church of England it is clean otherwise.
The most absolute Formalists, and most strict vrgers of conformity are the most
religious in the way of the Church of England: And as for the reformists their
zeal (to speak as the truth is, and as shall hereafter more fully be
manifested) is not in, nor for the way of the Church of England but a by path
from it, which the Church of England (considered in the formal constitution of
it) accounts schism, and rebellion: but rather the same way in effect which
we walk, if they were true to their own grounds, and durst practice what they
have professed in their supplications, and admonitions to the Prince, and
Parliament, and other their under hand passages, wherein they do plainly
condemn the Prelacy for Antichristian, the service book as superstitious, the
mixture of all sorts of people as confused, and so of the rest. And this Mr B.
iustifyeth the objections which you would so gladly prevent page 57. made by
your brethren in the faith (for so are the worst of them) the profane and
secure worldlings, and Athiests, that men paynfull and conscionable in their
Ministry and lives, do breed and further (as you speak) Brownistes and
Brownisme. For proof hereof I will here insert a few things written and
published both in former and latter times by such men, as I dare say Mr B.
reckens amongst the painful and conscionable Ministers.

Their words are these.

We have an Antichristian and Popish ordering of Ministers, strange from the
word of God never heard of in the primitive Church but taken out of the Popes
shop to the destruction of Gods kingdom. 2. Adm. to the Parl.

The names and offices of Archbishops, Archdeacons Lordbishops etc. are
together with their government drawn out of the Popes shop Antichristian,
divelish, and contrary to the scriptures. Parsons, Uicars Parish Priests,
Stipendaryes etc. be byrds of the same fether. 2. Admo. to the Parliament.

The callings of Archbishops, Bishops, with all such be ra^^er members and
parts of the whore and strumpet of Rome, then of the pure Uirgin and spouse of
the immaculate Lamb. Mr Chapter Sermon. upon Romans 12.

The calling of Bishops and Archbishops do only belong unto the Kingdom of
Antichrist. Discovery of D. Ban. slanders. page ^0.

Our Diocesan and Provincial Churches using Diocesan and Provincial government
and officers are contrary to Gods word and simply unlawful. Mr Iakob for
reformation: Ass: 1.

There is no true visible Church of Christ but a particular congregation only.
Christian Offer. Prop. 4.

Every true visible Church of Christ or ordinary assembly of the faithful has
by Christ's ordinance power in it self imediately under Christ to elect, to
ordain, deprive, and depose their Ministers and to exequute all other
Ecclesiastical Censures. Ibid: Prop: 5.

The visible Church of Christ wheresoever it be has the power of bynding and
loosing annexed unto it as our savior Christ teaches Math. 18. Discovery of
D. Ban. slanders. Preface.

We must needs say as follows, that this book (viz the Communion book) is an
imperfect book culled and picked out of that Popish dunghill the mass book
full of al abominations. Adm: to Parl. Treat: 2.

Amongst us the holy sacraments are communicated with the Papists, the holy
misteryes of God profaned, the Gentiles enter into the temple of God, the holy
things are indifferently communicated with the clean and unclean, circumcised
and uncircumcised. A plain declaration of ecclesiastical discipline. page 172.

Now let the indifferent reader judge whether these sayings with many more of
the like kind do not most necessarily conclude, yea and naturally beget a
separation from the government, Ministry, worship and communion of the Church
of England: and whether these men in thus writing have not opened the door unto
us, by which themselves enter not.

To the further charge of uncharitableness laid against us, as being Mr B.
glad when they contend amongst themselves never praying for the peace and
welfare of the ministry etc. I do answer, that we rejoice for all peace Answ.
in truth amongst all men but for peace in iniquity, which is a wicked
conspiracy, and fearful judgment of God we rejoice not, we pray not. Let Mr B.
ask the godly Ministers with whose supply he backs his book, whither they
rejoice in his and other men's peaceable subscription and conformity? or whither
they could not rather have wished they had contended against the same? yea let
me ask Mr B. himself whither he rejoice in the peace of the representative
Church of England the Convocation house, and in their unanimous consent in
framing and imposing their canons and constitutions? or whither he would not
rather clap his wings and craw for joy, if the two Archprelates with the rest
of their horned Clergy there, would oppose and cross one another? And let me
ask him yet further for the welfare of which order of Ministry he would have
us pray? or whither he himself pray for the welfare of the Bishops (except it
be sometimes before their faces.) And for us to pray for the inferior
Ministry and not for the prelacy is to dally with God, and to bless the
branch, and not the root.

And in alleging (as you do) Act. 11. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. to prove that holy
men have rejoiced for the people receaving of the gospel and not at their
standing in a constitution, you do injuriously separate things to be conjoined.
For the same persons that received the gospel joined themselves in a
constitution, or constituted Church as appears ver. 26. And it is expressly
said, Act. 2. 41. that they that received the word were added to the Church,
and being baptized they must needs be of a Church for baptism is not without,
but within the Church and an ordinance given unto it.

And how profanely bold soever you (Mr B.) are to blaspheme the tabernacle of
God which he has pitched amongst men, or visible Church framed according to the
pattern given by a greater then Moses, yet is it good for us to consider what
the H. Ghost notes, in the last verse of the forenamed Chap. that the Lord
added to the Church from day to day such as should be saved. Neither can you
possibly produce one example or other proof in the scriptures of one man
teaching the gospel but he was a member of a true Church, nor receiving it but
he joined unto one. And for the man that cast out Devils in Christ's name but
followed him not, Mark. 9. 39. he can no way help you for what purpose soever
you allege him.

For first he was a member of a true constituted Church the the Church of the
Jews, which was yet vndissolved. 2. he had no office but a gift. 3. his gift
and calling to use it, was extraordinary and miraculous.

Now for our love toward you, wherein you blame us as defective, it is the
same in general which we bear toward all men, and more special according to
the special bonds betwixt us and you, and toward many very great both for the
many good things we know to be in them, and under the hope also of their
further progress.

And for our prayers, as it is true that we cannot pray for you as visible
members of Gods Church, for God never gathered Church of the visible and
apparent members of the Devil as the greatest part of yours were and are: so is
it unjustly infinuated against us that we pray no otherwise for you the^ for
Papists Atheists and the like. We pray for the perfecting of Gods work in you,
and that as we think many of you his people in Babylon, so you may come out of
her.

Our next brand of uncharitableness is our accustomary excommunications Mr B.
even for light offenses in some, albeit others obstinate can be let pass. And
to prove this he quotes Mr George Johnson, and Mr White, the Answ.
former an excommunicate himself, whom Mr B. also page 35. of his book calls a
disgraceful libeller; the other an ungodly apostate, whose accusations have
been answered one by one. A fit evidence for such a plea and plaintiff.

But if Mr B. (knowing the fashions of the Church of England) had but once
remembered the saying of the Lord Jesus, Mat. 7. 3. 4. 5. he would never have
accused other Ch: of uncharitable and rash excommunications, which if they be a
mote in the Church of Amsterdam are a beam in the Church of England, wherein
there is more danger of excommunication to them that fear God then to any
other flagitious persons whomsoever.

Indeed no man can challendge Mr B. and his Church of Worxsop for any such
heady and rash excommunications, they are very moderate this way, and can bear
in communion with them any graceles person whomsoever til his dying day, and
then commit full charitably the body of their deceased brother to the grave,
with a devout prayer for his joyful resurrection: so charitable are they both
to the living and the dead.

But the thing which most grieves Mr B, and at which he has greatest
indignation Page 62. is, that we will not hear his sermons though he preach
nothing but the true word of God. And so he desires to hear of us, where the
hearing of the true word of God only preached is sin and for bidden by
Christ, or the Prophets or Apostles. For answer hereof I would know first
whether Mr B. speaking here and in many other places of the true word of God do
mean, that God has a true word and a false word or rather bewray not an
accusing conscience, that they in England have not the word truly taught, that
is in a true office of Ministry?

Now for the demand (referring the reader for more full satisfaction, to that
which has been published at large by others) I do answer, that as it was
unlawful to Number. ^6 2 Chapter 26. 1 King. 12.
communicate with Corah or with Vzziah though they burnt true incense, or with
Ieroboams Priests though they offered true sacrifices, so is it unlawful to
communicate with a devised ministry, what truth soever is taught in it.

Secondly the Lord has promised no blessing to his word but in his own
ordinance, though by his superaboundant mercy he often times vouchsafe that which
no man can chalendg by any ordinary promise.

Thirdly Tim. 5. ^2.
no man may partake in other men's sins, but every Ministry either devised or
usurped is the sin of him which exercises it. Rev. 18. 4.
And as no good subject would assist or communicate with any person in the
administration of civil justice to the Kings subjects (no not though h^
administered the same never so equally and indifferrently) except the same
person had commission from the King so to do: so neither ought the subjects of
the kingdom of Christ to partake with any person whomsoever in the
dispensation of any spiritual thing (though in it self never so holy) without
sufficient warrant and commission from the most absolute and sovereigne King of
his Church Christ Jesus.

And where Mr B. speaks of hearing the true word of God only preached, he
intimates therein, that if we would hear him preach it would satisfy him well,
and so teaches us with himself and others to make a schism in the Church in
using one ordinance and not another.

It is all one whether a man communicate with the Minister in his pulpit or
with the Chauncelor in his consistory, both of them minister by the same power
of the Bishop. The Chauncelor may judge justly, and who knows whither or no
the Minister will teach truly? And if he do not, but speak the vision of his
own heart, what remedy has the Church or what can they that hear him do? May
they ^ Tim. 5. 20.
rebuke him openly according to his sin, and so bring him to repentance? or
must they not bear his errors yea his heresies also during the pleasure of the
Bishops, even their Lord, and his?

And would you Mr B. be content your people should hear a mass Priest or
Jesuit, though he professed as loud as you do, that he would teach the true
word of God? And think not scorn of the match, for you have the self same
office with a mass Priest though refyned. If he be ordained by a Bishop
(though it be the Bishop of Rome) he may minister in any Church of England by
virtue of that ordination. And besides mass Priests preach some and those the
main truths, and the Ministers in England neither do nor da^e preach all, no
nor some which (it may be) the others do.

Is it not better then for the servants of the L. Jesus to exercise and aedify
themselves according to the model of grace received, though in weaker measure,
then to be so simple as to come to your feasts, though you cry never so loud
unto them, thinking that because your stolen waters are sweet, and your hidden
bread pleasant, that they have no power to pass by, but must needs become your
guests?

Lastly Mr B. even to make up the measure of his malice, as he formerly
reproached us by the oppositio^s, and dissentio^s which he has heard of
amongst us, so does he here by the unity and love which himself has seen in
us, comparing it page 64. to the love of Familists, and Papists, and other
wretched and graceles companions. So that belike whither we love or hate,
whither we agree or disagree, this man will be sure to find matter of reproach
unto us, and of stumbling to himself, as the Jews did both from John's
austerity, and from Christ's more sociable course of life, Math. 11. 18. 19. Mr
B.


Our fourth sin is abusing the word, of which all are guilty by misalledging
and wresting places of Scripture etc, and this Mr B. proves because some have
accused some of the principal of us with it.

If accusation be conviction Mr B. needs not speak of some or any Answ.
other, he himself has most mightily co^vinced us, for he has most hatefully
accused us of any man a live.

The fifth sin (supposed) is our wilful persisting in our schism, lightly
regarding Mr B.
reverend men's labors and sinfully despising weaker means, etc.

It is well known that Mr B. how earnestly soever he pleads Answ.
with us for the contrary, does himself as much neglect (save for his own
purposes) the judgment of other men, as any other: neither is there one
minister in the land (I am verily persuaded) with who^ he suiteth, but a right
Ismael is he less or more, having his hand against every man and every man's
against him.

Well I deny our separation to be schism, (as we take the word) much less do
we persist wilfully in it. And for the judgment of other men, as we despise not
the meanest, so neither do we pin our faith upon the sleeves of the most
learned.

The other exceptions of shifting and evading the scriptures, and of perverseness
of spirit in conference, I pretermit as being both frivolous and despitefull,
only something must be answered before we pass this point, to the charge laid
upon us, Page 98. touching, corruptions in the Churches Apostolical, and
reformed. And first, object to them Mr B.
(says he) the corruptions of the Churches Apostolical, and their answer is
either that we mayntayn our corruptions by the sins of other Churches, or else
they were in a true constitution.

And how can you with modesty reject this answer? you say we misconstrue Answ.
your intendement, which is that corruption make not a false Church. We grant
it except they be essential: but this is that we say that what Church soever
alleges the corruptions of other Churches with a purpose to continue in the
like themselves (which is your estate) that Church maintaynes her corruptions
by the sins of other Churches. And for the second point I do affirm that
merely by virtue of a constitution there may be a true Church of God though
abounding (for the present) in sin and iniquity, and yet another assembly not
rightly constituted or gathered into covenant with God, no true Church though
less impieties be to be found in it.

The Prophet Jeremy complains L^m. 4. 6.
that the iniquity of the daughter of his people (namely Jerusalem) was become
greater then the sin of Sodom, and the Prophet Ezeki^l affirms that Ezekiel 16.
46. 47. 51. 52.
Jerusalem was more corrupt by half then Sodom and Samaria. And yet was
Jerusalem the true Church of God, which neither Samaria nor Sodom were, no nor
yet any other place in the world, where not half the wickedness was wrought
that was to be found in the better of them. This point I will further examplify
by a symilitude. A woman free and separated from all other men and joined in
civil covenant to a man, is his wife, yea though she prove very stubborn and
disobedient, yea and dishonest also, till the bill of divorcement be given her;
but an other woman the wife of an other man, or not contracted to that man, is
not his wife, nor can be so reputed, though she be never so obedient and buxome
unto him: so the Church of England til it be separated and free from the world
and prince of the world that rei^^e^h in it, and so from Antichrist his Eldest
son in his hye^archy priesthood and other ordinances, and be taken into
covenant with the Lord cannot possibly be the true Ch: of God or wife of
Christ: no not though the good things in it were many more then they are. Which
we do not alledg, as is craftily insinuated against us, to justify any man's
continuance in a Church full of wickedness, but to prove that the constitution
of the Church that is the collection and combination of Saints as matter in and
into covenant with God as the form, is that which gives true being unto a
Church and nothing else, how vily soever men judge or speak of it.

And for corruptions in the Apostolical Churches it is true the Apostles
mentioned them, but always with utter dislike, severe reproof, and straight
charge of reforming them. Romans 16. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 1. 6. 7. 11 -- 13. 1 These. 5.
14. 2 These. 3. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 5. Rev. 2. 14 -- 16. 20.

But how do these things concern you? Though Paul, and all the Apostles of
Christ with him, yea though Christ himself from heaven should admonish any of
your Churches to put away from among themselves any person though never so
haeretical or flagitious, you could not do it, neither could you reform any
abomination otherwhere, though the same be as conspicuous as the 2 Chronicles. 26.
20.
leprosy of Vzziah which brake forth in his forehead. And this want of the
power of the Lord Jesus for reformation, which an other man would think were an
intolerable slavery Mr B. page 68. turns to good advantage, and thinks himself
and his Church half excused of all the evils which are amongst them, because
they want power to use the remedy: thus pleading for a priveledg the mark of
the beast, from which the servants of God ought to abhor, herin being passing
witty above other men in making an advantage of that evil, which the most have
enough to do to excuse.

And for true Churches not using aright the power they have for reformation,
they are like true bodies which through some obstructions, or stoppings for a
time cannot void things noxious, and hurtful till there be a remedy: but the
Church without this power is as a monstrous body wanting the faculties and
instruments of evacuation and expulsion of excrements, or other noy some
things* and therefore is never appointed of God to live, but devoted to death
and destruction?

Of the reformed Churches and our carriage toward them I have spoken else where,
and for your Turkish Argument in the margent wherein you incense the Magistrate
against us, as otherwise incorrigible, it well becomes the rest of your book
joining violence to slander. But are you your self wholly conformable Mr B? If
not, why do you incense the magistrate against us being your self obnoxious to
his displeasure? Or do you not hope to escape persecution your self by
persecuting us? This is too ordinary a practice amongst you. But the Lord sees
your haulting, and rewards you in your bosoms, as you have served us. And
when you and others more forward then you do consider and feel in what hatred
you are with the King and state, me thinks your hearts should smite you, as the
hearts of Joseph's brethren did them in their trouble for their barbarous
cruelty toward him. Genesis 42.

Our sixth sin by retayl Mr B. makes our railing and scoffing, and in Mr B.
particular H. Barrowes blasphemies, etc. whose repentance he would have us
publish to the world

If I should answerably require of you the publication of the Answ.
repentance of your Clergy not only for the cruel speakings, but even for the
wicked deeds, which ungodly they have committed against Christ in his
servants, and ordinances, it were an hard tax put upon you. Yea to spare you
for other men, do you but publish your own repentance for the same ^innes
(wherein you are deeply set) and without doubt your godly example shall provoke
many to the like.

And for Mr Barrow, as I say with Mr Ainsworth, that I will not justify all the
words of an other man no^ yet mine own, so say I also with Mr Smyth, that
because I know not by what particular motion of the spirit he was guided to
write in those phr^ses, I dare not censure him as you do: especially
considering with what fyery zeal the Lord has furnished such his servants at
all times, as he has stirred up for special reformation. Let the example of
Luther alone suffice, whom into what terms his zeal carried, his writings
testify. And yet both in him, and in Mr Barrow there might be with true
spiritual zeal ^leshly indignation mingled.

And though this in general might be sufficient, yet for the stopping of your
mouth Mr B. and for the satisfying of others, I will descend a little to the
very particulars, which you have c^lled out against Mr Barrow as most odious.

First then you fault him that he calls your Bishops Antichristian proud
Prelates, and the tail of the beast, etc.

And what are they but Antichristian, if their office be against Christ, and
his ordinances in the visible Church? And what else do all the reformed Churches
abroad and reformists at home judge, speak, and write of them? And what thought
you Mr B. otherwise of them, when even since you dealt against this cause of
separation, you affirmed before many witnesses that there was not a place in
the new testament against Antichrist, but you could apply it against the^?

And because you are come to this height of boldness and depth of dissembling, I
will here insert brei^ly certain reasons which I received from your self in
writing to prove the Bishops Antichristian, and that word for word as I have
reserved them by me to this day.

1. The fruits of the Hierarchy are contrary to Christ. 2. It forbids many good
means of religion as prophesying etc. Mr B.
3. It keeps in and nourishes offenders against paynfull laborers. 4. It
excommunicates the godly, yea for a word, and that ips^ facto. 5. It is lordly
and tyr^^mous contrary to 1 Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3. Luke ^2. 25. 6. It rules by Popish
laws and by the power of man which ar^ carnal weapons. 7. It remits the
offenders for many, though ^e repent not. 8. It establishes an universal
Bishop as well as a Diosesan, or Provincial Bishop. And as I remember at the
same time you brought forth D. Downame in his first book proving the Pope
Antichrist, chapter 4. affirming, that the Hierarch in the Romish Church was
Antichristian, whereof I am sure the the Bishops office is a part.
These reasons I thought good to set down not because they are all, or some of
them of the best, that can be brought, but because they are yours, which
notwithstanding I am persuaded neither you nor any other can satisfy.

And if Mr B. himself thus write and speak in private, why blames he us for
our public testimony?

Now if the Bishops be Antichristian and so the spirit of Divils Rev. 16. 14.
why might not Mr Barrow affirm their Ministry and ministration to be of and by
the Divill? and what are they but either the tail, or some other lim of the
beast?

And for their excommunications by name, it is evident by this they are not of
God, for that the most religious in the kingdom make least account of them.

For their Luciferian pride whereof Mr Barrow accuses them it is apparent they
burden the earth, and threaten the heavens with it* for their hateful Symony
both in giving, and receiving, they are so notorious, as the best service Mr B.
can do them in this case is, to turn men's thoughts from those evils which every
ey sees, and every heart abhorrs.

Towching the Ghost the Bishop gives in his blasphomous imitation of Christ,
Ioh. 20. 22. (except contrary to the rule in nature, nihil d^^ quod non habet,
he can give that he has not) it is not very likely he should give the Holy
Ghost* why then might not Mr Barrow call it an unholy Ghost.

And for the Bible in the Bishops hands which he gives his Priests in
ordination, Mr Barrow calls it the libell not in contempt of the book, but in
reproof of the ceremony, and that justly since the Lord never appointed the
scriptures for any such use, nor any such ceremony in the ordination of his
Ministers. Christ, and the Apostles would have such Ministers ordained as have
the Bibles in their hearts: the Bishops of England to supply this want give it
into the hands of their Priests which they think sufficient, though in truth
the most of them are more used to handle a pair of cards upon an alebench,
then the holy bible.

Your Patrons Mr Barrow calls great Baals, and Lord Patrons; and justly in
respect of that Lordly power they use in obtruding their Clerks upon the Parish
assemblies: your ministers yea all and every one of them Priests, which is
their proper name given them both in your book of ordination, and common
prayer: your Deacons half-preists according to the nature of their office,
betwixt which and the Deacons office in the new testament, Act. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4.
there is no consimilitude.

For the other more harsh terms wherewith he enterteynes such persons and
things in the Church as carry with them most appearance of holiness, they are to
be interpreted according to his meaning, and a distinction used by Mr B. in
page 79.
another place is here to be applied. Which is that Mr Barrow speaks not of
these persons, and things simply, but in a respect, and so, and so considered,
and so no one term given by Mr Barrow to my knowledge, but may (at the least)
be tolerated.

The Ministers (as they receive the wages of unrighteousness, o^ counsayl to
spiritual fornication) are B^l^^mites; in respect of their office vowed to
destruction, Cananites; as they plead for confusion Babylonish divines: as they
endeavor to stay Gods people in Egypt* spiritually so called) Egyptian
inchaunters: as they are members of the Hierarchy (...) of the Devil, by virtue
whereof he bear great sway, as the Preface to the Discov. of D. Ban. slanders.
reformists amongst you have expressly testified.

And for your very divine exercise^ of prayer, preaching* sacr^^^t^, and
su^ging of psal^s howsoever they be good and holy in themselves, or at leas^
have much good in them, yet in respect of the unhallowed communion, forg^d
minist^ry, and superstitious order wherein these, and all other things with you
are ministered and exercised, they are liable to the heaviest censure Mr Barrow
has put upon them.

And for the most forward preachers in the kingdom, considering their unsound
and broken courses in denying, that in deed and practice, which in w^rd and
writing* they prof^sse to be the reveal^d will o^ God, and inviolable testament
of Christ, binding his Church for ever, yea and practicing the contrary in the
face of the s^nne, commi^t^^g two evils, forsaking the Lord the fountain of
l^ving water to dig themselves broken pit^s which will hold no water, yea not
only refusing themselves to enter into the kingdom of God the Church, but
also hindering them that would, and persecuting them that do, and lastly
considering them in their unconscionable defense for their own standings and
practices, as that only the godly in the parish are of the Church with them:
that they hold and use their ministry by the acceptance of the people, and
not by the Bishops; that they obey the Bishops in their citations, suspensions,
excommunications and absolutions, a^ they are civil magistrates, and ^he like,
they do deserve a sharper medicine, then happily they are willing to endure.

Yea the very personal graces of knowledge, zeal, p^^ience and the like
manifested in many both ministers, and people, are most unjustly perverted, and
misused to the obduration and hardening both of the persons themselves, and
others in most deceivable ways, wherein the deepest mystery of iniquity, and
most effectual delusion of Satan that can be, works, as is by Mr Barrow and
others clearly discovered.

But that Mr Barrow should say that the preaching of Gods word, and ^^e spirits
effectual working should make men the children of hell and two fold ^orse then
before is a great slander, and could not possibly enter into his or any other
godly man's heart.

And so I leave these and the like more vnsavoury-seeming speeches of M^ Barrow
to the wise and Christian readers charitable interpretation.

The last rank of Mr B. reasons follows which respect the matter* of our
sep^^^tion (by him called schism) which how material they are shall appear
in their place.

Our first error according to his reckoning is. Mr B.


They hold that the constitution of our Church is a fals^ constitution.

And let us see how strongly your answer forces us from this Answ.
our hold.

1. Arg. They cannot prove this simply by any plain doctrine of scripture, Mr
B.
and that which they would prove is but only respectively, and so may any
thing, and their Church also be condemned. 2. Arg. It is against the evidence
of the scriptures which makes the word, external profession, and sacraments
the visible constitution, etc.
That you then affirm in the first place is, that we cannot prove this Answer.
simply by any plain doctrine, wherein you do half confess that we do it by
just consequence, though not by plain doctrine, and wholly, that respectively,
and so and so considered (as you speak) your co^stitution is false. And thus
(you say) any thing may be condemned.

But first it is not true that any thing may be condemned after this sort. The
constitution of the Ch: Apostolic could in no consideration be condemned,
neither could ours (to our knowledge) being according to that pattern, how
weakly soever we walk in it.

Secondly, the constitution even of Rome (as now it stands) is not simply
false, but only in this and that respect. So far as it separates fro
heathenish Idolatry, and Idolaters unto the true God, and reteynes any truths
of God and remaynders of Christ's testament, so far it is not false, or feyned,
and yet is her present constitution false and she incapable of the Lords
covenant.

To come nearer the matter. The constitution of the Church is the orderly
collection and conjunction of the sayncts into and in the covenant of the new
Testament: (...) the saints are the matter, the covenant the form, from which
two concurring, the Church arises, and is by them constituted. Now for the
word, it is an outward instrument preparing, and preserving the matter, but no
more the constitution of the Church then the ax is the co^stitution or frame of
the house: and for external profession it manifests the fitnes of the matter
for the form, and by it the saints enter covenant? which covenant also the
sacraments confirm as s^ales annexed to that end.

And where Mr B. affirms we cannot prove their Church co^stition false by any
plain doctrine of scripture, we will consider the scriptures he himself
alleges, and the doctrine of them which as so many touchstones do discover
the counterfeyt constitution of the same.

The word (says he) is the constitution of the Church: His meaning is, or
should be at the least, that the word is the ordinary outward means for the
collecting, and constituting of the Church of God* I grant it. But how
considered? Not the word in men's bibles alone* for then all the Haeretiques in
the world are true Ch: nor yet the word preached simply, for Act: 17. ^2.
23.-32.
Paul preached the word to the scoffing Athenians, and Act. 19. ^. 9.
to the blasphemous Jews, yet I think he will not say that either the one or
the other were Churches truly constituted. How then? the word published
understood, believed, and obeyed outwardly at the least, as the spiritual
sword, or ax, hewing the stones in the rock, and trees in the forest, and
preparing them to be the Lords spiritual house. And thus much "1 Pet. 2. ^
the very places produced by Mr B: (like Golyahs sword drawn out to cut off his
own sword) do evidently declare.

Math. 28. 19. (which is the first place), shows that such as by preaching of
the word were made disciples, for so much (...).
the word imports, were to be gathered into the Church and baptized. Mar. 16.
15. shows the same, especially if you add verse. 16. inferring that men by
preaching must believe, and so believe, as they have the promise of salvation,
which I note the rather to show the vanity of that verbal profession in a
profane conversation, which else where Mr B. makes so much of.

The places 2 Cor. 5. 19. and 11. 2. cited by you do prove that the wor^ of
reconciliation and ministry of the gospel believed and obeyed to the
forgivenes of sins and to the preparation and sanctification of the Church to
Christ is the means of gathering and building up the same, to which that of
Job. 33. 23. 24. consorteth.

The two places Act. 2. 14. 37. 38. 41. and 16. ^2. 32. 34. are of the same
(...) with the former and do prov^ that sundry of the Jews at Jerusalem by
Peter's preaching and that the ^aylours houshol^ at Philippi by Paul's preaching
were brought to repentance, and faith in Christ, and so added to the Church.

But what will be the conclusion of all these premises?

The Proposition is this. The true Apostolic Churches having a true
constitution were gathered and constituted of such men and women as by the
preaching of the gospel were made disciples, had faith and repentance wrought
in them to the obteyning of the forgivenes of sins, and promise of life
eternal and to sanctification and obedience.

Now though my logic be not much better then yours Mr B. yet since my cause
is, I will help you with an assumption or 2. Proposition.

But the Church of England was not so gathered after Popery, but on the
contrary without preaching of the gospel, and of men and women for the most
part ignorant, faythles mispenitent disobedient, to who^ no promise of the
forgivenes of sins, and life eternal appert^ynes: whereupon the co^clusio^
necessarily follows, that the constitution of the Church of England is not
true or Apostolic, but false counterfeyt and apostaticall.

Secondly the scriptures (says Mr B.) make external profession the visible
constitution of the Church. His meaning must be, that profession of faith is
required of such persons of years before they be admitted into the visible
Church. Which truth the place cited by him Act. 8. 12. 37. 38. does justify, to
which one place many other may be added to the same purpose, as Act. 10. 46.
and and 16. ^4, and 18. 8.

But what is the Church of Worxsop better for this? what profession of faith
did the particular members make, when at the first of an Antichristian
Synagogue (as in Popery it was), it became or was constituted a true Christian
Church? was not the house built at the first as it is at this day repaired? Let
a man but hire a house within the precincts of your parish, and he is a joined
member in your Ch: ipso facto, though he cannot manifest the least kernel of
faith, or repentance, yea though he profess himself an atheist, horetick,
^orcerer, blasphemer (or that which is worse if worse can be). All you do is to
use the wooden dagger Mr Barrow tells you of, to suspend him from the Lords
supper, and it may be to get him excommunicated by the official, (if he have
neither friends nor money.) And this very excommunication shows him to have
been a member of you, for only a brother is to be excommunicated, Math. 18.
15. 16. 17 and only he that was within, may be cast out, 1 Cor. 5. 12. 13.

And here, as before I will help to form your argument.

The members of the Apostolic Church which were truly constituted were
admitted by their personal profession of faith, and confession of sin, Math.
3. 6. Act. 8. 37. 38. and 10. 46. and 16. 14. and 1^. ^. and 19. 18.

But the members of the Engl. assemblies neither were nor are so admitted, but
according to the parish perambulation whatsoever impiety they profess.

Therefore their constitution is proved false by the evidence brought to
justify it.

Lastly for the sacraments, as they are not the constitution of the Church, but
do necessarily presuppose a Church constituted unto which they are committed as
Act. 7. 38. Romans 9. 4.
the oracles and ordinances of God unto Israel, so is not the Church of England
the Israel of God, the seed of Abraham, a peculiar people unto the Lord, but a
mingled seed, as Ezra, 9. 1. 2. incapable of the sacraments the seals of the
covenant of grace. And the places Mr B. brings forth are so far from justifying
the constitution of the Church of England by the sacraments, as they do most
notably evince the profanation of the sacraments by the Church.

The two places are Mat. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 10. 16. In the former the Lord Jesus
sends his Apostles first to teach, or make men disciples, and then to baptize
them (including the children in the parents according to the covenant made with
Abraham into which the gentiles were in their time to be gathered. Romans 11. 17.
Ephe. 2. 1, 2. 13. 14. and 3. 6.) But on the contrary the Lord Bishops in Engl.
having found a readier way send out their parrish priests to baptize all before
them that are borne in their parishes, whether their parents be taught or
untaught, the disciples of Christ or of antichrist, and the Divil, not passing
by the children of recusant Papists and others refusing all communion with
them, whose children they use to baptize by force, and against the will of
their Parents, as I could prove (if need were) by sundry instances.

And is not here an orderly constitution, and a Church truly gathered by the
sacrament of baptism?

Now 1 Cor. 10. 16. the Apostle teaches that the bread and wine in the supper
are the communion of the body and blood of Christ, that is effectual pledges
of our conjunction, and incorporation with Christ, and one with another: and in
the 17. verse. that all which eat of one bread, or one loaf, are one mystical
body. This place alone if Mr B. and his fellow ministers would seriously
conconsider and set themselves faithfully to observe they would rather offer
their own bodies to be torn in pieces by wild beasts, then the holy mysteries
of Christ's body to be profaned, as they are.

And here as formerly I will help the Arguments raised from the scriptures
produced by Mr B. and some other of the same kind into form thus.

The sacrament of baptism is to be administered by Christ's appointment, and the
Apostles example only to such as are (viz externally and so far as men can
judge) taught and made disciples, Mat. 28. 19. do receive the word gladly, Act.
2. 41. believe and so profess Chapter 8. 12. 13. 37. have received the holy Ghost
Chapter 10. 47. and to their seed. Act. 2. 39. 1 Cor. 7. 14.

But baptism in Engl. is ministered by a far larger commission then Christ's:
though there be in the parents neither appearance of faith nor holiness, if in
stead of them they can procure godfathers and godmothers to carry the children
to the font (yea will they nil they) the parrish priest has commission to make
them Christian souls every mothers child of them, borne within his parrish
precincts. And therefore the baptism in Engl. is not Christ's baptism in the
administration of it.

For the Lords supper the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. 16. that the bread and wine
sanctified to that purpose is the communion, that is, an effectual symbol or
pledge of that communion which the receivers have with Christ. Whereupon I do
turn the point of this scripture into the bowels of the Church of Engl. thus.

That which ioynes such men in communion with Christ as by his express word he
excludes from all communion with him, that is so far from being the true
constitution of the Church as it shows both an unholy confusion in the Church
and a violent profanation of the ordinance by it.

But the supper as it is ministered in the Parish-assemblies, (as they were at
the first, and still are clapped together) ioynes them with Christ with whom he
expressly disclaymes all communion and fellowship as their practice compared
with these scriptures does make manifest to all men. 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. 1 Ioh.
1. 6. Ergo.

So that baptism and the Lords supper are amongst you Mr B. and in your hands
and handling, but as the holy vessels of the temple in Babylon and there
togeither with the Lords people deteyned by frawd and violence.

Our 2. supposed error is thus laid down. Mr B.


They hold our constitution a real Idol, and so us Idolaters.

If the constitution of your Church be false and forged, (like Answ.
1 King. 12. 33.
the month which Jeroboam forged in his own heart) as has been formerly
proved in part, and shall be more fully in the traversing of the 8. error, then
it is an Idol, if an Idol, a real Idol, for it is not merely mental, or
notionall, but that which has being and existence without the mind or
understanding.

And where Mr B. affirms this to be contrary to the course of holy scriptures
never taking Idol in this sense, because neither he nor Marlorat finds the word
Idol so used, he must know it is as impossible for either him, or Marl. or any
other man to enumerate or reckon up all the Idols whereof the scriptures speak,
though not in express terms yet by just consequence and proportion) as to
number all the creatures in heaven and in earth, yea all the works of men's
hands, yea all the thoughts of their hearts, for all these may and do in some
abuse become Idols.

And that we may better discern whether there be a like truth and boldness in
this assertion that the scriptures never take idol in this sense, let us
consider and compare together a few places.

The Lord commanded Moses, Exodus 25. and 26. and 27. to make the tabernacle
and sanctuary of the Lord for the place of his dwelling and worship, and to
this end did appoint both the matter* and form of the whole work even to the
least pin: and if Moses had framed it, either of other matter, or of the same
matter after an other fashion, had not this forgery and devise for the worship
of God been a real, sensible, and palpable Idol, a sin against the second
Commandment which forbids nothing but Idolatry? It cannot be denied. Hence it
follows that the constitution or frame of the tabernacle or temple of the new
testament, which is the visible Church 2 Cor. 6. 16. if it be other either in
matter or form (as yours is in both) is a real and substantial Idol.
Secondly Antichristianism is Idolatry, and is in that respect called Rev. 118.
and 14. 8.
Babylon, Sodom, and Egypt spiritually, so Antichristians are said Chapter 14. 9.
to worship the beast: now a devised constitution, frame and fabric of the
Church is a part of antichristianism, and of the apostasy of Antichrist and
therefore a real Idol: and as Mr Smyth truly affirms a greater Idol then
either the Antichristian ministry or worship. As Mat. 23. 17. 1^.
the temple which sanctifyeth the gold is greater then the gould, and the altar
which sanctifyeth the offering greater then the offering, so the temple of the
new testament, the Church or people of God by whose faith all the ordinances of
the Church are sanctified, is greater then the ministry, worship or any other
ordinance: and so on the contrary being Idolatrous, a greater Idol then they.
And lastly the Church being the end of the ordinances, Mar. 2. 27. 28. is more
excellent then they being true, and being false a more detestable Idol then
any of them.

Lastly neither your bolstring out of a false constitution as a new sin shall
excuse you for not submitting unto a true, nor your profane scoffing at a true
constitution as at the Diana of the Ephesians discourage us from rejoicing in
our portion.

It is with you in this case as it was sometimes with Rechum and Shimshay who
making a show as though they would have built the temple Zerubbabel (but not
being the men to whom this work appertayned) labored afterward to hinder and
discourage him, and the Jews with him whom it did concern. Ezra. 4. 1, 2, 3.
8. 9.

Once you know Mr B. you did separate from the rest an hundred voluntary
professors into covenant with the Lord, sealed up with the Lords supper, to
forsake all known sin, to hear no wicked or dumb Ministers, and the like,
which covenant long since you have dissolved, not shaming to affirm you did it
only in policy to keep your people from Mr Smyth. Well Mr B. be not deceived
God is not mocked, neither will he hold them guiltless that so take his name in
vayn, but as you have sown so shall you reap.

To conclude, you would have no man blame you for your contumelyes against the
Isa. 5. 7.
planting of the Lords vineyard, the 1 Timothy 3. 15.
building of Gods house, the Ephesians. 2. 23
composition of Christ's body, the constitution of his Church. And wherefore?
because Mr Robinson held as much before into separation. And if it were so,
should mine iniquities excuse yours? But it is most untrue you affirm. There
never entered into my heart a thought, nor passed a word out of my mouth so
contumelious against the true and orderly constitution of Christ's Church:
though I have (and that worthily) disliked, (as I still do) that hard and rash
censure passed by some upon the persons of such as of who^ the Lord by the
evide^t work of his spirit gives a better testimony.

And for the point in hand, I am persuaded and so profess before all men that
I see not by the revealed will of God in his word how to judge otherwise of any
ordinance of the Church, or exercise of communion out of a true constituted
Church then of the sacrifices out of the tabernacle or temple, within whose
circle they were concluded by the word of God.

The third error is thus set down.

That such as are not of a particular constituted Church (to wit such a one Mr
B.
as theyrs is) are no subjects of Christ's kingdom.

And since our Church is a particular congregation separated Answ.
from Antichristianism, into covenant with God by voluntary submissio^ unto the
gospel, we do avow it for truth that such ^^ are not of a particular etc.

For since the visible Church is the visible or external Math. 21 43. Ioh. 10
16.
kingdom of Christ which he as mediator collecteth, protecteth, and
administreth, he that is not a member of the visible Church is not in this
regard a subject of Christ's kingdom. Neither are your exceptions 1 Cor. 15. 24*
against this doctrine of any force.

The scripture (you say in the first place) never sets forth any of Gods people
by this mark. Yes that it does and that often times without any other mark.

How often does Moses, and the other Prophets with him entreat the Lord to spare
Israel when they sinned, for their constitution, that is for the covenant of
his mercy into which he had admitted them with their forefathers Abraham,
Isaak, and Iaakob?

The Lord protests Is. 1. that Israel did rebel against him, that they did
not understand, but were a most sinfid nation, yea as Sodom and Gomorrah, and
yet he calls them children and his people. v. 1. 2. 3. 4. 10. yea passing Sodom
in iniquity, and yet the daughter of his people, and daughter Zion, Lam. 4. 6.
22. And what do these and infinite other the like places but conclude that
where there was little or nothing else to be seen, the Lord marked out his
people by this, that he had Deuteronomy. 29. 12. 13.
established them a people unto himself by covenant which though they for their
part had broken by their iniquities, yet was for the present on his part
vndissolved?

And where it is granted by Mr B. that the godly ought to ioyn with the
visible Church if possibly they can, why does he blame us which intend no
further? If men truly desire it but cannot possibly accomplish it, the Lord in
this as in other cases, accepts the will for the deed.

And so I answer your 3. Exception in order touching the martyrs in Queen
Maryes days and other godly persons there named, that some of them were
members of the true visible Church actually, others actually separated from the
false Church, and in will (which God accepts) joins with the true Church,
and others walking faithfully according to their knowledge whether living or
dead, are and were Gods people, though in Babylon.

Your second exception is certain scriptures to which (you say) this doctrine
is contrary. The first is Gal. 3. 7. 9. And how to this?

They that are of the faith of Abraham separate themselves by faith from the
world into covenant with the Lord, as Abraham did Genesis 12. 1. 2. 3. Heb. 11. ^.

To the 2. place which is 1 Ioh. 3. 14. I do answer that John speaks of such as
were of the true visible Church; neither can any other, according to the true
visibility and manifestation of the love which the Lord requires, love his
brother, which is not of a true visible Church.

He that does not admonish his brother (if he offend) after that order, and in
those degrees, which the word prescribes, does not love his brother. Lev. 19.
17.

But only he that is of a true visible Church and that furnished with the
power of Christ, the keys of the kingdom for the censures, can admonish his
brother in that order and those degrees which the word prescribes, Mat. 18.
15. 16. 17. And so this scripture Mr B. overthrowes both your opinion, and
standing.

The third scripture is 1 Cor. 1. 1.

Paul wrytes there only to visible Churches, to the Church of Corinth
primarily and so by proportion to all other visible Churches in the world, for
to them alone the censures, sacraments, prophesying, and other matters there
handled, do appertain. 1 Cor. 5. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 11. 20. and 14. 4. 5.

The brother spoken of in the fourth and last place which is 2 Th. 3. 15. was a
member of the visible Church and subject of Christ's kingdom, though walking
inordinately in his calling as appears, v. 11. and therefore to be
discountinanced and made ashamed by the Church that he might the more
faithfully apply himself to his business.

These scriptures then do none of them wash this mark, from of Gods people, but
some of them, if not all, print it far more deeply upon them.

Lastly you ask whither Christ's kingdom be not spiritual, and invisible Mr B.
also? Job: 18. 33. and 10. 16. Answ.


No man will deny it (though the places you allege do not so necessary prove
it). But as Christ's kingdom is spiritual and invisible also, so is it
spiritual and visible also. The 1 Cor. 2. 15.
man which has received the spirit, is spiritual, and not the soul only. So
external things may be spiritual and are in their relato^ and use and you
err, if you think otherwise. The Romans 1. 11. and 15. 27. 1 Cor. 10 3. 4.
word, sacraments, and other ordinances of the Church are spiritual, yea all
the Romans 12. 1* Heb. 13. 15. 26. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
sacrifices, of the faithful are spiritual, and more specially, as the Lord
Jesus is the Priest both of the soul and body and 1 Cor. 6. 20*
has paid a price for both, so is he also the King both of soul and body and
swayes the scepter of his kingdom not only internally by his spirit in the
soul, but externally, and visibly also by this word in the outward man,
guyding the same by his lawful officers depu^ed there unto.

But what is the cause why Mr B. should move this question?

Is it not for that himself and his Church not having Christ to rule over them
by his laws but other kings and Lords by their canons, he would insinuate that
Christ exercises none external regiment over his Church, nor is the King over
the bodies of his subjects at all, thus rather laboring to abolish that part
of Christ's Kingdom then to submit to it. But as our principal care at all
times must be to have the throne of our L. Jesus erected in our hearts, that he
may reign there, so, that we may give him his own entyre, and that which he
has so dearly bought, we must rank our bodies also under the regiment he has
established for the well ordering and preservation of his kingdom forever both
in soul and body, and not like Nichodemites, or Familists presume to submit
the outward man we care not to whom, or what.

Our fourth supposed error is. Mr B.


That all not in their way are without, and they do apply against us 1 Cor. 5.
12. Ephe. 2 12.

And since the way is one as Christ is one, and we assured, that our way is
that way of Christ, we doubt not to affirm that all not Answ.
in our way are without in the present respect; provided always that we do
judge that other Churches may be and are in our way, and we in theirs, and both
they and we in Christ's, though there be betwixt them and us sundry differences
both in judgment and practice. And that we do fitly apply against you the
scriptures above named, I do thus manifest.

The Apostle 1 Cor. 5. reproves the Church for tolerating amongst them the
incestuous person uncensured, charging them to use the power of the Lord Jesus
given unto them, for that purpose, and that as upon him for the present, so
upon other notorious offenders at other times. Now least they should mistake
his meaning he shows how far this his advertisement extends, viz: to such
offenders as were in the Church and to all, and only them. And this limitation
of the power of Christ to the proper object, he sets down in this 12. verse,
affirmatively, to them that are within, and negatively, to them that are
without. From this place then I do thus reason.

They that are within are subject to the power of excommunication by the Church
gathered together in the name of Christ, they without not.

But you Mr B. and so of the rest, are not subject to the judgment of the
Church thus gathered together, but to the Archbishop of York, Who is not the
Church of Workxsop.

Therefore you are not within but without in the Apostles meaning.

The second place we apply against you is, Ephe. 2. 12. whence I reason thus.

They that are aliants and strangers from the common wealth of Israel, are
without.

But such are you, and your whole parrish.

Ergo.

The first Proposition is the Apostles words: for to be without Christ (as
there he speaks) and to be a stranger from the common wealth of Israel, is all
one.

The second Proposition is thus confirmed.

The common wealth of Israel was a religious policy consisting of a peculiar
people, of whom every one was by the word of God separated into the covenant of
his mercy Deuteronomy. 29. 10. 11. 12. 13. Neh. 10. 1. 28. 29.

But to affirm that every person in the Church of England, or in any parish
Church is admitted by the Lord into the new covenant or testament, is both
against the express word of God, Heb. 8. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. and his own
conscience (I am persuaded) that affirmed it.

And thus so long as you keep your standing, you must be content to stand
without in the meaning of the Apostle in the places forenamed, neither can you
wrythe in your self, or corrupt these places to get in by them, though you give
sundry attempts. as

1. These places are meant of such as never made so much as an outward
profession of Christ at all:

What better are men for professing God in word when in deed Answ.
they deny him?

They are never a whit the less but the more abominable. Tit. 1. 16. And
might not any Papist or other heretik make this exception? For they make a kind
of profession of Christ Jesus. And when you Mr B. in your pulpit thunder the
judgments of God out of the Prophets and Apostles against Atheists, Papists,
blasphemers, proud and cruel persequuters, might not a man serve you as you do
us, and tell you that the most of the threatenings you denounce were directed
against the Heathen which did not so much as make an outward profession of
Christ.

Lastly the H. Ghost terming Antichristianisme Babylon, Sodom, Egypt,
spiritually teaches us to apply against it spiritually what the Prophets have
civily spoken against them. Mr B.


2. They cannot prove us without by the scripture, expounding this phrase
without by the scriptures, laying a side the forgeryes of their own brains.

The cause is plain that whosoever i^ not a free deni^en of the common Answ.
wealth of Israel, and under the judgment of the Church is without, and there
must stand by Gods appointment. And that this is your estate is as plain. And
both these we have proved by the scriptures without forgeryes of our own
brain; all the brayns you have will find no forgeryes in our proofs.

3 God almighty has witnessed that we are his people. Mr B.


1 By giving us his word, Psalm. 14. 7. 19. 20. and sacraments.

This scripture proves that God gave his word to Iaakob, and statutes Answ.
to Israel, but prove your selves the Israel of God; show us from the word of
God the charter of your corporatio^, and that your National, Provintiall,
Diocesan, and Parochial Churches are that new Jerusalem, and your inhabitants
the right Citzens of that City enfranchised with her heavenly libertyes, and
answer the proofs brought to the contrary, otherwise though you be never so
shameless a beggar of the question in hand, we may not grant it you. Mr B.


2 By Gods effectual working by his word, Ier. 23. 22. therefore heard ^^ the
voice of the son of God, Ioh. 5. 25. and the words of eternal life.

God forbid I should deny either the truths of Christ you have a Answ.
among you, or any good effect, which God has wrought by them, but this I
deny, that either they are or have been so effectual as to make any one of your
parish assemblies the Church of Christ truly gathered and constituted.

And for the place of Jeremy 23. 22. which as here to prove a true church, so
every where to prove a true ministry by the effectual work thereof is so
freque^tly alleged, I desire it may be well considered and it will appear that
the Prophet speaks not at all of the effect of prophesying, but of the drift,
and intent of the Prophets, which (had they taken counsel of the Lord) would
not have flattered the people in their sins, by preaching peace peace, as they
did, thereby hardening their hearts and strengthening their hands in their
disobedience, and rebellion, but would on the contrary by denouncing against
them the judgments of God, have endeavored their repentance, as the true
Prophets did.

And if we must thus judge of true, and false prophets by the effects of their
ministry certain it is that neither Ezechiel no Jeremy himself stood in Gods
counsel, but were false Prophets, for neither of them were effectual for the
peoples conversion, Ier. 20 7. 8. Ezech: 3: 7. 11. And yet a wonder it is to
hear what a noise Mr B. and his people do make with this scripture of Jeremy,
as though it did without contradiction justify both Church and Ministry by
some ministerial effect where it is most plain to all that but read the
Chapter with any observatio^, that the Prophet speaks not a word of the effect
of their Ministry, but of the drift of the ministers the false Prophets
desperately slattring the people to their destruction.

3 By Gods most strange and miraculous deliverance of us from the Mr B.
enemies of his gospel: a promise of God to his people. Lev. 26. 7. 8. Deuteronomy.
28. 7*

These deliverances do no more justify your estate before the Answ.
Lord, then the 1 Kin. 20. 13. 14. 15.
deliverance of Samaria out of the hands of the Aramites did the ten tribes in
their Apostasy.

The Lord does promise victory, and deliverance unto his people in their just
quarrels, and use of good means, but ever with condition of his glory, and
their good. And they thus walking, and being thus delivered take experience of
the truth of his promises, and have cause of rejoicing in the God of their
salvation; but besides this there are many other causes of deliverance and
victory which with all other things of the same kind, come alike to Eccles. 9.
2.
all men good and bad; and thus to measure the Lords love by morsels bewrayes
too carnal a mind in any man: and Mr B. neighbor minister (if he have a fatter
benefice then he) may as well avouch him self a better minister, for the quoted
scriptures do as well promise plenty and abundance as deliverance and victory.

And where in the last place you lay to our charge, that though we like it
well that you should call us brethren, yet we will not so acknowledge you, nor
do we hold our selves bound so to admonish you, I do answer, that as we find
at your hands Mr B. little brotherly dealing (traducing us in all places as
Brownists, Schismatiques, Anabaptists, and persons obstinate in sin) so neither
indeed can we acknowledge any of you for brethren in that visible communion of
Saints which is the Church, notwithstanding the loving and respective
remembrance wherein we have very many amongst you severally considered for your
personal graces.

Our reasons are these.

1. We cannot admonish any of you according to the rule and order of Christ,
Math. 18. to which duty toward every brother in communion we are absolutely
bound. 2. We can not acknowledge you for our brethen, but we must also
acknowledge your Prelates for our reverend fathers, under whose blessings we
mean not to come. 3. We cannot acknowledge some of you brethren, but we must
acknowledge all amongst you for such: for there is but one brotherhood of all
amongst you, as your own rhyme teaches ( and make us all one brotherhood).
Now by the scriptures we have not The Lords prayer in Rhyme:
learnt to enter any such fraternity, where we must acknowledge brother Priest,
brother half Priest, brother dumb Priest, brother Atheist, brother Epicure,
brother drunkerd, brother blasphemer, brother witch, brother conjurer, and
lastly brother recusant Papist, if not living yet dead, for so you must bury
him as your dear brother, committing his soul to God, and his body to the
earth.
And for these causes among others, we cannot acknowledge you (as we desire) in
that special fellowship of the gospel, and communion of saints.

But disclayme you the fatherhood of the Prelates, the brotherhood of the
unhallowed multitude, and fest your selves in the family, and househould of
God, and we will acknowledge you in word and deed.

We will not with that ungodly brother grudge your coming into our fathers
house, but will help with our own hands to kill the fat calf, and will make all
spiritual melody with you in the Lord.

The fifth error reputed is,

That only Saints, that is, a people forsaking all known sin of which Mr B.
they may be convinced, doing all the known will of God, increasing and
abiding ever therein are the only matter of the visible Church.

This Position, which you account error, rightly understood, Answ.
and according to his exposition from whom you received it, is an undoubted
truth. For of such only (externally, and so far as men can judge) the true
Church is gathered, whether out of Paganism, Judaism, Antichristianism, or any
other Idolatrous, or adulterous estate whatsoever, and of them alone framed, as
of the subject matter: which is only true, whilst it continues such, and
false when it degenerates from this disposition, and so as rotten and putrified
stuff to be cast out of the Church.

We will then come to your allegations to the contrary.

And first you say, this is a proper description of the invisible members Mr B.
of Jesus Christ, secluding even hypocrites from being true matter of the
visible Church.

All the true and lawful members of the visible Church, are to Answ.
me members of the invisible Church, to me, Isay, which am bound to judge them
to be in truth, as outwardly they appear: and so I am taught by the Apostle
himself who accounts the whole visible Ch: and every member of it Act. 20. 28.
1 Cor. 1. 2. Ephe. 1. 3. 4. 5. Gal. 3. 27. Phil. 1. 4. 5. 6. 7.
elect, redeemed, justified sanctified, which are conditons competent to the
invisible Church.

And for hypocrites, as they may perform all the conditions here required
(visible or to us) as Mr Smyth has answered, so do we take knowledge of none
such in the Chur: in the particular, til they be known in their day by the
outbreakings of sin, and being so discovered, they are no longer to be
retained in the Church, but to bear their sin, except they repent, and then
who can repute them hypocrites?

You object secondly, that this makes that David, Iehoshaphat, Mr B.
and the Church of God in their days were no true matter of a Church, for
there was marrying many wives, the continuance of the high places, the brazen
serpent worshipped, Ioabs murder permitted, the bill of divorsement allowed by
Moses: so after Corinth and the Church of Asia being admonished repented not, 2
Cor. 12. 21. Rev. 2. 20. 21.

To let pass here Mr Smythes erroneous and Anabaptistical answer, Answ.
wherein he makes the constitution of the Jewish Church the constitution of the
old testament, when as the Church of the Jews was co^stituted in Genesis 17. Romans
5. 20 Gal. 3. 17. 19.
Abraham 400 and 30 years before the law or old testament was given, which was
after added clean for an other end then to constitute a Church: the ordinances
and communion he makes merely ceremonial and carnal, which the scriptures
expressly call 1 Cor. 10. 4.
spiritual, whereof also prayer and prophe^ying were parts, neither are our
ordinances more spiritual Luke 22. 19.
remembrances of Christ come, then were theirs in their true and natural
relation, spiritual Heb. 10. 1
shadows of Christ to come.

I do answer to the exception, first that you cannot prove the holy men you
name to have sinned in all the particulars wherewith you charge them, as Moses
in tolerating the bill of divorcement which you injuriously affirm he allowed,
much less can you prove they were convinced of sin in suffering these things,
and yet suffered them. Nay is it not your own doctrine, that grace, and
continuance in sin without repentance cannot stand together? But what
countenance do the infirmities of these holy men give to the profane and
graceles multitude against whom we deal? and whom alone we cast out of the
account of Saints? with what conscience or color can any man bring in the
infirmities of Moses, David, and Iehoshaphat to plead the Saintship of all that
godles crew in the English assemblies?

And for the Churches of Corinth, and Thyatira, either they did repent upon
admonition, though not at the first, or else the Lord in his time discharged
them, as he threatened in the same, and the like cases. Rev. 2. 5. 16. 21. 22.
and 3. 15. 16.

The third exception is that the scriptures we bring are places speaking Mr B.
of invisible members properly, of visible figuratively, as they are judged to
be, on in hope they may be, or sh^wing what men ought to be, but show not that
men are so, or else are not Gods people.

It cannot be manifested that we bring one scripture meant of Answ.
the invisible Church, to prove the holiness of the visible Church. The vanity
of this objection has been discovered in the exposition of that your picked
instance, 1 Pet. 2. It is true indeed that the scriptures we cite speak of men
as they are judged to be, and if you would grant, that only they are true
members of the Church which by the word of God, (which must be the rule of our
judgment) may be judged saints, it would end this controversy. And even for
them without, though never so profane, they ought to be holy, and there is
hope they may be holy, but Gods people must be such as they ought to be in some
measure, and so are all they whom he receives into covenant with him, and if
they fall from their righteousness and will not be reclaymed, they are to be put
1 Cor. 5. 4. 5.
out and to be delivered to Satan, whose vassals they are, and not Gods people
any longer. Mr B.


In the 4. place you come to speak of this saint-ship in question negatively,
and affirmatively. First you deny men to be called saints in scripture, either
for soundnes of knowledge, for proof of which you allege the ignorance of
Christ's disciples and others, Act. 19. 1. 2. or for internal pure affections,
for then (say you) Paul had been no saint, Romans 7. Answ.
18. 21. or for holy practice of their duty always: for which you quote Est.
7. 12. Which is all one as if you should say, the scriptures do not call men
saints because they are saints, but for some other causes known to you. For
what is it to be a saint, but to be holy? And what to be holy, but to be of a
sound judgment, pure affections, and unblameable conversation? And here Mr B.
you speak both injuriously, and weakly; injuriously in insinuating against us,
as if we held no men saints but such as are free from all humayne fraylties.
Weakly, in affirming the disciples of Christ had not sound knowledge, because
they were ignorant of many things: that Paul had not pure affections, because
he had some flesh yet dwelling in him: and that there cannot be the constant
practice of holy duties, notwithstanding such fraylties, as to which all men
are subject. Whereas to all men of understanding, soundnes of judgment is one
thing, and infallibility an other: purity in affection one thing, and
perfection in purity another: and so an holy conversation one thing, and ^^ a
life without all humane fraylty an other thing vnatteynable in this life.

The Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 13 12.
knew but in part, how small then is our pittance in knowledge? and yet our
affections come short of our knowledge, and our practice of our affections, and
desires: and yet we doubt not (by the riches of the grace of God) but we have
all atteyned to soundnes of knowledge, purity of affections, and holiness of
co^versation, how small and weak soever our measure be.

Thus having considered of the exceptions against such marks of saynt-ship, as
we set down, we will come to view the badges, by which the author will have
saints descryed, and acknowledged. Mr B.


First (say you) men are called saints because of their outward calling to
Christianity as 1 Cor. 1. 1. which is holy and to an holy end, 1 These. 4. 7.

If your meaning be, that men because of their external calling A^s^^.
on Gods part, or that the gospel is preached unto them, are therefore saints,
whether they believe the gospel, or believe it not, you mistake too much, for
then all the persequuters and blasphemers to whom Paul preached, should be
saints: yea it is an error to think that Paul styles any saints by calling in
that place but such as were truly sanctified, so far as he could discern. For
the same persons he terms saints by calling, he acknowledges in the same as
sanctified in the Lord Jesus, which implies both justification and
sanctification.

And where you add, that the end of the Church is holiness 1 These. 4. 2. as the
thing you affirm is true, so the truth of it is sufficient to manifest the
unholy constitution of your Church, and your as unholy defense of it. For if
the end of the calling of the Church be sanctity and holiness to the glory of
God, which is the supreme end, Math. 5. 16. then the constitution and gathering
of the Ch: of England, which at the first was (I mean after the Romish
Apostasy) and still is of persons for the most part apparently unholy, and
vnsanctifyed, as it is most praei^diciall to the glory of God, so does it not
only frustrate but most directly cross and oppose the end for which the Lord
in great mercy, wisdom, and holiness, separateth his Church and people unto
himself from the rest of the profane world.

And as it is a certain sign that a Minister is not called into his place, if
he be not in some measure qualifyed with such holy gifts, and graces as serve
to the ends of the Ministry to which he is called, (which you both affirm,
and confirm undeniably, page 132. 133. of this book) so is it also in just
proportion a certain, and infallible argument, that the national Church of
England, (and so of the Churchlings under it) is not called into covenant and
communion with God being gathered of such persons (in the body of it) as are
only utterly unanswerable but clean contrarily affected to the ends of the
true Church which are holiness, and the glory of God.

And where you Mr B. would fasten the name of saints upon people unworthy of
it, by a similitude drawn from a Minister a^* the first rightly called to his
office, but after showing himself unworthy of it, whom you will still have called
a minister. I answer, that if he were known to be unworthy of it at the first
or not known to be worthy, he was not rightly called either to the office, or
by the name: and if he afterward show himself unworthy, he is to be censured
accordingly, and so with the office to forfeyt the name: (though he hold both
with you) and so it is with men in the general calling of Christianity: they
that are unworthy of it are never called of God to take it upon them, and if
they prove unworthy afterward, they are to be deprived of Christian society.

2 Because of the profession of faith in Christ who makes all true believers
Mr B.
holy and sancts.

It is true you say that Christ makes all true believers holy and Saints,
Answer.
but I deny that every profession of faith in Christ argues a true believer. A
false dissembler is he, and no true believer that in word pretends faith in
Christ, and in deed denies him.

3. In respect of Baptism, by which externally the party baptized is to be Mr
B.
judged to have put on Christ. Gal. 3. 27. to have remission of his sins,
Act. 2. 39. to be partaker of Christ's death, Romans 6. 3. 4. Col. 2. 21. and to
have assurance of salvation, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

All persons baptized neither do in truth, nor are by us to be Answer.
judged to have put on Christ, to have remission of sins, etc. but only such
as to whom by virtue of the covenant of grace, baptism apperteyneth. We must
not conceive of baptism as of a charm, or think it effectual to all it is
put upon, but must judge it avayleable and of use, according to the Genesis 17. 7
and 26. 4. Act. 2. 38. 39. and 3. 25 ^ Cor. 7. 14.
covenant of promise which God has made to the faithful and their seed, and
none otherwise.

And baptism administered to any others is so far from investing them with any
saynt-ship in that estate, as it makes guilty both the giver and receiver of
sacrilege, and is the taking of Gods name in vain.

4 In respect of the better part, though the fewer by many, for thus the Mr B.
scripture speaks, Deuteronomy. 1. 23. 24. 1 Cor. 6. 11. with 5. 1. 2 Cor. 12. 21.

The scriptures never ascribe holiness to a people for some fewes Answer.
sake, if the rest be unholy, and profane. I read in the scriptures that
unclean persons and things do Lev. 14. 46. 47 and 15. 4. 11. 12 Hag. 2. 12.
13. 14.
pollute, and unhallow clean persons and things, and that a 1 Cor. 5. 6. 7.
little leaven levens the whole lump: but that clean persons or things should
hallow persons or things, which are unclean, or that a little sweet meal should
make sweet a sower lump that read I not, but the contrary confirmed by the
forenamed scriptures. And for the Ch: of the Jews and of Corinth in which you
instance, as they were holy (omitting other respects) for the holy covenant
into which the Lord had assumed the body of them. Romans 11. 16. so were the
desperately wicked amongst them no true members of the body, but as putrifyed
and rotten parts to be cut off, and cast out from the rest. And where Paul
writes, to the Church at Corinth, styles them saints, and advertises them, to
excommunicate the incestuous person, what can be more unreasonably affirmed
then that the incestuous person was one of these Saints? as though Paul had
written to him to cast out himself, which must needs follow by Mr B. assertion
and proofs of it.

5. In respect of the visible signs of Gods favor, promise, and presence to
Mr B.
be with his, etc. as Jerusalem was called the holy city. Mat. 4. 5. Answ.


But we deny your national Church to be that Romans 21. 2.
holy city, the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven. It is rather
Babylon, though much purged and repaired. And Babylon cannot be Jerusalem, nor
was ever holy, not withstanding the spoils of Jerusalem, and of the Temple
also be found there: as were in the civil Babylon many Israelites captived, and
with them the holy vessels, the holy instruments, yea the holy writings of the
Prophets, and their persons also, 2 Chronicles. 10. 18. Psalm. 137. 1. 2. D. 9. 1, 2.

6. In respect of Gods good pleasure who looks not upon his Church, as the Mr
B.
particular members thereof are, but as he accepts of them: therefore it is
said, He saw none iniquity in Iaakob, nor transgression in Israel. Number. 23. 21.
and yet Israel was then an unbelieving and stifnecked people.

Here you say and unsay with one breath. You grant Israel Answ.
to have been an holy people and without iniquity, as Balaam spoke, in the
Lords acceptance according to his good pleasure, and yet to have been at the
same time an unbeleeving and stifnecked people, which affirmation as it
conteynes in it an apparent contradiction, so does it lay upon God an
insufferable imputation, as though he took pleasure in the wicked, or did
accept of them.

It cannot be denied but the people ever and anon rose up in rebellion against
the Lord: and for instance in the Chapter next but one before going, through
impatiency of their ordinary food, they murmured against God, and against
Moses. Numb. 21. 4. 5.

But did things so continue? No verily, for the Lord sent fyery serpents
amongst them, and destroyed many of them, and by his correction brought the
rest to repentance ^ verse. 6. 7. And now as at other times, when they provoked
him, smit them with grievous plagues and punishments, and so causing them to
pass under the rod and picking out the chief rebels, and fifting out the
sinners to destruction, and brought them again Ex. 32. 27. Numb. 11. 1. 2. Ps.
78 17. 18. 19. 21. 31. etc. Ezech. 20. 37. 3^. Amos. 9. 8. 9. 10.
into the covenant.

And thus much of your respects of Sainct-ship whereof some are not true in
themselves, others impertinent to your estate, and the most flatly condemning
it.

And though you Mr B. say it never so often, and all the divines in the world
with you (as here you speak) that the visible Church is a mixed company (as your
very own book of Articles affirms the contrary, describing the Church to be a
company of faithful people) yet do the divine scriptures speak otherwise,
which I will clearly manifest, and therein also free the Parable, Math. 13.
which you bring in for proofs, from that violence, which you and others offer
them: forcing Christ clean against his will to plead for Antichrist. And with
the scriptures I do affirm against you, that the Church of Christ is no such
mingled meslyne, or monstrous compound, but a body simple, uniform, and one,
proportionable in every member unto the head, informed by one spirit, and
called in one hope, Ephe. 4. 4.

And for wicked, and ungodly persons so far are they from being the true
natural members whereof the body consists, as the whole of the parts, as they
serve indeed for no other purpose then to infect, and corrupt the rest, and if
redress be not had in time, to eat out the very heart of the whole.

But before I come to the point in controversy, I will lay down two cautions
for the preventing of error in the simple, and of cavelling in such as desire
to contend.

First it must be considered, that where the quaestion is about I.
the visible or external Church which is by men discernable, and not of that
Church which is internal and invisible, which only the Lord knows, we speak
here of visible and external holiness only, whereof men may judge, and not of
that which is within and hid from man's ey. For we doubt not but the purest Ch:
upon earth may consist of good and bad in Gods ey, of such as are truly
faithful, and sanctified, and of such as have only for a time put on the
outside and vizard of sanctity, which the Lord will in due time pluck of,
though in the mean while man's dim sight cannot pearce through it.

2. I desire it may be remembered that the question betwixt Mr B. II.
and me is about the true and natural members whereof the Ch: is orderly
gathered and planted, and not about the degenerate and decayed estate of the
Church and members; for we know that natural Is. 1. 2. 21. 22. Ier. 2. 21.
children may become rebellious, the faithful city an harlot, the silver
dross, and the wine corrupt with water: the noble vine so planted whose plants
were all natural, may degenerate into the plants of a strange vine. But as it
were fond Philosophy, in the description of wives and children, and their true
and natural properties, to make rebellion a property of a child, because many
children prove rebels against their parents, or to make whoredom a property of
a wife, because many wives prove unfaithful that way, so is it as profane
divinity to make ungodly persons the true matter of the Church, and their
profanenes a true property of the same, because many seeming saints at the
first do so creep in, and do afterward discover their own shame, and are often
times through want of zeal too long tolerated in the Church, to the dishonor
of God and prejudice of the gospel.

And so I come to manifest by an induction of particulars, that all the visible
Churches gathered and planted by the Lords line and level from the beginning of
the world were in their collection and co^stitution, simple, uniform, and
unmixed, consisting of good alone in the respect in hand.

And first the Lord created a Church of Angels in heaven, which were all good
and holy without mixture, til 2 Pet. 2. 4 Jude, 6.
some by sin fell from their first and original estate, and so leaving their
own habitation were cast down to hell.

After that God created a Church of mankind in Paradise, consisting of two
persons both holy and good. And thus the Churches of creation were gathered of
angels and men without mixture.

Now if any man object that in these instances I fetch my beginnings too far
of, my answer is that the Lord had, and has the same ends and respects in the
creating and restoring of his Ch: which are his own glory and their happiness.
And if it were the will of the Lord that persons notoriously wicked should be
admitted into the Ch: then should he ditectly cross himself and his own ends,
and should receive into the visible covenant of grace such as were out of the
visible estate of grace, and should plant such in his Church for the glory of
his name, as served for none other use then to cause his name to be blasphemed*
Hereupon I frame an Argument thus.

That order for the gathering of Ch: which directly crosses the main ende^ for
which the Lord would have his Church gathered, is not of God.

But the order, for which Mr B. pleads ( which is, that apparently profane
persons may with the godly be gathered into the visible Church) crosses the
Lords ends of gathering Churches: and therefore is not of God.

The former proposition is without controversy, the latter is thus manifested.

The main ends for which the Lord gathers and preserves his Church upon
earth are that he might have a Levit. 20 26. Genesis 4. 26. Mat. 5. 1^. 1 Pet. 2.
12. Act. 2. 47. ^ Pe. ^. 7. 9.
peculiar people separated unto himself; from all other peoples to call upon
his name in faith and to glorify him their heavenly father in their holy
conversation, whom he also might glorify in the end of their faith, the
salvation of their souls. But for wicked and ungodly persons in the Church as
they serve no no way for these ends but the contrary causing Romans 2. 24.
Gods name to be blasphemed, and Ephe. 5. 6.
his wrath to come upon their disobedience so to gather or admit them into the
Church is utterly to frustrate Gods ends, and to gather for Satan rather then
for God.

To proceed. In the restoring of mankind and planting the first Ch: in the
covenant of grace established in Genesis 3. 24 25.
the seed of the woman, there were only saints, without any such mixture as Mr
B. makes. Now as all true churches from the beginning to the end of the world
are one in nature and essential constitution, and the first the rule of the
rest, so the first being gathered of good matter not bad, declares both Mr B.
Church and opinion to be bad, and not good.

And when in process of time 1 Ioh. 3. 12.
Cain which was of the evil one, bewrayed himself he as a degenerate branch
was broken of, and driven out of the visible presence of God, Gen: 4. 14. it is
further imputed by Moses for sin to Genesis 6. 2.
the sons of God that they married with the daughters of men. Now if it were
(and 1 Cor. ^. 39.
still be) unlawful for the godly to contract with the wicked in the civil
covenant of marriage, how much more in the religious covenant of the Church and
communion of Saints?

To descend lower* God gave unto Abraham and his family the covenant of
circumcision, Genesis 17. 10. which the Apostle, Romans 4. 11. calls the seal of the
righteousness of faith. Now to affirm that the Lord would seal up with the
visible seal of the righteousness of faith any visibly unrighteous and faythles
person were a bold challenge of the most High, for the profanation of his own
ordinance. And the same covenant which God at the first made with Abraham, and
continued with Isaak and Iakob, he after renewed with the whole Church sundry
times upon their repentance, in regard whereof the scriptures give very
honorable testimony of al and every one of them: as that they were Isa. 5* 1.
2. 3, 5. Ier. 2, 21.
the Lords pleasant plant, and vineyard hedged in, planted with the best
plants, yea a noble vine, whose plants were all natural, yea natural branches,
though they did often times degenerate into the plant of a strange vine, and were
therefore often times forsaken of God, and in the end Romans 11. 16. 17.
for their infidelity quite broken off.

Lastly when John Baptist the forerunner of Christ, Christ himself, and his
Apostles were to repayr the desolations of Sion, and to plant the Gentiles Ro^.
11. 17
into the root of the Jews, and to make them Ephesians. 3. 6.
one inheritance, and one body with them, they did not by the coactive laws of
men shuffle together good and bad as intending a new monster or Chymera, but
admitted of such, and none other, as Mat. 3. 6. Luke 7. 29. 30.
confessed their sin and justified God: as Ioh. 15. 18 19. 17. 16.
were not of the world, but chosen out of it, and hated of it: as Act. 2. 41
42. 46.
did receive the word gladly, and communicate ^^ of them in all things, as
every one had need and that in gladness and singlenes of heart: as received
testimony by the H. Ghost himself that they were such as should be saved: as
were Act. 20. 28.
al of them purchased with the blood of God: as Romans 1. 8.
for all whom there was cause to thank God: as whom the Apostle Phil. 1. 3. 4.
6. 7. 8.
did remember in his prayers with gladness, being persuaded that God could
perfect his good work begone in the as became him to judge of them all, being al
partakers of the grace of God with him in the confirmation of the Gospel, and
after all whom he longed from the very heart root in Christ: as 1 These. 1. 2.
3. and 2. Epist. 1. 3.
for all whom he gave thanks, always making mention of them in his prayers
without ceasing, remembering their effectual faith, diligent love, and patient
hope in the Lord Jesus, which did grow in every one of them.

Here is no such mingle mangle as M. B. would make of good and bad, but al
good, and so avowed by the Holy Ghost, though without doubt many of these were
masked, and hollow-harted hypocrites whose goodness was but Hos. 6. 4.
as the goodness of Ephraim and Judah, like the morning cloud, and like the dew
which fallen in the morning, and ^ades away.

And now I will come to the two parables, Mat. 13. with which as with two
mighty Engines Mr B. and others, will needs push over the partition wall of
separation of the saints from the world, of righteousness from unrighteousnes,
of light from darkness, of Christ from Beliall, of the believers from the
unbelievers.

And for ingresse into the exposition of these two parables of the field and
draw nett, I do desire it may be considered, that for the atteyning of the
right sense of the scriptures we must remember to interpret the more dark and
obscure places by places more plain and easy; and so parables being dark
speeches, and more hardly understood without express exposition, Mat. 13. 10.
11. Mark, 4. 11, 12, are not to expound plain rules, but to be expounded by
them. Which proviso alone being observed might stand in stead of all answer to
whatsoever out of these perverted parables could be objected.

The point is, Mr B. following (I confess) the most beaten way, makes the
field the visible Church, and the tares scandalous offenders, seen and
discovered. Whereupon it must follow, that as the Lord forbids the servants to
meddle with the tares, or with the plucking them up, but will have them, and
the wheat to grow together in the field till the harvest, so both ministers and
people are str^ytly inhibited and forbidden any way to admonish and censure
wicked and scandalous persons in the Church, but must let them there remain
without disturbance, till the last judgment.

The venomous weeds, the noisome tares, (Idolaters, heretics, covetous
persons, blasphemers and all) whose nature is to overspread and choke the
wheat, must be suffered still to grow with it. And thus at once by this one
profane gloss, all the tex^s of scriptures, and commandments of Christ,
both for admonitions, and excommunications, are utterly voided and a^nihilated.
The brethren, nay the ministers themselves may not meddle with the tares, the
wicked, to admonish or reprove them, they must be let alone; the sword of the
Censures so graciously given to cut of rotten members, must no more now be
drawn out, but must rust in the sheath of this exposition, notwithstanding all
the plain scriptures to the contrary, Lev. 19. 17. ^ These. ^. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 30.
and 2 Ep. 4. 2. Mat. 18. 15. 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5. All the power of our L. Jesus
Christ given to his Church for the rooting out of obstinate offenders, and
casting down of every thing exalting it self against the knowledge of God is
not only weakened, but even disanulled by this unreasonable exposition, that
tares, that is, notorious offenders must still be suffered to grow in the field,
the Church.

And if the parable be thus meant, how can it be defended that any Church
should cast out any offenders whomsoever? how dare the Prelates in Engl: with
their substitutes take this forbidden weedhook into their hands, and use it
against any tare amongst them? if any tares be to be plucked up, why not all?
and if all be to be let alone, why meddle they with any? Indeed I must needs
acknowledge and will not wrong them, that if they should execute their own
canons, as they have framed them, they should not very often practice against
this exposition, nor gather the tares from among the wheat, but the wheat from
amongst the tares. But to proceed. It may be some will answer, that Christ does
not here absolutely forbid his disciples the use of the Censures against the
wicked, but rather acquaints the^ before hand what will be the estate of the Ch:
and how the wicked will be suffered to continue in it uncensured. And if this were
so it made nothing against me, nor for Mr B: it were the Churches sin so to
suffer them, and I deny not but Churches usually are to negligent and remiss,
through want of zeal and faithfulness to the Lord in this duty. But it is plain
the Lord Jesus lays a flat inhibition against the weeding out of these tares,
and expressly co^maunds to let them alone: and this commandment also he backs
with two substantial reasons, the first least they pluck up the wheat with the
tares. v. 29: the 2. because the Lord has appointed another time, the time of
the harvest for the plucking them out, v. 30. Now some being ashamed of the
grosnes, and in deed of the iniquity of this exposition, would feign moderate
and qualify the matter, by turning it off to these and these sins, and
sinners. Some say that by the tares are meant the ministers only, and that
they are not to be meddled with, though they transgress, least the wheat be
plucked up with the^: as though the Lord would have the persons of men
respected in judgment: yea verily there is more need to look to them in such
cases, then to any private members whomsoever, as whose sins are more
displeasing unto God, more scandalous to them without, and more pernicious to
the Church then of any others. Some again will have this prohibitio^ only to
take place, when the multitude of the offenders is so great, as that they
cannot be censured without danger of schism, and distraction, as though the
multitude of offenders should priveledge the offense, and as though the Lord
Jesus by his power given to his Church; 1 Cor. 5. 4. should fear to meddle with
them for their multitude, and might, as David feared to meddle with the sons
of Zeruiah, because they were too hard for him. The Apostle says, (speaking of
the incestious man) that 1 Cor. 5. 6.
* little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: how much more a great deal, which
makes all more sower.

And for answer to both, it is apparent the Lord here forbidds the rooting out
of any tares whither fewer or more in number, whither of high or low growth.

Let men then cease to draw in by the hayr of the head these parables for the
tolerating of the wicked in the Church: (an intolerable wickedness) as most
prejudicial to the Isa. 52. 5. Romans 2. 24.
name of God, which is by this means blasphemed, to the parties salvation, who
by this connivency is hardened in his sin, where by 1 Cor. 5. 5
due censuring, he should be humbled: to the health and safety of the body
which is hereby corrupted and Heb. 12. 15.
defiled, and to the conversion of them without, who by the Math. 5. 16. 1 Pet.
2. 12. and 2 epist. 3. 1.
holy converversation of the Church should be provoked to the love of the truth.

These things being thus cleared, I come in the next place to the true and
natural exposition, which (I doubt not) these scriptures will well bear.

I do then find two interpretations, either of both (I am assured) more
agreeable to the truth, then this forced gloss by me confuted, and neither of
them containing in it any thing which the words of the Parable will not bear,
or which is dissonant to the analogy of faith or any other scripture.

First admit the feyld be the Church which Christ expounds the world, then say
I, by tares in the field are meant not notorious offenders, but hypocrites, not
so thoroughly discovered, which by the envy of Satan are foysted into the
Church. It will be said that tares are easily discerned from wheat: I answer not
always so, though oaks may, as one of your own has spoken upon this
scripture: Mr Cartw.
and it is certainly reported by such as have travayled Jury and those parts,
to which the Lord has reference, that the weeds we call tares are there very
hardly discerned from the true wheat. If it be further pressed that the tares
are espied, I do further answer, that it is in parables both curiosity and
danger to labor to make all parts meet in every particular: and since this
particular of spying the tares is omitted by Christ in the exposition we may
well be modest in it. But let it be that the tares are seen (as the words are)
the question is who those servants are espying them, and so desiring to have
them rooted out. These servants may well be some special persons in the Church
endued with a singular spirit of watchfulnes, and discerning, by which they do
discover in some persons this tarish disposition under the ^ayl of holiness: so
Paul spied out that bitter root of envy, and pride, by which some were Phil. 1*
15. 16.
set a work to preach Christ: such persons notwithstanding must be born till
their sins be ripe, and Psa. 125. 5.
the Lord lead them forth amongst the workers of iniquity. Or by the servants
may be here meant the Angels, who by conversing much with the Ch: both can and
without doubt do through the subtilty of their nature, and long experience spy
out in the Church much cloked wickedness, and impiety, which as the zealous
ministers of Gods justice they are ready to revenge.

But since the Lord Jesus, who best knew his own meaning, calls verse. 38.
the field the world, and makes v. 39.
the harvest which is the end of the field, the end of the world, and not of
the Church, why should we admit of any other interpretation? Neither is it like
that Christ would in the expounding of one parable speak an other, as he should
have done, if calling the feyld the world, he had meant the Church. As God then
in the beginning made man good, and placed him in the field of the world there
to grow, where by the envy of the serpent he was soon corrupted, so ever since
has the seed of the serpent (stirred up by their father the Devil) snarled at
the heel of the woman's seed, and like noisome tares vexed and pestered the good
and holy seed, which though the children of God both see, and feel to their
pain, yet must they not therefore Luke 9. 54. 56.
forgetting what spirit they are of, presently call for fire from heaven, nor
prevent the Lords hand, but wayt his leisure, either for the converting of
these tares into wheat, (which in many is daily seen; and the^ how great pity
had it been they should so untimely have been plucked up:) or for their final
perdition in the day of the Lord, when the Church shall be no more offended by
them.

And that the Lord Jesus no way speaks of the toleration of profane persons in
the(...) Church does appear by these reasons.

First, because (as has been observed) he does not contradict I.
himself by forbidding the use of the keys in one place, which in an other he
has turned upon impenitent offenders, Mat. 18. 15. 16. 17.

2. In the excommunication of sinners apparently obstinate, II.
with due circumspection, and in the spirit of wisdom, meeknes, and long
suffering, with such other general Christian virtues, as with which all our
special sacrifices ought to be seasoned, wha^ danger can there be of any such
disorder, as the plucking up of the wheat with the tares, which the husbandman
fears. verse. 29. III.


Lastly the Lord Jesus speaks of the utter ruinating and destruction of the
tares, the gathering and plucking them up by the roots, verse. 28. 29. and to
this end they are reserved by the husbandman, v. 30. (ever presupposed they so
continued) but excommunication rightly administered is not for the ruin, and
destruction of any, but for the salvation of the party thereby humbled. 1 Cor.
5. 5.

But, to conclude, admit of Mr B. exposition, and that the field here is the
visible Church, the good seed the good, and godly, the tares wicked and ungodly
persons, I am contented that the difference in this place betwixt him and me be
tried at the tribunal of this very scripture, even thus expounded, and I doubt
not but it will pronounce a clear sentence on my side in the thing for which I
contend: and that is, that the Church in the right gathering of it out of
Antichristianism, or Paganism, out of Babylon, Egypt, Sodom spiritually, or
civily so called, or out of any other society or Synagogue, which is not the
true visible body of Christ, must be and is constituted and compact of good
only, and not of good and evil.

The Lords field is sown only with good seed. verse. 24. 27. 38. his Ier. 2.
21.
vine noble, and all the seed true, his Church Romans 1. ^. 8.
saints and beloved of God all and every one of them, though by the malice of
Satan, and negligence of such as should keep this field, and vineyard, and
house of God, adulterate seed, and abominable persons may be foysted in, yea
and suffered also, which the scriptures affirm, and we deny not. But our
exception in this case is, first that the Church of England was never truly
gathered, the Church of England I say, that that is, the National Church,
consisting of the Provincial Churches, and those of the Diocesan Churches, and
the Diocesans of the Parochyall Churches, according to their parish precincts,
with their governors and government correspondent. That there were true
visible Churches in the land gathered out of Paganism at the first, I will not
deny, but that ever the whole Land in the body of it was a Church is an
affirmatio^ of them which consider not what is either the matter whereof, or
the manner how the Church of the new Testament is to ^e gathered. 2. Grant
that the way of the kingdom of Christ, the Church were now so wide that a whole
nation might walk a breast in it, and that England had been some times that
Canaan, the holy land, wherein none uncircumcised person dwelt, yet in the
apostasy of Antichrist it could not be so accounted, but was in the body of it
divorced from Christ with Rome, whereof it was a member, except you (Mr B.)
will affirm (as many do) that Rome remains still a true visible Church, and
that antichristianism is true Christianism, Antichristians true Christians, the
body which has the Pope the head, the true body of Christ: and so except the
Church of Engl. had been sown with good seed without tares since that general
apostasy, it cannot be the L. field.

The Jews were forbidden by God under the law to Lev. 19. 19.
sow their field with diverse seeds, and will he sow his own feyld with diverse,
yea with contrary seeds, wheat, and tares? What husbandman is either so
foolish, or carles, as to sow his field with tares and wheat together? And yet
this fair field of Engl: of whose beauty all the Christian world is enamoured,
is so sown, this pleasant orchyard so planted, this ^lourishing Ch: so
gathered. A few kernels of wheat scattered amongst the tares here and there, a
few good plants amongst the wild branches, a small strinkling of good me^
amongst the great and retchles rowt of wicked and graceles persons. And was
this field sown, this orchard planted, this Church gathered, by the Lords hand?

And as was the root, so are the branches, as were the first fruits, so is the
whole lump.

To conclude this point, thus I reason. The Lords field is sown with good seed
only, though tares may in time be conveyed into it by the Devils malice and
man's negligence. But the Engl: national Ch: was not so sown, but with tares
and wheat together.

Therefore it is not the Lords field.

And thus I hope the indifferent reader will easily see what succor Mr B.
finds amongst those tares, under whose shadow he would so feign shroud all the
Atheists Papists and other flagitious persons in the Church.

Now for the Parable of the draw net, Mat. 13. I confess the bad fishes may be
wicked persons in the Church, but undiscerned, as fishes under the water,
between which and the good no difference is seen. If the fishers and they that
drew the netts did know of the bad fishes in them, and had means of voyding
them, they would never burden themselves, and the nett with them, (except you
will have as foolish fishermen here, as you had husbandmen before,) but till
they do discern them to be as they are, they must take the^, as they hope they
are, though with you all be fish that come to the net, yea good fish too, till
the Co^missaries court judge otherwise.

And lastly to your saying, well it were that all were saints: but that is to
look for a heaven upon earth, I answer that the Church is heaven upon earth:
and if you were not a stranger to the true Church and to such scriptures as
speaks of it, you should find as in many other places, so espetially in the
Revelation the Church visible often Rev. 4. 1. 2. and 6. 13. 14 and 8. 1. 10. 13.
and 11. 6. 19. and 12 1. 3. 7. etc.
dignifyed with the name of heaven and with no name oftener. Yea to seek no
further then these two parables brought in by you to speak against heaven, that
is against the true and natural co^stitutio^, and conservatio^ of the visible
Church, Christ himself and that with his own mouth gives the Church no worse
name then Math. 13. 24. 47.
heaven, and the kingdom of heaven, and the only ordinary beaten way which
Christ has left to heaven in heaven, is heaven on earth, which way soever you
please to guide men.

The sixth insimulation against us is that we hold. Mr B.


That the power of Christ, that is authority to preach, to administer the
sacraments, and to exercise the Censures of the Church, belongs to the whole
Church yea to every one of them, and not to the principal m^bers thereof.

If Mr B. were but as able to confute us by just reason, as he is Answ.
willing to bring us into hatred by unjust and odious accusations, we should
then have as much cause to fear his skill, as now we have to complayn of his
malice. Only herein his skill is to be commended, that where he finds not
our opinions such as he thinks will be disliked by the simple multitude, he makes
the^ such, and so deals against them.

Here come in many things of great weight to be discussed: and although it were
in it self the readyest way to reduce things to some heads, and so to
prosequute them in order, yet since I have taken this task upon me to trace Mr
B. in the particulars, therefore I purpose to follow him step by step,
notwithstanding all his unorderly wanderings and excursions.

And first Mr B. charging us with error for giving authority to preach,
minister the sacraments, exercise the censures to the whole Church, and not to
the principal members thereof, plainly insinuates that the authority to do
all these things amongst them is in the principal members of the Church. But
the truth is otherwise in the parish Church of Worksop, and in all other the
parish Churches in the land. You have one only member that has power, (and
that under the ordinary) to any of these things, and that your self the parrish
Priest, though perhaps the parish clerk may by special indulgence be licensed,
to bury the dead, Church women, read service on light holy days, and do some
such like drudgery in your absence. But for the exercising of the censures,
that belongs not to the whole body, or to any member thereof principal, or
less principal, but to the Bishops and his substitute, which are forreyners
and strangers as in their office from the true Church, so even in their persons
from yours. All your portion in the censures Mr B. is to do the exequutioners
office, when the Official has played the judge, which if you should be so
bold as to refuse, besides the punishment of your contumacy, the Church door
would do your office, for the bull of excommunication hanged up there by the
sumner byndes the offenders both in heaven and earth. And for the position it
self, howsoever we do indeed maynteyne the most of the particulars against
which Mr B. intends his refutation, yet as he sets it down, we do utterly
disclayme it with all the errors in it.

First for teaching in the Church we do not use it promiscuously, nor suffer it
to be used but according to the order (as we are persuaded) which Christ and
his Apostles have prescribed. And for the sacraments, the contrary to that
which you affirm is to be seen of all men in our Article 34.
confession of faith, wherein it is held that no sacraments are to be
administered until Pastors or Teachers be ordained in their office: neither
have we practiced otherwise? And this Mr B. knew, when he writ this book, as
well as our selves.

Thirdly, touching the censures we do expressly confess that Act. 24.
the power, as to receive in, so to cut of any member is given to the whole
body together of every christian congregation, and not to any one member a
p^^t, or to more members sequest^ed from the whole, using the m^etest member
for the pronouncing the censures. And answerable to our profession is our
practice: with what conscience then or credit Mr B: can father upon us those
bastardly runnaga^es, let God, and men judge.

These things being thus, the untruths, which he says we build upon this
opinion are his and not ours, as the groundwork is his, so is the whole building
raised from it. But touching interpretation of scripture by private brethren,
and pollution by sin unreformed in the Church, and separation from it for the
same, we shall speak in their places. Only I desire it may be observed that
rather then Mr B. will forbear to accuse us that we hold it lawful for one
person to excommunicate the whole Church, he will back this most odious
calumniation with as fond and false an assertion: and that is, that separating
from a Church and Mr B.
excommunicating of it is all one in substance, though called less odiously.
Answ.
But the contrary is manifested by these two reasons.

First excommunication is a sentence judicial presupposing ever a solemn and
superior power over the party sentenced: but no such thing is inferred upon
separation.

2. Excommunication is only of them which are 1 Cor: 5. 12. 13. Math. 18. 15.
17. 18.
within and of the Church, but separation may be from them without. And I would
know of Mr B. whither a person, though never so mean, might not separate from
the assemblies of Pagans, Turks, Jews, Papists, and other haeretiques, and
Idolaters? I hope he would not draw such a man within his separatists schism:
and yet for the same person to excommunicate such an assembly were a sinful
profanation of Gods ordinance. And though we held (as we do nothing less)
that one man might excommunicate the whole Church, yet were it not more (as you
affirm) then your Church allows to any Bp. in Engl. no nor so much by a
thousand parts: for one Bishop with you may excommunicate a thousand Churches:
every Diocesan Bishop all the Churches in his Dioces, the two Provincial
Bishops their two Provinces, so livelyly do the reverend fathers the Bishops
resemble the holy father the Pope, which may judge all men, but be judged by
none.

The next collection made against us is that we hold that two Mr B.
or three gathered together must be a Church which has the whole power of
Christ, and may presently make them officers and use the discipline of Christ.

No such have Mr B. of making officers presently: we make no dumb Answ.
Ministers: neither dare we admit of any man either for a teaching or governing
Elder, of whose ability in prayer, prophesying, and debating of Church matters
we have not had good experience, before he be so much as nominated to the
office of an Elder amongst us: remembering always the deep charge of the
Apostle to 1 T^^ 5^ 21. 22.
lay hands suddeynly on man, nor to be partakers of other men's sums.

But this we hold and affirm that a company consisting though but of two or
three separated from the world whither unchristian, or antichristian, and
gathered into the name of Christ by a covenant made to walk in all the ways of
God known unto them, is a Church, and so has the whole power of Christ. And
for the clearing of this truth I will propound, and so prove by the scriptures
these two heads.

1. First that a company of faithful people thus covenanting together are a
Church, though they be without any officers among them, co^ntrary to that your
Popish opinion here insinuated, and else Mr B.
where expressed, that a company is no where in all the new testament page 99.
called a Church (Christian familyes excepted) but when they have their
officers, and that otherwise they are called believers, Disciples, but not a
Church but only by anticipation as heaven and earth are so called before they
were Genesis ^. 1. and that the officers give the^ the denominatio^ of a Church.

2. That this company being a Church has interest in all the II.
holy things of Christ within and amongst themselves immediately under him the
head, without any forreyn aid, and assistance. Of which holy things in
particular we shall consider as they come in our way.

These two grounds (by the grace of God) I will prove in order: and for the
confirmation of the former take these reasons.

The first is gathered from the authors own words, that a company I.
of holy persons (without officers) are called believers, disciples, but not a
Church which is all one, as if he said, that a Church is not called a Church,
for the word Church, is no more then a company or (...).
assembly howsoever gathered together: and so a set company of visible
believers must needs be a constituted visible Church: and to manifest the
vanity of that distinction, that one place shall serve Act: 19. 32. 40.
Act. 11. 26. where in the same verse the same persons* are called the Church,
Disciples, and Christians.

Two or three or more people making Peter's confession, Math. 16. are the
Church. But two or three or more may make this confession without officers.
Therefore such a company is a Ch:

The former proposition is evident by that promise Christ made Mat. 16* ^^* 18.
to build his Church upon the rock of Peter's confession.

The second, namely that men without officers may profess their faith is
without question, except we will hold that without officers no men can be
saved, Romans 10. 10.

Thirdly, if the new Testament speak of ordeyning Elders in the Church, then
does it necessarily conclude yea expressly affirm, that there were Churches
before Elders were ordained in them.

But the first is manifest Act. 14. 23. therefore the second. Neither can Mr
B^shift of the place by saying such assemblyes are called Churches by
Anticipation, any more then the Papists can the scripture, 1 Cor 11. 26.
against transubstantiation, by alleging that the Apostle speaks by
Posticipation. For why may not the Papists as well answer that Paul calls
Christ's body bread, not because it is bread, but because it was bread before
the words of consecration, as Mr B: that Luke calls the assemblyes without
officers Churches, not because they were so, but were so to be after the Elders
were ordained amongst them, neither is it true which you affirm for
confirmation of your distinction, that heaven and earth were so called before
they were, Genesis 1. 1. the meaning of Moses only is, that God created heaven
and earth first, and when before they were not.

If yet it be further answered by any, that the Church Act. 14. had Apostles
over them, it must be remembered, that Luke in that place and action of
ordination notes out three distinct orders of people, the Apostles ordeyning
Elders, the Elders ordained, and the Churches in which the Apostles ordained
Elders.

Of the same nature is the fourth Argument grounded upon 1 Cor. 12. 28. where
God is said to have appointed or set in the Church Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, necessarily implying a Church before, wherein they were appointed: as
a Sheriff appointed in a shyre, a Mayor in a City, a Constable in a Parish, a
Steward in a family do necessarily presuppose the Shyre, City, Parrish,
Family, wherein they are appointed. And indeed where should the Lord set his
stewards but in his family? Is any society capable of the Lords officers but
his corporation? Is not the Eldership an ordinance given to the Church? and so
the Elders called the Act. 20. 28.
Elders of the Church. In the Church is not an ordinance given to the Elders,
nor ever called their Church in the whole New Testament.

Fifthly they with whom the Lord makes his Covenant to be their God, and to
have them his people, to dwell amongst them as in his temple, which have right
to the promises of Christ, and to his presence, they are the Church of God, and
of Christ. Genesis 17. 7. Lev. 26. 11. 12. Mat. 18. 17. 20. Apoc. 1. 11. 13. Heb.
8. 16.

But a company of faithful people, though they have no officers amongst them,
may be received into Covenant with God, may be his temple, and have him dwell
amongst them, may have right to Christ and to his promises, and presence,
except we will say they may not be gathered in Christ's name, may not be called,
may not come out from among unbeleevers nor separate themselves and touch none
unclean thing. Mat. 18. 17. 20. Act. 2. 39. 2 Cor. 6. 16. 17. except they have
Ministers going before them. For they that may 2 Cor. 6. 16
separate themselves from unbeleevers may be the temple of God, that is the
true visible church, which the temple typed out.

Men are not to come out of Babylon, and there to stand still, and remember the
Lord a far of, but must resort to the place where he has put his name, for
which they need not go either to Jerusalem, or to Rome, or beyond the seas,
they may find Sion the Lords mountain prepared on the top of every hill. If they
as lively stones couple themselves together by voluntary 1 Pet. 2. 9.
profession and covenant, they are a spiritual building, the Lords Temple.

6. If a company of faithful people without officers be not a Church, then if
all the officers of a Church should dye or fall away the Church should be
nullified, and become no church: and to come nearer home (granting for a while
the parish of Worksop to be a company of faithful people) if Mr Bernard should
leave his Vicaridge for a better, then the church of Worksop should be
dischurched, and remain a Church no longer: and thus an assembly might be
Churched and vnchurched, and Churched again every week in the time of
persecution or plague, by having and loosing, and recovering again her
officers: and thus the officers should not be the eyes or tongue of the body,
for the body remaynes a true (though an imperfect) body without them, but the
head of it: yea the Pope though he hold himself the head of the Church, yet
acknowledges it a Church without him, and in the time of vacancy.

We read, Rev. 2. 5. that the Lord threatens to remove the candlestick from
the Ephesians except they amend. Now the candlestick is the Church, chap. 1.
20. and to remove the candlestick is to dischurch the assembly, or to wipe it
out of the beadrowl of Churches. Here is sin the discharging an assembly, but
that the death of the officers should do it, is no where found. We will
acknowledge the Ministers to be the Math 5. 4. Rev. ^ 2^.
lights, stars, and candles in the the candlestick the Church, and that the
Ministers death or fall is the removing of the light in a great measure, but we
may not grant them to be the Candlestick: that is the Church, wherein they are
set, as 1 Cor. 12. 28. which may stand still though they fall.

7. If a company of Saints, where no officers are, be not a true VII.
visible Church, then may they have no visible communion together either
public, or private; the reason is, because the communion of saints is an
effect, or property of the Church, and the Church a cause of it: the invisible
Church of invisible communion, and the visible Church of visible communion. And
as we can have no fellowship with Christ in his merits, and other works of
mediation, till we be in our persons joined unto him by faith, and grafted in
him, as the Ioh. 15. 1. 2. 4.
branches in the vine: so neither can we have communion one with another in
any spiritual grace, or work, till we be united one to another in love, as the
members of the body under the head. Communion in works whether natural, civil,
or religious, does necessarily presuppose union of persons. Yea if such a
company be not a Church, I see not how their seed can have right to baptism, no
nor how their own baptism ca^ be accounted true in the right ends, and uses of
it. For 1. baptism is within, and not without the Church: Ephe. 4. 4. 5.
Secondly, it is the seal of the covenant (which is the form of the Church) to
the faithful, and their seed, Act. 2. 38. 39. Thirdly, it is of the members
into the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. 13.

Lastly where the essential causes of a Church are to be found, viz. matter
and form, there is a Church. But this may be in such assemblies as have no
officers, ergo.

The former proposition is evident in it self, for the essential causes give
being unto the th(...) and it ha^h the being from them.

The 2. I gather from Mr B. own grant, where treating of the causes and
properties of the Church, he makes the page 112.
true matter such as profess Christ Jesus their only savior: and the page
116.
form to be the uniting of men to God, and one to another visibly. Now except
he will say (which God forbid) that none may make profession of faith, and be
united to Christ without officers, he cannot deny but there may be, (and so be
called) a Church without them. For all united unto Christ the head, are members
of the body, which is the Ch: and so the whole assembly jointly considered is an
whole and entyre body and Church. So that to deny an ordinary assembly or
communion of Christians to be a Christian Church, is an unchristian opinion.
And here I entreat the indifferent reader to consider whether these men's ways
be equal, or no. When we deny their assemblies to be true visible Churches,
though they consist for the most part of profane, and ungodly persons, under
the government of a Provincial, or Diocesan Bishop, and the Ministry of a
dumb or profane Priest, as the most do, (to which also the best is subject
within one month) they complayn of us, as most injurious detracters, and yet
will not they acknowledge any assembly of faithful and holy people only (if
unfurnished for a time of officers) to be a true Church, or capable of that
denomination. But let not the hearts of Gods servants be discouraged, he is no
accepter of men's persons, he has not tied his power and presence to any order,
or office in the world, but accepted of them that fear him, and work
righteousness, hating the assemblyes of the wicked, and all their sacrifices.

Upon this point I have insisted the longer, partly because it is the ground of
the other truths to be handled in their places, and partly in detestation of
the insufferable pride of this Prelacy, and Preisthood, which will have the
very life of all Churches to hang on the breath of their nostrels, yea (I may
safely say) on their lusts; if they die yea or forsake their charges in never so
fleshly respects their Churches are dissolved, at least during the vacancy, and
so the brethren dismembered from being of the visible body of Christ. But so far
are the officers from being the formal cause of the Church (as is intended) as
they are in truth no absolutely necessary appurtenance unto it. The power
indeed to enjoy them is an essential property seated in the body which may
branch out it self (as God gives fit means) into officers accordingly, which
if they prove unfruitful, it may also accordingly lop, or break off. And so
far is the Holy Ghost from giving countenance to this opinion, that the
Officers make the Church, as when he speaks distinctly of the body, and
officers, and considers them severally, he calls the body the Church, excluding
the Elders, as appears in these, amongst many other scriptures. Act. 14. 23.
and 15. 4. and 20. 17. 28. 1 Timothy 3. 5. 15. And the reason is, because the
Church is essentially in the saints, as the matter, subject, formed by the
cover^ant, unto which the officers are but adjuncts, not making for the being,
but for the welbeing of the Church, and furtherance of her faith, by their
service.

The second point now comes to be manifested, which is that two or three
faithful persons joined unto the Lord in the fellowship of the Gospel, have
immediate interest to Christ in all his ordinances.

Now least any should stumble at these words, two or three joined or gathered
together (as it seems Mr. B. would hereby take advantage to discountenance so
small a number) it must be considered, that two or three thus gathered together
have the same right with two or three hundred. Neither the smallnes of the
number, nor meannes of the persons can prejudice their right. When the Lord did
chose one nation from all other nations, he chose the smallest amongst them,
Deuteronomy. 7. 7. Ps. 105. 12.
fewest in number. And though now Christ have opened a way for all nations, yet
is it a Math. 7. 14.
narrow way and which few find, especially in the first planting or replanting
of Churches, of which Christ speaks most properly: in which regard also he
likens the Mat. 13. 31. 32.
the kingdom of heaven, or Church, to a grain of mustardfeed which is the
least of all seeds, but yet has virtue in it to bring forth a tree, in whose
boughs the birds of heaven may build their nests. And against this exception
of discouragement Christ himself has provided a comfortable remedy, in
speaking expressly of two or three Mat. 18. 19. 20.
to whom he has given his power, and promised his presence.

Now, for the point it self: the truth whereof is sufficiently manifested by
that which has been ^ormerly laid down. If a company I.
of faithful people (though without officers be the true Chapter and body of
Christ, and Israel of God, then to that company apperteynes the covenants of
promise, the oracles of God are committed untothem, and to them are given his
word, statutes and judgments: and so they Romans 3. 2. and 9. 4. Ps. 147. 19. 20.
Act. 2. 39*
may freely enjoy them amongst themselves in the order by Christ prescribed,
without any forreyn Ministers, for Mediators.

II. They that have received Christ have received the power of Christ, and his
whole power, for Christ and his power are not divided, nor one part of his
power from another.

But every company or communion of faithful people have received Christ. Ioh.
1, 12. Romans 8. 32. Isa. 9. 6. and with him power and right to enjoy him,
(though all the world be against it) in all the means, by which he does
communicate himself unto hi^ Church.

III. When the Scriptures would give us to understand the near union betwixt
Christ, and his Church, and the free and full title which he has given her in
himself, and all his most rich and precious benefits, they do teach the same by
resemblances of most straight and immediate conjunction, as of that between the
Ioh. 15. 1. 5.
vine and the branches, Ephesians. 1. 22 23. and 4. 15 16. and 5. 2. 3
the head and the body, Cant. 4. 8. 9. 10. Mat. 22. 2. 3. Ephesians. 5. 25. 29. 30.
Rev 21. 2.
the husband and the wise, and so as the branches do receive and draw the sap
and juice immediately from the vine, and as the body receives sense and motion
from the head immediately, and as the wife has immediate right to, and
interest in her husbands both person and goods, for her use, though she may and
ought to use the service of her husbands and own servants (as they can be had)
for convenient purposes, so has every true visible Church of Christ direct,
and immediate interest in, and title to Christ himself, and the whole new
Testament, and every ordinance of it, without any unnatural, monstrous, and
adulterous interposition by any person whatsoever, betwixt the vine and the
branches, the head and the body, the husband and the wife: which are Christ,
and his Church, though but two or three gathered together in his name, as has
formerly been manifested.

If all things be the Churches, even the ministers themselves, ye^ though they
be Paul, Cephas, and Apollos, and the Church Christ's, and Christ Gods, then may
the Church use and enjoy all things immediately under Christ, and needs not go
to Rome to fetch her power, whether Mr B. would send her, but may have and
enjoy the Ministers and ministrations (as her own) of all the holy things which
are given her. But the first the Apostles expressly affirms 2 Cor. 3. 21. 22.
23. and so the conclusion necessarily follows; which will also be more
manifest in the particulars as they come to be handled in their places, as
occasion shall be ministered by Mr B. reasons laid down against popularty as he
terms it, which in the next place come to be considered of.

The first and second whereof are, that it is contrary to the order which God
established before the law, under the law, and since Christ, or Mr B.
in the Apostles days; during all which times, he affirms, that the power of
governing was in the chief; in the first born before the law, in the Levites
under the law, and in the Apostles in their days. And for confirmation of
these things, he brings sundry scriptures from the old and new Testament, and
for the exposition of them, and clearing of his aslertion, intermingles sundry
other observations.

For entrance into the answer of which his refutation, I desire Answ.
it may be considred, that the visible Church being a polity Ecclesiastical,
and the perfection of all polities, does comprehend in it whatsoever is
excellent in all other bodies political, as man being the perfection of all
creatures, comprehends in his nature, what is excellent in them all: having
being with the Elements, life with the plants, sense with the beasts, and with
the angels reason. Now wise men having written of this subject, have approved
as good, and lawful, three kinds of polities, Monarchycall, where supreme
authority is in the hands of one, Aristocraticall when it is in the hands of
some few select persons, and Democraticall in the whole body, or multitude. And
all these three forms have their places in the Church of Christ. In respect of
him the head, it is a monarchy, in respect of the Eldership an Aristocracy, in
respect of the body, a popular state.

The Lord Jesus is the King of his Church alone, Isa. 9. 6. Math. 28. 18. 1 Timothy 6. 15.
upon whose shoulders the government is, and unto whom all power is given in
heaven and earth, yet has he not received this power for himself alone, but
does communicate the same with his Church as the husband with the wife. And as
he is Psa. 45. 6. 7. Heb. 1. 9.
announted by God with the oil of gladness above his fellows, so does he
communicate this a^noynting with his body, 2 Cor. 1. 21. 1 Ioh. 2. 20. Gal. 2.
9. 10. which being powered by the Father upon him the head runs down to the
skirts of the clothing, perfuming with the sweetness of the savor every member
of the body and so makes every one of them severrally Rev. 1. 6
Kings and Priests and all jointly a Ex. 19. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 6.
Kingly Preisthood, or communion of Kings, Priests, and Prophets. And in this
holy fellowship by virtue of this plenteous annoyntment, every one is made a
King, Priest, and Prophet, not only to himself but to every other, yea to the
whole. A Prophet to teach, exhort, reprove, and comfort himself and the rest, a
Priest to offer up spiritual sacrifices of prayer, praises, and thanksgiving
for himself and the rest, a King to guide and govern in the ways of godlynes
himself, and the rest. But all these always in that order, and according to
those special determinations, which the Lord Jesus the King of Kings has
prescribed. And as there is not the meanest member of the body but has
received his drop or dram of this a^noynting, so is not the same to be despised
either by any other or by the whole: to which it is of use daily in some of the
things before set down, and may be in all, or at least in the most of them. So
that not only Cor. 1^. 21.
the ey (a special member) cannot say to the hand (a special member) I have
no need of thee: but not the head (the principal member of all) unto the feet,
the meanest members I have no need of you.

And yet as if a multitude of Kings should assemble together to advise and
consult of their common affairs some one, or few must needs be appointed over
the asse^bly both for order and special assistance of the whole, which should
go before the rest in propounding, discussing, and determining of all matters,
so in this royal assembly, the Church of Christ, though al be kings, yet some
both most faithful and most able, are to be set over the rest, and that in
office, (not kingly but ministerial) because the assembly is constant, wherein
they are both deeply charged, and effectually encouraged to Minister according
to the Testament of Christ, and that not only for comlynes and order as Mr B:
slaundereth us to hold, page 90.
but for the proffit, aedification, yea and salvation of the Church. 2 Cor. 1
24. Ephesians: 4. 11. 12. 13. 1 Timothy 4. 16 by the ministration of such holy things as
to the Church appertain by the free, absolute, and immediate donation of
Christ.

This praemised, I come to Mr B. reasons and refutation.

And first I do freely acknowledge the thing, which he would charge us to deny,
and seem to prove by many scriptures: and that is that the government of the
Church before the law, under the law, and in the Apostles times, was (and so
still is) not in the multitude but in the chief. In the first born before the
law, in the Levites under the law, in the Apostles in their times, and so in
the ordinary officers of the Church ever since, and that the Lord Jesus has
given to his Church a Presbytery, or College of Act. 14 3. and 20. 7. 20.
Elders or Bishops for the feeding of the some, that is, for the ^eaching, and
governing of the whole flock according to his will: and these the multitude
jointly and severally is bound to 1 Th. 5. 2. Heb. 13 7.
obey all and every one of them, submiting themselves unto their government in
the Lord. And this it never came into our hearts to deny. Cease then Mr B. to
suggest against us unto such as are ignorant of our faith, and walking, that we
deny the Officers to be the governors of the Church or the people to be
governed by them. But this I desire the reader here to take knowledge of, and
ever hereafter to bear in mind, that it is one thing for the officers to
govern the Church (which we grant) and another thing for them to be the
Church, which Mr B. in expounding Math: 18. would needs make them; where he
would have the Ezech: ^3. 2. 3.
officers alone to admonish, and censure. As if because the watchman is set up
to blow the trumpet and to warn the people, when the sword comes, that
therefore he alone is the City, or Land, and bound alone to make resistance.
The officers of the Church are to govern every action, of the Church, and
exercise of the communion: are they therefore alone to do al things? They (if
there be any of them in the Church) are to govern in every election and choice
of ensuing Officers, are they therefore, alone to choose* excluding the Church?
They are to govern in preaching, prophesying, and hearing the word, and
receiving the sacraments, singing of Psalms, distributing unto the necessities
of the sayncts, are they therefore alone to prophecy, to sing Psalms, to
contribute to the poor and the rest, with as little reason can it be affirmed,
that they alone are to have communion in the censures, to admonish, and judge,
because they are to govern in the carrying and administering of those matters.

These things thus cleared, it will be very convenient for the purpose in hand,
and will give much furtherance to the truth, in a few words to consider of the
nature of Ecclesiastical government, and governors, which whilst politik men
through either ignorance, or contempt of the gospels simplicity, do neglect,
they labor to transform the Church into a wordly kingdom, and to set over it
a kind of kingly and lordly government: and such scriptures as give liberty
and power unto kings, and other civil officers over their subjects, and
people, for the making and altering of laws, and for the passing, and ordering
of judgments, these they pervert and misapply to Church governors and
government: then which nothing is more monstrous. Math. 20. 25. 26. 27. 28. 1
Pet. 5. 3.

I. For first civil officers are and are called in the word of God Number. 7. 2
De^. 1. 15. 16. Esa. 9. 2 Mat. 20. 25. Romans 13 1. 3. 1 Timothy 2. Tit. 3. 2. Ps.
^2. 1. 6.
Princes, Heads, Captains, Judges, Magistrates, Nobles, Lords, Kings, them in
authority, principalities, powers, yea in their respect, Gods: and according to
their names so are their offices: but on the contrary, Ecclesiastical
officers are not capable of these, or the like titles which can neither be
given without flattery unto them, nor received by them without arrogance:
neither is their office an office of Lordship, Sovereigntie, or Authority, but
of 1 Timothy 3. 1. Act. 1. 17.
Labor and Service, and so they the 1 Timothy 5. 17. 18. Mat 20. 26. 27. 2 Cor.
4. 5*
Laborers and Servants of the Church, as of God.

2. Magistrates may publish and execute their own laws in their own names,
Ezra. 1. 1. 2. etc. Est. 8. 8. Math. 20. 25. But Ministers are only
interpreters of the laws of God, and must look for no further respect, at the
hands of any to the things they speak, then as they manifest the same to be the
commandments of the Lord. 1 Cor. 14. 37.

3. Civil administrations, and their forms of government may be, and often times
are altered, for the avoiding of inconveniences, according to the circumstances
of time, place, and persons, Ex. 1^. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. etc. But the Church is
a kingdom which cannot be shaken, Heb. 12. 28. wherein may be no innovation in
office, or form of administration from that which Christ has left* for any
inconveniency whatsoever.

4 Civil Magistrates have authority by their offices to judge offe^ders, upon
whom they may also exequute bodily vengeance, using their people as their
servants, and ministers for the same purpose; but in the Ch: the officers are
the ministers of the people, whose service the people is to use for the
administering, and executing of their judgeme^ts, that is for the pronouncing of
the judgments of the Church (and of God first) against the obstinate, which is
the utmost execution the Church can perform. And what difference can be
greater? In the common wealth the people fewer or more (yea sometimes whole
armies) the ministers of the officers: in the Church, the officers the
ministers of the people.

5. In civil government obedience must be performed for the authority and will
of the commander, who is Lord over the bodies and goods of his subjects. Mat.
20. 25. 26. 1 Pet. 5. 3. yea though his commandments being with them bodily
damage, yea be they never so unjust, and unholy yet must obedience be given in
meek and pacient sufferance, though not in active performance. ^ Pet. 2. 13.
14. and 3. 14. 15. 16. but in Church matters not so. The officers may neither
exact obedience, nor the people perform it further then the goodness, profit,
and aedification of and by the thing commanded does enforce, 1 Cor. 14. 26.
Gal. 1. ^. Col. 2. 16. 1^.

And the reason is because civil Magistrates have authority annexed to their
office, and order, and though both they, and their commandments be most
unjust yet do they still reteyn their authority, which their subjects may not
shake of: but ministers and Church governers have no such authority tied to
their office, but merely to the word of God.

And as the peoples obedience stands not in making the Elders their Lords,
Sovereigns and, Judges, but in listening to their godly counsels, in following
their wise directions, in receiving their holy instructions, exhortations,
consolations, and admonitions, and in using their faithful service and
ministry, so neither stands the Elders government in erecting any tribunal
seat, or throne of judgment over the people, but in exhorting, instructing,
comforting and improving them by the word of God, 1 Timothy 3. 16. and in
affoarding the Lord and them their best service.

But here it will be demanded of me, if the Elders be not set over the Church
for her guidance, and government; Yes certainly, as the physician is set over
the body, for his skill, and faithfulness to minister unto it, to whom the
pacient (yea though his Lord, or Master) is to submit: the lawyer over his
cause, to attend unto it; the steward over his family, even his wife and
children, to make provision for them: yea the wachmen over the whole city for
the safe keeping thereof. Such, and none other is the Elders, or Bishops
government.

Now to conclude this point. All the scriptures which Mr B. brings (as the
reader may see) serves to prove that the governers of the Church, must be in,
and of the Church they govern: but the governers of the Church of Worxsop, are
not of it, neither would Mr B. I dare say, be well pleased they should. But
where it is further affirmed, that during all the Apostles days, the body of
the congregation attempted nothing of themselves, but that always Church
matters were begun, governed, and composed by the Apostle^, as it made nothing
against our matter, though it were even so, as is said, since w^ hold that
where there are officers in the Churches, and those faithful in all things, as
the Apostles were, there things are not to be attempted without them, so is it
not true which is affirmed, neither do the scriptures alleged prove any such
thing.

The three first places, Act. 1. 15. 23. 24. 25. and 6. 3. 6. and 14. 19. 20.
23. do only prove that the Apostles being general men, and officers of all
Churches, did when they were present with the Churches govern and assist them
faithfully in all things, which we also affirm to be the duty of al Elders in
their particular charges, whom the people are accordingly to obey. More
particularly. The two former places speak of the Church at Jerusalem, where
some of the Apostles were ever present: what marveil then if the congregation
attempted nothing without them? But touching the last scripture which speaks
of the Churches of and amongst the Gentiles, and of the ordination of Elders
there, Act. 14. 23. the case is otherwise. Of these Churches some were
converted to the Lord by the Apostles, and other by private brethren scattered
thither, and there publishing the Gospel. Act. 8. 12. and 10. 36-44. 47. 48.
and 11. 19. 20. 21. 23. and 13. 2. 12. 48. and 14. 1. 2. and that some certain
years before any ordination of Elders amongst them.

And can it be conceived with any reason, that all this long space, during the
Apostles absence, these Churches never assembled together for their edification
and comfort, in prayer, prophesying* and other ordinances? were there no other
co^verted all the while which desired to be admitted into their fellowship? or
had they no use of excommunication for the preserving pure of their communion
for sundry years? But to let pass these more general things and to come to
the special business mentioned: Act. 14, 23. The same rules which were after
left in writing to Timothy and Titus for the choice of Bishops, or Elders were
then in use amongst the Churches: and amongst other qualifications, it was
required of them that they should be 1 Timothy 3, 1, 2, 4, 5.
apt to teach, Tit. 1, 5. ^. 9.
able to convince, as also to manage the public affairs of the Churches,
which were to depend on them, whither in cases of controversy, or otherwise,
and such they both then were, and now are by good trial and experience to be
known to be: and those also no young plants for such fruits. And as it did *1 Timothy 3. ^.
most specially concern the brethren to know certainly, and by good experience
that those officers were so qualified, whom they were to set over them, and
unto whom they were to commit their souls to be fed unto life eternal, so
could they only take sufficient trial of them, their gifts, and faythfulnes
for the public ministry by due experience. The Apostles came, but
occasionally to visit the Churches, and to comfort them, making (in many very
small or no continuance) and fynding fit men for officers in the Churches where
they came, and the same known, testified and commended to be such by the
peoples election, they ordained Bishops or Elders over them, and so departed.
Act. 14. 21. 22. 23.

And what reason can be given, why the Apostles did not at the first planting
of the Churches, but so long a space after, ordeyn officers, (as also that Paul
did not perform that business himself in Creta, but left Titus the Evangelist
for that purpose, Tit. 1. 5.) save only that men of gifts might be trained up
in prayer, prophesying, and carrying of such other Church affairs as fell out,
and so due trial made of their gifts, and good knowledge taken of their
faythfulnes in and by the Churches whereof they were, and over which they were
to be set, being found fit for that service? Now the fourth scripture which is,
1 Cor. 5. does directly oppose that for which it is brought. It was the
Churches fault not to have purged out that sower leven, the incestuous person
before they either heard from Paul, or he of that evil amongst them: and for
their negligence herein the Apostle reproves them, as all men see that are not
willingly blind. And for Paul he in general as a penman of the Holy Ghost
wrote scriptures for the direction of the Corinthians and all other Churches to
the worlds end, and in special, as a chief Officer of that Church by v. ^.
determining for himself discharged his own duty: but did neither begin,
govern, nor compose the action: being at Philippi* or rather at Ephesus for the
present, from whence he writ the Epistle to the Church, unto which he commended
the business in hand, both for the beginning, and ending of it.

But what of all these, and many other the like scriptures to be alleged?
because the Churches are in all things to be guided by their officers
ministering faithfully, and according to the word of God, and their duty, that
therefore if either there be no officers, or if they be absent, or fayl in
their duty, the Church may do nothing either for information, or reformation?

The scriptures record, that after Stevens death Act. ^. 1. 4.
all the Church a^ Jerusalem was dispersed save the Apostles, and that they
which were dispersed went to and fro, preaching the word, the effect of whose
preaching amongst the Gentiles was Act. 11 20. 21.
the faith and conversion of a great number unto the Lord.

Here were not only Church matters but even Churches begun, preaching to and
fro, turning and joining of multitudes to the Lord, and that where neither
Apostles no^ other officers were present, for this is too gross to affirm that
during all the Apostles days nothing was begun but by them. And what if the
Lord should now raise up a company of faithful men and women in Barbary, or
America, by the reading of the scriptures, or by the wrytings, conferences, or
sufferings of some godly men, must they not separate themselves from the
filthiness of the heathen to the Lord? nor turn from Idols to the true God? nor
join themselves unto him in the fellowship of the gospel? nor have any
communion together for their mutual aedification, and comfort, till some
vagrant Priest from Rome or England be sent unto them to begin their Church
matters with his service book? And yet this would not serve the turn neither,
for he would be unto them a barbarian, and they barbarians unto him, 1 Cor. 14.
11. Some years must be spent or each could understand others language. Nay if
this were a true ground, that Church matters might not be begun without
officers, it were impossible that such a people should ever either enjoy
officers, or become a Church, yea I may safely ad, that ever there should be in
the world after the universal visible apostasy of Antichrist, any true either
Church, or officers; and so we must hold with the Arians, that except there
should come new Apostles to gather the Churches, and so a new Christ to call
those Apostles, that there can be to the worlds end neither true Churches nor
true officers. The reason is, Heb. 5. 4.
because * no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God
a^ Aaron: Now God calls no man ordinarily but by the Ch:, (for I suppose you
will not deny but that the choice of officers is a Ch: matter and not a matter
of the world.) And the Church must choose none but such as of whose knowledge,
zeal, and utterance they have taken trial by the exercise of his guif^s, as
you truly affirm else where in Page 1^8.
this book, and you will not say but this exercise of his guift^ after this
manner and for this end is a Church matter. Whence it follows, that both
Church matters, yea and Churches also may and in cases must be begun without
officers. Yea even where officers are, if they fayl in their duetyes, the
people may enterprise matters needful, howsoever you will have the minister
the only primum movens, and will ty all to his fingers. And to let pass the
godly Kings of Judah which were no Church officers (about whom the question is)
which sundry times set the Priests a work, and other with them in Church
matters, as 2. Chro. 17. 7. 8. 9. and 29. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. etc. and other
instances in the old Testament, which in the handling of the particulars will
fall into consideration, Act. 11. 22.
Peter himself was called by such as were no Apostles or other officers, to
render a reason of his going into men uncircumcised, which he also did to Gods
glory, and the Churches satisfaction, v. 18. Now how soever they which so
contended with him erred in the matter, and it is like, dealt too
contumeliously with him in the manner, yet had it been simply unlawful for
them to have propounded, and begun a matter of that kind, Peter would have
reproved and broken off their disorderly course, and not have pertaken with
them in their sin by undertaking the answer of the matter, which in the
general he does approve, by his orderly, and satisfactory answer.

Furthermore, where the Lord Jesus, Math. 18. 19. directs a brother in case,
and order, to tell the Church of his brothers offense, what can be more plain
then that he enioynes a private brother to begin a Church matter? Yea though
there be Elders in the Church, yea though the Elders alone, yea the chief of
them only (as Mr Bernard would have it) be the Church, yet must the matter be
brought to, and begun in the Church by him that is offended, and his witnesses.
To press this yet a little further: if any puliquely scandalous, or notorious
sin be committed in the Church by a brother, and the Elders neglect all means
of redressing it, ye^ put the case the Elders themselves be in the
transgression, and by name, that they preach haeresy, or both preach and
practice notorious Idolatry, and that the body of the Church also be corrupted
by them, and join hands with them in their mischief, what now must a private
brother do in this case, whose heart the Lord establishes in the truth, and
whom he plucks as a brand out of the fire? must he go on, and ioyn with that
Idolatrous assembly in their wickedness? God forbid. And leave them he may not
till he have dealt with them about this Church matter, and convinced them of
this Church sin: for if Christ would not have a brother cast of his brother
til he have dealt with him, nor the whole Church to cast of a private member,
till he refuse to hear it, Math. 18. much less will he have one brother to
forsake all the brethren, and officers also, or a private member to disclaym
the whole Church till he have by the best means he can affoard in himself, or
procure otherwise, and after the best manner, convinced, admonished and
exhorted both the Officers and people, and so found them obstinate and
irreclamable.

To proceed. The Apostle Paul writes to the Church at Rome, to Romans 16. 17.
observe such as caused divisions, and scandalls, contrary to the doctrine they
had learned, and to avoid them: and to the Church at Corinth, to 1 Cor. 5. 1.
4. 5.
deliver to Satan, or excommunicate the incestuous person, and again that upon
his repentance, they 2 Cor. 2. 7. ^.
would forgive him, and confirm their love toward him, and again to the same
Church, that they would have ready their 1 Cor. 16. 1 2. 2 Cor. 8. 7
collection for the saints at Jerusalem and gather it on the Lords day,
desiring further that they might abound in that grace, as in faith, love, and
the like: to the Colossians that they should Col. 4, 17.
say to Archippus look to thy ministry which thou have received of the Lord,
that thou fulfill it: so writes John to the Church at Pergamus that they Rev. 2.
should not suffer the Bala^mites and Nicholaitans to teach and to deceive, as
they did: v. 20.
and to the Church of Thyatira likewise not to suffer the 14. 15.
woman Iezabell calling her self a Prophetess to deceive Gods servants.

Now it seems by Mr BERNARDS doctrine that if the officers withdraw in these
things, and will not endeavor the reformation of them (or if they die or fall
away) that the silly multitude must bear all evil, and forbear all good;
they must not mark and avoid haereitcall and schismatic whether teachers or
others, they must not put out the old leven, that they may become a new lump:
nor confirm their love to any penitent person, or forgive him, though his
repentance be never so full or public: nor make any collection in the Church
for their brethren the saints, nor have any part in that grace: nor put their
Minister in mind of his office that he fulfill it: nor meddle with false
Prophets for their conviction or restrayn^, but may suffer them to deceive
without gaynsaying; these are all Church matters, Apostles only, and
Apostolic men must meddle in them, both to begin and end them. And thus the Ch:
without the officers help (though it cannot possibly be had) as a deaf, a du^b,
a blind, a lame, yea a liveles and senseles body: it must both have the eyes
put out, and the ears stopped, and neither see nor hear, it must be tongue-tyed
from speaking, and fast bound hand and foot from doing any thing for the
general, and joint good, yea it must not be saved without the officers, for
other ordinary way of salvation know I none by the revealed will of God in his
word, but in the use of the ordinances, which Christ has given unto his Church.

It is the stewards duty to make provision for the family, but what if he
neglects this duty in the masters absence? must the whole family starve, yea
and the wife also? or is not some other of the family best able, to be employed
for the present necessity? It is the Pilottes office to guide the ship, but
what if he ignorantly, or negligently, or desperately will run the same upon
the rocks, or sands, must the rest of the mariners forbear to intermedle, and
so perish? It is the Captains office to lead the army, but what if he or they
perfidiously will betray the same into the hands of the enemy, may not the body
of the army make the best head they can to defend themselves, and to offend
their enemies, using the best means they have for their present direction? Yea
even in the most peaceable and best governed co^mon-wealthes, a private man may
in a case of necessity become a Magistrate for a main work, and that which
ordinarily is the Magistrates peculiar. The Lord has given Romans 13. 3. 4.
the sword into his hand for the good of him that does well, and to take
vengeance on him that does evil, and to him it apper teynes to defend the
innocent. But if this innocent person be assaulted by a theif, murderer or
other enemy, when the Magistrate is absent, that should defend him, God puts
the sword into his hand, and he may as lawfully use it now, as wear it before,
and rather kill then be killed.

So may the Church as the wife of Christ, if the steward the minister neglect
the provision, use the help, and service of an other the fittest in the family
to provide food; the multitude, as the mariners, if the minister the Pylot be
desperate, set an other the most skillful at the stern: the body of the army
the Church, if the officers as the Captains be perfidious, use the help and
guidance of some other the most expert: so may, as a private citize^ a
magistrate, a private member become a minister, for an action of necessity to
be performed, by the consent of the rest. These first things even nature, and
the light of it teaches the natural man, the latter, grace, and the spirit of
grace the spiritual man. Of these things the more largely I have spoken in the
general, I may be the breifer in the particulars. Only for conclusion I must
demand of Mr B. this question: if Church matters be to be performed only by
ministers, why his Sexton being no minister reads divine service in his
absence, and that by authority from the Ordinary. If this be not a Church
matter, and that material, there is small Church matter in the most Churches
in the land.

Now the last thing I have to observe touching this first reason is, that so
far as the author speaks the truth in it, so far he speaks most plainly
against himself. In that he graunts (as he does page 90. 91.) the people under
the law aright from the Lord, to approve of the appointment of the Levites, and
that the body of the congregation were made acquainted with that which
concerned them, yea and had liberty to choose their officers, and to present
them to the Apostles, therein he overthrowes both his own, and all other the
ministeries in England, as by the laws both civil and ecclesiastical they are
constituted. For the law (with you Mr B.) allows not only Ministers ordained
at large, without any certain congregations, but entitles them also to their
special cures, without so much as the peoples knowledge: many parishes never
seeing the faces of their ministers till they come to ring their belles in sign
of victory: much less does the law provide, they should be approved, least of
all that they should be chosen, and presented by them.

As the truth you speak in this place makes against you, so had you spoken more
fully, you had brought more clear testimony against yourself, you do therefore
take up yourself in time, and mingle some untruths among* like darkness with
light, least the light should shine too clearly in the eyes of the reader.

Where you then affirm that the people did only approve of the Levites at the
Lords appointment when they took their charge, Numb. 3. 6* 12. Lev. 8. 2. 36.
and that the body of the congregation was only made acquainted with the choice
of Mathyas, Act. 1. 15. you speak unfaithfully: but where you add, that only
the liberty was granted them by the Apostles then to choose Officers etc. it is
both false and fond. False as the former, for the Levites were not only
approved by the people, but given by them: they were the the peoples gift, and
therefore theirs (for they gave nothing but their own) and by them given to
minister unto the Lord in stead of the first borne, Exodus 13. 2. 12. 13. and
22. 29. Number. 3. 12. The Levites are expressly called the peoples shake offering,
and so were not only approved, but given by Number. 8. 9. 10. 11.
them as their offering, even the offering of the whole congregation, and that
by solemn ordination and imposition of hands by the people Men may approve the
things done by others, but the people were principal doers themselves: the
offering was theirs, and by them as their gift presented, and so by Aaron offered
unto the Lord in their name.

And as shameless an untruth is it which you avouch touching the calling of
Mathyas, Act. 1. that the body of the congregation was only made acquainted
with that which concerned them all. For howsoever the ministration were
extraordinary, being an Apostleship, to which he was called, and therefore the
Lord reserved to himself the prerogative royal of immediate designation of the
very person, Gal. 1. 1. yet would he have the liberty of the people so
inviolably preserved, as that by direction, they were to present two, and after
to acknowledge by common consent that particular person which by the Lord was
immediately singled out, and designed to that work. verse. 23. 26.

Lastly the liberty granted to the people for the choosing both of Deacons, and
Elders, Act. 6. and 14. was not by any courtesy of the Apostles, as by the
Popes indulgence for that time, as Mr B. would cunningly bear the simple
reader in hand, but it was an ordinance eternal, and perpetual, never reversed
but by Antichrist, even a part of that connsell of God wherewith the Apostles
acquainted the Churches, and one of these commandments which they were to
teach all Churches to observe, which they also did.

And so I come to the third reason against this imputed popularity, Mr B.
taken from the commission of Christ to his Apostles, and their successourt.

This is something generally set down, but the thing (I perceive Answ.
by his proofs) which Mr B: intends is, that the use of the keys and power of
binding and loosing was committed by Christ to his A postles, and to those
which succeeded them.

And first here, I do grant with Mr Bernard, that look to who^ the power of
binding and loosing was primarily, and immediately committed, in their
successors it recideth for ever: so that the only point in quaestion is into
whose hands the Lord Jesus has properly and immediately given the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, the power of loosing, and binding sins.

For the better understanding then of this point it must be considered, that
the kingdom of heaven is compared to a great house into which some are
admitted, and others denied entrance: the door into this house is Christ: the
key that opens and shutts this door, is the gospel: the opening of it (which
is the loosing of sins,) is the publishing, opening, manifesting and making
known of the gracious promises of the forgivenes of sins and life eternal
to such as believe, and repent. The shutting of this door (which is also the
binding of sins) is the declaration and denunciation of the wrath of God,
against sin, and of coudemnatio^ upon persons impenitent, and unbelievers:
and both these according to the pleasure of the master of the house, though
the latter of them be not of the nature of the gospel, which is in it self 2
Cor. 3. 6
the ministry of life, and of the spirit which gives life, but accidental
unto it, by men's own fault, which through their unbelieving, and impenitent
hearts turn this key as it were, the wrong way upon themselves.

Now by the evidence of the former general truth approved (I doubt not) to the
conscience of every indifferent man (which is, that a company of faithful
people united together in the fellowship of the gospel, though without
officers, is a Church, This specialty in hand will be cleared. And wheresoever
the promise of forgivenes of sins, and life eternal is to be found, there
hangs the golden key of heaven gates, there sins are loosed in heaven: for
what else is it to loose sins, but to publish, proclayme, or declare in the
word of God and righteousness of Christ, the forgivenes of sins to them that
repent. But of these things hereafter.

I will in the first place consider of Mr Bernards proofs, and of his
collections from them.

The places alleged are, Math. 2^. 19. and 16. 19. Ioh. 20. 21. 22. 23. Mark.
13. 34. which scriptures are not all of one nature, nor serving to the same
end. Yet this in general I do answer to all of them, that we deny not but that
the public Ministers are by commission from Christ to publish the gospel,
administer the sacraments, bind and loose sins, watch and ward the house of
God, and the like, which for us to deny were wickedness, and for you to prove
is lost labor. But the points in controversy betwixt us are first, whether
these things and all of them, and with them all other Church affairs not here
mentioned, be so appropriated to the Officers, as that none other may meddle
with them: and 2. whether this power be committed to them immediately from, and
by Christ, or mediately from Christ by the Church: which consideration whilst
you neglect, you err your self, deceive such as follow you, and injury them
you oppose. But to the particulars.

The first and third scriptures, Math. 28. 19. and Ioh. 20. 21. 22* 23. are
meant only of the Apostles; and in them they receive the commission Apostolik,
which (to speak properly) is incommunicable to any other Officer in the Church.
For as none are to succeed them in the Office of Apostles, so neither is the
Commission (peculiar to the Apostles) ^^nveyed, or intended to any others,
which also further appears thus.

Their charge was to Math. 2^ 19.
teach and baptize all nations, and to Mark. 16. 15.
go into all the world, and to preach the gospel to every creature^ but
ordinary Ministers have no such commission, but are tied to their particular
flocks, Act. 14. 2^. and 20. 28.

2. Their Commission was extraordinary, and miraculous, whether we respect the
inward qualifications of the parties by the immediate inspiration of the holy
Ghost, wherewith they were at the first springled as it were, John. 20. 22. and
afterward replenished, Act. 2. 4. or whether we respect the miraculous
confirmation of the doctrine both by them tha^ taught it, and by them that
b^leeved it. Mark. 16. 17. 18. 20.

3. The very outward o^der and manner of conveying it was extraordinary, and by
Christ's immediate voice, and as it were with his own hands: where ordinary
Ministers have their commissio^s from Christ indeed, but by men, Gal. 1. 1. And
the consideration of this very difference does minister sufficient matter of
answer, that though Christ did transfer unto the Apostles their office, and
power to exercise it immediately, yet for ordinary ministers, the case is clean
otherwise.

Lastly the disciples of Christ did not then first receive power to teach when
they were possessed of their Apostleship, but long before they were admitted
into office, as did others also besides the^ without office as well as they,
Math. 10. 5. 6. 7. Luke 10. 1. 2. 3. 9. 10. which scriptures alone, as they are
sufficient to justify against Mr B. that the keys of the kingdom were given
into the hands of men without office, yea before any office or officer was in
the Church, so do they manifest the notable falsehood of that his pe^emptory
affirmation, page 93. that it is as plain as the shining of the sun of the
firmament of heaven, to such as are not blind, or wilfully shut not their eyes
from seeing, that Christ never said to the body of the congregation, that is, to
any out of office, (for that is the point) go preach.

The Apostles by Mr B. own grant in this place, and by these scriptures, and
at this time, and not before, had their commission of Apostl^ship granted them
from Christ, (and I hope he will not say they entered their office without a
commission) and yet both power and charge was given them long before to preach
the kingdom of God, as the forequoted scriptures manifest.

The next place is Mat. 16. 19. where express mention is made of the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, and of the power of binding, and loosing given to
Peter: by which scripture rightly interpreted I desire the difference betwixt
Mr Bernard and me may be determined.

That by the keys is meant the gospel of Christ, opening a way by him, and his
merits, as the door into the kingdom, I have formerly declared, and we must
take heed of that deep delusion of Antichrist, in imagining that this power of
binding or loosing sins, of opening, or shutting heaven gates, is tied to any
office, or order in the Church; it depe^ds only upon Mark. 2. 7. Rev. 3. 7.
Christ, who alone properly forg^veth sins, and has the key of David which
opens, and no man shuts, and shuttes, and no man opens: and this key externally
is the gospel, which with himself he gives to his Church, Isa. 9. 6. Ro^. 3.
2. and 9. 4. and not to the officers only for them, as Mr Bern. in his page
178.
last book come to mine hand in the publishing of this mine answer, does
insinuate, because the material book was give^ into the hands of the Priests,
and Elders to be kept. Deuteronomy. 31. 9. whence I do by the way gather thus much,
that since the keys of the kingdom of heaven is the gospel, and that the
gospel is give^ to the whole Church, and to every member of it, whether there
be Ministers or no, it therefore follows, that the keys are given to all and
every member alike, as the gospel is, though not to be used alike by all, and
every one, which were gross confusion, but according to the order prescribed
by Christ.

Now for the place in hand, (which is Math. 16. 18. 19.) it is granted by all
sides that Christ gave unto Peter the keys of the kingdom, that is, the power
to remit and reteyne sins declaratively (as they speak) as also that in what
respect this power was given to PETER, in the same respect it was, and is given
to such as succeed Peter: but the quaestion is, in what respect or
consideration this power spoken of was delegated unto him. The Papist affirms
it was given to Peter as the Prince of the APOSTLES, and so to the BISHOPS of
ROME as PETER'S successors, and thus they stablish the POPES primacy: the
PRELATES say nay, but unto PETER an APOSTLE that is, a chief Officer of the
CHVRCH, and so to us as chief Officers succeeding him, which is also Mr B:
judgment, page 94. Others affirm it to belong to Peter here as a Minister of
the word, and sacraments, and the like, and so consequently to belong to all
other Ministers of the gospel equally, which succeed Peter in those and the
like administrations. But we for our parts do believe and profess that this
promise is not made to Peter in any of these forenamed respects, nor to any
office, order, estate, dignity, or degree in the Church, or world, but to the
confession of faith, which Peter made by way of answer to Christ's question, who
demanding of the disciples, v. 15. whom (amongst the variety of opinions that
went of him, ver. 14.) they thought him to be, was answered by Peter in the
name of the rest, Thou art Christ the son of the l^ving God, ver. 16. To this
Christ replies, ver. 17. blessed ar^ thou Simon, the son of Jonas, etc. and
ver. 18. thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not overcome it. and v. 19. I will give unto thee the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth shall be
bound in heaven, and whasoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven.

So that the building of the Church is upon the rock of Peter's confession, that
is, Christ, whom he confessed: this faith is the foundation of the Church:
against this faith the gates of hell shall not prevayl: this faith has the
keys of the kingdom of heaven: what this faith shall loose, or bind on earth,
is bound, and loosed in heaven. And thus the Protestant divines (when they deal
against the Popes supremacy) do generally expound this scripture, though Mr B.
directly make the Pope and his shavelings Peter's successors in this place, as
hereafter will appear. Now upon the former ground it follows, that whatsoever
person has received the same precious faith with Peter (as all the faithful
have, ^ Pet. 1. 1.) that person has a part in this gift of Christ: whosoever
does confess publish, manifest, or make known Jesus to be that Christ the
son of the living God, and Savior of the world, that person opens heaven
gate, loses sin, and partakes with Peter in the use of the keys.

And hereupon also it follows necessarily, that one faithful man, yea or
woman either, may as truly, and effectually loose, and bind, both in heaven,
and earth, as all the Ministers in the world.

But here I know the Lordly clergy, like the bulls of Bashan, will roar loud
upon me, as speaking things intollerably derogatory to the dignity of
Preisthood, and it may be some others also, either through ignorance, or
superstition, will take offense at this speech, as confounding all things: but
there is no such cause of exception. For howsoever the keys be one and the
same in nature, and efficacy, in what faithful man's or men's hands soever, as
not depending either upon the number, or excellency of any persons, but upon
Christ alone, yet is it ever to be remembered, that the order, and manner of
using them is very different.

These keys in doctrine may be turned as well upon them which are without the
Church, as upon them which are within, and their sins either loosed, or
bound. Math. 28. 19. but in discipline (as we speak) not so, but only upon
them which are within. 1 Cor. 5. 12. 13. Again the Apostles by their office
had these keys to use in all Churches, yea in all nations upon earth: ordinary
Elders for their particular flocks. Act. 14. 23. and 20. 28.

Lastly there is an use of these keys publicly to be had, and an use
privately: an use of them by one person severally, and an use of them by the
whole Church jointly, and together: an use of the^ ministerial, or in office,
and an use of them out of office: but the power of the gospel (which is the
keys) is still one, and the same, notwithanding the diverse manner of using it.

And this distinction well observed will stop the hole, by which Mr Bernard in
his reply, sundry times scapes out (where otherwise he should be vnavoydably
taken in Mr Smythes arguments) by taking vantage at, and perverting of a phrase
used by Mr Sm: which is the ministerial power of Christ. This ministerial
power Mr S. makes that external communicated, and delegated power of Christ
with and to the Church, serving only for manifestation and declaration of the
remission, or retention of sins, opposing ministerial power in the creature,
to that power essential, and incommunicable which is inhaerentin Christ and
God the creator: but Mr B. on the other side, either ignorantly, or
deceiptfully, misinterprets the term Ministerial, as meant only of the power
in office, opposed to that which is out of office, and so creeps out at this
cranny. But with what reason can it be either conceived, or suggested that Mr
Smyth should affirm, that the body of the Church, or a private brother out of
office, should have this power spoken of in office? Thus much to prove that all
the precious promises, Math. 16. were made to Peter in respect of his
confession of faith, and so consequently to all others, which succeed him in
the same confession, and amongst the rest, the use of the keys, though not in
the same order, or office with Peter, which was peculiar unto him with some few
others. It follows.

First if the keys of the kingdom of heaven be appropriated unto the
officers, then can there be no forgivenes of sins, nor salvation without
officers: for there is no entrance into heaven but by the door, there is no
clyming over any other way, without the key the door cannot be opened: so then
belike if either there be no officers in the Church (as it may easily come to
pass in some extreme plague, or persecution, (howsoever in England a man may
have a Priest for the whisteling) and must needs be in the Churches of Christ
in our days either in their first pla^ting, or first calling out of Babylon:
for Antichrists masse-preisthood is not essentially Christ's true M^nistery) or
if the officers Mat. 23. 13.
take away the key of knowledge (as the Scribes and Pharisees did) and will
neither enter in themselves, nor suffer them that would, then must the
miserable multitude be content to be shut out, and perish eternally, for ought
is known to the contrary. They have no remedy in this case, no redress may be
had of this evil, no means used to avoid it. Though the Pope carry with him
thowsands to hell, no man may say unto him Sir, why do you s^? To admonish the
Officers of their sin, were against common sense that the father should be
subject to his children, the work dominere over the workman, the seeds-man be
ordered by the corn, and to excommunicate them and call new, were intolerable
usurpation of the keys, this power is given to the chief officers only, page
94. 95. and to separate from them is as intolerable. page 88. Miserable were
the Lords people if these things were so: but the truth is they are miserable
guides that so teach.

2 They which may forgive sins and sinners, save souls, gain, and turn men
unto the Lord, to them are the keys of the kingdom given, by which they open
the door unto such, as they thus forgive, gain, and save: but all these things
such as ar^ no ministers, may do, as these scriptures (which I entreat the
godly reader to consider) do most clearly manifest, Math. 18. 15. 2 Cor. 2. 5.
7. 8. 9. 10. Act. 8. 1. 4. with 11. 19. 20. 21. Iam. 5. 19. 20. 1 Pet. 3. 1.
Jude, 22. 23. Erroneous therefore, and derogatory is it to the nature of the
gospel, and free donation of Christ, thus to impropriate and ingro(...) the
keys, whichly common to all Christians in their place and order.

3. Lastly I do affirm with Mr Smyth that the twelve were as yet but
disciples, and not actually Apostles. Designed in deed they were to the office
of Apostles, but not possessed of it. A man may call such a woman his wife,
before they be actually married, and such a child his heir, though he be not
for the present possessed of a foot of his inheritance, nor like to be before
the testators death: and that this was the condition of the twelve, I prove by
these reasons.

If the twelve were called to the office of Apostles, Mat. 16. then Christ
called men to an office, for which they were altogether unfit, and unfurnished,
which to imagine were impious against Christ.

Now that they were utterly unapt to this office, appears in these particulars.

First they vvanted that Christian fortitude, and courage, which was most
needful for that office.

Secondly, they were ignorant of the nature of Christ's kingdom* not forecasting
his death, nor believing his resurrection, unfurnished also with the gift of
tongues, and so utterly unable to teach the gentiles, for whose sake they
received their commission in a special manner, Mat. 16. 21. 22. and 20. 20.
21. and 26. 51. Mark. 16. 11. 14. Luke ^4. 21. Act. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4. Mat. ^8. 19.
Ephe. 3. 5. 6.

2. When Christ ascended on high he gave gifts to men, viz. Apostles,
Evangelists, etc. Ephe. 4. 8. 11. And then and not before then was the Church
capable of the office of Apostles, who were to preach the gospel to all
nations, when the partition wall was broken down betwixt the Jews and
Gentiles, that the gentiles also which were formerly strangers and
foreigners, might now be made citizens with the saints, and of the househood
of God, Ephe. 2. 12. 19*

And a^ this particular I have now in hand, seems to receive confirmation
from the last scripture Mr Bernard brings for the Apostles commission, which
is Mark. 13. 34. where Christ at his departing into a strange country sets
his house in order, gives his servants authority and appoints them their work*
so does the exposition and application of the same scripture to the general
purpose (if we compare with this place that which he affirms in another)
argue him that brings it of a mind very unsound and unstable.

Here, (as all men see) Mr Bern. allegeth it to prove that the chief officers
only are by commission from Christ to meddle in the public affairs of the
Church, and in particular to redress things amiss, and to censure offenders:
but in his second book being pressed Reply unto Mr Smith page 195.
by an argument by Mr Smith taken from this scripture, he fare and ^^at^y
denies, that the Lord in this place intends to set out any government of the
Church at all: and thus compared with himself, he is like nothing l^sse then
himself.

Now since Mr B. disclayms this scripture as not intended at all of the
government of the Church, and that in his 2. and better thoughts, I have no
reason to spend much time in answering him. Only I can not pass by one
frivolous exception, in his reply, against Mr Sm. and another absurd collection
of his own. Where Mr Smyth affirms, that every servant or disciple in the
Church has authority (and that truly) (if he have the word of God he has
authority, for the word caryes authority with it, wheresoever it goes) Mr B.
excepts first that by servants are meant Officers: which as it is true
sometimes, so is it otherwise for the most part, espetially in the parables of
this kind, Mat. 25. 14. Luke 19. 12. 13. to which this parable seems well to
consort: wherein since all have received some good thing, or substance, from
Christ to be dispensed for the good of the rest, all should dilig^tly and
faithfully employ their labor in the same, ever expecting the return of the
master, and all and every one of them watching, and the Porter specially,
according to that special charge, laid upon him to watch, ver. 34. 35. 37. but
the exception I mean is that by servants cannot be meant the Church, because
the house is the Church, and the authority not given to the house, but to the
servants in the house, who are to look over others. Mark here, in the case of
government, the house must needs be the Church, the Church and house are both
one, and Christ speaking of the house, or Church means the people, excluding
the officers: and yet Math. 18. in the case of goverm^t, the officers are in
Christ's speech the Church, or house (for they are all one) excluding the
people. But to the point, as the officers are both the Lords Romans 1. ^ Heb. 3.
^.
servants in his house and parts of the Heb. 3. 6 1 Pet 2. 5. Gal. 6. 10. Ephe.
2. 10.
house and household also, so are the people not only the house or of the
house and household as in the forenamed scriptures, but Mat. 25. 14. Luke 19
12. 13. Ro^. 6. 16. 22. Rev. 1. 1. and 7. 3.
the Lords servants in his house also.

The idle and senseles exposition Mr B. gives is of the Porters watching. Where
the master at his departure appoyntes every serv^^t his work, and commands
all to watch, and the porter specially, least he (...) suddenly and find them
sleeping, Mr B. to join all together for the holding out of Mr Smythes
Argument, makes the Porter Gods spirit, as if the Holy Ghost were one of the
servants, and had a commandment from Christ to watch, least it should be
found asleep at his coming. And by this, I hope, it appears in the general
contrary to Mr B. affirmation, that the power of Christ (or keys of the
kingdom) is not delegated or committed primarily much less solaryly, or alone,
to the officers of the Church how soever they as the governors are to direct,
and as the minister to exequute in the use of this power, or of these keys. Of
the particulars hereafter. That which comes next into consideration is, that
the Apostles committed that their power received from Christ not to Mr B.
the body of the people, but to the chief ministers of the gospel, and chief
officers of the Church.

First here let the reader observe how Mr B. interesses these Answ.
cheiftayns only in the power of Christ as the Apostles successors (excluding
himself and the rest of his rank) that he may advance the throne of Antichrist
in his chief ministers the Lord Archbishops and Bishops, whose chair he thus
stoutly labors to uphold with both shoulders.

Secondly I deny, that either the Evangelists, such as were Timothy, and Titus,
succeeded the Apostles in their office, or that any other ministers in the
Church, did or do succeed either the Apostles, or Evangelists, as they were
such (as we speak). They were extraordinary officers in the first pla^ting of
the faith amongst the gentiles, their qualifications extraordinary, and
miraculous, as the gift of tongues, and the like, and so their offices were
determined in their persons. And yet I deny not but the true Ministers of the
gospel the Bishops or Elders, in their particular Churches do succeed the
Apostles (though not in office) yet in their ordinary ministration of the word,
sacraments, censures, prayer, ordination, and all other ordinances of the
Church whatsoever, according to the order Christ has left; but that the
Apostles and Evangelists have by any order committed their power or any part of
it to any such Chief Ministers or rather Lords, yea spiritual tyra^ts as the
Lordbishops and Archbishops in Engl. are, that I deny withal my power. There
are no such cheifteyns in the Church of Christ, or communion of saints. The
Apostles did, by the Churches free choice, ordeyn in every particular assembly
a company of Elders or Bishops, whom they charged with the particular flocks,
in, and to which they were to minister the holy things of God, and none other.
Act. 14. 23. and 20. 17. 28. 1 Timothy 3. 1. 2. 4. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 5. ^. 2. Much
less are the great Antichrists of Rome, the Popes, and Cardinals, the
Apostles, and Evangelists successors in any right by the word of God, or
capable in that their estate of Apostolical or other ministerial power of
Christ, as you Mr B. will make them, of which your Popish error more in place.

Now for the scriptures cited, they serve well to prove that which no man
denies, in which kind of disputing Mr B. has a special faculty.

The scriptures are* 1 Timothy 1. 3. and 3. 14. 15. and 5. 21. 22. Tit. ^. 5.
which places prove thus much in effect, that Timothy was to see false doctrine
suppressed in Ephesus; that men gifted according to the word of God should be
chose^ into the office of Bishops and Deacons: that he should deal impartially
in all things: that he should not partake in the sins of other men by laying
hands suddaynly upon any: and that Titus was left in Crete to redress things
amiss, and to ordain Elders in the Churches.

And what follows upon this? I know well what Mr B. infers: namely, that the
chief Ministers alone in the Churches whether pure, or impure (by which latter
he means the Church of Rome) as he expounds himself* page 145. that is, that
Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Suffraganes, Chauncelours* and the
rest of the triumphant Clergy, and they alone should meddle with supressing
error, rectifying things amiss, calling and ordayning ministers, and that all
others are absolutely inhibited any meddling with these things. Well, (to let
pass your fearful retyring (Mr B.) into the battered bulwarks of the Papists
for succor, and the discharging of your self, and all the inferior ministry
that these chief ministers might reign alone) the scriptures do not debar^e
the members of the Church from meddling in those things in their place, and
order, nor impropriate them to the chief Lords, as is pretended, only they
declare that the officers are to do their own duetyes in those businesses, and
to put the brethren in remembrance of theyrs, to command, teach, and speak
those things, exhorting and rebuking with all authority by the word of God as
occasion serves. 1 Timothy 4. 6. 11. Tit. 2. 15. And if Mr B. will conclude any
thing for his purpose by the scriptures he alleges he must take this position
for granted, that whatsoever Paul wrytes to Timothy, or Titus, touching the
Church, about that only they, and their successors the chief ministers are to
meddle; which presumpteous affirmation is sufficiently refuted by the very
recital of it. He that reads over the Epistles but with a piece of an ey may
see the contrary. There is no greater force in this collection then in that
Mar. 13. 34. because the porter is to watch, therefore he alone, and not the
rest also, which is contrary to the express words immediately following, where
all are commanded to watch, v. 37. And thus the conclusion, which Mr B. would
make, that the place, 1 Cor. 5. though generally spoken, must be understood of
the chief officers of the Church, is without pr^mises. It must be understood
as it is spoken, though both he, and the Pope say nay to it, and of the meaning
of it, we shall speak hereafter at large, when we come to handle the censures
of the Church, as also of your pretended proof. 2 Cor. 2. 6.

Only I must needs take knowledge of that part of the truth, which Mr B. being
set upon the rack of his conscience in reading this, 1 Cor. 5. is compelled to
confess, and that is, that from v. 5. ^^ may be gathered for the body of the
Church, that the offender must be delivered to Satan with their knowledge
publicly, when they meet together in the open assembly.

Towching which his grant I observe these three particulars.

First it overthrowes the practice in the Church of England, where the offender
is excommunicated by the Chauncelour, or Official, it may be, forty miles off
from the body of the congregation, whereof he is a member, and that most what
without the presence of any one of the body, yea or their privity either, till
such times as either the Parish Priest, or Church door signify the matter unto
them.

2. If the officers must judge, and excommunicate in the open assembly, then
can they alone in no sense be the Church. For the Church is nothing but the
assembly. And it is all one to say the (...)
officers in the assembly, are the Church, as to say the officers in the
assembly, are the assembly* which is a senseles affirmation. And if the
Officers alone be the Church, to which complaint is to be made, and which is to
reprove the offender and judge him, they must do it in a distinct assembly from
the body, and not in the assembly compounded necessarily of the officers and
the body: as your Courtkeepers do in their Consistories, and the Elders in the
reformed Churches in their private Chambers.

3. It is most untrue which you say, that no more can be gathered from this
place, but that excommunication was performed in the presence of the body of
the Church, and with their knowledge being gathered together: it is apparent
that they which were gathered together, were by the power of Christ to deliver
to Satan the offender, to purge out the old leven, to judge, and to put out
from among themselves that wicked fornicatour. v. 5. 6. 7. 12. 13. of which
more hereafter.

And so I come to the 4. Reason against Popularity (as you term ^t) but in
truth against Christian liberty: which is grounded upon Ephe. 4. 11. 12. Your
words are these.

It is most apparent that Christ ascending up gave gifts for preaching, Mr B.
administration of sacraments, and government unto some sorts of men, who
(...)e set out there and plainly distinguished from the other saints, the body
of the Church.

Against this hitherto I take no great exception: though the Apostles Answ.
meaning may be better laid down thus, that Christ Jesus the King and Lord of
his Church has set in it certain sorts, and orders, of officers rightly
fitted, and furnished with graces for the reparation of the saints, and
aedification of his body to the worlds end.

This we affirm as loud as you, and with more comfort. And therefore after I
have observed in a few words, how little this scripture serves for your
present purpose, I will in as few more make it appear, how directly it serves
against you in many other mayn matters, and that you in bringing it have only
lighted a candle whereby to discover your own nakedness.

This then is that which you would conclude, that because Christ has given
power, and charge to the sorts of ministers here set down for the reparation
of the saints, and aedification of the body, that therefore no brethren out of
office may meddle with the reparation and aedification of the Saints, or Church.

I do acknowledge that only Apostles, Prophets, etc. by office, and as works
of their Ministry, are to look to the reparation, and aedification of the
body: but that the brethren out of office, are discharged of those du^ties, I
deny, any more then the rest of the servants were of watching, (though out of
office) because the Porter alone was by office to watch. Mark. 13. 34 37. Yea
look what is laid upon the officers in this place, after a more special
manner, by virtue of their office, that also is laid upon the rest of the
brethren else where in the same words to be performed in their places as a duty
of love, for which they have not only liberty but charge from the Lord.

The officers are here charged with the reparation or knitting together of the
saints: the same duty in the same words is imposed upon every brother Gal. 6.
1. (...)
spiritual: and I hope you the Ministers will not be the only spiritual men
in the Church.

Secondly the officers are here given to aedifie the body: the same duty in
the same terms is laid upon every one of the brethren in their places. 1 These.
5. 11. and unto these few might be added an hundred places of the same nature.
Why then should the Ministers of the Lord, or any other Number. 11. 29. 1 King.
22. 24.
for their sake envy, unto the Lords people either their graces or liberty, or
thus arrogate all unto themselves, as though all knowledge were treasured up in
their breasts, all power given into their hands, and as though no drop of
grace for aedificatio^ or comfort of the Church could fall from else where then
from their lips. Moses in the place of numbers before named wished that all the
Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them:
and Paul gives liberty to 1 Cor. 14. 3. 23. 36. 31.
the whole Church, and to all in it (women excepted ver. 34.) to prophecy one
by one for the instruction, edification and comfort of all: but with Mr B: and
his Church, I perceive, neither Moses prayer, nor Paul's grant, nor Gods spirit
must be avayleable, or find acceptance for aedification by any save the
Ministers. The subjects of Kings use to complayn much of Monopolyes, but the
subjects of the Lord Jesus have greater cause of complaint, that he himself,
his power, presence, and graces wherewith he honors all his saints, are thus
monopolized, and engrossed.

The similitude which here you borrow from the body of man, wherein (you say)
the special members have their special virtues in themselves given of God and
not bestowed upon them by the body, as the eyes to see, the tongue to speak
etc. for the confirmation of the power of the Lord Jesus, or liberty to teach,
admonish, and censure in the hands of the officers alone is faulty in both
parts of it, and conteynes in it sundry errors both theological, and
phylosophicall.

And first I do here most justly except against your shuffling together I.
and confounding of the personal gifts, graces, and virtues of the Ministers
and their ministerial power or office. The first in deed they have from
Christ, and not from, or by the Church at all, as their knowledge, zeal,
utterance, wisdom, holiness, and the like: with which the Church finds them
furnished, and so appoints them under Christ to use these gifts in office of
Ministry, whereof out of office they have erst given knowledge: and this power
or appointment, which they have from or by the Church thus to vs^ these gifts
is another thing then their personal gifts, and qualifications themselves,
which you Mr B. do very fraudulently confound.

Secondly, it is ignorantly affirmed, that God endu^s certain members II.
of the body with special virtues and properties, as the ^y with seeing, and
the like: and that they have these properties not from the body but from God.
For first the very virtue, or faculty of seeing is not in the ey, but in the
soul, which uses the ey only for the instrument of seeing, and so other parts
in their kind. Oculus non vide^, sed anima per oculi^^. And that not
immediately neither, but with the help of the spirits, natural, vital, and
animal diffused throughout the body, which the soul uses most immediately as
the instruments of all life, sense, and motion. And so it comes to pass not
only in death where the soul and body are separated, but in sundry diseases
also of the body, that the ey fails in seeing, and so other members in their
service.

Thirdly, as the Elders of the Church (I confess) may be compared III.
to eyes in the body, and the Deacons to hands in a respect, so I deny the
similitude to hold absolutely. Similitudes (as they say) do not run upon four
feet: and to streyn them above that which is intended by the holy Ghost in
using them, is a course full both of vanity and error. The Deacons are the
hands of the Church for the distribution of her bodily things to them that
need, and yet I trow, you would not have the Church suffer the poor to starve,
where the Deacons are wanting to minister, or failing in their ministration: so
are the Elders the eyes and mouth of the Church for her government, and
ministration of spiritual things, and yet must not the Church perish
spiritually for their want, or negligence: no, the Lord is more merciful to
his people then so, and does nor ty them so short in the means of their
aedification, and salvation, how streyt and hard hearted soever you M. B. are
toward them, or co^temptuous of them: they may, and must use in cases of
necessity their best helps, for the distribution of things simply necessary to
the body. And dare you say (as you have done in both your books) that the
officers are absolutely to the Church, as the eyes to the body? and that there
is no spiritual light in the rest of the members save only in them? and that
all the body besides and without them is darkness? Indeed such a blind beetle
your spiritual Lords, and you make your Churches, and so you lead them. But,
oh you the people of God, yet in Babylon, partakers of the heavenly
illumination, trust not these your Seers too much. they would be thought all ey
from top to bottom, and would make you believe, that you the multitude are
stoneblind, and can not possibly without them see one step before you, that so
they might lead you by the lip, whither they list: but open your eyes more and
more, and you shall see more and more clearly that the ways of your National
Church* are not the ways which Christ has left for his visible Churches to
walk in, but a very by path: and take heed that these men, which would be
thought all, and only light, cause not a ^og of earthly ordinances to rise
upon you, and a dark mist to cover you.

To proceed. This one scripture, Ephe. 4. 11. 12. truly expounded, and
according to the Apostles meaning, serves at one blow to overthrow the whole
ministry of your Church of England, and all communion with it.

Your whole plea for your Ministry is, that you teach the word of God, and the
true word of God, and therewith you invite all your guests unto your ba^quet.
But now if your ministry be not the Ministry which Christ has set up in his
Ch: no^ of the gifts, which he has give^ unto his Church, but of an other
sort, and foundation, then it follows that no fellowship or communion is to be
had with it under any plausible pretense, nor upon any experimental profit
neither.

The officers the^ which Christ has given for the aedificatio^ of his Church
to the worlds end are, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers,
Ephe. 4. 11. 12. Now the first three sorts of these abovenamed were
extraordinary, and extraordinarily endued, for the first publishing of faith,
and planting of Churches, and so as temporary are ceased, with their
endowments, and this you grant in effect, page 184. of your last book. And for
the Pastor^ and Teachers here spoken of, you Mr B: and the Ministers of your
order would be thought the men. Of what sort then (I pray you) are your grand
Metropolitans, your Archbishops, Bishops, Suffraganes, Deanes, Archdeacons,
Chauncelours, Officials and the residew of that Lordly Clergy? They must needs
be of some other order then is here named, and the gifts of some other chief
Lord then of Christ, when he ascended on high, and gave his gifts, and that is
Antichrist, whose gifts they were when he ascended on high, even to the throne
of his Apostasy.

And now for you, which are set over the particular Parishes, to teach the
people, (as I confess you of all the rest to be likest unto the true Pastors)
so by your own confession are you excluded from that rank. The Officers which
Christ has appointed, when he ascended, have received power (by your own
assertion) not only for preaching and administering the sacraments, but for
government also. The page 92.
want then of the power of government bewrays you to be another gift then
Christ's, even his and none others, which has devised an other order, and
distribution of gifts then ever came into Christ's heart to appoint.

Lastly, as it is true you affirm, that Christ never said to the body of the
congregation, viz: in express terms, go preach, so is it most untrue which
you intend, viz: that he never gave liberty, and charge to any out of office
to teach in the exercise of prophesy. This point I have touched formerly, but
will more fully handle hereafter. The same I also affirm in the second place
touching the power of government, not opposing your words well interpreted, but
your meaning, which is, that none but men in office have power either to
reform any abuse in the Church or to perform any other necessary Church duty
without them. And for shutting up of this fourth Argument, let it be
considered, that here is a great difference in administration of doctrine by
teaching, and of admonition and excommunication in the order of discipline.
Only one man in the Church does teach at once, and all the rest both Elders
and people are taught by him, but the whole Church may admonish, or
excommunicate one or more at once, or by one act: and so though Christ never
say to the Church, go teach, yet, he says to the Ch: admonish, and
excommunicate. Mat. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5. In doctrine one man teaches the
whole Church, and the whole Church is taught: in disciplyne the whole Church
reproves and excommunicateth one man and hi^ censureth.

And thus your light Mr B. which you boast, is as clear^ as the sun in the
firmament of heaven, is darkened, your sun is gone down at noon day. Amos 8. 9.

The fifth reason is thus laid down.

It is never to be found in all the old testament that the people, but princes
Mr B.
and ecclesiastical governors men in authority were reproved for suffering
holy things to be abused. Ezech. 22. 26. 1* Sam. 2. 27. 1 King. 13. so in the
new testament, Math. 23. Rev. 2. 1. 8. 12. 18. and 3. 1. 7. 14. no mention in
these places is made of the people.

It seems Mr B. has learnt of them which give counsel to affirm Answ.
all things peremptorily, under hope to find some men with whom a confident
affirmation will go as far as a modest proof.

But here as always I do except against (as a corner stone of Babylon) your
unequal yoaking of ecclesiastical Officers and Ministers in the government of
the Church, with Princes and Magistrates in their civil authority: there is no
proportion betwixt them. A Lion and an Ox will payr better then these two kinds
of governors, and governments. Neither can it be rightly said of Church
officers that they are men in authority: they are men in 2 Chr. 35 3. Number. 16
9. Romans 16. 31. 2 Cor. 4. 5.
service and charge, whether we respect God, or the Church. They have power, I
grant, for they have the Romans 1. 16 1 Cor 5. 4. 5
gospel to preach and minister, which is, the power of God to salvation: they
are to speak with ^i^. 2. 15
authority, and that also in the order of office, and by special commission.
And so the Evangelists testify of Christ, that Mat. 1. 7. 28. 29. Mar. 1. 22.
he taught as having authority, and not as the scribes: the reason was, that
where the manner of teaching amongst the Scribes was very corrupt, and
degenerate, affecting the peoples hearts with no reverence of God, Christ on the
contrary did manifest in his teaching such virtue, and vigor of the spirit, as
did draw even the profane hearers into admiration. There are in deed in the
common wealth Kings, and Magistrates in authority under them, partakers of
their kingly power by subordination, by which participation they properly and
effectually even as the King himself, bind and loose, save and destroy, exact
and procure obedience civily both in Church and common wealth, and that by a
kingly and lordly power over the people, whose Kings, Lords, and Masters they
are: but the Officers in the Church are in no such authority by participation
of Christ's kingly power, neither can they properly and effectually bind and
loose, save and destroy, exact and procure obedience as Christ does: neither
are they, as civil Magistrates, though the Kings servants, and ministers, yet
the peoples Lords, and masters, but both Christ's, and the peoples servants,
and Ministers.

Now let any judge that has in him either religion, or reason, conscience or
common sense, if it be not irreligious, unconscionable, unreasonable, and
senseless that the body of the Church should have no more liberty and power in
the employments of their servants and Ministers in their Office, then the body
of the common wealth in the employments of their Lords, and Masters in their
Office. To this also I may add, that there are many civil ordinances and
constitutions in the common wealth which concern not one of a thousand of the
Kings people, many Magistrates and Officers chosen the inferior by the
superior without the peoples privity or consent, many administratio^s used,
judgeme^ts passed, and exequutions done, which the greatest part of the people
do not (nor are bound) so much as once to enquire after: much less are they
bound to complayn of the breach of every civil ordinance, to see it reformed,
to charge every Magistrate to look to his office, to admonish him if in any
thing he deal corruptly, or wickedly, and if he will not be reclaymed but go
obstinately on (in the spirit of an Haeretick, Idolater, or Atheist) to
disclaym or depose him: but in the Church, all and every ordinance concerns
every person (as a part of their communion) (without the dispensation of
necessity) for their use, and 1 Cor. 3. 22. and 14. 26.
aedification: all the Act. 1. 15 23. 26. and 6. 1. 2. 3. 5. and 14. 23. and
15. 2. 3. 2. Cor. 8. 19 23.
Officers to be chosen by suffrages and consent of the multitude: the brethren
are to admonish their brethren of every violation of Gods commandment, and so
in order to Mat. 18 15. 17. 18.
tell the Church, and to see the parties reformed: to observe and to take
notice of the officers carriage, and ministration, and to Col. 4. 17.
say to Archippus (as there is need) take heed to thy ministry, that thou have
received of the Lord, that thou fulfill it: and if the Ministers will deal
corruptly, and so persevere in the spirit of profanenes, heresy, idolatry, or
atheism, to Math. 18. 17. Ro^. 16. 17. 18. Gal. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 6. 3. 4. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 1 2. 3. 4. 5. Tit. 3. 10. 11.
censure, depose, reject or avoid them: otherwise they betray their own souls,
and salvation.

These things I thought good, upon this occasion further to annexed, touching
the difference and dissimilitude of civil and ecclesiastical governors and
government, not doubting for conclusion to affirm, that there is no one error
in Popery serving more directly to advance Antichrist to the highest step of
his throne, or there to establish him, then thus to confound these two estates
in their authority, and manner of government: though (alas) too many will
needs transform Ministers into Magistrates, servants into Lords: and as Rev.
17. 3. 4. 13.
the Kings of the earth have given their power and authority unto the beast,
and arrayed the great whore tha^ fitteth upon the beast, with purple, and
scarlet, and gilded her with gold, precious stones, and pearls, so do they
still help her to hold her kingly and lordly authority, and to bear up her
pompous train, and that specially by enforcing those scriptures for
ecclesiastical government, and the manner and order of it, which were left for
direction in civil governments, and their administrations.

And yet for more special answer unto you Mr Bernard, it follows not, that,
because the people are not interessed in the reformation of abuses by the
scriptures you cite, therefore it is never found either in the old, or new
testament, that any such duty lies upon them. The scriptures do not intend to
speak of all things at once, but that charge, which is omitted in one place, is
often times supplied, and prescribed in another. And to this purpose, I do desire
that these few scriptures amongst many others may be considered of: Number. 5 1.
2. Josh. 7. 1. 11. 12. 24. 25. and 22. 11. 12. -- 16. 17. 18. 20. Judge. 20. 11.
12. 2 Samuel 20. 22. Ezech. 44. 5. 6. 7. 9. Luke, 17. 3. 4. Gal. 6. 1. 1 These. 5.
14. 1 Cor. 5. whole Chapter and all these and many other of the same nature will
manifest, that the people are charged with the reformation of abuses for the
keeping pure of their communion, as well as the officers, though not in the
same order, or degree. But what need we seek further? as all the scriptures
brought forth by Mr Bern. do charge the govervours with reformation, and none
of them exempt the people in their rank, and order, so are there some of them
so pregnant against him in the point, and by which he has been so often silenced
to his face, that, if he had not set himself in opposition, without all
measure, or modesty, he would never offer his cause to be tried by that
evidence in writing, by which in speech, he has been so often cast and convinced.

The scriptures I especial mean are Rev. 2. and 3. And the thing which he
would prov^ from those scriptures is, that, because John in the verses named by
him, speaks to the Angels of the particular Churches, that therefore it
conernes the Angels, that is, the chief officers alone, and no way the people
(no nor any of the Officers but one in a Church by Mr Bernards exposition) to
see to the reformation of such abuses, and disorders, as in those Churches are
reproved. But if in these scriptures he thus sever, and sejoyne the officers,
and people, why might not the officers be excluded by a^ good consequence, by
other verses of these Chapters, where mention is made of the Churches, and not
of the Angels, as the people in these, where the Angels only, and not the
people are mentioned? and both alike. The answer, and truth then is, that John
Rev. 1. 11.
writes and sendes these Epistles or this book, to the 7. Churches in Asia, as
he is expressly directed by Christ: and so wills all men to Chap. 2. 7. 11.
17. 29. and 3. 6. 13. 22.
hear, and take knowledge what the spirit says to the Churches: but because
the matters were public, and he absent from the Churches, it was both most
convenient, and necessary he should direct his letters to the officers for the
whole Churches, as being not only most fit for their knowledge, but most bound
by their places to provoke the Churches unto, and to direct and go before them
in the reformation of such evils as were found amongst them. As if the King at
any time write his letters to any corporation in the land about some such
public business, as wherein every free man has an hand, he directs them to the
MAYOR, BAILEY, or some other chief officer, by whom they are to be published
to the whole body, and the matter managed, which they conteyn, though as I
formerly said, every freeman be to speak to, and consent in the business.

And here it is too much Mr B. should say (as he does) that no mention in these
places of the revelation is made of the people, but of the governors only,
where Christ expressly enjoynes John to write his vision, and to send it unto
the 7. Churches, ver. 11. where John expressly salutes them with grace and
peace, as Paul and others do them to whom they write in the beginning of their
letters, v. 4. Where he also calls those candlesticks he saw in his vision, the
Churches, though distinguished from the Officers, or Angels, whom he calls
stars, or lights. ver. 12. 13. 20. and lastly and specially where after his
both commendations, and reproofs, promises, and threatenings, he wills me^ to
listen what the spirit says not of, but unto the Churches. Chap, 2. 7. 11. 17.
29. and 3. 6. 13. 22. which do necessarily conclude the people in them.

But to let pass generals, and to come to such particulars in these Chapters,
as wherein the suffering of evils in the Churches is reproved. Only I must
needs show Mr B. his great oversight, that, where he should prove, that only
the angels of the Churches were reproved for suffering evils unreformed, he
points us to sundry Angels, and Churches, where there is no mention at all made
of suffering evils, but all of doing, as well by the Angels, as Churches, as in
Ephesus, Sardi, and Laodicea: and which is worse, unto other Angels, and
Churches, where there were no evils at all worthy reproof either done or
suffered: as in Smyrna, and Philadelphia. And is not this sound dealing? The
Lord Jesus finds nothing in the Ch: of Smyrna and Phyladelphia worthy of
taxatio^, but all of commendation, ergo the chief governors only in these
Churches are reproved for suffering evils unreformed. I now come to the
particular scriptures, in number two, where mention is made of evils suffered
unreformed, and reproof laid upon them which suffered them in the two Churches
of Pergamus and Thyatira.

And that John directs his reproofs against the Churches, and not against the
Officers alone, I do thus manifest.

1. Them, whose works Christ commends, for that, dwelling where Satan's throne
was, they kept his name, and denied not his faith, etc. them I say he reproves,
and against them he deals, for suffering them that m^^nteyn the doctrine of
Balaam, and of the Nichola^tans, v. 13. 14. 15. 16.

2. They which are commended by Christ for their works, love, service, faith,
patience, and increase in works, they are also reproved by him for suffering
the woman Iezebell, the false Prophetess to teach and to deceive, verse. 19. 20.

But it were senseless to affirm, that the Angel alone, and not the people
with him, was commended for dwelling where Satan's throne was, keeping Christ's
name, and not denying his faith in persecution, that the Angel alone was
commended for his works, love, service, faith, patience, and the like, and as
senseles, as to affirm, that only some of the Angel of the Church of Smyrna
was to be cast into prison. ver. 10, and therefore, as the faithful, the
brethren, the saints, the people, had their portion in these Christian virtues,
and in the commendations given unto them, so also do they bear their part in
the reproofs due to the toleration of such evils as were found amongst them,
and are exhorted to repentance. v. 16.

And this the two adversative conjunctions but and notwithstanding, or
nevertheless, v. 14. and 20. do evidently declare. In many graces these
Churches did abound, and faithful they were in great trials, but, or
notwithstanding in this they failed that they were not zealous enough against
such deceivers, as crept in amongst them, but suffered the^ to others hurt, and
their own danger also. ver. 24.

Of these things I have spoken something the more at large, to discover the
bold injury which Mr B. offers unto these scriptures: which may also serve to
manifest both the liberty and duty of the people for the reforming of abuses
in the Churches, against the usurpation of the English, or other Clergy
whatsoever.

Now to that which is inferred by way of conclusion, that 1 Cor. 5. must be
expounded by other places, and by the whole course of scripture, and the like,
and that, tell the Church, Mat. 18. 17. must be understood, tell the chief
Officers of the Church, these severalls must be answered.

First let it always be remembered, that we believe, and confess that the
Elders which Christ has left in his Church, are to govern the same in all
things (provided always the nature of ecclesiastical government be not
exceeded) according to the laws by him prescribed, and that so doing, the
brethren are most streytly bound to obey them, without disturbance, intrusion,
or opposition, under peyn of Gods wrath for their rebellion against him, and
them. Heb. 13. 17. But as else where is observed, it is one thing to be the
Church, an other thing to govern the Church, one thing for the officers to
direct, and go before the brethren in all things as guides, and another matter
utterly to exclude the brethren from any part of the communion, as neither
being the Church, nor any part of it, as this exposition does.

These things Mr B. ignorantly blunders together, and so he and others raise
odious clamours against us of Anabaptism, popularity, and the like, as if we
confounded all persons, and things, and made the Church a very Chaos, or Babel,
without form or order.

2. I acknowledge that one scripture must be expounded by an other, but ever
the more dark, and obscure by that which is more plain and lightsome: now so
plain, clear evident, and perspicuous are the two scriptures in hand for
excommunication, the former Mat. 18. 15. 16. 17. for the order and degrees of
proceeding, the other 1 Cor. 5. for the persons interessed in the buesinesse,
as that to bring in other scriptures for the expounding of them, is in truth as
needless, and lost a labor, as to light the sun and moon a candle.

Now for the places, severally, and first for Math. 18. 17. where Mr Bern.
says Mr B. tell the Church, is tell the chief officers of the Church: and so
must be expounded.

Well, the words are clear as the sun, tell the Church, that is, Answ.
the congregation or assembly whereof the offender is a member. But where you
make the Church, not the officers simply, but the chief officers, therein you
deal both wisely and dutifully. Wisely (to let pass other respects) in
preventing a quaestion, which otherwise you could not possibly answer: for if
you had said the officers simply, it would have demanded of you where your and
your fellow Ministers power of excommunication had been: duetify, and as an
obedient child in giving the rod of discipline into the hands of your reverend
fathers alone, and their substitutes. Well Mr B. whomsoever the Lord Jesus
meant by the Church, Mat. 18. he never meant, that the Archbishop of York, the
Archdeacon of Nottingham, the Official of Southwel, were the Church of
Worksop: and for this I will spare all Arguments, and send you to your own
guilty conscience for conviction, which as it condemns you in yourself, (which
is also the case of many thowsands in the Land) so do I earnestly wish both
you, and them to remember with fear and trembling the condemnation of him that
is greater then your conscience. Ioh. 3. 20. So far are they from being the
Church of Worksop as they are not so much as members of it, nor of any other
particular Church in the kingdom: they are neither the Pastors (so called)
nor under the Pastors of any particular Church, but with their tanscendent
jurisdiction in their Provincial, and Diocesan Churches, take their scope
without orb, or order: and as clouds without rayn, carried about with the wind
of ambition, and covetousnes for the the greatest part.

To leave them, and come to your reasons Mr B. by which you would prove, that
tell the Church, is tell the governors. But here behold the fruits of an
unstable mind. This man in his former book labored by many scriptures, and
reasons to lay down the nature of the Churches government, and in special to
prove, that the Church, Math. 18. 17. to which complaint of sins was to be
made, was the chief officers only, and this he affirms also to be Page 98.
the judgment, and the practice of all reformed Churches. But lo now in his
second book, he devoures the hallowed thing, and labors vvithall his power to
persuade page 211. 212.
young divines, and seely country people, (as he speaks) (and as in truth they
had need be both young, and seely, that are persuaded by him) that the points
of discipline and Church Government are not so apparent by the scriptures, as
that they can rightly judge of them. And to this end he brings in the variety
of judgments, and contradictions of learned men, some holding no government at
all, others that an external government is to be had, but of these, some
holding it alterable, others constant, and perpetual, and of these some to be
in the Pope, and Cardinals, others in the body of the congregation, some in
the Presbytery, with the peoples consent, and others, (which he puts last, as
best and for which he brings sundry reasons, referring the reader to the
treatises written to that end) in the Bishops his Lords. And again touching
the punishment of offenders, some he brings in holding excommunication, but not
suspension, some holding both, and some neither. And particularly for Math. 18.
he musters in thick, and threefold reasons and persons so reasoning, and
proving, that the place (and so of Lev. 19. 17.) does nothing at all concern
discipline, or ecclesiastical censures, but that Christ's meaning there was
only to direct the Jews how to carry things before the Synedrion, in cases of
bodily injury. And thus he brings men's contrary opinions to darken the
scriptures, which are most plain, like so many foul feet to trouble the pure
fountaynes of living water, that the thirsty may not drink of them. And as a
learned man in our age, and nation, to discover the vanity of prognosticatours,
gathered together their contrary guesses of the wether, and so presented them:
so this man to make the government of Christ's Church as uncertain as an
Almanac, sets together, and so offers to the vvievv of the world the
contrarieties of opinions concerning it. Now if other men should take this
course Mr B. does, in other points of religion, and one lay down the
differences that are about predestination and the points depending upon it,
some utterly denying it, others affirming it, and of these some grounding it
upon Gods mere grace, others upon man's faith, or works foreseen: an other
about baptism, some denying it to all infants, others ministering it to all,
others to such only as are of Christian parents in a sort, and others only to
them that are of believing parents, at the least on the one side: a third about
the Lords supper, in which point some hold transubstantiation, others
consubstantiation, others only a sacramental union, which some also will have
merely rational, others real also: there could not be a playner way beaten
for all Atheism to come into the world by, nor a course devised by the Devil
more pregnant to persuade the multitude, that there were no certaynty, nor
soundnes in the scriptures. But let God have the glory of his truth, and of
the clearnes in it, and let men bear the just blame, and shame of their
natural blyndnes: and in special let Christ have the honor of being as Heb.
3. 5. 6.
faithful in his own house, as Moses was in his Masters, in setting orders
and officers in it and let not vile flesh dare to flatter Princes and Prelates,
to mislead silly souls, and to preach liberty and licentiousnes to the world,
make Christ Jesus an Idol King, having a kingdom upon earth without laws, or
officers, for the administering of it: nor to make his redeemed, Idol subjects,
as whom it concerns little or nothing, whether they be under Chrits laws, and
officers, or under Antichrists his professed adversary. Now though I will not
trouble my self, and the reader about every stone, that Mr. B. idely casts in
the way, yet such as may stumble the weakest passenger, I will remove, and so
return to my former task.

And in the first place I will answer certain reasons in number six, brought
by Mr B. for the superiority of his Lord Bishops: but those not backed with the
scriptures, as in other points (when he thinks he speaks the truth) his manner
is.

The first is taken from the succession of James at Jerusalem, of Mr B.
Peter at Antioch, of Peter and Paul at Rome, and of Mark at Alexandria. I.


I answer first, that these were not Bishops set over certain Churches Ans.
here, and there, (though upon occasion they tarryed some good space in some
certain Churches) but general men, Apostles, and Evangelists, without
successors in their Offices: and so the Protestants do generally answer the
Papists instancing them, as you do now.

2. I deny the very Apostles used any such Lordly and Papal authority, as to
exclude either the inferior officers, or people in Church affairs: the
contrary is most evident in the choice of officers, Act. 1. 15. 23. 26. and 6.
1. 2. 3. 5. censuring of offenders* 1 Cor. 5. and debating of other Church
matters. Act. 15. 2. 3. 4. 6. 7. 22. 23. 30. and 21. 22.

The 2. Argument is taken from 1 Cor. 12. 28. where, say you, II.
three degrees are reckoned up, the first of Apostles, the second of Prophets,
the third of Teachers. But since the two former orders, which are Apostles,
and Prophets, are ceased as being temporary, how can there be superiority in
the third, which is but one?

Your third and fourth Argument you draw from the superiority III. IV.
ordained by God in the old testament, amongst ecclesiastical persons: and the
consequence of this Argument you prove two ways: first because this order is
not forbidden in the new testament: 2. because the ground of superiority is
alike in the new testament, as in the old which is to preserve order.

But do you not consider Mr Bernard that Heb. 8. 13. and 10. 1.
the old testament or law is abrogated, and disanulled, as having the shadow of
good things to come? and so every order, and ordinance in it, which is not
plainly renewed by Christ in the new? And where you seem to make the Chief
Priests besides the high Priest, a superior order to the other formally
differing, it is more (if I be not deceived) then can be proved by the word of
God. I know no diversity of administrations amongst them, but that any of the
Priests might in their course, and order offer sacrifice, and perform other
the most solemn duties of preisthood.

But where you further add that only the high Priest did type out Christ, and
not the other Priests so: you are much mistaken. The whole preisthood of Aaron,
Heb. 10. 1. Heb. 7. 11 (...)
under which the law was established, was a type of Christ's Preisthood (though
the high Priests in a special manner) and their sacrifices, of his: and being
a part of the law (which was a shadow or first draught, whereof the gospel is
the lively portrature) it must needs be ceremonial, and so a type: and to
affirm otherwise is a gross Jewish error. Lastly as I grant one end of the
subordination of Ministeries to have been the preserving of order, so I deny
that same order is to be preserved in the new testament, and in the old. The
order of the old testament was the order of a national Church, but the order
of the new testament is the order of a particular Church, wherein there needs
no such subordination of Ministeries as in the other which was national, the
ey of common sense sees this difference.

The law of nature whether written in the heart of man, or to be seen in the
workmanship of the world, from which you draw your fifth Argument, does not
prove superiority amongst officers in a V.
particular assembly, but only that there must be government in all societies,
which may well be, though the governors be of one order, and rank.

Lastly they against whom you deal, do mainteyne (as you say) VI.
an inequality in their government, in making the Pastor superior to the
Teacher. etc. and if they do so, why deal you against them? and why do you
labor so carefully to prove against them their own practice to be lawful?
though if they had not better warrant then you bring, they were ill bestead.
But this is the point, Mr B. (which you never touch) do they which hold two
kinds of officers, teaching, and governing Elders, or they which hold three
orders, Pastors, Teachers, and governing Elders, either of them both hold such
a superiority, as gives the superior jurisdiction over the inferior
Ministers? do they make a Bishop of Bishops, or a shepherd over a flock of
sheepheards? or do they set up any such ravenous creature, as devours the
liberty, and power both of the people, and other officers, as your Bishops do,
even as Genesis 41. 18. 19. 20.
the lean and evil favored kyne, which Joseph saw in his dream, ate up the
fat kyne, and welfavoured: And for the erroneous exposition of Luke, Luke 22.
25. 26. by D. Downame, and D. Dove, of which you boast, it has been confuted
both before, and since they gave it.

Now howsoever I purpose not the refutation of every particular in Mr B. second
volume, which he might have drawn into as few lines well nigh as he has done
leaves, had he not rather desired to have uttered many words, then many things:
yet seeing how he labors, even till sweating, to trouble the minds of his
young students, and seely countrymen, especially about the government, and
discipline of the Church, not caring how absurd expositions of scriptures he
admits of, nor how contrary one unto an other, so he may weaken the faith of
any that way, I will not therefore altogether hold off mine hand, but will open
as I go, his unsound dealing in this case, especially about Mat. 18. 15. 16.
17. which he will no way have meant of the piscipline or censures of the
Church, and the order of proceeding therein, but that Christ's meaning there, is
to direct the Jews how to prosecute their suits in matter of injury before the
heathenish Magistrates. And this he labors, p. 218. 219. and so on, to prove
by many objections, and answers, yet (as borrowed from other men's books) so put
out as other men's sayings, that by this means he himself may avoid some part
of that just hatred, by the better sort of people, which he knows will ly upon
this odious and ungodly gloss.

First then Mr Bernard graunts, page 212. that Christ has left a government in
his Church, and so consequently an order for the censuring of offenders, and he
accounts the contrary opinion but a familisticall conceit, and yet this truth
he cannot let pass without some untruth at the end of it, and therefore he
adds that to this familisticall conceit, the seely Brownists are drawn by
force of their own grounds, which are because they will have all in the Church
to be voluntary professors; where voluntarynes is taken away by being under
any government: to be subject, and ruled is an estate far from freedom:
Christians loose thereby Christian liberty, etc. And say in good sooth Mr B.
would you have men vnvoluntary professors against their wills, their
profession must either be voluntary, with their wills, or vnvoluntary, and
against them. Genesis 9. 27
Noah prophesying the calling of the Gentiles of Iaphets line, foretells, that
God will allure or persuade them to dwell in Shems tents. And the scriptures do
expressly affirm, that the Churches were gathered by Act. 28. 24. 2 Cor. ^.
13.
persuasion, and voluntary submission unto the gospel. And it is a strange
thing, even above wonder, that any man should have preached so many years, and
written so many books about religion, and yet not know, that the nature of
religion is not to be constreyned, but persuaded.

And tell me (Mr B.) did you subscribe the last time unto your Bishops
government sponte and ex animo, according to the Canon, yea, or no? Of if you
think that to curious a quaestion, answer me, whether you be under the Kings
government voluntarily, or against your will? If against your will, it is a
treacherous disposition in you: if voluntarily, or willingly, how seelely then
do you (which are thus rife in imputing seelines unto others) argue, that
voluntarines is taken away by being under any government? as though all
government were tyranny, and all obedience slaverie: but reason, why Mr B.
should thus speak, know I none, except it be, because in the Church of England
the Ecclesiastical government of and canonical obedience unto the Praelates
is such, as he speaks of* by which Christians indeed loose Christian liberty:
but in the easy yoke of Christ it is not so. And if Christians must be subject
to Romans 13. 3. 5. 6.
Princes in civil affairs for conscience sake (then which nothing is more
voluntary,) how much more is the subjection of the saints unto the government
of Christ, most free and voluntary, yea by how much more full and entyre
Christ's government is over the Saints whether within, or without, by so much
more voluntary, and free, is their obedience both ways. And so pass on to the
thing I che^^ly intend, and that is to show, that if there be a government left
for the Ch:, and order set for the punishment of offenders by Christ the King
thereof, that then this 18. of Mat. is the place, where that order is to be
found. Let Mr B: that I may use his own words, Page 224. 225. declare where else
is (not a more perfect rule, but) any rule for it left by Christ, or not any
supply, but any mention made, else where etc. The reasons now follow in the next
place by which Mr B. would prove that Christ Jesus, Mat. 18. 15. 16. 17.
speaks not of Church admonitions, and censures, but of private injuries, and
the civil menaging of them.

His first reason is taken from the cohaerence of these verses with ^.
that which goes before in the Chapter: where Christ, admonishes his disciples
to take heed both of the offenses that should be given, as also of offending
others. True Mr B. for the meaning of Christ was not only to prepare them
against the manisold scandals, and stumbling stones of offense (especially in
the new kingdom to which he prepared the^) which Satan would cast before them
every step they took, either to turn them out of the way of life, or to stop
them in it: but also to lay strayt charge upon them, that they for their parts
cast no stumbling blocks before others: admonishing them very severely neither
easily to take nor to give offense. And because through pride in our selves,
and contempt of others we are imboldened to give offense, especially to them,
in whom we behold any great infirmities, our savior Christ proceeds to show
what great care the Lord takes for the meanest of his, and what account he
makes of them, teaching them all moderation and compassion toward them in
their infirmities. But least any should then say, if it be so, the best way is
to let men alone in their sins, Christ prescribes a remedy for this evil,
even that golden mean, v. 15. 16. 17. that we should neither be bitter or
rigorous toward them to cause them to scandalize, nor yet so remiss, as by
connivency to flatter them in their sins.

For the occasion of the words, and the Argument taken from it, II.
because the author puts it down, not as he proves it to be, but as it is
thought, I pass it by as one of the thoughts spoken of by the wise man, in the
Prove. and with it the scope, which he tells us, is held to be a moderating of
the Jews passion for private injuries offered, as being both together, and with
them the exposition also in the 4. place, as being only so many beggings of
the quaestion in hand. The sum of which exposition is (for to relate all Mr
Bernards words were too tedious) that if one Jew offered an other injury, and
would not satisfy him when he required it, either privately or with a witness or
two, the party injured was to complain to the Jewish Synedrion, and if that
would not serve the turn, he might if he would proceed with him, and bring him
before the Romayn power, and sue him at Caesar's ^arr, as if he were a publican,
or heathen. The reasons now to prove this interpretation follovv. And the
first is because Christ spoke according no the time, as Mat. 5. 23. 26. It
follows not that because Christ so spoke that one time, and in that one place,
that therefore, he so speaks here. What is less forceable? 2. As Christ in
that place spoke both ecclesiastically and civily, as you expressly affirm, so,
if you grant in proportion, that he speaks here both civily for injuries, and
ecclesiastically for sins, you speak truth enough at the least to overthrow
your self.

Your second and third proofs taken from Peter's understanding of Christ, and
Christ's answer again in the parable (though it were no strange thing for
Peter to understand that civily, which Christ spoke spiritually, nor for Christ
to reply according to the present understanding) do not show that Christ's
speech is to be restreyned to personal injuries: the contrary shall appear
by, and by: And the same answer may serve to the 4. and 6. Argument.

The fifth Argument is taken from the propriety of speech in the text: as first
because Christ says, against thee, which (say you) shows the offense to be
private, etc. I grant it, and that Christ there fetches his beginning from
private, or rather from secret offenses, and sins, which being known unto
one only, may by one be remitted. Your second Argument is drawn from this
term brother, which shows (say you) that Christ meant the Jews, whom alone
both the Jews and disciples of Christ did account brethren. If Christ meant
only Jews, what makes it matter, if the Jews only were brethren, that is of
the Church? but it is not true you say, that only Jews were accounted
brethren by the disciples of Christ at that time: Christ shows that they which
believe, and obey his words, are his, and so his disciples Math. 12. 49. 50.
brethren as did amongst others, Ioh. 4. 39. 41. 42.
many of the Samaritans, which were no Jews, long before this time. That these
words thou have gained or won thy brother, show an alienation of mind in the
party that does the injury, is idle, as the former. For the alienation of mind
will rather be in him that has received the injury, which a man may do of
ignorance, self love, covetousnes, or other by regards, without any change of
his affection toward the person injured: the words in truth show, that the
lost sheep is found, the sinner converted. The next words are, let him be to
thee, which, you tell us, shows such a Church as the offender might not
regard, and so the plantiffe vnremyed might seek further. If you mean by these
words might not regard, that he might lawfully not regard it, you err; if that
he might be so wicked, as not to regard, it is no new thing for wicked persons
to disregard the Church of Christ. Your addition of dismissing to further
proceeding, is your own, and so I leave it to you. And the reason why Christ
says, let him be to thee is, because the brother spoken to was the first and
principal in the accusation: as under the law, the accuser of the false
Prophet must Deuteronomy. 13. 9.
first have his hand upon him, whom the rest of the people must follow in
putting him to death.

The last words Publican and Heathen do not declare that Christ speaks of the
Jews at that time either only, or civily, but serve for other purposes, as I
shall presently manifest, taking Arguments from these words, as from all the
rest, to prove, that Christ here speaks of sin, and of excommunication for
sin.

My first Reason I draw from the cohaerence, wherein I have formerly I.
manifested, Christ speaks not of private injuries only, but of all such
scandalles, as are to be found in that streyt way to heaven: no nor of injuries
at all as they hurt the outward man, but as they are sins, and hurt, and
hinder the soul in the way of godlynes: and so by the consequence of
cohaerence, (if Christ's words hang one upon an other) he speaks v. 15. 16. 17.
of sin and the carrying of it.

2. I reason from the term brother, which, since it apperteyned II.
at this time from the disciples, to many, which might not be brought before
the Jewish Synedrion, as to the believing Romans, Samaritans, and the like,
cannot be meant as is pretended, but speaks of a religious fellowship to which
any brother may be brought, of what country, or condition soever.

As the word ha^artano, turned offend, is of general signification by III.
your own grant, and so cannot be restreyned to that particular kind of
offense: so is it most properly used for sin, and that usually by this
Evangelist. Mat. 3. 6. and 9. 2. and 12. 31. and 26. 28. and which is specially
to be observed, when Luke would speak of trespasses, or offenses as sins
against God, he uses this word, but when in the same place he speaks of them,
as of injuries against men, he uses another word. Chapter 11. 4. And see how
soundly Mr B. deals, when he should show that the word turned offend is not
meant of sins, but of injuries, he brings in four principal writers varying
(as he says) about the word: and yet the unadvised man considers not, that all
four of them, as he himself alleges them, understand it of sin, and not one
of them of injuries, and so speak against him.

If Christ here spoke of injuries, where he says, if he hear thee, thou IIII.
have won or gained thy brother, he would have said, thou have won or
gained thy goods, or good name wherein he injuryed thee.

If these words be meant of injuries, and wrongs, then Christ V.
commands his disciples not to suffer wrongs at their brethrens hands, but to
deal with them in the order here prescribed, for Christ expressly commands to
tell the Church: and so Christ's doctrine, and Paul's teaching the 1 Cor. 6. 7.
suffering of wrong should contradict the one the other.

By this exposition one Jew might account an other as an heathen, VI.
which was utterly unlawful, he might not refuse religious communion with him
in the temple, into which no heathen might come; he might not deny him a
portion in the land of Canaan the type of the kingdom of heaven: he might not
account or call him other then a brother, whatsoever he were, till the time
came of the Jews defraction or breaking off for unbelief. Act. 7. 2. and 22.
1. and 33. 1. Romans 11. 17.

This interpretation confirms a point of Anabaptistry, namely, VII.
that it is not lawful for brethren so remaining, to sue at Caesar's bar,
where it is most evident, that brethren always might, and may, yea and (such a
case may fall out) ought to sue, without any alienation of affection, or such
heathenish thought one of another, as Mr B. would have Christ in this place to
commend unto them: for even these last words let him be to thee as an heathen
and publican are a commandment, as Mat. ^. 37.
let your speech be yea, yea, nay, nay, and hundreds others delivered in the
scriptures under the same form of words. And to conclude, Christ our Savior in
these words describes excommunication by the effects of it, which are,
withdrawing from the brother obstinate in sin, both in religious and civil
fellowship and familiarity, as the Jews did withdraw both from the Heathens,
and Publicans in both. Ioh. 4. 9. Act. 10. 3. and 31. 28. Luke 15. 2. and 15.
10. 11. And this very phrase Paul most clearly expounds, when he directs the
Church, 1 Cor. 5. 11. not to be commingled with obstinate offenders, nor to eat
with them: this ever provided, that no excommunication or other act in religion
whatsoever, may dissolve either civil, or natural society.

The next Reason is drawn from verse 18. where Christ ratifying VIII.
in the hands of his Church this his power, speaks in express terms of
binding, and loosing, not only in earth, but in heaven also: which words, me
thinks, alone should satisfy the conscience of any godly minded man, (yea and
stop the mouth of the most shameless) that Christ speaks of sin, and sin
only. Yet is Mr B. neither satisfied, nor silent, but replies, that binding,
and loosing in this place is not properly, or only to be understood of Christ's
Ministers: but is allowed to private persons, and for this, page 223 he brings
sundry reasons* Consider, Reader, this severe censurer of Mr Smythes
unstableness: Mr B. in his former book, page 95. will have this power of
binding, and loosing spoken of in this place to be in the officers of the Ch^,
two or three, and at no hand in private persons: and for this there he brings
sundry reasons: in this his next book, this power is ^l^t^ed to two or three
private persons, and must not be drawn to the Ministry only, and for this,
he brings as many reasons. Observe further, the very sum of Mr B. answer is,
that Christ speaks not here of binding, and loosing in the office of
Ministry. So we affirm, and that by two or three having this power cannot be
meant two or three Ministers, considered severally from the body, which alone
are not the Church for any public administration, but the officers of the
Church: but by two or three are meant the meanest communion or society of
saints whether with officers, or without officers. And is this a sufficient
answering of an adversary to bring sundry reasons to prove the very thing,
which he affirms?

Add to all these, that where the injuries offered to Christ's disciples, IX.
and such as would respect his direction, were usually for the profession of
Christ, it had been a most idle course to have complained either to the Jewish
Synedrion, or Romish Magistracy, which would have added injury to injury.

Lastly, where Christ, v. 23. in his answer to Peter's quaestion, X.
makes the protasis or first part of his comparison the kingdom of heaven which
is the Church he shows plainly, that all the while he has spoken of Church
affairs, and the carrying of them. And thus much to prove that the Lord Jesus
the King of his Church has left in this 18. of Math* a rule, and order for the
punishment of offenders in it. But this tedious matter is not yet ended. For Mr
B. marshals in eight fresh reasons, to force all the reformed Churches in the
world with us, to give over this hold of Mat. 18. page 224. 225. 226. of this
his last book: the best is they are of no great strength.

The first is a bare affirmation that the former exposition by me confuted is
true.

His second Reason is because Christ has erected no government in his Church;
(for why he should add by public doctrine I see not, except he would
insinuate, that Christ taught this point privately, and in a corner) but for
this brings he no one scripture or reason: as if his bare word were enough to
stablish an Idol King in his Church, without officers, or laws. Where
notvvithstanding in his former book, page 90. 91. 92. 93. he proves by many
scriptures that Christ has given officers for the government of his Church:
which no man denies, but himself.

In the third place he affirms, that Christ by the Church means not the
Jewish Synedrion, wherein I assent unto his saying, for reason brings he none.

Touching the nature of the Churches government (which he gropes at in the
fourth place) I have spoken else where.

The 5. Reason follows, which comprehends under it many petty Reasons, and
amongst other the 6, 7, and 8 in order: which save for the show in the margent
of 8. distinct numbered Reasons, might well enough have been spared. The sum is
that this 18. of Mat. is no perfect rule of discipline: the reasons are because
neither all sorts of sins are here brought in, nor all the parts of discipline
here comprehended. And how do these things appear? First because a man is here
to proceed only for trespasses, or as it is better turned for offenses,
against himself, but not for sin against God, against the Magistrate, or
against an other. But here you should have remembered Mr B. that 1 Ioh. ^. 4.
sin, being the transgression of the law, is only against God, to speak
properly, and therefore David, notwithstanding his defiling of Bath sheba, and
murdering of Vrijah confesses that he had Ps. 51. 6.
sinned against God only. But as the same transgression is so committed, as
man scandalizeth, or takes offense at it* so it is a sin against him: whether
the deed done respect God or man, yea man or beast, public or private person,
a man's self, or others in the object: and so he may forgive it after the order
prescribed by Christ. And where by way of exception you demand how one man can
remit trespasses done against an other? it is true it cannot be, if by
trespasses be meant personal injuries: but considering the same trespasses, as
they are sins against God, at which a brother takes offense, so the brother
offended may forgive them upon the offenders repentance.

And asking how men can forgive rebellion against God, you seem to have
forgotten yourself: for in the very leaf next before going, you both grant and
prove that not only Ministers by virtue of their office, but private persons
also may bind and loose sins. The thing it self you grant, and for the manner
of it, it is as they save, by manifesting, and making known outwardly
salvation, and the forgivenes of sins.

To your third objection concerning the keeping secret of public crimes
against the Magistrate upon the offenders repentance, you answer yourself, for
if they be public, or of public nature, they may not be kept secret, neither
are they capable of the order of secret dealing in them.

And here falls into consideration your seventh Reason, which is, that if
discipline be grounded upon Mat. 18. then the Church must judge in civil
affairs, and enter upon the bounds of the Magistrate.

And are you ignorant Mr B. that civil actions, as they draw sca^dalous sin,
with them, may be censured ecclesiastically, as may also religious actions be
punished civily by the Magistrate, which is the preserver of both tables, and
so to punish all breaches of both, specially such as draw with them the
violation of the positive laws of kingdoms, or disturbance of common peace?
Take your own instance of murder. The Magistrate is to punish it civilly in all
his subjects, whether the parties repent or no; the Church is to censure it
ecclesiastically in her members, yea though the Magistrate pardon or pass by
it, except the parties delinquent repent, for then they are to be forgiven. And
what usurpation is here upon the Magistracy? you to suppress Gods ordinance do
flatter the Magistrate, and accuse the innocent.

Next you except, that this of Mat. is a rule for sins private, and more
secret, but not for public and open sin. You might as well say that the
pattern of prayer prescribed by Christ, Mat. 6. is not perfect, nor a rule for
private prayer, or for things concerning our selves only, because it teaches
us to say, Our father, and forgive us our sins. But who knows not, that
generals include their specialties under them? The Lord Jesus in teaching his
disciples to say, forgive us our sins jointly, teaches them in the same
place to ask forgivenes either of their own sins, or the sins of others
severally, as occasion serves: so in teaching here all the degrees of
admonition jointly, he implies also the dealing in any one of them severally,
if there be occasion. And this exposition of Mr B. can I not fitlyer resemble
then to the practice of some silly pursevant, that, being sent to attach some
traitor, or other malefactor dwelling in Barwick, and so to bring him to the
Court, if he should meet the party by the way, would refuse to meddle with him,
and would say, that he was sent to Barw: to fetch him, and would either bring
him from thence, or would let him alone. And it seems, if Mr B. might construe
his co^mmission, he would so advise him. But would not common sense teach a
man, that the nearer he met with the party he ^ought, the more labor were
spared, and that he were to apprehend him where he found him? So where Christ
sends his disciples to deal with sin a far off, as it were, and in the
first, and utmost degree, but if it be come nearer, and be found in the 2. or
3. degree, it is to be taken where it is found. If it be secret, and yet rest
betwixt the brother offe^ding, and offended, it must there be dealt with: if it
become nearer the court, and be wrought before two, or three, or more, it must
there, and in that order be undertaken, the first degree is over, and that
labor spared: if it be of public nature, or publikly committed, the two
former degrees are past, and the labor in them spared: the sin must be dealt
with accordingly. And the Church either by information from any brother or
brethren, or by immediate notice taken, may convent or call for the offender,
that he which sinned publikly, may publicly be rebuled. And this may serve
for answer to the 8. and last exception.

Now for allowing of the plaintiff to seek further remedy, and of the
referring of the party obstinate unto him, which is the sum of the sixth Arg: as
also of these terms, let him be to thee as an heathen and publican, which is an
other exception, together with that consideration, that the party offended is
the principal in all the degrees of proceeding, I have formerly spoken in the
exposition of the words, to which the reader is to look back for answer, if
such idle conjecture give any cause of doubt to any. One only blow more is to
be warded, by which Mr B. would disable this 18. of Math. from being any rule
of discipline, and that is, because it provides not for suspension, we grant it
does not: and you your self half grant, that no such thing is to be found in
the new testament. And what reason have you, or any other man to put us to
prove your corruptions and devises, which you know we neither practice, nor
allow of?

These things thus ended, and the received exposition of Math. 18. confirmed,
viz: that Christ in it prescribes a rule of discipline in the Church, I come to
your reasons Mr B. in your first book by which you would prove that this Church
is the chief governors.

The first whereof is, that Christ could not be understood either then, Mr. B.
or now, except he spoke as the practice was then, or took some order
afterward, and so you go about to prove unto us, that the chief governors
only had authority to excommunicate, both in the synagogues and in the Church
of Corinth.

To this I answer sundry things. First it follows not, that Answ.
Christ was not then, or cannot now be understood, except he spoke with some
such reference as you note. The words are so plain, the order so equal, the
state of the Church under the new testament (which is not, as before,
national, but a particular assembly) so capable of such an ordinance, as that
laying aside prejudice, and politic respects, there can be nothing more
plainly spoken or more easily understood.

2. It does no way prejudice the exposition we give, though the disciples for
the present understood it not: they understood little, no not touching the death
and resurrection of Christ, or nature of his kingdom when they were at the
first taught them, till either by their own experience, or by the extraordinary
gift of the Holy Ghost, or some other means, the things formerly taught them
were brought to their remembrance. Mat. 16. 21. 22. and 20. 20. 21. Mark. 16.
14. Luke 24. 20. 21. 22 -- 25. 26. -44. And it is expressly affirmed, Act. 1.
3. that the Lord Jesus did the 40. days before his ascension instruct them in
such things as concerned the kingdom of God, which is the Church.

The next thing to be considered is your proofs from scripture, that the power
of excommunication was in the chief governors. But the places prove no such
thing. Ioh. 9. 22. and 12. 42. and 16. ^* do only prove an agreement amongst
the Jews, that such as confessed Christ should be dissynagogued: but that this
authority was only in the hands of the chief governors, cannot be thence
collected. I know there was at Jerusalem a representative Church for the whole
nation, of which we shall speak hereafter, but that there was such a Church
representative in every synagogue, furnished with such power can never be
concluded from these scriptures. They rather in deed prove the contrary. It is
said Ioh. 9. 22. that the Jews had ordained, that such as confessed Christ,
should be dissynagogued: which words do rather interest the people in the
business then otherwise. If you think, that because there is mention made of
verse. 13. 15. 16. and Chapter 12. 42.
the Pharisees, the officers only are meant, you are deceived. For Pharisaism
amongst the Jews was not an office, but a sect. There were no other lawful
officers ecclesiastical amongst them, but Lev. 8. Number. 3. 12. 13. and 8. 14.
16. 17.
the Levites whom the Lord took from among the children of Israel in stead of
the first borne for his service: but many of the Pharisees, were of other
tribes. Phil. 3. 5.

Besides, I see no sufficient reason to persuade me, that this casting out of
the synagogue was any ecclesiastical censure, but rather a violent rejection
or extrusion out of the place: as nothing was more common then such tumultuous
outrages in those days. And the very same word that John uses, chapter 9. ver.
35. Luke uses chapter 4. 28. 29. for the violent extrusion of Christ himself by
the Jews, upon the like occasion, both out of the synagogue, and city. The
same also does John himself use, chapter 2. 15. speaking of Christ's casting (...)
the money chaungers out of the temple. And yet neither the NAZARITES
excommunicate CHRIST, nor CHRIST the mony-chaungers.

But if there were amongst the Jews at that time any such distinct ordinance
of excommunication ecclesiastical, it was a Jewish devise, (I am persuaded)
and without ground of the scriptures: and that for these causes.

First every blasphemer, or worshipper of unknown Gods I.
was by the law of Moses to die the death without redemption, that so evil
might be put from Israel, Exodus 22. 20. Lev. 24. 16. Deuteronomy. 13. 6. 7. 8. 9 --
12. 13. 14. 15.

And so the Jews reputing this blind man such a one, were to put him to death:
but being deprived of this power by the Romans, through the just judgment of
God for their sins, they devised this other course of dissynagogueing, or
excommunicating offenders by them so deemed. II.


Secondly the several synagogues were not distinct Churches, but members of
that one national Church, which was both representatively, and originally at
Jerusalem: neither could any of them excommunicate out of the temple, which was
a higher communion then theirs: and so it is very probable that Christ found
this blind man afterward in the temple, Ioh. 9. 38. compared with 10. 22. into
which (had he been ecclesiastically excommunicated) he might not have entered:
neither hangs it together, that any rejected in the communion of the synagogue,
might be received in the communion of the temple. III.


3. The Lord did choose the whole nation of the Jews to be his peculiar people,
and took all and every one of them into covenant with himself, gave them the
Land of Canaan for an inheritance, as a type of the kingdom of heaven, erected
a policy over them, civil, and ecclesiastical, in the judicial and ceremonial
law, called the old testament, making the same persons and all of them, though
in diverse respects the Church, and the common wealth, whereupon the Church is
also called the common wealth of Israel. Exodus 19. 5. 6. Lev. 20. 24. 26. Deuteronomy.
4. 6. 7. and 29. 2. 10. 11. 12. Ios. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Romans 9. 4 Ephe. 2. 12.
Hence it follows, that except a man might enjoy one type of the kingdom of
heaven, as was the Land of Canaa^, and not an other, as was the temple, or
tabernacle, Heb. 9. 24. except he might be under one part of the old testament,
or covenant of God, namely the judicial law for the common wealth, and not
under an other part of it, the ceremonial law for the Church, it cannot be
that any such ordinance as excommunication could be used lawfully in the Jewish
Church.

Yet do I not deny but that the lepers and other persons legally unclean were
for a time debarred from the communion of the Church, and from all the
sacrifices, and services thereof, but this inhibition say I, was no way in the
nature of an excommunication.

For first it was for ceremonial uncleanness, issues, leprosy, and the like,
which were not sins, but punishments of sins at the most.

2. It did not only exclude men from the communion of the Church, but of the
common wealth also, and the affairs thereof.

3. It did not agree in the end with excommunication. The end of
excommunication is the repentance of the party excommunicated, 1 Cor. 5. 5. but
the person legally unclean, whether he repented, or no, was to bear his shame
till the date of his time were out, yea to his dying day, if his disease
continued so long. Lev. 12. and 13. and 14. Number. 5. 2. 3. 4. and 12. 10. 14. 2 Chronicles. 26. 19. 20. 21. A type I confess it was of excommunication, as legal
pollution was of moral sin: whence I also conclude that the type, and thing
typed outwardly could not both stand together.

But here it will be demanded of me, did not the Lord require in the Jewish
Church true, moral, and spiritual holiness also? God forbid I should run upon
that desperate rock of Anabaptistry. The Levit. 11. 44. 1 Pet. 1. 15. 16.
Lord was holy then as now, and so would have his people be then holy, as now.
Yea so jealous was the Lord over his people that he took order then as well as
now, that no sin should be suffered unreformed, no obstinate sinner uncut off.
Some sins were of that nature, as he that committed them was by the law to die
the death without pardon, or partiality, and so to be cut off from the Lords
people. Lev. 20. And when other sins not of that nature were committed,
whether of ignorance, or otherwise, the party offending was to be told, and
admonished of his offense, and so to manifest his repentance by the confefs^on
of his sin, and profession of his faith in the mediator, by offering his
appointed sacrifice, and so his sin was forgiven him. Lev. 4. 13. 14. 15. --
20. 21 23 -- 26. 27. 28. 35. and 5. 1. 3. 4. 5. 6. -- 10. and 19. 17. Number. 5.
6. 7. But now if there were with the least sin joined obstinacy, or
presumption, the party so sinning was to be cut off from his people, Number. 15.
30. 31. 32. 34. 36. Deuteronomy. 17. 12. and for this cause the Jews were so often
admonished to Lev. 20. 14. Deuteronomy. 17. 12. and 19. 19.
destroy the workers of wickedness, that there should be no wickedness amongst
them, that they should take away evil from Israel, and from forth of the
midst of them. And upon this ground does David as the chief Magistrate, whom
this business chiefly concerned, vow his service unto God in this kind, and that
he would even Psalm. 101. ^.
betimes destroy all the wicked of the land, that he might cut off the workers
of iniquity from the city of the Lord: though he afterward failed in the
execution of this duty. And to the very same end did 1 Chronicles. 15. 12. 13. 14.
15.
Asa the King with all the people enter a covenant of oath, to seek the Lord
God of their fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul: and that
whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel should be slain, whether be
were small or great, man or woman.

To end this point, upon which I have insisted something the longer for sundry
purposes in their place to be manifested: as the Lord usually conveyed
spiritual both blessings, and curses unto the Jews under those which were
bodily, so here was the spiritual judgment of excommunication comprehended
under this bodily judgment of death, by which the party delinquent was wholly
cut off visibly from the Lords covenant, and people.

That which you add of Cloes complaint made to the chief governor the
Apostle, is true, but misapplyed. You make an erroneous collection from it out
of your own lamentable experience. Because your Church of Worxsop can reform
no abuse within it self, but must complain to your Lords grace of York* or his
substitute, therefore you imagine the Church of Corinth to have been in the same
bondage, wherein you are: and Cloe to have complained to Paul's court. But it is
plain Mr B. to them that do not shut their eyes, and harden their hearts
against the truth: that the Church of Corinth was planted in the liberty of the
gospel, and had this power of Christ to reform abuses, and to excommunicate
offenders, without sending to Paul from one part of the world to an other, and
that the Corinthians Chapter 5. are reproved for failing in this duty. And had Mr
B. but taken this course in his writing, that two of his leaves had hung
together, he might have spared this objection, considering what he writ, page
92. that the same persons have the power to preach, administer the sacraments,
and excommunicate: for that he means by government. Now he cannot be ignorant,
that both the power, and practice of preaching, and administering the sacraments
were in the Church of Corinth in Paul's absence. 1 Cor. 11. 20. and 14. 1. etc.
And so by your own grant the Church of Corinth had power to excommunicate
though Paul were absent. Whereupon I also infer it was their sin not to use
it.

Now for the practice of Cloes family, we know Paul was an Apostle, and
general Officer, and so entitled to the affairs in all the Churches in the
world: whereupon Cloe complained unto him of such abuses in the Church as were
both of public nature, and which the Church would not reform: otherwise it
had been both slander, and solly to have complained. And what corn does this
wind shake? Do we make it unlawful for any member to inform the officers of
public enormities in the Church, that they according to their places might
see reformation of them? Yea if the Pastor, or other principal Officer of the
Church were absent necessarily, we doubt not but it were the duty of any
brother, or brethren in the like case, to entreat their help for the direction,
reproof, and reformation of the Church, for any public enormities there done,
or suffered: who might also judge, and condemn the same themselves, and for
their parts, exhorting, and directing the whole Church in their public
meeting to do the like as Paul did.

Your three next Arguments to prove that tell the Church, is tell the Officers,
are idle descants upon the forms, and phrases of speech scraped together to
fill your book with.

First you affirm that Christ having spoken in the third Mr. B.
person tell the Church when he comes to ratify the authority to be committed
to his Apostles, turns his speech to the 2. person, not saying, what it, but
what you shall bind, and loose, etc.

In so saying you give the cause, though you presently eat up Answ.
your own grant. For you affirm, that by the Church* ver. 17. is meant the
whole body, of which Christ speaks in the third person: and what say we more?
But where you add that the authority is not given till the 18. verse. and that
then Christ turns his speech to his Apostles, it is your own devised gloss.

For first it is evident, that Christ establishes the power of binding, and
loosing in the hands of the Church, speaking in the 3. person, v. 17. and that
so firmly, as what brother soever refuses to hear her voice is to be
expelled from all religious communion. Unto this the 18. v. is added partly for
explanation, and partly for confirmation. For where as the party admonished
might say with himself, well, if the Church disclaim me, I shall disclaym it,
if it condemn me, I shall condemn it again, the Lord does here back the
Churches censures for her encouragement, and for the terror of the refractary,
despising her voice, and that under a contestation, that what she binds, and
loses upon earth, (namely after his will) he also will bind, and loose in
heaven.

And for the change of persons in the 17. and 18, verses, it is merely
grammatical, and not natural. It is common with the Holy Ghost, sometimes for
elegancy, sometimes for explication, sometimes for further inforcement of the
same thing, to, and upon the same persons, thus to vary the phrase of speech in
the first, second, or third person grammatically, as the reader may take a taste
in these particulars. Psalm. 75. 1. Is. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. etc. Math. 5. 10. 11.
12. etc. and in this very Chapt. v. 7. 8. Romans 6. 14. 15. 16. and 8. 4. 5. 12.
13. etc.

Your 3. Reason, that, because Christ speaks of a few, two, or three Mr. B.
gathered together, therefore he means the officers of the Church, and not all
the body, is of no force, if the body consist but of two, or three, as Answ.
it comes to pass, where Churches are raised in persecution, as the most true
Churches are. Yet if Christ do speak of two or three officers of a Church,
gathered together in his name, he speaks against you, where all the power of
the keys over many 1000. Churches are in the hands of two Arch-Prelates, and
from them delegated and derived to their several underlings.

But the truth is, that gracious promise, which Christ here lays down, for
the comfort of all his saints, you do engrosse into the hands of a few Elders.
You might as well affirm, that only two or three officers gathered together,
have a promise to be heard in their prayers, and not a communion of two or
three brethren, for Christ, v. 19. 20. speaks principally, and expressly of
prayer, though with reference to the binding, and loosing of sin, which (as all
other ordinances) are sanctified by prayer. The very scope of the place, and
reason of the speech is this. The Lord Jesus had v: 18. enfranchised the
Church, with a most excellent, and honorable priveledge: now the disciples did
already see with their own eyes, and were more fully taught by their Master,
that the Church should arise from small, and base beginnings, and that it was
also, by reason of persequution, subject to great dissipation. Math. 7. 14. and
10. 17. 18. 22. 23. and 13. 31. 32. least therefore their hearts should be
discouraged, and they, or others, driven into suspicion, that the Lord would
any way neglect them, or his promise toward them for their paucity, and
meannes, he most graciously prevents, and frees them from that jealousy, and
tells them and all others, for their comfort, that though the Church, or
assembly consist but of two or three (as such beginnings the true Church of God
had and have, (though your English Church begu^ with a kingdom in a day) Act.
16. 14. 15. and 17. 34. and 19. 7. yet that should no way diminish their power,
or prejudice the accomplishment of his promise. And the reason has been
formerly rendered, because this power for binding, and loosing, being given to
the faith of Peter, depends not upon the order of office, multitude of people,
or dignity of person, but merely upon the word of God. And hence is it that
Christ thus graciously descends even to two or three, wheresoever assembled in
his name, yea though it be in a Cave, or Den of the earth: of which most
gracious and necessary priveledge you would bereave them.

Now in your 4. Reason out of v. 19, you do most ignorantly err in the
gra^maticall construction: for you make a change of the person again, where
there is no change at all. Christ speaks only in the third person, as the
original makes it plain, though the English tongue do not so distinctly
manifest it to an ignorant man. Christ says not, whatsoever you two shall
agree of, shall be given to them, that is to the Church, but whatsover two of you
shall agree of, or consent in, they two that so agree shall obtain it of God.
Which words (Mr B.) you do most vnsufferably pervert, to the seducing of the
ignorant: as if Christ had said, if two, or three of you officers, or you two
or three officers, shall agree together of a thing, whatsoever they, that is
the Church shall desire, namely of the Officers (for so you expound the words)
it shall be give^ them. where it is most evident that they which are to agree
upon the thing, they are to ask it, and that of God, who will give it them. And
where the scripture says, that the brother offended (speaking indefinitely of
any brother, and so of the Officers themselves) must complayn to the Church, M
B. on the contrary (as if he would even beard the Lord Jesus) tells us the
Church must complayn to the Officers.

Your 5. Reason follows with many little ones in the womb of it, which you
bring forth in order, to prove, that Christ speaks here figuratively, and that
by the Church he means the governors.

The first is. It agrees with the practice of the Jewish Church from whence Mr
B.
it is held, that the manner of governing in the Church is fetched.

And is this the necessary proof you speak of? whatsoever is so Answ.
held, is so in truth. And yet in your second book, as has been showed, you
bring in sundry men holding contrary things, as if contraries could be true.
Well, I confess it is so held, and that by many, with whom I would gladly
consent, if the scriptures taught me not to hold otherwise. It had been good
here the author had showed us, what the government of the Jewish Church was,
and not thus sleightily to have passed over things of this moment. For the
purpose in hand thus much.

The Church of the Jews was a national Church, Exodus 19. 5. 6. Lev. 20. 24.
26. Deuteronomy. 29. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.
the Lord separating unto himself the whole nation, from all other nations, to
be his people, and that he might be their God. And as one of the Lords
ordinances suits with an other, and depends upon an other, so from this
national Church does necessarily arise a representative Church. For where
communion together in the holy things of God is an act, and operation of the
Church, for the mutual aedification of the parts, and that it was impossible,
that the whole body of a nation should in the entire, simple, proper, or
personal parts, and members communicate togeither, the Lord so ordered and
disposed, that that communion should be had, and exercised after a manner, and
in a sort, and that was by way of representation.

And to this end the Lord made choice of one special place in the land, which
he gave his people to possess, at the first alterable, but afterward
constant, and unchangeable, where he would have his tabernacle pitched, and his
temple built, where he would put his name, and dwell, and which he would honor
above all places, with his glory and presence.

There was also one only tabernacle or temple, one high Priest, one altar,
unto which the whole national Church had reference, Deuteronomy. 12. 5. 6. 7.
thither must they bring all their sacrifices, tithes and offerings, Deuteronomy. 17.
8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
thither were causes Ios. 18. 1. 1 King. 8. 10. 29.
hard, and difficult to be brought, that the people might be showed the
sentence of judgment, informed, and taught the law, by the Priests of the
Levites. Exodus 29. 38. 39. 4^. 43. 45.
There was the daily sacrifice offered for the whole national Church, morning
and evening continually, there the Lord appointed with the children of Israel,
sanctifying the place with his glory, binding himself by his promise to dwell
amongst them, and to be their God. There was 2 Chro. 19. 8. ^. 10. 11.
Exo. 28. 9. 10. 11. 12 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 2^. 29. 30.
the high Priest to carry graven upon two onix stones, as the stones of
remembrance of the children of Israel, put upon the shoulders of the Eph^d, the
names of the children of Israel according to their tribes, for a remembrance:
and again, the names of the children of Israel, according to their twelve
tribes i^ twelve stones set upon the breast plate of judgment upon his heart,
for a remembrance continually before the Lord. There was also Exo. 25. 30. Lev.
24 5. 6. 7. 8.
set upon the pure table of Shittim wood in the tabernacle, twelve loaves of
show bread continually before the Lord, according to the twelve tribes of
Israel for a remembrance.

Now all these were ordinances representative, in a Church representative: and
other Church representative amongst the Jews, I neither know, not acknowledge.
And the ground of this representation was the necessary absence of the people
represented. Necessary, I call it, whether we respect the ordinance of God
inhibiting the peoples entrance into the place, where the most of these
representations were made, or whether we respect the impossibility of the
whole nations ordinary assembling, and communicating together.

And hereupon it comes to pass, that all other Churches since, so framed, and
of such quality, as that they cannot ordinarily assemble together, and keep
communion, have also as their images, or shadows, their Churches
representative. The catholic visible Ch: of Rome has her visible Ch:
representative, the Popes Co^sistory, or College of Cardinals, or the
general Council gathered by his authority. The national Church of Engl:, has
her national Church representative, the Convocation house: as have also the
Provincial and Diocesan Churches their representations, the Archbishops, and
Bishops Consistories. But as the bodies of these Churches are monstrous devises
of men's brains, (there being no other Churches under the new testament but
particular assemblies) so are their shadows, (the Churches representative)
mere devises of devises.

And to apply this nearer the purpose. Since the Church now consists not of
one nation severed from all other nations, but of particular assemblies of
faithful people, separated from all other assemblies, which like so many
distinct Act ^0. 28. 1 Pet. 5 2. 3. 1 Cor. ^. 4. and 11. 17. 20. and 14. 23.
flocks, do ordinarily heard together, and so communicate in the word, prayer,
sacraments, and censures, and that where the Church grew sometimes greater by
the suddayne, and extraordinary conversion of more then could well so assemble,
then was there presently a dispersion of the former and a multiplication of
more particular assemblies. Act. 2. 41. 42. and 8. 4. 5. 6. and 9. 31. and 14.
23. 27. and 15. 22. 30. Rev. 1. 4. 11. this rases the foundation of all
representative Churches, as either politic devises, or at the best,
praeposterous imitations of the Jewish Church, and polity. For (as I have
formerly said, and common sense teaches it) the foundation of representation
is the necessary absence of that which is represented, whether person, or
thing. And so since there is no necessity, that the body of a particular Church
should be absent, but on the contrary a necessity, that the same be present, at
and in all the public administrations, and actions of communion in the
Churches holy things, we do therefore disclaym as supersluous, and feyned, all
representative Churches whatsoever.

Secondly if the outward form of Church government now be fetched from the
Jewish Church, then as in that representative Ch: there was an high Priest set
over the rest, in whose person, and administration, the representation of the
whole Church was most eminent, so must there now be also in this representative
Church one officer over the rest, and as it were their high Priest. And so the
catholic representative Church of Rome has an universal Bishop the Pope over
it: the National, Provincial, and Diocesan, Churches representative,
National, Provincial, and Diocesan Bishops over them. And so in all equity
should the Synodes, and Praesbyteries, accounting themselves properly Churches,
or bodies Ecclesiastical, have their Officers over them: and so there should
always be one, or more Ministers over the Church of Ministers, and whose
charge these Synodes and Presbyteries should be, to be fed by them. And the
truth is, this reason fetched from the Jewish Church, as it far better fitts the
Praelates in England, then the Co^sistorians, so fitts it the Papists better
then either of them both: for there is one Bishop over the catholic visible
Church (as they speak) as there was one high Priest over the whole visible Ch:
then.

Add unto this, that if the representative Church at Jerusalem be a pattern
for a representative Church unto us, then as there not only hard causes were
opened, and declared according to the law, but also the sacrifices offered, and
most solemn services performed day, by day, without the presence of the body
of the Church, so now in this our representative Church consisting of the
officers only, there must be not only the use of the keys for admonition,
and excommunication, but there must also be the preaching of the word, and
ministering of the sacraments, (which are our most solemn services) whether the
people be present or no. And to imagine a power of Christ in the Church of the
officers for the use of one solemn ordinance out of the communion of the body,
and not for an other, has no ground from the Jewish Church.

Lastly, to fetch the form of government for the Church now from the Jewish
Church, were to revive Heb. 8. 13
the old testament, which so long since, is abrogated, and disanulled. For to
speak properly the old testament is nothing but that external policy
instituted by Moses in the Judicial and ceremonial law, for the dispensation
of the typical kingdom and Preisthood of Christ, shadowed out by that of Heb.
5. and 6.
Melchisedeck King and Priest: repraesented by the administrations of Moses,
and Aaron: and after continued in the Number. 18
Preisthood of the Levites, and 2 Chronicles. 13. 5.
kingdom of David and his sons, till Christ, in the dispensation of those
worldly, and carnal ordinances. Now as the judicialls, (which were for the
government of the Congregation civily) are dead, and do not bind any civil
polity, save as they were of common equity: so are the ceremonialls, (which
were for the Ch: polity) deadly: and may not be revived by any Church, save as
any of them have new life given by Christ. For though we now be made Ephesians. 2.
12. and 3. 6.
citizens of the common wealth of Israel, and one body with them, yet is that
in respect of Genesis 17. 7. Gal. 3. 17.
the everlasting covenant confirmed of God with Abraham through Christ. (I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed) four hundred and thirty years before
the law was given, or the polity and government of the lewish, either church,
or common wealth, in it established: and as we are the sons, and daughters of
Abraham by faith, but no way in respect of those Jewish ordinances in in the
old testament, or the order of dispensing them. And yet if it were granted
which you would have, that the Church government now is to be patterned by the
government of the Jewish church, then it would nothing avayle you for the
purpose in hand. For the church officers the Priests, and Levites unto whom
Numb. 3. 67.
the charge of the whole Congregation, for the service of the tabernacle did
apperteyne, had no authority by the order of their office to inflict any
censure spiritually upon the people, as had the civil Magistrates to punish
them bodily. The Priests and Levites were only to enterpret the law, and in
cases extraordinarily difficult, to find out the estate of the person, or
thing, and to show what in such a case the law required: and if you will say,
they gave judgment it was none otherwise, then as a Physician gives ^^dgement
of the body, or state of his patient by his faculty, or skill in his art: but
to sit upon them formally in judgment, and ecclesiastically to punish them,
that they might not do: neither are they called in the scriptures Deuteronomy. 17 9. 2 Chronicles. 1^. 5. 6.
judges, as the civil Magistrates are. Yea the scriptures do make a plain
difference where the civil Elders are to Ex. 18. 13. Ruth. 4. 2.
sit, and judge the people, but the Numb. 16 9. 2. 2 Chro^. 35. 3.
Priests to stand before the Congregation, and to minister unto them. Now
before we pass over this business in hand, I deem it not amiss upon this
occasion, to observe a few things by way of answer to a scripture usually
brought out for the foundation of these representative churches and their
power, and especially for these National, and Provincial Synodes, and the
like. And the scripture is, Act. 15.

1. There was no synod, or assembly of the Officers of diverse Churches, but
only certain messengers sent from the church of Antiochia, to the Church of
Jerusalem about the controversy there specified.

2. Neither the Church of Antioch which sent the messengers, nor the church at
Jerusalem whether they were sent, was a representative church, consisting of
Officers, much less of chief officers only. For first it is said, ver. 1. 2.
that the brethren of Antiochia, which Chapter 14. 17. are called the church, and v.
28. the disciples, and in this chapt. v. 3. the church, and v. 23. the brethren
sent their messengers with Paul and Barnabas to Jerusalem: and it will most
evidently appear by whom the message was sent, if we consider to whom the
answer was returned. ver. 30. where the messengers did not deliver the Epistle
till they had assembled the multitude. And 2. it is apparent that at Jerusalem,
not only the chief officers the Apostles, yea and inferior officers the
Elders also, met together about it, and sent answer, but the brethren with
them. v. 4. 12. 22.

And these scriptures alone in this chapt. are sufficient to chalendge the
liberty of the brethren in the discussing of public controversies out of the
hands of all officers whatsoever.

3. Paul and Barnabas, went not to Jerusalem either for authority, or
direction; for being Apostles, they had both equal immediate authority from
Christ, and equal infallible direction from the holy Ghost, with the rest of
the Apostles. Only they went for countenance of the truth in respect of men,
and for the stopping the mouths of such deceivers as pretended they were sent
by the Apostles. v. 24.

4. Their decrees were absolutely Apostolical, and divine scripture by
infallible direction from the holy Ghost, and so imposed upon all other
Churches of the Gentiles, though they had ^o delegates there, ver. 23. 28. Chapter
16. 4.

But it will be said, may not the officers of one, or many Churches meet together
to discuss and consider of matters for the good of the Church, or Churches,
and so be called a Church, Synod, or the like? I deny it not, so they infringe
no order of Christ, or liberty of the brethren, they may so do, and so be
called in a sense: but the quaestion now is about such a Church, as is gathered
for the public administration of admonition, excommunication, and other the
like ordinances of Christ, which Mr B. in his first book graunts page 92.
must be done with the knowledge of the body of the Church, and and in the open
assembly.

And here falls into handling certain borrowed stuff page 178.
in Mr B. 2. book about this matter.

As first, that Paul called the Elders of Ephesus, and conferred with them Mr B.
without the people, Act. 20. 27. which who denies, but they which set up a
Lord Bishop to rule alone without advising with either Answer.
the inferior Ministers, or people.

But that, which he adds in the next place, has almost as many errors, as
words in it, and that is, that the Elders sat in a Co^sistory, with James
their Bishop at Jerusalem, without the people, and did decree a matter, without
asking their voice. Act. 21. 18.

First you err in calling it a Consistory, or juditiall Court, for the
justification of your own: where it was only an occasional meeting for
advise. 2. in making James a Bishop whom Christ had made an Apostle. The Elders
were Bishops, Act. 20. 17. 28. Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 1. ^. 7. And so if you would
have held any proportion you should have made James an Archbishop. 3. that you
make him their Bishop, where Bishops, or Overseers, are set over the flock, not
over the Ministers, Act. 20. 28. 4. And most ignorantly, where you will have
James and the Elders to make a decree for Paul, as if the Elders had authority
over the Apostles (for that is the drift of your argument) or one Apostle over
an other: or as if Paul were subject to Consistorian decrees. It was only a
matter of advise, that passed amongst them, as all men may see.

An other observation Mr B. has in this place, as idle as the rest: and that
is, that the Elders are superior unto the people, because they are set before
them, Act. 15. 22. 23. where if the bold and inco^siderate man had but read
the 4. verse of the same Chapt: he should have seen the people set before the
Officers: the very same alteration appears ver. 2. and 12. so if his argument
was of force, two contraries might be true, which is a repugnancy in nature.
Yet deny we not but the officers are above the Church, in respect of the word,
and doctrine they minister, and teach: but we deny the order of Elders to be
superior to the order of saints, since it is not an order of Maystership, but
of service.

But I will from this place, Mr B. (if I be not much deceived) take a better
argument to prove the contrary to that you say, namely, that the Church is an
order superior unto the officers. And the reason is, because the Churches have
authority to send the officers, as their messengers, v. 2. 3. 22. 32. Now they
that send are ever in that respect, superior unto them that are sent.

That which you add in the last place, to wit, that the Apostles and Elders
did acquaint the people with the matter, who consented, but had no authority to
make the authority of the Apostles, and Elders nothing, is drawn out of the
same cask with the former. In which speech, there is imperfection,
co^tradictio^, and ignorance. Imperfection, where you give the people no further
liberty then to consent to the matter, being made acquainted with it. For in
that it is said, ver: 12. that the multitude kept silence when they had heard
James speak truly, and sufficiently, and that they held their peace, v: 13.
when they heard Paul and Barnabas speak, it shows they had also liberty of
speaking in the matter, had they seen cause. Contradictions you speak, in
affirming the people were to consent to the Elders, and yet in denying they
could praejudice their power, and authority. For howsoever this be true for the
Apostles, which were infallibly, and immediately directed by the H. Ghost in
their determinations, unto which all were bound absolutely to condescend, as
are all the saints at the last day to the judgment to be passed by Christ upon
the reprobate, yet is it not so for the Elders ordinary, then, or now, which
may err, and be deceived. And so where there is liberty of consenting
conditionally, and if men see cause, there is also liberty of dissenting, upon
the contrary occasion: and so this dissent of the body must either hinder the
action, or else it is a mere mockery. Ignorance it is, in the last place to make
equal the authority of the Apostles, and Elders in this decree. For the decree
was merely Apostolical (to speak properly) and framed by infallible direction
of the Holy Ghost, (which the Elders in themselves considered had not) as
appears, ver. 28. and was, and is, in the right end, and equity of it, a
part of the canonical scriptures, in penning whereof the Elders had no hand:
and so is imposed upon the Churches of the Gentiles every where, ver. 23. with
whom the Elders of Jerusalem had nothing to do, but only the Apostles, which
were general men: so that neither brethren, nor Elders did more then consent
to the decree it self, and that necessarily, as unto a divine oracle.

These things thus ended, I return to the Arguments in Mr Ber. first book to
prove by the Ch: to be meant the chief Officers.

The second and third whereof being but needles boasts of his former doings, I
pass over.

The 4: is, for order sake and to prevent confusion, for that which is all Mr B.
men's, is no m^ns: whereupon aryseth great carelesnes in seeing unto such
things, as are all men's in public: and by it pride, yea thereupon contention
ensues.

We do stand for the order of Christ against the confusion of Ans.
Antichrist in Babylon, which is incapable of all right order: as we also enjoy
the right disposition of things, and persons in their places, which is order.
And if you call it confusion in an assembly, wherein all have equal power, and
voice in the determining of things, some one or few going before the rest in
guiding, and directing them, you do (though you consider it not) strike through
our sides, the highest and honourablest court or assembly in the whole land,
and which is the rule and fountayn of all the rest, and that is, the court of
Parliament, where all things pass by voices, all, or the most: the proloquutor
being only chosen to propound, and moderate actions: which is also the order
in general councils, and (if I be not deceived) in your representative Church
of Engl* your Convocation house. Which order also is observed for the mayn
determinations to be made in the priveledged cities and corporations in the
kingdom. And what greater confusion is there like to be in the determining of
other Church affairs by voices, then in the calling of ministers? the order of
whose ^^t* 14. 2^. and 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
election by the suffrages of the multitude, guided by the officers, was both
established by the Apostles, and continued in the primitive Churches, many
hundred years.

Now the inconveniency of carelesnes in all, where matters concern all, is a
strange allegation. Me thinks it should make all more careful, the matters
especially being of conscience, and the persons consionable, whom they concern.
And I see not but you might as well say, it makes all men careless of the
knowledge of God, and Christ, and of salvation, and of the scriptures, because
these things concern all. And why do you not with the Papists deprive the
multitude of the use of the scriptures in the mother tongue, that you the
careful Clergy alone might look unto them? But what though this inconveniency
do arise sometimes, through man's corruption, it should be otherwise: and we
must ever consider of the nature of Gods ordinances in their right use, and
when men are exercised in them as they should be, and not according to ^rayle
man's aberration, and abuse in, and of the same: and if men be sometimes careless
of their duties, we must not therefore deprive them of their rights.

And in this plea, Mr Bernard, me thinks you very naturally resemble the mighty
oppressors in the world, which under this very pretense, do enclose all the
commons of their poor neighbors: for common things (say they) are commonly
neglected: and they can make one aker of ground, thus enclosed, worth two in
common. But if the Lord denounce such heavy judgments against the inclosers of
earthly things, Is. 5. 8. 9. what will be the end of those spiritual ingrossers
and oppressors, if they repent not? And for pride and contention, as they and
a thousand worse evils could not but fall out in a Church gathered as yours is,
of all the profane rabble in a kingdom, so when they do arise in a true
Church, there is power to void them out, and the persons with them, in whom
they reign. But if the unlawfulness of a Church government might be proved by
the pride, contention, and the like evils arising in it, then surely M B. you
that know so well how these and other mischeifs reign in your own, should lay
your hand on your mouth for shame, and be affrayd to provoke any man to meddle
in that matt^^. Besides it is apparent both in the scriptures, and
ecclesiastical writers, that not only pride, and contention, but herely, and
almost all other evils have sprung from the officers, and governors in the
Church. And surely nothing has more in former days advanced, nor does at this
day more uphold the throne of Antichrist, then the peoples discharging
themselves of the care of public affairs in the Church, on the one side: and
the Priests, and Prelates a^rogating all to themselves on the other side.

Lastly the word Church (you say) must be expounded figuratively Mr B.
to avoid the absurd^t^s, which e^s would necessarily follow out of the text,
viz: that, the whole Church must speak jointly, which were confusion contrary
to 1 Cor. 14. 40. that women must meddle in Church affairs, which the Apostle
forbids, ver. 34. that children must speak, which were impossible: so then it
must needs ^e taken figuratively, the part for the whole, and if one part must
be left out, why not an other, till the chief of the Congregation be taken, who
are chosen by the rest as their mouth.

Touching the exception of confusion, I desire the reader to remember Ans.
what has been formerly answered: adding further, that Mr B. herein does not
oppose us but the Apostles, and Apostolical Churches governed by them: yea the
H. Ghost it self propounding their examples for our imitation. The Apostle
Peter, Act. 1. 15. etc. standing up in the midst of the disciples (which were
about an hundred and twenty) spoke to them about the choice of one to succeed
Judas: and it is said, ver. 23. that they, that is, these brethren to whom he
spoke, presented two: as also that the whole multitude, Act. 6. 5. presented
the seven for Deacons to the twelve Apostles, who are said, v. 2. to have
called the multitude, and to have spoken unto them, and v. 6. to have prayed,
and laid hands on the elect Deacons. Now might not any profane spirit take up
M. B. words, and insult over the holy Ghost himself, and say: what did all the
disciples that were in the place (an hundred and twenty) present Joseph, and
Mathias? They must needs speak in presenting these two, and spoke they jointly,
or all at once? this were confusion contrary to 1 Cor. 14. 14. did the women
speak? they must not meddle in Church matters, ^. 34. did children speak? it is
impossible. So for Act. 6. did all the twelve Apostles speak at once, v. 2. and
pray at once, v. 6. did the whole multitude speak jointly, when they presented
the 7. Deacon^ v. 6. here were the like confusion; and besides here were women,
and children in the Church also. Now let the indifferent reader judge, what M.
B. has said more against us, then any Lucian or scoffing Atheist might object
against the spirit of God himself, and his holy penman the Evangelist.

Yea further, by these and the like consequences, women and children are
utterly excluded from the Church, as no parts of it.

Luke says, Act. 15. 22. that the whole Church sent messengers to Antiochia,
and Paul 1 Cor. 14. 23. speaks of the whole Churches coming together in one
to exercise themselves in prayer, prophesying, and the like parts of Church
communion; but children neither could send messengers, nor pray, nor prophecy,
nor the like, and women might not speak in the Church; and therefore both they
must be left out of the Church, and if one part why not an other, and so till
we come to the chief of the congregation, that they alone may be the Church,
and all in all? and as it is just with God, that he which opposes the truth,
should oppose himself also, so does Mr B. in this very place inta^gle himself
in the same absurdities, wherein he would ensnare us. First he affirms the
Church, Math. 1^. must be the principal of the congregation. Then Mr B. is not
your congregation the true Church of Christ, for the principal of your Church,
namely your self, has no power to excommunicate. And say not for shame, the
Archdeacon or official are principalls or less principalls of your
congregation.

Again, which is the chief thing I desire may be observed, you say, these
principalls must be chosen by the rest of the Church, and be their mouth, and
stand for the whole. And how chosen? must the whole Church speak jointly when
they choose them? that were confusion. must women speak? that is contrary to the
scriptures. Yet are they members of the congregation, and so are young youths,
children, and servants. I add further, the Church you say, is two or three
principal members. Well then, they two or three must speak to the party, how
can he else hear? but for two or three to speak together, is confusion, and
contrary to the commandment, 1 Cor. 14. 31. for all must speak by one and one.

And by this time, I hope you are ashamed of such tristing as here you use.

I do therefore answer in few words: it is not necessary that every one of the
people should speak to the offender, no nor of the officers neither. If but one
officer do sufficiently evince, and reprove the party, what needs more speak?
The rest both Officers and people, may manifest their consent either by voice,
sign, or sil^nce, yet so as liberty be preserved for any in place, and order,
to speak, either by way of addition, limitation, or dissent. And for women,
they are debarred by their s^x, as from ordinary prophesying, so from any other
dealing wherein they take authority over the man, 1 Cor, 14. 34. 35. 1 Timothy 2.
11. 12. yet not simply from speaking: they may make profession of faith, or
confession of sin, say Amen to the Churches prayers, sing Psalms vocally,
accuse a brother of sin, witness an accusation, or defend themselves being
accused, yea in a case extraordinary, namely where no man will, I see not but a
woman may reprove the Church, rather then suffer it to go on in apparent
wickedness, and communicate with it therein. Now for children, and such as are
not of years of discretion, God and nature dispenses with them, as for not
communicating in the Lords supper now, so under the law for not offering
sacrifices, from which none of years were exempted: neither is there respect
of persons with God in the common duties of Christianity.

And for that so often reinforced objection of authority given to two or three,
and therefore not to all, I have answered and do, that to two, or three, and
yet to all, when there are but two or three in all, as usually comes to pass
in the raising, and dispersing of Churches.

Your 6. Argument to prove that the word Church must be taken Mr B.
figuratively is first, that else the Corinthians had offended, who being all
commanded did but some of them proceed against the incestuous person. 1 Cor. ^
13. 2 Cor. 2. 6. 2. that else Paul had offended, who upon the complaint of Cloes
house did himself, without waiting for the Churches consent, being absent,
judge and determine the matter, and s^nt to them to execute ^^ sentence.

These two Arguments Mr B. are in your hands like the two witnesses Ans.
that came against Christ, they neither agree one with an other, nor either of
them with the truth. In the former you plead for the Presbytery in saying that
some of them did proceed against him, in the latter you utterly overthrow that,
and step in for the Bishops sole power where you make Paul alone judge and
determiner of the business. I am verily persuaded Mr Smyth has felt your pulse
in Mr Smyth page ^4.
this place, and found directly what blood runs in your ^eynes; to him
therefore do I leave you for judgment in the case.

And for answer to the particulars.

In the first argument you do most sinfully corrupt the scriptures, knowing
that if they be soundly alleged, they will give no countenance to your
error. For where Paul says, it is sufficient for 2 Cor. 2. 6.
the same man that he was rebuked of many, you for the word many put some:
where some does import a part, and but a part: (for where some are said to do a
thing, it follows, that other some do it not) where the word many is often times
put for all, as being opposed to one, or a few: as in this place, many rebuking
to one rebuked. Take for this phrase of speech, these scriptures. Dan. 12. 2.
Mat. 13. 17. Luke 12. 7. Romans 5. 19. and 8. 29. and 12. 4. 5. 1 Cor. 10. 17.
and 12. 12. 14.

But mark I pray thee (wise reader) when this man expounds Math. 18. 19. 20.
where mention is made of a few two or three having the power of Christ, there
by two, or three are meant the officers, and Christ has established the
authority of a few for the good of all, and again two or three officers, and a
few, have this authority: and yet notwithstanding, when he comes to expound 2
Cor. 2. 6. where mention page 95. 98.
is made of many rebuking the offender, there by many must be meant the
officers also.

What Mr B: are two or three Officers in respect of the whole body many? Does
the holy Ghost speaking of a few in the Church, mean the officers, and speaking
of many, mean the officers also? It were good you awoke out of your dream, that
you might spy your contradictions, and how one piece reproves an other.

To the objection I do answer, that first it does not appear that the party was
excommunicated, it may be upon admonition he repented, and so the extremity
spoken of, 1 Cor. 5. 5. was prevented: and 2. if he were, either by many may be
meant all, as I have formerly showed, or otherwise it is sufficient if some
reprove, the Elders or some of them, specially, by their office, and so of the
brethren in the second place, if they see necessary cause; whereupon with the
silent consent of the rest, judgment may be given, or the party delivered to
Satan. Mr B.


The 7. Reason to prove the Elders the Church, is, the judgment, and practice
of all reformed Churches.

As the reformed Churches do abhor from your practice, as ^ns.
intolerable, yea almost incredible, that the power of excommunication should
be in the hands of one man, and that a forreyn Prelate, or Official, that most
like never so much in his life as once came in the congregation, whereof the
offender is a member, as may be seen in one for all, Beza Epist. 12. so because
you will needs thus bear over all with all the reformed Churches, I will a
little step out of my beaten way, and call in a few (well-deserving audience)
of the reformed Churches to testify what their judgment is in the case,
joining unto them also a few of our own men seeming to be of the same mind,
whatsoever the practice is either of the one, or of the other.

To omit then the judgment and practice of the more ancient times, whether
whole councels, or particular persons, (as of the Council of N^ce, where
Paphu^tius, no Church officer, both had and used such liberty of speech, as he
persuaded the whole assembly touching the marriage of Ministers: of Tertullian
before that, who Apol: chap. 39. makes the officers only Praesidents in the
assembly, where manners are censured: of Ciprian who would never do any thing
in his charge, without the consent of the people. lib. 3* epist. 10. and in
particular thinks it specially the peoples right to choose or reject worthy, or
unworthy Ministers, then which what power is greater? Of Austin, that thinks it
helps much to the shaming of the party, that he be excommunicated by the whole
Church, lib. 3. contra epist. Parmen: and lastly of Ierom ad Demetr. which
affirms that the Church it self has right in excommunication, as the Elders
have in other Church censures) the first is Zwinglius, who arti^* 8. explanat:
speaking of the contention which has been what a Church is, acknowledges none
other Churches but 1. the company of sure and firm believers scattered through
the universal world, which we call the catholic Church: and 2. several
congregations, which ^o^veniently meet together in some one place, etc. and of
these he affirms Christ to speak, Math. 18. Tell the Church, and Paul. 1 Cor.
1. To the Church which is at Corinth. And answering an objection touching a
Church representative he says, of this I find nothing in the scriptures: out
of men's devises any man may feyn any thing.

Next Perter Martyr, in his common places pant: 4. chap. 5. sect. 9. making the
Church a Monarchy in respect of Christ, an Aristocracy in respect of the
Elders, adds also that because in the Church there are matters of great
weight, and importance referred unto the people, as excommunication,
absolution, of choosing Ministers, and the like, it has also a consideration
of popular government: and upon 1 Cor. 5. 4. The Apostle as great as he was
would not excommunicate alone, but did take counsel with the Church that the
thing might be done by common authority. Which notwithstanding the Pope, and
other Bishops dare do. The Apostle indeed goes before the rest, which is the
duty of the ancients of the Ch: that the more ignorant multitude by their
suffragation before going, may be directed in iud^ing.

With him ioyn Bucer, who in his first book chapt. 9. de regno Christi,
affirms that Paul accuses the Corinthians, for that the whole Church had not
excommunicated the incestuous person.

Bastingius in the 4. place, quaestion 85. of his Catichism speaking of the
difference between the two keys that of preaching, and the other of discipline
places it in this, that the former which is of the preaching of the gospel is
committed to the Ministers, the other, because it perteyns to the discipline of
excommunication, is permitted to the whole Church.

Lastly, even Beza himself, how streyt soever he be to the multitude in this
case, hardly granting them the liberty which first book page 98.
Mr B. yea which the very Maldonatus ^^on Math 18.
Jesuits do, namely that they were with the Elders gathered together in the
name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5. 4. yea and do plainly deny it in his
Annotations upon 2 Cor. 2. 6. Yet upon v. ^. he is constreyned to affirm, that
Paul entreats that the incestuous person might by the public consent of the
Church be declared a brother, as he was by the Churches public consent cast
out.

Now to these special lights in the reformed Churches abroad, I will annex a
few of the chief endeavors of reformation at home.

The first of them is Mr Hooper, who in his Apology writes, that
exco^municatio^ should be by the Bishop, and the whole Parish, and that Paul's
consent, and the whole Church with him did excommunicate the incestuous man.

To him add Mr Fox, whose judgment in the book of Martyrs, page 5. 6. 7. is,
and so is enforced by him that writ the discovery of D. Ban^r ofts untruths,
and slanders against reformation, that every visible Church, or congregation,
has the power of binding, and loosing annexed to it. If it be said the Church
has it, if the Officers have it: I see not but it may be as well said, the
Church has the scriptures in a known tongue, if the Officers so enjoy them.

Thirdly Mr Cartwright in his reply to D. Whitgifts answer, page 147 both
affirms, and proves, that Paul both understanding, and observing the rule of
our Savior Christ, communicates this power of excommunication with the Church,
Him also an other writing A demonstration of discipline, alleges, adding
further that they which were met together, 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5. were to
excommunicate the incestuous person: with whom also consorteth he that wrote of
the certain form of ecclesiastical government^, who under that head of the
authority of the Ministers of the word that by the Church Math. 18. Christ
means a particular Congregation, the Pastor, Elders, and people consenting,
making that the judgment of the particular congregation which is spoken of 1
Cor. 5. 12.

In the 4. place Mr Jacob in his book to the King for reformation, page 28.
pleads for the peoples consent and voyce-giving in elections, and
excommunications: to whom I ioyn them that made the Christian offer to justify
against the Bishops, and their adhaerents, that* every ordinary assembly of the
faithful, has by Christ's ordinance power in it self immediately under Christ,
to elect, and ordeyn, deprive, and depose their Ministers, and to exequute all
other ecclesiastical censures. Proposition 5. and Prop. 8, that the officers
can do no material ecclesiastical act without the free consent of the
Congregation.

Lastly page 180.
the godly Ministers in the end of Mr Bernards book do directly judge against
him, interpreting the Church. Math. 18. to be a particular Congregation, and
excommunication the judgment, and censure of that particular congregation
whereof the offender is a member.

Thus have I been constreyned by the bold boasting, and facing, which this man
uses, of, and with the judgment of all reformed Church^^, to set down the
judgments of some few amongst many both at home* and abroad for his
conviction; though I desire the touchstone of the holy scriptures alone may try
all differences betwixt him and me. I now return to Mr Bernard where I left
him: and so come to two reasons he annexeth page 98. 99. to prove the officers
to be called the Church: the former is, because it is, an Mr B.
usual speech to put the name of the whole upon the part, and this to be taken
for the whole. The 2. because a company is no where called a Church in the new
testament, but where they have officers.

The latter of these I have formerly confuted as the reader may Answ.
see page 126. 127. etc. Only I add one thing upon occasion of these words a
Church in the new testament, that as there is but Ephesians. 4. 4.
one body, or Church, and we under the new testament that Chap. 3. 6.
one, or the same body or Church with the Jews in the old, so (if the
Ministry made the Church, how much more if it were the Church) could it not
be, that the Jews and we should be one Church, for I shall never be brought to
believe, nor, I think will any man affirm it, that the Ministry of an Apostle,
or Elder now, is the same in nature with the Ministry of a sacrificing Levite
under the law. We are by faith Luke 19. 9.
sons and daughters of Abraham, and partaker of the covenant, and promises,
and Romans 11. 16. 20.
by faith grafted in their holy root, and in this stands our onenes with them,
but neither in the Ministry, nor in the government, nor in any other ordinance
which are but manners of dispensing that covenant, and those diverse and
changeable, where the covenant is nothing less.

And for the former of your reasons, (howsoever the place you bring Act. 15. 3.
proves no such matter) yet is the thing true you say, namely that a part of the
Church is sometimes called by the name of the whole; but what part? not the
officers, but the brethren, the saints, as being the matter (an essential
cause) of the Church: the Elders not so, as being but for the assistance, and
well being of it. And so the Church gives both being, and denomination to the
Elders, but not the Elders to the Church: which is never called the Church of
the Elders, as they are called Act. 20. 17.
the Elders of the Church, and so are of it, and not it of them.

That which you add of inconveniences, and discommodities following upon your
doctrine not to be regarded is frivolous, except by them you mean, absurdities,
and inconsequences, ^a al^g^ in theologia, as they call them, and then they are
to be regarded, as never necessarily following upon any truth: for the truth
brings forth no error by true consequence.

The sixth Reason, of the superior order, follows, (for Mr B. has his
reasons, and his under reasons) which is,

In it self (the multitude being ever unconstant) it is instability,
vnorderlynesse, Mr B.
where every one is a like equal, it is the nourse of confusion, the mother of
schism, the breeder of contention. Ans.


These very same things have been formerly objected by you in the fourth part
of your 5. argument, and there cleared. The truth is, the drawing of all power
into the officers hands, breeds in them pride, and arrogance, and in the people
ignorance, and security.

And for your contemptuous vpbrayding of Gods people in this book, with
inconstancy, instability, pride, contention, and the like evils, but specially
in your second book, where with a scurtilous, and profane spirit you nickname
them, Srmon the Sadler, Tomkin the Taylour, Billy the Bellows maker, as you
show whose child you are, Ioh. 7. 48. 49. in so speaking, so does the Spirit of
God give an other testimony of them Act. 2 41 42. Phil. 1. 6. 7. 1 Th. 3. 5. 6.
7 8. 1 Pet. 1 7 8. In deed (as I formerly said) no mervavl though such
multitudes as yours are, be unstable and variable, and ready to change their
religion with their Prince, yea though it be to Popery, as appeared in Queen
Mary's days, universally scarce one of ten thousand excep^^d: only the
mischief was, that the Praelates and Priests were as unstable as the rest, yea
their ringleaders also.

But for our selves, Mr Bern. and that whereof we take experience in this our
popularity, as you term it, I tell you, that if ever I saw the b^a^^y of Sion,
and the glory of the Lord filling his tabernacle, it has been in the
manifestation of the diverse graces of God in the Church, in that heavenly
harmony, and comely order, wherein by the grace of God we are set and walk:
wherein, if your eyes had but seen the brethrens sober, and modest carriage one
toward an other, their humble, and willing submission unto their guides, in
the Lord, their tender compassion toward the weak, their ^^rvent zeal against
scandalous offenders, and their long suffering toward all, you would (I am
persuaded) change your mind, and be compelled to take up your parable, and
bless, where you purposed to curse, as Balaam did, Numb. 23. But whatsoever
you, and all others do, these our experimental comforts neither you, nor any
other shall take from us.

Your 7. and 8. Reason are of one nature, and may for brevity Mr B.
sake be contracted into one: the sum whereof is, that the sheep, and flock are
to obey, and depend upon their shepherd, Heb. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 5. 2. the
children to be subject to their father, 1 Cor. 4. 15. the work to be ordered by
the workman 1 Cor. 4. 12. the corn by the seeds man, and not the contrary: and
there cannot be showed in the old or new testament any example, that ever the
people had command over their Pastors, or power to ^ast* them out.

These things are popular, and may deceive the simple, and credulous, Ans.
but though Prove. 14. 15.
the fool believe every thing, yet the prudent will consider his stepps.

We deny not then, but the flock both severally and jointly is to obey them
that have the oversight of them, Heb. 13. 17. to know them, and to have them in
singular love, 1 These. 5. 12. 13. but it must be in the Lord, and for their
works suke: and wherein they watch for their soul. as is expressed in the same
places. But what now if the officers will reign besides the Lord? if their
works be such, as deserve hatred, and not love? if in stead of watching for the
peoples souls, they take a course, either to starve them through negligence,
or to poison them with heresy, or evil life? must they still obey them? or has
the Church no remedy against them? The Churches of Galatia were bound to
receive, and submit unto such Ministers as brought the doctrine of Christ; and
yet Gal. 1. 9. Deuteronomy. 7. 26
if any man, yea though he were an Apostle, or above an Apostle, should bring
any other doctrine they were to hold him accursed, and so to cast him away as
an accursed thing. The Collosians were bound to obey Archippus in the lawful
exequution of his Ministry, and yet they might Col. 4. 17.
say unto him, look to thy Ministry, and if they might so admonish him,
certainly they might go further with him, if there were cause. The Pilate is to
guide the ship, and all that are in it* (yea though the King himself be there)
but if he either ignorantly, or desperately will run upon the sands, he may be
displaced by his passengers, and the fittest put in his room, as I have
formerly observed. Now not only the Church is commonly, and fitly compared to
a ship, but the very word used 1 Cor. 12. 28. ^or the (...)
govern^^^ of the Church, is borrowed from the government, and guidance of a
ship in the original. And if nature teach this liberty, in bodily danger, how
much greater liberty does the Lord give in the spiritual danger, both of
soul, and body also? And your quaestion of examples for the peoples casting
out their officers, is frivolous, if there be a commondement or rule for it.
What example have you, but grounds, for the baptizing of infants? Or where read
you of any officer excommunicate by any? And certainly if the body of the
Church may not cast out the Pastor for obstinate sin, no person, nor persons
upon earth may do it.

But the vanity of your opinion I do thus manifest.

First you affirm page 88. that to separate from, is all one in substance I.
with, to excommunicate (though called by a name l^sse odious). Whence it
follows that if the body of the Church may not excommunicate their officers,
they may not separate from them, no not though they prove Papists or Atheists,
or never so abominable, oh the hellish bondage wherein these men would enthrall
the Lords people to their destruction.

If the Congregation may choose, and elect their governors, II.
then they may reject and reprobate them: (for they that set up may pull down)
but this liberty (as streyt as you are to the multitude) you your self grant
them, page 97. and if you denied it, the scriptures assure it them, Act. 1, and
6. 1. 2. 3. 4. and 14. 23.

But if in these words, the people have no command over their Pastors, nor
power to cast them out, you would intimate, that they might depose them but not
excommunicate them, it would nothing avayl you. For as it were a strange
thing, that men should have no command over their servants, (as I have of^
times showed the Church Officers to be the Church servants) so were it a^
strange, if the putting of servants out of their Office, should not argue power
over them. And besides deposition (if any such ordinance be to be used in the
Church, is not of persons obstinate in sin, but of such, as having by gross
idolatry, or some other notorious crime, so scandalously fallen, as they cannot
be retained in their Ministry, with the safety, and credit of the Church, and
Gospel, no not though they repent, but (not withstanding their repentance, and
continuance in the Church upon the same) they are to be disseyzed of their
Ministry, and Ezekiel. 44 10. 12. 13.
to bear their iniquity, and shame. But this is nothing to men obstinate in
sin, who may not upon their deposition, be continued in the Church; and to deal
with them a new for the sin, for which they have been formerly censured, or
to censure them twice for one sin, is an idle and unwarrantable course. They
are therefore to be cast out by the people, and so under their excommunication,
is their deprivation comprehended.

If the Pastor (and so of the rest of the Officers) be a brother III.
in the Church, (as Mat. 23. 8.
all Gods children are the saints brethren) then must the Church not suffer
Lev. 1^. 17.
sin to rest upon him, but must admonish him, and if he remain obstinate, cast
him out. For the Lord Jesus subjects every brother indefinitely, and without
respect of persons, to this censure, Mat. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 11, 12. 13. From
which last scripture another Argument of the same nature may be drawn, which
is, that if the Pastor (and so of the other officers) be within, and not
without, and under the Lords judgment, then are they under the judgment of
the Church verse 4.
gathered together in the name of our Lord Jesus, which you confess to be page
92.
the multitude; yea I see not how the Pastor, or officers may be admonished by
the Church, if they may not be cast out, or how the Collossians may Col. 4. 1^.
say to Archippus, take heed to thy Ministry, if they may not censure him, if
he be heedlesse; for he that will not hear the Church, must be excommunicated,
or (which is a description of excommunication by an effect) must be accounted
an heathen or publican.

They Cor. ^. 12. 13.
that are without and under the Lords judgment, are exempted IIII.
from the Churches judgments, but they which are within, the Church* must
judge: and therefore if the Ministers be within, and not without, and under
Gods judgments, they must undergo the judgments of the Church.

If the Pastor (and the like reason is of the rest)* may not be excommunicated
V.
for sin, by the Church, then he and they want a means of salvation, which the
brethren have, y^^ the only folenin means of salvation in the case of
obstinacy, ^o which they are as subject, as any other, being frayl men, as the
rest. And the reason is, for that, as Romans 1. ^7.
the preaching of the gospel (which is the one key of the kingdom) is the
power of God to salvation unto them that believe, so excommunication (being the
other key) is, 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5.
the power of our Lord Jesus for the destruction of the flesh, or humbling of
the offender, that his foul might be saved. Now what a miserable priveledge
this were* all men truly fearing God, will easily observ^^* And for mine own
part, knowing mine own infirmities, and that I am subject to sin, yea and to
frowardnes in sin, as much as the brethren are: if by mine office I should be
deprived of the romedy, which they enjoy, that blessed ordinance of the
Churches con^ures, I should think mine office accursed, and my self by it, as
frustrating, and dissappointing me of that mayn end, for which the servants of
Christ ought to ioyn themselves unto the Church of Christ* furnished wi^h his
power for their reformation. And sin^e the chief thing, which after the glory
of God, the saints are to regard, is their salvation, and that their salvation
is no way indang^red, but by obstinate impenitency, and that obstinate
impenitency has none other solemn ordinance for remedy, but excommunication,
what cause of sorrow had I for the want of this sovereign remedy, and means
of salvation by mine office, which without it I might enjoy? As on the
contrary, God is my record, how in the very writing of these things, m^ soul is
filled with spiritual joy, that I am under this easy yoke of Christ the
censures of the Church, whereof I am, and how much I am comforted in this very
consideration, against my vile, and corrupt nature, which notwithstanding, I am
persuaded the Lord w^ll never so far suffer to rebel, as that i^ shall not
be taymed, and subdu^d by this strong hand of God, with out which it might
every day and hour so hazard my salvation.

That doctrine which advances an inferior and meaner estate VI.
in the Church, above that which is superior, and the chief, that is unsound,
and in deed serving in a degree for 2 These. ^. 4.
the exaltation of th^^ man of sin a (...) all that is called God. But this
doctrine of Mn^st^ setting the Elders without and above the judgments* and
censures of the Church does advance an inferior above a suporiour.

Ergo.

The point then to be proved is, that the order of saints or say^tship in the
Church; is an order superior unto, and above the order of officers* or of
Bishoptick, or Eldership* which I thus manifest.

1. The order of servants is inferior to the order of them, whose servants
they are. But the order of Church Officers, is an order of 2 Chronicles. 35. 3.
servants, and they by their offic^ to (...) the people* Ergo.

2. The order of Kings is the highest order o^ ^sta^^ in the Number. 16. 9 Eze.
44. 11. 2 Cor. 4. 5.
Church. But the order of Exo. 19. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Rev. 1. 6.
saints is the order of Kings, and we are Kings as we are saints not as we
are officers. Ergo*

3. As the Apostle proves the woman to be inferior unto, and less excellent
then the man, 1. because ^ Cor. 11. 7. 5. 9.
(...) is not of the woman, but the woman of the man^ and 2* because the man
was not created for the womuns sake, but the woman for the man's sake, ^o by
necessary consequence, and just proportion it follows, that the Elders are
inferior, and less excellent, then the Church, as being both of, and for the
Church, and not the Church of, nor for them.

4. As the Lord Jesus did prove against the Scribes and Pharisees, that Math.
23. 17. 19.
the temple was greater then the gold, because it sanctified the gold, and that
the altar was greater then the offering, because it sanctified the offoring, so
by proportion the condition of a saint, which sanctifies the condition of an
officer (as our general calling does our special calling) is more excellent
and greater then it is. To our sayntship, and as we have faith, is promised
the forgivenes of sins, the favor of God, and life eternal, but not to our
office, or in respect of it. The estate of a saint is most happy and blessed,
though the person never so much as come near an office, but on the contrary,
an officer, if he be not also, and first, a saint, is a most wretched, and
accursed creature.

Infinite others are the reasons to disprove the pretended charter, by which
this popish Clergy would exempt it self from the common condition of
Christians, in the common Christian ordinances of the Church, as though their
office ate up their brotherhood, and their special calling of officers their
general calling of Christians. And I cannot more fitly resemble this exemption
of one, or more officers, from the ecclesiastical censures, unto which one or
so many brethren are subject being in the same sin, then to the like
exemption or priveledge, springing (as it seems) from the same root, in civil
judgments, commonly called The benefit of clergy. For as by it a malefactor
(if he can read vt clericus, as they speak, shall escape death which others do,
and so he should without that benefit, undergo: so by the benefit of clergy
here, the person delinquent is freed from the dint of the spiritual sword, the
ce^sure of the Church, which others do, and so he should without that
priveledge, undergo, as well as they. Where me thinks, it were more meet, as,
that he, which can read, and so has, or may have greater knowledge should be
the more severely punished civily, so, that the officers in the Church should
undergo (if it were to be found) an heavier ce^sure for their sin, as being
both more scandalous, and less excusable: And so the Lord by Moses expressly
manifests his will to be, in enioyning the Priest a greater sacrifice Levit. 4.
3^-2^. ^^.
a bullock for his sin, where a goat (which was less) might serve in the like
case for the su^ of one of the people.

And this may well serve for a seventh reason to prove that the VII.
officers are by the law of God liable to as deep censures for sin, as the
people, and so the Pastor, as any one of the brethren.

Yet for the further and more full opening of the iniquity of those proud and
popish exemptions, and exaltations of Church officers, whereof from these
scriptures alleged by Mr B. and the like, they boast so much, and by which
they affright, and abuse the simple people, in all places, I will briefly, as I
can, lay down certain such different respects, and relations, under which the
officers of the Church do come, as being rightly understood, and justly
applied, will give good light to the discovering of this mystery.

First then, the officers of the Church are to be considered in respect I.
of the thing, which they minister, and that is, the word, and revealed will of
God, in which regard they are infinitely above, and superior unto all Gal. 1.
8.
men and angels, and 2 Cor. 5. 19. 2^.
in the very stead of Christ, and of God himself. And in, for, and according to
this message, or embassage of God, and of Christ, they are absolutely and
simply to be obeyed as is the meanest officer about the King, carrying with him
his warrant, and authority, by the greatest Pere in the kingdom.

In the 2. place they must be considered of us, in respect of their II.
office, by virtue whereof they do administer. And in this regard they are
inferior unto the Church, as being by it called to a place of ministry to
serve the Church, and not of Lordship to reign over it.

The 3. consideration they undergo, is, in regard of their persons, III.
and as they are brethren, saints, christians, (for they cease not to be
Christians, because they are Ministers, but must manifest their general
calling in their special) partakers of the same common graces, and subject to
the same common infirmities with the rest: and in this respect they are equal
with the brethren, standing in need of the same means both for their
edification, and reformation, and so particularly, of the censures for their
humiliation, if they be so far left of God, (as they may be, and often times
are) as they will not otherwise be reclaymed. And I had as leiv you should tell
me, that, because the Deacons are to distribute the Churches alms, therefore
the Church is not to releiv them, though they be in danger to starve bodily,
as that because the Elders are to minister the Churches judgme^ts, none must
judge them, though they be thorough impenitency in danger to perish
spiritually.

Now for the particulars, which Mr B. obiecteth: it is true, the people are
sheep, but not the Ministers, but the Lords sheep. Ezech. 34. 6. 8 -- 31.
neither are these sheep for the Ministers, as the natural sheep for their
sheepheards, but for the Lord, and the sheepheards for them. The people are
indeed an house, but not the officers house, but the Lords house, for him to
dwell in. Ephe. 2. 20. 21. 1 Timothy 3. 15.

Secondly the people are sheep, yet not unreasonable beasts, but men, Ezech.
34. 31. so to be looked to by the sheepheards, as they are also to look to
themselves, Act. 20. 28. Luke 17. 3. They are so a house, as they consist not
of dead, but of living stones, 1 Pet. 2. 5. so built up by the Officers as they
are also to build up themselves, Iud. 20. And which is especially to be minded
for the purpose in hand, the officers are so sheepheards, as they are, also
themselves sheep, (if they be not goats) Math. 25. 37. Luke 12. 32. Romans 8.
36. They are so fathers as they are also brethren, Mat. 23. 8. Act. 1. 16. 2
Cor. 8. ^^. yea, as they are sons also, in a sense as the Levite was in
sundry respects, both Michaes father and his son* Judge. 17. 1. 11. They are
so workmen, or builders, as they are also part of the house, Ephe. 2. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 20. so seeds-men, as themselves are also seed, and a part of the
harvest, Math. 13. 38.

These distinctions rightly observed, will both teach the officers how to
govern, and the people how to obey, and both officers, and people how to
preserve themselves, and one another, under the power of Christ given to his
Church.

And where you demand in this place, (by way of digression) how a few of us
become a Church, we answer in a word by coming out of Babylon, (thorough the
mercies of God) and building our selves into a new and holy temple unto the
Lord. But where you affirm the Ministry, that is the office of Ministry, or
the word so ministered, to be the Lords only ordinary means to plant Churches,
or to urge men to ioyn unto them, you streyten the Lords hand, and wrong his
people. When ^^h. 4. 28 29. 30 40.
the woman of Samarta spoke to her neighbors of Christ, and called them unto
him, they both believed, and came; but had you been amongst them, it seems you
would have done neither the one nor the other, except a Minister had called
you. I confess indeed the Churches in England, were very manne^ly this way,
and would not so much as forsake the Pope of Rome, till their massepriests went
before them, who being continued in their office, did by the attractive power
of King Edwards proclamation at the first, and Queen Elizabeth's afterward* and
by their statute laws, gather heir Parish Churches unto them, under their
service book, as (...) does her chicken to be brooded under her wing. But the
^^formed Churches were otherwise gathered then by Popish priests continued over
them: the people first separating themselves from idolatry, and fo^o^^ing
together in the fellowship of the gospel, were afterward (when they had sit
men) to call them into the office of Ministry, and so they practiced, as
appears in the Epistle of Melanctbon to the Teachers* in Bohemia* in D. Tile^us
his answer to the Earl of Lavall: and in Peter Martyr upon the 4. of Judges.

It is true indeed, that the Lord Jesus sent forth his Apostles into the world,
for the first planting of Churches: (though even in their times Ch: were
planted and men turned to the Lord by the preaching of private brethren, Act.
8. 1. 4. and 11. 19. 20. 21. and therefore Barnabas coming among them, is not
said to have joined the^ unto the Lord, but to have exhorted them, which were
joined, to continue with the Lord. verse. 23. and to have persuaded others to
ioyn themselves unto the Lord also: verse. 24.) but that this course ordinary
set by Christ, should be held in the replanting of Churches after the
universal apostasy of Antichrist, is a thing impossible. There were then no
Ministers, but popish Priests* and are they the Lords means Mr Bernard? Shall
2 These. 2. 3. 8.
the man of sin be consumed by himself, or by the breath of the Lords mouth?
Are false Ministers the Lords ordinary means of planting Churches? Or are
popish massepreists, or the popish Bishops from whom they have their authority,
and so the Pope himself from whom they have theirs, true Ministers? And is the
Church of Rome a true visible Church? For it is not possible there should be a
true Ministry in a false Church. These are the inconveniences, and
discommodities, Mr Bernard speaks of, and by which he says we would wring the
truth from him. But it is certain, they are such plain demonstrations, as do
evince his pretended truths of popish and popular errors.

And for the gathering of a Church M. B. I do tell you, that in what place
soever, by what means soever, whether by preaching the gospel by a true
Minister, by a false minister, by no minister, or by reading, conference, or
any other means of publishing it, two or three faithful people do arise,
separating themselves from the world into the fellowship of the gospel, and
covenant of Abraham, they are a Church truly gathered though never so weak, a
house and temple of God rightly founded upon the doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets, Christ himsef being the corner stone, against which the gates of hell
shall not prevayl, nor your disgraceful invectives neither.

Indeed *the Pharisees thought because they had Abraham for their father, and
did descend of him by ordinary succession, and were the formal Teachers of the
Church, that therefore God could not possibly cast them off, or have a Church
without them: even so it is with the Pharisaicall formal clergy in Rome, and
England* they think that Christ has so tied his power and presence unto their
ceremony of succession, that without them he knows not how to do for a Church,
but must needs have it pass through their fingers. But as John Baptist told
the old Pharisees* verse. 9. 10.
that God was able of the stones to raise up children unto Abraham, though they
all, and every one of them, like unfruitful trees should be cut down and cast
into the f^r^: so say I unto their children, the Pharisees of our ^yme, that
though the Lord reject them, and every one of them for their apostasy, and
rebellion, yet can he by the seed of the word (cast with what hand soever)
raise up unto Abraham children, unto himself a Church. They that are Romans 4.
12. 18.
of the faith of Abraham, they are the children, and seed of Abraham, and
within the covenant of Abraham Genesis 12. 3* Gal. 3. 6. 7. ^. 15. 16. 17.
(though but two or three) and so of the same Church with him, by that
covenant.

Your last argument to prove the officers the Church Math. 18. IX.
and directly to disprove our supposed popularity is, that it is against the
dignity, and office of the Ministers, who represent Christ's person unto Mr B.
the Congregation, 1 Cor. 4. 1. having authority from him to preach, administer
the sacraments, use the censures, which none but such as represent him can give
them, (which the body of the people do not by office) nor take from them etc.
Answ.


This indeed is the thing: the dignity of Preisthood is it, which goes nearest
you: and that you keep last as Jacob did Benjamin, whom of all his sons he
was loathest to part with, Genesis 42. 4. and 43. 14. But first if your meaning
be, that the Ministers by their office represent Christ in his office, it is
little less then blasphemy; for Christ is the husband, and mediator of his
Church, by his office, and herein not to be represented by any other man, or
angel. The ministers in publishing the gospel, and word of reconciliation are
in 2 Cor. 4. 2^.
Christ's stead, and therein to be obeyed as himself; but what if they speak the
vision of their own heart, and publish heresy, and false doctrine, or lead a
scandalous, and profane life? their office is no dispensation for them,
neither are they now any longer in the stead of Christ, but of the Devil whom
they resemble, as children their father, and are so to be reputed.

Besides, there is no force in your argument: because the body of the Church
represents not Christ by office, as the Ministers do, therefore it is no way
equal with the Ministers, nor may meddle with them, but the contrary. May not a
man as well argue thus? Because the wife no way represents her housband in
office, (for she is in no office (the same may be said of the children) a^ the
steward, and the bayliffe do, therefore the wife is no way superior unto
them, she may not reprove, or displace them in her husband^ absence, what evil
soever they do in their office, or persons, but on the contrary they may
rebuke her, and turn her out of doors (and her children with her) if there be
cause. For they represent the master in office she not. Now we know well
Cant. ^. 9 ^0. Ephe. ^* 29. 30. 32.
the Church is the wife, and spouse of Christ, and 1 Cor. 4. 1 2.
the Ministers stewards.

Thus having cleared the way of such objections, as wherewith Mr Bernard would
stumble the reader, I come in the next place (as I have formerly ordered my
course) to declare that the Church, Math. 18. 17. is not the officers, but the
whole body meeting together for the public worship of God, and that 1 Cor. 5.
proves the same by practice, which is in the former place enjoined by rule.

Only I must needs, by the way, make a step into his 2. book amongst his score
of reasons there against popularity, and so remove, as it were with my foot,
such of them, as are tumbled in by him to make rough the plain ways of the
Lord. And they are as the author numbers them the 7. 12. 13. 17. 18.

The 7. Reason is, that if a sort of persons professing Christ together, Mr B.
without officers have the power of such officers in themselves, they may do
all the officers may do*

We say not that the Church has the power of the officers, but Answer.
the power of Christ, as is expressly affirmed, 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5. and 2. it
follows not, that because the Church has the power of Christ for all things,
therefore it can enjoy all things without officers. The power is one thing,
which is inseparable from the body, the use of the power an other thing, which
in many cases it may want. Civil corporations have the Kings power, and
charter, as well without as with officers, and yet it may be there are
liberties in their charter they cannot enjoy without officers: they have
therefore power for officers also, which they may choose, and so enjoy all their
liberties by their help: so in the spiritual corporation the Church, there is
always the whole power of Christ residing, which therefore may call officers
for the use of it; to which it is sufficient, that it can without officers use
this power for things simply necessary, as for the receiving in of members by
profession of faith, and confession of sins, for the aedifying of them by
exhortations, and co^forts in the ordinance of prophesying, and so for casting
them out by excommunication, which fall from their former profession, or
confession. ^^ Bern.


The sum of the 11. and 12. Reas: is, that this power or liberty of the
multitude to judge in Church matters, overthrowes the power, and authority of
Christian Magistrates in the Church, to whom the people are commanded to be
subject both in the old and new testament. ^^sw.


And does not the ill advised man consider that his own opinion, making the
officers of the Church, alone the Church, and giving them power to judge in
Church matters without the rest of the body, does as much overthrow the
authority of Christian Magistrates, as ours, in making the officers and body
with them the Church, having power to judge together? yea much more: for if the
ecclesiastical officers alone be the Church, Math. 18. and so must judge and
censure sins (which is the thing he pleads for) then ^ the civil magistrate
simply excluded: where we reputing the whole body the Church, do necessarily
include the Christian Magistrate, as being one of the Church.

Secondly is Mr B. and his brother Bell (whom he quotes in the (...)gent) to
ignorant, as they cannot distinguish betwixt civil authority, and judgments in
Church matters, and that authority and those judgments, which are
ecclesiastical? The Christian magistrate, as he is a brother, may be censured
ecclesiastically by the Church, whereof he is a member: and yet the same person
as a magistrate whether of the Church, or not of the Church, or cast out of the
Church, may censure, and punish civilly the whole Church, and every member of
it, if there be cause, whether in matters of the Church or common wealth.

In the 17. reason Mr B. would fasten upon us an absurdity, in Mr B.
making the body both to govern and to be governed, and so to be both Lord and
servant, Prince and subject, etc.

It is your self Mr Ber. that commit the absurdity, which I thus Answ.
manifest.

The Church must be governed, says the scripture, and common sense.

But the Church is the officers, Math. 18. says Mr Bernard.

Whereupon it follows that the Officers must be governed.

And to your reason, whomsoever you count Lords, and servants, and whosoever
are Lords, and servants in your Church, I know by the scriptures that in the
Church of Christ the officers are 2 Cor. 4. 5.
servants, and in that relation the Church may be called a Lord; and if Christ
truly call Math. 2. 27. 28.
the son of man Lord of the sabbath, because the sabbath was made for man,
and not man for the sabbath, may we also call the Church in a respect, Lord of
the Officers, for the Officers are for the Church, and not the Church for them.

And yet we hold the same officers which are servants, to be governors also,
for the government of the Church, is merely a Church Service, as all not
carnally blinded with ambition, or superstition, will grant with me.

Now where you affirm, Reas: 18. that the people are never termed by any name
insinuating sovereignty, but that the Ministers are, you speak partially on
both sides, would you have the Ministers, that is, the servants of the Church,
to be her sovereigns? The names you bring as most advauntageable, argue no such
thing. They are Overseers, as the watchmen are for the city: Elders for their
gravity: Fathers in respect of the seed of the word by which they b^ge* to
conversion, and therefore Paul makes himself he only 1 Cor 4. 15.
father of the Corinthians, because he had been the instrument of their
conversion, notwithstanding all other teachers whomsoever, to whom in that
respect he opposes himself* as not being their fathers. And so men out of
office may be as well the fathers of others, as they in office. However,
fatherhood argues no sovereignty. And yet the holy Apostles and Prophets
thought not much upon all occasions, to account the saints their brethren, and
themselves theirs. And I would you wist, whose names John Bale in his
Paraphrase upon the Revelation chapter 17: verse. 3. thought your Grace, your
Lordship, your Fatherhood, to be. And where further you name the brethren,
sheep, the household of faith, the wife, or spouse in respect of the officers
(for that is the consideration in hand) therein you deal very deceiptfully; for
the brethren or saints, are not the Officers sheep, household, wife, or spouse,
but Christ's: betwixt whom, and them the comparison is not.

Lastly your affirmatio^ that the saints are called Kings, Rev. 1. 6. not for
any outward power over me^, but for the inward power of Gods spirit sa^ctifying
the elect, by which, as Kings, they rule over their own corruptions, is an ill
gloss corrupting the text. For in the same place, they are called Priests
also. Now as they are not Priests only for themselves, but for their brethren,
for whom they are to offer up the spiritual sacrifices of prayer, and
tha^ksgiving: so neither are they Kings for themselves alone, but for their
brethren also, having 1 Cor. 5. 4. 12.
the power of Christ whereby to judge them, Math. 16. 19.
the keys of the kingdom to bind and loose them, in the order by him
prescribed.

These things thus laid down occasionally, I return to the point. I.
And first against the figurative exposition of these words, Tell the Church, I
do allege two approved Rules, and Canon* in divinity, for exposition of
scriptures. The former is, that scriptures must be expounded according to the
largest extent of the words, except there be some apparent restreynt of them.
The second is, that they must be expounded simply, and according to the letter,
except necessity compel to depart from the litterall sense to a figurative.
And therefore since there appears not any such necessity, as is pretended,
either of figure or restreynt, the words must be taken in their largest, and
simplest meaning.

With these rules I desire the reader to bear in mind that, which has been
formerly observed to the purpose in hand, and amongst other things, that the
officers are to govern the Church in the ce^sures, as in all other actions of
communion, and therefore cannot be the Church; that every true Ch* has, or is
capable of, a ministry over it, and so there should be a minister of
ministers: that the order of officers in the Church is an order of servants,
and the order of saints an order of Kings (which is the highest order in the
Church) fitting upon the thrones of David for judgment, whom the ministers are
to serve in guiding and going before them, in, and in ministering of their
judgments. And so I go on.

The rule prescribed Mat* 18. concerns all the visible Churches II.
in the world: since the power of excommunication is an essential property,
one of the keys of the kingdom, the only solemn ordinance in the Church, for
the humbling, and saving of an obstinate offender, and as necessary as the
power to receive in members, without which a Church cannot be gathered, or
consist. And therefore the Officers cannot be the Church there spoken of, since
true Churches may (and do) want officers, as I have formerly proved.

If two or three officers be the Church, Math. 18. then may they III.
two or three excommunicate the whole body, though it consist of a thousand
persons: for what brother, or brethren soever, will not hear the Church there
spoken of, he or they are to be accounted as heathens and publicans. Yea, I ad,
if the power of excommunication be ^yed to the office, since the office may
remayn in one, I see not but one may do any work of his office, and so as well
excommunicate, as admonish, preach, minister the sacraments and the rest. Now
whether this power in one or two, to punish judicially one or two thousand, be
not Lordly at the least, let the reader judge.

Further, if the officers be the Church, I would know, if one of IIII.
them fall into scandalous sin, and will not be reclaymed, what must then be
done. It will be answered, that the rest must censure him. But what if there be
but two in all, must the one excommunicate the other? the ruling Elder (it may
be) the Pastor? 2. if the rest of the Elders, (being many) may displace the
Pastor by their authority, they may also place him, and set him up by their
authority, and so the poor laity is stripped of all liberty, or power of choosing
their officers, contrary both to the scriptures, and your (...)o^ne grant.

If the Officers be the Church, then they alone may excommunicate V.
a brother without the consent, yea or the privitie of any of the brethren: for
the business concerns none but the Church, Math. 18. neither need they so much
as acquaint any others with it. But so absurd is this, as you your self grant
the contrary, and ^ag. 92. upon 1 Cor. ^5.
tha^ it must be done with the knowledge of the Church publicly, and when the
body meets together in open assembly.

The Apostles themselves, (whom no ministers now can equal VI.
either for skill, or authority) did not thus engrosse all things into their
own hands, but did interesse the people, though raw, and newly come to the
faith, in all the public affairs of the Church, and in such deliberations, as
arose about them. And who should deny them to meddle in those things which
concern them? But if any do, these scriptures avow their liberty. Act. 1. 15.
23. 26. and 6. 2. 5. and 11. 2. 3. 18. and 22. 1. and 14. 17. and 15. 3. 4. 14.
21. 22. 30. 31. and 21. 22. Romans 16. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 4. and 16. 3. 2 Cor. 8. 19.
23. 24.

Now there is nothing that more concerns the body of the Church, then the
excommunication of a brother, whether we respect the commandment of God,
binding them Lev. 19. 7.
not to suffer sin upon a brother, but to rebuke him plainly, and 1 These. 5 4.
to admonish him, that being 1 Timothy 5 0.
rebuked by many he may be humbled, and drawn to repentance: or the credit of
the Church, which must be defended against the slanders of the excommunicants,
which will ever be just in their 2 Cor. 2. 6
own cause: or their own good, that ^t by the rebuking of one, all may learn to
fear: or their conscience who must to day avoid him as an heathen, and lim of
Satan, whom yesterday they were to embrace as a brother and member of Christ.
How clearly these things plead the brethrens both liberty, and interest in all
this business, let the indifferent reader judge.

If the Officers alone be the Church, to which offenders are to ^II.
be brought, and by which they are to be judged, then are they as the Church to
admonish and judge those offenders, either apart from the body, or in the face
of the public congregation: but neither of these two ways; and therefore
they alone are not the Church. Not in private, or apart, for,

Then may the Pastor be excomunicated before any one of the I.
brethren know of it. Of which evil I have spoken formerly.

2. It is against the nature of the ordinance, being a part of the II.
public communion of the Church, and worship of God, to be performed but
publicly. Yea there is no reason, why admonitions and censures should be
administered less publicly then doctrine, and prayer. For the kingdom of the
Lord Jesus is as glorious, as his preisthood, or prophetical office: and his
throne is to be advanced as high, and made as conspicuous to the eyes of all,
as his altar, or pulpit, that I may so speak. Now as the Preistly, and
Prophetical offices of Christ are administered in prayer, and preaching, so is
his Kingly office in government. In deed if we thought (as you do), that
Christ had left his kingdom, the Church, without laws, and officers for the
government of it, or that this government were an indifferent thing alterable
at the wills and pleasures of men, then we should be as indifferent, where,
or how, or by whom it were administered, as you Mr B: are.

3. The officers are to Act. 20. 28.
feed the flock, one part whereof consists III.
in government. Now if admonitions, and excommunications may be administered
apart from the body, how is the flock fed by them? or how do those Elders, upon
whom the government of the Church especially lies, discharge their public
Ministry, and service unto the Lord, and his Church, to which they are called?
or how can the Church see, and know their ministration, that they may 1 These.
13.
have them in super abundant love for their works sake, if there be cause, or
contrariwise, if reason require the contrary? or when 1 Timothy 20.
they that sin, are rebuked openly, whether Elders, or people, how can the rest
fear? Yea how can these men which are to feed the flock by government, be
accounted faithful sheepheards, either before God, or men, if they gather not
the flock together, and see they feed accordingly? though with you Mr B. they
that feed the flocks by government, never so much as see the faces of the
hundred part of their sheep, and when they have a sheep in hand for straying
(it may be from a dumb shepherd to a preacher) they deal with him for the
most part many a mile from, but never in, the place, where the particular stock
walks, whereof that sheep is.

Lastly the administration of Christ's kingdom, being a part of IIII
the communion of saints, and public worship, is to be performed of the Lords
day, as well as other parts are: and to be joined with the administration of
the word, sacraments, alms, and the rest, as making all one entyre body of
communion: yea in cases, to go before the rest, (I am persuaded) least the holy
things be polluted by notorious obstinate offenders. And if 1 Cor. 16. 1. ^.
the collections for the saints which concerns the body, be a Lords, or first
day^^ work, how much more the spiritual ordinances which respect the soul,
either for humiliation, or comfort? Yea I see not how the Church can compel
any to forbear their bodily labor in the six days, wherein God has given
them liberty to work, except it be upon occasions extraordinary, and as they
may be constreyned to meet for any other part of public worship*

Well then it must needs be, that this Church of officers must receive, and
examine complaints, reprove and censure offenders publicly, and with the
knowledge of the whole body, met together in public assembly, and this
liberty in the exequution of excommunication, you grant the multitude, page
92. of your book. And surely there must be but one Church for the whole
business. But this course is more unreasonable then the other, namely, that the
brethren must be gathered together to be spectatours, whiles the officers alone
sit upon the thrones of David, to hear, and judge, excluding the brethren from
all communion with them, though they be personally present. For the communion
of the Church stands not in this, that men are present, and see and hear what
is done, and receive proffite, (for so may they do which are without) but in
the mutual relation, and concurrence of the parts, and is in this ordinance
only amongst them, which are reproved, or do reprove, at least by consent, if
they see cause, which are censured, or do censure. And besides it is against
common sense, that the officers should be the Church representative, when the
body of the Church, which they represent, is present, (as has been formerly
showed:) and to call the officers alone the Church, or assembly, (which are
both one) when the people are assembled with them as necessary parts, is to
call one part of the Church, the Church, excluding an other part of it.

If the officers alone be the Church to be told, and to admonish, VIII.
and judge the offender, (for there is one, and the same Church for all these)
then it must follow, that if the Officers admonish, the Church also
admonishes, and on the contrary, that if the officers refuse, the Church also
refuses to admonish an offendour: but neither the one, nor the other of these
is true. First, the Elders observing sin, may and ought to admonish the party
sinning, whether the Church observe it, or no* yea though the whole Church be
otherwise minded, yea any one of the Elders may admonish (if he see cause) both
the rest of the officers, and the brethren also: but this admonition cannot be
the admonition of the Ch:, except we will say the Church may admonish where
she sees no sin, yea against her will, yea which is most senseles, except
she may be said to admonish her self.

The second point needs no great refutation. For who will say, that, if the
officers refuse to admonish, and make themselves accessory unto sin by
boulstering it up, that then the Church is also sailing, and the whole lump
thereby levened, except the rest consent with them, or fayl in their personal
duties: which notwithstanding might be said of them, and imputed unto them, if
by the Church were meant the officers.

If a brother, privately considered, may bind sin privately, upon IX.
the parties irrepentance, then may the same brother, as a part of the publik
assembly, bind for his part publicly: and so he brings the party impenitent
privately bound to the Church, holding him still bound upon the continuance of
his obstinacy, but publicly now, with the whole communion, as privately
before by himself (...)th his witness. The consequent of this argum: Mr B.
graunts in his latter book, page 200. upon Mr Smythes urging Mat. 18. compared
with some other scriptures much what to this purpose; but the Antecedent (as he
speaks) he denies, or rather distinguishes of these words binding and loosing
which he understands only to be meant of personal wrongs against a man, but
not of sins at all against God.

But as this exposition conteyns in it two notable absurdities, the first that
other men may forgive injuries or wrongs done unto me, and secondly, that a
communion of faithful men (for so the words are) Luke 12. 14
which is the Church, may meddle with judging civil matters (as are injuries)
otherwise then as they are sins against God, at which they take offense, or
scandalize: so is it evidently convinced by the text, when Christ speaks of
Math. 18. 1^.
binding and loosing in heaven, whither injuries come not, save as they are
sins against God. Yea Mr B: himself graunts in another place of this book,
viz: page 223. toward the end, that our savior in this place, speaks of
binding and loosing spiritually, and that not by the power of Christ given to
Ministers, but to common Christians: where he also brings sundry reasons to
prove, that the binding, and loosing there spoken of, does no way concern the
Ministers, or public Officers, but private persons; notoriously crossing both
his first book in the persons, which he will there needs have officers, and no
private men, and here private persons, and no officers* and his second, in the
thing, which in the former place he will have merely of civil consideration,
but here graunts to be meant religiously.

The next reason I take from v. 19. where mention is made by X.
Christ of prayer, by which the censures there spoken of are to be sanctified
both before, and after they be exequuted. Whereupon I demand, whether the
brethren present with the officers, be part of the Church, to which the
offender is brought, and by which he is judged, in the communion of prayer, or
no? It will not be denied; thence it must follow, that they are also part of
the Church in receiving, and judging of the complaint, or else that they pass
in, and out, and in again, in respect of the communion, during one and the same
exercise, and the sanctification of it.

They which are gathered in, or into the name of Christ, they are the XI.
Church spoken of, Math. 18. and have the power of Christ for binding, and
loosing, as is evident, ver. 20. Now as me thinks it should be strange to
affirm, that the brethren present with the Officers, are gathered in or into
any other name then the name of Christ, so does Paul (drawing this rule into
practice 1 Cor. 5.) command, that the multitude, with the officers (by not
only Mr B. but the Jesuits confession) be gathered together in, or into the
name of Christ, and that they so gathered, do by the power of Christ* deliver
to Satan the offender for his humbling* ver. 4* 5*(...) XII.


Lastly, if the officers, without the brethren, be the Church for the censures,
then are they the Church for the other public ordinances of prayer,
preaching, sacraments, and the like, and may minister them out of the communion
of the body; neither can there be any reason given why they should be* the
Church for one solemn ordinance, and not for an other, for one part of the
public communion of the Church, and not for an other. And therefore in the
representative Church of the Jews at Jerusalem were not only the hard causes
opened, about which the people came to enquire, but there were also the
sacrifices offered, and other the solemn services performed, according to the
dispensations of the times. And to make the officers the Church for one part of
the power of Christ, and not for an other, for one solemn administration, and
not for an other, (especially having fit instruments to exequute,) is a broken
course, and indeed to devide Christ from himself.

But about this something will be said, though nothing against it, and namely
this. That the officers are to do in one of these ordinances, as in an other,
and the multitude no more in the one* then in the other^ and that as the
officers only are to pray, preach, and administer the sacraments, and the
people not to meddle with these things, so in the matter of excommunication.

To this I reply sundry things.

First, if the officers alone be the Church in the censures, then I.
it is not in this part of communion, as in other parts: for not the officers
alone, but the brethren with them, are the Church, in prayer, preaching,
administering the sacraments and the like. And as the Church (being the body of
Christ) is the most entire, and best compact of all bodies, so is the communion
in it most entyre, and full amongst all the parts, so far as natural
impossibility* hinders not. And therefore even children (though by nature
incapable of other parts of communion, wherein it is required they should be
agents, or do any thing) yet do communicate in that one ordinance of baptism,
in the administration whereof (as of circumcision before times) they are merely
patients, and baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. But in
other actions, and amongst other members, with whom natural inability
dispenses not, there is a full, perfect, and entire communion, and that as
sensible, and bodily amongst all, as may be, without confusion. In preaching,
prayer, the Lords supper, psalms, elections, and alms, all communicate though
with some difference of order and manner of the thing. In the first which is
preaching, all communicate, one officer teaches, and the rest both officers
and people are taught: in prayer one officer vtters the voice, and the rest of
the Church say, Amen, and so all communicate: in the Lords supper all
communicate, one by giving, or administering, and all the rest by receiving with
him: in singing of psalms all communicate, yea and that vocally, and together
where they can all co^bine and concur without disorder: in elections all choose,
or are chosen: in the distribution of the alms, all either give or receive,
and so communicate together. But now in public admonitions, and
excommunications, there must be a schism, for the body of the Church is by Mr
B: excluded from the communion, (yea though locally present) for all the
communion passes betwixt the parties admonishing, and admonished,
excommunicating, and excommunicated, whereof the body of the Church is neither,
but a very ^ipher, and a hangby.

Secondly, there is great difference betwixt prayer, and II.
preaching, on the one side, and excommunication on the other side, in respect
of the ordering, and manner of dispensing those ordinances. One officer
prepares in secret, and several from the rest for preaching, and prayer, and
so administreth these ordinances lawfully, as the ordinances of the Church
without the consent, yea or foreknowledge of any one either brother, or
officer: but it is otherwise in admonition, and excommunication. The sin must
be told to the Church, and they upon knowledge of it; must admonish the sinner,
and so the excommunication is publicly to be prepared, with the
foreknowledge, and foreconsent, of the body, which otherwise the officers,
(much less one officer, without the knowledge or consent of either other
officer, or people) may not minister. One officer* I confess* may admonish an
offender, without the consent of the Church, yea or of any other officer, be
there never so many, yea he may admonish both the officers and Church: but this
can in no sense be called the admonition of the Church* except we will say one
officer is the Ch: excluding both the people, and other officers, and that the
church may admonish her self* and that against her will, which were
unreasonable, and senseles affirmations.

Thirdly, for a kind of preaching, namely: that we call Romans 12. 6.
prophesying, (and so of prayer for the sanctifying of it) that I affirm not to
be so appropriated to the ministry, but that others having received a gift
there unto, may and ought to stir up the same, and to use it in the Church, 1
Cor. 14. 3.
for aedification, exhortation, and comfort, though not yet called into the
office of ministry, as has been in part already, and now is more fully proved
by these scriptures. Number. 11. 29. 2 Chronicles. 17. 7. Ier. ^0. 4^. Math. 10. 1. 5.
Luke 8. 39. and 10, 1. 2. 3 -- 9. Ioh. 4. 28, 29. 39. Act. 8. 1. 4. with 11.
19. 20. 21. 1 Pet. 4. 10. 11. Rev. 11. 3. and 14. 6.

And more specially, the Apostle 1 Cor. 14. does of purpose, and at large
handle this business, not only giving liberty unto, but laying charge upon all
such (though not in office) as have received a spiritual gift, to exercise the
same, in the ordinance of prophesying. Now for the better understanding of this
point, it must be considered, that the Church of Corinth did abound with
spiritual gifts, above an other Churches, both ordinary and extraordinary:
which gifts of the spirit they did abuse too much unto faction, and ambition.
Whereupon the Apostle takes occasion in the beginning of the 12. hap. and so
forward, to direct them in the right use of these gifts of God, which was the
employment of them to the aedifying of the body in love: and therefore having*
ch* 13. laid down a full description, and large commendation of that grace of
love, in the 14* chapter and the beginning of it, he exhorts to prophesying, and to
the study, and use of that gift* which though it were not so strange a thing,
as was the suddayn gift of tongues, not which drew with it such wonder, and
admiration, yet was it more profitable for the Church* and though a matter of
less note, yet of greater charity, which must bear sway in all our actions.

Against this scripture (though in it self most pregnant for the purpose in
hand) two exceptions are taken. The one that the Apostle speaks of such persons
only, as are in office, and so of their ordinary ministerial teaching: the
other, that he speaks of such gifts, as were extraordinary, and so being
ceased, that the ordinance as temporary, is ceased with them. But neither of
these rubs, must turn us out of the way of truth, nor cause us to forbear this
most excellent, and comfortable ordinance of the Lord Jesus, wherein is to be
seen, and heard the variety, and harmony of the graces of God, for the
aedifying of the Church, v. 4. and gayning of the unbelievers, v. 24. 25.

That the Apostle in this Chapter directs the Church in the use of
extraordinary gifts is most evident, neither will I deny, but that the officers
are to guide, and order this action of prophesying, as all other public
buesinesses, yea even these wherein the* brethren have greatest liberty, but
that he also intends the establishing of, and so takes order, and gives
direction for an ordinary constant exercise in the Church, even by men out of
office, I do manifest by these reasons.

First, because the Apostle speaks of the manifestation of a gift, I.
or grace, common to all persons, as well brethren, as ministers, ordinary, as
extraordinary, and that at all times, which is love: as also of such fruits,
and effects of that gaace, as are no less common to all, then the grace it
self, nor of less continuance in the Churches of Christ, to wit of
^dification, exhortation and comfort. v. 3. compared with 1 These. 5. 11. 14.

Secondly verse 21. he permits all to prophecy and speaks as largely II.
of prophesying, as of learning, and receiving comfort.

But now least any should object may women also prophecy? the Apostle prevents
that objection, and it may be reproves that disorder amongst the Corinthians,
ver: 34. by a flat inhibition, inioyning them expressly to keep silence in the
Church, in the presence of men to whom they ought to be subject, and to learn
at home of their housbands, v. 35. and not by teaching the m^^, to vsurp
authority over them, 1 Timothy 2. 11. 12. which the men in prophesying do lawfully
use. Now this restreynt of women from prophesying, III.
or other speaking with authority in the Church, both in this place to the
Corinthians, and in the other to Tim: does clear the two former objections. In
that Paul forbids women, he gives liberty to all men gifted accordingly,
opposing women to men, sex to sex, and not women to Officers, which were
frivolous. And again in restreyning women, he shows his meaning to be of
ordinary not extraordinary prophesying, for women immediately, and
extraordinarily, and miraculously inspired, might speak without restreynt. IIII.
Exo. 15. 20. Judge. 4. 4. Luke 2. 36. Act. 21. 17. 18.

The Prophets here spoken of, were not extraordinary, because their doctrines
were to be judged by other Prophets, and their spirits to be subject unto the
spirits of others, v. 29. 32. where the doctrines of the extraordinary Ephe. 2.
20. and 3. 5.
Prophets, were neither subject to, nor to be judged by any, but they, as the
Apostles, being immediately, and infallibly inspired, were the foundation upon
which the Church is built, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.

The Apostle, verse. 37. makes a Prophet, and a man spiritual all V.
one, whom he further describes, not by any extraordinary gift, but by that
common Christian grace of submission unto the things he writes, as the
commandments of the Lord. Unto whom also ver. 38. he opposes a man wilfully
ignorant: teaching us, that he does not measure a Prophet in this place, either
by the office of ministry, or by any extraordinary prophetical gift, but by
the common christian gift of spiritual discerning.

It is the commandment of the Lord by the Apostle, that 1 Timothy 3. 2.
a VI.
Bishop must be apt to teach, and that such Tit. 1. 9.
Elders or Bishops be called, as are able to exhort with sound doctrine, and to
convince the gainsayers: Now except men before they be in office, may be
permitted to manifest, their gifts, in doctrine, and prayer, which are the two
mayn works requiring special qualification, in the teaching Elders, how Act.
6. 4.
shall the Church (which is to choose them) take knowledge of their sufficiency,
that with faith and good conscience, they may call them, and submit unto them,
for their guides? If it be said, that upon such occasion, trial may be taken
of men's gifts, I do answer, first, that men's gifts, and abilities* should be
known in some measure, before they be once thought on, for officers: and 2.
that there is none other use* or trial of those gifts* but in prophesying: for
every thing* in the Lords house is* to be performed in some ordinance, there is
no thing thrown about the house, or out of order in it: and other ordinance in
the Church, save this of prophesying, is there none, wherein men out of office
are to pray, and teach, which therefore they ought to covet, v: 39. and in it
to be excercised, and trained up, that when officers want, the Church may not
need to set up men, as it were to play their prizes, nor send them like
school-boyes to be posed, as your fashion in England is. And that minister,
that is not called upon the Churches experimental knowledge of his sufficiency
in these things, comes not in by the door, which Christ has opened, nor may be
accounted a true minister of Christ, and his Church. VII.


Lastly, either men not yet in office (being accordingly qualified) may preach
the truth of Christ, or it is not possible, that the people should be taught in
lawful manner, either in nations universally heathenish, or universally
apostate under Antichrist, before there be true Churches gathered, by which the
officers are to be chosen: for as it is not very like that heathenish or
antichristian priests will sincerely teach the truth, neither is it lawful for
them to administer, or for any to join with them in their administrations, by
virtue of any heathenish, or antichristian calling, or ordination* Rev. 14* 9.
10. 11. 1 Timothy 5. 22. And howsoever the Church of England has preferred a
dumb, mass, and profane preisthood with a service book before this ordinance,
yet the truth of Christ is otherwise, and so the Church of Christ is taught to
practice: which you also Mr B* might do well in modesty to acknowledge, though
you want liberty to use it. XIII.


I have insisted the longer upon this point, both for it self, and because it
serves effectually to prove the other point in hand. For if the brethren have
liberty in this ordinance of prophecy, they have also liberty in the other
ordinance of excommunication: for they are both of the same nature. Look to
whom Christ gave the one key of doctrine, to them he gave the other key of
discipline: and they that may handle the one, may have a finger upon the other:
they that may bind and loose by doctrine, reproof, and comfort, they may also
bind or loose by application of the same doctrine, reproof, or comfort to the
person obstinate in sin, o^ penitent for it. As the one of those does
necessarily establish the other, so take away either, and the other cannot
stand. And here I gather an other argument against your exposition of Math: 18.

Lastly, as the Elders principally to be employed in teaching, cannot XIIII.
warrantably be chosen without good experience of their gift, and faculty, in
prophesy, and prayer, so neither can they, which are chiefly to be employed in
government, with good conscience of the Church, be called to that ministration,
except they also have given, and the Church taken good proof of their ability,
and simplicity in the discussing, and debating, carrying, and contriving of
Church affairs, as also in admonition, exhortation, and comfort publicly
occasioned, and so manifested. And a very presumptuous sin it is in any Church,
to choose an officer, not thus trained up, and tried. Whereupon I conclude, that
brethren, (though not in officer*) have not their hands tied from meddling in
the affairs of the Church, especially the censures, but are bound in their
places to see to, and assist in the reformation of public scandalls, and
therefore are part of the Church, to which an offender is to be complained of*
for only they are bound to see reformation of the evil, to whom the complaint
is to be made, where Christ says Tell the Church.

It now remaynes we come to the other scripture, which Mr B. turns so lightly
over, viz. 1 Cor. 5. which that we may aright understand for the present
purpose two things must be considred: the one whereof is, what the Apostles
scope is, and what he intends in that Chap: and the other what persons he
interesseth in the business, about which he deals.

The Praelates with their obedient clergy, do constantly affirm, that the
Apostle there reprooves the Corinthi^ns for not complaining to him of the
incestuous person, that he might have censured him, and that he commands them
(being now judged by him, as having the sole authority in his hands) to
exequute his sentence upon him; and this exposition Mr Bern. labors to
confirm, page 92. 94. 98.

We on the contrary affirm, that the Apostle in that scripture reproves the
Church of Corinth, or them, to whom he writes, for suffering (as they did) that
wicked man uncast out, and that he now wills them to discharge that duty,
wherein they had formerly failed in excommunicating him: to which he also gives
his consent, going before them, as his duty was, in judging, and withal
avouching his presence in spirit, that is in will, and consent, since he could
not be bodily present with them. And that this is the Apostles meaning, it is
much that any man reading the chapter with an honest heart, should deny. The
arguments of proof, are manifest in the particulars.

1. They ought with sorrow to have put him out. v. 2. 13.

2. They were gathered together in the name of the Lord Jesus, and were by the
power of the Lord Jesus, to deliver the offender to Satan for his humbling*
that is, to cast him out of the Church into the world, where Satan reigns. v.
4. 5.

3. A little leven leveneth the whole lump. v. 6. whereupon the Apostle
(alluding to the ancient custom of E^: 12. ^5*
putting leven out of the houses, when the Passover was eaten) bids the Church
purge out the old leven, (that is the incestuous man) that they might be a new
lump. v. 7. showing therein, that they were sowred, and become an old lump, in
not purging him out, else what need they do any thing to become new?

But here sundry things are objected by Mr Bernard. As first, ^ book. page 229.
that a man may be where leven is, and yet not be levened, if he take not
leven* If by taking leven he mean, enclyning or falling into the same sin, it
is idle to imagine, that the whole Church was in any such danger of incest.
Where 2. he adds* that a man reproving the offender, complaining of him, and
seeking as he may in his place, reformation as Cloe did is not levened, he
colors with a few good words many fowl errors. First, that Cloe complained of
the incestuous man, which was not so: she co^playned of the contentions amongst
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. ^. 2.
but that of the incestuous person was rather brought to Paul by common fame,
then otherwise. 1 Cor. 5. 1. 2* That it is sufficient for the people, yea or
the Ministers either to reprove an offender, and so to complayn to the Bishops
court of him. 3. That a man is discharged if he seek reformation as he may in
his place, whereas it is first required a man have such a place, or be in such
a-Church, as is capable of Gods ordinances, and wherein he may use the means
for reformation, which Christ has left: other wise his very place, and
standing is not of God, nor may be by him continued. La^tly, where he says,
that the incestuous man had not levened the Corinthians because Paul says, ye
are vnlevened v. 7. it is an ill collection. For they were unlevened or sweet
bread in their persons, that is sanctified by the spirit, but sowred or levened
in the lump of communion, by suffering that wicked man uncensured: and the
Apostles desire is, that that wicked man might be cast out of the society; that
as they were severally pure, or in their persons, so the whole Church together,
or mass might be pure, which before was polluted with his contagion.

4. The Corinthians had formerly been taught by Paul not to company or be
co^mingled with fornicators, covetous persons, etc: that is* according to the
drift of the whole Chapter, to cast them out, and so have neither spiritual,
nor civil familiarity with them. ver. 9. and here he reproves them for failing
in that duty.

5. They to whom Paul writ were to judge them that were within, and are charged
to use that power in putting away from among themselves tha^ wicked man. v: 12.
13.

And thus the evidence for the first point is clear, that they to whom Paul
writ and which were to be gathered together, were to be gathered into the name
of Christ, by his power to bind or deliver to Satan the offender as Math: 18
18* 19* 20. were to purge out the old leven, not to be commingled with the
ungodly, to judge them that were within, and to put away, and from among
themselves the obstinately wicked. And it is most untruly, and unconscionably
affirmed by this man Page: 92. (as I have formerly observed) that all that can
be gathered from this place, is that the censures are to be executed with the
public knowledge of them that are gathered together.

Now the 2. consideration is, who those persons are thus to be gathered
together, upon whose shoulders the Apostle lays this duty of delivering to
Satan, purging but, putting away, and judging this wicked man.

And for this, I need no more then M B: own confession in the place before
named, page: 92. where he expressly affirms, that by them that there meet
together, is meant the body of the Church* And though he, and all the world
should deny it, yet would the truth of God stand: which I thus manifest.

1. They among whom the fornicatour was, out of the midst of whom he was to
be put, and which were puffed up, when they had rather cause of sorowing, to
them the Apostle writes, them he reproves, they were to be gathered together
for the excommunicating, purging out, and judging the offender, v. 1. 2. 3. 4.
5. And therefore the duty here enjoined, as well concorns the brethren as the
officers, except we will say, the fornicatour was only among, and in the
midst of the officers, and to put from amongst them, and left amongst the
people still, and that the officers only were puffed up, when they should have
sorrowed, and not the brethren with them.

2. It concerned the people as well as the Priests in the type, and shadow,
Exo. 12. 15, 8. 15.
to put away leven out of their houses, and to keep the Passover with
unlevened bread: and so in the truth, and substance, to purge, and put out this
leven Paul speaks of, namely the incestuous person. v. 7* 8.

3. The Apostle admonishes them, that were not to be commingled with
fornicators* nor to eat with them: v. 9. 10. 11. and this duty, I hope, as
well concerned the brethren as the officers. 2^


4. They with whom Paul deals are commanded to put the 2^
wicked man from among themselves v: 13. so that the same persons, from among
whom he is to be put, are to put him away, which are both officers, and people.

And so I conclude* that the rule praescribed by Christ, Math: 18. and the
practice of the same rule commended by. Paul 1. Cor. 5. do severally* and
jointly couple and combine together the Elders and people in th(...)ing of an
offender, the officers going before, the brethren (...)ng in their order, and
the women lastly by silent consent, wherein the scriptures distinguish them from
the men, 1 Cor: 14. 14. 1 Timothy: 2. 12.

To these things I will add in the last place the consideration of a
scripture, to wit, a Cor: 2. 6. which M. B: and many others with him, think of
force sufficient to dash in pieces all that has been, or can be spoken for the
brethrens liberty, and right in the fore-handled business. But as I have
formerly answered the objections, forced from this scripture against the truth
I hold, so will I here set down one Argument or two, very pregnant, (except I
be deceived) for the confirmation of it, from the same scripture, and the
context thereof.

1. They whom the Apostle by his letter made sorry, for their failing I.
in the casting out of the incestuous man, and that with a sorrow to
repentance, manifesting it self, with great indignation and zeal, they were
^^ reprove, and censure him, and so did, to his reformation, and their own
clearing: which that it was not the case of the officers alone, but of the
brethren with them, appears in these scriptures. 1 Cor. 5. 1. 2. with 2 Cor.
2. 5. 6. and 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.

2. Paul writes not only to the officers, but to the brethren as II.
well as to them, to forgive or loose, to comfort and confirm their love toward
the same person upon his repentance. 2 Cor. 2, 7. 8. therein plainly
witnessing, that the brethren as well as the officers, had bound, rebuked, and
manifested their indignation against the sin, and the person for it.

Now this point in hand I will conclude with the observation of a practice yet
continued, and in use in the Church of England, which is, that persons
excommunicated for notorious sins, before they be absolved, are to do their
penance (as they call it) in the parrish Churches, whereof they are, and there
to ask the whole Church forgivenes. Now I would know of you Mr B. whether the
church have power to forgive the parties sin, (as men can forgive sin) yea, or
no? If you say no, you discover the shame of your Church, thus profanely to
take in vayn the name of God, and to make a mock of Christ ordinances: if you
answer affirmatively, then you grant the power of Christ to forgive, and to
loose sins, and so consequently to reteyn, and bind them, to be in the body
of the Church, for which I contend* The truth is, there is no such power in the
parish assemblies, as now they stand, they can neither bind the sinner, nor
re^^yn his sin, be he to the^ never so impenitent: or loose him, and his sin;
seem his repentance unto them never so full, and vnfeighned* these knots are to
be tied, and loosed, only by the Chauncelours, or Officials singers, this
power have they enclosed with hedge, and ditch, and as things are judged at
their tribunal, so must the captived Church take them, and will it, nill it,
receive or refuse the party accordingly. The Prelates, and their substitutes
have seized the substance, and kernel, as it were, into their hands, ^aving the
poor people only the shell, and shadow to feed upon. And yet this very
formal shadow still remaining in the Apostate asse^blies, i^ (...) to bewray
how substa^tiall a power the Churches of Christ were possessed of in their
constitution. This shell that remaynes shows where the(...) has been. And as
in this, so is it in sundry other paints: When the Bishop ordeynes a Minister,
he bids him (...)pel, though he have been his porter, and be known unable to
read sensibly: he uses also th^s^ words, t^ke thou authority (...)* though it
may be he is an (...)dred mil^^ off (but never in the place wherein he is to
minister: he gives him charge also to monster, the (...) of Christ^, as the
Lord has commanded, though he be but the Bishops man's man to exequute his
judgments: which forms of speech, notwithstanding serve to show, what the
Ministers ought to d^^, and where, and by whose election they ought to be
appointed, though in truth they do, or be nothing less. And ^h^^ God by his
providence continues vnworn out in the degenerate assemblyes, such steps, and
s^adles, as may serve to shame them, by showing unto all that will see, how and
where things have stood by Christ's appointment in his Church, which do also
very well consort with the disposition of Antichrist, whose property is under a
formal flourish for Christ to fight against him in his truth, and ordinances.

Our ^. reckoned error is. Mr B.


That the sin of one m^n publicly and obstinately stood in being not
reformed, nor the offender cast out, does so pollute the wh^le congregation,
that none may communicate with the same, in any of the holy things of God
(though it be a Church rightly constituted) till the party be excommunicated.

This Position thus set down I deny with Mr Ainsworth, though Answ.
with him* and Mr Smyth, I do undertake the confirmation of that truth, which
in his refutation Mr B* goes about to impugn. And that is that the whole
communion in the Church of England, is so polluted* with profane, and
scandalous persons; as that even in this respect alone, were there none other,
there were just cause of separation from it.

And to this purpose I will lay down a ground, upon which I do build whatsoever
I speak in this point* which I entreat the reader h^re, and always to observe,
and that is.

He that fayles in those duties for the reformation of the sin of an other,
which the Lord(...) his hand, he is accessory to that other man's sin, and
(...) own by connivency* (...) And this not only the scriptures* but e^e^
common sense, and the light of nature do confirm. And upon this ground I deny
your en^^neration of parts, in the case of pollution, to be sufficient. This
streyn comes more ways then you are aware of. A man may be polluted by, and
guilty of the sin of another, though he neither in judgment ^^llow of ^^* nor
in affection like it, nor practice the like* but the contrary* yea though he
speak against it, discountenance it, and brow-beat it, as you speak, when you
teach your people to look big upon sin, where they dare not meddle with the
reproving it: and do his best in his place to reclaym the sinner, (which are
the preservatives you give against pollution) and that th^se ways.

When a man does not 1 T^^^s. 5. 14. Heb. 3. 12. 13. and 10. 24. 25.
consider or observe his brother as he^ ^.
ought, nor watch over him in the holy communion of saints wherein he is set,
and which the Lord has established for this end, that he might be honored in
the communion, and fellowship of saints. And it is a saying only becoming 1
Ioh 3. 12.
CAIN, and those that are with him of that wicked one, Genesis 4. 9.
am I my brothers keeper (...) Thus then a man may be guilty of the sin of an
other* yea though ^^ be utterly ignorant of it. And thus, it is like, was ^^^
7. 1. 4, 5* ^^. 11. 12* ^^ ^6. and 22, 2^.
all Israel guilty of* (...), in the excommunic^^^ thing* who th(...) are
^^a^g^d by the Lord to have committed as^^, and to have (...)* and (...)* and
were punished by the Lord for the same, and deprived of ^^^ pr^s^^^^ till the
excommunicate, or ex^crable thing were destroyed from among them.

A 2. case of pollution is the neglect of admonition for the reformation II.
of the offender, according to the order and degrees by Christ himself set
down, secret and betwixt the offended, and offender, if the sin be of secret
practice, and nature: privately, and with a witness, or two, in the second
place: publicly in the last place by complaint made unto the Church having
the power of Christ for excommunication. Lev: 19. 17. Mat. 18. 15. 16. 17.

There is yet a 3. duty and that is separation, whereof you also III.
Mr B. in sundry cases do admit. page 105. and to which the Lord in the
scriptures calls his people for the shaming of obstinate rebellious offenders,
Romans 16. 17. 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16. 17. 1 Timothy 6. ^. the neglect whereof casts
both the guilt of the sin, and condemnation of the sinner, upon him that
neglects it. So that a man is not only bound in his place to do his best for
the reclaiming of his brother, but to see his place be such as wherein he may
orderly discharge the duties of admonition, otherwise both his practice, and
place are unlawful. And you your self will teach your people this truth in the
general, that the place, or calling absolutely tying a man to the breach of
any of Gods commandments, is unlawful, and to be forsaken.

Now this is your very case, and the case of the best in your Ch:, (the Lord
open your eyes you may see it, and give you hearts to make a right use of it.)
As there are in your parish whom you dare not admonish secretly, much less
with a witness, or two, so (which is the last and chiefest remedy) you cannot
make complaint to the Church: your Church is not furnished with Christ's power
to take vengeance upon disobedience: you are utterly unfurnished of the weapons
of this warfare. Great was the slavery of the Israelites under the Philistims,
when 1 Samuel 13 22.
there was not a sword found amongst them, in the day of battle: far greater,
and more to be bewailed, is your spiritual slavery under the Philistim, and
Egyptian Lords, the Praelates, which have spoiled you of all, and left you
unarmed, for the Lords battle. You know well Mr B. that the Official is not
the Church and so do thousands in England with you. For all whom, how much
better were it, and more agreeable to true godliness, to renounce such
vnsanctifyed places, and standings, wherein they do in avoydably day, by day,
steyn themselves with so many impieties of their brethren (as though their own
personal sins were too few) by sailing in this most necessary duty, laid by
the Lord himself upon every brother for the reformation of his brother, then to
plead, they do the best they can in their places, to reclaym them? It will not
be sufficient for men suffering themselves to be tied short in the chains of
Antichristian bondage from the performance of this necessary duty, at the day
of the Lord, when men shall appear to have perished through their fault, which
might have been gained by their admonition, Mat. 18. 15. to say they have done
what they could within the reach of their chayn. But let all them that fear the
Lord, and his righteous judgments, and which have hearts tenderly affected
with the conscience of the duty they owe unto their brethren, and to whom the
liberty purchased with the blood of Christ seems precious, break assunder
those chains of unrighteousness, those bonds of Antichrist, and come out of
Babylon, and plant their feet in those pleasant paths of the Lord, wherein
they may make straight steps unto him, walking in that light, and liberty,
which Christ has so dearly purchased for them.

But for separation from a Church rightly constituted, or from a true Church
(so remaining) I do utterly disclayme it. For there is but Ephesians. 4. 4. v. 5.
one body, the Church, and but one Lord, or head of that body, Christ: and
whosoever separates from the body, the Church, separates from the head, Christ,
in that respect.

But this I hold that if iniquity be committed in the Chruch, and complaint,
and proof accordingly made, and that the Church will not reform, or reject the
party offending, but will on the contrary maynteyn presumptuously, and abet
such impiety, that then by abetting that party and his sin, she makes it her
own by imputation, and enwrapps her self in the same guilt with the sinner. And
remaining irreformable, either by such members of the same Ch:, as are
faithful, (if there be any) or by other sister Churches, wypeth her self out
the Lords Church-rowl, and now cease to be any longer the true Church of
Christ. And whatsoever truths, or ordinances of Christ, this rebellious rowt
still reteynes, it but usurps the same, without right unto them, or promise of
blessing upon them, both the persons and sacrifices are abominable unto the
Lord. Tit. 1. 16. Prove. 21. 27.

Now if any object the Church of the Jews, and the obstinacy thereof in sin,
and wickedness, which was a true Church notwithstanding: it must be considered,
that no Church in the world I.
now, has that absolute promise of the Lords visible presence, which that
Church then had, till the coming of Christ, Genesis 47. 10. and 17. 7. Exodus 19.
43. 44. 45. II.


It was simply necessary the Messiah should be borne in the true Church,
wherein he might have communion, and fulfill the law. Math. 5. 17. Luke 2. 21.
22. 23. 29.

The Lord did ever affoard the Jews, even in their deepest III.
apostasy, some or other visible signs of his presence, and those even
extraordinary, when ordinary failed: thereby declaring himself still to remember
his promise made to their forefathers, and ever and anon by some godly King,
Prophet, or Priest, or (if these would not serve) by some severe correction,
destroying from amongst them the chiefest rebels, brought them to repentance,
and caused them to pass a new into his covenant, as has formerly been
declared.

But with us it is otherwise. No Church now can expect, or does enjoy such
extraordinary privileges. But if it depart from the Lord by any transgression,
and therein remayn irrepentant, I.
after due conviction, and will not be reclaymed, it man fests unto us, that
God also has left it, and that, as the Church by her sin has separated from,
and broken covenant with God so God by leaving her in hardness of heart with
but repentance, has on his part broken, and dissolved the covenant also. II.


The Lord Jesus threatens the Churches, for leaving their first love, R^v. 2.
4. Ca. 3. 16
and for their lukewarmnes, that he will come against them speedily, and remove
there candlestick, that is dischurch them, except they repent; and spue them as
loathsome out of his mouth.

There is the same reason, in due proportion, of one member III.
sinning, of a fevv, of many, and of a whole Church, now if a brother sin,
and will not be reclaymed by the ordinary means. appointed by Christ for that
purpose, he is to be accounted no longer a brother, but an heathen, and
publican, Math. 18. 17. so is it with two or three brethren, with a few, with
many, or with the whole Church, though there be a different order of dealing:
for the multitude of sinners does no way lessen or extenuate the sin either in
the eyes of God or men, Pa^. 171. 572. 173. of your 2. book.


Now for your arguments. In handling whereof I will also take in such of your
score of Reasons against pollutio^, as are worthy consideration.

First you say, under the law there was a sacrifice for all manner of
pollutions, Mr Ber.
but none for this, and therefore it is no sin.

It is not so, for 1. if a man polluted his hands with innocent Answ.
blood by murder, or his body with adultery, or wrought any other wickedness
punishable by death, there was (that I find) no particular sacrifice for it. 2.
The people of Ezekiel. 44. 6. 7. 9.
Israel were guilty of the pollution of the Lords house, by bringing, or
suffering to come, into his sanctuary, st^^ungers either uncircumcised in flesh,
or in heart: and so there was an Lev. 16 15. 16. 20. 20. 33. 34.
^ffring to be made once a year for the purging of the holy place, and
Tabernacle, for the cleansing of the Altar, and to be an atonement for the
Priests and for all the people of the congregation. 3. The pollution I speak of
coming only by neglect of some duty for the reformation of a brother, cannot
be denied to be sin, and with other pollution meddle I not.

The godly people were never reproved for being at the ministration of Mr B.
holy things though wicked men were there.

We grant it in the true Church, but deny a company of impenitent Answer.
sinners to remayn the true Church, being to the judgment of men,
vnrecoverable. Yea if but one have committed the evil notoriously scandalous
and the rest so tolerate him, that 1 Cor. 5. 6.
little leven levens the whole lump, and with Ex. 12. 15
leven must not the Passover be eaten in any case. And here Mr Bernard your
cavelling 2 book p. 210.
Reply upon Mr Ainsworth, speaking of the whole Church, and all the assembly, is
answered. The Corinthians might as well have eluded, and put of Paul's argument,
and reproof, as you Mr Ainsworths: for Paul speaks of the whole lump, as Mr
Ainsworth does of the whole Church. And surely if two or three officers be the
whole Church that has the power of Christ to judge and consure offenders as
you say, the whole lump might soon be levened, and the whole Church plead for
open iniquity.

The Prophets did not separate themselves though they cried out against Mr B.
wickedness, Isa. 1. 4. 5. 6. 9. 10. etc.

Both the Prophets, Priests, and people that were godly did separate Answ.
from Apostate Israel in Ierboams time, which we take to be 1 King. 11. 29. 30.
31. 32, 33. 2 Chro. 11. 14. 16.
your estate in a great measure, considering your worship, holy days,
Preisthood, and government. But for Jerusalem and the Church there, the case is
otherwise. Touching which I desire these two Rules may be born in mind.

First that there was that one only visible Church upon the face I.
of the earth, tied to one temple, altar, sacrifice, Preisthood, in one place,
and that no man could absolutely separate from that Church, but he must
separate from the visible presence, and from all the solemn public worship of
God.

Secondly that the Jewish Church had not that distinct ecclesiastical II.
ordinance of excommunication, which we now have, but that the obstinate or
presumptuous offender was by bodily death to be cut of from the Lords people,
the same persons namely the whole nation being both Church, and common wealth,
according to that special dispensation of those times. Whereupon it follows,
first, that since absolute separation from the Jewish Church was unlawful,
communion with it was lawful: and 2. that since the Church had not the power
to cast out an offender, it was no pollution unto them to suffer him amongst
them, so they discharged, such other duetyes, as were enjoined them, by the
Lord. But it is now otherwise: the times are altered and the dispensations of
them. Every place where a company of faithful people are gathered into Christ's
name, is mount Syon, and has the promise of Gods presence: and separation from
one Church remaining incurable may be made into another. And as separation may
be from a Church, so may excommunication be of person, obstinately wicked. And
these two Rules, rightly applied will (as I am persuaded) satisfy the
scriptures and reasons brought by Mr. B. here and both by him, and others else
where, from the old testament, and the unpolluted communion of the servants of
God in the Jewish Church. The other scriptures I will briefly pass over.

Tit. 1. 15. shows, that all the creatures of God are pure to the pure. I
grant it, and his ordinances also. But ever provided, in their lawful, and
right use, which in a profane and unsanctified communion they are not. By your
exposition Mr Bernard, a godly man might eat the Lords supper with haeretiques,
exco^municates, yea Turks or Pagans, if they would, and yet all should be pure
to him. Of the 2. and 3. chap. in the Revelation, I have spoken formerly, and
there proved that the Churches were polluted by the tolleration of wicked
persons amongst them, and therefore reproved, neither is it material, if the
scriptures do not expressly tax the whole Church for connivency every time they
rebuked some persons in it. It is sufficient they do it in some places, and in
some Churches: there is the same reason of all, neither has one Church
privilege above an other, or for one sin, more then an other. And this also
may serve for answer to the 2. and 3. of your twenty Reasons in your 2. book.
Only you must take knowledge page 1^ 1.
of your* gross oversight in the latter reason, where the question being of
the true matter of the Church, you bring in Noah in the old world, and Let in
Sodom unpolluted, as though the world, and Sodom had been true matter of the
Church, and Noah and Lot of the same religious communion with them. The like
ignorance you show in the 8. Reason, where you demand why the fellowship in
civil society should not be polluted, as well as religious communion. As though
you had never read that 1 Cor. 7* 14.
the unbelieving husband is sanctified to the believing wife for civil society,
which is no way dissolved, no not though the one party be a Turk, Jew, or
Atheist. And do you think Mr B. that religious communion may be held with such
without pollution?

In the next scripture which is Gal. 5. 10. the Apostle no way acquites the
Church of transgression, but speaks under hope of their repentance, which they
were to manifest by avoiding and cutting off such as had troubled, and sedu^ed
them, Gal. 1. 8. 9. and 5. 12.

In Mat. 5. 24. 25. Christ commands that before a man offer his gift he
reconcile himself unto his brother. True, but where hatred is, there is no holy
reconciliation: and where brotherly admonition is not, and that to the
reformation of the brother offending, there is hatred, as is manifest* Lev. 19.
17. And if you would improve to the right use this scripture, it would drive
you and others from your Corban, till you had discharged the duties of mercy to
your brethren, which the Lord accepts above sacrifice.

Touching 1 Cor. 11. which is the next scripture, I will speak Mr B.
something more largely, because Mr B. thinks it most pregnant for the decyding
of the controversy, for that the Apostle speaking purposely of the pollution of
the sacrament, bids every man examine himself, and not one an other, and that
under peyn of eating damnation to himself, and not to an other, if he come not
reverently, notwithstanding there was much evil in the Church.

And is it so in deed, that, because men must examine themselves, Answ.
therefore not others? what warrant then have you for your Eastershrift, your
examining the people before they communicate? You I hope, are to examine your
self, as well as others. And might not your people tell you out of your own
book, that you have naught to do to examine them? Might not the meanest of them
say unto you, examine your self, if I* eat and drink unworthily, it shall be mine
own damnation not yours? Yea might not any ungodly person thus answer either
officer, or brother, that should reprove him either publikly, or privately?
This indeed is the common fashion in the Church of England, and nothing more
common: and it is a received rule, that every man shall answer for himself, and
every tub stand upon his own bottom* and brotherly admonition is accounted by
the most but a precise curiosity of busy-headed people. And in this you confirm
them, by your collection: teaching the offenders Zach. 7. 11. 12.
to pull away the shoulder, and to stop the ^are, that they might not hear, to
make the heart hard, as an adamant stone. You do then err Mr Bern. in
expounding 1 Cor. 11. 18. exclusively. It does not follow, that because I am
bound to examine my self, therefore not my brother, that is, not to observe
him, admonish him, and bring him to repentance for apparent sin, for of such
an examination we only speak, leaving to a man's self the examination of the
heart, and of things secret. You may as well argue thus. We are to save our
selves, Act. 2. 40. to speak unto our selves in psalms, etc. Ephe. 5. 19. to
teach and admonish our selves, Col. 3. 16. to comfort our selves, 1 Sa^. 30. 6.
to edify our selves, Iud. 20. and therefore neither to save, nor to speak to,
nor to teach, nor to admonish, nor to comfort, nor to aedify others: which is
contrary to these, amongst many other scriptures. Iud. 23. 1 These. 4. 18. and
5. 11. 14.

Furthermore you your self page 120. of this book, make (and that truly) the
Lords supper a testimony of that* visible communion of love amongst the
members. Except then there be that love, which is there testified, the Lords
ordinance is profaned, and his name taken in vayn. Now where admonitions are
not for the purging, gayning, humbling, and saving of the the offender, Mat.
18. 15. 1 Cor. ^. 5. and 2. 6. 7. there is not true love, but hatred, Levit.
19. 17. And that true spiritual love required in the members of Christ's body
should be betwixt the servants of God, and notorious profane persons, either
way, passes both mine understanding, and affections. And to conclude this
point, I would but desire you Mr B. to read the marginall note given in your
authorized Bible* printed at London 1603. upon the 31. verse of this Chapter.

And thus you see how pregnant this scripture is to decyde the contreversie,
and to determine against you, that except reformation of sin be orderly
sought, and seasonably obtained, there can be no right or lawful communion in
the Lords supper. And Paul in writing as he does, provokes as every man
specially to look to himself, so the whole Church together to see the
reformation of the disorders amongst them. ver. 17. 18. 33. 34.

Lastly for 2 Cor. 12. 11. it must be considered that the case was depending,
and in hand concerning such as had sinned and not repented, and as the issue of
things should be, so were the godly to carry themselves toward them: if they
would be drawn to repentance, by admonition, they were to forgive them as 2
Cor. 2. 7. if not, the Church was bound to judge, and cut them of, whether Paul
came, or no. 1 Cor. 5. 11. 12. 13. Wherein if they failed, God would punish
their carnal security and want of zeal, as he threatens. Rev. 3. 14. 16. 19.

To proceed, where you affirm that our position insinuates, that Mr. B.
the sin of one dissolves the b^nd of allegiance between God, and another,
it it is no thing so. The sin, and apostasy of others can no way hinder, Answ.
or praejudice our salvation, or standing with God, if we discharge our duty
toward them. But here is the oversight, that men consider not, that, as God
has commanded men to worship him, receive the sacraments, and to use other
his ordinances, so he has also called, and separated unto himself a Church, a
communion, or fellowship of saints, and holy ones, in and amongst which those
holy things are to be used, Psalm. 147, 19. Romans 3. 2. and 9. 4. and that we are
as well to look in what fellowship, and communion we receive the holy things of
God* as what the things are we do receive. And as in the natural body there
must first be a natural union of the parts with the head, and one with an
other, before there can be any* action of natural communion either between the
head, and the members, or one member, and an other: so in this spiritual body*
the Church, the members must first be united with Christ the head* and become
one with him, before they can any way partake in his benefits, o^ have
communion with him, either in the merits or virtue of his death, and obedience,
Ioh. 15. 2. 4. 5. Romans 8. 1. as also one with an other, as members of the same
body, under him the head, before they can communicate in their works, or
operations. Communion in works, and actions, does necessarily presuppose union
of persons.

And if it be true which Mr B. labors so much to justify, both in his page
104. 105. 106. 107.
former, and page 171. 172. 173. 174.
latter writing, that a man is only to look to his own person, that it be
holy, and to the thing in hand, that it be commanded of God, and that it
matters not, to how unholy a society this holy person adjoynes himself, in the
communion of this holy thing, then may ^e lawfully repute, and acknowledge an
assembly of atheists, haeretiques, and idolaters (though as the assembly
gathered, Mark. 5. 9.) usurping the holy things of God, for the temple of the
living God, and for his 2 Cor: 6. 16. 18.
sons and daughter^, among whom he does dwell, and walk there. There may he
call upon God, as their common father, and say with faith, as Christ has
taught his discipls, Mat. 6. 9.
our father; there may he have 1 Cor. 11 1^. 17.
communion in the body and blood of Christ, as with the members of Christ. But
the Lord Jesus in teaching his Church, with one heart, and voice, to say our
father, has established an other brotherhood: and in Mat. 26. 26. 27.
giving his body and blood to be eaten, and drunken of all, in communion, has
knit in one an other society. The Apostle writing unto the Church of 1 Cor. 11.
16. 17.
Corinth, compares the whole Church to a man's body, and the persons in the one,
to the members of the other, viz* to the head, 1 Cor. 1^.
foot, ^y, ear, hand, and other parts: and endeavoring purposely to draw them
to the right use of those spiritual gifts, wherewith they abounded, without
contempt, or envy, he shows that all have need* and use, each of others, the
head of the foot, the hand of the ey, and so mutually one of an other, and that
without the help each of other, neither could consist. Now since every part
stands need of other, even the head, the chiefest, of the feet the meanest,
does it not concern the head to consider what a foot it has? the ey to see
what an hand it has? and so every member to forecast, that it be coupled with
such other members in this body mystical, as may not fayl it in the time of
need? Eccles. 4. 9. 10.
Woe be to him that is alone (says the wise man) for if he fall there is not a
second to lift him up, but if two be together the one will lift up his fellow,
if he fall. And how behoofull both for the comfort, and safety of the several
members, and whole body it is, that jointly and severally, all, and every part
be so fitted and furnished, as they may faithfully discharge their duties, and
affoard their service upon occasion, and as need stands, and how great not
only the discomfort, but the danger is, when there is a failing this way,
both the word of God and common reason, and every man's own experience will
teach him. Whereupon I conclude, that it concerns every man as first, and
most, to look to his own person, and to consider how things stand betwixt God
and himself, so in the next place to take heed he join himself in such a
communion, as wherein he may with comfort call upon God as a common father, and
partake in his ordinances by a common right to him, and the rest: and that
being so joined, he fayl not the body, or any member of it, as there is need of
his help, and service, otherwise Mr B. reasons will not bear him out, no not
though for scores, he put hundreds, which being compared with the scriptures,
and grounds from them formerly laid down, will appear to be the very froath of
his own lips, neither solid, nor savoury.

Next Mr B. reduces to certain heads such places of scripture, as Mr. B.
forewarn Gods people to separate themselves, and that first under the law, as
1. from Idols of false Gods, as Israel from Egyptian, Babylonish, or
heathenish Gods, and Idolaters dwelling about them. 2. From Idols of the true
God, as Judah from Israel in Ieroboams time, and after. 3. From persons
ceremonially polluted. In the time of the gospel. 1. From Jews not receiving
Christ, but railing against him. 2. From Gentiles without Christ. 3. From
Antichrist under the show of Christ, persecuting Christians. 4. From
familiarity private with men excommunicate, or of lewd life, etc. which places,
you say, no way concern you at all, and so you give a very ample testimony of
your selves, if we durst believe your words, against our own knowledge.

Your first head I let pass, and in answer unto your second, affirm Answ.
thus much* that in your constitution, you are partly, as the Egyptians, in
respect of your bondage: partly, as the Babylonians, in respect of your
confusion: and partly as Ieroboams Church, in respect of your Apostasy in your
devised preisthood, sacrifices, and holy days: the Lord having appointed no
such Ministry, as your preisthood, no such sacrifice as your service book, no
such holy days, as your single, and double feasts: which you have forged of
your own hearts.

Touching separation from persons ceremonially polluted, it must be considered,
that ceremonies have their signification, and shadows their substance. The
ceremony then was, that, Numb. 19. 13. 22. Lev. 15. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
19. 20. 21. etc.
whosoever touched a dead person, or a person, or thing unclean, was unclean:
and whom, or whatsoever the unclean perso^touched, that person, or thing was
unclean: so that a person unclean did not only pollute the thing he touched to
himself, as Mr B. would have it, but to others also: whosoever touched the
thing that he touched, was polluted by it. What is then the substance of these
ceremonies? Who is now a leper, but he which has the leprosy of sin arysing
in his forehead? Who has an issue of blood upon him, but he in whose soul, and
body the issue of sin runs unstopped? Who is the dead person now that may
not be touched without pollution, but he that is dead in trespasses, and in
sins? And who touches such an unclean person, if he that becomes, and
remaynes one body with him, by spiritual communion, and a member of him, touch
him not? Ro^. 12. 4. 5. 1 Cor. 10. 16. 17. and 12. 12. 13.

Thirdly, if separation be lawful from persons not receiving Christ, but
railing against him, then is communion unlawful with any assembly in the land,
wherein there are many, which remayn in unbelief as their works declare, Iam.
2. 20. and so receive not Christ. Ioh. 1. 12. but do on the contrary both
revile and persequute him in his graces, servants, and ordinances: howsoever
for fear or fashion, they be content to be accounted Christians.

Now for separation from Gentiles without Christ, and from Antichrist, under a
show of Christ, persecuting Christians, as the scriptures do account of
antichristianism, as of haethenism in this respect, calling it Rev. 11. 8. and
14. 8 and 18. ^. 4*
Babylon, Sodom, Egypt spiritually, and so warning the Lords people to come
out of it: so for the second point, I do not yet believe, whatsoever you write,
but you Mr Bernard, are as verily persuaded as my self, that the Church of
Engl. formally considered in her laws, and canons ecclesiastical, contrived,
and exequuted by the prelates, and their substitutes, does persecute Christians
under a show for Christ. That the Bishops make a show for Christ, all grant:
and that they persequute true Christians, let your prisons be searched, and
there will want no records: and if you yet will pass by the poor brethren of
the separation, as the Priest, and Levite did the wounded man, which had fallen
among thieves, Luke 10. and will take no knowledge of us, ask your own
brethren, the godly Ministers, with whose supply against us, you back your
book, and I doubt not, but the suspensions, and deprivations of the most of
them for refusing the Prelates badges, and liveries, the surplice, typpet, and
the like, will testify with us the persequutions of the Antichristian
Praelacy, against Christians.

The separation you admit of in the last place is from familiar accompanying in
private conversation with men excommunicate, or of lewd life worthy to be
excommunicate, when neither religion commands, etc.

What Mr B. ought men to avoid familiarity with excommunicates only in private
conversation, and not both in the private, and public worship of God? Is
there any religious familiarity, or communion save in the Church, out of which
excommunicates are cast? The Jews had no religious communion at all with
heathens* or persons Ezekiel. 44. 7 9.
uncircumcised, which therefore might not enter into the sanctuary of the Lord,
though you be driven in answer to Act. 21. 28. 29. to affirm they might. 2 book
page: 175. and as such, must we account them, that refuse to hear the Church.
Mat. 18. 17. And as no religious communion either private, or public, may be
held with persons justly excommunicated by the Church, so neither with such
lewd persons, as deserve excommunication, and are thereof clearly convinced,
though the Church want grace to cast them out. The Churches ungodly co^nivency,
and vpboulstring them in their scandalous sins, makes them nothing the better,
but it self in truth like unto them, as Deuteronomy. 7. 26. Josh. 7.
he that brought a thing abominable into his house, was accursed like it: how
much more, if he either bring it into, or keep it in Gods house? And how we are
to avoid persons incorrigibly wicked, whether Idolatours, Haeretiques, or
profane livers, (the common bonds of natural, and civil society ever kept
inviolated) which as they are to the Lord, so ought they to be unto us
abominable) see these scriptures, Act. 2. 40. 47. and 19. 19. Romans 16. 17. 1
Cor. 5. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16. 17. Gal. 1. 8, 9* 1 Timothy 6. 3. 4. 5. 2 Timothy
3. 2. 3. 4. 5. Tit. 3. 10. which places do not only forbid private and
voluntary familiarity, as you speak, and affirm, but religious also (to which
you unskillfully oppose voluntary, where no society is so voluntary, as that
which is religious) and that both private and public. Neither is there any
reason, whither we respect the glory of God, or our own safety, or the
avoiding of offense in others, or the shaming of the parties why we should
avoid civil communion with any, and yet hold religious communion with them. To
conclude, since the Lord will be glorified by his people, not only severally,
and in their persons, but jointly, and in their holy communion, and has given
them in charge to exhort, comfort, admonish, and reprove one an other, as there
is cause, and in the order he has prescribed, as also according to the same
order, to sequester, censure, reject, and avoid persons incorrigible, and
infectious, the brother or brethren failing in these duties, are steyned, and
polluted, not by other men's sins (which can no way hurt them, or the holy
things they use, save to themselves) but by their own swarving, and neglect,
from, and of, such duties, as wherein they are to acquit themselves, in their
most streyt, and sacred bond of communion. Only before I end, I must touch one
point of deep divinity set down by Mr B. Mr Bern.
for the purpose in hand: which is, that the Lord takes a people to be 2. book.
p. 176.
his, before he command them: and that commandments are for his people to
rule them, not to make them his people.

But how agrees this (to let pass his former book) with that Answ.
which he not only writes, but substantially proves, page 277. of his second,
that, when the L. sets up a people to be his people, first he gives them his
word, which is his ordinance to make them his people, his power to subdue the^,
the means of reconciling the^, that, by which he extols a people above other
people? Well Mr B. (to let pass your inconsiderate lightness in those weighty
matters, wherein you exceed Mr Smyth, for that, where he confutes one book by
an other, you confute yours by it self, in an other place) howsoever your
national Church were not made the Lords people by his commandments, but by
the commandments, precepts, and proclamations of men, yet would the L. Jesus
have his Churches gathered, and men made his people, by the publishing, and
preaching of his commandments, wherewith he furnished his Apostles for the
making of disciples, by the knowledge, faith, and obedience of them. Mat. 28.
19. 20.

The ^. error laid to our charge is, our holding, That every one of their
assemblies, are false Churches.

If one of them be, then are they all, for they are all, and every one of them
cast in the same mould? We profess we put a great difference betwixt person,
and person amongst you, and do not doubt (God forbid we should) but there are
hundreds, and thowsands amongst you, having assurance of saving grace, and
being partakers of the life of God, in respect of your persons: but considering
you in your Church Communion, and ordinances, we cannot so difference you, but
must testify against your apostasy, as we do. And let it not be greevous unto
you, Mr B. or unto any other, that in this regard, we speak thus generally and
alike of you all, without exception: for even your own Church intends you
all, and every one of you alike, without exception: as appears, in that it
appoints one set service in so many words to be said, by all, and every
Minister, to all, and every parish, and person in it. It appoints one set form
of words, wherein all persons, without exception, must be married, all women
without exception after childbearing, purified: all children born in the
kingdom baptized, all sick persons visited, and all dead persons buried without
exception. How shall we then sever you in the things, wherein you join your
selves? or put a difference where your selves put none?

And where further (as loath to let fall the plea of the wicked) you Mr B.
do add, that God called Israel his people after defection, and their
children in respect of circumcision his children. Ezech. 16. 21. 22. I answer,
first, Answ.
that the Lord did not call them his children in respect of circumcision (for
the Genesis 34. 24.
Scechemitcs were circumcised, and yet were not Gods people, not their children
his children) and 2. that the Prophet speaks of the first born, which by right
did in a special manner apperteyn to the Lord, Exodus 13. 2. though he were
most injuriously defrauded of his due. Where you proceed and say, that some in
the Mr. B.
Acts, 19. 2. which were ignorant of the holy Ghost, were called believers,
that is too grossly applied to the ordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, Answ.
which is meant of such extraordinary visible gifts, as wherewith God did for
a time beautify the Church, which these persons also there spoken of, did
afterward receive by imposition of hands by Paul, verse. 6.

For the Churches of Corinth, and Pergamus, with whose corruptions as with a
buckler, you would cover your selves, it must be remembered, that they, and
every person in them, were in their co^stitution, separated by voluntary
profession into covenant with the Lord, and did with their covenant receive
power and charge to reform such evils, as might break out amongst them, which
if they neglected, they brake covenant with God, and so forfeyted, on their
part, both their covenant, and power, provoking the Lord, if they repented not
to break with them, and shortly to remove their candlestick out of his place.
Rev. 3. ^.


That which you add the last, and in deed the worst of all the rest, is, that
the Church of Christ, is set out even by the naming, that Mr B.
is by the profession of the name Jesus Christ. Romans 15. 20.

But the Apostle intends no such matter, but only to magnify Answ.
his Apostleship by this amongst other the notes of it, that he had preached
the gospel, where before there had been no sound of it. And if the naming of
Jesus Christ set out a Church, then are the Papists (besides other haeretiques)
a true Church, for they name Jesus Christ, as often as you, and with as many
courtesies.

But things are best discerned in their particulars, and to them Mr B.
you descend, saying, that that congregation which is false, has a false head,
false matter, false form, and false properties, which (say you) cannot be
avouched against our congregations.

And what if but some of these be false, and not all? To make Answ.
a thing true must concur all the essential parts, and properties: but to
make it false, there needs not be all false, some few will do it. For the
particulars.

You have no false head, because you hold Jesus Christ, and worship Mr B.
no other God, but the Trinity in unity.

The Papists also worship the Trinity in unity, and in word, and Answ.
in the general, confess Christ their head: and you in deed, and in the
particulars, many of them do deny his headship.

Christ is the head only of his body, Col. ^. 17. But the body of Christ
consists not of the lims of Satan, of which your national Church was for the
most part gathered, and compact, after the general apostasy of Antichrist,
and of such it consists at this day: except you will deny that they are the
lims of Satan 2 Cor. 4. 4
the eyes of whose minds he bl^ndeth, that the light of the gospel should not
shine in them: Ioh. 8. 44
which do the lusts of the devil, and are his children: which 1 Ioh 3. 8
commit sin: which persequute the godly, and Rev. 2. 10.
cast in prison the servants of Christ. Now tell me not, Mr Bern. of the wicked
persons in the Churches of Corinth, Thiatyra, and the rest; for these Churches
were not gathered of any such outwardly, and so appearing: it is blasphemy
against the Apostles so to affirm: and if any appearing such were afterward
suffered, it was a ^anker in the Churches which in time ate out the hearts of
them. As therefore the Papists make the Church a monstrous body, in setting two
heads over it, Christ, and the Pope; so do you make Christ a monstrous head, in
uniting unto him members of so contrary a nature. And let the profane world
make as small account of it, as they list; it is certain, no false doctrine,
haeresy, or Idolatry can more either displease, or dishonor God, and his
Christ, then wretched men, in word professing his truth, and name, and in deed
denying both him, and them.

Further you have not Christ the head of your Church in the administration of
his prophetical, preistly, and kingly office: which I will only point at*
referring the reader to such other treatises, as do more fully confirm these
things, and in special to Mr Ainsworth his arguments disproving the present
estate and constitution of the Church of England; against which his plain
proofs your idle exceptions Mr Ber. will be as easily answered, as read.

First then, your Church admits not of the ordinance of prophesying, I.
or teaching out of office, Romans 12. 6. 7. which as I have formerly proved to
be a perpetual ordinance for the Church, so how profitable it is, both for the
edification of them within, and conversion of them without, we find by
experience, and the scriptures declare* 1 Cor. 14. 3. 24. 25.

2. You silence the Lord Jesus in your Church from revealing II.
the whole will of his father. A part of his word is utterly excluded by your
calender, and may not so much as be read in your Church, but is justled out by
the Apocrypha writings: a greater part even the most of that which concerns the
true gathering, and governing of the visible Church, though it may be read, yet
may it not be faithfully taught, much less obediently practiced:
notwithstanding any charge of the Prophets, Apostles and Christ himself. Deu.
29. 29. Math. 28. 19. 20. Romans 16. 25. 26. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. so that though you
have the whole will of God in your books, as Papists have, yet in respect of
the doctrine, and obedience of a great part of it, the book is sealed up, and
may not be opened. And to make up the measure, you have in stead of the
canonical scriptures of the holy Ghost, men's Apocrypha scriptures, the books
of homilies, and that of common prayers, your popish canons, and constitutions,
(which are as well the doctrine of your Church, as the canons of the Tridentine
council are the doctrine of the Church of Rome) and (if you will) in stead of
Prophets to teach, your significant ceremonies, the cap, surplice, cross,
typpet, which are neither dark, nor dumb, but apt to stir up the dull mind of
man to the remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable signification. Here
is dross for silver, and for the finest wheat, chasse.

Lastly your Prophets which administer that part of Christ's prophecy, III.
or of the scriptures, which may be taught, and practiced amongst you* have
neither the true office of ministry, which Christ has prescribed, nor a
lawful calling to that they have: as has been in part noted from Ephe. 4. and
is else where clearly evinced.

Now Christ's preistly office you do corrupt, and profane vnsufferably, whether
we respect the persons, or things whereof you make him a mediator.

Are those Atheists, and ungodly persons, wherewith you confess I.
in the beginning of your book, your Church is full, and which if you should
deny, heaven and earth would witness against you, are they I say, their souls,
and bodies, those Romans 12. 1. and 15. 16
lively, holy, and acceptable sacrifices, and offerings sanctified by the holy
Ghost?

Are those devised, printed, and stinted collects, read out of II.
your humane service book, the Romans 8. 26. 27.
spiritual sacrifices of prayer, and thanksgiving, which the spirit of God
teaches the sons of God to offer, the fruits and calves of the lips which
confess his name? 1 Cor. 12. 7


Is that constreyned payment of a weekly, or monthly rate, and III.
assesment for the poor (more fitly called a malevolence, for the Heb. 13. 15
Hos. 14. 3.
ill will it is paid with, then a benevolence) that 2 Cor. 8. 1. 4. and 9. 5* 7
Phil. 4. 18. Heb. 13. 16
gracious cheerful care for the saints, that freewill offering of love, and
mercy, that sweet smelling odor, that acceptable, and well pleasing sacrifice
unto God?

Are these, I say, those sacrifices, for which Jesus Christ the eternal high
priest appears for ever before his father in heaven, that he might offer them
unto him in the golden censure, perfumed with the odours of his own
righteousness? or are they to be sanctified by the golden altar of his merits
standing before the throne of God? Rev. 8. 3. 4. Math. 23. 19.

A less indignity sure it was to lay upon the material Altar in the
tabernacle, or temple, dogs, swine, vultures, and all unclean beasts, and
byrds, with their dirt, and dung, then thus to lay upon this heavenly altar,
those Rev. 18. 2
unclean beasts, and byrds, whereof Babylon is an habitation, and cage.

And for Christ's kingly office, who is able to set down the indignities, and
outrages offered in your Church to the scepter thereof?

For first where Christ reigns as the King in Syon, his holy mountayn, I.
ruling over his servants, and subjects only, as Rev. 15. 3
the King of saints under his father, you have gathered him a kingdom, and
crowned him the King thereof (contrary to his express will) of known
traitors, and rank rebels unto his crown, and dignity: even of such as do
visibly, and apparently fight for Satan, and his kingdom, the kingdom of
darkness, hating, deriding, and persecuting to the utmost of their power, all
such as desire to please, and serve Christ in any sincerity. Of such, and none
other, does the body of your Church consist, for the greatest part, as all
amongst you that fear God will testify with me.

2. Where Christ rules over his subjects by the scepter of his II.
holy word, which is Psalm. 45. 6.
a scepter of righteousness: in the place of it, the ungodly canons, and
constitutions of Popes, and Prelates must, and do bear sway. Such subjects,
such laws. And say not, Mr B. as you do, in answer to Mr Ainsworth, page 259.
that you acknowledge no other lawgiver over your consciences in matters of
says, and obedience, between Christ, and you, save him alone. For what does
your Church representative but bind conscience, in binding men to subscribe to
the Hierarchy, service book, and ceremonies, spont^ et exanimo? in pressing men
to the use of things reputed indifferent, absolutely, and whether they offend,
or offend not? in tying men to a certain form of prayer, and thanksgiving:
excommunicating men for the refusal, and omission of these, and the like
observances of their laws? And what do you but loose and unbind the
conscience, in tolerating, yea approving, yea making, and ordeyning unpreaching
Ministers, and in binding the people, under both civil, and ecclesiastical
penalties to their ministrations, in their own parishes, and from others? And
what do you else in your dispensations for pluralities, non-Recidency, and the
like? Are not these matters of conscience with you Mr B. wherein your laws,
and lawmakers bind and loose, as they list? All the laws, and ordinances for
the ministry and government of the Jewish Church, were matters of faith, and
obedience between God, and the Church, bynding the consciences of the people:
and is the new testament less perfect then the old? and the laws, and
ordinances for the administration of it less excellent, and of a baser
foundation then the former? It matters not what your words are, since it
appears by your deeds, that you vsurp the throne of Christ, in appointing
officers, and making laws for the government and administration of his
kingdom the Church: and those many of them to the abolishing of his, herein
rather holding Christ as a captive, then honoring him, as a King.

3. Where Christ has given to his Church liberty, power, and III.
commandment, every one of them severally, and all of them jointly to reprove
and reform disorders, and whatsoever is found, whether person or thing, faulty,
and disagreing unto his word: alas this liberty is enthralled, this power
lost, this commandment made of no force. The Prelates have seized all these
royalties into their hands, as though they alone were made partakers of Christ's
kingly annoynting, and were as Kings to rule in his Church. Here is a King in a
great measure without subjects, without laws, without officers, without power.

But here I must needs observe a few things about two answers given by Page
260. 261.
Mr B. in his 2. book to two of Mr Ainsworths objections about the matter in
hand. To the former being about the officers of Christ in the Church, he
answers, that they have Christ's officers appointed to govern; the civil
Magistrate, the Kings Majesty, the Mr B.
ruling Elder, next under Christ, etc. and the ecclesiastical governors under
him, the Bishops, who are also Pastors, and Doctors.

But you should have considered Mr Bern. that the question Answ.
is not about civil but ecclesiastical governors. The King in deed is to
govern in causes ecclesiastical, but civilly, not ecclesiastically, using the
civil sword, not the spiritual for the punishing of offenders. And if the
King be a Church officer, then he is, first, a King of the Church: ^* to be
called to his office, and so deposed from it by the Church, or at least by
other ecclesiastical persons, by whom alone you will have Church officers
made. And lastly, if the King be such a ruling Elder, as the scriptures speak
of, he is inferior to the teaching Elders, and deserves less honor then
they. For so the Apostle orders things. Ro^. 12. 7. 8. 1 Timothy 5. 17.

Now in making your Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors, you are double forgetful
of your self, and double injurious unto them, and which is worse then both the
rest, you sin against the Lord, and his truth. For the first, in your former
book you made your Bishops chief officers in the Church, and the successors of
the Apostles, and Evangelists, and here you make them Pastors, and Teachers,
which are the lowest orders of officers, that* Christ gave for the work of the
ministry. Ephe. 4. 11. 2. if your Bishops be Pastors, and Teachers by their
office, what are you, and the rest of your rank? You and they have not the same
office, but you an office under them, and so Pastors and Teachers being the
lowest order that Christ has left in his Church, your order must needs be
something under the lowest, and of an others leavings then Christ's. 3. in
making your Bishops the Pastors and Teachers of the Church of England, or the
particular Churches in it, you lay to their charge an accusation, which they
will never be able to answer at the day of the Lord, which is, their not
feeding of so many thousand sheep committed unto them to be fedd, and taught by
them. Lastly, nothing is more untrue, and disagreable to the word of God, then
that your Provincial, and Diocesan Bishops are the Pastors, and Teachers
given by Christ to his Church. There were no other ordinary officers left or
appointed by the Apostles, in the Churches but such as were fixed to particular
congregations, ordinarily called Bishops or Elders, Act. 14. 23. and 20. 17.
28. Phil. 1. 1. And if it can be showed, that, by the word of God any other
officers were left, or appointed in the Church after the extraordinary
officers, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, whose gifts, and places were
extraordinary, besides such Bishops, and Elders, as were limited to particular
Churches, I will yield this whole cause in the point of the Ministry, and so
profess.

The other of Mr B. answer I mind, is, about the power of Christ, against sin,
Satan, Antichrist, the want whereof, Mr Ainsw: and that truly, objecteth
against the English assemblyes. Mr B. defense Mr B.
summarily is, that, there is in the Church of England, the preaching of the
word, which is the power of Christ, Romans 1. 18. as also excommunication, though
not in every parrish, yet in the Church of England in which is comprehended all
parrishes, and all superior power over them.

For which let the Reader observe these particulars. Answ.


First a national Church since Christ's death, and the dissolution I.
of the Jewish Church, is amonstrous compound, and savours of Judaism.

Secondly, if the mayn part of the power of Christ be to be administered II.
in a particular congregation, by the ordinary officers thereof* namely the
preaching of the gospel, why not the inferior part, the censures also, save
that the Bishops to Lord it over all, will keep this rod in their own hands?
III.


Thirdly, the Ministers whose judgments and reasons you avouch, both say, and
prove, in the latter end of your book, that this power is given to a particular
congregation of faithful people. page 180.


Fourthly, you your self lay it down as a mayn ground against IIII.
popularity, and withal sundry scriptures to prove it, that Christ has
appointed the same sorts of men in his Church for preaching, page 92.
administration of the sacraments, and government.

Lastly it is apparent, that the particular Church of Corinth 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5.
gathered V.
together in the name of the Lord Jesus, had the power of the Lord Jesus for
excommunication: and so has every other faithful assembly in the world, as
they had, which since your assemblyes are not, they may want this power without
any great wrong: the evil only is, that it rests in a worse place, then the
worst parrish assembly, the Bishops court, or consistory.

I proceed. Only my desire is, that the things which I have noted touching
Christ's kingly office, be the more carefully observed by all the people of God,
and servants of Jesus, in respect of that most direct opposition, which in
those latter days is made against it, and the administration thereof. For as
in the first times after Christ's coming in the flesh, his prophetical office
was directly impugned, by Jews, and heathens, so as it was not lawful to speak
Act. ^. ^2 ^3. and ^4. ^. 17. 18.
in his name, and since that his preisthood by the masse-preisthood, and
sacrifices in the popish Church, so now in the last place does Satan in his
instruments bend his force most directly against, and with might and mayn
oppose the sovereignty, and crown of our Lord Jesus that he may not rule in his
Church, by his own officers, and laws.

The matter, you say, is not false, and to show this you note a difference Mr.
B.
between true matter, false matter, and no matter. As you speak that, which
neither any other, nor yet your self, can understand of false matter, so you
call them no matter, which make no profession of Christ at all, ^^ Jews,
Turk^s, Pagans, and all them true matter to wit, visible, which openly profess
this ^^yn truth, that Jesus the son of Merry is the son of (...) Christ the
Lord, by whom only, and (...) they shall be saved.

Many grievous errors are bound up (...) invective of Mr Bernards, Answ.
but for prophanenes, this one surmounts them all. For what can be spoken more
prejudicial to the glory of God, or deragotory to the body of Christ, h^^ that
any person, but pronouncing so many words, how fill(...)ious soever he be in his
life, or what errors soever he mingle with this truth, is notwithstanding true
visible matter of the Church, or a true member of Christ's body visibly, or so
far, as men can judge, and so must be received and acknowledged.

Against this odious, and profane error, I will first deal by some clear
Arguments proving the contrary, and then come to the allegations he makes for
his ungodly purpose.

If all, that profess this mayn truth, Jesus the son of Mary etc. be true
matter of the Church, then are most notable haeretiques true matter of the
Church. The Apellites, C^rdo^^ans, and Marcio^^^es holding two contrary
beginnings, or Gods, the one good, the other evil: the Macedonians denying the
Holy Ghost to be God: the Cer^^^hyans holding that Christ is not yet risen from
the dead: the Paternians affirming the inferior parts of the body of man to be
created of the Divill: the Patric^^^^ holding so of the whole body: the
Novatians, and Cathari, denying repentance to them that sin: the Nicholaitans
holding community of all things: the Swenk seldians, and Enthusiasts denying
the outward ministry, and waiting upon the revelation of the spirit alone: and
with these many others, as ill, or worse then they, professing notwithstanding
this mayn truth, as the most of them did, and do.

Then are excommunicates, true matter of the Church, though II.
cast out for notorious wickedness, for many of them hold these mayn truths,
and many more, yea more then Mr B. himself does.

Then is the true matter of the world, and lims of the Devil, III.
(for such are all wicked persons whatsoever truth they profess, Ioh. 8. 44.
and 15. 19. Romans 6. 16 2 Timothy 2. 26. 1 Ioh. 3. 8. 12.) true matter, and members
of the Church.

They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections, and IIII.
lusts of ^^. Gal. 5. 24. therefore persons visibly wicked are not visibly
Christ's, and so not visibly or in respect of men, true matter of the Church, or
members of his body.

That which destroys the Church, and makes it become either a V.
false Church, or no Church at all, cannot make a true Church, or be the true
matter, whereof it is made; for these things are contrary. But wicked men,
whatsoever they profess in word, make the Church a Synagogue of Satan, and
very Babylon, which is an habitation of Divils, and hold of all foul spirits,
Rev. 18. 2. provokes God to remove the candle-stick that is to dischurch a
people, and to spew them out of his mouth, Rev. 2. 5. and 3. 16.

Mr B. had need be a skilful workman, which can make a true Ch: of Christ, of
that matter, which makes the true Churches planted by the Apostles themselves,
either false, or no Churches at all.

They which are true visible matter of the Church, or true visible VI.
christians, have Christ for their King visibly, or in outward appearance, and
so far as men can judge: (for by visible, we mean that which may be seen of
men, opposed to invisible, which only God sees) for Christ is not divided,
but look to whom he is a Priest to save them, and a Prophet to teach the^, to
the same persons he is also a K. to reign, and rule over them* but he is not a
King to any ungodly ones, neither does he, but Satan, and their lusts reign
over them.

If profession in word, with a wicked conversation, make true VII.
matter of the Church, then an apparently, a flat contradiction, a known sin,
and that which makes men more abominable, makes them true matter of the
Church. For he that says, he has fellowship with God, or believes in Christ,
and yet walks in darkness, does ly, and does not truly, 1 Ioh. 1. 6. He that
professes Christ to be his savior, and does wickedness, contradicts himself
(for Christ is not a savior of the wicked) and sins against the 4.
commandment, in taking Gods name in vayn. Other reasons might be brought for
the ^^iction of this soul, and profane error, for truth unanswerable, and for
number sufficient to make a volume: but these may suffice for the present: some
other I will intermingle, as occasion shall be offered in the examination of
that, which Mr B. brings for the confirmation page 112.
of his assertion. For which end he sets down 4. Reasons.

The sum of the three first is thus much: viz: that Christ, and his Mr B.
Apostles preaching the gospel, such as believed the same, and made profession
of it, and of their faith, were without stay, or let, received into the Church
as true matter.

We are as far from denying this order of gathering Churches, Answ.
as you are from enjoying it, Mr B: you needed not to have made three distinct
proofs of this, which no man denies: nor to have brought so many scriptures as
you do, for the confirmation of that, which we grant with you, and practice
without you. But herein you deceive the simple reader in that you separate, and
disioyn those things, which then were, and always should be joined together:
and they are faith, and repentance. These two jointly did Christ himself
preach, and John Baptist before him, and the Apostles after him: and these two
were preached to, and required of every one both man, and woman, which was
admitted into the Church, Mat. 3. 2. 6. Mark. 1. 15. Act. 19. 4. Luke 13. 3. 5.
and 24. 47. Act. 2. 28. and 8. 37. and 19. 18. But now because faith, and
repentance are inward graces resydeing in the heart, and known to God alone,
which knows the heart, and that the profession, and confession of them are the
ordinary means by which these hidden, and invisible graces are manifested, and
made visible unto men, there was no cause, but they, which made this profession
to men, in sincerity, so far as men could judge, should by men be deemed, and
acknowledged for true members of Christ, and fit matter for the Lords house.
And so if by any other means men manifested themselves to have faith, and
holiness wrought in them (though they made neither profession of faith, nor
confession of sins) yet were they, (and so ought to be) entitled, and
admitted to the liberties of the Church, as appears, Act. 10. 44. 46. 47. And
upon this very ground also it is, that the children of the faithful are of
the Church, and baptized, though they make no profession of faith at all,
because the scriptures declare them to be within the gracious covenant of Gods
mercy, and love, and under the promises of the gospel, and so by us to be
reputed holy. Genesis 6. ^. and 17. 7. 8. 9. 10. Deuteronomy. 29. 10. 11. 12. 13. Act. 2.
39. Romans 11. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 14. so that it is not for the profession of faith*
ex opere operate, or because the party professing vtters so many words, that he
is to be admitted into the Church: but because the Church by this his
profession, and other outward appearances, does probably, and in the judgment
of charity, (which is not causlesly suspicious) deem him faithful, and holy in
deed* as in show he pretends. But that a man of a known lewd conversation,
and appearing still to remain in his sin (whatsoever in word he professes)
should be received into the Church, (out of which he ought to be cast though he
were one of it) or should have baptism administered unto him, (which is as Mr B.
rightly confirms from the scriptures, the seal of the forgivenes page 119. 1^^.
of sins, of new birth, and of salvation,) being judged not to have the
forgivenes of sins, nor to be born a new, nor to be in the estate of
salvation, were a most desperate and profane practice, then which I know not,
whither the Devil has brought any other into the Church, more derogatory to
Gods glory, or prejudicial to man's salvation. This were to make the way of the
kingdom of heaven broad enough, by which all the Atheists in the world might
enter into the Church, and certainly would every one of them, if the Magistrate
should use his compulsive power, as it is in Engl: at this day: yea a parrat
might be taught to say over so many words, yea the Devil himself* (though he
were known so to be) would not stick for his advantage to utter them, and so
might be true matter for Mr Ber: Church.

The material ^ King. 5. 6. 17. 18. and ^. 7. 2 Ch^* ^. 8. 9*
templi was to be built only of costly stones; of ceda^s, firres, and the like
special trees, and those all prepared before hand* hewed, and perfect for the
building, so that neither hammer, nor ax, nor any tool of iron, was to be heard
in the house in the building of it. * By the gates 2 Chr. 2^ ^.
of the house were the porters set, that none, that was unclean in any thing,
should enter in. Upon the altar there might be " offered no unclean beast, Lev.
22. 9. 20. 21. etc. and 27 1.
no nor that which was clean, having a blemish upon it. And is any rubbish, and
ri^rat now good enough for this spiritual house and temple of God, the Church,
whereof the material temple was but a carnal shadow? may the porters, the
officers, let into it, the clean, and 1 Pet. 2 ^ Cor. 6. 16 Rev. 11. 1. Heb.
13. ^.
unclean, without difference? may dogs, and swyne, and all unclean beasts and
birds promiscuously be offered upon * the altar we have in our spiritual
tabernacle? God forbid. And far be it from the servants of the Lord to prepare
his Majesty such a house to dwell in, or to defile his holy things with such
unclean persons, or to offend his nostrels with the stench of such sacrifices.
Yea, whosoever shall bring me this doctrine, that a man of known wicked
conversation, without such appearance of repentance, as the Church by the word
of God, and rule of charity, is to judge true, may by warrant of the word, or
practice of the Apostles, be received, and admitted into the Church, by the
prattling of a verbal profession, I will hold that man, yea though he were an
angel from heaven, accursed.

And for the places which Mr B. brings for this purpose, they are so evident
against him, as when I read them, I do even wonder, with what conscience,
modesty, or wisdom, he could set them down. They do speak in deed of faith,
and the profession of faith, in, and by such, as were received into the Church:
but of what faith? of a dead faith without works, as Chapter 2. 26
James speaks? or fruitful in evil works, which is worse? nothing less, but
of such a faith, as has the express promise of Act. 15. 9. Gal. 5. 6. 1 Ioh.
5. 1
life eternal annexed unto it, even of that faith, which purifieth the heart,
and works by love toward God, and man.

The places of scripture are these, Romans 10. 9. Ioh. 1. 12. and 3. 36. Ioh. 17.
3. Act. 2. 36. and 8. 37. and 9. 20. and 11. 26. and 16. 31. 33. and 19. 4. ^.
and ^8. 28. Luke 24. 47. 1 Cor. 15. 3. and 3. 11. Godly reader view the places
one by one, and see if any one of them speak of a verbal faith, only begot in
the mouth, or of such a profession of faith, as has joined with it a profane
conversation; the contrary will appear as clear as the sun, and in it, how
evil a conscience this man uses thus to pervert the scriptures to the
maintenance of a vile opinion, and profane practice.

Your 4. Reason to prove that the profession of the mayn truth before laid down
is of force to make a true Christian, is, that by Mr B.
it the man so professing does differ from Jews, Turks, Pagans, and Papists.

He does in deed, for he is so much worse then they, by his verbal Answ.
profession of the truth, taking Gods name in vayn, and dishonouring it far
more then the other. 1 Timothy 5. 8. Isa. 52. 5. Romans 2. 24. And what matter is it
from whom he differs, that differs not from, but is one of the men of the
world, a lim of Satan, and an habitation of his spirit?

Lastly, ^^ fire it may be considered, whether you be not a partial, and (...)
judge* betwixt the Papists, and your selves. They for shutting ^^ their works,
at a third or fourth hand, with faith in the (...)f salvation, must be judged
^^^se matter, and their error against the (...) of faith in the Son of God,
and destroying it, and against he truth of the gospel, because it is against
the sacrifice of Christ's Preisthood: and yet you, though you yoke Antichrist
with Christ, and the Popes Canons with Christ's Testament, in the spiritual
government of the souls, and bodies of his people, and so sin against the
scepter of his kingdom, must be reputed true matter; your error no way
against the nature of faith, or truth of the gospel; as though true faith did
not as well apprehend Christ a King, as a Prophet, in the cause of salvation,
though not in the act of justification: and as though the order which Christ
has left, in the Evangelists, Acts, and Epistles to Timothy, and Titus, for
the gathering, and government of his Church, were not as well a part of the
gospel, and so the object of faith as any other portion of it. Yea to conclude,
I tell you Mr B. and not I but the holy Ghost (and I pray you consider it well)
that a lewd co^versation and evil conscience is as damnable a sin* and as
directly against the nature of faith in the son of God, and the truth of the
gospel, and does as plainly destroy faith, and prejudice salvation, as any
either Popish, or other haeresy in the world. Luke 24. 47. 1 Cor. 5. 11. Gal.
5. 19. 20. 21. Ephe. 5. 5. 6. 1 Timothy 1. 19. and 5. 8. 1 Ioh. 1. 6. But grant
(as you would have it) that profession in word with an apparent denial of the
same in deed, made a true Christian, or true matter of the Church, and that the
Apostles built the Lords house of such stones, (which for me to grant were
both solly, and impiety, as it is in you to affirm it) yet would it no way
advantage you, nor justify your Church. For the profession, by which the
Apostles, and Apostolic Churches received members, was voluntary, and
personal, freely made by the particular persons which joined themselves unto
the Lord, as the scriptures by you quoted prove, as every one that reads
them, may see: but where was or is any such personal, and particular
profession used or required of any men, or women, in the replanting of your
Church after Popery? A man may go out of these countries where I now live, as
many do, and hyre a house in any parrish of the land; ^e is by the right of his
house, or f^rm, a member of the pa^rish Church, where he dwells, yea though he
have been nousled up all his life long in Popery, or Atheism, and though he
were formerly neither of any Church, or religion. Yea though he should profess
that he did not look to be saved by Christ only, and alone, but by his good
meanings, and well doings: yet if he will come, and hear divine service he is
matter, true as steel for your Church: yea be he of the Kings natural
subjects, he shall, by order of law, be made true matter of the Church,
whether he will or no.

And what profession of faith in this very case of salvation, the body of your
Church makes, or would make, if men freely spoke their thoughts, a Minister of
good note amongst your selves shall testify out of his own experience. The
person is Page 218.
Mr Nichols, who in his Plea of the innocent, expressly affirms, that conferring
with the particular persons in his parish, (after he had preached some good
space amongst them) about the means of salvation, of 400 co^municants he
scarce found one, but that thought, and professed, a man might be saved by his
own w^ll doing, and tha^ he trusted he did so love, that by Gods grace he
should obteyn everlasting l^se, by serving God, and good prayers. Now how do
these agree together? Mr B: says that all profess salvation by Christ only,
and alone: Mr Nichols on the contrary affirms out of his own experience, that
not one of 400 so thinks, and professes. And if he, and all the ministers in
England should deny it, we out selves by our own experience know what the
faith, and persuasion of the multitude in most places is.

Now for your further reasoning, that because a Bishop, or two, published this,
and some other mayn truths unto the world, with the approbation of the
Parliament, and Convocation house, and that some preachers here, and there do
so teach, therefore all the land so professes, (where many thowsands do not so
much as understand it) what can be imagined more vayn? Can men profess the
truth they know no^? What is this, but the Papists implicit faith, when men
beleiv, as the Church beleiveth, though they know not what it is? yea and worse
then it also, for as we see, and know infinite multitudes believe, and upon
occasion profess the contrary. But most vayn of all is it to affirm, that
because a few godly martyrs have sealed up this, and the like truths with
their blood, that therefore they that murdered them, profess the same truth,
and are true Christians without any other change wrought in them for the most
part, then by the Magistrates sword, and authority. You affirm by way of answer
page 249. of your second book, that the Magistrates compulsion unto goodness is
no hurt unto it, neither makes men unholy, or less good, if they have goodness
in them. As it is not simply true you affirm, that the compulsion of men to the
faith, does not hurt it; for if the causing the truth to be blasphemed be to
hurt it, then the co^pelling of apparent wicked persons to profess the same,
hurts it, as it does both them, and the Church whereof they are; so if the body
of the land in the beginning of the Queens reign, were good, and holy at all,
the magistrates compulsion wrought it in men, and made them of persequuting
Idolaters, true Christians: for other mean^^ intervening, or coming betwixt
their profession of the mass, and of the gospel, had they none, saving the
Magistrates authority.

But here I am by necessity, and in respect of the present matter in hand,
drawn into Mr B. 2. book: and a great benefit were it to me, if there I might
find him, (though in both unfound) yet one, and the same. But a great trouble
it is to walk with a drunken man, and to be bound to follow him in all his
vaga^ies: so is it to deal with an adversary light headed, and dizzy with
wrath, vanity, and error, whom a man must follow in all his staggerings, and
reelings to, and fro, and in all the forwards, and backwards that he makes, often
times going, and vngoing again the same bypathes. There is no one thing
whereupon Mr B: labors more in his former book, and for which he brings more
reasons, and scriptures, and those often repeated, then to prove the Church of
England, or rather such particular Churches, as have the word preached in them,
to be truly gathered after the suppressing of Popery, and by the order of the
Apostolic Churches: both in respect of separation from Idolatours, and
Antichristian Papists, page 108* as also by profession of the mayn truth, and
sum of the Gospel, wherein they differed from Jews, Turks, and Pagans, as no
matter; and also from Papists as false matter of the Church. page 111. 112. 113.
116. And therefore having proved by a multitude of scriptures that the
Apostolic Churches were gathered by free profession of faith, he concludes
thus of them, and of his own Church, page 113.
such as make this profession, are true matter, and so are we: for we all
profess this faith etc. But now, as though he had either forgotten what he
wrote before, or cared not how he crossed himself, so he might oppose us,
against whom he has vowed such utter emnity* he suckes in his former breath,
and eats the words he had formerly uttered, peremptorily affirming in his page
146. ^4^. 246.
2. book, that in the reformation of a Church after Popery, there is not
required any such profession, nor yet the word of God to go before their
reformation, but that the fear of the Magistrates sword is sufficient to
recover them, and to setle the people in order to the worship of God. The
ground upon which he builds this his new, and cross opinion, is, the practice
of Asa, Ezechias, Josias and Nehemiah, godly Kings, and Princes of Judah, in
the reformation of that Church, after her Apostasy, in the days of ungodly,
and Idolatrous Kings: and thereupon, taking it for granted, that the
catholic visible Ch: of Rome (as it is called) now is, and that the national
Church of England in Queen Mary's days and before, when Popery reigned, was,
in the same estate with Judah in her apostasy, he concludes thence, that as the
Magistrates then without any voluntary profession, did by force, bring the
people of the Jews back from Idolatry to the true service of God, so might
King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth by force, bring back the people of England
into covenant with God, to be his true Church, without any such profession of
faith, as in the first planting of Churches, is required. We will then consider
of this point at large, as being both weighty in it self, and having many
others depending upon it.

That Judah was at the first, and so continued (by virtue of the Lords Covenant
with her forefathers, on his part faithfully remembered, and kept, though by her
often times broken) the true Church of God, and Romans 11. 16. 20.
holy in the root, till she was broken of for unbelief, after the death,
resurrection, and ascension of Christ, fully published, and confirmed by the
Apostles, I grant with him: but the same or the like things, of the Church of
Rome or of England in the respects laid down, may I not acknowledge. That there
was at Rome a true Church Romans 1. ^ 7.
beloved of God, called saints by giving obedience unto the faith, is apparent:
but that either the city, or Church of Rome, consisting of many cities, and
countries, was ever within the Lords covenant, and holy in the root, as Judah
was, may I neither acknowledge, neither can he possibly prove. So for England, I
will not deny, but there were at the first true Churches planted in it, by the
preaching of the gospel, and obedience of faith; and these as the other
Churches in every nation, though Ioh. 15. 19. and 17. 14. 15. 16.
in the world, yet not of it, but chosen out of it, and hated by it: Act. 10.
35.
men fearing God, and working righteousness, and so being accepted of God, in
what nation soever: chapter 20. ^8
purchased with the blood of Christ, and so made his flock: 1 Cor. 1. 2
saints by calling, and sanctified in Christ Jesus, and calling upon the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ in every place: such were Act. 9. 31
the Churches in Iud^a, Galily, and Samaria; Gal. 1. ^. ^1.
the Churches in Galatia; Rev. 1. ^.
the 7 Churches in Asia: and of such people, gathered into so many distinct
assemblyes, each entyre in her self having peculiar Act. 14. 23. and 20. 17. 28.
Job. 1. 1.
Bishops or Elders set over her* for her feeding, by doctrine, and government,
did those particular Churches consist: they thus separated from the rest both
Jews, and Gentiles in every nation, whether more, or less, were that chosen
generation, that royal Preisthood, that holy nation, and purchased people of
the Lord. But 1 Th. ^. 12. Tit. 1. ^.
that ever the whole nation, and all the Kings natural subjects in it, should
have been within the covenant of the Lord, and entitled by the word of the
Lord, to the seals of the covenant, and all the other holy things depending
upon it, is a popular, and popish fantasy, as ever came into man's brayn:
requyring a newfound land of Canaan, for a seat of this national Church,
wherein no uncircumcised person may dwell; and a new old testament, for the
policy, and government of the same. And lastly it makes all one, them that
Christ has chosen out of the world, and the world; them that fear God, and
work righteousness, and whom he accepts in every nation, and the nation it
self: the beloved of God at Rome, and the sanctified in Christ Jesus at
Corinth, with the City of Rome, and of Corinth: then which what confusion can
be greater?

But to admit that for truth, which you so take, namely that Rome in the sense,
wherein we speak sometimes was the true Church of God, as Judah: and more
specially, that the English nation was, as the nation of the Jews, and all,
and every person in it* high, and low, received into covenant with the Lord, to
be his people, and that he might be their God: yet can it not be said of Rome,
that she still remayns the true Church of God, as Judah did in her defection:
but on the contrary, as she brake her covenant with God, advancing by degrees ^
Th. 2. 3 4.
that man of syn, the son of perdition, and adversary, Antichrist, till he
was exalted into the throne of Christ: and that v. 7.
mystery of godlynes, in, and according to which, that Church was planted at
the first, degenerated into the mystery of iniquity: so did ^ Tim. 3. 16.
the Lord, for her adulteryes (wherein she was incorrigible) when they were
come to the height, break the covenant on his part and gave her, as an harlot,
a bill of divorce and put her away, and her daughter Engl. with her amongst the
rest.

Now for the more full clearing of this truth, I will in the first place answer
such reasons as Mr B. brings against it: and that done, lay down certain
arguments to disprove his Popish plea for that Romish Synagogue.

Only in the mean while I wish him to consider, that, if Mr ^m. deserve so
severe a censure, as he lays upon him, page 281. of this book, for some
favorable affirmations touching some things, ^^ persons in Rome, he himself
is much more blame worthy, that both professes and pleads her the true
Church of Christ, and in the covenant of grace, and salvation: then which what
greater and more notable plea can be made for her? Nay if it be probable, that
he, which pleads for Rome, as Mr Smith does, will in time* become ^n love with
it, and sit down a blind Papist, it is necessary, that he which thinks it a
true Church, return unto it, from which he has wickedly schismed, as all men
do that separate from the true Church of Christ, for any corruptions
whatsoever. Here I do also entreat the prudent Reader to bear it in mind that
the constitution of England cannot be justified, nor she proved to be rightly
gathered, but with the defense of Rome, yea of Rev. 1^. 2 4.
that great, and purpled whore to be the true spouse of the Lord Jesus.

The Reasons by which Mr B. would prove Rome a true Church, are by him reckoned
five in number; we will consider of them in order.

The first is taken from the first planting of that Church in S. Paul's I.
time, by virtue of which former calling, and constitution (says he) Rome Mr B.
still remaynes the Lords people, as Israel did in the wilderness,
notwithstanding her idolatry.

I do answer first, that Rome (as we now consider of it) was never Answ.
the Lords called nor under his covenant, though a Church, or assembly in that
city (or it may be more then one) of saints, were, and secondly, that though
she were, yet is the covenant broken through her fornications, and impenitency
in them, both on her part, and the Lords visibly, and she devorced long a go,
and her daughters in, and with her.

His second Reason is grounded upon 2 Th. 2. 4. because Antichrist, II.
that is, (says he) that head with his body sits, in the temple of God:
which (he further tells us) must be understood visibly in respect of the truths
Mr B.
of God in doctrine, and ordinances of Christ held there, of which Gods people
among them partake in his mercy, to their salvation, and others from time, to
time, have mayntayned openly to the preservation of some fundamental points of
the Apostolical constitution. Whereupon he also concludes, that since the
temple of God (typing out the Church) wherein he sits, has a true
constitution, Rome and that in respect of the time present, has a true
constitution, and is a true Church. He might also have added, and ever shall be
a true Church, for Antichrist ever shall sit there til Christ's second coming.
v. 8.

Many men have written much about the notes and marks of the Answ.
true Church, by which it is differenced, and discerned from all other
assemblyes: and many others have sought for it, as Joseph and Mary did for
Christ, with heavy hearts Luke 2. 48. that they might there rest under the
shadow of the wings of the Almighty, enjoying the promises of his presence, and
power. But what needs all this a do? Mr B* points us out with the finger a
mark of the true Church, most evident, and conspicuous, and like a beacon upon
an high hill, and that is, the exaltation of Antichrist. I had thought the
Churches, and Ex. 25. 8 2 Cor. 6. 16
people of God should have been known by his dwelling among them, and walking
there, and by Christ's presence Math. 11. 20.
in the midst of them: but I now perceive Antichrists power, presence, and
exaltation is a sure sign, by which the Churches of Christ must be discerned.
If any therefore desire to plant his feet in the courts of the Lords house and
there to abide for ever, let him be sure to choose such a Rev. 1. 13.
Church to ioyn to, as wherein Antichrist sits; and so espeia^lly the Church
of Rome, because he sits surest there? And it is very like this is one reason,
why Mr B. is so much persuaded of the Church of England, as of a true Church,
because he thinks Antichrist sitts there in a measure: and it is not
impossible, but this may have been some part of the cause, why in former times
he was so loath to leav that Church, and to ioyn to us, (when he thought we had
the truth) because he perceived we wanted that prerogative of Antichrists seat,
which England enioyes. But though this show the absurdity of the opinion, yet
does it not answer the objections. I do then answer the same in effect, which
Mr B. makes his fourth Argument: namely, that, Popery, or Antichristianism
begun not out of Christianity but in the Church of God: where it did also by
steps advance it self into the very throne of God, and of Christ: and there
did in time, and by degrees so universally corrupt, and confound both persons
and things, as that God could no longer be said to dwell there, by his visible
presence, and promises, but Antichrist in his stead: having destroyed the
temple of the Lord, the Church, and carried captive his people, with the holy
vessels into Babylon spiritual: as did the civil Babylonia^s the material
temple, carrying captive with them into Babylon civil, the holy vessels, and
other appurtenances thereof, together, with a remnant of the Lords people, of
which more hereafter. Only I do in the mean while except against two
particulars in this second Argument. The former is, that Antichrist sitting in
the temple of God (viz so remaining) is that head, with his body. 2 Th. 2.
Antichrist was not in the Apostles time, nor in a long time after, a perfect
man, consisting of the head the Pope, and the body, the Hierarchy
ecclesiastical, but was in the seed only, or as an embrie in the womb, not
perfectly framed, much less visibly brought forth, least of all grown to that
height, as to iustle with Christ for his throne, yea to dispossess him of it,
as now he does, and has done a long season. Secondly it is not truly
affirmed, that because there are some fundamental truths of God in doctrine,
and truths in ordinances of Christ (as you Mr B. speak) held there, that
therefore Rome is the true Church. How should Antichrist and the Divil in him,
so effectually deceive with the delusion of vanity, and error, if he did not
countenance the same with some truths? And do you not think it possible Mr B.
that any malignant, and fal^e Churches, should vsurp some truths and
ordinances of Christ which apperteyn not unto them? If your argument be good,
the Greek Churches, the Arians, Anabaptists, Vbiquitaries, yea and all the
assemblyes of haeretiques and schismatiques in the world, are true Churches of
Christ; for they all reteyn many mayn truths, and ordinances of Christ. III.


The third Argument is, that as the children, or infants of the ten Mr B.
tribes in Ieroboa^s Apostasy were called the children of God, by circumcision
the visible seal of Gods covenant, so may the little ones in the Romish Church
be called Christ's, for that they have received true baptism. And so that Rome
has a true constitution by true baptism in the children, who are Christ's
thereby, as the children of the Israelites were the Lords by circumcision, til
by education they be made Antichristian, and by that offered up to Antichrist,
as the Israelitish children became Molechs, by their fathers offering them to
him. Answ.


You do here Mr B. in the first place alter the state of the question in both
the terms. The question is, whether the Church of Rome be the true vsible
Church of Christ, or no. You for the Romish Church, put the l^tle ones in the
Romish Church: and in stead of their being the visible Church, you tell us, they
may be called Christ's. Whereas 1. those little ones, or infants, are not the
Church, but the least part of it: and secondly, they are not necessarily either
the true visible Church, or of it, because they are Christ's, (^^ so they were)
in a respect: for God has his in Rev. 18. 4*
Babylon, which are visible Citizens, of that visible City of fornication,
(though the Lords, in respect of election, and the beginnings of personal
sanctification) whom he therefore calls out of the co^m(...)* of it, and the
abo^^ ^ations therein, under a severe penalty. Secondly, wh^^ you say, (...)
the children in the Romish Church have a true (...) by (...) are Christ's, till
by education they be made Ant(...), ^^d by it (...) up to Antichrist, you seem
to make the Church of Rome to be, or to comprehend in it, two distinct, yea two
(...) visible Churches: a Christian Church of infants, before they be capable
of education: and an Antichristian Church of those that are of rip^ years. And
yet further where you say, that i^ (for so your words are) has a t^^e
constitu^s ^^ by true baptism in their children, there it seems, you will have
the parents to have one constitution, that is to be one Church, with their
children, and that true, by their true baptism: and to the parents, which by
their education, are Antichristian: must by the baptism of their children be
made christian: and yet the children, by their parents, when they are capable
of their education, be made antichristian and offered up to Antichrist. The
scriptures every where teach, that parents by their faith, bring their children
into the ^en. 1^. ^. Act. 1. 39.
covenant of the Church, and entitle them to the promises: but that children by
their circumcision, or baptism, should constitute their parents in the Church,
read ^ not, but in this m^ns scripture. Yo^ most manifest it is every where,
that wicked parents by their (...)lity, or other sins, depriving themselves of
the Lords presence, and covenant, have enwrapped their children ^^th (...) and
visibly: Deuteronomy. ^9. 29.
secret things ever reserved unto God. So Genesis 4. 16 ^^d ^. 2.
C(...) the presence of the Lord carried his posterity with him: so ^i^ Ismaell,
and I^sa^ theirs, the Ismaelites, and Edo^^es. And ^^th Lord dis^laym Hos. 2.
2. 5.
the mother for a harlot, not reputing her his wife, he accounts the children
no better then bastards, on whom he will have no pity. And if the children of
the Jews be not Romans 11* 17.
broken of with their parents, for their unbelief, they are successively within
the covenant, and of the true Church every one of them to this day. Neither
does this at all cross that which else where you object out of the Prophet,
that Ezekiel. 19 20.
the soul that sins shall die, and that the son shall not bear the iniquity
of the father, etc. For first the Prophet there speaks of such a son as
forsakes his fathers evil, and practices the contrary: Otherwise the Lord
threatens, that he Ex. 20. 5
will visit the sins of the fathers upon the children: yet not so; as the
children are without fault, for infants newborn by Adams transgression, and
their natural, and original corruption, are Ephe. 2. 3 Ps. 51. 5.
children of wrath, and liable to all Gods curses; but the Lord takes occasion
by the sins of the parents to execute his justice upon the children, in whose
punishments he also punishes the parents themselves after a sort.

The next thing I observe in this argument is, that you affirm the children of
the Apostate Israelites to be the children of God by circumcision, and infants
now to be Christ's by baptism, which you say also constitutes the Church:
against which Popish, and anabaptistical, error, I do justly except. Popish I
call it, for that the papists imagine that by baptism their children are made
Christian souls, and in sign of that, they have the font ever standing at the
Church door: so do the Anabaptists make baptism the form of the Church, which
you call the constitution, as indeed the form of a thing constituteth it, and
gives being unto it. Whereof if I my self were persuaded, I could not defend
the baptism received either in Rome, or England, but I must withal justify
both the one, and the other for the true Church of Christ. But against this
unsound opinion both theirs, and yours, I will lay down certain arguments
plainly proving the contrary.

And first, it is the covenant of God, which makes the Church as you your self
both affirm, and prove, page 277. of your 2* book, of page 132.
which covenant you also grant in this place baptism to be the visible seal,
as was also Romans 4. 11.
circumcision in those times; and therefore it is not the covenant it self,
but is after it in the order both of nature, and time.

Secondly, the Lord had his Church before either circumcision or baptism were
appointed, which is also one, and the same in essence from the beginning to the
end of the world; which it couldnot be, if either circumcision, or baptism,
were parts constitutive, or essential of it.

Thirdly, Genesis 17 7
the Lord made his covenant (and so admitted them into the Church) w^^h
Abraham, and his seed, to be his and their God, in their ages and generations:
so that he children of Abraham, and of the Jews, were not without the Lord
covenant, and him to be their God, til the time of their circumcision, which
was the eighth day; but were born, yea begot in the covenant, and an holy seed:
and therefore the manchilde, not circumcised the eight day, is said to have
broken the Lords covenant, whereof circumcision was asigne. To v. 11. 14.
this also add, that the Lord did admit into (...) with himself (accepting them
to be his people) all, and every one of (...) Israelites in the Deuteronomy. 29. 10.
11. 12. 13. etc.
wilderness, where notwithstanding all of them in comparison, were
uncircumcised. Ios. 5. 2. 3. 4. 5.

Fourthly if baptism were the constitution of the Church, as Mr B. speaks, then
were all heretics, and schismatiques baptized with water, into the name of
the Father, Son, and H. Ghost, true christians, and their assemblyes, true
Churches of Christ: so had the ^ S^^ce^^tes been a true Church by circumcision,
and so * Genesis 34. 24.
of the Is^^^elites or Agarians, which have retained circumcision to this day:
the same may be said of the E^^^ites, and Edomites, which were notwithstanding
as far from being true Churches, as Mr B. is from the truth of God, in writing,
a^ he does.

A fourth consideration is to be had of an affirmation by you peremptorily and
absolutely made, (as though it were without all contradiction, or limitation)
in the third argument: and that is, that the baptism in the Romish Church is
true baptism. Touching which I do commend unto the godly reader this
distinction. Baptism is to be considred of us in a twofold respect: first
nakedly, and ^^ the essential causes; the matter, water; and the form, the
washing with water into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the H.
Ghost, and in this respect, I confess true baptism both in England and Rome.
Secondly, it is to be considered of us, (...), as they speak, and clothed with
such appurtenances, as wherewith the Lord has appointed it to be administered:
as for example, a lawful person by whom, a right subject upon which, a true
communion wherein, it is to be ministered, and dispensed; in which regards,
neither I can approve it, nor Mr B. manifest it to be true, either in Rome, or
England. When 2 King. 25. 9. 15. Ier. 52. 13. 18.
the house of the Lord at Jerusalem was destroyed by the C^aldees, and the
vessels thereof, together with the people, carried into Babylon, they remained
still, both in nature, and right, the vessels of the Lords house: though in
respect of their use, or rather abuse* they became Dan. 5. 2. 3.
Belshazzars, qua^fing bowls. So is it in the destruction of the spiritual
house of the Lord, the Church, by the spiritual Babylonians, and in the
usurpation, and abuse of the holy vessels, and in special of this holy vessel
of baptism.

Yet is there in this point a further consideration to be had of us, unto which
both the scriptures, and our own experience do lead us: namely that, as the
Lord has his people in Babylon, his, I mean, both in respect of election, and
of personal sanctification: so has he for their sakes there preserved
(notwithstanding all the apostasy, and confusion, which is found in it) sundry
his holy truths, and ordinances, amongst which baptism is one. But as this his
people, being commingled with the Babylonians in one visible communion, cannot
be called the true visible Church of God; so neither can these ordinances, in
the administration of them, be called the true visible ordinances of Christ,
and of his Church: but as the Lords Rev. 18. 4.
people are commanded to go out of her, and to 2 Cor. 6. 17.
separate themselves, and so to build the Lords house a new in Jerusalem, or
rather themselves, into a new 1 Pet. 2. 5. 2 Cor. 6 16.
spiritual house for him to dwell in; so are they to bring with them out of
Babylon these ordinances, and in particular this ordinance of baptism, and to
enjoy the same (being sanctified) in the right use, and order. All which was
livelily shadowed out in the material temple, and ordinances as appears Ezra
1. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. and 5. 13. 14. 15. And this also may serve for answer to
that you bring in your second reason for the justification of Rome in respect
of the truths of doctrine, and ordinances there.

In your fourth argument there is little but the answer (of which Mr. B.
I formerly spoke) unto the second; to wit that antichristianism begun in
Christianity, which is true, as sowernes begins in wine, til by degrees Answ.
it turn it into vinegar: and as other haeresies begun in the Eastern Churches,
which have notwithstanding long since eaten out the hearts of them, that they
cannot, nor could not of long time be called the true Churches of Christ. True
also is it, which you say that antichristianism does not wholly disanul
christianity: for if it did, it were not possible it should deceive so
effectually as it does. How should the Divil be believed in so many lies, if he
should not in some things speak the truth? But where you further add, that
Popery is nothing, but idolatrous, and he^itic^l corruptions upon the
profession of Christian faith, covering it with the same, as Jobs body was with
sores, and in the more large application of that Simile, page 245. do affirm
that as he, though covered over with botches, and sores, so a^ he could scarce
be known by his friends, was Job still under the sores, and the very same
essentially, that he was before, so ^s the Church, and christianity in Popery,
though covered with the antichristian corruptions, which Satan has brought
over them, in so saying, you are like your self, only constant in
inconstancy, and error. And tell me I pray you Mr B. is the Popes universal
supremacy, and headship over all Churches, by which also he claymeth power of
both the swords, only a s^ab upon the skin of the true ministry, which Christ
has left in the Church, without preiudicing the essence or nature of it? Is
the sacrifice of the mass only, a soar brought upon the Lords supper, under
which notwithstanding it lies the very same in nature, and substance, which was
by Christ ordained? Is prayer unto saints only a corruption come upon true
prayer, but no more against the life of it, then Jobs ulcers were against his
life, or does it not destroy the very soul, and life of prayer? Is adoration
of saints, service in an unknown tongue, with all other the abominations in
the masse-book, but as a scurf come over that true worship of God wherewith he
will be worshipped? John. 4. 23. 24. under which the very same true worship lies
(as Job did under his soars) which God has commanded, and that without any
more danger of loss of life, then Job was in by his outsyde skabs? Lastly, is
the opinion of justification by works, only a botch, and byle upon true faith,
but not against the nature of it* nor destroying the essence of it? Your error
is sufficiently convinced in the recital and opening of it, in these
particulars: your inconstancy, and contradiction is most notorious in the last
of them, compared with that you write, page 113. of your former book; namely,
that the joining of works in the cause of salvation, which the Papists do, is
against the true nature of faith in the son of God, and destroys it. V.


That which you call your fifth reason has no countenance of Mr B.
a reason in it, but is merely a conclusion inferred by you upon your 4 former
reasons, to prove Rome, in respect of the time pr^^ent, a true Church: and the
sum of it is* that the Churches now coming out of Babylon, do not require any
n^w plantation, but only a reformation, as did Judith in the time of
Hezechiah, after the apostasy of Idolatrous Ahaz, and of the people w^^h him.
But since the reasons wherewith you would underprop this your inference, are
taken away, it must needs ^^ll to the ground. Neither will your Babel stand any
whit the stronglyer for the Ezekiel. 13 10.
daubing you make with this, and the like untempered mortar, that it has not
made a nullity of religion: that it has not lost the Apostolical constitution
totally: that it holds truths sufficient to judge men christian by, the
corruptions being taken away.

For first, what matters it, though Rome have not made a nullity, if it have
made a falsity of religion, by most gross untruths, haeresyes, and
Idolatryes, making void the commandments of God by men's traditions: and
teaching for doctrines, men's precepts? And secondly what though the
co^stitutio^ be not totally lost? If an house, or material building be not
totally demolished, but there still remayn some few posts, or studdes not yet
pulled down, or some few stones of the foundation vndigged up, is it therefore
truly an house, and so to be called? Lastly does it follow, that, because
Papists might be judged true christians for the truths they hold, their
corruptions being taken away, they are therefore such with their corruptions:
so the vilest haeretique, Idolater, or other miscreant in the world, take away
his haeresy, Idolatry, and mischief, may be judged a christian: yea the Divil
himself, take but away his corruptions, is a glorious Angel of light.

Having thus answered the reasons brought by Mr B. to prove Rome a true Church,
and the like, I will in the next place lay down such arguments from the
scriptures, as manifest the contrary, and those also taken out of his own
writings, for the further discovering of his unsound, and deceitful dealing
with men, in the Lords matters.

And first in his cathechism printed 1602. page 1^. he demands I.
this question. ^^ the Church of Rome a true Church of Christ? whereunto he
answers. No; but of Antichrist the Pope the chief teacher of the doctrine of
Divils. And in the same place to prove that religion a false religion, he
brings 7. general reasons very weighty, all, and every one of them, as he that
reads the place, shall find.

Secondly, in his seperatists s^hism, he makes as Jews, Turks, and II.
Pagans, no matter, so Papists false matter of the Church, and contrary to true
matter, in that they ioyn with Christ, their works in the cause of salvation.
page 111. 112. 113, 116.

Thirdly, he affirms in his last book page 277. that the covenant III.
betwixt God, and the people is the form of the Church; and proves, that this
covenanting mutually does give a being unto a people, to be Gods people Deuteronomy.
29. 12. 13. To this let that be added, which he wrytes page 281. of the same
book, namely that the Papists have not the same word, and fundamental points of
the covenant, with them in England. And in particular, that they make a
covenant with Angels, and Saints, and so hold not the person in the covenant:
that they make another word even men's traditions, the declaration of the
covenant, and so change the evidence: that they make more s^craments, and so
add counterfeyt seals, turning the Lords supper into a Popish sacrifice, and
so do tear off the Lords seal, and make it nothing worth: and page 280.
these three, namely the person, the writing, and the seals he makes the
foundamental poyn^s of the covenant, as wherein the foundation thereof does
stand. And who now sees not, how this man is first constrained to plead for
Rome as a true Church, to defend the Church of England, and afterward being
ashamed of that plea, to condemn it as a false Church, corrupt, and counterfyet
in the very foundation, and form, which gives the being, as he himself speaks.

Fourthly, he graunts in these his page 161.
plain endeavors, that Rome is IIII.
Babylon, and that the H. Ghost so calls it, and applies rightly the places
literally spoken of the type the heathe^ish Babylon; spiritually to the thing
signified, the Antichristian Babylon, the Romish Synagogue. And the same thing,
the wrytings of the godly learned, both at home, and abroad do confirm. No^
what can be more plain? Is it possible that Rome should be both Babylon, and
Jerusalem? both the Synagogue of Antichrist, and the Church of Christ? Can that
Catholic visible body, the Church of Rome, (as it is called) under that
visible head, Antichrist the Pope, be the true visible body of Christ, under
him the head? The Apostle writing unto the Galatians, calls the Church of the
new ^estame^t Chapter 4. 26
Jerusalem, which is above, and the mother of the ^aythfull: and John in the
book of chapter 14. 8* and 15. 2. with chapter 21. 2. 3.
the Revel^tion, opposes unto Babylon spiritual, the ^^w Jerusalem coming
down from God out of h^^ven: and the tabe^n^^le of God, where he dwells with
men, making them his people, and himself(...)heir God. Now as the people of God
in old time, were called out of I^r. 50 8. 9. 10. etc. and 51. 6. 7 8. 9. Is^y.
21 9.
Babylon civil, the place of their bodily bondage; and were to come E^ra. 1.
2. 3. 5. etc.
to Jerusalem, and there to build ^ new the Lords temple, or tabernacle,
leaving Babylon to that destruction, which the Lord by his servants, the
Prophets, had d^nounced against it: so are R^v. 14. 8. and 18. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
7. 8. and 1^ 2. 3.
the people of God, now to g^^e out of Babylon spiri^^^^, to Jerusalem, and to
build up themselves as lively stones into a s(...), or temple for the Lord to
d^vel in* leaving Babylon to that d^^truction and desolation (^ea furthering
the same) to which she is devoted by the Lord. B^^ if the people of God should
receive Mr B. doctrine, they were not to come out of Babylon, nor to endeavor
her destruction, but to tarry in her still, laboring for her reformation, and
the reparation of her decayed places: neither were they to build my new
spiritual temple, or to constitute any new Church from Rome present, (for of
such a new constitution we speak) but there to abyd^, reproving her
corruptions, and endeavoring the reformation of them. It is therefore untrue
which you ^^y Mr B. page 133.
that* the Romish Church must be dealt with only, as the Church of God was in
Iud^th: it must be dealt with as was Babylon, even abandoned and forsaken by
the Lords people, upon p^^ill of the curses, and plagues due unto it, and
denounced against it, and against all that abide in it.

To this which Mr B. in this place so greatly contends for, namely tha^ Rome is
the true Church of Christ though under corruptions, as Job was a true man under
his sores, let that be added which he writes else where in this book that page
265
corruptions are made matter of reproof, but no cause of separation from the
Church: and further that page 110. 111.
they that separate from a true Church, the body, cut of themselves from
Christ, the head: and to these two a third grant, and profession he makes, as
that their page 114.
profession, and laws in England separate a protestant, from a Papist: that
the Church of England is separated by profession* laws, and public m^etings
from Papists: that page 129.
the very societyes of Papists are to be left as no people of God, and his
writings will appear to all men like a beggars cloak patched together of old,
and new * page 142.
pieces, scraped up here and there, scarce two of the same either color, or
thread. Let me a little stich his patches together, and set them in some order.

They that separate from the true Church, cut of themselves from Christ. Mr B.
page 110. 111.

But the Church of England in separating from Rome, is separated from the true
Ch: Mr B. page 114. 129. 14^. with 131. 132. 133.

Therefore by Mr B. both grant and proof the Church of England is separated
from Christ.

And is this your piety, and thankfulness Mr B. toward your mother, for want of
which you cast so many bitter curses upon the separatists? you are so far
carried in honoring your grandmother Rome, as a true Church, that you clean
forgot your mother England, and condemn her for a schismatical Synagogue. Yea
well were it, or at the least more tolerable in you, if you thus dealt only
with your self, and your own, but this vile injury which you here offer,
extends it self far, and nere, even to Luther, Zuinglius, and the other godly
guides of separation, and to all the reformed Churches separated from the
Church of Rome, yea to the martyrs in King Henryes, and Queen Maryes days, and
to all other the like godly minded, through the whole world, whom you condemn
as wicked schismatiques and separated from Christ the head, in separating
themselves from his body, your true Church of Rome. VI.


Lastly the Apostle Paul writing to the Church of Rome in her first, and best
estate, praemonisheth her to stand fast in the faith received, least he, which
had Romans 11. ^7. 20. ^1.
not spared the natural branches, the Jewish Church, but broken them of for
vnbel^if, should not spare the wild branches. whereof she consisted. How then
Mr B. can you deny, that Rome is, and has been long, broken of, which so long
has ^^yned works in the cause of salvation, which you your self affirm to be
against the true nature of faith, in the ^o^^ of God, and that which destroys
^^?

And that all may take knowledge, how the Lord deals with his Churches under
the new testament, and may learn both to fear in themselves, and how to judge
of the present state of Rome, let it be observed, what Christ Jesus by his
servant John writes unto the Churches in Asia, especially Rev. ^. ^. v. 4.
to the Church of Ep^esu^: which he having blamed for leaving her first love,
exhorts to repentance and to the doing of her first works, threatening withal,
that otherwise he will come against her shortly, and remove her candlestick out
of the place, except v. 5.
she amend. The same thing in effect he denounces against v. 12. 16.
the Churches of Perga^us, and Thya^yra, and so against the rest, upon the like
occasions. And if the Lord dealt so severely with the v. 18. 2^. 2^.
Church of Ephesus, notwithstanding the many excellent things, which were found
in her, and so acknowledged by the Lord himself, v. 2. 3. as to remove her
candlestick. 1. to dis-church her, as chapter 1. 20. for leaving her first love,
and that speedily, except she repented, how can it be that the golden
candlestick should still stand in Rome, and she remayn the Church of Christ,
which so many hundred years since, has left not only her first love, but her
first faith also? changing her faith into haere^y, and Idolatry, and her love
into most bloody, and cruel persequutions against all that have endeavored her
repentance, and so has continued a long space, and does continue at this day.
None but professed Romanists will plead, any Charter for Rome above other
Churches. These things thus opened, and these two capital errors confuted, the
former Jewish, namely, that England now is, as Judah was: and that as then, all
the Jews in that nation, so now all the English men in the Kings dominions
should constitute a national Church: the latter Popish, viz. that the Romish
Church is the true visible body, or Church of Christ; it is evident, both that
the Evangelical Churches must be new planted, or constituted, by profession of
faith, as the temple, was new built, after the captivity of Babylon; as also
that not Iosiahs sword, that is the coactive laws of men, but Paul's word, even
the preaching or publishing of the gospel, is the proper means, which the Lord
has sanctified for that purpose, though, I doubt not, but there both has
been, and is, great use of the Magist^^^^^ authority for the furtherance of the
gospel that way.

When the Lord Jesus purposed to advance the scepter of his king ^^me, he sent
out his Apostles, not furnished with sword, and ^p^^^, no^ yet backed with
humayn laws, or authority, but with ch^^ge, and commission, to publish, and
declare his holy comm^^nd^ments, and the things which he had taught them, and
th^reby to (...) Disciples, or gayn subjects unto his kingdom* Math. 2^. 19.
2^. which they also practiced, admitting, and initia^ing m^n into ^^^ Church
upon their voluntary submission unto, and (...) of the ^ayth of Christ.

N^^ ^^ unto ^^^ be added a second consideration, namely, where, and, to ^^^ a
the Apostles were first to preach and to (...) the (...) commission received
from Christ, it will both g^ve ligh^ to the ^o^nt in hand and discover the
vanity of a distinct^^n in Mr B. ^ book, to which he trusts much, and
therefore ^^th o^t, ^^r the gathering, and establishing of Churches after the
P(...), by fy^^, and sword, without any further respect, then the magistrates
authority* the sum whereof, as also of that he infe^reth upon it, is, that to
page 14^. 14^. 16^.
a Church in the f^^^t (...), that i^, as ^^ e^pound^ himself, gathered of
in^i^els, and of such a people ^^ ^re no Church, (...), there is required
preaching, and (...) going before with the word, and profession of the name of
Christ: but for a people that are not infidels, but Christians (h^^ corrupt
soever) a^^ a Church, ^^ such preachi^^ on the one side, n^^ (...) of ^^yth, on
the other, is r^q^ired: (...) compel with the fear of the sw^^^, the
Magistrate, authority is sufficient in such a case* Let the Reader behold this
bold man's gross ignorance, and contradi^tions, and if he will not open his eyes
to see them* he may feel them with his hand, so palpable are they. I will lay
them down in these particulars. ^^^st he affirms, page 176* that, the Lord
ta^^s a people to be (...) and that comm^^^dements, are for his people to ^^^^
^^^m, and not to make them (...) ma^s comma^ndeme^t mak^s not a servent, but
decl^^es such a one to be ^is ^^^vant already: and so he gives God not more
power to command the wicked, and unbelievers, then a man has to command
another man's servant: and yet here he tells us, that before a people can become
a Church, Paul must go with the word: and expressly, page 277. that the Lord,
to make m^n his people, gives t^em his word, and quo^es, Math. 28. 19. to prove
it. Secondly by this his distinction, and his inferences upon it, he makes all
the Jews, to whom John Baptist, Christ, and the Apostles preached, and which
were baptized by them, or any of them, to have been Infidels before, and n^
Church, no Christian^. And ^^ he affirms directly, page 262. (though I suppose
he consider^t not) where, in answer to a proposition of Mr Aynsworthes, that
the Churches of Christ were established of saints only, and men visibly (...),
confirmed amongst other scriptures, by Math. 3. 6. he p^^emptorily avouches,
and so builds upon it, that that, p^oposition, and scripture, amongst the rest,
is to be understood of a people, A^^. 1. 39. and 3 25. 1 ^^^. 1^. ^. 4. Ephesians. 3.
6
which is no Church and no Christians: and so the Church of the Jews at that
time, must be no Church, and they no Christians with this man, (for of them
that scripture speaks) whatsoever Peter and Paul say to the contrary. Thirdly,
since the Apostles being sent by Christ to teach, and make Disciples, were to
begin their ministration amongst the Jews in I^d 24. 4^. A^^. 2. 1. 2. 5 6. --
14. ^^. (...) 3. ^. 14.
Jerusalem, Judea, and else where; (which is the consideration, I formerly
mentioned) and so by the publishing of the gospel of faith, on their part, and
by the profession of faith, and confession of sins on the peoples part, to
gather, and establish particular A^^. ^. ^^. Gal. 1. 21.
Churches: and that the Church of the Jews was at that time the Church of God,
in respect of which, the establishing of these particular Churches was no new
plantation, but a continuation of their former ingra^^ing in the same root,
wherein they formerly were planted, not differing from it essentially, but
being only reformed, perfited, and otherwise ordered then before: it appears
most untrue, which Mr B. affirm^th, that the preaching of the gospel is only
necessarily required for the planting of Churches of such people, as were
formerly infidels and no people of God. Fourthly, and lastly, even that which
he most freely graunts in one 146
page namely, that at the first, the word must be preached, and by that means
men brought to a voluntary (...) without compulsion, that he utterly reverses,
and denies in the very next 14. 7.
page where pleading the proclamation of Hezechiah, and compulsion of Josiah, he
annexeth to the same purpose as cunningly, as his wit will serve, an
insinuation, that Mordecai (for fear of whom, he says, many of the heathen
(for such the people were) became Jews) procured of the King proclamations,
and other statutes, for the compelling of his subjects to the Jewish religion:
wherein he both perver^s Est. ^. 4.
the words, as the reader may see, and the meaning also of the scripture* which
is, that the heathen observing the mighty and mervelous hand of God for his
people, and against his and their enemies, many of them became Jews, and Ezra.
6. 21.
separated themselves unto them, from the (...) of the heathen of the land, to
seek the Lord God of Israel: as also in alleging to the same purpose, Luke
14. 23. as he does in another place: borrowing (as it seems) the corrupt
exposition of that scripture from the Ministers whom ^e draws in with him, in
his page 1^5.
former book: of which more in due place.

But that I may not be carried too far in this my digression, I do first deny,
that the reformation by Queen Elizabeth (though great in it self and she for
it, of blessed memory) did in any measure equalize the reformation made by
Hezechiah, Josiah, and N^he^yah, in whom you most insist Mr Bernard. For
whereas all reformation respects either persons or things, that which was
wrought by these godly Kings, and governors, receives testimony from the H.
Ghost himself, to have been most full, and intyre, both ways. And to let
pass, for brevityes sake, the things themselves, with referring the reader to
these and the like 2 King. 1^. 3. 4. 5. 6 2 Chr. 29. 2. 3. 5. 19. 20. 21. etc.
and 30. 1. 2 etc. and 31. 1. etc.
scriptures, which handle that part, I will insist a little upon the persons,
about whom the question here is, between Mr B. and me, in whom the other part
of reformation is to be considered; which will better appear, if we compare
together officers with officers, and people ^ King. ^^. ^. and 23. 1. 2. 4. 5.
6. 7 8. -24. 25.
with people. And first it is evident in the scriptures, that those Kings, and
Princes of Judah, did not apoint any other Priests, either for the purging of
the temple, or for any other Preistly work, whither of reformation, or
administration, then the Levi^es, whom the Lord 2 Chr. 3^. ^. 3. 4. 5. ^ ^3.
had chosen to stand before him, to serve him, and to be his Mini^^ers, and to
^^^^ ^ncense, 2 Chr. 29. 4. 5. 11. And therefore when some that pretended they
were Levites, could not Ezra. ^ 61.
by searching* find the writing of their genealogy, they were put from the
Preisthood: and for the Priests of the high places which had gone astray after
Idols in the time of Apostasy, and served the^, and caused the people to fall
into iniquity, if they were not Levites, and called of God, but of Ieroboams
institution, they themselves were 2 King. 23. 20.
sacri^iced upon the altars, with which they had so provoked the Lord: and
though they were Levites, and the anointed of the Lord, and so had their lives
spared upon their repentance, yet were they deposed from their holy
ministration, and verse. 8. 9
came not near unto the Lord any more, ^er unto any of his holy things in the
most holy place, but Ezech. 4* 10. 13.
were to bear t^^^r shame, and their abhomm^tions, which they had wrought. But
what answerable unto this can be brought forth in the reformation of the
English Judah? wherein the Priests of as ill an institution, or worse, then
Ieroboams, even the institution of Antichrist, were continued in the most
solemn administrations: yea both those which had been ordained, and made in
Queen Maryes days, for their breaden God, and those which had fal^ back from
that profession of the truth they made in King Edwards days, and caused the
people to fall into iniquity: (which makes the mischief much the greater) both
they of the one kind and of the other, being for the most part, ignorant,
profane, and popishly affected: as though either the sacrifice of the mass
had been no Idol, or that the Lord had laid no shame, or other burden upon
such Idolatrous Apostates, and seducers.

Now for the people (entreating the reader to bear in mind what I have formerly
manifested, as that neither the whole English nation ever was the Lords true
visible Church, as the Jewish nation was, nor if it were at the first could so
remayn in the deep Apostasy of Antichrist) I do add, that no man can by the
word of God affirm the same things in any measure of the people of England in
the beginning either of King Edwards or Queen Elizabeth's reign, which the
scriptures d^ of the people of the Jews in the time of Hezechiah, Josiah,
Nehemiah, and other the like godly instruments of reformation.

First for Hezechiahs time, it appears that after 2 Chr. ^9 5. 12. ^1. ^*
the Levites ^ad sanctified themselves, and the house of the Lord, they offered
after al solemn manner* ^s^^n offering for the kingdom, and for the sanctuary,
and ^e^. 4.
for Judah: the King* and the congregation laying their hands upon the
sacrific^s, thereby confessing that they were guilty of death, and deriving
their guilt upon the goats in figure, but upon Christ in truth, (...)* 31* 35 36
whom they figured: and afterward when the congregation was to ^^^^g
sacrifices, and every one that was willing in heart, burnt offerings, it is said
the burnt offerings ^^re many, yea so many, as the Priests were not able to
s^^^ them all: and that all the people rejoiced, that God had made the people
(...). Add unto this that which is written chap. 30. v. 11. 12. that d^^^rs of
Ash^^. M^nasseth, and Z^bulun did submit themselves unto the counsel of
Hezechiah, and that willingly, (for he had no authority over them at all) and
came to Jerusalem, of whom the Lord also testifies that they (...).
prepared their whole heart to seek the Lord God, etc. and for Judah* that the
hand of God was with them, ^^ that he gave them one heart to do the commaundment
of the King, and of the rulers, according to the word of the Lord: and lastly
that the whole assembly kept the passover with joy, and that (...)
all the congregation both strangers, and those that dwelt in Judah rejoiced
with the Priests and Levites, who also blessing them, had their voice heard in
heaven, and their prayer in the Lords holy habitation. And for Iosiahs time, it
is written, that, ^ Chr 34* 30 31. 32
he, the Priests and all the people from the greatest to the s^^lest went up
into the house of the Lord, and that he read in their ears all the words of
the book of the covenant, and that he stood by his pillar, and made a covenant
before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his commaundments and his
testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart etc. and caused, or appointed
(for the word signifies no more) all that were found in Jerusalem and Benjamin
to stand unto it: and that the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the
covenant of God, the God of their fathers. Thirdly for the estate of the people
in Nehemiahs time, with whom also I ioyn Ezra in the work of reformation,
first, it appears, (...). 2^
that none were constrained to return to Jerusalem for the building of the
Lords house; but (...).
such amongst the people, as would, and with ^.
whom their God was* were by the proclamation of Cyrus to return: and secondly
that * Ezra and such as went with him did, before their jorney, humble
themselves by fasting before the Lord, for direction: and that, when they were
come to Jerusalem, there was much weeping and wayling by him for the sins of
the people (especially for that great trespass they had committed, in taking
strange wives of the people of the land) together with great manifestation, and
practice of repentance, by all the congregation: and afterward in the book of
(...) 2. 3. 4. 5. ^ 7. ^. 9. 1^. ^7.
Nehemiah, when all the people were assembled together in the ^^ry street, the
same Ezra, and the Levites with him, read, and expounded the law ^^ to them, to
the great humbling of all the people at the first, and afterward to the great
rejoicing of them all, when they understood the words, which were taught them:
and thus they practiced every day, even from the ^ 18.
first day unto the last, all the seven days, whylst the f^^st (...): and in
the last place, and for the shutting up of all, confessing their sin^s, chap.
^. 1 2 chapter 1^. 1. 2^ 29.
and the iniquities of their fathers, with fasting, sackcloath, and earth upon
them, they made a sure covenant, and w^^^^e it, sealed it, and swore unto it,
the Princes, Levites, Priests, and people all that were separated from the
people of the ^^^d* unto the law of God, their wives, sons, and daughters,
all that could understand, the cheaf for the rest, that they would walkin Gods
law which was given by Moses the servant of God, to observe and d^e all the
commandments of God, and his judgments, and statutes. Unto these former
scriptures I will annex one other of the same nature with them, and respecting
the case of reformation. It is recorded therefore of 2 Chr. 14 2. ^. 4.
Alia a godly King of Judah having in the beginning of his reign, abolished
idolatry, ^^ the monuments of it, and commanded Judah to se^k the Lord God of
their fathers, etc. that afterward upon the "chapter 1^. 8. 9. 12. 13. 1^
exhortation of the Prophets Azariah, and Obed, he not only went on with that
work, but * assembled together all Judah, and Benjamin and (...) which had
(...) out of Israel, when they saw the Lord his God was with him* and that they
made a covenant to seek the L. God of their fathers, with all their heart and
with all (...) and that whosoever would not seek the L. God of (...), whether
he were ^^^al or great, man or woman: and the same covenant with the Lord being
confirmed by an oath, it is said, that all Judah rejoiced at the (...) and the
reason is added, for they had sworn unto the Lord with ^^^ their (...), and
fought him with a whole desire, and he was found of them. The Lord* as he had
chosen this whole kingdom to be his people, and raised up this* and the like
notable instruments of reformation amongst them, so did he upon this and the
like occasions work a most wonderful, and extraordinary work upon them, bowing
their hearts universally to the love of his word, for the present, and to the
receiving of the same with joy, together with all readiness unto the obedience
of his commandments: the like unto which never was, nor shall be seen, to the
end of the world in a whole kingdom except the Lord do again choose one nation
from all other nations to be his people, as then he did. And I am verily
persuaded that Mr B. (how bold soever he be in his affirmations) will not say
the like of all England, either in the beginning, or end of King Edwards, or
Queen Elizabeth's reign, which the scriptures themselves here, and else where, do
testify, of all Judah: whither we respect the disposition of the people whose
hearts universally the Lord on his part did thus affect; or the solemn
covenant, which they on theirs, did contract, or rather renew with him. And
here I do further also infer, since all Judah rejoiced at the oath of the
covenant, and swore unto the Lord with all their heart, and sought him with a
whole desire: 2 Chr. 15. 13. and that the hand of God was in Judah, so that he
gave them one heart to do the commandment of the King, and of the rulars
according to the word of the Lord: Chapter 30. 12. and so at other times, that it
is most untruly affirmed by Mr B. how often soever he repeat it, that the
reformation of Judah was not voluntary, but of compulsion, and of fear. True it
is, that the Kings of Judah made compulsive laws for the reformation of the
people, or rather for their continuance in that reformation, to which they had
voluntarily submitted; but as Mr B. ignorance is intolerable in that his
seditious error, tending indeed to the disturbance and subversion of all
states civil, and ecclesiastical, that voluntarinesse is taken away by being
under any government: that Page 212.
to be subject, and ruled is an estate far from fredome: and that Christians
loose thereby christian liberty: so should he here have observed a difference
betwixt compulsion active, and passive, as they speak: or more plainly thus,
that it is one thing for Kings, or men in authority, to require of their
subjects the performance of necessary duties or the forbearance of the
contrary, upon such, and such penaltyes, and another thing for their subjects
to obey them herein, for fear, and involuntarily. Many of the Kings laws do
require loyalty of all his subjects toward his majesty, and do forbid upon
pain of death al treasons, and rebellions: now will any man hereupo^ be so
unadvised, as to affirm, that therefore all the Kings subjects do forbear
treasons and rebellions, through compulsion, and fear, and unwillingly? That
godly magistrates are by compulsion to repress public, and notable idolatry,
as also to provide that the truth of God in his ordinance, be taught, and
published in their dominions, I make no doubt; it may be also, it is not
unlawful for them by some penalty, or other, to provoke their subjects
universally unto hearing for their instruction, and conversion; yea to grant
they may inflict the same upon them, if after due teaching, they offer not
themselves unto the Church; but that any King now upon earth is by the word of
God, to draw all the people of his nation into covenant with the Lord, (how
much less before they be co^veniently taught) and to confirm the same by oath,
and to inflict death upon all that refuse it, or remayn wicked* and
unrepentant, as the Kings of Judah were to do by the people of that nation, can
never be proved by Mr B. or any other man, how often soever they bring in their
practices for presidents. And if the Kings of Engl. should hold it their duty,
as the Kings of Israel held it theirs, to Ps. 101. 8
destroy all the wicked of the land, and to 2 Chr. 15. 12. 13.
slay all that would not seek the Lord God of Israel with all their heart, and
with all their soul, whether great, or small, man or woman, and should
practice accordingly, they would be left barer of subjects, then I hope they
shall be. To these considerations let this be added, that when David the most
famous King of Israel had 2 Samuel 5. 1. 2. 3. 5.
subdued the nations round about him, and made them tributaries, and reigned
over them, he did not force them into the Church by compulsive laws, nor take
any such violent courses, that we read of. Neither can you shift of the matter,
Mr B. by alleging that these nations were heathens, and infidels, and such as
made no profession of religion, nor were circumcised: for amongst the rest over
whom David ruled, the vr 14.
Edomites are named, which were the posterity of holy Abraham, as well as the
Israelites, coming of Esau, as they of Iaakob: who did also (besides many mayn
truths) reteyn circumcision, and that true also, as well as the Papists reteyn
true baptism; and by which they might as truly be deemed the Lords people,
though in apostasy, as the Papists by the other.

To end this argument of violence in religion, to which it is very unnatural;
neither Hezechiah, nor Josiah, nor any other King, either of Judah or England
had, or has power from God to compel an apparent profane person (so
remaining) either to join unto, or continue in the Church, and the Church so to
receive, and continue him. The Kings of Judah as I have showed, were to
destroy, and put to death all such wicked ones, and so to weed them out of the
Church, by the sword, according to the dispensation of those times, to what end
then does Mr B. bring in them, and their authority, either for the planting, or
watering of such persons in the Church, for which purpose notwithstanding he
produces them. So for other Kings, though they be not to destroy all the
wicked in their land, or nation, as not being to gather a national Church, so
are they to use their authority for the preserving pure of the Church, and to
see that wicked and ^lagitious persons be neither taken into, nor kept in the
Ch: to the dishonor of God, and profanation of his ordinances. You speak much
of the reformation of your Church after Popery. There was indeed a great
reformation of things in your Church, but very little, of the Church, to speak
truly, and properly. The people, as I have said, are the Church: and to make a
reformed Church, there must be first a reformed people: and so there should
have been with you by the preaching of repentance from dead works, and faith in
Christ: that the people (as the Lord should have vouchsafed grace) being first
fitted for, and made capable of the sacraments, and other ordinances, might
afterward have communicated in the pure use of them: for want of which, in
stead of a pure use, there has been, and is at this day a most profane abuse
of them, to the great dishonor of Christ, and his gospel, and to the
hardening of thowsands in their impenitencie. Others also endeavoring yet a
further reformation, have sued, and do sue to Kings, and Queens, and
Parliaments, for the rooting out of the Prelacy, and with it, of such other
evil fruits as grow from that bitter root: and on the contrary to have the
Ministry, government, and discipline of Christ set over the Parishes, as they
stand: the first fruit of which reformation, (if it were obtained,) would be
the further profanation of the more of Gods ordinances upon such, as to whom
they apperteyned not, and so the further provocation of his great Majesty unto
anger, and indignation against all such, as so practiced, or consented
thereunto. Is it not strange that men in the reforming of a Church, should
almost, or altogether forget the Church which is the people, or that they
should labor to crown Christ a King over a people, whose Prophet he has not
first been? or to set him to rule by his law^s, and officers, over the
professed subjects of Antichrist, and the Devil? or is it possible that ever
they should submit to the discipline of Christ, which have not first been
prepared, in some measure, by his holy doctrine, and taught with meek^es to
stoop unto his yoke? Both you Mr B: and they of the other sort do tell us often of
the reformed Churches, and of your agreement with them. I wish to God from my
very heart, that both you, and they, would compare your selves with them, in
this principal point, unto which all other are but as accessaries. They after
the abolition of Popery, were established at the first, whether by a new
plantation (new we mean in respect of the present estate of Rome) or by
reformation only, as you will have it: and are still continued, and increased
by the free, voluntary, and personal profession of faith, and confession of
sins of such men, and women, as are by the word of God, and the publishing of
it, persuaded, and in some measure fore-fitted to join unto them, and walk with
them: and all this without any compulsion with the fear of Iosiahs sword, or
Hezechiahs proclamation, by page 246. 247.
which you confess your Church to have been, in the persons of King Edward and
Queen Elizabeth, brought back from Antichrist to the reformation wherein now you
stand: for which you peremptorily profess, there is not required any
profession of the name of Christ. Let it then be considered of, and judged by
all indifferent men, how it can possibly be that both the reformed Churches
abroad, and the unreformed Church of England, can be truly gathered, after the
apostasy of Antichrist: the former being separated from Popety into covenant
with the Lord, in the particular members, by voluntary profession of faith
without compulsion; and the latter by compulsion, without profession of faith.
Howsoever government, and freedom, or voluntarynes, be not contrary according
to your most ignorant affirmation; yet compulsion, and voluntarines are; and
contraries cannot stand together and be made true, no not by God himself. My
hope was that (the argument of compulsion once ended,) I might, with good
leave, have returned to the former book: but see, after so many provings, and
professings of Rome a true Church, and still in covenant with God, and that the
Churches now separating from her, were not to be gathered of such voluntaries,
as in the first plantation, nor needed the preaching of the word to go before
for their conversio^, but that the Magistrate might compel them by fear, and
that so the reformation of the Church of England was wrought, Mr B. now tells us
a clean contrary tale, and that their reformation was voluntary, and not
constreyned, and how that page 145.
came about.

First, (to let pass the succession of the Church he pleads from King
Etheldred, King of Kent, of which I have spoken so lately, as the reader may
bear mine answer in mind) that the Queens Majesty with many others, began a
voluntary reformation, and that the supreme power Mr. B.
(as he calls it) being gathered, made proclamation of her godly intent, which
was a kind of teaching to which the people yielded voluntarily, for any thing
that any man can say to the contrary: and page 245. adjoined themselves unto
them, and that the act of the chief doing it voluntarily, is to be accounted
the act of all, though the inferiors come not to consent, for proof of which
he quoteth three scriptures, Ex. 19. 3. 7. 8. Josh. 4. 2. 8. 2 Chr. 14. 2.

A solid proof; because the Queen did voluntarily embrace the Answ.
truth in a measure, therefore the whole body of the land, whom she urged by
proclamation, and other inforcements, did voluntarily profess, and embrace the
same. For touching the supreme power gathered, that is, the Counsel, and
Nobles, when she came to the crown they were such, as had imediately before
both enacted, and exequuted most bloody statutes against such as voluntarily
professed the truth, and where you, and the Ministers with you, page 187.
affirm that the body of the land did in Queen Elizabeth's time adioyn themselves
unto that company which had stood out in Queen Mary's days, it is clean
otherwise, for they that so stood out adjoined themselves to the rest in the
several Parishes, where their houses stood, and occasions lay, under the
formerly masse-preists, and then for the most part, ignorant and profane
priests, with their English reformed masse-book. In adding further, that the
Queens proclamation was a kind of teaching, you trifle notably: the quaestion
is of such a teaching, as was effectual to make a whole nation of
Antichristians the week before, true Christians, and a true Church. It was in
deed the only effectual means the people had generally: and if the Queen had
proclaimed the contrary the next week, it would have been as effectual to have
turned them to their former vomit again. Your presumption, that no man can say
to the contrary, but that the people yielded voluntarily to the truth, upon the
Queens proclamation is vayn, considering what the 2 Cor. 9. 13.
voluntary yeeling, or submission unto the Gospel of Christ is, which the
scriptures commend unto us, in the establishing of Churches. The gospel is a
supernatural thing, and cannot possibly be yielded unto voluntarily by a
natural man, or persuaded, but by a supernatural motive, which is only it
self: and that by the operation of the spirit also in some measure, it cannot
be understood, and believed but by it self published, and proclaimed (as the
sun is seen by it own light) much less can it be willed, and willingly yielded
unto: for the will must follow the understanding, neither can any man will that
he knows not. Besides, the many treasons* and great rebellions raised to
reestablish Popery in the la^d, the great good liking of the old law (as they
term it) which still is found in the multitude, and the apparent hatred and
persequution against the true profession of the gospel in any measure, (though
there be ten now for one in the beginning of the Queens reign that have
atteyned to some measure of knowledge and conscience of godlynes) do confirm
that which I say, viz: that the yielding unto the gospel in the multitude,
could not be voluntary. The three scriptures you bring to show, that the
agreement of the chief is accounted in the case of faith, and religion the act
of all, though the inferiors give not their consent, is by you egregiously
perverted; for they do all and every one of them plainly prove the peoples
consent. The first is Exodus 19. 3. 7. 8. where v: 3. the Lord signifies his will
unto Moses, and v: 7. Moses propounds the same things unto the Elders, and v:
8. all the people (viz having the same things by the Elders propounded to them,
as Iunius upon that place, (and so will any man of common sense) notes,
promise obedience to all the Lords commandments. The second place is Josh. 4.
2. 8. where it is evident to him that reads the scripture quoted with it, that
which is written, chapter 3. 9. and Deuteronomy. 27. 1. 2 3. etc. that the twelve men that
took the twelve stones out of the mi^des of lorden for a memorial of the
peoples safe passing over, did it with the distinct knowledge, and actual
consent of the multitude, and of all the people, as is said, v: 1. who are also
expressly commanded by Joshua, v: 2. of the same chapt: and v: 12. of the chapt:
before going to choose, or take these twelve men for the purpose before named.
Lastly for 2. Chron. 14 as ^t is true, that Asa the King did provoke the rest
to seek the Lord, both by his example and authority, so is it as true, that the
people sought the Lord their God with him, and as untrue that any did by v. 7.
his power, obey, in fear, as you affirm. The Lord himself testifies expressly
against you, and that all Judah, and Benjamin assembled in Jerusalem, ^h. 15.
9. 10 12. 15.
and made a covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers with all their heart,
and with all their sowl; of whom also it is witnessed accordingly, that, they
swore unto the Lord with all their heart, and sought him with a whole desire.
And for the point it self, howsoever in bodily things, the people may refer
themselves to the determinations of their superiors, and may bind themselves
to rest in them, as in their own acts, though they neither take knowledge of,
nor give consent unto the things in particular, yea though they be to their
bodyly damage: yet in the matters of faith, and religion, it is clean
otherwise, and to hold the same proportion is a very popish error, which makes
the governors Lords over the peoples faith.

And thus at the last am I got back whence I digressed, and will now proceed in
the examination of such reasons, as Mr B: brings to prove that profane persons,
or to use his own words, men of lewd conversation, are not false matter of the
Church. To which purpose, he first distinguishes true matter into good, and
bad; and so taking that which is bad, and naught unto himself, for the matter
of his Church, he will yet have it true, and no false matter. And this
distinction of his, he labors to exemplify by similitude, and to confirm by
example. The similitude he borrowes from a material house, and the matter of
it, timber, and stone, which makes either nothing to the matter in hand, or if
any thing, against himself. If there can possibly be any false matter of an
house, then rotten timber is false matter: and so wicked and unrepentant
sinners dead, and rotting in the grave of sin, are false matter in
proportion: but if there can be no false matter of a material house, then he
may see how maimed his comparison is, when the terms of the one side are
impossible. Howsoever it is evident, that the house of God, the Church is a 1
Pet. 2. 5
spiritual house made of lively stones, 1 Cor. 15. 45. Ephe. 2. 20.
built upon that lifegiving foundation Christ Jesus. And as a man, (or other
living creature) being once become dead naturally, cannot be called a true man
naturally, so neither can a man spiritually dead in trespasses, and sins, be
called a true man spiritually, and therefore not true matter of that spiritual
house the Church.

The things you further add, namely, that all Churches have in Mr B.
them good, and bad matter, that men deserving justly to be cast out, are not
false matter, nor so cast out of the Church, but as bad matter, but true: that
excommunicates are still brethren by their profession; are all of them so many
devises of your own without proof, or truth.

For first it is not true, that all Churches (which you take for Answ.
such) have in them good matter: for there may be by your own grant, true
Churches by their profession, consisting only of wicked persons, which you
acknowledge bad matter, though true; and there are full many parish Churches in
Engl: wherein, he that should be put to find any good matter, yea one holy and
sanctified man, had need with the Cynick Philosopher, seek it, o^ him, with a
candle at noon day, neither is it true on the other side, that all Churches
have in them bad matter: there are Churches in the world, wherein (by the mercy
of God, and power of his ordinances) there is no visible bad matter, that is,
no person of known lewd conversation: else God forbid. You wrong the Churches of
Christ, and deceive the Christian reader, where in the shutting up of this
point, you persuade him, that he shall find, ever cause thus to Page 116.
be affected, and to greive, (viz at lewd persons in the Church) wheresoever he
comes. He may, and ought to come, where there is no such cause of grief, nor
(by the grace of our God assisting us) shall be, without reformation; though you
measure others by your own line.

Now for the second point, nothing can be more untruly affirmed, then that the
Church may cast out any part, or parcel of her true matter. For first, all the
true matter of the Church has upon it the form of the Church, and so is of the
essence, and being of the Church, which for the Church to cast out, were to
destroy her own essence, and being. Secondly, the true matter of the Church,
and true members of Christ, are the same. As 1 Cor. 3. 11.
Christ is called the foundation of the house, they of the Church, are the
matter of the building: as he is called Ephe. 1. ^2. 23.
the head of his body, they are his members: whom to excommunicate, is to
deliver unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. whereupon I do necessarily infer, that if to
excommunicate be to deliver to Satan, and that the Church may lawfully
excommunicate wicked persons, and that wicked persons be true matter, and that
true matter be true members of Christ's body, then may the Church lawfully
deliver to Satan the true members of Christ's body, which I abhor to write. And
though your Ordinaries Mr B. be often times so liberal of the true members of
Christ, as thus to deliver them to the Devil, yet had the Ministers of Christ
rather have their own members torn from their bodies, then thus to dismemthe
blessed body of the Lord Jesus. The heynousnes of this fact shows the vanity
of your distinction, the error of your opinion, and the falsity of your Church.

Lastly you do mistake the two scriptures, which you bring to prove, that a man
justly excommunicate is still called a brother in the scriptures, and so to be
held by the Church.

The Apostle in the former place, 2 Th. 3. 15. speaks not of a man
excommunicated, no^ worthy to be excommunicated neither: but of such a person,
as follows not his calling faithfully as he ought, but, being negligent in his
own, is to busy in other men's matters: whom he wills the brethren to mark, and
no way to countenance in suc^ walking, but on the contrary to show their
dislike of it, that he may see it, and be ashamed of it: and this he that reads
over the chapter, shall observe (I suppose) to be the Apostles meaning. In the
second place, which is, 1 Cor. 5. 11. his meaning is, not, that Christians
beco^ming fornicators, covetous, Idolaters, and so continuing obstinate, should
still be reputed brethren notwithstanding, but he speaks of a brother there, as
Ezechiel speaks of a righteous man, chapt. 18. 24. that turns away from his
righteousness and commits in^quity, and does according to all the abomination of
the wicked, etc. and as truly may it be affirmed, that the person Ezechiel
speaks of, is still to be reputed a righteous man, as that he, of whom Paul
speaks, is still to be accounted a brother. Both the Prophet, and Apostle
speaks of such persons, ^s were righteous, and brethren reputatively, before
they did so bastardly degenerate. And is it possible, that Christ should charge
his Ch: to account an obstinate offender, as an heathen and publican, Mat. 18.
and that Paul should come after, and direct them to account him a brother?
Besides Math. 23 8.
all the members of the Church are brethren: and to become a member is to
become a brother, and so to be excommunicated out of the Church is nothing else
but to be cast out of the Churches brotherhood. Lastly, the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.
11. names idolatours amongst the rest; and will you have idolaters your
brethren, Mr B? why then did you in the former page exclude Papists, and page
108. Idolatours universally? A holy brotherhood it seems you will have, brother
idolater, haeretique, and what not?

The instance you bring of Simon Magus an hypocrite received by the Apostle,
(by the Evangelist you should say) Act. 8. makes strongly against you, if it be
well considered, what is written of him. For after he was discovered by Peter
not to have his heart right in the sight of God, he was pronounced by him to
have neither part, nor fellowship in that business. ver: 21. Now if Philip had
discerned thus much by him at the first, do you think he would have
acknowledged him for a partener in it? or have given the seal of the forgivenes
of sins, of new birth, and of salvation (as you truly prove baptism to be
page 119.) to such a blank? nay would be have profaned the Lords holy things
upon such a dog or swyne, contrary to the express commandment of Christ,
Math. 7. 6. Cease Mr B. to excuse your self by accusing the holy Apostles, and
Evangelists of Christ.

And hereupon I do thus argue.

They that have no right to the holy things of God in the Ch: are not to be
admitted into it, neither is the Church gathered of such persons, rightly, and
truly gathered.

But men of lewd conversation have no right to the holy things of God in the
Church; and therefore the Church gathered of such persons, is not truly
gathered.

The former proposition is clear, because men admitted into the Church, are
admitted to the participation, and communion of the holy things of God in the
Church. The 2. also appears, both by the scripture before named, where Peter
pronounces, that, such as have not their heart right with God, (which no lewd
persons have or ever had) have no part in the holy things of God, as also by Mr
Bernards own grant, namely, that wicked persons are to be cast out of the
Church. And what could there be in the world more ridiculous, yea or wherein
God were more plainly mocked, then to gather a Church of such persons, as are
judged fit to be cast out of the Church? And yet for this Church-gathering
(being indeed his own) Mr B: pleads both here, and every where, both in this,
and his other book.

In the next place come in certain popular similitudes, to color over that
rotten error, which can by no reason, or scripture, be made sound: in number
three, which I will consider in order. I.


Two persons are lawfully married by public profession and mutual cor^^nt:
Mr. B.
now though the wise perform not her covenant, but prove unfaithful, yet is she
still a true wis^, till the bill of divorcement be given out.

I grant it: but see you not, how you take the thing for granted, Answ.
which we deny, namely, that your national Church is the true wife of Christ?
Since he divorced his ancient wife the nation of the Jews, he never married,
nor will marry, nation more: much less, (which is more specially to be
considered) did he ever marry for his lawful wife the profane multitudes of
unhallowed Atheists wherewith, as you confess in the beginning of your book
your Church abounds. Has Christ commanded his 2 Cor. 6. 14.
people not to be unequally yoked with unbelievers? and will he yoke himself
with them, and with Atheists, and other wicked persons? which are in deed 1 Timothy ^. 8. Tit. 1. 15. Iam. 2. 17. 20.
infidels, and unbeleevers, whatsoever they profess in word, though you in
your 2 book Mr B. do with defiance avouch the contrary.

The same Apostle in an other place affirms that, 2 Cor. 6. 15. 16.
he which coupleth himself with an harlot, is one body with her: and forbids
the faithful, as a most impious thing, to make the members of Christ, the
members of an* harlot: and will Christ make himself the head of harlots,
theves, murderers, blasphemers, and the like? or become one body with them, he
the head, and they the members, as it is betwixt him, and his Church, 1 Cor.
10. 17. and 12. 12. 27. Lastly, no Woman having a former housband alive, may
take a second, or be lawfully married unto him: but wicked and profane persons
have a former husband yet living, even the law, or sin taking occasion by the
law, to work in them all manner of lust, and ruling over them as the husband
over the wife, to which also they are bound, as the wife unto the housband:
Romans 7. 1. 2. 3. 5. 8. and therefore cannot be married unto Christ, nor become
his wife. The 2. similitude follows. II.


A man professing obedience to a king as his alone sovereign, and obeying Mr B.
his laws in the general, though he transgress in some things openly, and
greatly, is that Kings true subject notwithstanding.

You deal unfaithfully, and put the case wrong. The question is of a Answ.
man professing himself in word the Kings loyal subject, and his alone, but in
deed, and truth, the sworn slave of his professed enemy, and an apparent rebel
against the Kings majesty. And whether such a one be a true subject unto the
King or no: for such, and no better, are wicked, and profane men, whatsoever in
word they profess, even slaves, and vassals of the Devil, and rank rebels
against the L. Jesus. Right now you would have Rome a true Church, and now you
will have Jesuits the Kings true subjects: for such they profess themselves,
as boldly, as falsely. And yet no Romish Priest, or Jesuit is more treacherous
to the Kings person, and state, then is a profane vngoldly man professing
Christianity, to the crown, and dignity of Christ Jesus.

The 3. resemblance is of a man professing one only trade, though bunglingly,
III.
or carelessly, whom none will call a false tradesman, but either no good Mr B.
tradesman, or unprofitable, yet truly that tradesman by his profession.

Here, as before, you mis-put the case; you should instance in a Answ.
man professing a trade or faculty, but practicing the contrary in his general
course. For example, a man professes himself* in word a surgeon, or physician,
but is observed, and found in deed and practice, to poison men, and cut their
throtes, and this to be his resolved course. Now so charitable is Mr B. as he
will have this man still called, and that truly, a Physician, or surgeon,
though not good, nor profitable. But the truth is, he is a false, and
treacherous homicyde, and murderer, and so to be abhorred of all, but of none
either to be called, or accounted a true physician, or surgeon, either good, or
evil. Such a one, and no better is he to his own soul, that under the
profession of Christianity in word, practices wickedness, and impiety, and has
his conversation in them.

The author, having thus ended his defense for the bad and naughty matter of
his Church, so granted by him, in effect, comes to speak of false matter: but
so briefly, and darkly withal, as it appears plainly, he is loath to meddle
with it, least in the handling, his bad matter should prove false matter, as it
comes to pass with counterfeyt coin. That he says then is, that false matter
is contrary to this true matter, that is to the true matter, of which he has
spoken. Whereupon it follows, that since the true matter, he has spoken of,
is wicked, and ungodly men, though professing Christ* and that holy, and godly
men are contrary to men wicked, and ungodly, that therefore godly and holy men
are contrary to the true matter of his Church, and so by his reckoning, false
matter. To conclude this point. What is false, but that which has an
appearance of truth, but not the truth it self, whereof it makes show? in which
respect the scriptures also speak of false Christ's, false Prophets, false
Apostles, false brethren, false witnesses, false balances, and the like:
pretending themselves to be that which they are not, and to have that truth in
them, which they have not: of all which, there is none more truly false, nor
more fitly so called, then that man is, and is called truly a false christian,
or false matter of the Church, which (...) in word he looks to be saved by
Jesus Christ, and yet continues in a lewd, and wicked conversation 2 Timothy 3. ^.
having a show of godliness, but denying the power thereof: and Tit. 1. 16.
professing the knowledge of God, but by works denying him. Whereupon I do also
conclude, that the body of the Church of England being gathered generally* and
for the most part of such members visibly, cannot be the true visible body of
Christ, except a true living body can be compact of false, and dead members.

That which comes next into consideration, in M^ B: order, is the visible form
of the Church; as he calls it, which he makes (and truly) the uniting of us
unto God, and one to another visibly, and in his page 277.
2. book, the covenant, by which Godsets up a people to be his people, and they
him mutually to be their God. This description he illustrateth by a similitude
borrowed from a material building, whose form arises from the coupling
together of the stones upon the foundation: which he also further manifests,
by comparing it with the form of the invisible Church, by which the faithful
are united to God, through Christ invisibly, and one unto another. Of the
terms of which comparison, and their proportion, we shall speak by, and by. I
do only in the mean while entreat the reader to observe with me these two
things. The former, that, Mr B: having in the beginning of his book censured us
very severely, and that with D. Allisons concurring testimony, for misapplying
1 Pet. 2. 5. to the visible Church, which said they, was meant of the invisible
Church, here notwithstanding he interprets it of the visible Church, even as we
do. The latter, that speaking of the invisible Church, and the form of it, he
brings in sundry scriptures, as so to be expounded, which are apparently
intended of the visible Church: and amongst the rest these three. Ephe. 2. 22.
and 4. 4. 1 Cor. 12. 13. the last of which he himself also within a few pages
following expounds as meant of page 125.
the visible Church, and the properties thereof. Now for the comparison betwixt
the form of the invisible, and visible Church* wherein if Mr B. observed due
proportion, and made the form of the visible Church the same visibly,
externally, and in respect of men, which he does the form of the invisible
Church invisibly, internally, and in respect of God, and so laid down things in
simple, and plain terms, the truth in the point would easily appear, and much
needles labor be spared on both sides. The form of the invisible Church he
notes, first, and on Gods part to be raised, by the spirit, by which invisible
hand, God takes men immediately by the heart, and ^^^ B.
says he will be th^^^ God: 2. and on man's part, by ^aith, by which invisible
hand the believers do take hold of the promise of the spirit, believing that
they are his people, and he their God: and that thru God and man are invisibly
united* and 3. by love, by which men take hold one of another and so are united
together invisibly. And all this he confirms sufficiently by the scriptures.
Answerable unto which 3. invisible hands for this invisible union, he makes 3.
visible hands for the visible union: 1. unto the spirit, the word: 2. unto
faith, the profission of faith: 3. unto love, the sacrament of the Lords
supper: for ^o he proportioneth them. The color of truth, which these things
may seem to have in their mutual reference, will ^ub off in the very touching
of the particulars. But if Mr B. would have observed just proportion, and have
set things down plainly, he should have said thus, or to this effect. As the
invisible, internal, and effectual union of God with man, of man with God,
and of one man with another is raised from the invisible, internal, and
effectual work of the spirit, invisible, internal, and effectual faith, and
love, which are only seen, and known of God, and of the parties themselves, in
whom they are; so must the visible, external, and apparent union of God with
man, of man with God, and of one man with an other, arise from the visible,
external, and apparent work of the spirit; visible, external, and apparent
faith, and love, which are seen of men, and made sensible to the ey of charity,
which judges probably of things which are not seen, by the things which are
seen. For albeit, it be true, which Mr B. has in his 2. book, that we page
136.
are not therefore a Church of God, because men so judge us, but because God
has received us into covenant with himself; yet it must also be considered,
that the Church is not called visible in respect of God, but of men, to whom it
does, or may appear, and by whom it is so discerned, and judged probably.

The scriptures do speak of a Ro^. 3. a^^ ^.
justification before God, which is by ^aith alone; and of Iam. 2.
a justification before men, which is by work^: the former of which we may
truly call invisible justification, as known to none but God, and the
conscience of the party justified: the other visible justification, as being
manifest, and made visible unto men, by works, as ver: 18. of the Chapter
before named, where the Apostle speaks of showing, manifesting, or making
visible faith* and so consequently justification; by works. And look what is
here said of visible, and invisible faith, and justification, the same from
other scriptures compared together may be affirmed of visible, and invisible
election, redemption, sanctification; as also of visible, and invisible saints
for the matter; and of the visible and invisible union for the form of the
visible, and invisible Church: the invisible being certain, infallible, and so
known to be, of God: the visible, moral, probable, and so appearing unto men.
There is in deed, and in the right disposition of things by the revealed will
of God, but Cant. 6. 8. Ephe. 4. 4. and 1. 22. 23 Act. 20. 28.
one Church of Christ, which is his body, whereof he is the head, and which he
has purchased with his blood: for Christ has not purchased two Churches with
his blood, but one, neither is the head of two bodies, but of one: and
according to this purchase of Christ, and ordinance of God, all that are of the
visible Church are also of the invisible, and all of the invisible of the
visible Church, which are indeed not two, but one Church, in two sundry
respects, as I have formerly showed. I deny not, but that, as it has been said
of old, there are many sheep without, and many wolves within: many of the
visible Church, which are not of the invisible Church, and so answerably, many
of the invisible Church, which never come into the visible Church. But this say
I, is not according to the revealed will of God, in his word; but by man's
default, and sin. It is their sin of ignorance or infirmity, which (being of
the invisible Church) do not, (if possibly they can) join themselves unto the
visible Church, there to partake in the visible ordinances: it is their sin
of hypocrisy, and presumption, which not being of the invisible Church; do
adjoyn themselves to the visible Church, there to profane the Lords covenant,
and ordinances, to which they have no right. For how can they being wicked, and
unholy, chalendge the LORD to be their GOD, that is, all happiness, and goodness,
unto them, which is one part of the covenant. or profess themselves to be his
people, which is another part? when the Devil is their God, and their lusts;
and they his, and their people, and servants, to whom they obey? or what have
they to do to meddle with Gods covenant, whom he expressly forbids to take it in
their mouths? It is therefore a vile and profane defense, which you are driven
to, Mr B: by pleading, that wicked persons are true matter of the Church, and
so admitted into covenant with God, in the 2. book; that obedience only
follows the covenant page 279.
as the fruit of it: and that God requires not actual obedience, or that we
should be actually good, or holy, before, or when we covenant with him: but
that he should make us good; and that we should be good, and perform actual
obedience afterward; which as it is notable Anabaptistry, and in deed the
ground of that haeresy being applied to the covenant of the Jewish Church: so
being applied to the covenant of the Church now, it is worse then Anabaptistry.
And consider this man, he makes the sacrament of the Lords supper a ground, and
part of the covenant, and yet affirms, that God for men's entering into this
covenant, requires not that they should be holy, and good: and so by this deep
divinity, it must needs follow, that the Lord requires not that men should be
good, or holy for their partaking in the sacrament of the Lords supper.

The particulars now follow, in which you place this visible union, and
covenant of the Lord with his people, of them with him, and of one of them with
another. The first whereof is his word, which (say you) is the only first
visible note, and testimony from God, by Mr B.
which he makes a people his people. Ps. 147. 19. Romans 3. 1. 2. Ioh. 17* 6. and
so you go on to prove, that this word is Gods outstretched hand to subdue
people unto him: the sword of the spirit by which he smites: the immortal
seed, by which he begets, and makes alive: the word of reconcilation, by
which he reconcileth his Church, and people. And thereupon you conclude, that
to whomsoever God sends his word, to them he testifies his love, and desire to
make them his Church, and people.

To let pass the repugnancy in your words, as first, where you Answ.
speak of the only first note, as though there could possibly be more firsts
then one: and 2. where you make the word a note, and testimony, by which God
makes a people his people: whereas notes and testimonies do not make that to
be, which is not, but do show and declare it to be already. I do answer, that
as it is true, that where God sends his word, there ^e testifies his love; and
is desirous, that is, in respect of the outward offer of the means to make
such a people his Church; so is it most untrue, that to whomsoever God sends
his word, and testifyes his desire outwardly to make them his people, and
Church, that those he makes his Church, and people, or unites himself visibly
unto them. The uniting of God unto men is an effect of the word, which it
always has not upon them to whom it is sent. External efficients do never
prove and argue their effects necessarily, except they work naturally, and
infallibly also, which the wor^ does not, but morally, and according to the
good pleasure, and blessing of the Lord upon it. It is as you truly say, Mr B.
the outstretched hand of the Lord in it self, but it does not unite the Lord to
any, except he take hold of them with it: it is in it self hat* immortal seed,
but may fall upon Math. 13. 19.
the very high way, and so have no good effect at all, either in truth or
appearance: the messengers of it are the Lords mouth unto them to whom it is
sent, but all receive not this message to whom it comes; Mat. 22. 4. 5. 6.
some make light of it, and neglect it, others do evilly entreat them that
bring it, hating, reviling, and persequuting both them and it. Act. 13. 45. and
17. 18. Now will you say that God strikes hands with these men, and on his part
enters covenant with them actually, because his word is published amongst them?
The inward, and invisible hand of the spirit must not only be stretched out by
the Lord, but must seize, and take hold of the heart, and be effectual
invisibly, and internally, before this invisible union be made on the Lords
part: so must the Lords outward, and visible hand, his word, not only be
stretched out, but also seize, and take hold of the outward man, at the least,
and be effectual visibly, and externally upon him, before the Lord can be said
on his part to have contracted any visible union.

In the next place comes the visible hand of man, by which he on Mr R.
his part c^tracts with God, and enters covenant with him visibly: and that Mr
B. makes the open profession of faith unto the doctrine taught, which such as
make, he says, have visibly taken hold of the word, and struc^en hands with
God.

You make much of nothing Mr B. or of that which is worse the^ Answ.
nothing. Even now the profession of faith made the true matter of the Church;
and here it must make the true form of the Church: and yet the truth is, that
in the forming of your national English Church by a new covenant from that
wherein it stood in Popery, which was by your own grant, with Saints and
Angels in stead of God, and, I add, with Antichrist, in the stead of Christ,
no such profession of faith was made, as your self here do both require, and
prove necessary for the forming of the visible Church, or her uniting with God.
And that I manifest in two particulars. The former is* that the profession of
faith required for a peoples uniting with the Lord their God, must be made both
freely, and particularly by the persons themselves so uniting. And this
appears both by that which you have said of Gods giving, or sending his word,
which is his visible outstretched hand, by which he offers reconcilation unto
men personally, and so by consequent requires that they stretch out the hand of
personal profession to him: and also by the scriptures alleged by you; all
which do give witness of such a confession of faith, and sins, as was freely
made by the persons themselves particularly, which were joined to the Church.
Let the reader take knowledge of these scriptures amongst the rest. Mat. ^. 6.
Act. 2. 38. 1 Cor. 1^. 1. 2. the profession of faith noted in the scriptures by
you produced, was not made by men of lewd conversation, or apparently
unsanctified (of whom alone, and their union with God our question is) but by
men visibly, and externally holy; and such, as all of them were, visibly, and
so far as men in charity could judge, justified, sanctified, and entitled to
the promises of salvation, and life eternal. The scriptures are (besides the
th(...) last named, Math. 3. 6. Act. 2. 38. with which compare verse. 3^* 41 47.
1 Cor. 15. 1.) Mat. 10. 40. 41. and 32. Act. 8. 12. 13. 37. 38. 1 Cor. 6. 1^.
Col. 2. 11. 12. Tit. 3. 5. Who but you Mr Bernard would thus wrong either these
scriptures as justifying the admission of lewd persons, des^rving to be
excommunicated, into the Ch: or the Apostles of Christ for admitting, or
baptizing such? And yet these persons are the true bad matter, for which you
pleaded so much formerly: and which here by these scriptures, you would bring
into a true bad union with God. For of these for the most part, has the nation
always consisted, and of these your Ch: was gathered at the first, when it
became national, and so has stood formed ever since.

The 3. and last thing for the perfecting of this visible covenant, and vn^ing
of the members one to another, M. B. makes, the holy sacrament Mr B.
of the L. supper, which a^ it is a seal of our faith, so i^ i^ a testimony of
that visible com^^^io^ of love, also of one member with another. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
17.

You confound all things in saying the sacrament makes the covenant; Answ.
which is a seal of it, and praesupposeth both the covenant, and the Church,
whereof it is an ordinance. The covenant must be before the Church, and the
Church before the sacrament: how then can the sacrament make the Church? And
where you further call it an holy sacrament, a seal of ^aith, a testimony of
the visible communion of love, and of one member with another, you speak the
truth, but not truly: such it is in it self, and in the right administration,
and use of it: but not in the profane abuse of it upon wicked men, of whom we
speak: and for whom, and their uniting with Christ you here plead. Upon whom
whilst you, and the rest of the ministers of your Church, do profane it, as
you do, the more holy it is in it self, the more unholy is your fact, and the
more heinous your sin. It is as you say, the seal of faith, and of the
for^ivenes of sins through faith to the penitent, and believers, but is it
therefore so, and such to apparently impenitent, and unbelieving persons? it is
in it self a testimony of the communion of love: but is it so unto, and among
the wicked? or is it not in that abuse made a lying witness to testify, and
witness love, where apparent hatred, and malice reigns against God, and good
men? It is an outward pledge, or symbol of the communion which the faithful
have with Christ, (for of that the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 10. 16. 17.
directly) and so by consequence, one with another: and because it unites Christ
the head with his own members, and one of them with another, does it therefore
unite Christ or his true members, with the true apparent visible lims of the
Divil, which all ungodly men and women are? This is the force of Mr Br.
arguments. Because the L. supper is of this or that use unto them, to who^ by
the word of God it apperteyns, therefore it has or must be judged to have the
same use amongst them which are apparent usurpers of it, and to whom by the
word of God it apperteyns not. There is nothing more common in both his books,
then this kind of deceiptfull arguing.

Here is yet an Arg: of co^pariso^ to be taken knowledge, and co^sidred of; and
the rather because the author both wills the reader to note it, in the margent,
and repeats it himself over and over, in the text.

The Argument is, that, a^ continual si^nes and corruptions of the hart^ of Mr
B.
the elect, do not make the^ false Christians before God, or no true invisible
members of Christ: so neither do outward offenses, or corruptions, m^k open
professors of the says, false Christians before men, or no true visible
members of Christ. True, no more; due proportion observed: namely, tha^ Answ.
those outward offenses do not reign in the mortal bodies of men, ^^ the
inward corruptions do not reign in the hearts of the elect.

But let the reader here remember the subject of the quaestion, which is, men
of lewd conversation, and deserving to be excommunicated, and then the noting
of Mr B. Arg: will be like David^ noting the Amal^kites tidings of the death of
S^ul, and Jonathan, to the destruction 2 Samuel 1.
of him that brought them. For by the same rule of proportion I argue thus. As
they in whose hearts, sins, and corruptions reign inwardly, are no true
Christians before God, nor actual members of Christ invisibly: so they in
whose lives, and conversations, sins and corruptions reign outwardly, are no
true Christians before men nor members of Christ visibly. And here comes to my
mind an other argument much what like this, in Mr B. 2. book: where he will
have a mixed company of godly, and wicked persons to be called holy, or a
company of saints, as well as a person, holy, in whom there is a mixture of the
spirit, and flesh. But the difference is plain. In this mixed body of godly, and
wicked, sin reigns in some of the members but in no part of body, or faculty of
soul of a person, in whom the spirit is, (though never so much flesh be mingled
with it) does sin reign. He might as well say, the whole Church so mixed
shall be saved: for the whole man shall be saved, by faith in Christ,
notwithstanding all mixture in him.

Now the conclusion Mr B. makes, that, their congregations profess Christ, as
is before said; that God has given them his holy word, and sacraments: and
moved the hearts of all of them outwardly to receive both the one, and the
other, is vnproved, and untrue.

For first, there is no one congregation in the Land whose particular members
made that holy profession in any measure, by and according to which the
Apostles did constitute and unite visible congregations. Secondly, I deny that
the Lord has given his sacraments to any congregation in the Land: there are
very many in the best ordered parishes, which take them without the Lords gift:
as being wicked usurpers of them, unto which by the revealed will of God they
have no right. But here I must needs discover Mr Bernards haunt, and the
turning, by which in his second book he usually declines both Mr Ainsworths and
Mr Smyths Arguments of this nature: and that is, by telling them, that all are
not wicked amongst them, that some, or many have the true knowledge of Gods
word: and that the fear of God possesses the hearts of many: as in page 249.
250. etc.
this place, that God has moved the hearts of many of the people effectually,
and the like: and that therefore we do them wrong in condemning all for some:
and in denying the good their right, for others default. To this I answer first
that those that can be truly judged to fear God, are thin strewed in the best
places: and not many in comparison of the rest, as is pretended, but a very
small handful: and besides, it is but casual, and accidental to the
congregation, and nothing to the constitution of it, that there is one man
truly fearing God in it. The parish must be a true vivisible constituted
Church, as well one as another, and so receive the sacraments together, whether
the Lord have had any such work (as is here spoken of) in the hearts of any, or
no. And 2. it must be considered, and I pray the teader well to observe it,
that the quaestion here betwixt Mr B. and me (and so ordinarily betwixt him,
and them) is about the congregation (which consists of all the members jointly)
and not about some particulars considered severally from the rest, of whom the
congregation consists not. I am verily persuaded there are in many
congregations many that truly fear God: (and the Lord increase their number,
and graces) and if they were separated from the rest into visible communion, I
should not doubt to account them such co^gregations, as unto which God had
given his sacraments: but take them as they are even one with the rest, in one
joint communion, as members of one body, making all together one Church, and
congregation, so joined at the first, and so still remaining, I deny that this
Church, or congregation is the Lords people in covenant with him: or that he
has given unto it his sacraments: yea or that those, which truly fear God,
and are accepted of him in their persons, have in that communion, the right,
and lawful use of them in many particulars. They cannot take them for pawnes
and pledges of Gods love, and the forgivenes of sins, to that congregation,
wherewith they ioyn in the use of them: nor as testimonies of true spiritual
love amongst the persons communicating in them: nor as notes and badges of
d^stinction, of that assembly, from all profane and unhallowed assemblies in
the world. And yet are all these common ends, and uses of the sacrament, as it
is a communion, or common union of the members with the head, and one with
another mutually. Since therefore your congregations, or parish assemblies are
(and always have been) so constituted, as that neither the greatest part of
them (being profane) have any interest in the sacraments, or can have any
right use of them in their persons, nor yet the rest in their communion: it
must needs follow, (except the Lord have given his sacraments to them, which
can have no right use of them, and to whom they apperteyn not) that the Lord
has not given his holy sacraments to your congregations. And where you further
add, that God has moved the hearts of all the people of your congregations
outwardly to receive both the word, and sacraments, it is one, amongst the rest
of your bold, but bare affirmations. Are there not many thowsands amongst you
that understand not Heb. 6. 1.
the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, the very first principles of
christian religion? And has God persuaded the hearts of these to receive the
word and sacraments in any sense? The Lord Jesus teaches us in the gospel that
Ioh. 3. 20.
every man that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to light, least
his deeds should be reproved. And yet you will have us believe, that God has
persuaded the hearts of all the evill-doers amongst you, not only to come to
the light, but also to receive it. Let your own parish Mr B: stand for
instance. There were in it (to mine own knowledge) when you wrote this book,
that held most blasphemous errors touching the very Trinity; and there are at
this day, (as I am certainly informed) who are so moved to receive the word, as
that your Churchwardens are driven to spend a great part of the Lords day in
hunting them from the alehouse to the temple. And if this be your case, what
is the condition of the most congregations in the Land, to which the word of
God has not so much as been offered in any indifferent measure for the moving
of their hearts to receive it? The truth is, the people are drawn in the most
congregations, the most of them, and many in all, by compulsive laws, to keep
their Parish Church, to hear divine service, to communicate at Easter, and to
receive the sacraments, and other rites: as is commanded in the communion
book: but how far the most are from having their hearts thus moved, as is
pretended of all, to receive the word of God, appears too evidently in that
great contempt, and hatred wherein they have such amongst themselves, as do in
any sincerity either preach or profess the same. To these things I may
further add, that, since the Lord has given his word and sacraments to be
dispensed to no people, but by the means which he has prescribed in his word*
except the English Preisthood, and leitourgy were prescribed by the word of
God, for these ministrations, even in this respect God cannot be ^ayd to have
given his word, and sacraments to the congregations spoken of.

Now although this which has been said in answer to your grounds, be
sufficient to disprove the form of your Church, as you your self Mr B. raise
it, yet for your further conviction, I will add certain Arguments to manifest,
and make plain, that wicked, and ungodly men, and women are incapable, by the
word of the Lord, of his covenant, and of all spiritual visible union with
him; and so consequently your congregations (gathered of such persons at the
first, and of such still consisting generally, with a handful godly minded
scattered amongst them) to remayn unformed, by the Lords holy covenant. The
Arguments are,

First, because godly, and wicked men are contraries, as being I.
guided, and led by contrary causes, the one sort by Gal. 5. 1^.
the spirit, and the other by the flesh, which are contrary one unto another.
Now two contraries are not capable of one, and the same form.

Wicked men, and such as Psalm. 50. 16. 17.
hate to be reformed are forbidden, by II.
the revealed will of God, from meddling with his covenant, or ordinances: and
therefore are not by the revealed will of God received into covenant with him,
or to the participation of his ordinances* which are both one.

Since wicked men are by the word of God (as you your self III.
grant) to be excommunicated, that is to be cut off from the visible union
with Christ and his Church, how can they be said by the same word of God, to be
capable of this union with Christ and his Church? nothing can be either more
unreasonably affirmed, or more ungodly practiced.

Lastly, the scriptures do expressly debar men of lewd, and ungodly IIII.
conversation, of all fellowship, union, and communion with God. If we say,
that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we ly and do not truly,
says the Apostle, Ioh. 1. Ep: 1. 6. and what fellowship says Paul, has
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness?
and what concord has Christ with Bel^ ill? or what part has the believer with
the unbeliever, or infidel? etc. 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. The former of
these scriptures is so directly against you, as if it were recorded by the holy
Ghost with particular respect to your error. You say that men though of a lewd
conversation, that is, walking in darkness, have visible fellowship, union, and
communion with God, if they profess they believe in Christ, or so say; John on
the contrary teaches that they which walk in darkness, have no fellowship with
God, though they so say, but are liars. The other scripture must be further
opened, and enforced: considering how you charge us in your 2. book with the
wretched abuse of it; and labor by a long discourse page 140.
to wring it out of our hands: as being our special weapon (as you say) to
fight for separation, and to defend the same. The four heads under which you
reduce all the particulars about it, I will prosequ^te in order, as they are by
you laid down. 1. the occasion. 2. the scope. 3. the matter entreated of. 4.
the persons spoken of.

For the first, it is true you affirm of the Christian Corinthians Mr B.
going to the idol feasts in the idol temples at the bidding of their friends,
and kinsfolks the heathen Corinthians: which I also acknowledge to have Answ.
been the mayn, and most immediate occasion of the Apostles writing, as he
does, but not the only occasion. There was a former occasion of that, namely
their marying with the unbelievers, and their ver. 14.
unequal yoking with them that way: by which the other mischief was occasioned
amongst them, as it had been with other the servants of God before them, from
the beginning of the world. Genesis 6. 2. In which respect therefore the Lord in
the law forbad Exodus 34. 16.
the Israelites to take of the daughters of the heathen unto their sons,
least they provoked them to go awhoring after their Gods: which when they
neglected, and mingled themselves with Idolaters in marriage, they presently
fell into that monstrous mixture in religion, against which the Apostle
deals, Numb. 25. 1 King. 11. 1. 2. 3. 4. Ezra 9. 1. 2.

But where for the clearing of your selves of the very occasion, you do add,
that you dwell not in civil society with idolaters, but under a Christian
King, and with a people professing Christ, where no public Idols are set up,
nor any feasting in honor of them, you follow your old fashion of bold
boasting without measure, or modesty. Do you not live in civil society with the
Idolaters? Have you no Papists in your kingdom? I may say in your Parish? or
are Papists become no idolaters with you, as Rome was right now no false
Church, nor Jesuits false subjects? The face of your charity Mr B. is so full
set toward Rome, and Papists, as no marvayl though you be so unequal toward
us, as you are. The truth is, you are in the most streyt bond of civil society
with Popish idolaters, that may be. There is nothing more common amongst them of
your Church, then to ioyn in marriage with them: neither is there (to my
knowledge) amongst all your canons any one against this* profane commixture.
Neither is it any thing you speak of living under a Christian King, or with a
people professing Christ: for idolaters may live under a Christian King, and
profess Christ too in a measure, as both many others, and all antichristian
idolaters do. Yea I have formerly manifested, that you live not only in
civil, but even in religious society with Papists, and you your self grant as
much of Atheists in the beginning of your book: and will you say that visible
Atheists are true visible matter of the Church, and capable, by the word of
God, of true visible fellowship, and communion with Christ, and the true
members of his body?

The scope of ^e scripture follows, which, say you, i^ that the believing Mr
B.
Corint^ians may have no fellowship with the infidels, and unbelievers, to
their evil works; but that they reprove, condemn, hate, and avoid them.

Belike then they might have had fellowship with them in any Answ.
good work: and so if any of the heathen, or infidel Corinthians would have
communicated with the Christian Corinthians in the sacraments, or prayer, they
might not have refused their fellowship, or communion herein. For by your
exposition the Apostle only forbids partaking with them in evil works and the
works of darkness. Of which more hereafter. And here in our names you frame an
objection, the sum whereof is, that if all the godly would separate from all
the wicked, then there should be no wicked of the Church. Unto which you answer
sundry things: but how sufficiently will appear in the particulars. First you
say, God commands not his to separate wholly from all the wicked: but from
Infidels, Gentiles, Idolaters; Jews, Turks, Papists, whose very societies are
to be left as no people of God.

Well then, I perceive, all religious fellowship with Papists is unlawful, and
that their societies are no people of God. And how agrees this with your other
affirmations, that Rome is a true Church: Papists true Christians, though under
corruptions, as it was true Job, though under soars: baptism there, a true
sacrament, and seal of the covenant; and yet here the societies of Papists are
no people of God, that is in no covenant with him? Or how does this separation
thus wholly to be made from Papists agree with that you write, page 91. of
joining in prayer with such Papists, as though they be of the Church of Rome,
yet sorrow for the abominations, and as are come out from it in their souls,
the best part, though not so in their bodies?

The distinction you put between Infidels, and idolaters, and men of profane
life, we shall consider of in due place: and for your speech of all the Church
falling into the estate of infidelity, and so ^^dged of the Church, either it
is without sense, or I, which understand it not. Now to that you add of
separating from the private familiarity of the wicked, living in the society of
the godly, and that, if they will not be reformed, other courses are to be
taken with them, as their sin of obstinacy deserves, I answer these things.
First, that, as there is a case, wherein private withdrawing from a brother is
warrantable, namely, when his offense is private, and he privately obstinate,
and that his sin either cannot be, or is not yet made public, and publicly
^vin^^d: so to separate from men privately, and that only, for public
offenses, is a course without ground either of scripture, or rea son. You say,
page 144. that (alvin so expounds 1 Cor. 5. 11. and therevpo^ do take an
occasion to accuse our practice as Brownisticall, and us of Luciferian schism,
and Pharisaicall pride. As I leave your raylings to be judged by the Lord, so
do I give the reader to understand, how you grossly abuse Calvin's authority:
who expounds that scripture (as all men know it is meant) of excommunicates,
and of men's private carriage toward them: with which, public separation is
also to be joined: I suppose you your self will not deny it. And where you
speak of an other course to be taken with wicked men, that will not be reformed,
you should also show what that course is, and what is to be done, if that
course be not taken: but you have thought it a point of your wisdom to be
silent in these things least by opening them too particularly, you should
discover your own shame.

The course to be taken is, the censuring of such incorrigible offenders by the
particular congregation, whereof they are, being gathered together in the name
of Christ, by the power of Christ; with which 1 Cor. 5.
power divine, and heavenly privilege, he has furnished his Churches every
one of them, as well as that one of Corinth; neither does any true Church of
Christ want this power, or neglect the use of it without sin. And if any
Church of Christ would neglect to use this power against scandalous sin
manifestly proved, and co^vinced, and would obstinately continue
(notwithstanding all good means used to the contrary) this sower leaven
unpurged out, the whole lump were levened, and with leven might not the
Passover be eaten. And as the Church, if sin do arise, is first to endeavor
the casting out of the sin by the sinners repentance, and if that will not
be, in the last place to cast out the sin, and sinner together: so if the
Church do wickedly bear out, and boulster iniquity amongst themselves, such as
are faithful are first to quit themselves of that Church-sin by testifying
against it, and reproving it, and in the last place to quit themselves of the
Church, if it remayn incurable. Now here you bring in certain differences, and
distinctions of separation, but without application. The first I omit as being
before handled, so much as concerns the present purpose. The 2. difference is
between the wicked remaining among the godly, and the godly being* of the
fellowship of the wicked: this difference I acknowledge, and withal affirm, that
the latter part of it notes out the estate of your national Church: wherein a
few godly minded in comparison, live in the fellowship of a wicked, and sinful
nation. And if persons excommunicate by the Church be not of her fellowship,
then certainly the number of the godly in your fellowship is very small: since
your national Church representative, the convocatio^ house (whose Act also
page: 147. you avouch to be the Act of all the Church, and so to be accounted)
does pronounce ipso facto excommunicated all that do affirm either the
ceremonies of the Church, or government by Arch Bishops, Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, and the rest, to be Antichristian, Canon 4. 6 7. 8*
or the books either of common prayer, or of consecrating Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, to conteyn in them any thing unlawful, or repugnant to the word of
God. Your third distinction I pass by as impertinent: and the fourth, as being
already handled, save only that in the end of it you bite at us, as you go,
for separating from Gods ordinances in the Church, for some wicked men's sake.
But you know Mr B. that we do not deem your Church Government, worship,
ministry, and ministrations to be Gods ordinances: nor your Church in that
confusion, wherein it was gathered, and consists, to be rightly possessed of
the ordinances which it injoyes: no nor that any person how godly minded
soever, can have the right use of Gods ordinances, in your assemblies, as they
are public joint exercises of the communion of the body. In the fifth, and
last difference, you speak of godly men's breaking society with themselves,
because of some wicked persons. To which point I answer thus much; since the L.
Jesus has given his Churches both power, and charge to put from among them
such wicked persons, as do arise, and appear incorrigible; and has also taught
by his Apostle, that the neglect of this duty levens the whole lump: that they
which countenance, and continue in the Church such wicked persons against the
godly zealous, which endeavor their reformation, that they I say, do break the
society of the godly with themselves, and do rather make choice of the society
of the wicked, whom they thus bolster, and bear out.

In the 3. place we are to consider of the matter entreated of, and found fault
with by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. which you say, is in sum Mr B.
thus much: believers are not to be with the wicked in their unrighteousness, in
the state of their darkness, nor to partake with them in their evils, and so to
agree together: which no way helps our separation from light, righteousness, etc.

It is true that the particular matter the Apostle finds fault Answ:
with, is, the believing Corinthians communicating with the unbelievers in the
idol feasts: but withal it must be considered, that the Apostle upon this
particular occasion delivers a general doctrine, then which nothing is more
usual both in the old, and new testament. The same Apostle in his former
Epistle to the same Corinthians takes occasion from the fornicatour among them,
to forbid them the companying, or commingling not only with fornicators, but
with covetous persons, Idolaters, raylers, drunkards, extortioners, and all
other wicked men whomsoever, chapter ^. 1. 11. so in this place, he takes occasion
from their communicating with Idolaters in the Idolathytes, and the uncleanness
thence arising, to enjoin them separation from all other uncleanness whether of
persons, or things, as the whole tenor of the scripture manifests. More
particularly: though the Apostle (as you would have it) did only forbid
partaking with the wicked in their evils, yet even therein did he forbid all
religious communion with them since their very prayers, and other sacrifices
are their evils: wherein whylst the godly do communicate with them, what do
they else but acknowledge their common right, and interest in those holy things?
But that the Apostle in this scripture forbids communion not only in the evil
works of wicked men, but with their persons: and that he commands a separation
not only real, but personal, does appear by these Reasons.

First, because the scripture has reference to the yoaking of the I,
believers with the unbelievers in marriage, as the occasion of that spiritual
Idolatrous mixture, which he reproves. Now this joining was not in an evil, or
unlawful thing, but with wicked, and unlawful persons.

2. The very terms, believers, unbelievers: light, darkness: Christ, Beliall, II.
do import opposition not of things only, but of persons also, for the things
sake. So the faithful are called Cor. ^. 21
righteousness, Math. ^. 14.
light, and as they are light, so are the ungodly Ephesians. 5. ^.
darkness: and so not only their works but their persons are called.

3. The Apostle forbids all unlawful communion in this place: but there is an
unlawful communion of the faithful with the wicked, III.
in things lawful: as with exco^municates, Idolaters, heretics, or any other
flagitious persons, in the sacraments, prayer, and other religious exercises in
the respects formerly by me laid down: whereupon it was, that the Jews were to
separate themselves not only from the manners of the heathen, but even from
their persons. Ezra. 9. 1. 2. and 10. 2. 3 Nehem. 9. 2. and 10. 28. 30. and
that Paul reproves the Corinthians, Epist. 1. Chap. 5. for having fellowship
not in the persons incest, but with the incestuous person: whom therefore they
were to purge out, and to put away from among themselves. verse. 5. 7. 13.

Fourthly, the Apostle enjoins such a separation, as upon which IIII.
a people is to be reputed Gods people, the temple of the living God, and may
challenge his promise to be their God, to dwell among them, and to walk verse.
16. 17.
there. And as, for the temple, where the Lord promised to dwell, the timber,
and stones, whereof it was to be built, were to be selected, and separated from
all the trees in the for^est, and stones in the rock, and to be hewed, and
squared accordingly, and so to be set together in that comely order, which was
prescribed: so, that this spiritual house, or temple, the Church now, may have
the promise of Gods presence, and dwelling there, it must be framed of
spiritual stones, and timber first separated from the rest, and then fitted
and prepared by that ax, or sword of the spirit, the word of God, and so
coupled, and combyned together in due order, and proportion. Besides, it is
evident, that the holy Ghost has reference in this place to the people of the
Jews, which was separated from all other peoples, and persons in the world: as
appears, Lev. 20. 24. and 26. 11. 12. therein noting out what must be the
course, and condition of the G^^. 6. 16
Israel of God to the worlds end.

But here Mr Bern. excepts against our exposition of these places page 136.
of Levit* and the like, as miserably wrested, and falsely applied to our
separation. For by Gods separating them from other people, is meant, says he,
Mr B.
a setting apart of Abraham's posterity to a special service of God, and
therein to be a people differing from all the world. And by other people is
meant such as worshipped not the true God; which is nothing to them that
worship Jesus Christ, etc. but no Israelites to separate from other Israelites,
which were even then when Moses thus spoke of separation, a corrupt people
a^^^g themselves.

And is this your righting of our wrestings Mr B? Els-where you Answ.
tell us, that the Lord separates a people from others, and takes them to be
his before he so much as command them any thing* and here the page 176.
Lord sets a people apart to be his, and separates them from others in respect
of some special piece of service appointed them. The things you speak are
contrary, but neither of them true. The Lord never did, nor will take people
unto him, but by their submission, and obedience unto his commandments: and
for that special R^. 9. 4.
service of God enjoined the Israelites, it was an effect of their separation
from other people, and covenant with God: and no cause by, or for which, they
became the Lords separated people. We must always consider the Church of God
principally, and properly in the persons of men, and secondarily in their
works: as we must first consider the Isa. 5. ^. 7 Math. 21. 33. 34.
vineyard in the trees, and afterward in the fruits they bring forth. And so
was Israel separated, and set apart from other people. Your addition, tha^ by
other people, is meant such as worshipped n^^ ^he true God, which is nothing to
you which worship Jesus Christ, etc. and that there is no place to prove that
Israelites were to separate from other Israelites, for their corruptions, as
false matter, is like that which goes before. For first, Papists, and
Anabaptists, with Idolaters, and Heretics many mo, do worship Jesus Christ;
from whose societies notwithstanding you profess separation. 2. The
Ismaelites, and Edomites, did worship the true God, though not after a true
manner, and yet the Israelites were a people separated from them: so as an
Edomite (though he had voluntarily joined himself to the people of God) might
not bear any public office amongst them, to the third generation, which you
too ignora^tly expound* page 248* of his admission into the Church. Yea I do
further add, that even Israelites, and those which came of Israel, or Iaakob,
were commanded to separate themselves from Israelites, and that for an
usurpation in the ministry, as the scriptures make it plain, Number. 16. as
afterward also upon Ieroboams defection in the ministry, worship, and holy
days, which he forged in his own heart. 2 Chronicles. 11. 13. 14. 15. 16. with ^
King. 12. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32.

And thus is the exposition cleared, against your frivolous exceptions of such
scriptures in Levit: and else where as make mention of the separation of the
Jewish nation from all other nations: which do fitly also serve to confirm, and
justify the separation of all the Churches in the new testament from such
people and assemblies in all nations, as of whom the Lord by his revealed will
cannot besayd to accept, as I am sure he cannot profane, and godles persons.

Now because* the issue of all controversies depends upon the true exposition
of the scriptures, whose letter men will bring on both sides: and that Mr B.
takes special exception in this place against the expositions we give of such
scriptures, as seem to us most material for our separation: I will therefore
take in his exceptions, as I return whence I came, and make manifest, as God
inableth me, the insufficiency of them.

The next place that comes into consideration is, Act. 2* 40. where, ^ayth Mr
B. Peter speaks to the Jews of such Jews, as denied Christ, and Mr B.
renounced the very foundation, even Jesus Christ, which is (if we will believe
him) nothing to them that profesie him to be the true Messiah.

It seems then that separation is not to be made from the Papists, Answ.
for they hold Jesus Christ to be the true Messiah, and the very foundation:
yea even the merit of their works do they found upon the merit of Christ's
obedience: derogating less in truth (though far too much) from the^ virtue of
his Preisthood, then you do in the constitution of your Church from the dignity
of his kingdom in the outward government, and administration of it. 2. Your
national Church is so far from being separated from them, that deny Christ,
as it is indeed, for substance, compact, and gathered of such* to wit of
impure, and profane persons, who whatsoever they do profess ^^ word do deny
in deed, and visibly both ^^^. 2. 15. 16. (...) 4.
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, as the scriptures do expressly testify. And to
deny that apparent wicked and profane men, or Churches, do raise the
foundation of religion, is a profane error, tending to libertiuism: and which
foundeth all religion, and Christianity in the brayn, and nothing in the heart.
Lastly Peter's exhortation upon the occasion in hand, was, that the faithful
Jews should separate from that froward generation: whereupon the general
doctrine is rightly raised, that the faithful at all times must be separated
from all froward generations. And of this duty we are to make the greater
conscience, considering the words of the Apostle, which are, that we save our
selves from such froward generations: as indeed (considering the duty we ow
unto our brethren for their humbling, if they be froward in sin; the
discomfort we have in continuing communion with them; the want of that godly
furtherance we should have by our brethren in our holy communion: and lastly
the danger wherein we stand, either to be corrupted by them, or at least to
have our zeal, and other graces of God decayed in us) our salvation does not a
little consist in our departure from the assembly of the profane, as Beza
rightly notes upon this scripture.

Of the same nature with the former place is the next in order; where the
Apostle Paul both departs himself, and separates the disciples from such as
were hardened, and would not obey, but spoke evil of the way of the Lord
before the multitude. Act. 19. 8. 9. But this, you say, proves not our purpose:
and your exceptions are,

First, that our way is not the way of God; 2. that if is were, yet we Mr B.
have not spoken to all your Church, and made it known to all, nor have found
all hard hearted: and 3. that the place teaches separation from such obstinate
wicked, which will not be won to the Church: and that* here is a departing
of some true members of the Church, from such as be not the Church, but not of
members of the true Church, forsaking members of the true Church.

That our way is the way of God, appears by this very scripture Answ.
amongst many others: wherein also we have both the reformists at home, and
reformed Churches abroad giving testimony with us for the substance of it. But
put the case ours be not, yet if the way of the reformed Churches be the way of
God, our separation is justified by this scripture. For first, your convocatio^
house and Church representative is hardened against the way of the reformed
Churches, blaspheming, and persecuting it, and all them that either seek, or
plead for it. And their act, being the chief, is, by your own grant, to be
accounted the act of all, though the rest come not Page 145.
to consent: so that you are all, by your own words, to be acounted a
disobedient, and hardened people, upon the former praemises, namely, that the
way of the reformed Churches, is the way of God. But howsoever it be either
with us, or them* yet if that Mat. 7.
narrow way, whereof Christ speaks, that leads unto life, be the way of God,
then surely there are thowsands in your national Church, and many in every
parish Ch: in the kingdom, which speak evil of the way of God, yea hate and
persequute it to the utmost of their power, and all them, that endeavor in any
uprightnes to walk in it. Whereof you your self also Mr B. in former days have
had experience: though for the opposing, reviling, and persequuting of us, you*
and they agreed well, and like Herod, and Pylate were made friends. Now if we
separate from all them which thus disobey, and speak evil of the way of God,
we know too well, we can have no communion with any assembly in the Land.
Lastly, you are greatly overseen in saying that Paul's separation was not from
the Church, nor members of the true Church. It was from the Church of the
Jews, and the members of that Church with whom formerly he had held co^manion,
as the true Church of God; which for this their disobedience, Romans 11.
and unbelief, were broken off, and so afterward in deed to be reputed.

One scripture more remayns to be considered of, and that is Ioh: 17 ver. 6. 9.
14. 15. 16. whence we believe, and confess, that the true visible Church of
Christ is gathered by separation from the world, and the men of the world
visibly. Against this our exposition Mr B. excepts, and will have this place
understood of Mr B.
the elect only, that are ordained to life: and of invisible members: and of
men as they are holy before God: rating us, as egregious deceiptful abusers of
this scripture, in applying it to the visible members, or Church.

But most unjustly as appears by these three plain reasons. Answ.


First, because Judas was one of them, whom the Father had given I.
unto Christ out of the world, whom alone of all them so given him, he had
lost, that the scripture might be fulfilled. verse. 6. 12. whence it is evident
to all men, that do not blind their eyes, that Christ here speaks of such a
donation, or gift, as was visible, or of such members as were visibly, and in
respect of men separated, and sanctified from the world unto God, and not at
all of any invisible gift, or members.

Secondly, Christ speaks of such persons as the world hated, because II.
they were not of the world: ver. 14. but the wicked world does not hate men,
as they are elect before God, and invisibly, or inwardly separated, and
sanctified, but as they are outwardly such, and so separated, whether they be
inwardly so, or no.

Lastly, Christ speaks of such a choosing out of the world, as III.
he does of a sending into the world, ver. 18. which sending as it was visible,
and external, so was the selection, and separation spoken of. And say not for
shame, Mr B. that the visible Church of Christ is to be gathered, or consist of
the men of the world visibly. The Church, and world are two distinct, yea two
contrary states, and bodies, though the body of your national Church were at
the first gathered, and has over since consisted of the world, and all.

To conclude, this light man, being pressed by Mr Ainsworth in another place of
his book with this scripture, both affirms, and Page 254.
proves by many reasons, that Christ here speaks of a mixed company, which the
elect are not. And howsoever his reasons be not only unsound, but indeed
ungodly, wherein he affirms Christ to have been in respect of men the
mediator of Paul, vvhylst Mat. 27. 24. 17. with Luke 23. 34.
he continued a persequutour, and of others wicked in respect of men, yea of
Pylate, and the soldiers, pagans, and infidels, because he prayed for them,
(whereas Christ prayer for them was no proper effect of his Mediatourship for
his body, except we hold universal redemption, and make the whole world his
body, but a most perfect demonstration of his love toward his enemies, left
also for a pattern unto us, to the worlds end) yet do they, with that he there
labors to prove by them, compared with his affirmation of the contrary, in
this place, manifest his great both weakness, and lightness in the things he
affirms.

And thus I return to the exposition of 2 Cor. 6. and in it to prove, that the
Apostles meaning is to forbid communion, and fellowship not only with wicked
works, but also with the wicked persons themselves that walk in them. For which
purpose I do ad this one only consideration: namely that the Prophet Isaiah
(from whom the Apostle borrows this phrase, come out from among them, verse.
17.
separate your selves, and touch none unclean thing, and I will receive you)
does not so properly speak of the departure, or separation, which the Priests
were to make from the sins of the Babylonians, as from their coasts, and
persons: thereby teaching all Christians, which are that spiritual house, and
holy Preisthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through
Christ, 1 Pet. ^. 8. Rev. 1. 6. that their separation, and departure must be
spiritually, as theirs was civilly, not only from the sins of spiritual
Babylonians, or other unbelievers, and unclean persons, but even from their
persons also, and from all personal communion with them. And as in the type,
he that touched a dead man, or leper, or him that had an issue upon him, or
other unclean person, or was by him touched, was legally unclean, and polluted,
as well as he that touched, or was towched by any unclean thing whatsoever:
Levit. 5. 7. 11. so in the thing typed, and truth, he that touches, or is
touched by a man spiritually dead in sins, or that has an issue of sin, or
spiritual leprosy running upon him, he is spiritually polluted and defiled.
Now without touching cannot the numbers of the same body, and one of 1 Cor. 12.
2. 13. 27.
another possibly consist.

But were it, as we would have it, that not only the works, but even the
workers of wickedness were to be avoided for their works sake* yet does Mr B.
take a double exception against our interpretation of this scripture. The
former is, that it serves not our Mr B.
turn, except we prove them all to live in darkness, in unrighteousness, to be in
league with the Devil. etc.

I do answer, that if light and darkness, believers and unbelievers, Answ.
Christ and Beliall, must have no fellowship together, then must the believers,
and they that are in Christ forbear fellowship with all unbelievers, and men
of Beliall, so continuing incorrigible: and if any believers, or Christians
will notwithstanding still combyne with unbelievers, and godles men, it is
their sin thus to confound the order which God has set in separating from
the faithful, with whom he has joined them, by joining with the unbelievers,
and unfaithful, from whom he has 1 Cor. 4. 7.
separated them; yea I add, in doviding Christ from himself, and uniting him
with Beliall, and the Divill, in his members, what in them lies. To conclude,
what reason has Mr B. thus to object, that all which are amongst them, live
not in darkness, and that all are not in league with the Devil, considring, that
by his own exposition of this place, the very societies of Papists are to be
left as no people of God, and yet all Papists live not in darkness, as here he
understands it, nor are in league with the devil: neither in deed had they
need, considering what league of spiritual communion he professes else where
he will have with many of them.

Mr B. 2. objection, is, (which he also makes the 4. head of his Mr B.
division) that there is no proportion betwixt the persons here mentioned, to
be separated from, being infidels, and such as were no members of the Church,
and Gentiles, that had enterteyned no profession of Christ, on the one side:
and the members of the Church on the other side: and that the consequence
follows not from infidels, Heathens, Pagans, Idolaters, led by the Devil, to
Christians professing Christ, though in life not answerable to their profession.

Even now you justified separation from Papists by this scripture: Answ.
and here you restreyn it unto Infidels, and Gentiles, that had not enterteyned
any profession of Christ: as though Papists were infidels, or without all
profession of Christ, which is contrary both to truth, and to your own express
affirmation page 132. 225. 226.
every where.

But my answer is, that howsoever infidelity, and Idolatry be two grievous
sins, and which do principally separate those which continue in them, from
God, and his Church, yet not they alone, but any other transgressions as well
as they, obstinately stood in, do raise this wall of separation: as is
manifest in the scriptures.

And first, the Apostle in this very place disioynes righteousness and I.
unrighteousness, light and darkness, as far a sunder, as believers and
unbelievers, as the temple of God and Idols: in which former also, the union
betwixt Christ and Belial is as monstrous, as in the latter. Unto which I do
also add, that Mr B. in this very place, debarring infidels, and idolaters
from being matter of the true Church, Romans 8. 14. Gal. 5. 15. 2 Timothy 2. 26. 1
Ioh. ^3. 8.
lays this down as a cause, or reason, that they are led by the Devil:
whereupon it follows, that since none other wicked men are led by Christ, but
all by the Devil, as well as they, that none other can be matter of the true
Church, more then they. And that some persons led by the Devil should be matter
of the Church, and some not, is a distinction not found in the scriptures, but
devised for a remedy against the iniquities of the times, and for the avoiding
of trouble, and dissipation. I^.


Secondly, as the scriptures do every where denounce the same judgments upon
other wicked men, and upon idolaters, and infidels; for example, that, as well
he Ezech. 18 and 11. 12. 13.
that de^ileth his neighbors wife, or oppresses the poor, or gives forth
upon usury, shall die the death, as he that eats upon the mountains, or lifts
up his eyes unto the Idols: and that as well Rev. 22. 1^. see also chap^. 2^. 8.
whoremongers, un^rtherers, and such as love, or make lies* as Idolaters,
shall be without the heavenly Jerusalem: so do they also both warrant, and direct
us the same course of walking toward the one, and other. The Lord Jesus, Mat.
18. 17. enjoins the Church to account every obstinate offender as an Heathen.
And the Apostle Paul gives the Corinthians in charge as much to avoid 1 Cor. 5.
11.
form^atours, covetous persons, raylers, drunkers, and ^xtortioners, as
Idolaters. And no marvayl, for Ephe. 5. 5*
covetous persons are Idolaters; and so are carnal men, Idolaters, making
Phil. 3. 19.
their belly their God. Unto these add, that the same Apostle unto Ch: 1. 15
16.
T^tus calls unholy, and profane persons (what profession of God soever they
make) (...).
unbeleevers, or Infidels, which are the same. Which scripture I wish the
Reader to observe in respect of Mr B. bold ch^lendge of all the Brownists in
the world to show the term, or name of unbelievers to be given to such as are
not become absolute Apostates from Christ. Page 2^* ^.


Lastly, unto that which Mr B. ob^^^teth in the fifth, and last place against
our exposition of this scripture to the Corinth: for our separation, namely
that at this very time, when the Apostles thus Mr B.
writ, there were of them which did partake with the heathen that they were a
mixed company, among whom were dissentions, envying, open incest, drunkenness at
the Lords supper, fornication, wantonness, men denying the resurrection, I do
give this answer.

As there was this mixture in the Church at this time, so does Answ.
the Apostle most severely reprove the same. For the incestuous man suffered
uncensured, he pronounces the whole lump levened, 1. Epist. 5. chapt: For the
abuse of the Lords supper, that they came together not with profit, but with
hurt, chap. 11. 17. where I entreat the reader also to take knowledge of the
counsayl, which upon that occasion Beza gives in his Annotations upon ver. 31.
which is, that we try, and examine our selves, by faith, and repentance,
separating our selves from the wick^d. For this very sin here spoken of* namely
their partaking with Idols in the Idolothytes, that they could not partake of
the Lords supper. 1 Cor. 10 21.
You cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils. You cannot be
partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of Devils. And in this very
place about which we now contend, that except they separated themselves, and
left this their ungodly mixture, they could not have the promise of the Lord,
that he would dwell among them, and walk there, and that he would be their God,
and have them his people, ver. 16. And does the holy Ghost in leaving these
things recorded give any countenance to a mixed company? or can you from hence
either take unto your self, or give unto others any comfort in your, or their
confused walking? Will you make your self a medicine of their poison? or a
plaster of their ulcers? You are a physician of no val^w. Besides, it must be
considered, that all the evils mentioned amongst the Corinthians were contrary
to their constitution, and so many aberrations, and defections from that
estate, and condition wherein the the Ch: was gathered. It is evident that Paul
1 Cor. 3. 6. 9.
planted the Ch: at Corinth, he being Gods labourer, and it Gods husbandry. Now
who dare open so profane a mouth, as to affirm, that this faithful labourer
would plant the Lords vineyard with such imps, or gather unto him a Church of
any such slagitious persons, as fornicators, drunkers, incestuous men, or such
as denied the resurrection?

But what is this to your national Church, which was constituted, and
gathered, for the greatest part, of fornicatours, drunkerds, blasphemers and
the like? with such wild branches was your vineyard planted.

Thus much of our interpretation, and application of 2 Cor. 6.

I will here only add one argument more to prove your national Church
incapable of the new covenant, or testament, by which you your self do grant,
and truly, the Church of Christ to be formed.

The Prophet Jeremy spe^king in the name of the Lord, of the calling of the
Gentiles into the new covenant, or testament, as the author to the Hebrews
expounds him, testifies, that with whom soever the Lord would make that
^ere. 31. 3^ 33. 34. Heb 8. 8. 10. 11. 12.
testament, or covenant, he would put his law in their mind, and write them in
their heart, and so be their God, and make them his people: and that they
should all know him from the least to the greatest, and that he would be
merciful unto their s^^nes, and remember their iniquities no more. But your
national Ch: never came within the compass of this promise, that all in it
should know the Lord, have their sins forgiven them, and his laws written in
their heart. Therefore your national Church is not within the Lords covenant,
nor ever (...), nor his people having Page 153.
him for their God. Your exceptious in your 2. book to this Argument are
insufficient. The first is, that by this exposition hypocrit^s should not be
under the covenant, because the law of God is not written in their hearts. But
my answer is that hypocrites in respect of God and his secret, invisible, and
approving will, and calling, are not of the Church, nor under the covenant:
but in respect of men, and of the revealed will of God, according to which me^
must judge, all that are outwardly holy, have their sins forgiven, and the law
of God written in their hearts. And to your 2. exception, namely, that the place
is not understood barely of a member of the visible Church, but so of it, as
withal he be an elect saint, I do answer, it is true you say, ^o^sidering what
bare members of the visible Church you make, and of what members your Church is
most what made, even such as ar both bare, and empty of all grace, and
appearance of grace. But let them be such in any measure, as of whom the Lord
in his word gives approbation, and whom he entitles to the visible ordinances
in his Church, and then they are not barely visible members, as you speak, but
elect saints also, in the respects formerly mentioned. It is evident that both
Jeremy, and the Apostle to the Hebrews speak of the new testament, or covenant
of grace, whereof Christ is the mediator in his own blood; opposed to the old
testament, and covenant of works established by Moses in the blood of bulls,
and goats: and of the persons with whom the Lord makes this covenant, and
which have legacies in this will, and testament of Christ, which he has also
confirmed by his death: which do all know God, and have his law written in
their hearts, and their sins pardoned. And there is nothing more derogatory to
the grace of God, and blood of Christ, then that any within the compass of
this covenant of grace, or having a portion in this testament established in
Christ's blood, should not have his iniquities forgiven, and his heart
sanctified by the spirit, truly or in appearance, as he is truly or
apparently partaker of the former graces. And here also appears the vanity of
your third exception so often repeated by you, to wit, that you are not all
without the law of God written in your hearts, and without the forgivenes of
sins, but that some of you have obtained this grace. As though the quaestion
were of some few in your Church, and not of the whole Church. If you minded
what you had in hand, you should see, that to prove your Church within the
covenant of the new testament, you were bound to manifest, not that some few,
but that all the members of it were (at the least in the constitution)
partakers, of those promises, wherein it is established: the reason is because
not some few severally, but all the members jointly considered, do make the
Church.

John in Chap. 9. 7. 8.
the Revelation describing the Locusts, says of them, that they had faces like
the faces of men, and hair like the hair of women. Does it therefore follow
they were men, or women, because they had eyes, mouths, noses, and some other
members that men, and women have? So neither is a profane people a true
Christian Church, or body of Christ for some few Christianlike persons
v^tequally yoked with them, since the Church, or body, as I have formerly said,
consists not of some few but of all the members coupled, and combyned
together in one communion.

And thus much to prove that lewd and ungodly persons, so continuing, are
incapable of the new covenant, or testament consumed by the death of Christ:
and that they have no fellowship, or union with God in Christ, in whom alone he
establishes his covenant: and if any man will affirm the contrary, not I, but
John by the word of God, reproves him expressly for 1 Ioh. ^. 8
a liar. And in deed what more impudent untruth can there be affirmed, then
that an apparent visible lim of Satan should be an apparent, or visible member
of Christ, or that graceless persons should be within the covenant of grace,
and salvation, as is that coven^^t into which the Lord gathers, and in which
he uniteth his Ch: unto himself?

For conclusion of this point, let the reader observe, that as the Church is
essentially constituted by this union of the members with God, and one with
another, so, consider it as an ecclesiastical policy instituted by Christ the
King thereof; and then that form, or ord^r of government, which he has set,
and which the Apostolik Churches used, and enjoyed, is the form of it: as it is
in all other po^ici^s, corporations, and common wealths in the world. Which
form of government the Church of England is so far from enjoying, a^ it hates
worse then Papists all that in any measure desire it.

Now as from the matter, and form of the Church concurring do arise the
properties, so would Mr B. in the next place justify against us, that the
congregations amongst them have the true visible properties of the Church,
which he makes three in number: the first, their continuance Mr B.
in he^^^ng of the d^^h me of Christ re^r^ved, and using of the sacraments, and
prayer. 2. the holding out of this truth, and the sacraments, as banners
displayed against the enemy. 3. a care for the welfare of all, and every one
for the whole, and each for other: though in his ^ag ^83. ^84. ^85.
2. book (as if it ^ad not been he) 1. the h^ldin^ out of the profession of the
person covena^ted with, Christ Jesus: 2. the holding the words of the
covenant^, the written w^^^ of God: 3. the m(...)ng of the publication of this
covenant by the (...) and (...) the assemblies, are become the properties of
the Church: as if the Church were as chaungeable in her properties, as (...) in
his.

And here I must needs take knowledge of Mr B. distinction in Answ.
his* 2. book betwixt the properties and privileges of the Church, and the
rather, because he lays it down with great ostentation for our learning, as he
says. His distinction is, that properties arise from within the Church, and
privileges from without: and my learning from his distinction is, that he
undertakes to teach others, where he has not yet learnt himself. His error
then is in the too streyt acceptio^ of the term property, which he should take
in a larger sense, as Mr Smyth has rightly taught him: namely that, whatsoever
is proper unto a person, or thing (whether within, or without) and not common
to other things, or persons with him, or it, that is a property, or property of
that person, or thing. And so since all the privileges wherewith Christ has
endowed his Church, are proper, and peculiar unto the Church, and not common to
her with the world, it is most evident, they are all of them the Churches
properties, and so to be accounted, though she may for a time want the actual
use of many of them. And even those privileges, which your self bring for
instances, are true properties of the Church: as to be called saints, faithful,
elect: to suffer for Christ: to be the ark to keep the books of the covenant:
to set to the seals: to use the keys to open, and to shut heaven: then which
what can be more proper or peculiar unto the Church? And it is strange that
sayntship, and holiness, grace to suffer for Christ, and the like should not be
accounted more natural propertyes of the Church, then a profane profession of
faith and usurpation of some ordinances of religion by lewd, and ungodly
persons.

But towching the properties of the Church by you laid down, my answer is, that
except your national Church be that true Israel of God, which he has
admitted jointly, and severally into the covenant and fellowship of grace, and
salvation, and to whom he has given the promises of that covenant, and to whom
by his revealed will the seals, and sacraments for the confirmation of those
promises, do apperteyn, the more you meddle with this covenant by professing or
publishing it, the more you take Gods name in vayn; and the more of the
ordinances of God, and his covenant, you use, and enjoy, the more you abuse,
and vsurp: and the longer you continue in so doing, the more dangerous is your
estate, and the more to be bewailed.

And for the things themselves by which you would have the Ch: of Christ
distinguished from all other assemblies, they are such, as may in the outward
ceremony, and observation of them, without any sanctified use (which is the
point in controversy between me and you) both be performed, and continued in,
either for fear, or fashion by any accursed conventicle of atheists,
murderers, adulterers or the like; yea by a company of men, and women
excommunicated for these, and the like tra^sgressions. And can these things
which ly thus in common to all, be the true properties of the Church?

2. I must be bold to tell you Mr B. that the holding out of the truth, and
sacraments are not so properly the displayed banners of your Church, as is the
observation of your popish ceremonies. The surplise is a banner far broader
displayed then the preaching of the gospel, or ministration of the sacraments;
the cross is a standard higher advanced then baptism; so is kneeling, then the
Lords supper: without th^se neither the word may be preached, nor the
sacraments administered, but where these banners are set up, and fair borne,
there is that which is required, and will serve the turn, though there be very
little truth held out, either by preaching, knowledge, or obedience, but the
contrary.

Lastly, where speaking of the marks, and tokens of the true Ch: you will the
reader to observe well, that they are not the word truly preached, nor the
sacraments rightly administered: but the true word preached, and the true
sacraments administered* I cannot but observe it well, and in it, both your
error, and lightness. In your little page 13. 14.
catechism printed 1602. you demand this quaestion* What are the marks of the
true Church here on earth? to which your answer is, amongst some other things:
Christ's word truly preached, and his sacraments rightly administered. But now
in your Separatists schism, not the word truly preached, Page 122 132.
but the true word, nor the sacraments rightly administered, but the true
sacraments are the infallible, and convertible marks, and tokens of the Ch: in
the judgment of ill the divines at home, and in all the reformed Churches in
Christendom. Now that which I observe hence is, that Mr B. is one in his
catechism, where he labors with good conscience to instruct his people in the
knowledge of God, and another in his Invective, headily begun, and
unconscionably prosequuted. In the former he endeavored with good conscience
to lay down the grounds of Christian religion: but now considering that the
Christian grounds there laid will not bear the Antichristian confused
building, which he is to defend in his latter book, he chooses rather to raze
his former Christian foundations, and to lay new, and those contrary, then to
leave one stone of Babell vndawbed with his untempered mortar. Now for the
point it self let the reader observe these few particulars.

First, that rightly, and truly in preaching, and administration, are by Mr B.
very ignorantly restrained to the holy graces of the Church: for which, right,
and lawful persons by, and to whom these administrations are to be made, are
required. And are persons graces, Mr Bernard?

2. It is not true you affirm, that all divines hold the true word, and true
sacraments (though not truly nor rightly administered) the infallible tokens of
the Church. I do not remember that ever I read this phrase the true word
before, in any writers. Such as write of these things are generally against
you, as you are against Art. 19.
the truth. Your own articles of religion condemn you, which make it a property
of the Church to have the sacraments duly administered. And since the word, and
sacraments are divine ordinances instituted by the Lord for certain ends, and
purposes, and determined to circumstances of persons, as by, and to whom they
must be administered, it is necessary we measure, and defyne them by the manner
of ministration: otherwise we make them but as the charms of wizards, or at
the best, as the prayers of Papists, which they account true, if so many words
be said over by whomsoever, or howsoever. The word of God may be, and often times
is, in a great measure preached, or published upon a stage; and what if the
sacraments should be added to it, were here a true Church marked out? And as
the word, and sacraments may be sacrilegiously usurped by them which are no
Church of Christ, nor have any right at all unto them, so may the true Church
of Christ be for a time without them, though never without spiritual right
unto them; as in the time of some great plague, when the Church dare not
assemble, or of persequ^tion, when it is severed either by bonds, or ^light. It
does not then cease to be a Church, no nor a visible Church neither. It remayns
visible in it self though it be not actually seen, or open to the ey of all (as
you speak) as colors are always visible, and sou^ds audible in themselves,
though for the present they be neither seen nor heard. But what do I striving
with this man, which needs none other adversary but himself? As he crosses his
first book with his second: so does he both cross, and confute his second by
his third. In his first, he will have the word truly taught, and the
sacraments rightly administered to be the marks of the true Church: in his 2.
the true word preached though not truly, and the true sacraments administered
though not rightly, are in^allible tokens, and reciprocally converted with the
Church: in the 3. and last book, Page 286
the Church may be a Ch: without the use of the sacraments for a long time, as
the Ch: of Israel was in the wilderness, so it be not done of contempt: and such
as are either no Church of God at all, or an antichristian assembly, may have,
and vsurp the seals put to a blank as Ismael, and Esau out of the Church had
circumcision, and the Papists now have baptism. And that which he says of
Baptism, may as truly be said in cases, of the word, and the publication of it
by reading, and interpretation. As the true Church may for a time want the use
of both, so may a false Ch: vsurp, and abuse both, as well the writing, as the
seal. ' Rev. 2. 1. ^. 5.
He that held the seven stars in his right hand, and walked in the midst of
the seven golden candlesticks, threatened the Church of Ephesus, that he would
shortly remove her candlestickout of his place, for leaving her f^rst love,
except she repented, though she still held and used the word, and sacraments:
and if a company of schismatiques leaving a Church without cause, or of
excommunicates justly cast out of the Church should unite themselves together,
usurping and assuming the word, and sacraments, and professing the covenant
outwardly, and in the letter, did this their ^old usurpation make them a true
visible Church of Christ? The matter is, the true Church may want upon occasion
the use, or administration of the word, and sacraments, but never the right,
power, and interest in, and unto them: so may a false assembly vsurp o^ assume
them, but never have right or power from Christ unto them. And this spiritual
power, and liberty arising from the Lords visible covenant, to communicate,
and partake in the visible promises, and ordinances of it, is the true
essential property of the visible Church: as is the faculty of reasoning the
property of a reasonable man, and the faculty of seeing, hearing, tasting, and
the like, the property of a sensible creature; though neither the one have the
actual use of reason for the present, nor the other of sense.

The third, and last property of the Church Mr B: makes, the care for the
welfare of all, and every one for the whole, and each for other: Mr B.
and this either corporal for the maintenance of the body, as in alms deeds.
Act. 2. 42. or spiritual touching the soul, which stands in admonition, and
exhortation, and so ^orth, as 1 These. 5. 11. which also he says they, and
their congregations have.

It is noted of some persons beside themselves, that all the Answ.
ships they see in the haven, and fair houses in the country, they think, and
say, are theirs: where if they were in their right wits, they would both know
and acknowledge, that they were poor, and beggarly, and had nothing. So is it
with this man, because he reads in the scriptures, that the Apostolical
Churches consisted of saints; and were gathered by voluntary profession, into
the covenant of God; that they had given them, and did enjoy by the Lords gift,
and donation, his word, sacraments, and other ordinances; and did in that holy
communion, whereunto they were called, exercise themseves mutually for the
welfare one of another both bodily, and spiritually: thereupon he concludes
peremptorily that the Church of England, whereof he is, and for which he
pleads, has all these things: and that they have all these properties: where
if he had a sound mind, and an honest heart in the things of God, he would both
see and confess, that things were nothing less with them, then as he says;
and that in stead of this great and universal abundance, whereof he boasts,
there were generally nothing but spiritual beggary, and want. Rev. 3. 1^
Thou say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and
know not how thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor* and blind, and
naked.

More particularly; as you want the office of Deaconship, which Christ has
left by his Apostles for the collection, and distribution of the Churches
alms, and have enterteyned under the true name, a false, and forged office of
half preisthood, perverting and misapplying Book of ordination, Art. 6.
to the justification of it, such holy scriptures, as are left for the calling,
and ministration of true, and lawful Deacons in the Church of Christ: so is
there not that care for the bodily welfare one of another amongst you in any
measure, whereof you boast. The needless, and endless suits, and quarrels
amongst you filling all your courts, and judgment seats; your daily thefts,
and murders amongst the members of your Church; the continual cousenings, and
circumventions one of another; the vsuryes, oppressions, extortions, which
overflow both country and city, as did the waters in the time of Noah, both the
valleys, and hills, do too manifestly show how far you are from this care of
the welfare each of other bodily, whereof you thus vainly boast. But though this
care of each for other, both bodily and spiritually, be almost wholly Mr B.
wanting, yet (say you) the Church is not to be judged a false Church, no more
then the household is to be judged a false household, because there is not that
care that ought to be amongst them of the family: or a man a false man if
through folly, madness, or wilfulnes, he neglects the welfare of his body.

Surely it had not need, considering how not only this is wanting, Answ.
but how the contrary abounds in all places. And to let pass all other
matters, no man is ignorant what care the two great factions in the Church,
that of the Prelates, and the other of the Reformists do take, each for other,
namely how each may subvert, and root out the other. And for your similitudes
borrowed from an household, and a body, as we deny your Church to be Ephe. 2.
19. and 4. 16
that household of God, or body of Christ, wherein every member has his
effectual working, in his measure, as the Apostle speaks, so is there no way
the like reason of them, and of the Church, in the respect, wherein you compare
them. A man does not, nor cannot cease to be a true man naturally by any
means, if his person survive: neither can a family cease to be a true family
civily, if it be not dissipated and dissolved: but a Church though the same
persons survive still, and combyne together, as they did, may cease to be the
true Church of Christ: and may either become no Church by forsaking all
profession of Christianity, or a false Church by holding, and professing
themselves still Christians, and in fellowship with God through Christ, when
being considered by the revealed will of God, and testament of Christ, they are
in truth and in deed, neither the one, nor the other. And considering what
Epist. 3. 10.
John says, that he which loves not his brother, and so consequently cares
not for his welfare which issues from the former, as the stream from the
spring, is not of God, nor of his children, but of the children of the Devil;
and withal, that you your self right now did place the form, and covenant of
the Church in a great measure, in the manifestation, and testimony of love in
the members each to other, and so consequently of care each for the welfare of
other, I see not how that Church can be accounted the household of God
consisting of his children by the word of God, or the body of Christ united and
coupled together of his members, by your own doctrine, where this love of, and
care for each other is visibly, and outwardly wanting.

But to pass over all other things, the point upon which Mr B. insists, and
which he would most gladly fasten upon the reader, is, Mr B.
that the power of the censures, and of excommunication, termed by the name of
discipline, howsoever it be a thing necessary for the well being of the Church,
yet is it no essential property, nor of such necessity, but that a true Church
may be without it. And this (wanting scriptures, or reasons to confirm it) he
affirms again, and again, and in the end, illustrates by a similtude taken from
a man who is not therefore a false man, though he can neither see, nor g^e, nor
speak.

It is recorded of one THEODOTIVS, that having denied Christ Answ.
in persequution, to lessen his sin, he went about to lessen Christ, and taught
that he was mere man, and not God: so many, in the case of Christ's government,
that their own and other men's sin may seem lesser, in not using, or
submitting unto it, do labor to extenuate, and make it less excellent, or
useful then it is: and thereupon one tells us it is not a part of Gods
worship, nor of religion; another that it is a thing indifferent, arbytrary,
and changeable; a third that it is not simply necessary for the true Church: as
Mr B: in this place. The unsoundness of whose affirmation, and illustration, I
will by and by manifest, the Lord assisting me; in the mean while I do desire
the reader to observe with me these two things in his writings about this point.

The former is, that, in laboring thus earnestly to persuade (as here he does)
that the power of excommunication is not of simple necessity, he in effect
graunts that, which all men know to be true, namely, that the Churches in
England do want this power* Now if here he answer, as he does in his "2. book,
that, though page 261.
the power of excommunication ^e not in every parish, yet it is in the Church
of England in which is comprehended all pa^rishes, and all superior power over
these Parishes, in which is the power of Christ, I reply these particulars.

First that he might thus answer, though one Bishop alone had engrossed into
his hands all this power; yea a Papist might answer thus for the Popes sole
authority over all the Churches in the world, yea though he should communicate
the same with no other person, or persons.

2. Let this man's shifting be well noted. When both in this, and the other book
he pleads for the Ministry in the Church, he passes by the National,
Provincial, and Diocesan Ministry, and speaks only of the Ministry in some
parishes, where some honest zealous preachers are, but now coming to plead for
the power of Christ in the Church, he takes the contrary course, and passing by
the parishes, takes his flight to the National, Provincial, and Diocesan
Ministry there to find comfort.

3. the quaestion here as he himself puts it, page 125. of this book is about
particular congregations, which, he says, there are with them, having true
matter, true form, and true properties. whereof excommunication is one. To this
also add, that in the end of his book he a^oucheth the Ministers affirmation,
that this power is given to the particular page 180.
congregations in the land.

4. and lastly, I have formerly manifested, from Mat. 18. and 1 Cor. 5. that
this power, and praerogative is given to a particular congregation, (besides
which the new testament acknowledges none other visible Church:) and if that
one particular Math. 18 ^^. 20. 1 Cor. ^ 2. and ^. 4. 5 6. 12. 13.
Church, or congregation a^* Corinth gathered together into the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, had the promise of his presence, and that he would be in the
m^ddest of them, and were by this power of the Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver to
Sat^n, purge out, judge, and put away wicked men from among them (for failing
in which duty, they were reproved by the Apostle) then why not every other
particular Church or congregation of Gods people, as well as that one?
espetially since that, as all other scriptures, was written for our learning;
and that there is but Ephe. 4. 4. 5.
one Church, or body, as there is but one Lord: one, that is, in matter, form,
and essential properties. see page 267


The 2. thing I desire may be noted, is, that Mr B: does if not page 126.
deceiptfully, yet unfitly comprehend the power of the censures under the care
for the welfare of the Church: since this power may be full and entire, where
the care is either very little, or not at all: as it came to pass in the
Church of Corinth, which had this power 1 Cor. 5.
always amongst them, but neglected the use of it, and therein the care for
the welfare of the Church which they should have had, and for which neglect
they were reproved by the Apostle.

Now for the similitude, I do except against it in a double respect: first for
that God does often times deprive a man of the natural power of seeing, going,
and speaking, by natural infirmities within, or bodily violence from without:
but Christ never deprives his Church of this spiritual power of
excommunication, neither can it be impeached by any outward violence: only
Antichrist exalting himself against all that is called God, and intruding
himself into the throne of Christ, does deprive the Church of God, and of
Christ, of this liberty, and power; and so all those Churches, or congregations
over whom he thus usurps, receive his mark, and are in that respect subject
to his judgment. 2. Mr B: as I have formerly observed, does most unaptly
compare the power of casting out offenders to the faculty of seeing, speaking,
and the like: it is more fitly resembled to the want of power to void, and
purge excrements, which is prodigious in nature; and so neither the natural,
nor spiritual body so constituted can possibly consist, or live. And for the
parts of the body, to which he here has reference, and the like; they do more
fitly resemble the officers of the Church, then the ordinance of
excommunication: the eyes, and mouth the Bishops, and Elders, which are to
oversee, and teach the Church: the hands, the Deacons, who are to distribute
her alms. And a^ there may be a true (though an imperfect) natural body
without these parts, so may there be a true visible Church, or body of Christ,
without these officers, though imperfect, and defective.

It now remayns I lay down some reasons to prove the power of the censures, and
of excommunication, simply necessary unto the Church of Christ. The Reasons are,

First, because it is simply necessary for the being of a Church, I.
that there be power for true members to join together, and so to receive
others unto them: even so consequently must there be power to disioyn, and cut
of false members.

2. Excommunication, and absolution are of the same nature II.
with preaching the gospel: yea the very same, particularly applied to persons
obstinate, and repentant, which preaching is in the general. The Romans 1. 16.
preaching of the gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes: excommunication is 1 Cor. 5. 4* 5.
the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the destruction of the flesh, of him
that is otherwise incorrigible, that his spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus. The preaching of the gospel makes the first, or major proposition
thus; he that believes not, and repents not, is bound in heaven, and has his
sinn^ vnremitted; but he that believes, and repents, his sinn^ are pardoned,
and he loosed in heaven. Now excommunication, and absolution applied to a
particular person, and occasion, do make the second, or minor proposition thus:
thou beleevest not, or repentest not of this thy sin, and therefore thou art
bound in heaven, and thy sins unpardoned: and so of absolution, or the
loosing of sins. Add also unto these things, that the same Bishops, or Elders
are to preach the gospel in way of doctrine, and to minister the censures in
way of discipline, though in some diverse order, as I have formerly showed. And
these two being the two mayn duties of the Ministers, comprehended under this
general duty of Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 1. 2. ^ Tim. 5. 17
feeding the stock, must needs be of the same nature: both of them mayn, and
necessary parts of Gods worship, and of religion, and so to be performed upon
the Lords day, as his work, and in the assembly of the saints, as an exercise
of their holy communion, howsoever with you, and others, they are made a
consistory, and working day matter, to the great violation, and indignity of
the kingdom of Christ, in the dispensation of it in his Church.

3. The want of excommunicating and censuring wicked men III.
^ Cor. 5. 6.
levens the whole lump: and makes the whole particular congregation whereof
they are, accessory to their sin: and to purpose to continue in such a
congregation, or Church, as has not this power, is to purpose to continue in
disobedience to the commandment of the Lord Jesus which he has laid upon all
his disciples to Math. 18. 1. 15. 17
tell the Church in the order by him prescribed.

4. Without the censures, the Church Rev. 18. 2
becomes of Syon, Babylon, IIII.
even the habitation of Devils, and the hold of all ^owl spirits, and a cage of
every unclean, and hateful byrd. And so Mr B. in his forenamed page 15. 16.
catechis^^^ teaches that the holy, and right use of discipline, and of
excommunication serves to maint^yn the Church, and to over throw haeresy, that
destroys the foundation, and other mischiefs. And since haeresy destroys the
foundation, as Mr B. teaches; and that 1 Cor. 1^ 19.
there must be haeresies in the Church, as Paul teaches: and that the Church
cannot possibly be purged of them, without excommunication; that must needs be
absolutely necessary to the Church, without which the Church must absolutely
necessarily come to naught.

To these I do add, as a fifth, and last Reason, that as Math. ^. 16. 1 Pet. 2
12. and 3. 1 Romans 2. 24.
the glory V.
of God, and salvation of them without, are most furthered, and advantaged by
the holy conversation of the members of the Church: and on the contrary most
disadvantaged, and hindered, by their unholy, and profane courses: so is the
power of excommunication, by which solemn ordinance alo^e, prophanenes and
impiety are rooted out, of absolute necessity for the Churches of Christ. And
of this point I desire the reader to take knowledge, not only as of a matter
of truth, but of conscience also, and for practice.

That which Mr B: reputes our nynth error, is our holding all Mr B.
their ministers false Ministers. Answ.


As I have formerly said of your Churches, so say I here of your ministers:
that if one be false, all are: for all are of one constitution. In deed Mr B:
if he might be let alone, would save himself much labor this way, by
restreyning his defense to some few of the most able, and conscionable men
excluding the rest: and therefore in his former book, he speaks of such
ministers, as God has page 132. 133.
furnished with gifts to discharge their function: with holy graces: and a
blameless lif^: and in his 2. book, he desires to page 290.
be understood of such as are sent of God, and set over congregations,
according to the truth, and true meaning of the laws, and book of ordination.
In which he does directly exclude the Archbishops, Bishops, Suffragans, Deanes,
Archdeacons, Chauncelours, Commissaries, and with them, all pluralists,
non-residents, unpreaching, and profane ministers. For some of these are not
set over congregations at all, but over Provinces, and Diocese: others not in
respect of their offices above named: and others, though they be set over
particular Churches, yet have they neither gifts, nor graces for their
function. But as he were nothing faithful unto a city, that undertaking the
defense of it, should p^ck out here and there a corner most strong, and
defensible, and fortify there, leaving the body of the city to the invasion,
and spoil of any that would assault it: so neither is Mr B: faithful to the
Ministry of England, who pretending the defense of it against us, calls out
here and there a man, whom he will justify, and leaves the body, and all the
principal members of it undefended. And here I would demand of him why he
does not as well defend all the Ministers, in this place, as he did even now
defend all the people, or why a Minister so called, though unapt to teach, and
of a profane life, is not as well a true, though a bad Minister: as a
Christian so called, being ignorant, and of a lewd conversation, a a true,
though a bad Christian? There is one and the same reason of both: though Mr B:
have more reason for to plead the one then the other, considering his own
standing. If he should plead for the ignorant, and profane Ministers, he
should deprive himself of all arguments for the justification of the preaching,
and more conscionable sort: for he rayseth them all, as the reader may see in
both his books, from their gifts, and aptnes to teach, from their holy graces,
their painful and zealous preaching, their suppressing of Popery, and
conversion of souls, with other the like effects of the truths of the gospel
published, and taught by them: which things since he dares not affirm of the
scandalous, and unpreaching Priests, he cunningly passes them by as some small
moat fallen into the Church, by the covetousnes of 2 Book p. ^90. 296.
Much-wormly patrons, but contrary to the true meaning of the laws: and
without the least default of the Bishops, or Archbishops: as though the
covetous Patrons could present them, except the ungodly Bishops had first
ordained them. If he had undertaken the justification (but as true, though not
as good) both of the unpreaching, and preaching Ministers, he must have sought,
and produced such Arguments as would have agreed to both; but finding himself
able to make no show at all for the ignorant, idle, and scandalous sort, having
no colors to paynt, no mortar to dawb over those filthy stones, no not to any
show, he smothers all them, though far the greater both in number, and
authority, and in deed the almost only true formal ministers (according to
the Church canon, and constitution) and presents to the reader a few dispersed,
disgraced, tolerated, and tolerating persons, and undertakes their defense:
manifesting himself a right natural Rev. 1^ 11.
merchant of that great whore, in showing some handful of tolerable wares,
thereby to deceive the simple buyer with the whole piece, or heap of rotten
stuff, which goes with them. Now on the contrary if Mr B. should not have
defended men of lewd conversation, as true visible matter of the Church and
members of Christ's body, he could not have justified with any color, the
National, Provincial, Diocesan, and Parish Churches, or any one of them, as
true; since they were all at the first collected, and do still consist, for the
greatest part, of such people, and so disposed. He therefore takes liberty unto
himself to make such defense, and for so much of his Church, and Ministry, as
will serve his turn amongst the deceived multitude, and of no more.

But the mayn point in this place, and about this matter in hand, to be
considered of, is, whether ability to preach be a qualification, and so
preaching a work, necessarily required in the ministry of Engl: according to
the true meaning of the laws ecclesiastical, and civil, and the book of
ordination. This Mr B. takes for granted affirmatively, and upon it as a mayn
ground builds his whole treatise about this matter: but I on the contrary do
affirm, that this is (and so is known to be to all that mind it, with wisdom,
and good conscience) clean otherwise: and that neither this ability, nor
practice of preaching is of necessity required to the true, and natural
constitution of the English ministry, in the meaning of the laws established
in that case.

And for the confirmation of that I affirm against this man's presumptuous
asseveration, these proofs suffice.

First, the books of Homilies published, and confirmed by law, I.
to be read of such ministers as cannot preach, do evidently declare, that
ability to preach, is not necessarily required of all, in the true meaning of
the law.

2. By the statute law of the land, and in particular by one statute II.
enacted for the prevention of unworthy ministers (though wanting the book, I
cannot set down the title, time, or order of it) he that is either a Bachilour
of arts in one of the Universities; or can give an account of his faith in
latin: or has been brought up in a Bishops house; (though he have been his
porter, or horsekeeper) or has a gift in preaching, is capable of orders, and
may be by the Bishop ordained a minister: so that by the express letter, and
plain meaning of the law aptnes, and ability to teach is not necessarily
required in the English ministry. If he have any one of the three former
qualifications, the law approves of him; and being ordained, the Patron may
present him to any congregation in the land, whom the Bishop also must
institute, the Archdeacon induct, and the people receive; and may be thereunto
compelled, whither they will, or no.

Add unto these, that your canons, and constitutions, framed III.
by the convocation house, and confirmed by the Kings royal assent, and so
being the laws ecclesiastical of your Church, and by your doctrine Mr B. the
Act of all the Church, though the inferiors come not page 144.
to consent, do not only approve an unpreaching Ministry, but also lay deep
curses, and Anathemaes upon all that deny either the truth or lawfulnes of it.
To this also I might annex that it is a very common doctrine with your
Prelates, and their Chaplins, and faction, that Mr Col(...).
preaching is no necessary annexum, or appurtenance unto Orders, which they
also offer to defend against all gainsayers.

But it seems you have special reference to the book of ordination: let us
therefore see what it makes for you, or your purpose. That you build upon, I
know, i^ these words of the Bishop, when he orders his Priest; and delivers him
the Bible in his hand. Take thou authority to preach the word of God, and to
minister the holy sacraments in this congregation, where thou shall be so
appointed. The words I hear, and acknowledge, but the true meaning of the book
I deny it to be, that every Minister should be able to preach. It may as well be
said, it is the meaning of the book, that that every Priest should be ordained
in the particular congregation, where he is to minister, because of the latter
words in this congregation, where thou shall be so appointed: and that he is to
minister the discipline of Christ, as well as the doctrine and sacraments,
because such words pass betwixt him, and the Bishop in another place of the
same book. It is not the least delusion of Satan, or mystery, that such forms
of good words are retained both in the Romish, and English Church, without any
truth either of purpose or practice in those which use them: for by them the
eyes of the simple are easily bleared by such deceivable merchants, as right
now I spoke of: though it be not without a special providence of God, that
these, and the like forms of words should be used, for the more full
conviction, and condemnation of them that choose to be deceived, as I have
formerly noted in this book. page 244.


To conclude this point. The reading of the service book, in form, and manner,
the celebrating of marriage, churching of women, burying of the dead,
conformity, and subscription, are more essential to your ministry, and more
necessarily required by the laws of your Church both civil and
ecclesiastical, then preaching of the gospel is. The wearing of the surplice,
and signing with the cross in baptism are of absolute necessity, without
partial dispensation, yea I may ad violation of oath by the Bishops: whereas
preaching of the word is no such necessary, or essential duty, but a work
casual, accessory, and supererrogatory, which may be done or undone, as the
minister is able, or willing, without any such absolute necessity, as is here
pretended. Hereupon then it follows, that since the preaching of the gospel
is no necessary part, or property of the office of ministry, in the Church of
England, that that ministry cannot be of Christ: as also that the conscionable
and effectual preaching of some men is no justification at all of the office,
which may, and does consist essentially without it, and to which it is but
casual, and accidental; but a commendation of the persons, which, besides the
natural, and necessary parts of their office, do so practice and preach. And
this consideration alone might suffice for answer unto all Mr B. proofs for the
legitimating of the ministry in the Church of England: yet will I for the
further discovering of them (considering the confidence wherewith he propounds
them) descend to the particulars.

In his former book he lays down, and proves by the scriptures these three
sound, and mayn grounds touching the ministry. page 131.
1. that the Lord only ordeyns offices in his Church. 2. that he
distinguishes them one from another, that one may not intrude into an others
office. 3. that he only prescribes the duties to be done in every distinct
office, and so in the fourth place he comes to the qualification and gifting of
men for their functions, and so proceeds to other particulars. But observe his
dealings: when he comes to apply, and compare the ministry of England to, and
with these golden rules, and by them generally and truly propounded, to
justify it in the particulars, he passes them all by in silence, as if he had
utterly forgotten them, and speaks not one word, either of the offices
themselves, or of the distinction of them one from another, or the duties to be
done in page 141.
them; but comes in the very first place to the gifts, and graces of the
persons. And in so doing (like the unrighteous steward) he does wisely, though
nothing less then faithfully. He knows well, that he cannot find in the
scriptures the least color for the offices of Archbishops, Bishops,
Suffragans, Deanes, Archdeacons, half Priests, or Engl: Deacons: nor that the
duties of celebrating marriage, purifying women, burying the dead, reading the
service book in manner, and form, are laid upon the ministers of the gospel, as
duties to be done in their offices: nor that the Provincial, and Diocesan
officers may intrude into their office, which are set over particular
congregations, and deprive them of the power of government; nor the Deacons to
administer the sacraments: nor that any of them may intrude into the office of
the civil Magistrate (as they all do less or more) in meddling with matters of
marriage, divorce, testaments, or with iniuryes, as they respect the body, or
outward man, according to your, and other m^ns exposition of Math. 18. making
ministers Magistrates, and E^ders in the Church, Elders in the gates. These
things he knew, and therefore coming to speak of the ministry in England, and
to apply these general rules to their particular estate, he not so much as once
mentions either the diversity of offices in the Church; or their distinction
one from another: or the several duties to be done in them, least in naming
them, he should (as it could not have been otherwise) have condemned that
thing, which he would so gladly justify. And this I desire the Reader to note
not only against him, but specially against the Ministry he pleads for.

His Arguments to prove the Ministers of England: true Ministers Mr B.
of Christ, follow in order.

The first is because they are not Ministers of Antichrist: and that I.
he would prove by 4. Reasons. 1. by their doctrine, and oath against him. 2.
because they show no obedience unto him. 3. because Antichrist himself
disclaimeth them, as no Ministers, and condemns them, as haeretiques 4.
because Antichrists Ministers are sacrificing and m^ssing Priests, which they
are not. Answ.


Here Mr B. (had he done faithfully) should have cleared our Arguments, by
which in sundry treatises published for that purpose, we have proved them in
respect of their offices, entrances, and administratio^s, the Ministers of
a^tichrist: but thinking it easyer to strike, then to fence, he passes by what
we have written against them, and lays down certain colorable reasons for
them: which I have summarily set down in order: and unto which I return this
answer.

First and generally, that there is one common error in all his Arguments:
namely, that there is no Antichrist, but that great Antichrist the Pope: as
though there were no more Divils but Beelzebub, because he is the chief of the
Divils. I would know of this man, what he thinks of the clergy in King Hen. 8
days, that took the oath of supremacy, and taught against the Pope, opposing
him, and being opposed by him: or what he thinks of the Lutheran Ministers,
that disclaym the Antichrist of Rome as haereticall, and are disclaymed by him,
and yet do abhor from the reformed Churches, and from al communion with them,
for the mayn truths they hold, touching the sacrament, and predestination. The
thing then is, that there are degrees of Antichristianism, and orders of
Antichrists, that is of such as are adversaries unto Christ. In Paul's time that
2 These. 2. 3. 4.
man of sin, and adversary was got into the temple of God: and in John's time 1
Ioh. 2. 18. and 4 3.
many Antichrists were come into the world: and yet there was then neither
Pope, nor mass priest; no nor Diocesan or Provincial Prelate neither. There
was in deed 3 Ioh. 9. 10.
Diotrephes, who sought for praeheminence, and to rob the Church of the power
of Christ, and so 1 Cor. ^. 4.
was an Antichrist, as there were many other impugning Christ the Lord
otherwise: but the great Antichrist of Rome was by many degrees, and long
continuance to be advanced to his throne. And as there were lesser Antichrists
before him, by which he entered: so are there also after him; and those left
behind him in the Church of Engl: out of which he is driven. And those are the
Lord Arch bishops, and Lordbishops, with their orders, and administrations:
unto whom whilst the inferior ministers do swear canonical obedience, they do
by oath promise obedience unto Antichrist, and receive his mark: and so
ministering, are the marked servants of Antichrist, whom they obey: whom they
are also by doctrine to defend, except their oaths, and words disagreed. From
whom if any of them do withdraw this their bounden, and sworn obedience, by
denying subscription unto his orders, or conformity unto his ceremonies, them
he silences, suspends, and deprives as schismatic (if not heretical), and
utterly unworthy of their, and their Churches service. And these things the
reader may apply to Mr B. 3. first several Reasons.

Now to your fourth, and last Argument, viz: that you are no masse-preists, my
answer is, first that you have the same office with mass priests though
reformed of that massing, and some other impietyes: and this both the practice
of your Church, and your doctrine (pleading for succession, and ordination from
Rome, and Romish Bishops, do necessarily confirm. All the massepreists ordained
in Queen Mary's days for that end, were upon their conformity to the orders
then, continued Ministers in their several congregations, in Queen Elizabeth's
days, by virtue of their former ordination. And so are such masse-preists at
this day (though ordained at Rome) received and continued amongst you, upon the
aforenamed conditions. Now it is your own constant affirmation every where,
that ordination makes the minister. Whereupon it follows, that no new
ordination, no new minister, but the old massepreist reformed of such
impieties, wherein Rome exceeds England. 2. it is your doctrine in your first
book, that the ministry makes the Church, and gives denomination unto it: and
in your 2. book, that the Church of Rome is a true Church: whereupon it
follows necessarily, that the ministry in the Church of Rome is a true
Ministry: except a false ministry can make a false Church. And if any order
of ministry be, it is that of the parish priests, for they are the likest the
Pastors in their several charges. Whence I do also conclude, that since the
Romish priests office is a true office though under corruptions, as it was true
Job overshadowed with byles, either the English priests must have the same
office with the^, (though with the byles cured) or else they are not the true
ministers of Christ. And for the name priest, at which (you say) we catch, you
do idly draw it from the Greeks, since it is most evident, that with the
office, the name was tanslated unto you from the Latin, and Romish Church:
their sacerdos being your Priest in your books of ordination, and common
prayer, which you have from them: otherwise why do you not turn the Greek words
praesbyter, and proistamenos, priests in your English Bibles, which are
translated from the originalls.

The sum of the 2. Arg. is that the Ministers of the Church of Engl: II.
are Pastors, and Teachers, that is good sheepheards, such as do keep, Mr B.
feed, and govern the flock; and as are qualified with gifts, and
understanding, and instruct them that are unlearned.

If in stead of Pastors, and Teachers, you had put Parsons, and Answ.
Vicars, your writtes of presentation, and institution would have proved it.
But that you are Pastors, and Teachers, such as Paul speaks of Ephe. 4. by
holy writ you can never manifest. 2. though the things were true you speak both
for your power, and practice, yet except you administered those things by a
lawful calling, in a lawful office, and to a lawful assembly, you were not
true Pastors, and Teachers. But it is not true you say of your selves that you
play the good sheepheards in feeding, that is in providing pasture for the
sheep, and in governing, and ordering them to, and fro, and at it. Your
Prelates govern or rather reign, but teach not: your parish Priests some of
them that can, and list, teach so much as they dare for fear of their
imperious Lords, but govern not.

Your 3. Arg: for your Ministers is, that they are called and sent of III.
God, and of his Ch:, and therefore are true ministers. Their calling, and
sending Mr B.
of God you make his preparing of them with gifts, and graces to be able to
exequute in some measure the office, whereunto he does appoint them. But herein
you are greatly mistaken: the Lords inabling men Answ.
with gifts is one thing, and his calling them to use them in such, and such an
order, is another thing: and though the Lord calls none, but he inables them,
yet he inables many, he never calls. Many counselors, judges, lawyers, and
others in the land, are very able to discharge the office of ministry, but are
not called thereunto of God; if they be, it is their sin not to obey the
heavenly calling, and to become ministers. And as a man may be qualified with
gifts for the ministry, and yet not called of God to use them, (so being
qualified accordingly) he may be a true Minister of the Church, though he be
never called of God at all, as we now speak: So was Judas, who was never
inwardly called of God, that is, persuaded by the work of Gods spirit in his
heart, in the zeal of Gods glory and love of the salvation of men, to take upon
him the office of an Apostle. And what true calling of God the Ministers in the
Church of England have to take upon them their offices, and charges, as they
do, appears in their easy forsaking them upon a little persecution, yea before
it come near them. Of which more hereafter.

Now for the calling of the Ministers by the Church, albeit we put of the more
full handling of it to the 4. Arg. yet something must be said for the present.

And first, though it were true you say, that the Church of England were the
true Church of Christ, yet were not your Ministers called, and sent by the
Church, except a Lordly Prelate be the Ch: of England, for by such a one is
every Minister amongst you, called, and made. 2. I deny here, (as always) your
national Ch: to be the true visible Church of Christ: and that which in this
case, you say, is largely proved, I hope is sufficiently refuted.

But here a demand you make in your answer to Mr Sm: must be satisfied, namely,
why true ministers may not arise as well out of a false page 313.
Church, as a false ministry out of a true Ch:? The latter I agree unto: for
the Church may err, and through error or otherwise, choose a man incapable of
the Ministry by the word of God. Whereupon it* follows, that the Minister
makes not the Church (as you erroneously affirm) for then the Church should in
the very instant become a false Church when she sets up a false Minister. But
your inference I deny. For first evil may arise from good, though by accident,
without any external cause coming between: as sin did from the angels in
heaven, and our first parents in paradise: but so cannot good from evil. 2. the
officers are 1. of, 2 by, 3. in, and 4 for the Church. 1. of it, as members of
the body, and so must be members of a true Church, before they can be true
officers. 2. by it, in respect of their calling, as Gal. 1. 1. and therefore
except they can either be true officers by a false calling, or that a false
Church can give a true calling, they cannot be true in it. 3. in it, as the
accide^ts, or adjuncts in the subject, without which being true, they can have
no more true existence, then reason can have, without a reasonable soul, or
subject. 4. for it, and therefore since the Lord has appointed no ministry
for a false Church, there can by the word of God be no true ministry in it:
and this I wish them to consider, which still adhere to the Church of England
(though they wholly dislike the constitution) for the ministry in it.

Now where you add, that Luther and other worthy Ministers of Christ were
raised up out of the Romish Church, you wrong him and them, and the truth in
them, whilst you would gratify Rome, and England. Luthers Ministry from Rome
was his Fryardome: and is a Friar a true minister of Christ by his office, or
of Artichrist whither? Besides, look what ministry the Church of Rome gave
him, it took from him: and lastly if he had been a true officer or minister of
the Church of Rome, it had been sin in him to have left his charge. Touching
the baptism received in the Romish Church I have formerly spoken; and of our
reteyning it, but not our Ministry, I shall speak hereafter.

That, which is worthy consideration in the fourth Argument IIII.
is, the entrance into the ministry: in the substance of which he tells us,
Mr B.
there is nothing wanting by their laws. For touching the ability, and desire
to teach, and other graces he speaks of, they no more make a minister, then
Exodus 18. 21.
courage, the fear of God, true dealing, and the hatred of of covetousnes make
every man a Magistrate, that is so endowed. Now this entrance he lays down in
4. particulars: 1. presentation. 2. election, 3. probation, and 4. ordination
with imposition of hands. But these in such confusion, and with so many
contradictions, as do evidently show what monsters an ill cause, and a vayn
spirit meeting together, will gender, and bring forth. First, in his former
book page 136. he places the whole calling, (or as he speaks) the making of a
Minister in ordination: and comprehends under it as the 3. parts of it. 1.
examination: 2. election: 3. admission, with imposition of hands. In his second
book he makes ordination but the fourth, and last part of his calling, page
295. as in deed it is, and the same with admission: The reason why he would
thus advance ordination is, because that in Engl: is all in all, being done by
a Bishop, yea though it be by the Bishop of Rome. And so they call their book
they make ministers by, the book of ordination not the book of election, or
choice, or calling of Ministers. The Bishops Lordship swallows up the peoples
liberty: and if he but lay his hands upon a man, and bid him Receive the H.
Ghost, he is a minister of the Church sufficiently ordered.

2. Where in his former book he puts examination, or probation before election:
in his ^. he would have election first, and the probation, or trial of the
parties gifts, and graces to come afterward: mis-interpreting that, which is
written 1 Timothy 3. 10. of probation to be made before election. And the Reason
of this I conceive to be, because the Ministers in England are not only
elected but fully made, before any such trial be taken of them. But I come to
the particulars: and first to that which he calls presentation: for which he
quotes Act. 1. 23 and 6. 6. In which scriptures, especially in the latter of
them, he is much mistaken: the presentation there spoken of not being before,
but after election. The cause, I suppose, of this his confused writing, is the
confused practice in his Church, where the Patron presents his clerk both
after his choosing, and ordeyning. But for the thing it self, (understanding by
presentation the nomination of the person to be chosen, or considered of for
choice) as the officers are in, all other things to go before the people, so
in this ordinarily: provided always the brethrens liberty be not infringed,
but that they may present, or nominate others, if any amongst themselves seem
more fit.

Now for the examination, and trial of the parties gifts, and graces, as we
all know what it is in the Church of England where if a man have the gift of
subscription, conformity, and canonical obedience, though other gift, or grace
he have none, he is a tried minister, and so reputed: which if he want, be his
other gifts, and graces never so eminent, he is neither to enter into, nor
being entered, to continue in his Ministry: so do the things, which you write
in your page 137. 138.
former book, touching this trial, and examination of men, before they be
chose^ into the Ministry, notably condemn both the ministry of your Church,
which you labor to justify, and on the contrary justify sundry practices
amongst us, which else where you condemn for notable errors. The particulars
are these. 1. First, that the gifts of him that is to be chosen, must be
examined according to those things, which the place wherein he must be,
requires, and God has commanded. 2. that the place or office of the
Ministry consists principally in the preaching of the word, administration
of the sacraments, and prayer. 3. that the first, namely the preaching of the
word, is to be preferred in the first place, as being first imposed, Math. 10.
28. 29. and most necessary both to beget, and preserve a people. Iam. 1. 18.
Prove. ^9. 15. 4. that the knowledge; zeal, and utterance of of ^^^ party to be
elected must be examined. Whereupon these things follow. First, that, by your
own grant, men out of office may preach, administer the sacraments, and
prayer: and so exercise their gifts, and graces of knowledge, zeal, and
utterance. But as there is some difference, in the respect in hand, between the
sacraments on the one side, and the word, and prayer on the other: because
there is no special gift required for the administration of them, as there is
for the latter: so is the exercise of prophesying, and prayer out of office (so
much impugned by you) vndenyably justified by this your own position. And as it
is a very presumptuous evil to call any man into the office of a teaching
Elder, whose gift in teaching has not been sufficiently tried out of office,
so is it no less presumption in a Church to set a man over herself for
government, of whose both ability, and faithfulness in the reproving, and
censuring of sins, and in other public affairs of the Church, she has not
taken good trial.

2. If this be true, that the office of the Ministry consist principally in
the preaching of the word, and administration of the sacraments, and prayer,
how is that true, for which you have so much contended in the former part of
your book* that the authority to censure offenders, is in the chief officers,
and governers of the Church, as their special prerogative? page 94.
Can a less principal work be the peculiar priveledge of a more principal
office? It is against the light of nature, and common reason.

More particularly: this observation by you truly made, with that also which
follows, namely, that the preaching of the word is to be praeferred in the
first place, overthrowes the order both of the Prelacy and Preisthood of your
Church. For if the preaching of the gospel be the principal work of the
Ministry, and to be preferred in the first place* then are not your
Provincial and Diocesan Bishops, of God, which have obtained the principal
order, and office in your Church for a less principal work, namely
government; and are preferred to the highest, and first place, not for the
teaching of their Dioseces, and Provinces, which were impossible, though they
desired it, but for ruling of them. You say they are the successors of the
Apostles: but the chief work of the Mat. 28. 19. 20. A^t 5. 42. and 6. 4. Ro^.
1. 15. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 17.
Apostles Ministry was the preaching of the gospel, not ruling (much less
Lording) wherein your Bishops office stands. The order, which the Apostle
Paul has left, is, that those 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Elders, which labor in the word, and doctrine, should have special honor,
and above them, which are employed in ruling: but this order Antichrist has
subverted, as being a course not only too base, and laborious, but even
impossible, for him to honor his Ministers by, as he desired, and has
effected; and has procured not double, and treble, but an hundred fold greater
honor to be ascribed to ruling, and government, then to preaching. And this is
not the least part of that confusion wherein you stand, and against which we
testify. 2. If the office of Ministry consist principally in preaching, how
can your office of Ministry or order of Preisthood, be of Christ, which
co^sists not at all in preaching, as I have showed, but may stand without it,
by the Canons and Laws of your Church: not requiring it necessarily as any
essential property for the being, but only admitting of it, as a convenient
ornament for the well-being: commending in deed the person that uses it, but
no ways justifying the office, which requires it not. Yea most evident it is,
that the Ministry of the Church of England, considering it not only in the
state, and carriage of things, but specially in the civil, and ecclesiastical
laws wherein it is founded, consists more principally in the wearing of a
surplice, then in the preaching of the gospel. To conclude this point, as the
examination of such with you, as are to be ordained, by the Bishop, and his
Chaplayn, is no trial of their gifts of knowledge, zeal, or utterance, or that
they are 1 Timothy ^ 2.
apt to teach, but a devise like the poseing of schoolboyes, without either
warrant fro the scriptures, or good to the Church: so the only examination
which the word of God approves of, is that just, and experimental knowledge
which the Church, by wise observation, is to take of the personal gifts, and
graces of such men, as the Lord rayseth up amongst them, manifesting themselves
in the public exercises of the Church in their places, as there is occasion;
though you Mr Bern. be bold to abuse 1 Timothy 3. 7. to the justification of your
letters testimonial unto the Bishop, which any ungodly person may procure from
other persons as ill as himself, and thereby may find acceptance with some
Bishop or other, as evil as either of both. The Apostle Act. 1. ^^ 21.
Peter directing the disciples, or Church about the choice, or nomination of
one to be chosen into the room of Judas, tells them they must think of such a
man, as had companyed with them all the time, that the Lord Jesus was
conversan^ among them.

And the same Apostle, together with the rest, by the same spirit directs the
Ch: afterward to Act. 6. 2. 3.
choose from among themselves seven men justly qualified, to take upon them the
administration of the Church treasury. And upon the same ground it was that the
Apostles Paul and Barnabas did not streightway upon the gathering of the
Churches of the Gentiles Act. 14: 23.
ordeyn them officers, but a good space after, even when the people had made
good proof and trial of the gifts, and faithfulness of such men as by their
free choice, and election, the Apostles ordained over them. And whom does it
concern so nearely to make proof, or to take observation of them that are to be
called into office, as them that are to call, or choose them, and to commit
their souls unto them? Of which election it follows we consider in the next
place.

And the first thing I purpose about it, is to sum up, and set together a few
of Mr B. sayings, which like so many waves driven by contrary winds, do dash
themselves asunder one against another.

First then he affirms, former book.
page 133. and 138. that the Church i^ t^ separate, and c^^se (...) amongst
others, for Ministers, such as are found fit: and in so saying, what does he
but grant, that the Church is before the Ministers? They that choose must needs
be before the that are chos^n^* How them do the Ministers make the Church? 2.
In his page 325.
2. book he reproacheth Mr Smyth, as an impudent ga^nsayer of the t^^t, for
saying that the Church did elect Mathias, Act. 1. where the Lord did make the
ch^ise: and yet in the same book, page 295. 296. he graunts, that such examples
of practice were then in use for the peoples choosing Ministers; and quotes this
very scripture, with some others for that purpose. 3. he affirms in his page
138.
former book that the guides, and governors of the Ch: were to choose the
Officers, and alleges to that end Act. 14. 23. Neither remembering what he had
formerly written in the same book, namely, that page 97.
the rest of the congregation were to choose the principal to be their mouth,
and to stand for the whole Church: nor yet caring what he was to write in his.
page 295.
2. book, to wit that the people were to choose their ministers, for which he
also brings the same scripture, Act. 14. 23. If this man had been in John
Baptists place, the Jews might well have answered Christ, that they Luke 7. 24.
had gone out to see a reed shaken with the wind.

But to leave his contradictions of himself, and to come to his oppositions
against the truth.

And first, it is erronious^y written by him, and the scriptures Act. 13. 1. 2.
and 14. 23. sinfully perverted to the justification of his error, that
Separat. schism. page 138.
by the Church which, is to chose officers ^s meant the guids, and governors
thereof. That which I have formerly noted out of both his books, espetially his
quoting the latter of these scriptures for the peoples liberty in choosing their
ministers, does give great Mr B.
cause of suspicion, that in this case he thus writes for his purpose, against
Answ.
his conscience, and is in deed condemned of himself. And for the other place,
which is Act. 13. 1. 2. I may as justly (yea and much more) reprove Mr B. for
bringing it for the governors choosing of Paul, and Barnabas, as he Mr Smyth
for bringing Act. 1. for the peoples choosing of Mathias.

For, first Barnabas and Saul were Apostles, as well as Mathias: and therefore
not to be called to their office by man but by God, Gal: 1. 1. and so were of
Act. 13 1 2. and 1. 24. 26.
the Holy Ghost as immediately separated by name, as was Mathias by lot.

2. Mathias was at that time first called to the office of Apostleship, which
before he had not: but Paul, and Barnabas were Act. 9. 1 Cor. 9. 1. 2. 6.
Apostles long before, and at that time designed only to a special work, but
not called to any office.

3. It appears that Paul, and Barnabas were not separated, and sent by the
governors only, but by the Church with them, wherein they ministered, and which
joined with them in prayer, and fasting, and so consequently in dismissing, or
letting them go, ver. 2. 3. though most like the ceremony of imposition of
hands was performed only by the Teachers, and Prophets, but with the foregoing
consent of the Church, according to the express direction of the holy Ghost.
And that, not the governors severally, but the Church with them, separated and
sent them, under the Lords express nomination, appears evidently, Act. 14. 27.
where upon their return* they made relation, not to the officers, but to the
Church gathered together for that purpose, what things the Lord had wrought by
the^, that so not only the grace of God toward the Gentiles might be taken
knowledge of, and magnified, but also that their service, and ministration
might be approved to the Church, which sent them.

And thus all may see how injurious this man is to the right, and liberty of
the brethren, as formerly in the censures, so here in the choice of officers:
making the governors alone the Church both in the one, and the other. And
being both of them Church matters, and parts of the public administration of
Christ's kingdom, the same scriptures which demonstrate the peoples interest in
the one, do conclude the same in the other.

In the beginning, the Lord Jesus, and his Apostles by his spirit, appointed
none other true visible Churches but particular co^gregations of faithful
people; (for of the vanity of representative Churches in the new testament I
have formerly spoken) but as 1 Cor. 8. ^
knowledge puffs up* so within a few ages, the officers and governors of the
Church (being men of knowledge) began to swell with that poisoned humor of
pride, and ambition, wherewith Antichrist had infected them, especially when
they were once settled in peace, and plenty; and taking withal, partly
advantage, by the peoples negligence in themselves, and superstitious
admiration of their guides; and partly occasion by the abuse of their liberty)
have been bold to engrosse the liberties of the whole Church into their own
hands, and with them, the name. They alone must have the keys of the kingdom
of heaven hanging at their girdell, for the opening, and shutting of heaven
gates: which is all one as if in plain terms they should affirm, that to them
alone were committed the oracles of God, the gospel of salvation, see Romans 3.
2. Jude, 3. They alone must 1 Cor. 14 3.
speak in the Church to adif^ing, exhortation, and comfort: and so all the
brethren must be silenced in the exercise of prophesying. To them alone must
the complaints of sins be brought, and they alone must be heard in the
reforming of them: and thus must the bottomless gulf of the governors authority
swallow up the brethrens liberty in the reproving, and censuring of
offenders. They alone are to separate, and choose the ministers: and of this
branch of the power of Christ amongst the rest, must the body of the Church be
stripped. And as there is no end of errors, where they once begin, especially
of those, which tend to the advancement of the man of sin in his Ministers
above all that is called God, so has this iniquity prevayled yet further, even
to the bereaving of the people of the cup in the Lords supper, and of the very
scriptures in their mothers tongue: the Priests alone communicating in both
parts of the supper; and enclosing the scriptures themselves with in the
Romish, or Latin language, which they alone, to speak of* understood. Yea, to
conclude, so effectual has the delusion of Satan been this way, that it has
been universally taught, and believed, that an implicit faith was sufficient
in the lay people, and that no more was required of them then to believe, as
the Church (that is, the ( guides, and governors of the Church) believed,
though they were utterly ignorant what their faith was. And what less in
effect does M. B. affirm in his page 145.
2. book, where he writes, that, if the chief do voluniarily receive, profess,
and proclaym a faith, or religion, it is to be accounted the act of all, though
the inferiors come not to consent? he might as well have added, though they be
ignorant of it, or what it means. Yea does not this conclusion follow upon the
former ground, that the officers are the Church. Mat. 18. for the reproving and
censuring of offenders, and for the binding, and loosing of sins? If the
Officers be the Church for one religious, or spiritual determination, why not
for an other? And if the censures agreed upon and ministered by the Officers, be
by way of representation, the censures of the Church, without the actual
consent of the people; why is not the faith agreed upon, and published by the
officers the faith of the Church, by way of representation, before the peoples
distinct knowledge of it, or actual consent unto it? Put the case the officers
change their ancient faith in some mayn point, wherein the body of the Church
still abides, and so differs from them; and that they take occasion to
excommunicate some brother, or brethr^n, that most opposes them: if this
excommunication of the officers be the excommunication of the Church
representatively, without the peoples consent; then is this new faith also of
the officers, for which this excommunication is practiced, the faith of the
people notwithstanding their not only not consenting unto, but their utter
dissenting from the same.

Now as the governors did thus engrosse the power, and libertyes of the
Church, so no marvayl, though with them, they assumed the name. Hence is it
that they alone are called the Church, the Clergy, the spiritually: the
profane idiotish laity are excluded both from the title, and thing. Simon the
Sadler, To^^k^^ the Taylour, Belly page 197.
the Bellowes-maker must be no Church men, nor meddle with Ch: matters. As
though it were either not true, or to no purpose, which is written, that Christ
himself was Mar. 6. 3.
a Carpenter Act. 18. 3. " Math. 4. 18. 21.
Paul a ^en^maker, "Peter, Andrew, James, and John Fishermen.

One only thing more I will add, and so conclude this point; which is, that
the Priests were not more eager at the first upon the people, till they had
svvallovved up their liberty, then they were afterward one upon an other,
till one had gotten all; from whom, as from the Catholic visible head, all
power should issue, and be derived to the several parts of the body. And how
clean a way Mr Bern. and others (which knovving better have the more sin)
make to this mischief, in pleading that Paul alone, 1 Cor. 5. and the several
Angels alone in the several Churches Rev. 2. and 3. were to reform, and
censure abuses, let the wise reader judge.

The 2. allegation made by Mr B. against which I except, is, that the
Ministers with them have all things in substance required by the word Mr B.
of God for their making, as presentation, election, examination, ordinatio^,
with imposition of hands; and that the exceptions we take are but about
circumstances only, and same manner of doing: which do not make a nullity, or
falsity of the deed done.

As we do except against the very office it self, and against the Answ.
mayn, and most principal works of it, by law required, as works of
will worship, and Col. 2. 23.
voluntary religion, so do our exceptions against the very calling, and
entrance of your Ministers evince them sufficiently not to be the true
Ministers of Christ. Heb. 5. 4. 5.
No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron.
No, Christ himself took not this honor to be made the high Pr^^st, but he that
said unto him, thou art my son, this day begat I thee, gave it him. And if
Christ the Lord of his Church did not take upon him the solemn administration
of his office, till by the Father he was called thereunto from heaven, it is
great presumption for any man (and he a bold usurper, that so practices) to
take upon him any office in the Church, not being chosen and called thereunto
by them, which under the Lord, have received this Charter, thus to call
Ministers, which are only his Church, and people. And by this doctrine of Mr
Bern: that faylings in circumstances, and manner of doing, make not a nullity,
or falsity of the deed, it should follow, that if a company of Papists, Arians,
Anabaptists, or of any other Haeretiques, or idolaters should chose, and call a
minister, though it were a child, an idiote, yea a woman, and that after the
most profane, and superstitious manner that could be, yet this made no
nullity, or falsity of the action, for all were but errors in circumstances,
and manners of doing. Yea by this trifling, murder, adultery, and all the
mischeifs in the world might be defended. If a private person should take upon
him without lawful authority to be a judge, and should condemn the inocent,
and justify the guilty person, all the evil were but in the circumstances of
persons judging, and judged. If a man gave his body to the wife of another man,
the evil were but circumstantiall, he might have done it to another person,
namely his own or proper wife. What confusion would these excuses of
circumstances only, and manner of doing things, bring over all estates, if
they were admitted of? Of this mischief I have spoken, page 21. 22. 23. 37.

The 3. consideration in this matter is, about such devises, as Mr Bern. has
found for the shifting off such places, as prove that the people ought to
choose their Ministers. The scriptures are Act. 1. and 6. and 14. 23. to which
also might be added Numb. 8. 9. 10. Act. 11. 22. 1 Cor. 16. 3. 2 Cor. 8 19.
with many others. His answer Mr B.
is, first, that these places testify, that such examples of practice were
then, but that there is no praecept for the perpetuity of it.

This is an ungodly evasion Mat. 15. 6. Hebr. 9. 15. 16. 17.
making the commandments of God of Answ:
none authority by men's traditions: and tending to the abolishment of the
testament of Christ, which he has confirmed by his death: wherein he has not
only by practice, but also by the doctrine Ephesians. 2. 20 21.
of the Apostles, upon which he has founded the Church, or temple of God, for
ever, established this ordinance, as a part of the new testament: and that
not upon some extraordinary, temporary, and changeable occasion, as some thing
have been ordered, and decreed by the Apostles, Act. 15. 1. 2. 28. 29. but upon
ordinary, and constant grounds, and upon reasons, and causes of perpetual
equity; such as concern all Churches in all places to the worlds end: as shall
appear hereafter.

When the Lord Jesus sent forth his Apostles to gather Churches, he gave them
in charge Math. 28. 20.
to teach them to observe all things, whatsoever he had commanded the^.
promising vvithall that in so doing he would be with them always until the end
of the world. And that, amongst other doctrines, they taught the people this,
that they were to choose their officers, the scriptures cited do fully testify.
See Act. 1. 15. 16. 16 -- 23. and 6. 2. 3. 5 6. and 14. 23. Answerable unto
this is that which the Apostle Paul protests to the Act 20. 17. 20. 26. 27.
Elders of Ephesus at Miletum that he was pure from the blood of all men, in
that he had kept no thing back, but showed them all the counsel of God: one
part of which counsayl was, that the people were to choose their Officers, which
by Mr Bernards own grant they observed. to which also add, that the same
Apostle writing unto the Church of Corinth about a matter of 1. Cor. 14 40.
order, avoweth v. 37. 38.
the things which he writes, to be the commandments of the Lord; and charge
all them as wilfully ignorant, which do not so acknowledge them. With what
conscience then. or color of reason ^an this man say, that this power, and
right of the people to choose their Ministers, was only a matter of practice,
but not of praecept? and no immediate right from Christ, but a grant unto them
from the Apostles, or upon their exhortation for the time?

It is true he says in the same place, 1. that the people did not elect, or
choose, but when the Apostles were amongst them; and 2. that they page 296.
did it upon their exhortation. And for the first who denies, but that where
faithful, and godly officers are, the people are by their direction, and
government according to the will of Christ, to use their liberty in this, and
all the other affairs of the Church? So for the second, it was so the Apostles
exhortation, as it was also a divine institution by the spirit of God, never
reversed but by those Rev. 16. 13. 14.
unclean spirits of Devils, which like froggs came out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophet: part of the counsel of God, never altered, or departed from, but by
them, Isa. 30. 1.
which take counsayl, but not of God: and lastly, one of the commandments of
Christ, which the Apostles were bound both to teach, and exhort the people to
observe, never disannulled, but by the counter-commaund, craft, and violence of
Antichrist: who as one of your own Prelates has truly observed, never ceased,
till by cursing, and fighting he had gotten all into his own hands. The
insinuation therefore which you make against us in assuming this liberty unto
us, as a right of our selves, is unjust: considering we have it conveyed unto
us from Christ in the writings of the Apostles, wherein they do as expressly
teach it us, and as effectually exhort us unto it, as if they were personally
present with us. And that which the people might then do in their presence,
upon their speech, they may now do upon their writings, in their absence, and
in the absence of all other officers also, if the particular Churches be for
the present unfurnished of them.

Now where he further adds, that the people then were very judicious, and
able to make a choice, whereas it is now far otherwise with many: it is of some
consideration for the people, and Church of England, but of none at all for the
people, and Church of God. If the people in the parish assemblies there should
vsurp this power, it would be far otherwise with them indeed, for the most
part, then with people judicious, or able to make a choice. Can blind men judge
of colors,? or 1 Cor. 2. 14.
natural men of spiritual things? If a man would prophecy unto them of wine,
and strong drink, he were a Prophet for such a people. It is certain they would
choose Ministers like themselves, ignorant, and loose fellows for the most
part, and the saying of the Prophet would be verifyed, Hos. 4. ^.
as is the people, so is the Priest. And yet worse then are made, and chosen by
the Bishops, and Patrons generally, they could hardly find. But observe your
self Mr B. when you plead for 2. Book 110 114.
the ignorance, and prophanenes of your own people, you write that the Apostles
received into the Churches persons very ignorant* and of lewd conversation: Now
when you come to plead against the liberty of the people of God, you make them
in the Apostles times to have been very judicious, and able to discern of
things, far otherwise then the people now are.

Now for the exception it self, it is of no value. But as the ordinances, and
administration of the Jewish Church, remained the same, and unalterable, though
the peoples knowledge were not always the same but sometimes greater,
sometimes less: so is it in the estate of the new testament with all the^
which deem that Heb. 3 3.
Christ the Son is worthy of as much honor in his ordinances, as was Moses,
a servant of the house, in his. And if this devise were admitted of, that the
liberty of the people should eb, and flow, according to the measure of their
knowledge, then should not all the brethren in the same Church have the same
Christian liberty in the choice of officers, censuring of offenders, and the
like ordinances; for all have not the same measure of knowledge, nay it may be
scarce two of all; so diverse is the dispensation of grace to the several
members. Then should scarce two several Churches in the world enjoy the same
Christian liberty, the one with the other; no nor any one with it self, any
long time, since one Church differs from another, yea from it self at diverse
times, in the measure, and degree of knowledge, and other graces of God.
Besides, if we should wey together in the balances, the Churches of Christ
now, and in the Apostles times, the Christian liberty of the people would
rather sway the balance this way, then the other way, and to the people now,
then in the Apostles days.

For first there were present with the people in those first times, besides
other extraordinary officers extraordinarily endowed, the Apostles themselves,
those great Maister-buylders, which (if any other in the world) might lawfully
have deprived the people of their power in this and the like cases: which
notwithstanding they did not, but on the contrary did faithfully inform, and
direct the^ according to the commandment of Christ, in the right, and lawful
use of the same. And yet notwithstanding the Bishops of the Romish, and English
Church (though not worthy so much as of the name of daubers in the Lords house,
in comparison of those other Maister-buylders) dare without fear, or shame,
engrosse all into their own hands; and have their proctours, this man and
others, many a one, to plead for them in their usurpation.

2. The Churches in the Apostles time were newly converted from Judaism, and
Paganism, and had still cleaving unto them much ignorance in many great points.
And in particular, the disciples, or Church at Jerusalem, after they were both
possessed, and had use of Act. and 1. 6.
this power of choosing officers, were ignorant of no less a point then the
calling of the Gentiles; of which, or the like mayn ground Act. 10. 14 15* 3^.
35. with Chapter 11 2. 3. 4. 5. and ^.
of religion, no true Church of Christ now is ignorant, as that Ch: then was.
And thus it appears, that the choice of Officers by the people in the
primitive Churches was not a matter casual or of the Apostles courtesy, but a
commandment of Christ, left penned by the H. Ghost, as is the rest of that
story, and of those Acts of the Apostles, for our direction, and the direction
of all the Churches of Christ to the worlds end.

One shift more Mr Bernard makes, from which he must be put, and that is, that
the Patron chooses for the people a fit man, whom the Mr B.
Bishop finding fit by examination, ordeyneth, and that this is a lawful
calling. page 319.


To let pass, that the Patrons usually choose not for the people, Answ.
but for themselves, and their own profits, and pleasures, which though it be
apparent to all men, is (not without cause) winked at by the Bishops,
considering how, and by what means they procure their own choice, I answer
first, that the patron does not choose for the people, that is, as the people
did choose in the Apostles times. For the people then made choice of such, as
were before private persons, but by their election to be ordained into office:
where the Patron chooses a Clerk, who is in office already, and ordained by the
Bishop before the Patron make choice of him. The Bishop does at the first make
him a Minister at large, and not of any particular Church, and so sends him, as
it were, to graze upon the Commons, till afterward he be found by, or rather
find, some Patron, which by his presentation makes a gap, and lets him into
some vacant Vicarage, or Parsonage, there to minister accordingly. But admit in
the 2. place, that the Patron stood in the room of the people to choose for
them, I would demand, who set him there? or where the scriptures do either
teach or approve of any such A^^urney-ships in the matters of religion, and of
Gods worship, as you make by telling us in one place that the officers do make
profession of faith; in another, that they censure offenders; and here, that
they choose Ministers for the people. If some one man in a parish had ^nta^l^d to
him and his heirs for ever, the power of appoynting housbands to all the women
in the parrish, the bondage were intolerable, though in a matter of Civil
nature: how much more intolerable then is the spiritual bondage of the
parrish assemblyes under the imperious presentations of those Lord patrons,
whose Clerks they must receive, and submit unto, whither they will or no? Great
is the sin of the people, which loose this Gal. 5. ^.
liberty, greater of the Patrons, which engrosse it, but the greatest of all is
that for the Ministers, which by their doctrine, and practice, confirm both the
one and the other in their iniquity: all three conspiring together in this,
that they alter the ordinances, and commandments of Christ by his Apostles,
and so both Deu. 4. ^. Rev. 22. 18* 19.
diminish of his institution, and add of their own devise.

Now as the forenamed scriptures (like a gracious charter given to this
spiritual corporation, the Church, by the King thereof, Jesus Christ) do
clearly plead the peoples liberty, and power of the choice of their Ministers,
so will I add unto them certain Reasons, to prove this order, and ordinance to
be of moral, and perpetual equity.

The first is because the bond between the Minister, and people I.
is the most streyt, and near religious bond that may be, and therefore not to
be entered but with mutual consent, any more then the civil bond of marriage
between the housband, and wife. II.


It makes much both for the provocation of the Ministry unto Act. 20. 2^ 29.
Job. 10. 9. 12. 13. Act. 6. 1 -- 5.
all diligence, and faithfulness: and also for his comfort in all the trials,
and temptations which befall him in his Ministry, when he considers how the
people, unto whom he ministers, have committed that most rich treasure of
their souls (in the Lord) yea I may say, of their very faith, and joy, to be
helped forward unto salvation, 2 Cor. 1. 24
to his care, and charge, by their free, and voluntary choice of him.

It much furthers the love of the people to the person of their III.
Minister, and so consequently, their obedience unto his doctrine, and
government, when he is such a one, as themselves in duty unto God, and love of
their own salvation, have made choice of: as on the contrary, it leaves them
without excuse, if they either perfidiously forsake, or unprofitably use such a
man's holy service, and ministration. IIII.


Lastly it is agreeable to all equity, and reason, that all free persons, and
estates should choose their own servants, and them unto whom they give wages,
and maintenance for their labor, and service. But so it is betwixt the people,
and ministers: the people a free people, and the Church a free estate
spiritual, under Christ the King* the Ministers the Churches (as Christ's) Romans
15. 31. 2 Cor. 4. 5. and 1. Cor. 9. 14.
servants: and so by the Churches provision ^o live, and of her, as 1 Timothy 5.
18.
laborers to receive wages.

Thus much of the 4. Argument. The 5. follows, the sum whereof is, that,
because the Ministers of the English assemblies, teach true, and sound doctrine
in the root, and fundamental points of religion, they Mr. B.
are therefore the true Ministers of Christ. And that sound doctrine is the
trial of a true Minister, Mr B. would prove from these scriptures, Answ.
1 Timothy 4. 6. Ier. 23. 22.

Of the unsound doctrine of your Church, and that more specially in the
fundamental points of religion, Mr Ioh. Answ. to Mr Jacob. page 46. 47. 48.
etc. 157* 158. etc.
others have spoken at large formerly, and something is by me hereafter to be
spoken: for the present therefore this shall serve, that, since 1 Cor. 3. 11
Christ Jesus not only as Priest, and Prophet, but as King, is the foundation
of his Church: and that the visible Church is Mat. 13. 11. 19. 24. 31. 33. and
21. 5. 43. Act. 1 3.
the kingdom of Christ; the doctrines towching the subjects, government,
officers, and laws of the Church, can be no less then fundamental doctrines
of the same Church, or Kingdom. Which how unsound they are with you, appears
in your Canons ecclesiastical composed for that purpose. Which if your
ministers preach, they preach unsound doctrine, and strike at a mayn pillar of
religion, viz: the visible 1 Timothy 3. 14.
Church of God, which is the pillar, and ground of truth, as the Apostle
speaks: if not, then are they schismatiques in, and from your Church, whose
solemn doctrines they refuse to publish.

Now because Mr Bern. every where bears himself big upon the sound doctrines
taught by the ministers in England, and in this place brings in two scriptures
to warrant their Ministry upon this ground, let us a little consider of the
scriptures, and of the intent of them, and what verdict they give in on his
side. In the one place, the Prophet Chapter 23. 22. ver. 11
Jeremy reproves the Priests and Prophets, for not dealing faithfully with the
people, in laying before them their abominations, and Gods judgments due unto
the same, that so they might have turned from their evil ways, and from the
wickedness of their v. 22.
inventions; but for flattering them on the contrary, in their iniquities, and
for preaching peace unto them, for the strengthening of their v. 14. 17.
hands in evil. Now if the Ministers in England be measured by these men's line,
they will appear to ly level with the^ in a great measure.

For first, the greatest part of them by far, declare not the Lords word at all
unto the people, but are tonguetyed that way, some through ignorance, some
through idleness, and many through pride. And of them which preach how many are
there mere men-pleasers, flattering the mighty with vayn, and plausibly words,
and strengthening the hands of the wicked; and with profane, and malicious
spirits, reviling, and disgracing all sincerity in all men: adding unto these
evils a wicked conversation, by which they further the destruction of many, but
the conversion of none. And lastly, for those few of more sound doctrine, and
unblameable co^versation, let these things be considered.

First, they are reputed schismatiques in the Church of Engl: and I.
are generally excommunicated ipso facto, and so will appear to be to any that
compares their practice with the ecclesiastical laws of that Church.

2. They do with these sound doctrines mingle many errors: II.
yea the same things which in the general they teach, and profess, they do in
the particulars, but specially in their practice, gainsay, and deny.

3. As they declare the Lords will unto the people but by halves, and III.
keep back a great part of his counsel, which they know is profitable for them,
and wherein they would walk with them, were it not for fear of persecution, so
are they ready to de silenced, and to smother the whole counsel of the L., and
not to speak one word more in his name unto the people upon ^h^ir Lord Bishops
inhibition: which (were they persuaded in their consciences they were sent of
God) I suppose they durst not do. Of which more in the seventh Argument.

Now for that in Tim. 1. Epist. 4. chapter ver. 6. if the doctrine of the Ministers
agree with the doctrine, and practice of the Ch: they will appear liker to
them, of whom Paul speaks, ver. 3. then to Timothy, ver: 6. If it be said, that
the Church of England, forbid* not marriage, and use of meats absolutely, but
in certain respects; I answer, no more does the Church of Rome, but to certain
persons, and at certain times: against who^ notwithstanding all Protestants do
apply this scripture: and so does the Church of England forbid them; though
more sparingly (as good reason the daughter come something behind the mother)
as marriage to fellows in Colleges, and to Apprentices, and to all at certain
times, especially at Lent: during which holy time, the eating of flesh is also
forbidden, and abstinence commanded, and that in incitation of Book of Common
pr.
Christ's f^^ting for our sakes forty days, and forty nights; and that for a
religious use, namely the subd^ing of the flesh unto the spirit, for the better
obedience of godly motto^s in righteousness, and true holiness, as the Collect
for the first sunday in Lent witnesses.

But admit the Ministers of Engl: taught foundly in all the mayn points of
religion, as I acknowledge some do in the most, yet did this no way prove them
true Ministers of Christ, that is, lawfully called to true offices in the
Church.

In what mayn point of religion (as you value points) could Corah be challenged?
and yet he was no true Priest of the Lord, but Number. 16.
an usurper of that office* v. 10. 11. as on the contrary, they were Ier. 23.
11.
true Priests, in respect of their office, who deceived the people here, and
every where, as the scriptures manifest. So that both he, which is no true
minister of Christ, may teach the ma^n truths of religion: and he also that is
a true Minister, may err greatly, and yet not presently cease to bear both the
place, and name of a true minister of Christ. Otherwise all Ministers are
Popes, that cannot err.

To end this Argument, Mr B. in both his books would have probation, and
trial to be made of a man's gifts, and graces before he be admitted into the
ministry. And not only he, but Paul himself amongst, and above the rest,
requires, 1. Tim. 3. 2.
aptnes to teach and Tit. 1. ^
ability to exhort with wholesome doctrine: and as this gift must be in him, so
must it be known to be in him, before he can be lawfully called into the
ministry* and this Mr B. affirms expressly, and that by the exercise of this
gift, his knowledge, zeal and utterance, is to be manifested. Whereupon I
conclude that, if trial by sound doctrine must be made of them, which are no
ministers at all (as indeed it must in the exercise of prophesying) then cannot
sound doctrine be any sufficient trial, that is proof, or Argument, of a true
minister.

The sixth Argument for the justification of the ministers in Engl. Mr B.
is, Gods ordinary, and daily assistance of them in their ministry, for the
working men's conversion unto the Lord.

God forbid I should either deny, or make doubt of the effectual Answ.
conversion of men unto salvation in Engl. neither does Mr Ainsworth say (as
you charge him in your 2. book) that none are converted Page 298.
by you: but he shows, first, how you co^tradict your selves in saying that
you convert men to God, and yet affirm, that the same persons before their
conversion, were true Christians: and 2. that considering the swarms of
graceles persons, wherewith all your parrishes are filled, you have more cause
of blushing, then of boasting this way. But this I deny, that the conversion of
men unto God is a sufficient Argument to prove a true minister of Christ: that
is, to prove a lawful calling into a true office of ministry, according to
Christ's testament. It is most evident, that whosoever converteth a man unto
God, that person does in truth, and in deed minister the word of God, and the
spirit by the word: and so may be said to be sent of God; but that every one,
whom God so honoreth, (though never so ordinarily) should therefore be a true
Church officer lawfully called to public administration (which is the
quaestion betwixt Mr B. and me) is most untrue and contrary both to many Lev.
4. 22 23 27. 28. and 19. 17. mat. 18. 15. Ioh. 4. 39. Act. 8. 4. with 11. 1^
20. 21. 1. Cor 14. 24. 25. Iam. ^. 19. 20.
scriptures, which show that men in no office, may, and to much experience,
which shows they do convert, and save sinners. And if only officers may
convert unto the Lord, to what purpose should private persons exhort, instruct,
and reprove any upon any occasion whatsoever?

But here I am driven to take upon me the defense of them, whom Mr B. page 299.
of his 2. book challenges for cavellers, upon the same ground* he chalengeth
Mr Ainsworth for deceip^ful dealing, page 304. of the same book.

Mr Ainsworth denies that qualification with good gifts is a proof of a lawful
Minister. Herein says Mr B. he severs deceiptfully things Mr B.
to be conjoined, for this reason with the rest in my book, shows, who is a
true Minister. In like manner, we except against his 6. Argument, and affirm
that others, besides Ministers, do co^vert men to God; and that therefore
conversio^ argues not a true minister. This is cavelling, says Mr B. for both
these, and others may conv^rt: and again this is but one Reason, but there be
m^re besides, which are sufficient to prove our ministry.

And is it cavelling in us, or ignorance in you thus to speak? Answ.
you do acknovvledge page 304. that qualification with good gifts is a Reason
amongst the rest to show a true Minister: and page 298 you make the conversio^
of men, a distinct argument to prove the same thing. And know you not, that
every sound Reason, or Argument must prove, or argue, of it self, the thing,
for which it is brought? Many Reasons indeed, or Arguments may be produced to
prove one, and the same thing: and so for further confirmation, may follovv
one upon another: but so as every one of them severally be of force to prove
the thing in quaestion, otherwise it is not worthy the name of a Reason, or
Argument, but is a mere sophistication. Either therefore Mr Bernard bring such
Arguments, as vvil of themselves evince that they are brought for; and then
reckon them up by sevens as you do here; or by tvventies if you will, as else
where you do: or else cease to abuse the Reader with a multitude of maimed
proofs as your custom is.

Now because the conversion of men to God is much urged by the Ministers, and
much stood at by many well minded people (as indeed both in equity, and good
conscience, men are to respect the instruments of Gods mercy toward them) I
will enlarge my self, in this point, further, then otherwise I would.

And first for the two scriptures quoted in both your books. Mr B. 2. book p.
308
Romans 10. 14. 15. 1 Cor. 9. 2. from the former of which you conclude, that
because you so preach, as people thereby do hear, believe, and call upon God,
you are therefore sent of God.

Let the Reader here observe, that the Apostle in both these places Answ.
speaks of the conversion of Heathens, and Infidels to the faith of Christ, as
were the Romans, and Corinthians before the preaching of the Gospel unto them:
and so let him demand of Mr B. whether the Ministers in England have had the
same effect in their preaching unto the people there, with them, that preached
unto the Romans, and Corinthians, and brought them by preaching from
infidelity to believe in God? If they have, then were the people Infidels
before, and without faith, and so are the rest not thus effectually converted
by their preaching: if not, how then stands the comparison, or proportion
between the effect of their Ministry then, and theirs in England now? or what
Argument can be taken from these effects compared together? In the general, I
confess, there is a proportion, and so in that general, and large sense,
wherein Mr B. page 313. expounds the word sent, or Apostle, I do acknowledge
many Ministers in Engl: sent of God* that is, that it comes not to pass
without the special providence, and ordination of God, that such, and such men
should rise up, and preach such, and such truths for the furtherance of the
salvation of Gods elect in the places, where they come. They which Phil. 1. 15
16.
preached Christ of envy, and strif^, to ad more afflictions to the Apostles
bonds, were in this respect sent of God, and therefore it was, that the Apostle
toyed a^ ver. 18.
their preaching. How much more they that preach of a sincere mind, though
through ignorance, or infirmity* both their place, and entrance into it be
most unwarrantable? Genesis 37. 4 8. 11. 28. Act. 7. 9.
Joseph's brethren* the Pa^r^arks, did of h^^red and envy sell him into Egypt:
and yet the s^riptur^s testify, that Genesis 45. 1. 7. 8.
God sent him thither. And the same God which could use their malice (by which
he was sold into Egypt) for the bodyly good of his people there; even he can
use the power of A^tichrist, (by which the Ministers in the Church of England
have their calling) Psalm. 10^. 17.
for the spiritual good of his people there. And yet neither the secondary
means of Joseph's sending, nor of the Ministers either entry, or standing, any
thing at all the more warrantable.

The other scripture is 1 Cor. 9. 2. of which I have spoken something formerly,
and others much more: and in which for the avoiding of ambiguity, I consider
these two things. First, what the Apostle purposes to prove: and 2. the
medium, or Argument by which he proves his purpose.

Touching the former, it is evident, his purpose is to prove himself an
Apostle, in the most strict, and propper sense, (howsoever page 321.
Mr B. tri^les) contrary to the false insinuations of his adversaries, which
bare the Churches in hand against him, that he was only an ordinary Minister,
or at least, inferior to the Apostles, and had his calling, and other
ministrations from, and under them: as appears. 1 Cor. 9. 1. 2 Cor. 10. 16.
and 12. 12. Gal. 1. 1. 17. 18. 19. and 2. 6. 7. 8. 9.

The Argument to prove this, which he also calls the seal of his Apostl^ship,
and his work, Mr B. ^akes, the Lords effectual working by 1. Book. p. 120.
his Ministry, in the conversion of s^ules unto God.

Touching which his affirmation, I desire first to know whether 2. Book. p. 321.
this conversion of the Corinthians by Paul were to sanctification of life,
yea, or no? If he say no, he gainsayes the Apostle, and his testimony of them:
who, writing unto the Church at Corinthus, confesses them there 1 Cor. 1. 1
to be sanctified in Christ Jesus, and Saints by calling: and again advertising
them, that Chapter 6. 9. 1^. 11.
neither fornica^ours, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunckards, nor raylers,
nor extortioners should inherit the kingdom of heaven, he testifies of the^,
that such were some of the^, but says he, ye ar washed, but ye ar sanctified,
but ye are justified in the name of the L. Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.
Besides, if Paul's work were not the work of sanctification upon the
Corinthians, how will M. B. raise his Argument for the Ministers in England,
from their work of sanctification upon the people there? If on the other side
he say, that the conversion by Paul's ministry was unto sanctification, he
contradicts himself in his own distinction of double conversion, page 307: of
his 2. book, where he allows unto the Romans, Corinthians, and Eph^sians,
only the primary conversion, which is to the profession of Christ, but not the
secondary, which is to sanctification of life. In which his distinction, as he
idly imagins a true co^versio^ without sanctification, so does he highly
detract from the APOSTLE PAVL, as if he had not converted men to
sanctification; or had gathered Churches of persons unsanctified outwardly, and
in the judgment of charity.

2. How can the simple conversion of men prove both Mr Ber. an ordinary
Minister, which he would be, and Paul no ordinary Minister, but an
extraordinary Apostle, which he would be?

3. If conversing be a sign of a true Minister, then are both the Bishops in
Engl: and the Ministers in the reformed Churches, true Ministers: for without
doubt, some of both have been instruments under God of men's conversio^: but
that is impossible, considering how the Ministry of the one, wheresoever it
comes, eats up, and destroys the other. Yea then should both the Ministers of
Engl: and we here of the separation (who have as M. B: truly answers Mr Smyth,
renounced our Ministry received from the Bishops, and do exercise an other by
the peoples choice) be true Ministers of Christ: for as they there avouch this
work of conversion, so have we also here been made partakers of the same grace
of God: and found hi^ blessing even that way upon our Ministry also.

4. As it was the most proper work of an Apostle to convert Heathens to the
Lord, and 1 Cor. 4. 15. and 3. 6. ^.
in Christ Jesus to beget them through the Gospel, and so to plan^ Churches,
not rejoicing in the things already prepared by others, but to preach the
gospel, even where Christ had not been named: so is it on the other side the
Pastors work to feed the^ that are Cor. 10. 16.
already begotten, converted, and praepared: and therefore the Apostle Romans 15.
20
Paul comprehends the whole Pastors, and Elders duty under the Act. 20. 17. 28.
fee^ing of the flock, all and every part whereof he avoucheth in the
judgment, and evidence of charity, to be purchased with the blood of Christ.
And what is a Pastor, but a shepherd? and over what flock is a shepherd
set, but over a flock of sheep? and who are sheep, but they which have laid
aside their goatish, and swynish nature? which till men have learnt to do, they
are rather swyne, and goats, then sheep, and so are they, which keep them,
rather swyneheards, and goteheards, then sheepheards.

But here two exceptions made by Mr Bernard, in his second page 308.
book must be satisfied. The former is, that, the Pastor is to feed such little
ones, as are borne in the Church: the other, that he is to Mr B.
reclaym such unto sanctification, as fall to wickedness.

To the former exception I do answer. First, that Paul in the place in hand,
rayseth no argument at all from any work upon the ^^^l^ ones born in the Church
of Corinth, but upon the men of riper years, whom he turned from idolatry to
the true God. 2. Even ^^^l^ ones born in the Church, may in their order, and
after their manner, be said to be converted, or turned unto the Lord, or born
again, which are all one: otherwise being Ephesians. 2. 3.
by nature children of wrath, Psalm. 51. 5
born in iniquity, and conceived in sin, how could they be reputed 1 Cor. 7. 14.
holy? yea how could they possibly be saved, or enter into Gods kingdom? Ioh.
3. 5. And since you grant Mr B. that the Pastor is to feed those little ones,
do you not therein acknowledge they are converted, or borne a new? In the
preface of your book you would have men begotten after they were born: and here
you will have them fed before they be borne. Now for those little ones, as we
are to repute them holy in regard of the Lords covenant, and do therefore set
his seal upon them, so are their parents even from their cradle to Ephesians. 6. 4.
bring them up in instruction, and information of the Lord: and so to prepare
them for the public ministry: unto which if they in their riper years give
obedience in any measure, they are so to be continued in the Church: if
otherotherwise, they are in due time, as unprofitable branches to be lopped of,
and so cease to be of the Pastors charge.

Secondly for men falling into wickedness in the Church; if they continue
obstinate, and irreclamable, then are they in order to be consured, and so the
Pastor is discharged of them: if on the contrary, God vouchsafe them
repentance, this cannot be called a conversion of them to sanctification, but a
Gal. 6. 1.
restoring, or recovering of them out of some particular evil, or evils, into
which, through infirmity, they are falln. So that the doctrine stands sound,
for any thing that Mr Bernard has said, or that either he, or any other man
can say, that the Pastors office stands in feeding, not in converting: as also
that Paul's scale, and work, was not the bare conversion of the Corinthians, but
their conversion from heathenism, plantation into a Church, and these with the
signs of an Apostle, even signs, and wonders, and great works, 2 Cor. 12. 12.

Lastly, that the simple be not deceived, and either give honor where it is
not due; or give it not, where it is due, let them consider, that the
conversion of a man is no way to be ascribed to the order or office either of
Apostles, or Pastors, but only to the word of God, which by the inward work
of the spirit is Romans 1. 16
the power of God to salvation, to them that believe: it is ^Psal. 19. 7.
the law of the Lord, that converts the soul. The Mat. 13. 19. 23.
word of the kingdom is that good seed, which being sown in good ground
prospers to the bringing forth of fruit to life, whether he that sow it be in
a true office, or in a false office, or in no office at all. And though it be
true, which Mr B. says in his page 130.
former book, that the Ministers in England do preach as publik Officers of
that Church, yet does their Office confer, or help nothing at all to the
conversion of men. It is the blessing of God upon the mayn truths they teach,
not upon their office of Preisthood, which converts: which truths if they
taught without their office, either before they were called to it, or being
deprived of it, would without doubt be as effectual, as they are, yea, and
much more, by the blessing of God; as appears in this, that such amongst them,
as make least account of their office formally received from the Prelates, are
the most profitable instruments amongst the people: where on the contrary, the
professed formalists cleaving unto their office, and order canonically, are
generally unprofitable either for the conversion, or confirmation of any to, or
in holiness.

To conclude then, the turning of men unto holiness of life, is no justification
of your office of ministry, or calling unto it, but of such truths, as are
taught amongst you: which all men are bound to hold, and honor, as we also do:
though we disclaym the order, and power, in and by which they are ministered.

The seventh, and last argument Mr B. takes from certain properties of true
sheepheards, laid down, Ioh. 10. which he also affirms, Mr B.
the Ministers of the Church of England have: the first whereof is, that they
go in by the door, Jesus Christ, that is, by his call, and the Churches, which
(as he says) he has proved at large.

In so saying he speaks at large: let him prove, that the Bishop* Answ.
or Patron, or either of them, is in Christ's place set by him to choose
Ministers: or that they are the Church, to which he has committed the power of
calling and choosing them, and answer the Reasons brought to the contrary:
otherwise his large proving will appear but a large boasting: and he will give
men occasion to remember the proverb, It is good beating a proud man.

The 2. property wherewith he investeth them, is, that the porter opens unto
them: by which porter Mr Smith means the Church, for which Mr B* reviles him
out of measure; making the porter invisibly Mr B.
Gods spirit, visibly the authority committed by the Church unto some for
admitting men into the house, the Church of God, which says he, is a sensible
exposition according to the custom with us, and in Iudaea.

As there are many true ministers (in respect of men) which enter Answ.
not in at all by the spirit of God, or any motion of it, as it was with Judas,
and is with all hypocrites, who for by-respects take that calling upon them:
so is Mr Smithes exposition making the Church the porter far more probable then
yours, who make the porter, the authority, of the Church committed to some for
the admission of men. Is not the porter a person rather then a thing? And who
that has but common sense, will not rather by the porter understand the person
or persons having authority, then the authority, which he, or they have? And if
you Mr B. had but remembered, what you write of the properties of the Church
page 237. 138. making as here you do, the porter, or authority of the Church a
property of a shepherd, you would (I suppose) in modesty have forborne the
charging of Mr Smith to have his brains intoxi^ated by his new ways, and to
be madded by his own fantasies in religion, for writing in this point, as he
does. And for the thing it self, it is evident, that Christ Jesus is properly
the shepherd of the sheep, here spoken of: and that therefore the authority
^. ^. 11.
of the Church can be no porter for hi entrance, or admission. I do therefore
rather think, that by the porter is meant God the father, whose care, and
providence is ever over his flock, who therefore has called, and appointed his
son Jesus Christ to be that good shepherd, who gave his life for his sheep.
And if you will apply this to ordinary Pastors, and their calling, then sure
by the porter must be meant such, as have received this liberty, and power from
Christ by the hands of his Apostles, for the choosing, and appoynting of
ministers, which I am sure, of all others, are not the Romish* or English
Bishops. Christ would never have the wolves to appoint his sheep their
sheepheards.

The 3. property of good sheepheards which you challenge to your Mr B.
selves, is, that they call their own sheep by name, that is, they take notice
of their people* of their growth in religion ^^d do abide with them, diligently
watching over their flocks: as by true and faithful promise made in the open
congregation they be bound in their ordination.

It must here be observed, as before, that Christ speaks only of Answ.
himself properly; for of him only, it can be said, that the sheep a^ his own:
the people are very improperly called the Ministers sheep: and Christ says not
unto Peter Ioh. 21. 15 16. 17.
feed thy sheep, but my sheep.

2. To take your own exposition Mr B. how can your Praelates, whom in the 6.
Argument you make sheepheards, call their sheep by name, or take notice of, and
watch over their whole Diocesan, and Provincial flocks? Yea if your self or
any one amongst you, take notice of your people, as the flock of Christ, and of
their growth in religion, they take notice of that which is not. I speak of the
flock, though I doubt no^ but there are some sheep straying from the right
fould, in your herds. Of the abiding of your Ministers with their flocks, we
shall speak hereafter: only this in the mean while, that considering how many
flocks you your self Mr B. have forsaken, me thinks you should have forborne, in
wisdom, to make this one property of a true shepherd.

A 4. property of a good shepherd, you say, you have, which Mr B.
is, to lead forth your sheep, viz, from pasture to pasture, from milk to
strong meat, etc.

There are many fair, and wholesome pastures in the field of Answ.
Gods word, into which you do not lead your sheep, no nor so much as point to
them with the finger: neither indeed dare you, because they are hedged in with
humain authority, your statutes, and canons ecclesiastical. Nay all your care
is to keep your people from the knowledge of them, least they should break
through those thorny hedges, at which you stick.

The 5. and last property for which you commend your selves, is, Mr B.
your going before the flocks, that is, in godly conversation.

As I acknowledge the unblameable conversation of many amongst Answ.
you, so do many Papists, Anabaptists, and other vile haeretiques, and
schismatiques walk as unblameably this way, as you; and yet are they not true
sheepheards of Christ's sheep. But by the sheepheards going before the sheep in
this place is meant, as I take it, partly the care of the minister in governing
the people; partly, his constancy in danger, to which he exposes himself in
the forefront; and in these respects, he is said to go before the flock. Now
f^ll ^ll do these properties agree with the Ministers, for whom Mr Bernard
pleads. Who as they govern not the people at all, but are themselves and the
people with them under the government of their Diocesan and Provincial
Pastors: so do they in the time of danger most perfidiously forsake their
flocks: wherein their sin is the greater, considering the faithful promise,
which you your self testify they make in the open congregation, diligently to
watch over their flocks.

Now howsoever, that which has been spoken will appear, I doubt not,
sufficient to force Mr B. from this 10 of John, yet because he d^^ms it so
strong an hold for him, as we cannot overthrow it, page 302.
we will adventure a little further upon it, and see whither there be not to be
found in it sufficient of the Lords munition, not only to batter the wall, but
even to raze the foundation of the ministry of England for which he pleads.
I.


First then, all true sheepheards are set over flocks of Ioh. 21. 15. 16. 17.
Act 2^. 1^. 25. 29.
sheep to feed them. But the ministers in England were not set over flocks of
sheep, but indeed over herds of swine, goats, and dogs with some few sheep
scattered amongst them. Which the wild, and filthy beasts push worry, and
defile. Therefore the ministers of England are not true sheepheards.

2. True sheepheards enter in by the door Christ, v. 2. 7. that is by II
the means, which his Apostles at his appointment, have commended unto the
Churches, act. 6. 2. 3. 4. 5. and. 14. 23. But the ministers in England enter
into their charges by the presentatio^ of a Patron, the institution of a
Praelate, and the inductio^ of an Archdeaco^, which is not the door opened by
Christ, for the shepherd to enter by, but a lather set up by Antichrist
whereby to clime over the fold.

3. The shepherd is by his office to feed and govern the flock, as Mr III.
B: himself testifies from this scripture. But as seeding, that is, (...).
^92.
reaching, or preaching unto the people (as is his meaning) is no part of the
parish Priests duty, but a casual, and super-erogarory work: so are they
altogether stripped of government; and therefore no true sheepheards of Christ's
flocks.

Lastly, the good shepherd seeing danger toward the sheep* will IIII.
rather give his life then ^lee; where on the contrary, the hireling s^ing the
wolf coming, sleeth, because he is an hyreling. ver. 11. 12. 13. whereupon it
follows, that the ministers Mr B. chiefly means, leaving their flocks upon
the Bishops ungodly suspensions, and deprivations, as upon the ba^king of a
wolf, do evidently proclaym to all the world, that they are no good
sheepheards, but hyrelings. And so far am I persuaded of hundreds amongst them,
that, I doubt not, but if they thought in their hearts, they were by Christ's
appointment set in their charges, and by him commanded there to minister, they
would never so fowly, as they do, forsake their flocks upon the suspension, or
deprivation of a profane Praelate, or Chauncelour, for refusing conformity or
subscription, to their popish devises.

When DAVID was in his greatest trials, and that his enemies labored most,
either to frustrate, or deprive him of his kingdom, and so to turn his glory
into shame, his comfort was, that God had Psalm. 2. ^. and 4. 2. 3.
set him as his King upon Syon, the mountayn of his holiness: and that the Lord
had chosen, or separated him unto himself. Likewise when Iakob was in that
great both danger, and fear of his brother Esau, the thing that sustained him,
was, that Genesis 32. 9.
God had said unto him, return unto thy country, and to thy fathers kindred,
and I will do the good.

And as it was with these two, so is it with all the servants of God both in
their general, and special callings. When they have assurance by the word,
and spirit of God, that he is the author of their calling, then do they with
patience, and comfort of the H. Ghost suffer such trials, and afflictions, as
are incident thereunto: where on the contrary, wanting thi^ assurance, they are
soon discouraged even in the good things they do, if persequutions do arise;
and being without the Lords calling, no marvayl though they want his comfort.

The Apostle Paul advertiseth the Act. 20. 27. 28. 29.
Elders of Ephesus, that they are made overseers or Bishops, of the flock, by
the H. Ghost, and thereupon takes occasion to exhort them to all vigilance, and
faythfulnes against the invasion of such wolves, a^ should enter in to devour
the flock. Now if those men of whom I speak, be persuaded that they at placed
in their charges by the H. Ghost, how do they forsake the^ not being by him
displaced, or do they think the H. Ghost lisplaceth them for their weldoing, or
for their refusing to do evil, as to sub^ctibe, conform, and the like? They
speak of the seal of their Ministry, and of their inward calling, and of the
peoples acceptance, and of many things more, very plausible to the multitude;
but in the day of their trial, it appears, what small comfort they have in
all these: and as is their coming in, so is their going out: since they entered
not in by the door, no mervayl though they suffer themselves to be thrust out
by the window, or to be tumbled over the wall, or otherwise to be discharged
upon some small, and sleighty occasion. Mr B.


But * suppose (say you) a false entrance, yet that no more disanulls page
142. 1. book.
the ministry, then does a faulty entrance to marriage, disanul that ordinance
between two conjoined to be lawful man, and wife.

But first, I deny your very office of ministry in it self to be a Answ.
spiritual ordinance of God, as is marriage a civil ordinance.

2. If one of these two persons were incapable of marriage, there would follow a
nullity: and so is it with you, where your parish assemblies are all of them
incapable of the ministry of Christ, and the ministrations thereof.

3. If this marriage were made without the free consent, and choice of the one
party, were it not to be disanulled? and this is your case, if you consider it,
where the minister is put upon the people, without their free choice, and
election.

Lastly, if two persons were married with this condition, that they should leave
one another upon the imperious command of some great man, for some small, and
sleighty matter, or other; were this true, and lawful marriage? And is not this
the estate of your Ministers, and people under their imperious Lords the
Prelates? by whom they are in continual danger of divorce, for want of
canonical conformity in some trivial, and trifling ceremony.

Thus much of this similitude, as also of this matter.

That which comes next into consideration, is the point of succession: wherein,
in the first place, answer must be given to a demand made by M. B. in his page
311.
2. book: in which many others also think there is much weight: and that is,
why we hold, and reteyn the baptism received by succession, and not the
Ministry? Mr B.


For answer unto him I would know of him, whether the Church I.
of England do still, (or did at the first) reteyn the ministry of Answ.
the Church of Rome, or no? If he say it does, then I would entreat him, and
others not to take it ill, if we call and account them Priests; for such are
the Romish Ministers. 2. How can the Church of England forsake the Church of
Rome, and reteyn the Ministry which is in the Church, as in the subject?
especially if the Ministry make the Church, as Mr Bernard affirms: for then a
true Ministry must needs make a true Church: and communion with the Ministry
draws on necessarily communion with the Church. But if on the contrary he
affirm, that the Church of England does renounce the Ministry or Preisthood of
the Church of Rome; then I return his demand upon himself, and ask him, why it
reteyns the Baptism of Rome? and so leave him to himself for answer.

2. The Baptism both in England, and Rome, is in the essential causes of it,
the matter, water, the form, baptizing into the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, Christ's baptism, and ordinance, though in the administration it be
Antichrists devise: but for the Ministry either in Rome, or England it is
otherwise. The Ministry of Christ does summarily, and in the substance of it,
consist in the Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 1. 2.
feeding of the flock, that is, in providing food for the flock, and in guiding
and ordering the same accordingly; in a word, in preaching, and government, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Put what is this to the Preisthood of England, (to let pass that
of Rome) unto which preaching is not necessarily annexed, nor government so
much as permitted? To swear Canonical obedience, subscribe, conform, read the
service book, celebrate marriage, Church women, and bury the dead in form, and
order, are essential and substantial parts, or properties of the Ministry
there, in the present both practice, and constitution.

The vessels of gold, and silver, which were taken out of the temple in the
captivity, and carried to Babylon, and there profaned, might notwithstanding
(being sanctified from their profanation there) be lawfully carried back to
Jerusalem and set up in the temple newly built, and employed, as in former
times to Gods service: but had these vessels been broken in pieces in Bab^lon,
and there (being mingled with brass, and iron, and such b^se metal) been
cast in another mould, they could not th^n have ob^^^ned th^^ former place in
the temple, nor there have been (...)d for the holy ministration. Now such is
the difference between the Baptism, and Ministry, both in the Romish, and
English Church. To form^r, as a vessel of the Lords house, may with the Lords
people be brought back from Babylon spiritual to the new Jerusalem and there
may (being sanctified by repentance) serve, and be of (...) to all the ends and
purposes for which God has appointed it. But for the Ministry, or Preisthood,
either in the one, or other, it is in it self no vessel of the Lords house;
it is neither made of the metal, which the Lord has appointed, nor cast in
his mould. It is essentially degenerated from that office of Pastourship which
Christ the Lord has set in his house for the feeding of the flock by teaching,
and government, as has been formerly showed: and is in the true natural, and
canonical institution of it a very devised patchery, and compound, like Dan.
2. 30. 32. 33.
the image, which the King of Babylon saw in his dream; save that little, or
nothing of it is gold, or silver, but all brass, iron, and clay, and the like
base metal, and stuff: fitting right well both in the administration of it
unto the people, and in the subordination unto the people, and in the
subordination unto the Prelacy, for the exaltation of the man of sin, which
has for that very purpose devised it, and placed it in the Church for his
service: that by it, as by an vnderst^p he might climb up, and advaunce
himself into the throne of iniquity, where he sitts exalted III.
above all, that is called God.

3. The Ministers of the Church now do succeed the Esa. 66. 21. Ier. 33. 18, 21.
Priests, and Levites under the law, as Col 2. 11. 12.
baptism also comes in the place of circumcision. Now we read in the
scr^p^ures, that such of the ten tribes, as were in Ieroboams idolatrous
schism, and apostasy, (thereby as a branch from the root, cutting off
themselves actually from the only true Church of God, which was radically at 2
Chro. 30. 11. 18. 2^.
Jerusalem, where the Lord had founded his temple, appointed his sacrifices,
and promised his praesence) that such of them, I sa^, as returned to the Lord
by repentance, and joined themselves unto the true Church, were, by virtue of
the circumcision received in that their apostasy, wherein they had no ^i^le to
Romans 4. 11.
the seal of the forgivenes of sins (which circumcision was) admitted into
the temple, Ezech. 44. 7. Act. 21. 18.
into which, no m^n uncircumcised might enter, and to the participation of the
Passover, Exodus 12. 48.
whereof none vncircumsed person might eat. But that any person, should by
virtue of his office of Preisthood received in that, or the like apostasy,
have entered into the Lord, sanctuary, there to have done the Priests office
upon any repentance whatsoever, had been an intolerable usurpation, and
sacrilegious 2 King. 23. 9. Ezech. 44. 10. 11. 12. 13.
invasion of the holy things of God: yea the sons of Aaron themselves, unto
whom the Preisthood did of right apperteyn, if they thus went astray from the
Lord after idols, were for ever debarred from doing the Priests office,
notwithstanding any repentance they could make: and were to bear, all their
lives long, their iniquity, and shame. Now by that which has been spoken of
circumcision, and the preisthood under the law, the reader may easily observe
the difference betwixt Baptism, and the Ministry now. The particular
application for brevities sake I forbear.

4. and lastly, the difference betwixt Baptism, and the Ministry IIII.
is exceeding great, in respect of that special, and most necessary relation,
which the MINISTRY above Bap^ism has unto the CHVRCH: whether we respect the
entrance into it, or continuance in it. We do read in the scriptures, that
holy men, called thereunto of GOD might lawfully administer BAPTISM unto fit
persons without the consent, or cognition of the Church; as Act. 8. 12. 38. chapter
9 18. and 10. 47 48. and 16. 15. 33.
PHILIP did the SAMARITANS, and the EUNUCH, ANANIAS SAUL, PETER CORNELIUS, PAUL
LIDIA, and the IAYLOUR: but now for the appointing of Ministers without the
Churches consent, and choice, that did they not, as the scriptures testify, and
M. B. himself confesses. And as the entrance of ordinary officers (of which
we speak) does necessarily praesuppose a Church, by whose election, they are to
enter, so does their continuance require a Church, in which, as in a subject,
they must subsist, and to which they must minister. For since the 1 Timothy 3. 1
o^^i^^ of a Bishop is a work, a man is no longer a Bb. the^ he works. It is
not with the office of ministry, as it is with the order of knighthood, that
once a Minister ever a Minister. The Popish Character is a mere fiction,
brought in for the confirmation of the sacrament of orders as they call it.

Whenever the scriptures do mention Act. 14. 23. and 15. 2. 4. 22. and 20 17.
28. 1. Cor. 12. 28.
Elders, or Bishops either in respect of their calling, or ministration, they
still speak of them, as in or of such, and such particular Churches, and none
otherwise. And to imagine an Elder or Bishop without a Church, is to imagine a
Constable without a parrish or hundred; a Mayor or Alderman without a
Corporation, or a public officer without some public person, or society,
whose officer he is. Hereupon also Phil. 1. 1. T^^. 1 5. 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2
it follows, that if the Church be dissolved by death, apostasy or otherwise,
the Minister cease to be a Minister, because the Church cease; in relation
unto which (under Christ) his Ministry consists: but on the contrary, a
baptized person remayns still baptized though the whole Church, yea all the
Churches of the world be dissolved, so long as God, and his Christ remayn the
same, into whose name he has been baptized.

And of the same consideration is it, that a Minister may (for some scandalous
sin) be degraded, and deposed from his Ministry, as I have formerly showed,
and as all Churches practice: and so that, which was formerly given him, is
taken from him, and he no more a Minister, then he was before his caling: yea
if he remayn obstinate in his sin, he is to be excommunicated, and so ceasing
to be a member, he must needs cease to be a Minister of the Church. But neither
do the scriptures mention, neither did any Church ever attempt the vn-baptizing
of a baptized person. And as a man may justly be deposed from his Ministry, so
may he in cases lawfully depose himself, and lay it down: as if by the hand of
God, he be utterly disabled from ministering, as it may come to pass, and often
times does: but for a man to lay down his baptism for any such infirmity, were
impious, as it were sacrilegious for the Church to deprive him thereof. To
these considerations I might also add, that if a man forfeyt his Ministry,
and so be deprived of it, either by deposition, or excommunication, and be
afterward upon his repentance judged capable of it, he must have a new
calling, or a confirmation at the least, answerable unto a calling: so must it
also be with him, that is translated from an inferior office to a superior;
but in baptism there may be no such changing, or repetition. The practice were
haereticall.

Add unto these things, that as a man once baptized is always baptized, so is
he in all places, and Churches where he comes (as a baptized person) to enjoy
the common benefits of his baptism, and to discharge the common duties, which
depend upon it. But a Pastor is not a Pastor in every Church, where he comes
upon occasion, neither can he require in any other Church, saving that one,
over which the H: Ghost has set him, that obedience, maintenance, and other
respect, which is due to the officers from the people; neither stands he
charged with that Ministry, and service, which is due to the people from the
Officers: and if you Mr B. say otherwise, you make every Pastor a Pope, or
universal Bishop. Col. 4. 12.
Epaphras, though he were at Rome, was one of them (that is a Minister) of
Collossus: so were Act. 20. 17. 28.
the Elders of Ephesus, though they were at Miletum, the Elders of Ephesus
only, but of none other Church; and charged to feed the flock over which the
holy Ghost had set them, but none other; for over none other had the holy Ghost
set them. And as a Mayor out of his Corporation, a Shiriffe out of his County,
a Constable out of his Parish, or Hundred, is no Mayor, Shiriffe, or Constable,
(but in relation to that particular body of which he is) neither can he perform
any proper act of his office without usurpation; so neither is a Bishop, or
Elder, a Church Officer, save in his own particular Church, and charge, and in
relation unto it, neither can he without ambitious usurpation perform any
proper work of his Office, or Ministry, save in that Church by, and to which,
in his ministration, he is designed.

And thus much to show the difference betwixt that relative ordinance of the
Ministry, and that personal ordinance of Baptism in the Church; as also to
prove, that we do lawfully, and with good warrant disclaym, and renounce the
Ministry received in Rome, and England, notwithstanding we reteyn the Baptism
received both in the one, and the other. To which also, I could add (if there
were need, or use) both the judgment of the learned at home, and abroad, and
the practice of the reformed Churches, where we live, for the continuing of the
Baptism in Rome received, but no more of the Mass priests for Ministers, then
of the Mass it self, for which they were ordained. But it is more then time I
come to the mayn controversy about succession; which might be laid down
summarily in these words: whether the reformed Churches were bound to submit
(notwithstanding their separation from Rome) unto such ministers only, as were
ordained by the Pope, and his Bishops: but for the better clearing of things I
will enlarge my speech to these three distinct considerations.

First, whether the Ministry be before the Church, or no.

2. Whether the delegated power of Christ for the use of the holy things of God
be given primarily, and immediately to the Church, or to the Ministers?

3. Whether the Lord have so linked the Ministry in the chayn of succession,
that no Minister can be truly called, and ordained, or appointed without a
praecedent Minister.

Touching the first of these Mr Ber: affirms as in his page ^^.
former book: that the Officers make the Church, and give denomination unto it:
so expressly in his page 18^.
2. book, that the Ministry is before the Church. And noting in the same place
a two fold raising up of the Ministry: the first to beget a Church: the
second, when the Church is gathered; he puts the Ministers in both before the
Ch: in the former, absolutely, in the latter, in respect of their Office, and
ordination by succession from the first: In which discourse he intermingleth
sundry things, frivolous, unsound, and contradictory.

Now for the first entery, I desire the reader to observe with me that the
quaestion betwixt Mr Bernard and me is about ordinary Ministers, or officers of
the Church, such as were the first Ministers of the reformed Churches, and as
Mr B: and I pretend our selves to be: and not about extraordinary Ministers,
extraordinarily, miraculously, or immediately, raised up as were Adam, and the
Apostles by God, and Christ: whom he produces for examples. Admit the one sort
(being called immediately, and miraculously) may be before the Church: yet
cannot the other, which must be called by men, and those either the Church, or
members of the Church at the least.

Besides, the word Minister extends it self not only unto Officers ordinary,
and extraordinary, but even to any outward means, whether person or thing, by
which the revealed will of God is manifested, and made known unto men for their
instruction, and conversion. Yea it reaches even to God himself: and so far Mr
B. stretches it, where he makes First book page 144.
God the first preacher Genesis 2. 3. As though there were a controversy between
him, and me, whither God, or the Church were first. I see not but by the same
reason he might avouch, that the Ministers of the Church could not all die, or
be deceived, because God is free from these infirmityes. It is true which Mr B.
says, that the word is before the Church, as the seed, which begets it, and
so is that which brings it, yea whither it be person, or thing, which may also
be called a Minister, and be said to be sent of God, as it is an instrument to
convey, and means to minister the knowledge of the same word, and will of God
unto any. So if any private man, or woman should be a means to publish, or make
known the word of God to a company of Turks, Jews, or other Idolaters, he or
she might truly be said to be their Minister, and the Lords Ambassador unto
the^, as you speak. Yea if they came to this knowledge by reading the Bible, or
other godly book, that book or bible, as it served to minister the knowledge of
Gods will in his word might truly in a general sense be accounted as a
Minister unto the^. But what were all this to a Church Officer, about who^ our
quaestio^ is? These things Mr B. shuffles together, but the wise reader must
distinguish them, and so doing, he shall easily discover his trisling.

The particulars follow. And first he affirms, that God made Adam Mr B.
a Minister, to whom he gave a wife to begin the Church, and as Adam was before
his wife, so is the Ministry at the first before the Church.

If Adams wife began the Church, then is your mayn foundation Answ.
overthrown; namely that the ministers make, and denominate the Church, except
you will say that Eve was a Minister. Secondly it is not true you say, that God
made Adam a Minister, before Eve was created. In the same place you make (and
truly) a Minister, and Ambassador which brings the word all one: and unto
whom could Adam either minister the word, or be an Ambassador to bring it
before Eve was formed? There was nothing but bruit beasts, and senceles trees,
and to them I suppose he brought it not. The truth is, Adam and Eve were the
Chapter not by his, but by her creation, which made a company, or society: and thus
we are in the first place to consider of them, and of Adam as a teacher in the
second place; the special calling here, and ever, following after, and upon
the general.

Of the same force with your first proof is your 2. which you Mr B.
take from Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. where it is said, God gave some not only to
confirm the Church, but to gather the Saints to make a Church.

To let pass your boldness with the words, I except against your Answ.
exposition, and application of them. The word gathering upon which you insist,
is in some books turned repayring, and is the same in the Greek with that
which is restoring, Gal. 6. 1. of which I have spoken formerly.

Again, Paul in that place speaks not only of Apostles, and other Ministers
of the first raising up: for the begetting of Churches: but of Pastors, and
Teachers which were taken out of the Church, and of the 2. raising for the
feeding of the flock. You will not deny but the Apostles and brethren at
Jerusalem were a Church of God, Act. 1. 15. 16. when as yet no Pastors or
Teachers were appointed in it: and how then can your doctrine stand, that the
Ministers spoken of Ephe. 4. 11. 12. (amongst which were Pastors and Teachers)
were before the Church, out of which they were taken, and raised up of God to
beget a Church? Yea it is evident that the very office of Pastor was not then
heard of in the Church; whereby the falsity of your other affirmation is
discovered, to wit, that the Office of such Ministers as are of the second
raising, and which are taken out of the Church, is before the Church.

Thirdly, the Apostles themselves (howsoever extraordinary officers immediately
called, and sent forth to beget other Churches both of Jews, and Gentiles)
were Christians before they were Apostles, and members of the Church before
they were Officers. And the scriptures do expressly testify, that ^ Cor. ^^. 28.
God ordained, or set in the Church Apostles, amongst other Officers: and this
their setting in the Church does necessarily praesuppose a Church, wherein they
were set, as the setting of a candle in a candlestick, praesupposeth a
candlestick: as in deed the Church is the Rev 1. 2. Math. 5. 14 15.
Candlestick, and the officers the candles, lights, and stars, which are set
in it.

Lastly, it is a senceles affirmation you make, that a man sent to win people
is a minister to the hidden number, not yet called out, which Mr B.
are also his flock potentially though not actually. Answ.


The Ioh. 10. 3 page 302.
scriptures, and you accordingly in another place, make it a property of a good
Minister to call his own sheep by name, that is, as you expound it, to take
notice of his people and of their growth in religion etc. and now here, you will
have a minister of the hidden number whereof he can take no notice at all: nor
can tell whether or no, he shall find one sheep amongst them. Besides you
commit a Logical error in raising an actual Minister from the relation he
has unto a flock potentially: you may as truly affirm, that a single man
toward marriage is an housband, and a father, because he may have wife, and
children. Any man, that upon a just calling, or occasion, opens* and makes
known the Gospel of salvation unto a company of Turks, or Pagans, may in that
general sense be called the Lords Minister sent unto them: but a Church
Officer, of who^ our quaestion is, till he have by his Ministry called, and
separated them unto the Lord, and be by their election, called, and separated
to his office, can he neither be, nor be called.

One thing more you add, which is, that Ministers may be the Mr B.
Church, as they are Christians, and that they are Ministers in respect of an
office bestowed upon them in their state of Christianity: wherein you Answ.
speak (and that truly) sufficient to overthrow not only your particular
error in this place, but well nigh your whole writing. For thereupon it
follows, First that the Church is before the Ministry, because men are a
Church as they are Christians, and Christians, before they be Ministers. 2.
That Ministers make not the Church but become such by an office bestowed upon
them in their state of Christianity, that is, in their Church state. Thirdly,
that the Christian brethren though not in office are part of the Church, Math.
18. since even the officers themselves are acknowledged the Church, or of the
Church, as they are Christians.

I come now unto the 2. consideration, and do affirm against Mr Ber. that the
delegated, and communicated power of Christ is given primarily, and immediately
to the Church, and not to the officers.

This point I have formerly handled at large, under two general heads opened
in the former part of my page 125. 126. etc.
book, unto which I do entreat the reader to look back, yet will I for further
satisfaction I.
briefly annex a few things.

First, because Romans 3. 2. and 9. 4. E. phe. 2. 12.
unto the Jews were of credit committed the Oracles of God, unto whom also did
the covenants apperteyn, and all the privileges of them, as to the common
wealth of Israel. 1 Cor. 3. 22 23.


2. Because the Ministers themselves are given to the Church, and the Churches
immediately, as the Church is Christ's, and Christ Gods. II.
And if this holy thing the Ministry be the Churches immediately, then other
things also as well as it, in respect of right, and possession, though she use
the service of the Ministers ordinarily for the dispensation, and exequution of
them. It is not denied, but that the officers in such works, as they perform
unto the Ch^in the name of the Lord, as ofdoctrine, exhortation, admonition,
and the like, stand in a more imediate relation unto the Lord, then the Church
does: but it must also be remembered, that this no more advances the order of
their Office above the order of the body, then it does one private bother,
performing the same work orderly in the exercise of prophesying, or otherwise.

3. The Officers are to dispense, and exequute the holy things III.
of God, as the Romans 15. 31. 1 Cor. 4. 1. 2 Cor. 4. 5. Col. 1. 24. 25.
servants, and Ministers of Christ, and his Church: and whatsoever they do in
their office, they do it, as the servants, and ministers both of Christ and of
the Church. Now common sense teaches men, that, what power, or authority
soever the servants, or Ministers of others have, or use in their places, that
authority and power, they have first, whose servants and ministers they are:
and that therefore the holy things of God are primarily, and immediately the
Churches under Christ, and in the last place the Officers, as the servants of
Christ, and his Church, for execution, in the order, which Christ has left.

The last, and greatest quaestion now comes into handling* namely whether
Ministers may be made by such as are no Ministers. For this phrase of making
Ministers Mr B. affects much, belike with refere^ce special to the Ministers
of England, and Rome, who are fitly said to be made by the Bishops, and to be
the workmanship of their hands.

Mr Ber. vehemently v^geth the negative part, namely, that no Minister may be
made but by a minister: and tying, as he does the Ch: to the Ministry, and the
Ministry to succession, there is cause he should. For if the chayr of
succession should break, both the Ch: and Ministry of England must fall to the
ground.

The only Argument he brings for his purpose, is an historical narration (as
he speaks) from time to time, without any one instance to the contrary: and the
constant practice of the Church of God from the days Mr B.
of Adam hitherto. 2. book. 186 ^ Book. 144 Answ.


I desire the Reader in the first place to take knowledge from me, that I deny
not, but confess, that the Churches of God, more particularly, and the
Churches of the new testament continuing, and abiding in that state, Col. 2. 5.
^ayth, and order, wherein they were set, and established by the Lord in the
hands of his servants the Apostles, and E^angelists, were to receive their
ministers constantly by succession, after a sort, namely so far, as that all
succeeding Ministers were to be ordained by Ministers, and no otherwise. But
would any man, save either a marked servant of the Pope, or one that cared not
what he wrote for some praesent seeming-advantage, argue as this man does, from
the estate of the Churches of Christ, and in particular of the Church at Rome,
in Peter, and Paul's time, to the estate, wherein now it is, or was an hundred
years since, in which estate we are to consider of it? But of this more
hereafter.

The historical narration before spoken of, Mr B. divides into 4. times or
ages: the first whereof is from the beginning of the world, till the giving of
the law: the 2. from the law, till Christ's coming: the 3. from Christ, till
the end of the history of the new testament: p. 184. 185.
the 4, and last from that time, hitherto.

Let us consider of his instances. And first (says he) God at the Mr B.
worlds beginning, ordained Adam in his place; and till the law did raise up
extraordinary Teachers: whom he also names in his 2. book, as Henoh, Noah,
Abraham, Isaak, Iakob, Joseph, Lev^ and the rest.

As it is true, that all Ministers are both to be called, and ordained Answ.
of God, and ordinary Ministers to be called by the Church, and ordained by the
Church Officers if there be any in that Ch: by, and to which the latter are
called, so neither does the age wherein you first instance, draw any such
straight line of succession, or conclude any such necessity of ordination by
praecedent officers, as you praetend. And that you may more clearly see this,
you must take notice of your error, in affirming, that God raised up
extraordinary Teachers till the law.

The first born in the families were the ordinary Teachers, ordinarily
succeeding, til the Levites were appointed: the office of Preisthood being
annexed to their birthright. In which respect it was, that God told Cain Genesis
4. 7.
his brothers desire should be unto him, and that he should rule over him. For
which purpose see also Genesis 21. 9. and 25. 31. 32. 33. 34. and 49. 4. with
Deuteronomy. 33. 8. Add unto this also, that the Lord would have Exo. 12. 2 Chapter 19.
22.
every first born amongst the chidren of Israel consecrated unto him: that the
Priests, or, (as it is better turned) the administers of the holy things which
come near to the Lord, should sanctify themselves: and that Chapter 24. 5
Moses sent the young men of the children of Israel to offer burnt offerings,
and sacrifices unto the Lord. But most evidently does this appear in that Number.
3. 12. 13. and 8 15. 16. etc. With Deu. 33. 10.
the Levites were appointed to teach the people, and to offer sacrifices, and
to do the service of the children of Israel in the tabernacle of the
congregation, for the first born, that opens the matrice among the children
of Israel.

And as the first born were the ordinary Teachers successively, before the law,
in whose stead the Levites afterward were appointed; so was this order in
sundry persons, and upon sundry occasions, broken, and interrupted. As in Genesis
4. 8. 12. 14. 16.
CAIN, for his murder: in Chapter 11. 31 with* Josh. 24. 2. 15.
TERAH for his Idolatry: in Chapter 21. 9. 14.
ISMAEL for his mocking: and in Chapter 25. 31 32. 33. 34. Heb. 12. 16 Genesis 27. 27
ESAV for his prophanenes. To descend lower. When the order of succession in
the Preisthood was so far estalished, as that it did divolve, by the word of
God, from the parents upon the children, as by an haereditary right, yet then
we see, it was sometimes for the sins of men, broken off, and interrupted.
Take for instance Eli, and his house. 1 Samuel 2. 30. 31.
The Lord God ^f Israel had said, that his house, and the house of his father
should walk before him for ever: but now (the L: says) is shall not be; for
them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be despised.
Behold the days shall come, that I will cut off the arm of thy fathers house,
etc. then he adds, and I will stir me up a faithful Priest, that shall do
according to mine heart, and according to my mind, etc. which was also
especially accomplished in Salomons days, when ver. 35.
the Preisthood was translated from Abiathar to Zadock. 1 King. 2. 35. To the
same purpose tends that which the Prophets, Ezechiel and Hose threaten, and
denounce, against other Priests of Israel, for their idolatry and other
iniquities. Ezec. 44. 10. 13.
The Levites, (says the Lord) which went back from me, when Israel went
astray, shall bear their iniquity: and they shall not come near vno me to do
the office of the Priest unto me, etc. And again by Hose: Hos. 4. 6 7.
because thou have refused knowledge, I will also refuse thee, that thou shall
be no Priest to me: and seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will
also forget thy children. I will change their glory into shame. For the
shutting up of this point; the Lord Jesus himself coming to repayr the decayed
places of Sion, and to enlarge the walls of Jerusalem, did not choose his
Apostles out of the number of the Priests, and other ordinary Teachers, but else
where They in deed supposed (as the Prelates, and Priests now do) that the Lord
could neither propagate, nor mainteyn his Church but by them, because they were
Math. 3. 9.
the children of Abraham: but John Baptist tells them, and all other with the^,
that hang upon the same, or like line of personal succession, which they did,
that except they prevent the Lords wrath, and bring forth fruits worthy
amendment of life, he will with the ax of his wrath hew them down, and cast
them as unfruitful trees into the fire: raising up unto Abraham seed, and
children of the very stones.

If now the Lord have thus ever and anon, from the beginning of the world,
changed the course, and current of succession, for these sins, namely,
murder, idolatry, persequution, profanenes, and the like; is it possible that
the stream should still run, by the Lords appointment, without stop, or change,
for so many hundred years, in the Romish Church, where these, and all other
sins, and iniquities have abounded? and where they all, as so many members
co^pact together, make the man of sum co^plete? Is the Lord l^s^^ zealous now a
days, then in times past of the honor of his name, and ordinances? Or has S.
Peter procured some Charter of impunity for his successors the Popes of Rome,
what impieties soever they have fallen, or can fall into? Or does this man think
by any plea he can make for them to hold them in possession of that right which
they have so notoriously forfeyted so many ways, and for so many years, and
whereof the word of God has so evidently disseyzed them? For conclusion of
this particular, the Apostle Paul foretelling the general 2 These. 2. 3. 4.
apostasy of that man of sin, the child of perdition, advancing himself above
all that is called God, or is worshipped, adds that the Lord will destroy him
with the spirit of his mouth. In which words we are to observe, first, the
verse. 8.
universality of the apostasy, advancing it self above all that is called God;
and secondly, the manner of restoration of the Church, which is to be by the
Lord, and the spirit of his mouth, where if it were to be by the ministers of
Antichrists making, or the Popes calling, the^ should the man of sin consume
himself. Ioyn with this scripture another of the same nature, wherein the H:
Ghost, speaking by the mouth of John, of the same general apostasy, foretells,
how God would raise up his Rev: 11. 3. 7.
two witnesses, which should prophesy against the beast, which came out of the
bottomless pit, and against all the abominations of Antichrist: whereas, by
the doctrine of succession, no witnesses should be raised up against Antichrist
but by himself.

Now by these scriptures, and instances it appears, that the stream of
succession has not run so currantly from the days of Adam hitherto, as Mr B:
praetendeth, but that it has sundry times been stopped, and turned by, and
that most specially in the Romish apostasy.

The thing I purpose in the next place is, to prosequute certain Arguments of
Mr Smythes, and the rather because himself has in a measure forsaken this
truth with others (adding also some others unto them) to prove, that the
ministry (and so other* the holy things of God,) is not tied by Christ to the
succession of office, or order, but of faith. The Arguments I will take up as
Mr Bernard together with their answers lays them down in his 2. book. Page:
186. 187. 188 etc.


Of the first Argument, I have spoken in another place. The 2. is, that if
Christ's ministerial power be by succession, to the Pope, Bishops, or
Praesbytery, then the Ministry of Rome is a true Ministry* Mr Bern: answer
is, that he means true succession, which is both personal, and has with it a
true office, true doctrine, true sacraments, and prayer, about which Christ's
true ministers are exercised: but for the Romish Ministry it is idolatry, and
superstition, and the men appointed there to ordained sacrifising Priests.

This answer of yours Mr B. puts me in mind of a practice of children, who when
they have a long while busyed themselves in drawing the best forms, and
figures they can in dust, and ashes, do at the last with one dash of their hand
deface all, and undo, what they have formerly done. And that this childish
dealing you use, no reader that considers the quaestion in hand, can be
ignorant of.

The quaestion then between him, and me, is not of such a succession personal,
as has joined with it succession in a true office, true doctrine, true
sacraments, and prayer, wherein the minister is in any measure faithfully
exercised: but generally, whether succession of persons be of such absolute
necessity, as that no minister can in any case be made but by a minister, and
more specially, whither the first ministers of the reformed Ch:, or of such, as
come out of the confusion of Antichrist, must of necessity be ordained by the
Pope, and his Bishops, or minister by virtue of their ordinatio^ so received.
And that this succession by, and from the Romish ministry, is that Mr Ber:
pleads for, his writings manifest: as first, that, as in all the Apostles time
the Ministry 2. ^ok op^g 185. 186.
was by succession; ministers, as it were, begetting Ministers by ordination,
so after their time the like succession has been kept from time to time,
Bishop after Bishop, and Ministers ordained by them: which the Catalogue of
the^, and stories of times, on which we must rely, where the script: cease to
make further relation, do witness: for the continuation of which succession to
the worlds end, he alleges Math. 28. 20. odiously perverting to the Pope, and
his shavelings, the promise, which Christ there made, to be with his Apostles,
and other faithful ministers, teaching the things, which he had commanded, and
dispensing his other ordinances accordingly. Answerable unto which, is his
other saying (in which, his terms, and meaning do well suit) that Churchmen
ever ordained Ministers, and not the lay people. To this also let his infere^ce
be added in another place page 311. that, if we receive, and hold our baptism
from Rome, why not our ordination also? And in his former book Page: 144.
most clearly condemning our Ministers for being made by such, as are no
Ministers: contrary to the constant practice of the Church of God from the
days of Adam hitherto. And again, that this custom of ordeyning Ministers did
continue in the times following the Apostles times (as before it had done) in
all the Churches of Christendom, as ecclesiastical writers do make mention:
and so through pure, and impure Churches* and that, God in the last reformation
of his Church, would not break this order; but choose men, who were Bishops
ordained even in the Popish Church, so that they might ordeyn fit persons
afterward. And this he tells the Reader he speaks of the Church of England, as
in deed he may well; for other Ch: departed from Rome, would be loath to join in
his plea. And lastly, he charge us with great praesumption, for daring to
break this order of God, continued five thousand, and six hundred years. Now
what can be more vain? The very point which MR. BERNARD is to prove, and from
which he brings his historical narration from Adam to this day, is, that God
has continued the course of succession in the Romish Ministry, and that from,
and by it successively, the Ministry in England has been, and is at this day,
continued. And yet in his answer to Mr Smyth, he is driven to affirm, that he
has no refere^ce at all to the Romish Ministry, which he accounts Idolatry,
and superstition: but means such a personal succession, as has joined with it
a true office, true doctrine, and the like. He will have succession continued
from the days of Adam hitherto; and this to have been the order of God for
five thousand, and six hundred years: and that he chose Bishops ordained in the
Popish Church, to ordeyn fit persons in the Church of England: and yet Mr Smith
is to know he speaks not at all of the succession in the Romish Ministry,
which is idolatry, and superstition.

Now that the more simple reader may not loose himself in this man's maze, and
that he may the better know the state of the quaestion, and judge of it, I will
here interpose some few things, touching succession and ordination accordingly.

First then we acknowledge, that in the right and orderly state of things, no
Ministers are to be ordained, but by Ministers, the latter by the former in the
Churches, where they are, and over which the holy Ghost has set them. And so
the Apostles being general, and extraordinary men (unto whom the Evangelists
also were joined for assistance to ^ Cor: 3* 6. Tit: 1. 5.
water where they planted, and to finish the works, by them begun) as they had
^ Cor: ^. 28. Act: 15 36. 1 Cor. 4. 17.
the care of all the Churches committed unto them, and were charged with them,
so were they also to Act. 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5
ordeyn the Elders and Bishops in them, and the people bound to wayt their
coming for that purpose, as Mr Ber. truly affirms: as were also these
Bishops, or Elders to ordeyn others in the Churches over which they were set,
and so others after them in the order appointed by Christ in his Apostles; with
who^ also he promised to be always till the worlds end, in this and the like
their holy ministrations. But is the consequence good, that, because Math. 28.
20.
the Apostles and Evangelists were to ordeyn Elders in the Churches by
Commission from Christ, and that the people converted from Indaism, or
Paganism, were to wayt till they came to ordeyn them their ministers, therefore
the Pope, and Prelates under him have commission from Christ to ordeyn his
priests and that the people converted from Antichristianism are to wayt (...)
they come to ordeyn them their Ministers, or till they send them such as they
have always in store ordained to their hands? or that because the Apostles,
and Evangelists had Christ's promise to be with them always, that therefore the
Pope, Cardinals, Lord Bishops, and Lord Suffragans have interest in the same
promise. It might asvvell be concluded, that as the Lords people were bound to
obey, and submit unto the former in their times, so are they now to submit
unto, and obey the Pope, and his underlings. And yet is this the very mark Mr
Bernard aims at in his long drawn historical narration: this is the force of
his argument, and his manner of arguing. If this line hold from Peter to the
Pope, and from the Pope to his clergy, and so successively to the Ministry of
England, then it stands upright; if it break, then does the ministry of
England* (which as Mr Bernard truly, and honestly confesses is thus raised)
fall flat to the ground: as indeed it does according to the foretelling of the
Angel, Rev. 14. ^.
it is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great City.

But here it will be demanded of me, how the Lords people coming out of
Babylon, separating from Rome, are to obteyn, and enjoy Ministers. Surely one
of these three ways. Either by the extaordinary, immediate, or miraculous
designation of God; or by succession; or by the same peoples choice, or
appointment, to which they are to minister. To expect ministers by the first
means were fancy* and presumption: so that by one of the two other ways they
must come necessarily. The power of the holy things of God, and so specially of
erecting the minstery, is either tied to the order of office, and so to the
order of to the Popeship, and Praelacy under it, or else to the faith of the
people of God forsaking Babylon, and joining together in the covenant of
Abraham, and fellowship of the gospel. The former of these though Mr B: be
drive^ to plead it in the proof of succession, yet in the defense of it, he is
forced to disclaym, and disavow: yielding the Romish Ministry to be Idolatry,
and superstition, and that he speaks of such a succession, as requires with it
a true office, true doctrine, true sacraments, and prayer. page 188. and again
that he means by succession a continuance of Gods ordinance by persons elected
thereto from time to time, being of spiritual kindred by the faith of
doctrine, by which the ordinance is vpheld, and true succession mainteyned. page
190. With which grant of his I might rest, as indeed wherein he yields the
whole cause, and cutts off, as it were, with his own hands, the cord of true
succession in the Ch: of Rome; making it to fayl, when the truth of doctrine,
and of election failed in the same Ch:. But because it is so common a thing
with him, to say, and unsay* and to say again the same things, either
forgetting himself, or thinking others forgets, or because he would say
something to every thing, though never so contrary both to the truth, and
himself in another place, I will press Mr Smythes other Arguments. The third
of which is, that by the doctrine of succession men are bound absolutely to
sin, in joining to the sins of the Minister. This is says Mr B: to take
vnproved a principle of Brownism to overthrow a truth, namely, that a man
cannot receive the holy things of God, but he must needs sin with others.

And is it so indeed? Do not the scriptures every where teach men to Rom: 16
17. Gal: 1. ^. 1 Timothy: 6. 3. 4. 5. Tit: 3. 10 11.
avoid, reject, and hold accursed, false teachers, haeretiques, and idolaters?
and 1 Timothy: 5. 18. 2 Ioh: 10. 11. Rev 1^. 4.
not to partake in the sin of others, either by practicing them, or giving
consent, or countenance unto them? Whereupon it follows, that the doctrine,
which binds the Ministry, and other holy things of God unto succession, and
thereby to partake with haeretiques, and false teachers, or at least with such
in their ministration, as have received the power, and authority by which they
minister from the Pope, and his Praelacy, bynds men to sin in joining with
the sins of the Ministers.

Of the Jewish Church and Preisthood (which Mr Ber^here objects) I have spoken
formerly, and do now add, that, as no man is now so tied to any Church, or
Ministry in the world, as was every faithful person in the world then to that
one temple, and Preisthood at Jerusalem, so neither could any man then, without
sin, communicate with an ^aereticall, or idolatrous Priest, especially
ministering in a false office, and by the like calling, and commission, which
the Ministers both in Rome, and England do.

In the 4. Argument Mr Ber: deals dishonestly. Mr Smiths inference upon the
doctrine of succession, is, that then the Lord has made the Ministers Lords
over the Church, so that the Church cannot have or enjoy any of the Lords
ordinances, or holy things, except they will consent unto them; for the holy
things are in their power. Now Mr Ber. only trifles about the word Lord, and
passes by the substance of the inference which is most sound upon the
doctrine. For if the Lords ordinances and holy things be tied to the Ministers,
then without their consent there can be no use of them. And so where Ministers
either are not, or not willing to communicate them, there can be no Church, no
election of Ministers, no keys of the kingdom, and so no salvation: as I have
formerly manifested upon Math. 16. 19.

The sum of Mr Smithes 5. Argument is, that then the Pope may excommunicate the
whole Church universal; the Bishops their whole Dioceses, and Provinces: and
the Praesbytery the particular Church whereof it is. Your answer Mr Bernard,
is, that this were to do the Pope a great favor to prove him to have an
universal power, etc. and 2. that by this sequel of Mr Smythes, this
absurdity would follow, that the Bishop might cast out the Church, out of the
Church.

It is you that do the Pope this great favor, though you would not own it. For
if the Ministry make the Church, and that Rome be a true Church, then must the
ministry of Rome be true, specially of the Pope, from which the other is
derived as from the head.

Again, if the ordinatio^ by the Bishops in the impure Church of Rome be the
Lords order, as you expressly affirm p. 145. of your former book, then must the
Popes universal power, by which the Bishops do universally ordeyn, be the
power of the Lord which from him he has received for that purpose. They which
hold, that the power of the keys was given first and immediately to the
Apostle Peter, and so to the Popes of Rome his successors, they hold that the
Pope may excommunicate the whole Church: so they which hold the Bishop, or his
substitute to be meant, where Christ says, tell the Church, they must
necessarily hold, that the Bishop or his substitute may excommunicate his whole
Province, or Dioces; and so of them which hold the Praesbytery to be the Ch:
there spoken of, for the particular assembly over which it is. The Church there
meant may excommunicate any brother, or brethren (whom, or how many soever)
that refuse to hear her: as the Church of Corinth, to who^ 1 Cor. 1. 2. and ^.
1^. 13
Paul writ might judge all them which were within, and not without, and under
the Lords judgment

The substance of the seventh, and last objection, is, (for the 6. has no
weight in it) that the doctrine of succession overthrowes it self, and the
Reason is, because one POPE does not make another by ordination whiles he
lives, but the Cardinals do by Election make the new Pope after the death of
the former. So that the Pope receiving his ministerial power from the
Cardinals, cannot give it to them, and so to the rest of the Clergy in Rome,
and England, neither can it descend from Christ through the Apostles, and so
through him to the other inferior ministers, but as in a chayn if the highest
link be broken, the rest which hang upon it must needs fall: So if there be a
breach of this chayn of succession from the Apostles to the ministry of Rome,
and of England (which descends of it lineally) in the higest link, the Pope,
all the rest of the chayn that hangs upon it, except it be otherwise vpheld,
must needs fall flat upon the ground. It is true which Mr Ber: answers that
election, and succession by ordination may stand together in the ministry, but
in this case it cannot, except the Pope should by the election of the
Cardinals, or others, ordeyn his succession whilst himself survived. Now in
this last answer Mr B: challenges his adversary to be wild in wandering, and
to have lost his quaestion, in concluding that the doctrine of succession is a
false doctrine, where he should prove that Christ's power is not given to the
principal members. But this challenge is both unjust, and unadvised. Unjust,
because succession from the popish Church, and Clergy is made by M: Ber: in his
former book the foundation of the ministry of England, and so of the Church:
the Church by his affirmation being made by the ministers, and the Ministers by
such Bishops page: 145
as were ordained in the popish Church. Unadvised because these two points, do
depend each upon other necessarily. For if Christ's power be tied to the officers
whether principal, or inferior, then must it come to the ministry, and
Church of England by succession: if it come not by succession from, or by the
Pope, and his Clergy, then must it come by the same succession of faith, and
doctrine unto the children of Abraham, two or three, or more faithful persons
joined together in the covenant, and fellowship of the gospel. And for the
quaestion in Mr Bernards own words (remitting the Reader to such places as
prove, that a company of faithful people in the covenant of the gospel,
though without officers are a visible Church, that they have immediate right to
the holy things of God; and that the keys for bynding, and loosing were given
to Peter's confession) I will add only one Argument, and so proceed.

It has been sundry times observed, and proved by the Number: 16. 9 and 1^. 7. 2
Chr: 35. ^. Ezech: 44. 11. Math. ^0. 2^. 26. 27. 2 Cor: 4. 5. Rom: 15. 3^.
scriptures, that the officers of the Church, are the servants of the Ch: and
their office a service of the Lord, and of his Church. Whereupon it follows
necessarily, that what power the officers have, the body of the Church has
first, and before them, the very light of nature, and common sense teaching it,
that what power, or authority soever the the servants of any body, or persons
have, the body or persons whose servants they are, must have it first, and they
by the^. And for this purpose let it be further observed, that no power at all
came unto the Church of the Jews by the Levites: not the use of the sacrament
of circumcision; no nor of the very sacrifices: which were offered by the first
born in the family, and that even after the peoples coming out of Egypt under
the hand of Moses, till Levi was called to the Preisthood. Ex. 13. 2. and 24. ^.

I proceed. If the Ministry of the reformed Churches must be by succession, or
ordination by Popish Bishops, then must the same office of Ministry be
continued from the one Church to the other: as indeed it was withal the
Ministers of the Church of England at the first; who without any new either
calling, or ordination (which depends upon it) continued their office, and
place formerly received; there being only a reformation of some of the
grossest evils, like the healing of Jobs soars, as Mr B. speaks: as the
office of Iustice-ship, or the like in the common wealth, may be continued the
same in the same persons individually, though by edict of Parliament, or other
superior power, there be a surceasing of some mayn act of it.

Further to ty the Ministry thus to succession, is to ty the Lords sheep to
submit to no other sheepheards but such as the wolves have appointed. And if a
company of Gods people in Rome, or Spayn, should come out of Babylon, and no
consecrated Priest amongst them, they must, by this doctrine, enjoy no
Ministers, but such as the Romish wolves will ordeyn, and do, according to
their Popish, and profane order.

To these things I might also add, that look what power any of the Popes
Clergy receive from him, the same he takes from them and deprives them of,
where they withdrew their obedience, or separate from that Church: as also that
the ordinations in Rome, by their own Canons, are very nulli^yes, and many the
the like exceptions pleaded by learned protestants against the Romish
preisthood, and this Romish doctrine of succession: but that which has been
spoken is sufficient in the general, and I hasten to the third and last means
of the three, by which Gods people after Antichrists defection are to enjoy the
ministry, and other of Christ's ordinances.

And for our better proceeding herein, I will first consider, what ordination
is: and 2. how far the brethren may go by the scriptures, and the necessary
consequences drawn from them, in this and the like cases, in the first planting
of Churches, or in the reducing of them into order,, in or after some general
confusion. The Prelates, and those which level by their line do highly advance
ordination, and far above the administration of the word, Bishop Barl. ser:
b(...)e the King.
sacraments, and prayer: making it, and the power of excommunication the two
inco^municable prerogatives of a Bishop in their understanding above an
ordinary minister: But surely herein these chief ministers do not succeed the
chief ministers, the Apostles, except as darkness succeeds light, and
Antichrists confusion Christ's order. Where the Apostles were sent out by
Christ, there was no mention of ordination; their charge was to Math. 28. 20
go teach all nations, and baptize them: and that the Apostles accounted
preaching their principal work, and after it baptism, and prayer the
scriptures "A^t. 6. 4. 1. Cor. 1 17.
manifest. And if ordination had been in those days so pryme a work, surely
Paul would rather have tarryed in Crete himself to have ordained Elders there,
and have sent Titus an inferior officer Tit 1. 5.
about that inferior work of preaching, then have gone himself about that,
leaving Titus for the other.

But because Mr Bernard (with whom I deal) when he writes most advisedly,
preferrs page 137. ^^^st book.
preaching to the first place, and the administration of the sacraments, and
prayer to the next, passing by ordination as not worthy the naming amongst
these principal works, I will therefore leave it to be honored by them, whom
it most honors, and for whose ease, and profit it best serves, and will
consider in what place he sets it.

He then pleading, that as well the ordination; as the baptism received 2. book
p. 311.
in Rome is to be held, makes ordination and the calling of the Ministers all
one. Wherein as he unfitly compares together things not to be compared, to wit,
baptism into the name of the true God, and ordinatio^, into a false office
(except he hold a masse-preisthood a true office) so does he unadvisedly
confound a part with the whole, yea the last, and least part, as ordination is:
and which does indeed depend upon the peoples lawful election, as an effect
upon the cause, by virtue of which it is justly administered, and may be thus
described, or considered of us: as the admission of, or putting into
possession, a person lawfully elected, into, or of a true Office of Ministry.
For example, the Mayor, Baylife, or other chief officer in a privileged City,
or Corporation, is chosen by the people to his office, but withal must be
entered, and inaugurated with some solemn ceremony, as the giving of the Cities
keys, or sword, into his hand, or the like, by his praedecessour. So is it
with the Ministers, the officers of this spiritual corporation the Church, the
right unto their offices they have by election, the possession of the^ by
ordination, with the ceremony of imposition of hands. The Apostle Peter,
advertising the Act. 1. 15. 16. 21. 22. 26.
disciples, or brethren that one (so fitted as is there noted) was to be made
in the room of Judas, a witness with the eleven Apostles, of the resurrection
of Christ, (when two were by them praesented, such as were fit, and by them so
deemed) did, with the rest praesent them two, and none other, to the Lord, that
he by the i^mediate direction of the lot might show, whether of them two he had
chosen. In like manner Chapter 6. 2. 3. 5. 6.
the twelve being to institute the office of Deaconry in the Ch: at Jerusalem,
called the multitude of the disciples together, and informed them what manner
of persons they were to choose: which choice being made by the brethren
accordingly, and they so chosen praesented to the Apostles, they forthwith
ordained them, by virtue of the election so made by the brethren. To these ad,
that the Apostles Act. 13* 2. and 14. 23.
PAUL, and BARNABAS (being thereunto called by the H. Ghost) did pass from
Church to Church, and from place to place, and in every Church, where they
came, did ordeyn them Elders by the peoples election, signified by their
lifting up of hands, as the word is, and as the use was in popular elections,
throughout those countries. Now the Apostles were in a manner strangers unto
them, coming as it were to one place over night, and ready to depart the next
morning, or at least tarrying a very small while in every Church, as does
appear, both by the course of the story, and by the many several places they
passed to, and fro, and those some of them distant one from another a great
space, both by sea, and land. So that neither the liberty of the very Apostles
was so great in ordeyning, as was the peoples in choosing: neither were they to
ordeyn but such as the other choose, nor but to ordeyn them, except just
exception were against them: neither was their ordination so much as the others
election, no more then possession is so much as right: neither did the Apostles
in their ordination rely so much upon their own as upon the peoples knowledge,
and experience of the men, which were to be called into office.

Besides these things, though it appear that Act. 13. 1. 2. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 14 and
2. 1. 6. Act. 14 23.
Paul, and Barnabas were ordained by laying on of hands, to that special work
appointed them by the H. Ghost, and that the Evangelists were so ordained, and
so the Bishops, or Elders in the Churches by the Apostles, and Evangelists, yet
read we of no such solemnity performed by Christ upon his Apostles, when he
called them; nor by Peter, or the Apostles at the choice of Mathias, Act. 1.
but being by the people praesented with Joseph, and by the Lord singled out by
lot, he was by a common consent counted with the eleven Apostles. Whereupon
also some reformed Churches have thought that this solemn ordination The
Churches in Scotland.
by imposition of hands is of no such necessity, but that it might be used, or
not used indifferently, and so have practiced.

But the judgment, and plea (when they deal with us) of the most forward men
in the Land, in this case, I may not omit; which is, that they renounce, and
disclaym their ordination by the Prelates, and hold their Ministry by the
peoples acceptance. Now if the acceptance of a mixed company under the
Praelates government, (as is the best parish assembly in the kingdom) whereof
the greatest part have by the revealed will of God, no right to the covenant,
ministry, or other holy things, be sufficient to make a minister, then much
more the acceptance of the people with us, being all of them jointly, and
every one of them severally, by the mercy of God, capable of the Lords
ordinances.

These things, thus opened, I come in the next, and last place to manifest,
what liberty the scriptures, just consequence, and good reason do allow the
people for the reducing themselves into the order, and under the Ministry of
Christ, after some general cofusion, such as the Papacy was, and is.

And for this purpose I entreat the reader to recognize with me the points
lately mentioned, and proved in the former part of the book, namely that page
125. 126. -- 130. 131.
a company of faithful people in the covenant of the Gospel are a Church,
though without officers: that this Church has interest in all the holy things
of God within it self, and immediately under Christ the head, without any
forreyn assistance: that in cases, page 142. 143. 144.
a private person, or brother, in such a Church, may do a necessary work of an
officer: and lastly, that page 149. 150. 151.
the keys of the kingdom were given to, and the Church to be built upon the
rock of Peter's confession, Math. 16. And so I come to the point it self.

I do then acknowledge, that where there are already lawful officers in a
Church, by, and to which, others are called, there the former, upon that
election, are to ordeyn, and appoint the latter. The officers, being the
ministers of the Church, are to exequute the determinations, and judgments of
the Church under the Lord: the Censures of deposition, and excommunication by
pronouncing the sentence of judgment, and by it, as by the sword of the spirit
drawn out, cutting of the officer from his office, and the member from the
body, and all communion with it: So are they to exequute the peoples election
by pronouncing the person elect to his office, charging him with the faithful
execution of it, with imposition of hands, and prayer. And indeed ordination,
in the calling of the ministers is properly the exequutio^ of election.

But as in a civil corporation, or City, though the Mayor, Baylif, or other
chief officer elect, be at his ^nterance, and inauguration, to receive at the
hands of his praedecessour, the sword, or keys of the City, or to have some
other solemn Ceremony by him performed unto him: yet if either there be no
former, as at the first; or that the former be dead, or upon necessity absent,
when his successor enters, then is this Ceremony and work performed by some
other the fittest instrument: neither need that City borrow an officer of
another City: neither could he intermedle there, without usurpation, though
both the Corporations have the same Charter, under the same King: so is it in
this spiritual Corporation, and City of God, the Church: the former officers,
if there be any in that particular congregation, are to ordeyn such as succeed:
but if none be to be found, this Corporation is not to go to the next to
borrow an officer, or two, but may use such fit persons, as she has, for that
service so absolutely necessary: neither may the officers of an other
Corporation do the acts of their office in that, except they be either
Apostles, or Evangelists, and have general charges: or rather except they will
make themselves Popes: as indeed this exorbitant, and roving course makes as
many universal Bishops, in respect of power, and so likewise of exequution, if
there be occasion, as there are officers in all the Churches. But to come unto
the scriptures, it has been formerly noted that the first born in the family,
before the law, did perform the priests office: in whose place the Levites were
afterward substituted. Now as Exodus: 29. 1. 2. 3 and.
the Priests of the Levites did not enter upon their office without solemn
consecration, nor the ministers of the new testament upon theirs, without
solemn Act: 6. 6 and 14. 23.
ordination or appointment, so neither can it be conceived, that the first
borne did Heb: 5. 4
take unto themselves the honor to administer, without some solemnity
performed to or upon them, by their predecessors: and so we read, that when
Gen: 27. ^7.
Isaak conveyed the blessing, and birthright to Jacob, he kissed him, as did:
ch: 48 17. 18. 19 20.
Jacob also lay his right upon the head of Ephraim, when with the blessing he
did transfer the birthright to him from Manasseth. But if the father of the
family were suddenly taken away, or dyed before his first borne were capable
of this ministration, then could he not thus solemnly resign, or transmit to
him the office, or work, but there must needs have been some interposition of
another, if any solemn admission at all were required. To come lower. When
Numb. 8. 6. 9. 10. etc 20. 21.
the Levites were given, at the first, to the Lord, as a redemption of the
first borne, for the service of the tabernacle, we do find that the people
did, by putting their hands upon them, offer, and ordeyn them, as their shake
offering, and gift unto the Lord. But this liberty, which the people here used,
by the Lords appointment, at the first, and when the first officers were
consecrated in the Church, we do not read to have continued, or so to have been
used in the consecration of the succeeding Levites ordinarily.

And as the Lord would have the people to use this special liberty in the
first institution, and consecration of the Levites in that Church, (which
notwithstanding they used not in the ordinary consecration of such Levites, as
followed, when the Ch: was once furnished with officers) so does the holy Ghost
give testimony of the same, or the like liberty used by them afterward upon a
special occasion and in that general confusion, which fell upon the whole
Church, when the Priests were slain, and the Ark of God was taken by the
Philistims.

It is then noted 1 Samuel: 7. 1. that, upon the 1 Samuel: 6. 20. 21.
message from the men of Bethshemesh, the men of Kirjath-i^arim came, and took
up the ark of the Lord, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill;
and that they sanctified Eleazar his Son to keep the Ark of the Lord. And the
very same word which is used Exodus: 29. 1. where the Lord bids Moses consecrato
the sonns of Aaron to be Priests, is used in this place where the men of
Kirjath-i^arim sanctified Eleazar to keep the ark: sanctification, and
consecration being all one in substance, and the word the same in the original.

Lastly, the Apostle Gal: 1. 1. 2 8. 9
Paul writes to the Churches of Galatia to reject as accursed, such ministers
whomsoever, as should preach otherwise, then they had already received: and the
same Apostle wrytes to the Church at Colossus, to admonish Col: 4. 17.
Archippus to take heed to his ministry: so did John also to the Church of
Ephesus, commending it for Rev. 1. 2.
examining, and so consequently for silencing such, as pretended themselves
Apostles and were not: as also to the Church of Thiatyra reproting it for Chapter
3. 20
suffering vnsilenced the false Prophetess lezabell: now as these things did
first, and principally concern the officers, who were in these, and all other
things of the same nature to go before, and govern the people: so were the
people also in their places interessed in the same buesines, and charge:
neither could the officers sin, if they were or should have been, corrupt, or
negligent) discharge the people of their duty in the things, which concerned
them: but they were bound notwithstanding to see the commandments of the
Apostles, and of the Lord Jesus by them, exequuted accordingly. And if the
people be in cases, and when their officers fayl, thus solemnly to examine,
admonish, silence, and suppress their teachers, being faulty, and unsound:
then are they also by proportion, where officers fail, to elect, appoint, set
up, and over themselves, such fit persons, as the Lord affoardeth the^, for
their furtherance of faith, and salvation.

In the 2. place I do add the conclusion unto the praemises lately proved,
that since the people of God going out of Babylon must come under the Lords
order, and officers, and may not receive them by succession from the Pope, and
his Clergy, nor are to expect them immediately from heaven, therefore they
themselves are to call and appoint them for the Lords, and their own service
under him.

3. Upon the former ground, that the Lords people must come out of Babylon, and
build a new the Lords temple in Jerusalem, even themselves, their souls, and
bodies, for 1 Pet. 2. 5
a spiritual house, and that the Levites, and Priests of the Lord must
minister there, it is necessary we consider by the scriptures what course has
been taken formerly for the furnishing of this house thus newly built, of the
Church newly constituted, with officers, where they have wanted.

We do then read, that when that ancient, and mother Church of the Jews was
to be furnished with Officers, Numb. 5 9. 10. 11. -- 16. 20.
the Lord commaun^^! Moses to assemble all the congregation of the children of
Israel, and to direct them how to offer and freely to give unto the Lord for a
shake-offering the Levites, for the first born, to execute the service of the
Lord. Afterward, when in the Apostles time, Act. 1. 15 etc.
one was to he chosen in the room of Judas, Peter standing up in the mids of
the disciples informed them in their liberty, and directed them in the use of
it, for the praesenting of two, of which, the Lord would single out one to
succeed him. Likewise in the same story, when Deacons were wanting in the Ch:
at Jerusalem, Chapter 6. 2. 3. 5.
the twelve calling the multitude of the disciples together, put them in mind
of their liberty, and informed them in their duty for the choosing of so many
as were needful, so furnished as is there noted. The same course did Paul, and
Barnabas afterward direct Ch: 14. 23.
the Churches amongst the Gentiles for the choosing of Elders in every City,
where they came. Now if Rom: 15. 3.
all things which are written before, be written for our learning, and for the
learning of all the Churches, and people of God, why are not the people, and
Churches of God, in all places to learn from hence their liberty, and duty,
for the choosing of officers, where they are wanting* having men thereunto
fitted by the Lord. And what hinders but that the Church, the multitude, the
Disciples (call them as you will) in the fellowship, and covenant of the
gospel, may be as clearly informed in their duty, and as effectually
exhorted to the use of their liberty by the writings of the Prophets, and
Apostles, as by their speeches. The Apostle, writing to the Church of Corinth
about the censuring of the incestuous man, though he were 1 Cor: 5. 3.
absent in body, yet was present in spirit, which was, in effect, all one, and
as avaylable to that purpose as his bodily presence should have been: so though
Moses and Peter, and Paul, be bodily absent, yet are they in their wrytings,
present in spirit, after a sort, nay God himself in spirit is present in them,
with his Churches, and people, both for their warrant, direction, and comfort.

Though it be true then which M B: says that the people waited first book 145.
2. book 296
till the Apostles came; and that they did not elect officers but upon their
exhortation: yet must it also be considered that Apostles do now come in their
writings, as there they did in corporal presence, and that they exhort as
fully in them now, as they did in speech then. Besides there are now no
Apostles upon earth, nor other Church officers having 2 Cor. 11. 28.
the care of all the Churches, in the world as the Apostles had: nor that are
extraordinarily and miraculously endewed with all gifts especially with the
gift of all tongues, as the Apostles were; nor that have the like general
commision Act. 2. 1. 3. 4. etc. Mat. 28.
to teach all nations, as they had. The ordinary officers, which the Apostles,
and Evangelists left in the Churches, and for the choice of whom* they left
order to the worlds end were such Elders or Bishops as were assigned, and fixed
to such particular flocks as they were to feed, under that chief shepherd,
and great Bishop Jesus Christ. Besides, if the Churches, or people should wayt
now, as M Ber. would have them till the Bishops of Rome, or England came to
them, as the Apostles did to the Churches in their time, to exhort them to
choose officers, and to ordeyn them for them, they might languish under a wan
hope, and wayt till their eyes failed in their heads.

Whereupon then I do conclude, that if the Church without officers may elect,
it may also ordeyn officers* if it have the power and commission of Christ for
the one, and that the greater, it has it also for the other, which is the
less. If it have officers, it must use them as hands to put the persons by
ordination into that office, to which they have right by election: but if it
want officers, it may, and must use other the fittest instruments it has: as
in the natural body, if men want hands, or be deprived of the use of them,
they do for their present necessity use their teeth, or feet, or other fittest
parts of the body, for the busynes possible to be done by them.

Lastly if the Lord should raise up in America, or the like place, a company of
faithful men, and women, (which of stones should become children to Abraham)
by the reading of the scriptures, or by some godly men's writings, or (which is
most like) by the holy instructions, and exhortations of some merchants, or
travaylers, how, or by what means should they come by Ministers? Must they be
sent out of Europe unto the^? And if they were they would be barbari^ns each to
others, neither understanding others 1 Cor. 14. 11.
language. But what to do has the Pope of Rome, or the Bishops in England, or
the Praesbytery in Germany, or France to appoint them in America Ministers? It
is evident that such an assembly, as I speak of, having received the gospel,
have received the keys of the kingdom, and the power of Christ: and being
joined in this fellowship of the gospel, have the joint use of the keys, and
power of Christ: and being within the covenant of Abraham, are the Ch: of God:
and so have power to choose, and appoint their own Ministers from within
themselves. Now because these things will be better taken at other men's hands,
then at ours, yea it may be with many, through praejudice, their very authority
will sway more then our Arguments though never so rightly grounded upon the
scriptures, and common reason, I will therefore here crave leave to bring in a
few men of singular note both at home, and abroad, to show their judgments in
the case in hand.

And I will first bring in one, of our own nation, of great account (and that
worthily) with all that fear God, how ever he were against us in our practice.
The man is Mr Perkins. He then writing about ordination, and succession, in his
Co^mentary upon the Epistle to Gal: ch: 1. ver: 11. gives this testimony: that,
if in Turkey, or America, or elsewhere, the gospel should be received of men, by
the counsel, and persuasion of private persons, they should not need to send
into Europe for consecrated Ministers, but had power to choose their own
Ministers from within themselves: and the Reasons of this he renders in the
same place, because where God gives the word, he gives the power also. And I do
desire especially his Reason may be observed: which is, that, where God gives
the word, there he gives the power also. Whereupon it follows, that any other
asse^bly whether in America, or Europe, separating themselves from Idolatry,
whether Heathenish, or Antichristian, and receiving the gospel of Christ, do
with the gospel receive the power also: and so may choose their ministers
within themselves: and need not send to any other place, no not to the next
parish for consecrated Ministers.

In the 2. place I will alledg one of greater note, and more ancient: and that
is Philip Melancton: who, in his Answer to the ministers in Bohemia, which
taught the incorrupt doctrine of the gospel, refutes the praetext of
ordination to be taken from the Bishops, with that of Paul, Gal. 1. 8.
if any teach another gospel, let him be an Athema; adding also that only the
assembly where true doctrine sounds is the Church: and that in it is the
ministry of the gospel: in it are the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
Wherefore in that very assembly (in eo ipso coetu) there is the right of
calling, and ordeyning the ministers of the gospel, because we must fly the
enemies of the gospel, as an Anathema. And besides (says he) if we should
desire of them the ceremony of ordinatio^, they would not give it, except we
would bind ourselves to renounce the true doctrine; and other wicked bo^ds
would they cast upon us. Neither therefore ought the true Ch: to be without
Pastors, without the keys, without the voice of the gospel, without
forgivenes of ^inns, because the tyranny of the Bishops either drives away, or
refuses to appoint fit Ministers. And again, it is the confusion of order to
seek sheepheards from the wolves. And lastly, this has ever been the right of
the true Church, to choose, and call out of her own assembly fit Ministers of
the gospel. Thus far h^.

In the third place Peter Martyr shall speak, who upon the book of Judges chapter
4. verse. 5. says thus: Touching the ecclesiastical Ministry we have
signified before, that it may not be committed to women, and that they are not
fit for it. But now we add, that, in the planting of Churches anew, when men
want, which should preach the gospel, a woman may perform that, at the first;
but so as when she has taught any company, that some one man of the faithful
be ordained, which may afterward minister the sacraments, teach, and do the
Pastors duty faithfully.

4. Zanchy* upon the fifth to the Ephesians, treating of Baptism propounds a
quaestion of a Turk coming to the knowledge of Christ, and to says by reading
the new Testament, and withal teaching his family, and converting it, and
others to Christ; and being in a country, whence he can not easily come to
Christian Churches; whether he may baptize them, whom he has converted to
Christ, he himself being unbaptized? He answers, I doubt not of ^^, but that he
may, and withal provide, that he himself be baptized of one of the three
converted by him. The Reason (be gives) (...), because he is a Minister of the
word extraordinarily stirred up of Christ: and so, as such a Minister may, with
the consent of that small Church, appoint one of the Symm^stam.
communi^ants, and provide, that he be baptized by him.

Add in the fifth place Tilenus, who being demanded of the Earl of Lavall,
from whom Calvin had his calling, answered, from the Church of Geneva, and from
Farell, his praedecessour: who had also his from the people of Geneva; who had
right, and authority, to institute, and depose Ministers: which thing he also
confirms by Cyprian: Ephesians. 14.

The sixth, and last I will name is Sadeel who writing a treatise of purpose,
touching the lawful calling of Ministers, against such as agreed with the
reformed Churches in the doctrine they taught, but excepted against them in
this, that they had not their Ministers by ordinary succession: s^ewes, that
amongst, and above other things the ecclesiastical Ministry of Rome is
corrupted: and makes it a shameless thing, that any boasting of the pure
knowledge of God, should object against them, that they did not draw the pure
reformation of the ecclesiastical Ministry out of the dr^gges of Popery. The
first argument he uses to justify the calling of their Ministers is, that they
are called, chosen, and received of these assemblyes which do appear by
manifest signs, and arguments to be true Churches* as having the true doctrine
of faith, the pure administration of the sacraments, the right and sincere
^^vocation of Gods name, observing religiously the discipline instituted by
Christ, and his Apostles: and lastly testifying by the duties of love,
constancy of Martyrs, and reformation of the whole life, that they are by the
great mercy of God, adopted into the number of the faithful, as members of the
Catholic Church: etc.

And thus much of the Ministry both yours Mr Ber: and ours: and more
particularly to prove, that an assembly of faithful people separating
themselves from Heathenish, or Antichristian idolatry, have right within
themselves to call, and appoint their Ministers.

Now from this conclusion thus manifested do arise sundry others worthy the
noting down, for the common controversy.

As first that such an assembly (though without officers) is a true I.
visible Church, the kingdom of Christ, and City of God. And I suppose it needs
no confirmation to any good conscience, that the choice of Church officers is a
Church action, a mayn part of the administration of Christ's kingdom, and a
privilege of that spiritual City the new Jerusalem: and that such an assembly
has the power of Christ, and from him authority, and commission: without
which it were intolerable usurpation to praesume to choose his officers:
especially the chief officers in his kingdom, as are they which administer the
word, and sacraments, of whom we principally entreat.

2. That the people have power to censure offenders: for they that II.
have power to elect, appoint, and set up officers, they have also power (upon
just occasion) to reject, depose, and put them down: and so are part of that
Church, where officers are; and the whole Church, where they are not; of which
Christ speaks Math: 18. 17. where he says tell the Church. Besides, that the
calling of officers, and censuring of offenders are the two mayn
administrations of the kingdom of Christ, and so both of one nature.

3. And lastly that the brethren out of office, whether in a Church III.
furnished with officers, or without them, are not mere private persons; as
you Mr Ber: and others, would make them, in the exercise of prophesy, calling
of Ministers, and judging of offenders for scandalous sins. Considering them
in deed severally one by one, or in opposition to the public officers, they
may be called private persons: but take them jointly, and in these and the like
acts of their communion, and they are more then so: and as the Church is a
public body, so are they members of the body, and parts of the whole, and of
the same public nature with it: and not private parts, or members of the
public body: which were a senseles contradiction, and contrary to the rule in
Reason. The whole, and all the parts jointly taken, are the same. When Act: 1.
the brethren made choice of Joseph, and Mathyas to be presented: and
afterward of the ch: 6.
seven Deacons: and after that of ch: 14.
the Elders in every Church, did they make a private choice of public
officers? or could they as private persons merely, make a public choice? When
the Apostle Paul wrote to the Church of Corinth (which you grant to be the
multitude, or first book Page: 92.
body of the Church about the censuring of the incestuous person) did he will
them to judge and censure him privately for his public scandalous sin? or
could they as persons merely private pass a public judgment?

The thing then is, that when the Church is gathered or come together in one
for the administration of the word, sacraments, censures and other exercises of
religion, and parts of Gods worship, the officers, (if there be any) and
brethren with them, are one and the same public body, to be exercised in one
and the same part of their public communion: and to make the officers public
persons, and the brethren private in the communion, is to make a schism in the
Church: and to make the brethren part of the communion, in the administration
of the word, and sacraments, prayer, singing of Psalms, contribution, calling
of officers, censuring of offenders, or other Church action whatsoever,
private, and the officers publik is to make it schismatical, and them in it
schismatiks.

Thus much of the 9. error objected. The tenth follows, which is, that we say

Their worship is a false worship. M: B.


For answer unto this assertion Mr B: refers us to the end of this treatise;
and there then will we attend for it: and yet somewhat will he say against it:
and that is. First, that they worship no false God. 2. that they worship the
true God with no false worship.

We charge you not with the worship of any false God, though Answ:
we shall see by, and by how, in one particular, you will defend your selves.
But the thing you should have endeavored, is, to prove that your
divine-service-book framed by man, and by man imposed to be used, without
addition or alteration, as the solemn worship of your Church, is that true, and
spiritual manner of worshipping God, which he has appointed: and with which he
will be worshipped in spirit, and truth. Of this you say little, or nothing,
but because you seem to your self to say somewhat, we will see what it is.

The word (you say) preached, is the true word: the sacraments true M: B.
sacraments: the prayers we pray (whether, conceived, or set, and stinted) are
such as may be warranted by the word: and agreeable to the prescript form taught
by our savior Christ.

The word preached in popery, or in the most haereticall assembly Answ.
in the world, is the true word, but the devises of men are not the true word,
either with you or them. Yea the devils themselves preached the true word, when
they affirmed, and published that Jesus was Luk 4* 41 and 8. 28
that Christ, the son of God, the most High: did they therefore perform unto
God true worship? Of the sacraments I have spoken formerly, and have showed
that in the administration of them, they cannot be reputed true. It is the Ephesians:
5. 26.
word of promise, that makes the sacraments, except then the parish assemblies,
jointly considered in their members, have right unto the spiritual promises of
God, the sacraments administered in, and unto them in that their estate, cannot
so be accounted true sacraments.

For your prayers, I observe sundry things out of your own words, which I may
not pass over: as first, that you speak not properly, no nor truly in saying
you pray stinted prayers: for you read them, and who will say reading is
praying? you pray to God, but will you say you read to God? or if you so say,
and do, is it agreeable either to his ordinance, or to common reason? Mistake me
not, as though I speak of inward prayer, or of the lifting up of the heart: for
I grant a man may pray inwardly, or lift up the heart to God, when he reads,
or preaches, or sings, or receives the sacraments: of such prayer we neither
speak, nor can discern, but in our selves: our speech then being of the outward
act, and ordinance of prayer, I do affirm, (and so marvayl if all reasonable
men concur not with me) that the ordinance of reading cannot be the ordinance
of praying.

3. In your division of prayer, wherein you make some conceived, and some set
and stinted, you grant, that the prayers which are set, and stinted, are not
conceived: wherein you do as much as grant, that they are not of God, nor
according to his will. The Apostle Jude directs us always to Jude, 20.
pray in the holy Ghost: and Paul teaches, that Romans ^. 26
we cannot pray as we ought, but as the spirit helps us, and begets in us
sighs unutterable: by the work of which spirit if our prayers be not conceived
first in our hearts before they be brought forth in our lips, they are an
unnatural, bastardly, and profane birth.

Lastly, if your stinted prayer be (as you say) agreeable to the prescript form
of prayer taught by our savior Christ, then must none other form of prayer be
used but a stinted or set form: for none other form may be vsd but that which
is agreeable to the prescript form of Christ: since Christ has said, Math. 6. 9.
after this manner, pray.

Where you further add, that nothing is imposed or done by you for the worship
of God, but the word read, and preached, and the sacraments, and prayer, I
demand of your first, in worship, or honor of who^ are your holy days,
bearing the names of S. Michaels, S. Peter's, S. John's day, and the rest,
imposed, and kept? if in the honor of the Saints and Angels, then are you not
clear (as you make your selves) from the worshipping of false Gods: neither
can you exempt your selves from the number of them, which Collos. 2. 18* 23.
in voluntary religion worship Angels: if on the other side those days be
appointed and so kept holy, in the worship and honor of God, then do you (and
that by authority) worship God by, and put holiness in, other things, then the
word read, and preached, and the sacraments, and prayer; yea and other things,
then ever came into the Lords heart to sanctify for his worship. And so the
place Math. 15. 9. and other scriptures to that purpose are truly (though you
say, falsely) alleged against you.

2. I do demand of you, whether your Apocrypha books, namely that which is
placed betwixt both testaments, causing the Jews to think the new testament no
better, then the fables which are joined to it, as a learned man of our nation
has observed, and the other book Mr Broughto^*
of Homilies, be enjoined, and used as parts of Gods worship? It is evident
they are so held. And therefore it is, that a great portion of the former is
preferred in the most solemn assemblyes before the canonical scriptures; and
the reading of them, before the reading of the other, which they justle out of
their place. And for the homilyes, they are enjoined (and so used) in stead of
the preaching of the word which is the principal part of Gods worship:
whereupon it follows that the Apocrypha wrytings of me^, being preferred
before one part of Gods worship, which is the reading of the Canonical
scriptures, and used in stead of an other part of Gods worship, yea and that
the principal part, as is preaching, are imposed (and so used) as parts of
Gods worship. So that it is not without good cause, M Ber: that M Ainsworth
bids you prove the Apocrypha scriptures, and books of Homilies the true word of
God. Nothing, you tell us, is imposed and used amongst you for the worship of
God, but the true word of God read, and preached, and the sacraments, and
prayer: now these being imposed, and used for the worship of God, and being
neither the preaching of the word, nor the sacraments, nor prayer, must needs
be the true word of God, and so you must prove the^, or else the truth of your
assertion is disproved.

Touching your discourse of the order of Gods worship before, in, and after the
Apostles time, I observe (to let pass other particulars) your error, in
making the particular Synagogues of the Jews, as the particular Churches are
now. The Synagogues were not entyre Churches of themselves, but parts, or
members of the national Ch: neither could they have use of the most solemn
parts of Gods worship, as were then the sacrifices: neither could the chief
Ministers in the Church execute their office in them: but as they depended upon
the temple in Jerusalem, so were the people Deuteronomy. 12. 1 Chro. 22.
to carry their offerings thither, and there to enjoy these ministrations. But
particular congregations now do stand in no such dependancy; they may enjoy
within themselves the word, sacraments, and prayer, which are the most solemn
services in the Ch: now, and so by consequence, all the rest. In deed it is
with your parrish assemblyes, somewhat as it was with the Synagogues: they
cannot enjoy the Ministers by, and from within themselves, nor have the use of
ecclesiastical government, but must depend upon their Ierusalems, the Bishops
Chapels, and Consistories, for these their most solemn, and peculiar
administrations.

Mr B: in his page 32^.
2. book to prove their worship true worship, pretends 3 distinct Arguments.
The first, because it is according to the word of God. 2. because it is not
forbidden in the scripture. 3. because it is after the M B:
manner of the worship of the true Churches of God, set down in the word.

An other man would have comprehended these three reasons in Answ:
one: and so might Mr Ber. have done well enough, considering his confirmation
of them: wherein he brings not so much as one scripture, or reason from
scripture, to prove their prescript leyturgy by man devised, and imposed (of
which our mayn quaest on is) to be according to the word of God: etc. only in
the 3. Argument he touches an objection, which he calls a conceyt of ours,
viz: that it quenches the spirit: to which he gives a double answer. First,
that it is against known experience: 2. that it is the groundwork of Mr Smith*
casting of reading the scriptures in the assembly. Other things he speaks are
not worth the insisting upon; let us consider of his answers.

To the former, of them touching known experience, I do reply two things: first
that the experience of supposed good in a course, or by means, not warrantable
by the written word of God, is of all godly wise men to be suspected. 2* though
the experience of good be certain, yet must men take heed they honor not one
thing for an other, as the means of that good: but they must put difference
between that which is good, and that which is evil, in the same compound
action. Many do avouch they have wrought in them much hatred of murder,
treason, and the like evils, by a stage play: others, that their devotion is
much furthered by organ music, and the chaunting of quiresters, yea by the
prayers in a tongue they understand not: all these will allege their kn^wn
experience. But to leave these things. The Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 14. testifyeth,
that a man v: 4.
speaking a strange language may ^di^y himself, though not the Church: and
though he ^: 14.
pray in a strange tongue without the understanding, or benefit of the Church,
yet that his spi^^t may pray. Might such a man therefore allege his known
experience for prayer in a strange tongue, contrary to the Apostles express
inhibition? neither is it any justification of the service book in the use we
speak of, that people do in the reading of it, find by experience, their
affections furthered: God may, and does therein honor the simple, and honest
affections of his people so far, as to receive the request of their heart,
which he sees in secret, covering in mercy the outward manner of putting up
the same, wherein they of ignorance, or infirmity, fayl.

And that these stinted and devised forms do quench the spirit of prayer,
appears in that they deprive the Church, and minister of that liberty of the
spirit of prayer, which God would have the use: stinting the Minister, yea all
the Ministers in the kingdom, to the same measure of the spirit, not only one
with an other, but all of them with him, that is dead and rotten: and so
stinting the spirit, which the Lord gives his Ministers, for his Church: and
that so strictly, as till the stint be out, it may not suggest one thought or
word otherwise; or when it is out, one more, then is praescribed.

1 Cor: 12 9.
The manifestation of the spirit says the Apostle, is given to every man to
profit withal. But in the reading of a praescript form of prayer, there is
not the manifestation of the spirit of the minister given him to profit the
Church withal, but the manifestation of of the spirit of him, that devised,
and penned the service book.

Now for M Ber: 2 Answ: namely that this conceit of ours, saying that set
prayer quenches the spirit, is the groundwork of Mr Smithes casting of reading
the scriptures in the assemblyes: first, he wrongeth M. Smyth, who does not
deny the reading of the scriptures in the assembly, but that the reading of
them is properly a part of Gods worship. 2. Not our conceit, but his own ill
collection is the groundwork of his error. Let the indifferent reader judge,
whither this consequence be good or no. Because the reading of the Apocrypha
Prayers of the Bishops of Rome or of England, or their Chapleyns, for prayer,
quenches the spirit, or is not the true manner of prayer, which Christ has
left; therefore the reading of the Canonical scriptures penned by the
Prophets, and Apostles, for reading, quenches the spirit, and is no part of
Gods worship.

Other observations M Ber: has in his Answer, some nothing to the purpose, and
others against himself: as for example: The Jews in the old Testament did
meet together at set times commanded by Page: 327.
the Lord: so did the Churches of Christ in the new, or the first day of the
week. Ergo the Church of England does well in meeting at set times, yea holy
times, not commanded by the LORD, and that far more solemnly, then on the
first or LORDS day. 2. The Jews had preaching every Lords day, in every
Synagogue^: Page: 328 329
therefore the Church of Engl: is in good estate, where there is no preaching,
or as good as none, in one parish of ten, on the Lords day, or at other times.
3. The Jewish Church had singing of the Psalms Page: 328
of David, and of other prophetical men: and Christ himself did use the same;
therefore the Church of England does co^mmendably in singing besides them, the
Apocrypha songs of men, full of errors, and vanities: as that The humble suit
of a sinner.
the Saints, and Angels in heaven do yet see the wounds, and blood of Christ:
that a sinner Lamentation.
need not confess his life, because God knows all things: and that he needs
not repeat what he would have, because God knows it before he asks: that
Complaynt of a sinner.
the scripture declares, there was no drop of blood in Christ, which he shed
not for sinners: that 12 Artscles of faith
the spirit of Christ did after his burial descend into the lower parts, to
them that long were in darkness, the true light of their hearts: that
Thanksgiving after the Lords supper.
the sun in the firmament, the heavens, the earth, the sea, and all therein,
yea the spirits beneath, were made for man to rule them.

But these things I pass over, and come to Mr B: second row of errors imputed
to us, which he judges sufficiently confuted in the former, as also to be so
absurd, and false, as that the reading of them is sufficient to make them to be
rejected.

The first of them is, that their congregations, as they stand, are all, and
every one of them incapable before God to choose them Ministers, though I.
they desire the means of salvation. Answ:


First let it here be noted, that Mr B: in this same book page: 136 compared
with page 138. makes it a rule for the Churches making a Minister, which must
be kept, and from which she may not ^werve, that the guides, and governors of
the Church do choose one from amongst others for the Ministry. If the guides,
and governors must choose, how then apperteyns this to your congregations? or
how are they capable of this liberty?

2. If they be capable of this liberty, why do they not use it? There is no
congregation in the Land, which as a Church, chooses their Minister: the
Patron, and Bishop have seized this liberty, and at their courtesy does the
congregation stand to receive either a preacher, or dumb priest: either a man
of some conscience, or without all ^oar of God, or common honesty, whom they
may not refuse. And if some parishes choose, it is not as Churches, but as
Patrons. They have purchased the right of patronage with their money, and so
use it. But what is this to that spiritual liberty, and charter of Christ's
spiritual kingdom the Church?

3. I deny that any congregation in the Land desires the means of salvation. I
speak of the congregation, which is the whole consisting of the parts jointly
considered. The best parish has too many in it that Ioh. 3. 19
love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil. This you find
true in your own, Mr B. which you deem one of the best. And what right has
such an assembly to choose a Minister, which has no right to his ministrations
of the sacraments, and other holy things? Because the Lord Jesus has given his
power, and charter to his subjects for the choice of their officers whether
many, or few, does it therefore follow that the subjects of sin, and Satan,
professed traitors unto his Majesty, have the same liberty? or can his
subjects combine with them that are, and always have been such, in the use,
or rather in the usurpation of that divine privilege? These things Mr B: you
extenuate, because you want them, but the Churches of Christ accounts them
precious things: which they therefore labor to preserve pure.

Of your false worship something has been before, and more shall be II.
hereafter spoken; and you do idely make it a distinct error from the tenth.

That baptism is not administered into the faith of Christ simply, but into III.
the faith of Bishops, and Church of England, which you make our 3. error,
Answ:
do we not affirm, but leave it to him for justification, which not content
with that in England received, has found out since a 2. or 3. as he supposes
better then that was.

We are to consider, baptism first, and principally in relation from GOD to
us, and as a seal of the covenant of grace into which he has received us: and
secondarily in relation from us to God, and as we restipulate, or promise again
unto him. In the first respect, it is effectual upon the very infants of the
faithful, though for the present wanting faith: and in the 2. both may be, and
is upon such as err in many great points of faith: otherwise the baptism
ministered by John into the faith of Christ which came after Act: 19. 4.
him could not have been true unto many which received it, being ignorant a
long time after of the very kingdom, and office of Christ. To conclude then,
since the essential form of institution is retained in the baptism in Engl:,
and the doctrine of the Trinity sincerely held, into whose name all persons are
baptized indefinitely, the particular errors in that Church touching the
manner of worshipping God, or touching the uses or ends of baptism (which are
not of the essence) cannot make the baptism in it self cease to be indefinite.

Of the 4. Error imputed unto us, namely, that we hold your IIII.
faith, and repentance false, I say as of the third: and doubt not, but the
personal faith, and repentance of very many men, and women there, according to
the measure of knowledge, and grace received, Answ:
is true, and sincere before God: yea and so visibly declared, and manifested
to be, before men, in respect of their persons: notwithstanding all the evilles
in their Church Communion and ordinances.

Your 5. exception, viz: that your ministers convert men not as Pastors, V.
but as teachers, is neither our error, nor assertion, but your own
misconstruction. This we hold, that the conversion of men with Answ:
you is no way to be ascribed to your office, which it justifies not: but to
the truths of God taught amongst you, by the special blessing of God upon
them, notwithstanding the other evils wherewith they are mingled inseparably
amongst you.

To your demand what idol you worship, because we affirm your VI.
Church to stand in an adulterous estate,

I do answer that you may stand in an adulterous estate, though Answ:
you worship the true God only, if you do it after a devised manner: as in deed
you do in your government, ministry, servicebook, and ceremonies; which being
all properly matters of religion and not commanded by the Lord, are devises of
your own against the 2. commandment, which forbids nothing but idolatry.

Your 7. insimulation against us, is, that we cannot say certeynly VII.
by any warrant of Gods word, that any of you have either faith or fear of
God. Wherein you consure us, as having lost the feeling of former grace, and
all true charity. Answ:


Mr Smyth in his Parallels shows your fraud, and evil dealing with him in this
case, whom you name in your margent. And I further add, that I do not only in
the general believe there are many such, but am so persuaded in the particular
of many I know. Yet so to say certainly of any of you, I cannot, nor of our
selves neither, by the word of God. A man can say this only of himself
certainly, because he only knows his own heart: but of others morally, and in
the judgment of charity, which is according to outward appearance, and which
may deceive.

The 8. and 9. errors imputed to us are, that we hold none of their 8. and 9.
Ministers may be heard: and that it is not lawful to ioyn in prayer with any
of them.

Sundry things Mr B. brings to evince the former position of error, Answ:
but not one of them so much as tending to prove it lawful to partake in an
office of Ministry either devised or usurped with out lawful calling, as that
in Engl: has been proved to be. It is not true then which he says, that we
censure any for hearing the word: we do it for partaking in other men's sins:
and for receiving the 1 Timothy: 5. 22. Rev: 18. 4. Chap: 14. 9
mark of the beast, in communicating with the Ministry of Antichrist; as we
assuredly know yours to be the office, and entera^ce into it (notwithstanding
the truths taught, and personal graces in the teachers) and for obstinacy in
the same. It is true then, but not pertinent, which Mr B. says, that it is a
good thing to hear the word: which who denies but the Church of Engl: that
sile^ceth the Preachers of it for her own, and the Popes inventions? and that
ties the people to their unpreaching parish-preists, rather then permits them
to hear a Preacher in the next parish?

Other things objected by him are else where handled: yet seems Separists
schism. Page 153 154.
it not amiss to ad something touching three scriptures by him produced, and
appy'ed to his purpose: and they are Mat. 23. 1. 2. 3. Phil. 1. 15. 18. Tit. 3.
10. 11.

And first, there is not one of these scriptures that gives so much as any
color of cou^tena^ce to the hearing of the word ministered in a false Church,
devised office, and by virtue of an unlawful calling: or where any of these
bars are put: and by all these we do believe and affirm our selves to be kept
from hearing you. And this general defense I do apply unto the particulars,
and first to the first: answering, that the Scribes, and Pharisees did neither
minister to any but the Lords people, the Israel of God, nor in an unlawful
place, nor by an unlawful entrance, how corruptly soever they ministered: and
for corrupt administrations, besides the co^stitutio^, in the true Church, we
do not think the Ministers are either suddeynly, or unorderly to be forsaken.
To which I do ad further, first, that the words do sit in Moses chayr, and
whatsoever they bid you do, may more strictly after the Greek be turned have
sit in MOSES chair, and have bidden you observe, that is, what you have heard
of them formerly according to Moses, that do, and observe. But let the words be
as they are, and that Christ speaks of the time to come, yet I see not how in
them, the LORD either commands, or approves of his disciples hearing the
Scribes, and Pharisees in their public, and solemn administrations: but if he
speak of them, then he may only permit his DISCIPLES in respect of their
weakness, and being (for the present) too much addicted unto them, so to hear
them: or otherwise Christ may speak of such occasional meetings and
conferences, as passed ordinarily between the Pharisees, and his disciples:
wherein what was of Moses, he wills them to receive from them, without
praejudice of their persons: and so we do also will, and exhort the people with
us to receive, and reteyn whatsoever of God they hear from you, or any others
upon the like occasion. And considering, that in the first verse Christ spoke
unto the Math. 9. 11. and 17. 10.
multitude, and to his disciples, (laying no more upon his disciples in this
case, then upon the multitude) and what respect the disciples had the Pharisees
in, and how often, and usually they met, and meddled together, it is very
probable, that Christ, upon this supposition, that the disciples would, or
should hear, or meet with them, intends only to provide, that the word of God
may reteyn all due authority with his, in that confused estate wherein all
things then stood: neither commanding, nor approving the hearing of them.

And considering what Christ himself testifies of the Scribes, and Pharisees
in that very chapter, that they v. 13.
shut up the kingdom^ of heaven before men, neither going in themselves, nor
suffering them that would: ver. 15.
making those of their profession twofold more the children of hell, then
themselves: what haeresies they taught touching justificatio^ by works, and
perfect obedience to the whole law, how they made void the commandments of
God for their own traditions: how they denied in Christ both the person, and
office of the Messiah: blaspheming him in his doctrine as a deceiver of the
people; in his life as a glutton, and drinker of wine; and in his most glorious
miracles as one that wrought them by the "Devil; considering I say these
things, it should be strange that Christ should either send his disciples to be
taught by these blind guides, or approve of their hearing them, him self also
being the only v: 8. 10.
doctor and teacher of his Church. And this I would know of you Mr. B: and of
others which urge this scripture, as here you do, whether you would like it
well, or be content, that the disciples should hear any such corrupt,
haereticall, and blasphemous teachers, as were the Scribes, and Pharis^es, and
that denied both the office, and person of Christ, as they did. You your self
teach in this very 15 4.
page that obstinate haeretiques are not to be heard: and such were the
Pharisees yea so maliciously obstinate in their haeresies, as that the Lord
Jesus insinuates against them, the very Ma^he 12. 31.
sin of blasphemy, against the H: Ghost. If then you your selves would allow
your disciples to hear teachers far less corrupt, and haereticall then were
the Scribes, and Pharisees, to what purpose do you produce, and insist upon
Christ's allowance of his disciples to hear them? Is this fitly to allege the
scriptures, or not rather to take Gods name in them in vayn;

To the other scripture, which is Phil: ^. 15. 16 answer has been given both
by others, and by my self formerly: and I now do ad, that those there spoken
of, which preached Christ of envy, and strise, had corrupt inward affections so
appearing to the Apostle by that special spirit of discerning which was in
him, though not so discovered unto others: but what makes this to such as
minister in an office devised, and by an entrance found out by Antichrist, and
so left to them, which think his mark a priveledge.

Touching your 3. Argument, which is from Tit* 3. 10. 11. I do first observe
your grant, that private persons, and such as are not in office may reject
obstinate hare^iques, and so by consequence, that the things, which Paul
writes to Timothy, and Titus touching the reformation of abuses, and censuring
of offenders, do not concern the officers only, much less the chief
officers, but even the brethren also in their places. 2. There is no
consequence in your Argument, that because obstinate haretiques may not be
heard, therefore usurpers may. You might as sensibly argue thus: because 1 Cor.
5. 11. 12.
a fornicatour* must not be eaten with, but judged by the Church, therefore a
covetous person, an idolatour* a rayler may be eaten with, and must not be
judged, contrary to the Apostles express writing.

In your 9. charge, namely that we hold it not lawful to ioyn in prayer with
any of you, and in your comment upon it, you do us a double injury; first in
saying we approve not of any of your praying for us: 2. That we pray for you
only as we do for Jews, Turks, and Papists. For as we are persuaded we fare
the better for the prayers of many amongst you, and so both approve of, and
desire the same; so do we also pray for many as for the Lords people in
Babylon, and that they may at the Lords call, Revelat. 18. 2. 4*
go out of her: and that as they are holy in their persons, so they may be also
in their Church communion, and ordinances.

Now for the point it self: and first for your Reason by which you would prove
it erroneous. If (say you) we hold any of you the children Mr B.
of God, then our Savior has taught us to ioyn with you in prayer, and to
say, Our father with you.

You do write in another place of this book, that page 114.
a man justly Answ.
excommunicated, and cast out is to be held a brother, and so consequently a
child of God; for the brethren of the Saints, are the children of God;
whereupon if your Argument in this place, and Position in the former place, be
good, it must be lawful to join in prayer with a man justly excommunicated. I
do answer then, that it is true you say, we ought to communicate both in
prayer, and in all the other ordinances of God with all Gods children except
they themselves hinder it, or put a bar: which we are persuaded they in the
Church of Engl. do, in choosing rather the communion of all the profane rowt in
the kingdom under the Prelates tyranny, then the communion of Saints, which
Christ has established, under his government. So that it is not we which
refuse them, but they us, binding us either to practice as we do, or to
communicate in one spiritual body with all the graceles persons, and vile
miscreants in the kingdom. For as he which has hold of any one member of the
natural body i^ not separated from the body, but holds the whole and every
member by cohaerence, so he which is joined in communion with one member of the
Church, is by cohaerence joined with the whole Church, and every member of it.
We do profess it is not in neglect of the graces of God, which we acknowledge
to be eminent in many, that we deny communion with them: but only in
conscience of the order which Christ has set: and in testimony against the
disorder, which Antichrist has brought Act: 2. 4^. 47. 1 Cor: 1. 2. Phil: 1. 1.
into, and left in the world. The order which the Lord has set, is, that those
which fear him should be of a true visible Church rightly gathered: and that
any such should be out of the true Church, or co^mingled with all the profane
Atheists in a kingdom, is a mayn part of Antichrists confusion. Now if God has
set us in the orderly communion of a Church, we must not break our order for
other men's disordered courses. Communion is a matter of order, and relation,
standing in the orderly combyning of the graces of God in two faithful
persons, or more. And how far order ought to praevayl with men in this case let
these particulars manifest.

One of the Church co^mits some notable sin known to me alone, which (being
dealt with by me) he denies; and without Deuteronomy: 19 ^^. Math: 18. 16.
two or three witnesses the Church may not proceed against him. I must
therefore still communicate with the Church, and so with him as a member of it,
til God so far discover him as he can be orderly dealt with, and till Psalm:
125. 5.
the Lord lead him forth with the workers of wickedness. And as I am to
communicate with an ungodly man, with whom I am orderly joined in the Church,
till I can be orderly disioyned from him: so by proportion I am to forbear
communion with a godly man out of the Church, until I be orderly joined unto
him. Further, put the case a man be excommunicated in mine absence, upon the
testimony of two or three witnesses, and that I know he is injuryed, Math: 18.
15. 16. 17. 1 Cor: 5. 11. 12.
and am able to manifest his innocence to all men: yet will I for order sake
(and so am bound) forbear communion with him for the praesent, till his
i^nocency be by me sufficiently cleared. Now if for order I must refuse
communion with him, which is put out of the Church for weldoing, by the sin
of others how much more with him that keeps out himself by his own default,
and sin? So that the holiness of a man's person is not sufficient for
communion, but withal it must be ranged into the order of a Ch:, wherein both
his person, and actions must co^byne, and under whose censure they must come:
whereas this other unorderly course destroys the censures, which by Christ's
appointment, do exte^d to every brother whosoever.

These things I do desire the godly Reader indifferently, and without offense
to take knowledge of: and to rest in this our defense, if it be found according
to the word of God: if not, to give us knowledge by the same word of the
contrary, wherein we shall willingly rest, and (by the grace of God) so
practice.

Our 10. reckoned Error, is that ministers may not celebrate marriage X.
nor bury the dead. And this M. B: affirms we say, but without scriptures. M B:


First, you that charge our opinion with error, should so have Answ:
proved it by the scriptures, or some Reasons from them. 2. You speak against
your own knowledge, having seen our wrytings: especially our Apology, where, in
the 3. Petition, to the KING, and the fourth branch of the sixth Position,
there are almost twenty several scriptures, and nine distinct reasons grounded
upon them, to prove, that the celebration of marriage, and buryall of the dead
are not ecclesiastical actions, apperteyning to the ministry, but civil, and
so to be performed. You your self M: B: both affirm and prove in this book
from 1 Cor: 12. 4. that Page: 131
the Lord only praescribes the duties to be done in every distinct office of
ministry in the Church. And the Apostle 2 Timothy: 3. 16. 17
testifies that the scriptures, being divinely inspired, do make perfect, and
fully furnished, the man of God, or minister, to every good work of his
calling. Now I suppose M. B: will not be so ill advised, as to go about to
prove that the celebration of marriage, and buryall of the dead, are duetyes
praescribed by the Lord Jesus to be done in the Pastors office, or that the
scriptures lay this furniture upon the man of God for the proper works of his
office. They are then other spiritual Lords then the Lord Christ, that
prescribe these duties to be done by their men, furnished by other scriptures
then the divine scriptures, the Bishops scriptures, their Canons, and
co^stitutio^s: whereby they are fully furnished indeed, with ring, surplus,
service book, and other preistly implements for the business.

The Apostle Paul Ephesians: 4. 8. 11. 12. teaches, that when Christ ascended on
high, he gave unto men such gifts, that is, such ministeryes of the Church as
should serve for the repayring of the saints, and aedification of his body,
till the work of grace were perfected in all his: and so he makes the work of
the ministry, and the aedification of the body of Christ all one. Now who will
say that the celebration of marriage, or buryall of the dead are in themselves
matters of aedification, or which further the unity of faith. They serve for
the general administration of the world, and so are lawful amongst Turks,
and Heathens, as to eat, and drink, or to perform any other natural or civil
work: and not for the special administration of the Church, or body of Christ,
and therefore no works of the ministry, which is peculiar unto the Church.

The Church is a religious society, and so the ministry which is given to the
Church is a religious calling, and so the proper works of the ministry must
needs be works of religion: which if marriage or burying the dead were, then
were it unlawful for a faithful husband to communicate with his wife being an
infidel, or excommunicate, in the duties of marriage: or for a brother being a
faithful person to ioyn with his brother being an infidel, or excommunicate,
in the buryall of their dead father (for with such persons religious communion
may not be kept) whereas the scriptures do commend unto us these duties so
performed, both as lawful, and necessary, Genesis 25. 9. and 35. 29. 1 Cor. 7.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14. These are then civil duties, and so practiced by the
servants of God in all ages: whose practice also for our learning is recorded
in the scriptures, and commended unto us accordingly, Genesis 24. 50. 51. 58. 59.
67. and 25. 34. Ruth. 4: 1. 2. 5. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. Math. 27. 57. 59 60. Act.
8. 2.

Whether it be an error in us as in the 11. place ^e are accused, XI.
to hold: that Ministers ought not to live of tithes, and offerings, but of the
peoples voluntary contribution, let the Reader, considering what is answered
both by Mr Aynsworth, and Mr Smyth, and what is more Apology. Posit. 7.
fully written in the book before named, judge.

But This says Mr B. is against the wisdom of God, who allows a M B:
settled maintenance under the law: and there is nothing against it in the
gospel.

But say I, as the Lord appointed under the law a settled maintenance Answ:
by tithes, and offerings, so did he a settled land of Canaan, which was holy,
and a sacrament: so did he also appoint that the Levites to be maynteyned
there, Deuteronomy: 1^ 1. 2. 3. 4.
should have no part, nor inheritance with the rest of the Israelites their
brethren. And has Gods wisdom so appointed now? If it had I fear many would
not rest in it, so wise are they for their bellyes. And where you add, that
there is nothing in the gospel against this ordinance ^^ the law, the author
to the Hebrews might have taught you, that the law is abolished by the gospel,
in the sense we speak of: and the old testament by the new, in respect of
ordinances: whereof this was one. If it be said that Gen: 14. 1^. 20.
tithes went in use, and given by Abraham to Melchizedek Priest of the most
high God, before the law, or old testament was given by Moses, I do answer,
that so was circumcision ministered, and sacrifices offered before Moses: which
notwithstanding were parts of the old testament, and assumed by Moses into the
body of it, and so are abolished by the new.

To conclude this point, since tithes, and offerings were appurtenances unto
the preisthood: and that the Psalm: 110 4. Heb: 7. 17. and. ^. and. 9.
priesthood both of Melchizedek, and Levi are abolished in Christ, as the
shadow in the substance* and that 1 Cor: 9. 14.
the Lord has or deyned that they which preach the gospel, should live of the
gospel, we do willingly leave unto you both your preistly order, and
maintenance, contenting our selves with the peoples voluntary contribution,
whither it be it be less, or more, as the blessing of God upon our labor, the
fruit of our ministry, and a declaration of their love and duty.

The 12, and last error imputed to us, is, that your Churches (as XII.
you call them) ought to be raced down, and not to be employed to the true
worship of God. Our mayn reason of this assertion, being (as you say) by making
equal Paganism, and Antichristianism, you endeavor to weake^ M. B.
by sundry exceptions. As 1. that there is great difference between
Antichristianism, and Pagnism, for this is the worshipping of a false God, and
without any profession of the true God: but the other worship the true God, and
hold many truths of God. Paganism was wholly without the Church but Antichrist
sits in the Church of God, etc. 2. that we are to prove your Churches to have
been built by Antichrist.

We do not make equal Paganism, and Antichristianism, in the Answ:
degree, though we put not such difference between them as you do. And first
we do affirm, that both the one, and the other, are not only against that 2.
connaundement, but the first also. 2. that both of them may in their degree,
and for a time be in the Church: as also that both of them may in time, and in
their degree, destroy the true Church of Christ. 3. that as well the relics,
ornaments, and monuments of the one, as of the other are by lawful authority
to be abolished: and in the mean while to be forborne especially in the worship
of God, by all such, as fear him, and his judgments denounced against the
same, let us hear what the scriptures teach in these cases.

The Apostle Paul writing purposely of 2 These: 2 3. 4.
that man of sin Antichrist, testifies, that he is an adversary and exalts
himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he
sits in the temple of God as God* showing himself, that he is God. And as
Antichrist cannot be rightly discerned of us, but in his oppsition unto Christ,
and exaltation above him, so does this his exaltatio^ appear sudry ways, by
which he does translate unto himself the honor due unto God alone, and his
son our Lord Christ: as in dispensing with the moral law professedly,
bynding, and loosing conscience, devising, and imposing forms of religion,
tra^sferring empires, and kingdoms; and al these does this earthly God (as he
is called) by the plenary power of the seat Apostolical. The same also it was,
which John for saw in chap: 9. 20.
the Revelation namely, that the Antichristians worshipped Devils, and Idols of
gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and wood, which can neither see nor
hear, nor walk, and again, that they chap: 13. 15. 16.
worshipped the beast, which came out of the earth, and the image of the beast,
both small, and great, rich, and poor, free, and bond, and received his mark
in their right hand, and in their foreheads. And is the man of sin, and devils,
idols, the beast, (al which Antichristians worship) the true God? Or is that
notable idol their breade^ God in the sacrament of the altar, which they so
much adore, the true God? Yea are the Virgin Mary, and other saints, to who^
they pray go in pilgrimage and perform other devotions, and in whose honor
they have built, the very temples we speak of, the true God? Oh Mr Bern: that
you should be drawn to this ple^sor Rome? Surely the hand of God is upon you,
and it is a fearful thing you feel it not.

And as Antichristianism does not worship the true God only, but false Gods,
or such as are no Gods, with him: and therefore is both against the 2. and 1.
commandment as has been said: so neither is Paganism (as you speak) without
all profession of the true God. To let pass that the learned of our nation
have proved the contrary against the Papists, pleading for themselves, as you
do for the^, that they worshipped only the true God, that which is written 2
King. 17. (if there were no more scriptures) does sufficiently manifest your
error. It is there said, that U: 6. 24.
the King of Ashur, taking Samaria, and carrying away Israel to Ashur, brought
from Babylon, and other Heathenish Countries, folk, and placed them in the
Cities of Samaria in stead of the children of Israel. And in the same place it
follows, that those Babylonians, v: 27. 28. 29. 32. 33.
and other Pagans reteyning still their Paganism, and worshipping, as before,
the Gods of their own nations, did withal worship Jehovah the true God.

Of like truth with the former is that which follows, namely, that Paganism
was wholly without the Church, but that Antichrist sits in the Church of God.

For first, admit it be true of Paganism in the land of Canaan, before the
Israelites entered into it, yet afterward it was otherwise, Psalm: 106. 35. 36.
37. 38.
as the scriptures testify: and got too great footing in the Church, in that
place as it had done before in all places. 2. it is not true you say that
Antichrist sits in the Church of God: he sits in his own Church, into which the
Church of God is degenerated: though there remayn usurped sundry things still,
which are of God. It is a great untruth to affirm that the Popish Synagogue in
the present state is the true visible Church of God, unto which he has
promised his presence, and given his power. As Paganism has subverted other
Churches, so has Antichristianism that Church long agone.

And here I would demand of Mr Bern. what he judges of the Israelites in, and
after Ieroboams apostasy, especially in the time of Ahab, and Iezabell, when 1
king. 17 30. 31. 32.
Baall was espetially worshipped, and temples, and altars reared up unto him in
Samaria? Does he judge them at that time plain Pagans? Or was their worship
simple Paganism? I see not but, as the religion of the Papists, in the
opposition it has to Christianity, is rightly called Antichristianism, so the
religion of the ten Tribes, in the oppositio^ it had to the law given by Moses,
may fitly be called Anti-Iudaism. And for the Baalims then, Bucer.
and there worshipped, they were even as the lesser Gods at this day, Uirell.
which are called Patrons, amongst the Papists. The devil to the end he might
bring in again the old Idolatry, craftily borrowing the names of the holy
Apostles, and martyrs, by whom it was in former times overthrown, and driven
away: and by this means it has put on another person, that it might not be
known. Whereupon it follows by proportion, that as Deuteronomy. 12 1. 2. 3. 2 King.
10. 25. 26. 27. 28. and 18. 1. 3 4.
the temples, altars, and high places, for those Baalims, and other Idols, were
by godly kings to be razed down and taken away, and no way to be employed to
the true worship of God, so are the temples (with their appurtenances) built to
the virgin Mary, Peter, Paul, and the rest, though true saints, yet the Papists
false Gods, and very Baalims, to be demolished and overthrown by the same
lawful authority: and in the mean while as execrable things to be avoided by
them which have none authority to deface, or demolish them.

Now howsoever the difference put by M. B. is neither true, nor to the purpose,
if it were true, yet do I grant a difference, not in respect of the things,
but of the times, and that there was something legal in many of the
commandments given by Moses touching these, and the like execrable things:
yet so as there is one, and the same general, and common equity, bynding the
Jews then, and us now: and that I consider in two respects: the one in the
detestation of Idolatry past; and the other in the preservation of it for the
time to come. And as the godly under the law were to show their detestation of
Idolatry by defacing and abandoning the monuments, relics, and remembrances
of it: so are they now to manifest in the same manner, their just, and zealous
hatred of the same, or like impietyes: and as the kings, and mighty of the
earth have in former times given their power unto the beast, and adorned the
purple-coloured whore with many ornaments, and with stately temples, and
aedifices amongst the rest, so shall they in the day of her full visitation,
strip her naked of these, amongst her other ornaments, and leave her desolate.
Now for the 2. reason, who is ignorant how many thowsands in the land are most
dangerously nourished in their erroneous, and superstitious persuasions by the
howses themselves (to let pass the particular both memorials of, and
incitements unto Idolatry still appearing in some places more, and in some
less) knowing none other Church, to which God has promised his special
praesence, and wherein he will be glorified, save in that of lime, and stone: and
putting holiness in the very place: And how well your Church provides for this,
appears in sundry things; as in whyting the walls of the houses, where you
silenced the preachers: in bynding the people absolutely to the places, though
little care be taken, what either they, or the ministers, to whom they come, do
there, so they deal not too faithfully in the Lords buesines: in tying
Christian burial absolutely to the Church, or Churchyard, where the Minister,
with all his holy implements, Service book. Homilies Tome. 2.
must meet the corpse at the Church-style, and so with singing, and saying, as
is appointed, admit it into the holy ground. And lastly in teaching the people,
that by keeping their Churches in good repayr, they shall not only please God,
and deserve his manifold blessings, but also deserve the good report of all
godly people. And for the Papists all men know, what claym they lay unto the
places (as in deed they do far better fit their pompous religion, then the
simplicity of the gospel) what new life they continually receive from them,
what religion they put in them, and what devotion they have unto them, ever by
how much the more superstitiously bent, by so much the mo^e devoutly addicted
unto them. And so far is that from truth which you say, Mr Bernard, that the
godly, and Church of Page. 157.
God have in Popery kept possession of those buildings, for the godly, which
should follow them; that, as they were erected by such, as were most
superst^tiously seduced, so have they been ever since, the proper posses^ions
of the most dangerous seducers in the Romish Synagogue, the Praelates, and
their Clergy.

So that the moral equity of those commandments in the old testiment
touching the demolition, and subversion of idolatrous temples, and other the
like superstitious monuments, does as well bynd now, as then. Which
commandments are also in effect renewed in the new testament, where the
faithful are charged to 2 Cor: 6 1^.
touch none unclean thing; 1 Ioh: ^. 21.
to keep themselves from idols, which they cannot do, except they keep
themselves from their appurtenaunces: to Jude 23.
hate even the garment spotted by the f^^sh: not to Rev: 14. ^. ch: 18. 4.
receive the least mark of the beast, but to go out of Babylon, ch: 11. 8.
which is also called Sodom, and Egypt, spiritually, as for other sins
reigning in her, so for her idolatry amongst the rest: which I the rather note,
that men may se, it is not we, but the holy Ghost, that compares together
Paganish, and Antichristian Idolatry.

Lastly, where Mr Bernard bids us prove that their Churches were built by
Antichrist, their records, as Mr Ainsworth observes, will prove it: so will
their situation directly East, and West, with the Quyer, or Chauncell always
at the East end, and the roodloft in the middle to separate it from the body of
the Church, the profane layity: their vacant places for Images abolished, and
their popish pictures still remaining: and lastly their names, even the names
of the Apostles, Saints, and Martyrs, in whose honor they were built, and to
whose peculiar service thy were consecrated.

Thus much of the temples, which is the last difference betwixt Mr B. and me,
and I confess the least; and this much also of his book. Something remayns to
be spoken of the Ministers Positions, but very briefly, both because the things
in them for substance, have come formerly into consideration, and also because
Mr Bernard affoards them no confirmation in his 2. book, being shaken by Mr
Ainsworth, as they are.

ANd to omit the bloody doom which these Ministers pass upon The Ministers
Positions Examined.
us all (contrary I am persuaded to their own consciences) that we are cut of
from Christ for our separation from the Church of England, I will consider
briefly of their reasons to prove it a true Church.

THe first is, because They enjoy, and ioyn together in the use of those
outward means, which God in his word has ordained for the gathering Minist:
of an invisible Church, which are, preaching of the gospel, and
administration of the sacraments: which they will prove by the vnf^yned
conversion of many: and by the scriptures, Math: 28. 18. 20. Ephesians. 4. 11. 14. I.


First the Church of Engl: namely the national Church, under a Answ:
national government, and Ministry, is a popish devise: the Lord having
appointed none other Church, under the new testament but a particular
congregation (as these Ministers truly understand. Page: 180.
Mat: 18. 17.) with a government, and Ministry correspo^dent.

2. Before men join together (as a Church in the fellowship of II.
the gospel, and communion of Saints) in the ordinances of God, they should be
prepared by the preaching of the word, and fitted as spiritual stones for the
Lords building, and so join in covenant, by voluntary, and personal profession
of faith, and confession of sins: from which how far the body of the national
Church of Engl: both is, and ever has been, all know.

3. As the sacraments are no means to gather either the III
visible, or invisible Church, but do praesuppose a CHVRCH gathered already
into covenant with God, of which covenant they are seals: so does not the
Church of England ioyn together in the preaching of the doctrine of says,
which is the outward means for the gathering of the Church. The greatest part
of the parishes, as they have only the service book for prayer, so have they
only the homilies for preaching. And even in the Parishes where the word is
best taught, and the sacraments most orderly administered, yet do not men join
in the use, but in the abuse of these ordinances: considering the confused
communion wherein, the usurped authority by which, and the book-service
according to which, they are dispensed. If the Ministers had only affirmed,
that they had taught amongst the^ such truths of the gospel, as by which the
Lord might, and did sanctify, and save his elect, or gather an invisible
Church, as they speak, I should not contend with them, but should further ad,
that I doubt not but such truths are even in many assemblies of Papists, and
Anabaptists, and to hold otherwise is a fowl, and cruel error: but where they
speak of enjoying the outward means, and by them understand the offices of
Ministry, which Christ has given unto his Church, for the gathering and
feeding of the same (for which purpose they allege Math. 28. 18. 20. and Ephe.
4. 11. 14) I deny they enjoy the outward means ordained for the gathering of
the Ch: neither shall they ever be able to prove it, except they can prove
themselves lawfully, and according to Christ's testament possessed of some of
the offices there spoken of.

In the 4. place I would the cause, why these ministers speak of IIII
the outward means of gathering an invisible Church, and not of a visible,
since both the quaestion betwixt them, and us, is about the visible, and not
about the invisible Church, and also that the scriptures they bring for the
justification of these means amongst them, do speak of the means, and
ministeries given not to the invisible, but to the visible Church: and if it be
not, because they know, that if they had spoken of the means of gathering the
visible Church, we would (and that justly) have excepted, that they do not
enjoy, nor have not so much as taught amongst them, those doctrines of the
gospel, and that part of Christ's Testament, which teaches the right, and
orderly gathering of the visible Church, by separation of the saints from the
unsanctified world into the covenant, and fellowship of the gospel, by free,
and personal profession of faith, and confession of sins.

Lastly, as the preaching of the gospel is the only outward means to gather a
Church, so though this means be used never so fully, and men enjoy it, and
join in it never so ordinarily, yet except withal they join in the
understanding, faith, obedience of, Math. 13. 19. Ioh. 10. 3. 4. 5. Act. 2. 41.
42. and 8. 36. 37 and 10. 35. and 11. 20. 21. 23. 24. 26. Col. 2. 5
and submission unto it, and that in the order which Christ has set, they are
not made a Church by it according to the right use of it, but do make
themselves, by abusing it, a conventicle of profane usurpers: howsoever M. B.
and these ministers, and many others do indeed make the word of God a very
charm, in writing and teaching, that the bare use (they might say the abuse) of
the word, and sacraments by a company of people, though either altogether, or
for the most part for fear, fashion, or with opinion of merit ex opere
operato, and without all knowledge, or conscience, makes them a true Church of
Christ. The Argument from the external efficient, except it work absolutely
necessarily, to the effect, is unsound. It were senseles to affirm, that
because physic is the means of recovering health, therefore whosoever use
physic, are healed: much more to affirm, that because the word is the means to
gather a Ch:, whosoever use it, are a Church; since physic is a natural
agent, and works by a natural power given it of God; where the word is a
moral agent, having in it sel^ no natural virtue, but working merely by the
will of the author, and supernatural efficacy of Ioh. 3. 8.
the spirit, which like the wind, blows where it lists. The two next
Reasons (being indeed one in effect) which the Ministers bring for the
justification of their Church, are 1. that their whole Church makes profession
of the true faith, for proof of which Minist:
they refer us to the confession of their Church; the Apology of it: and the
Anno Domini 1562.
Articles of religion agreed upon in the Convocation house. 2. that they hold,
teach, and mainteyn every part of Gods holy truth, which is fundamental, and
such, as without the knowledge, and believing whereof there is no salvation.
All which afterward they reduce to this one head, as the only fundamental
truth of religion, That Jesus Christ the son of God who took our nature of
the virgin Mary, is ^ur only, and all sufficient savior: which truth, say
they, whosoever receive, are the people of God, and ^n the estate of salvation:
they that receive it not, cannot possibly be saved. Math: 16. 18. Mark. 16. 16.
1 Ioh: 4. 2. Col: 2. 7.

These two Arguments, for substance, have been handled in the Answ:
former part of the Page: 261 262. 263. etc: and 270 271. 272. 273.
book, unto which also M. Ainsworth has given answer in the particulars: of
which I entreat the Reader to take knowledge: and do thereunto annex these
considerations.

First, it is a very presumptuous thing for these ministers, yea or for any men
or angels thus peremptorily to determine how much knowledge a man must have to
be saved: that if he have just so much, I.
then he may be, or is it the state of salvation: if he want any of that, he
cannot be saved. Who knows by how little knowledge the Lord may, and does save
a man, that is faithful in the little he knows, and endeavors by all means to
further knowledge, and so to further faythfulnes? As on the contrary, the Lord
rejects many with greater knowledge, for their unfaithfulness, both in not
practicing the things they know, and in neglecting to know more, least they
should learn that truth, which they have no mind to practice for fear, or in
other corrupt regards.

And howsoever I do acknowledge a difference of truths, and that some are
more, and some less principal, yet do I wish more conscience in the
application of this distinction. For whereas the ministers are by the laws,
and penaltyes, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, limited in their doctrine; and both
the ministers, and people in their obedience of, and to the truth of the
gospel, and ordinances of the new testament, this is made a salve for every
sore, that they have the substance of the gospel; the doctrine of faith: all
fundamental truths: and whatsoever is necessary to salvation. In which
defense (as it is made) there are these evils.

First, in it men not only endeavor (which is too much) the curing of Babell,
but iudeed to make Babell believe she stands in no great need of curing* and
that her wounds are neither deadly, nor dangerous.

2. It tends to vilify, and make of small moment many of the Lords truths, and
ordinances, howsoever these Page: 173 174.
ministers will not hear of it. And this will appear, if the end be considered
of these distinctions, and qualifications: which is, that men should setle
themselves, without pressing further in the disobedience, and want of sundry of
the commandments, and ordinances of Christ Jesus, till with bodily peace, and
leave of the magistrate, they might enjoy the same. And if Math. 15. 6.
the Scribes and Pharisees were reproved of Christ for making the
commandments, of God of none authority by their traditions, do not they make
the commandments of God, and ordinances of Christ of small moment, who for
the traditions, and inventions of men (yea of that man of sin) though supported
by the arm of flesh, have forborne and do forbear (and, so purpose to go on)
the obedience of the fame? which whether it be not the very estate of these
ministers in forbearing to preach (that I may let pass other matters) for the
refusal of subscription, and conformity, let their own consciences judge. And
mark their defense. page 174.
They beleiv, and teach that there is no part of the holy scripture, which
every Christian is not necessarily bound to seek, and desire the knowledge of,
so far forth, as in him lies. Here is a great charge laid upon every Christian
to seek the knowledge of every part of holy scripture: but no word of his
obedience unto every part of it: as if Mat. 28. 19 20. 21.
Christ had not sent out his Apostles to teach men to observe, to the worlds
end, but to know, what he had commanded them: and as if Psalm. 119. 105.
the word of God were only a light and lanthorn unto men's eyes, that they
might see the ways of God, and not to their feet, and paths, that they might
walk in them. The same Prophet in the same Psalm entreats the Lord to teach him
the way of his statutes, that he might keep it unto the ver. 33. 34.
end: and that he would give him understanding, that he might keep his law:
professing also in the same place, that he was comforted in GOD against all
that confusion, which his enemies would have brought upon him, that he had
respect to all GODS commandments: and this respect was not of bare knowledge,
but of observation, and obedience, as appears in all the five verses before
going. Neither therefore can the ministers excuse themselves from making some
parts of the holy scriptures of small moment, and needles, as Mr Barrow
charge them, because they advise the people to desire the knowledge of them,
except with their ver. 6.
knowledge they joined obedience; neither ought the people to rest in that
unsound advise, considering that, Ia^: 4. 17.
to him that knows how to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin: and
that Luke 12. 47.
to him that knows his masters will, and does it not, many stripes are due.

3. This pleading by the ministers, that they hold, and enjoy every
fundamental truth, and whatsoever is of necessity to salvation, (considering
the end of it, which is, the stopping of the people from pressing unto further
obedience, and profession of the will of God, and ordinances of Christ) is
injurious both to the growth, and sincerity of the obedience of Gods people.
For whereas they ought to be Heb. 6. 1.
led forward unto perfection, this teaches them to stay in the foundation, as
if it were sufficient for the building of the house, that the foundation were
laid: and secondly, it insinuates, that it is sufficient, if, men so serve God,
as they can obteyn salvation, though with disobedience of a great part of the
revealed will of God: occasioning them thereby to serve him only, or chiefly
for wages as hypocrites do. As if a child should be taught so far to honor,
and please his father as he might get his inheritance, but not much to trouble
himself about giving or doing him any further honor, or service.

Secondly I do answer that this truth, which the ministers make II.
t(...) only fundament truth in religion is held, and professed by as vile
haeretiques, as ever were since Christ came in the flesh. May not a company of
exco^municates hold, teach, and defend this truth, and yet are they not a true
Church of God. III.


3. I deny, that the whole Church of England: has received, and does hold, and
profess this fundamental, truth: how boldly soever these ministers affirm
it. They grant there are many Atheists in the land, (they page 166.
might say in the Church, for Atheists are, and ever will be of the Kings, and
states religion) and many ignorant, and wicked men besides, who make not so
clear, and holy a profession of the true faith, as they should. And do these
Atheists hold, and profess the true faith, and every article of Gods holy
truth, which is fundamental? Are there not many thowsands in the national
Church ignorant of the very first rudiments, and foundations Heb. 6. 1. 2.
of religion, as the Apostle notes them down: and can they hold, and profess
that whereof they are ignorant? Yea how can any wicked men hold, that CHRIST is
their savior, but they hold an apparently in the eyes of all men? for which
notwithstanding these Ministers will have them reputed true members of Christ's
body. I ad, that since the body of that Church or nation, consists of mere
natural men, and that natural men are Papists in the case of justification,
and look to be saved by their good meaning, and well doings, it is most untruly
affirmed by those ministers, that their Church accounts none her members, but
such as profess salvation by Christ only. They hold otherwise and so
profess, if an account of their faith be demanded, as I have showed by the
testimony of Mr. Nichols, and could do by the testimony of others, if all men
did not see it too evidently. And yet see what these men affirm and that
confidently, and without fear, for their advantage: as that their whole Church
makes profession of the true faith; that it holds, and maintayns every article
fundamental of Gods holy truth: and particularly that Jesus Christ the son
of God etc; and lastly that they that receive this truth, are the people of
God, and in the state of salvation. Whereupon it must follow, that their whole
national Church is in the state of salvation. And surely so had it need be (in
the judgment of men) having the promises and seals of the covenant of
salvation applied, and ministered unto it, and to every member of it.

Lastly, though the whole Church of England, and every member IIII.
in it, did personally profess the true faith in holiness, as all the true
members of the Church do (which are therefore called both Ephesians: 1. 1.
saints, and faithful) and that we had do just exception against that
profane, and implicit profession, for which both Mr. Ber. and the ministers
plead, yet could nor this make it or them a true Church. The bare profession of
faith makes not a true Church, except the persons so professing be united in
the Covenant, and fellowship of the gospel into particular congregations,
having the entyre power of Christ within themselves. As hewed stones are fit
for an house, but not an house nor any part of it, till they be orderly laid,
and couched together: so are men professing faith, and holiness fit for the
Church, but not a Church, nor of it, before their orderly combination into a
particular assembly having in it the power of Christ for the ministry,
government, censures, and other ordinances. A company of exco^municates put out
of the Churches order, may profess the same faith they did formerly: so may a
sect of schismatiques putting themselves causelessly out of the Churches order:
so may many particular persons, never joining themselves unto any Church at
all. You your selves define a Church to be a company of faithful people etc.
so is not your national Church, but many companyes: not distinct and entyre in
themselves, and so only one in nature, as all the true Churches of God are:
but one by monstrous composition, in a praeposterous, and absurd imitation of
the Jewish national Church, and government.

Thus much of the Arguments; in the handling of which the ministers insinuate
against Mr. Barrow sundry unjust accusations, Page: 167. 168.
which I will briefly clear. As first, that he will account none members of
the visible Ch: but such as are truly faithful, not only in outward profession
Minist:
and appearance, but even in the Lords ey, and judgment: because a Church is
described a company of faithful people, that truly worship God and readily
obey him.

But wherefore should the ministers thus interpret him; does he Answ:
not speak of the visible or external Church, and so by consequence of
visible, and external faith, and obedience, which are seen of men. In their
Articles of religion a Church is made a company of faithful people: and if they
must not be truly faithful, then they must be fals^ly faithful. And for Ioh:
4. 23 Rom: 15 18. and 16. 19.
true worship, and ready obedience, the Lord requires them in his word,
according to which we must defyne Churches, and not according to casual
corruptions, and aberrations, brought in by man's fault.

2. They charge Mr. Barrow to hold that every member of our Minist:
assemblyes is led by the spirit into all truth, and that it is evident, he
would Page: 170. 171.
have none to be accounted the people, and Church of God, who either know not,
or profess not every truth, contained in the scriptures: because he af firms
in his Discovery, that to the people of God, and every one of them, God has
given his holy sanctifying spirit, to open unto them, and to lead the^ into all
truth.

It follows not that because he affirms they have received the spirit Answ:
to lead them into all truth, that he therefore affirms, they are led into all
truth, by the spirit. May not the Papists as truly avouch, that Paull teaches
that the Church, is without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, because he
teaches, that Ephesians: 5. 25. 2^.
Christ has given himself for it, that he might make it unto himself a
glorious Ch:, without spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing? It is then an il
collectio^, that because one thing is done, that an other might follow upon it,
that therefore the latter* which is to follow, is also done. And for the point:
as it is the work of the spirit to lead men into all truth, and as Ro^: 8. 9.
all that are Christ's, or members of his body, have his spirit, so does it
follow that all the members of the Church have the spirit given them of God, to
lead them into all truth, though it have not his full work, by reason of Gal:
5. 17
the contrary work of the flesh, in this life, where 1 Cor: 12 12.
all me^ know but in part.

3. That Mr. Bar: holds every truth in the scriptures fundamental, that is (as
they expound it Page: 147.) such as if it be not known, and obeyed, the whole
religion and faith of the Church, must needs fall to the ground. Minist:


Mr. Ainsworth has set down his words: from which no such Answ:
collection can be made: he directs them, and that worthily, against these
deceivers which knowing and acknowledging, that they want many special
ordinances of Christ, and are burdened in stead of them, with the inventions of
Antichrist, do notwithstanding encourage themselves, and others, by these
distinctio^s that they have the fundamental truths of the gospel, and
whatsoever is necessary to salvation, and the like, in a purpose to go on all
their life long in disobedience. For which men how much better were it to
consider how it is written, that, Math: 5. 19.
whosoever shall break one of the least commaundments and teach men so, he
shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven, then thus to turn upon them
which reprove them for their unfaithfulness; and misinterpreting their sayings
most injuriously, to spend thus many words, as these ministers do, in confuting
their own corrupt glosses.

Their fourth, and last Argument, is, for that all the known Churches Minist.
in the world acknowledge their Church for their sister: and give her the right
hand of fellowship.

This Argum. has been sundry times urged by Mr. Ber. and so Answ:
answered sundry times both by M. Ainsworth, and my self in the former part of
my Page: 40. 41. 42. 46. 47.
book: whether I must refer the reader, contenting my self with a brief
observation of such untruths, and errors, as these ministers are driven unto
in the prosecuting of this Argument: as

First, that, all the known Churches in the world are well acquaynted with
Minist.
their doctrine, and liturgy: to which they should also ad their book of
ordination, and canons Ecclesiastical, for their ministry, and Answ.
government: then which nothing is more untrue, Beza, which was specially
interessed in these matters, will hardly be persuaded of the true state of
things: touching dispensations, pluralityes, the power of excommunication in
one man, and the like. II.


It is most untrue, that God has sanctifed the testimony of Churches Minist:
for a principal help in the decyding of controversies in this kind. It is
(though Answ:
some help) yet less principal, yea the least of many.

3. That Paul feared that without the approbation of James, and Cephas, III.
and John he should have run in vayn. Minist:


Paul feared no such thing; for he was both assured of his calling Answ:
from the Lord, and had also taken, long before that time, good experience of
the Lords blessing upon his ministry both amongst the Jews, and Gentiles; and
knew right assuredly, that his preaching was not in vain. His care was to take
away from the weak all scruple of mind, or iealousy of contention amongst the
Apostles; he went up to Jerusalem to confer with them.

4: That Paul sought to win commendation and credit to the orders which IIII.
he by his Apostolical authority might have established, by the judgment of
Minist:
other Churches. Whereas the Apostle Paul did by his Apostolical authority
appoint those orders in all those churches he speaks of, Answ:
as the scriptures quoted testify. 1 Cor: 4. 7. 17. and 16. 1. Besides, the
Church of England: can win no great credit to her orders by the orders of other
Churches, considering how contrary she is in them to all other Churches
departed from Rome, whom alone in very many the resembles.

Fifthly, the testimony which John Baptist gave of Christ, is unfitly V.
brought for the testimony of one Church of an other. For it was Minist:
the proper, and principal work of John's calling to give witness of Answ:
Christ: wherein also he could not err. It is not so with, or between Ioh: 1.
6. 7. 15* 23.
any Churches in the world.

Where it is further affirmed, that there are cases wherein one Church VI.
is commanded to seek the judgment of other Churches, and to account it as
Minist.
the judgment of God; for which Act: 15. 2. is alleged: as it is true, Answ.
that one Church is in cases to seek the judgment, and help of an other, so is
it untrue, that the judgment of that other Church, or of all the Churches in
the world, is to be accounted as the judgment of God. Indeed the decrees of the
Apostles at Jerusalem, being by imediate, infallible direction of ver. 28.
the H: Ghost, were to be accounted, as the judgment of God: but for any
ordinary either Churches, or persons to challenge the like unto their
determinations were popelike praesumption.

To the Ministers demand in the next place. Says Christ to any VII.
particular congregation of the faithful in our land, Whatsoever they bind in
Minist.
earth, is bound in heaven, Mat. 18. 18. and says he it not also to the
Churches of other nations?

I do answer that if Christ have so said to the particular co^gregatio^s, Answ.
who has said it to the Praelates and their substitutes, or to any officer, or
officers, excluding the body of the Congregation? Even none but he, whose work
it is to gainsay Christ, and to subvert his order? 2. If any of your parishes
be such congregatio^s, why do not you as faithful Ministers exhort the^ to, and
guide them in the use of this power of binding, and loosing, which Christ has
given them? Or are not you content to suffer them to go on, and your selves to
go before them in the loss of this liberty, yea in a most vile subjection to
their and your, spiritual Lords, which have usurped it? And for the Argument
it is of no force: for neither has any one Church in the world that power over
an other, nor all the Churches in the world over any one, which the meanest
Church has over any her member, or members whomsoever. One Church may forsake
an other, but juditially to censure, or excommunicate it, may it not. The same
answer for substance may serve for that which is objected from 1 Cor. 14. 32.
Besides, no Church can so fully discern of the estate of an other Church, as it
can of the proper members apperteyning unto it. Yea I ad, that in this respect,
we are better able to judge of the Church of Engl: then are any forreyn
Churches, (notwithstanding our weakness) because they do not in any measure know
the estate of it, as we do.

Lastly, as that saying of the Ministers must have a very favorable VIII.
interpretation, vi^, that the Church has power to judge of a man infallibly,
Minist.
that he is in the estate of salvation, so is their other affirmation, that the
discerning of the spirits, and doctrine of such teachers, as arise in the
Church, is such a gift, as the true Ch: never wanted, as popish an error, Answ.
as ever was broched in Rome. For how then can the Church err? or how can it
be deceived by false teachers? or how could Rome come to that estate of
apostasy wherein she now stands? Or may not a Papist plead thus with these
men? Rome was a true Church of God. Now the true Church never wants the gift of
discerning spirits and doctrines, therefore Rome neither has wanted, nor does,
nor ever shall want this gift: and so by consequence cannot be fallen from the
truth, as is praetended against her.

To conclude, it is not truly said of these men, that this judging of one
Church by another is a matter of salvation. The Ch: Act. 10. 14 15. 34. 35.
with 11. 2. 3. 4. 5.
of Jerusalem was ignorant of the calling of the Churches of the Gentiles, as
the scriptures testify. And I would know what the Church of England judges of
the Lutheran Churches, as they are called. It accounts of them, as of true
Churches. So do not they of their Churches, whom they call Calvinists, but on
the contrary repute them as haereticall. Whereupon it follows, that either a
true Church may err in judging of an other Church, or else that either the
Church of England, or the Lutheran Churches, or both, are not true Churches.
Howsoever therefore we do not make light account of the testimony, and
judgment of other Churches, as these Ministers accuse us, yet dare we not
make idols of them as they seem to do: who wanting both the word of God, and
practice of other Churches for their warrant, seek commendation by the
testimony which some have given of the^ in respect of certain general heads of
doctrine, in which we our selves also do for the most part concur with them.

Thus much of the Ministers Arguments. Now follow their answers to two mayn
objections made by us against the whole body of their Church, and their Parish
assemblies.

The first is, that it was not gathered by such means, as God in his word has
ordained, and sanctified for the gathering of his Church. The 2. that they
communicate together in a false and idolatrous outward worship of God, which is
polluted with the writings of men, vidz, with read stinted prayers, homilyes,
catechismes, and such like.

These objections have been else where prosequuted, and the exceptions taken by
the Ministers against them, particularly answered by Mr Ainsworth, and therein
their both corrupt, and weak dealing manifested. I will briefly add a few
things.

Against the former objection they take five exceptions.

First, that they might lawfully be accounted a true Church, though it could
not appear that they were at the first rightly gathered: as the disciples might
be assured of Christ's bodily prasence amongst them, when they saw, and felt
him, Ioh. 20^ 19. 28. though they could not have discerned, which way, or how
he could possibly have come in.

Belike then we must believe that the Church of Engl: was Answ:
gathered miraculously, as Christ came by miracle into the place where his
disciples were assembled. But the answer is, that these men take the mayn
quaestion for granted, which is, that their national Church is for the
present, a true orderly gathered Church of Christ; and that so sensibly, as it
may be seen, and felt.

Secondly, that they might be rightly gathered to the fellowship of the visible
Minist:
Church, by other means then by the preaching of the gospel, that is, as they
expound it, by public, and ministerial preaching; for which they allege our
opinion though unsound, yet having force enough to stop our mouths.

And do these men deal soundly, who to prove a point in controversy, Answ:
bring the opinion of their adversaries, which they condemn* as unsound? The
opinion is most sound, that men out of office (for so we speak) may convert
men to God, and that ordinarily: otherwise they may not prophecy ordinarily;
nay to what end should they ordinarily instruct, reprove, and exhort privately
such, as are out of the way? And where further they make it one thing for men
to be soundly converted, and an other thing for them to be lawfully made a
visible Church, they use craft to cover error. They use craft in speaking of
sound conversion, to conceal that profane and hateful error, that a visible
Church may be lawfully gathered of unconverted persons. For as our quaestion is
about the external, or visible Church, so do we require for it only
external, and visible conversion, or that which is seen, and discerned of men,
leaving unto God the judging, and discerning of that which is sound or inward*
according to the difference which them selves truly put from the 1 Samuel: 16. 7.
Act: 15. 7. 8.
scriptures, in an other Page: 16^
place.

Now that it is a vile, and profane error to hold that men converted, and
wicked (viz: so far as men can judge by outward appearance) may lawfully be
admitted into the visible CHVRCH, I have showed at large in the former part of
the Page: 269. 270. 271. 272. 273. 301. 305. 306. 307. 308. 309-310.
Book* and could if need were show the whole course of the scriptures against
it. Mat. 28. 19. 20. Act. 2. 40. 41. 46. 47. and 4. 32. and 8. 5. 6. 8. 37 and
9. 15. with 13. 42. 43. and 14. 15. and 16. 14. 15. 31. 32. 33.

Of like nature with the former, is that which follows, namely that men may
by other means be lawfully made a visible Church, then by Minist.
the preaching, that is by the opening, or publishing, of the gospel. For which
they instance in those which follow Christ, and professed themselves his
disciple^, who yet were not all drawn by his word, but some by miracles Ioh. 2.
23. 25. some by the report they heard of him Ioh. 4. 39. some by the desire
they had to be fed by him: Ioh. 6. 24. 26. and that, Christian Kings have by
their laws been means to bring men to the outward society of the Church, unto
which men may be compelled. Luke 14. 23.

It is not true that Christ in his life gathered any visible Churches. Answ:
These persons indeed, which followed Christ, were members of the visible
Church, but it was of the Church of the Jews, which Christ gathered not. He
lived and dyed Romans 15. 8
the Minister of circumcision, and gathered no distinct Churches at all from
the Jewish Church. Secondly neither any of the things named, nor all of them
together, without or besides the gospel, are means sufficient lawfully to
gather a visible Church. Some of them as miracles, may be means Mark. 16. 20.
to confirm the gospel, and the rest of them to draw men to the hearing of, and
outward submission unto it* but is alone is the hand of God, as Mr Ber. truly
writes, stretched out to sub du^ people unto him: it is the seed of the Lords
husbandry: the word of Page 118.
his kingdom.

When the Lord Jesus sent out his Apostles to gather Churches, 1 Cor. 3. 9.
Math. 15. 19. Math. ^8. 19. 20.
the only means which came into his heart was the teaching, or making of men
disciples: and the Apostle to the Ephesians: witnesses, that the Church, or chapter ^.
^0.
temple of God, is built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophet^,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone^ but these men, it seems,
will have the Church of God built upon the laws of Magistrates, yea upon the
reports* yea upon the bellyes of men. They would be counted Ministers of the
gospel, and yet they make no conscience of ascribing the honor which is
peculiar unto the gospel, unto so many other, and so mean things. And for
Christian Kings, and Queens* as as I acknowledge them for noursing fathers, and
another, so may I not for proc^^ant parents, of the Church. It is unreasonable
to affirm, that civil causes, as are their compulsive laws, should bring forth
spiritual effects, as is the Church or kingdom, of Christ. By this Argument
the Turk may make all his dominions a Church in a week, or two. It may as
truly be affirmed, that Magistrates may by their laws compel Act: 2. 41.
men to receive the word gladly: to stand in the estate of v: 47.
salvation: to be 1 Cor: 1. 2
saints, and sanctified in Jesus Christ: to be 1 The: 1. 1 and 2. 1. 1.
in him, and in God the father, through him; viz: externally, and in
appearance, and so far as men can judge: for such is the Church, and of such
persons does it consist, as the scriptures cited testify. And for the parable
in Luke 14. 23. which they bring to prove that the Church may be gathered by
bodily compulsion, as Mr Ainsworth has justly reproved their folly from Prove:
26. 9. and sufficiently confuted their erroneous exposition, showing that Luke
speaks of a spiritual violence, and compulsion, which the word of God
offers unto the consciences of men: so do I ad for the conclusion of this
point, that even the blind Math: 22 15.
Pharisees did see, and discern, that Christ meant by the former servants the
Prophets, which the Lord the King sent to the Jews; as he did by the last, the
Apostles, whom, when the Jews refused the gospel, he sent to the gentiles, to
compel them by the efficacy of the Heb: ^4. 12
word (which is mighty in operation) to the obedience of faith.

Lastly what compulsive laws soever the Magistrates may make, or exequute, it
is a vile error to think, and a sinful flattery to bear the^ in hand, that
they have power from God to co^pel an apparently see page: 300
flagious person to enter into the Church of God, and the Church so to receive
and continue him.

The Ministers 3. exception that their Church was gathered by the Minist:
preaching of the word: and that the first conversion of their land to the
faith of Christ was by the preaching of the gospel, as appears by the best
historyes. And so they go on* and tell us of many from age, to age, called by
the same means: who in the time of persequution sealed the truth with their
blood, and in the time of freedom did openly profess the same.

In the page immediately before going, a Church might be gathered Answ:
without conversion: and now their Church was lawfully gathered, for it was
converted to the faith of Christ, by the preaching of the gospel. 2. It is
both untruly and unadvisedly affirmed of these ministers, that their land was
converted to the faith of CHRIST. The defense of their national Church, and of
the compulsion of all the flagitious persons in the nation to join, and
continue members of it, drives them to this absurd assertion, that the whole
nation, or land was at the first converted to the faith of Christ.

And where they speak of many in all ages since called by the gospel which
also they have sealed with their blood, as I confess this with Mr Ainsworth,
(and rejoice for the mercy of God toward them this way) so I doubt not but the
truths taught in Rome have been effectual to the saving of many: for which
also there have many of them (and no doubt, would many more if there were
occasion) lay down their lives against Pagans, and Infidels.

But these men should prove first, that the body of the land have been
converted to the faith of CHRIST, and orderly joined into particular
congregations: and 2. that it has so continued ever since, even in the times,
when the blood of those Martyrs now spoken of, was shed by the laws civil, and
Ecclesiastical, made by the body of it, through the seduction of Antichrist,
for that purpose: and so that there needed no new gathering after the Romish
apostasy, by the preaching of the gospel on the one side, and by willing
subjection in free, and personal profession, on the other.

That which they ad of sundry secret congregations in Queen Maryes days in
many parts of the land, is but a boast: there were very few of them in any. But
where they say, that these did upon Queen Elizabeth's entrance openly profess
the gospel, it is untrue; there was not one congregation separated in Queen
Maryes days, that so remained in Queen Elizabeth's. The congregations were
dissolved, and the persons in them bestowed themselves in their several
parishes, where their livings, and estates lay. The circumcised were mingled
with the uncircumcised, whence came that monstrous confusion, against which we
witness. And show me one of your ministers continuing his charge in Queen
Elizabeth's days, over the flock to which he ministered (in Queen Maryes days)
the persequuted gospel. It is certain the congregations (whether many, or few)
were all dispersed, and that the members of them joined themselves to the
profane Apostate Papists, where their outward occasions lay. As then an
handful, or bundle of co^^e shufled into a field of weeds, though in it self
it retayn the same nature, yet cannot make the field a corn field: so neither
could this small ha^dful of separated people in Queen Maryes days sanctify the
whole feyld of the idolatrous, and profane multitude in the land, by their
seating themselves amongst them.

As then it is not true, that the body of the land, in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign, did join unto the secret congregations (so remaining) in
Queen Maryes days: but on the contrary, these congregations did dissolve, and
join themselves with the unhallowed rowt in the popish, and profane parishes
under their late (mass, and their du^b) priests for the most part: so neither
matters it which joined unto which since the unhallowed, and graceles multitude
neither could by the word of God ioyn unto others, nor be joined to by them in
the covenant of grace and of the gospel, with the seals and other the
ordinances thereof, to which they had, or have no right. Upon the same ground
also I infer, that it is not material, though the people were not compelled to
the profission of the gospel before the midsomer after the Queen came to the
crown: if they were compelled to profess the gospel, of, and unto which, they
were apparently, and notoriously ignorant, and disobedient, as they were. They
knew what they were to look for: and so being, for the most part, of no
religion, they set themselves to conform, as the times were, to that, which
they discerned the Queen to be of.

And for the Preachers, and Commisioners, which were sent before this set day,
for the catholic faith of all the Queens subjects, as I think it was well, so
was it not sufficient to make the whole land, or to prepare them to be a true
Church: besides that the people were of the Church all this while: the same
national, provincial, diocesan, and parochial Church, and Churches
consisting of the same persons generally, still continuing under the same
government, and ministry, and in the same will worship, though in a measure
reformed, as before in Queen Maryes days.

Now for the Preachers you name, as Mr Knoxe, Lever; etc. which exercised their
Ministry in some of the best reformed Churches, during Q. Maryes reign, as the
good they did to some few. (in comparison) by the truths they taught, could
not make all the Queens subjects a true national Church, so do we all know how
hardly they were suffered in the begi^ning of the Queens reign, and that
contrary to the public Church Government, and ministry: as also that neither
they, nor any others, could or can be admitted to any Church by any ministry
received in the reformed Churches, but only by the ordination of a popish
Praelate whether English, or Romish, it matters not: by which also it is
apparent to all men upon what string the English ministry hangs.

Lastly where these men say that many are daily added to the Church by the
ministry of the word preached, I marvayl how this can be, and from whence they
are added. Addition is a motion, and in every motion, there must be the terms,
or bounds, from and to which it is made. All they to whom they preach, are of
the Church already: for recusant Papists come not to their Church; and besides
the number of them increases daily. It seems then they are added from the
Church to the same Church. Because this practice of adding men to the Church by
the preaching of the gospel was in use in the primative Churches, and this
phrase used in the scriptures: therefore these ministers think they may abuse
the phrase, without the thing: and so feed their simple readers with words of
the wind.

Of the ministers 4 exception, viz: of the uniting of the Queens subjects
Minist:
unto those professors, whose fellowship in popery they had forsaken: and of
the course taken for that purpose by the example of the godly Kings Answ:
of Judah I have formerly spoken: of the former part even now: and of the
latter else where, declaring. 1. first that the English nation, and all the
people of the kingdom never was admitted into the LORDS covenant, by the rules
of the new testament, to become a national CHURCH, under national government,
as was JUDAH, and all the people in it under the old. If this can be proved I
acknowledge my self in many great errors: if not it is vanity, and error,
thus to instance in IVDAH, and indeed to revive Judaism, and the old testament.

2. That though England had been sometimes a true national Church, as was
Judah, yet that it did not so remayn in the deep Apostasy of Antichrist but was
divorced in Rome her mother: whereas Judah on the other side, (into what
transgression soever she sell) was never divorced by the Lord, but still
remained his (though unfaithful) wife: the L. ever and anon, stirring up some
extraordinary instrument or other for her reformation, and the renovation of
her covenant: with which also the Lord so effectually wrought, as the things
are wonderful which are written of all the people, and such, as never shall be
found in any whole kingdom to the worlds end.

3. That the reformation by King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth (though great in
it self, and they in it under GOD greatly to he honored) was nothing
comparable to that which was made in Judah, by Iehosaphat, Josiah, Asa,
Ezechiah, and Nehemiah.

These points I have proved at large Page 276. 277. 278. 279. etc: to 304
else where, and do refer the reader thither for answer, only I will note some
particular oversights of the ministers in this fourth exception: as first,
where they say they have proved there was a true Church in the land before
Queen Elizabeth's reign; they should have proved, that the Land was a true
Church: for so was Judah. 2. Where they say, that the noble men were sent by
Iehosaphat only to accompany, and assist the Levites, and to 2 Chr: 17. 7
countenance their ministry, where the scriptures affirm they were sent even
to teach. You will have no teaching but by Church officers: therefore you so put
the scripture of. 3. That they say, Josiah compelled See page 295. 296. 297. 298.
his subjects to the service of the true God: taking compulsion as they do;
where it is evident the people did it freely: though I acknowledge he made
compulsive laws. 4 Speaking of the authority of magistrates over their
subjects they bring in Ezechias proclamation, as they call it, sent to Israel:
whereas the ten tribes were not his subjects, nor he their King. And lastly,
that the Ismaelites were separated from the Church of God: therein
acknowledging that IVDAH was always the true Church of God: which I suppose
they will not say of Engl: always, or of Rome: if they do, it is their sin to
separate from the true Church.

The fifth, and last exception of the ministers is, that Mr Minist:
BARROVV and Mr GREENVVOOD required that the people in the begi^ning of the
Queens reign should by solemn oath, and covenant, have renounced Idolatry, and
have professed faith, and obedience to the gospel, after the example of Asaes
reformation. To which their answer is, first that such a covena^ting by oath is
not absolutely necessary, as appears in Iehosaphats, and Iosiahs reformation.
2. That the people was before that oath, and covenant, Gods true Church: which
their people also may be. 3. That sundry congregations as in Coventry, and
Northampton did publicly profess repentance for their Idolatry, and promised
to obey the truth established. 4. They doubt not to affirm that the whole land
in the first Parliament did enter a solemn covenant with the Lord for
renouncing of Popery, and receiving the gospel.

That Mr Bar. and Green: should require, that the covenant Answ:
into which the Church enters, should be by oath necessarily, is more then I
know: or then we practice. But that they required, that the people, that is,
the whole nation, should so have passed a solemn oath, and covenant, I know is
most untrue. All men know they thought the ignorant profane, popish multitude
incapable of the Lords covenant, and the seals of it: and to have required of
them an oath for such a purpose had been to have required of them the taking of
Gods name in vayn. Where it is said in the 2. place that the people of Judah
were Gods true Church, before the time of that oath, and Covenant, it is true,
and against you. And I would demand of you whether your people were Gods true
Church, when Popery reigned. Your answer is, so may our people be. You dare
not say they were; for then you should acknowledge the Romish Synagogue the
true Church of GOD, and that you had sinfully, schismed from it, as Mr Bern.
proves against you, and himself: you will not say, they were not: for that
would make against you in the point in hand: and would manifest, (as in deed it
does) that the course taken with Judah (being the true Church) for her
reformation, cannot agree with Rome, or Engl: as a member of the Romish Church
for her reformation.

To that which is added in the 3. place of Coventry, Northampton, and some
other congregations, my reply is, first that this is not likely to have been
the deed of the congregations, but of some two or three forward ministers, (a
few of the people it may be approving of it) which their successors were as
like to reverse. 2. They did not repent of their public idolatry nor purpose
to obey the truth in sincerity: of their profane mixture, Romish hierarchy,
and ministry, popish leyturgy, and constitutions (according to which all
things are administered amongst them) they repented not: and besides they knew
right well many truths, which they purposed not to embrace. 3. grant it were
(as they pretend) with these few parishes, what must be said of the rest which
did not so practice? with whom they make, and always have done one entyre
national Church, or what is this to the public, and formal state of the
Church of England against which we deal. The truth is, these men thus
practicing, were reputed, (and truly) schismatiques in the formal
constitution of the Church: and by which this their dealing has no warrant at
all. If we should object unto you the Papists doctrines and practices, of two
or three ministers amongst you, not warrantable by law, you would not admit of
our exception against the formal established estate of your Church: so neither
may we admit of yours, for the practice of two or three, disliking the present
state of things, and seeking for reformation of them.

Lastly, we see indeed that those Ministers doubt not to affirm, that the
whole land (Papists, and Atheists and all) did in the first Parliament of the
Queen enter a solemn covenant for renouncing of Popery, and receiving the
gospel: but we would see first, how all these swarms of wicked Atheists, and
most flagitious persons were by the revealed will of God capable of the
covenant of the new testament, and the seals, and other rites, and privileges
of it. Otherwise this haling them into covenant with the Lord against his
express will, was a profane, and presumptuous enterprise in it self, though I
doubt not arising from a godly intent in the Queen, and her chief connsellers
being mislead by them, whom they too much trusted. 2. We would see what warrant
there is in the new testament for this national covenant, or that all the
people in a Land (since the Land of Canaan was profaned) should unite into a
national Church, under a national government, and ministry. 3. That which
we answered in the 2. place to the former branch of this exception, must here
again be remembered. 4. this undoubted affirmation of the ministers touching the
whole lands covenanting in the Parliament, first infers that the enacting of
civil laws, and penal statutes by Kings, and States, does gather CHVRCHES:
for none other covenant was there in the Parliament. 2. It confirms the
popish doctrine of implicit faith: see page: 302 303. 304.
and that men may receive, and profess a faith whereof they are ignorant, yea
which they dislike and hate, so far as they know it: for so was it with the
body of your nation, the greatest part by far being mere 1 Cor. 2. 14.
natural men, and so not knowing the gospel: yea Ioh. 3. 20
evil doers, which hate the light.

Our 2. objection touching the outward worship wherein the Ch: of England
communicates, comes now to be enforced. In the clearing of which the Ministers
do (to speak on) insist only upon their stinted, and set forms of prayer: for
the justification of which Minist.
they bring sundry scriptures as Numb: 6. 2. 3. 24. Deuteronomy. 26. 3. 15. Psalm. 22.
1. and 92. Luke 11. 2. Now for our more orderly proceeding, I will reduce the
things they say to three Answ.
general heads (under which I will consider of the particulars) showing how in
all, and every of them they are mistaken.

First, in that they do confound, and make all one ordinance, Blessings,
Psalms, and Prayers.

2. In misinterpreting the scriptures they bring to prove a set, and stinted
form of words to be imposed in prayer.

3. In concluding (as they do) that if Moses, and Christ might appoint, and
impose a certain form of words to be used for prayer, that then the Bishops in
England or others, may use the same power, and appoint an other form of words
so to be used. Of these three in order.

And first, it is evident, that, howsoever some kind of blessing, and prayer
be all one, and so may be confounded, yet that solemn kind of blessing spoken
of Numb: 6. and which the PATRIARKS, and PRIESTS did use in their places, was I.
clean of an other nature. In prayer the MINISTER stands in place of the
PEOPLE, and in their name offers II.
up petitions, and thanksgiving to GOD: But in blessing, the Minister stands in
the place of God, and in his name pronounces a blessing, or mercy upon the
people. 2. Whereas this duty of prayer may be performed by one equal to
another, by an inferior to a superior, yea by a man to himself: that other of
blessing is always from the greater to the lesser: and therefore the Apostle
to the Hebrews, to show that the Preisthood of Melchi-sedek was Heb. 7. 17.
more excellent then that of Levi proves it by this, that Melchisedec blessed
Abraham; taking this for granted without all contradiction, that the less is
blessed of the greater. 3. Mr Ber: himself in this book III.
makes prayer one thing, and the blessing pronounced upon the people, page 148.
when they departed, another thing: as he also makes singing of psalms a third
distinct thing from them both: as there is cause he should.

For first, the Apostle writing to the Corinthians of the diverse I.
gifts, and administrations in the Church, speaks thus. 2 Cor. 14. 15.
I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also: I
will sing with the spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also.
Answerable unto which is that in Chapter 5. 13.
James, Is any among you afflicted? let him pray; is any merry? let him sing:
both the one, and other Apostle making singing, and praying distinct exercises.
Ad unto this, that whereas II.
in praying we are to speak only unto God, it is otherwise in singing, where
we are taught to Ephe. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.
speak unto our selves in psalms, and to teach, and admonish our selves in
Psalms, and himnes, and spiritual songs. What greater difference? In prayers
we speak only to God: in psalms to our selves mutually, or one to another.
Neither had Mr Giffard any adva^tage in the words following, where we are
taught to sing with a grace in our hearts to the Lord: for by singing with a
grace is meant such singing as ministers grace unto the hearers, contrary to
that corrupt, or rotten communication. Ephesians. 4. 29. And in this, as in all other
things, we must propound the glory, and honor of God unto our selves.

3. There are very many both of David's, and others Psalms, III.
wherein there is no title of prayer: but they are merely to be sung for
doctrine, instruction, and meditation, as Psalm. 1. 2. and many Minist: page
192. 593.
more. The Ministers write, that the most Psalms that David made, were sung
not only as meditations, and doctrines, for the instructions of the Ch: but as
prayers to God: because they are said to be sung unto the Lord: for which
purpose they insta^ce in one only, which is Psalm. 66. 2. 3.

Well, not to fall to reckoning with them (wherein they and Answ:
I should not agree: for I would except against their picked insta^ce: Ps. 66.
2. 3. which all me^ may see was not sung for prayer, nor unto the Lord, as they
mean, but for instruction, and provocation of the Church to praise God) if they
consider it, they should have proved, not that some, but that all psalms are
prayers; otherwise they may not be confounded, and made one ordinance, as by
them they are. But to come to that which is specially to be observed: even
those Psalms, whose matter is prayer, are not prayers: neither is the singing
of them, the outward ordinance, and exercise of praying, And this is the very
state of the controversy* Which that it may be understood the better, it must
be considered, that the very same matter of prayer may be used diversely, and so
formed into diverse external ordinances. It may be read, preached, heard,
written, sung, or prayed. Now who is so simple, as to say hereupon that
reading, preaching, hearing, writing, singing, praying, are all one? If a man
read David's prayer, that 2 Samuel 15 31.
the Lord would turn the counsayl of Ahitophel into foolishnes: or either read,
or sing the 6. Psalm where in his prayer, he professes, that he causes his
bed v: 6.
every night to swim, and waters his couch with tears: or Psalm. 42. that he
remembers God from the Land of Jorden etc. does that man therefore ver: 6.
pray to God, that he would turn into foolishnes the counsel of Ahitophel? or
does he profess, that he waters his couch with tears every night, and
remembers God from the Land of Jorden? or is it not evident he reads, and sings
those prayers only for instruction of himself, and others? And so we read in
the inscription of the last named psalm that it was committed to the sons of
Corah (not to pray it, which they could not do without folly) but for
instruction. And as truly may it be said, that the reading of Noah's curse, or
Schemies, is cursing, Genesis 9. 25. 2 Samuel 16. 5.
as that the reading, or singing (for singing is, but a reading in tune) of
David's prayers, is praying.

But it will here be asked, is it not then lawful for a man in the singing of
David's psalms (consisting of prayer) to lift up his heart, and to have it
affected accordingly, as he can apply the matter in them to his present state,
and occasions? yes certainly, it is both lawful, and godly: but withal it
must be remembered, that the quaestion here is not about the inward affection of
the heart, but about the outward ordinance: and 2. that a man may so lift up
his heart, and have the affection of prayer, and thanksgiving, in preaching,
hearing, writing, reading: and yet not perform the outward exercise, and
outward ordinance of prayer, of which our quaestion is.

Lastly, in psalms there is of necessity required a certain known form of
words, that two or more may sing together: according to the nature of the
ordinance, wherein many joining vocally, do make a concent or harmony. But who
will say there is such simple necessity of a set form of words for prayer?
wherein one is to utter a voice, according to the suggestions of the spirit in
his heart, and the rest to consent by silence, with saying Amen. By which it
appears how unadvisedly these ministers and others, do thus again and again
urge set forms of psalms to prove set forms of prayer.

Thus much of the first head; the second follows, in which such scriptures
are to be considered of, as are brought to prove a set, and stinted form of
words to be imposed for prayer. The principal scriptures for this purpose, and
unto which the rest may be reduced, are Numb. 6. 23. 24. Math. 6. 9. Luke 11. 2.

It is a troublesome thing that that these Ministers thus urge the letter of
the scriptures: as if the quaestion were not about their sense, and
interpretation: which they should prove to be for their stinted service: as
they should also disprove our reasons to the contrary. But herein they are
utterly silent, and think it sufficient to inculcate the words, Thus shall ye
bless the children of Israel, Numb. 6. 23. Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11. 2.
and say unto them etc: and, when you pray, say thus, Our father etc. even as
the Papists urge these words this is my body.

First then we do acknowledge these words to be in the scriptures by them
cited: 2. we hold it lawful to use those very words in our-prayers, all, or
any part of them, if we be thereunto guided by Jude, 20. Romans 8. 26. 27.
the Holy Ghost in whom we must always pray, and by whose help we must make
our requests unto God. But the quaestio^ is, whether Moses tied, and stinted
the Priests to that form of words in blessing the people: and whether Christ
tied, and stinted his disciples to that very form of words for prayer, so to be
used by the one, and other, without alteration, addition, or diminution.

And that this is not the meaning of the holy Ghost, I do manifest by these
Reasons.

First, these particles thus, or on this manner, and say, do not usually I.
in the scriptures design, or note out the form of words, but the substance of
the thing spoken of. Take an instance, or two. When the Lord sent Moses unto
Ex: 4. 22. 23.
Pharaoh King of Egypt, it was under these terms. Thou shall say to Pharaoh,
thus says the Lord, Israel my son, my first born: wherefore I say to thee,
let my son go, that he may serve me: etc. But when Moses came to deliver his
message in the next chapt: ver. 1. 2. he does not ty himself to the self same
words, nor uses them. He did not understand, thou shall say to Pharaoh, and
thus says the Lord, of the form of words, but of the substance of the thing.
The same in effect may be said of Gen: 24. 12. with 42. etc
Abraham's servant going about a wife for Isaak, who, relating to Laban the
prayer he made for direction in the buesines, does not use the same words, when
he tells him what he said in his prayer. It seems in his understanding, a man
might say thus, and thus, in prayer, though he used not the same words if he
spoke to the same purpose.

Many more scriptures might I bring, as others have done before me, to prove,
that these words, and particles, (upon which these men would reckon the words
of their prayers do no way enjoin any such stint of words, and sillables, but
only a similitude of matter, and are for direction therein. II.


It is evident in the scriptures, that neither Moses, nor the Priests, or other
holy men stinted themselves to these words. 1 Samuel 1. 17. and 2. 20. Deuteronomy. 33.
1. 2. etc. 2 Chronicles. 6. 3. 4. etc. III.


Thirdly, why do not the ministers now ty themselves to this form of words in
blessing the people: they being Isa: 66. 21. Gal: 6. 16.
the Lords Priests, and Levites, and the Ch:, the Israel of God? This blessing
was no ceremony, or shadow to be abolished, but moral, and perpetual.

4. If the Lord Jesus in directing his disciples to pray, praescribe IIII.
them a certain form of words, to be used, when he bids them pray thus, or
after this manner: and when they pray, say, then either Matthew, or Luke miss
in Christ's intendement* for they (as all may see) record not the same certain
form of words. If defense be made, that they speak of two several times,
wherein Christ gave this direction, I answer such a man, that if that be
granted, it makes against him: for Christ intended the same thing in both
places, and at both times: whereupon it follows that the use of a certain
form of words, was no part of Christ's intendement.

It is evident that these words of Christ, pray thus, and when you pray, say,
are a commandment, binding his Church to the worlds end, in all places, and at
all times: and that when you pray, say, is V.
as much as* whenever, or ^^ what time soever, you pray say: as, when they
deliver you up, Math. 10. 19. when one says I am Paul's, etc. 1 Cor. 3. 4. when
ye come together etc. Chap. 14. 26. is as much as, when or at what time soever,
they deliver you; when soever one says, I am Paul's: whenever ye come
together. And to let pass all other scriptures, in the 6 of Matthew where
Christ delivers this form, and speaks of this, and the like matters, when thou
give thine alms, v: 2. when thou prayest, v: 5. when ye fast, v: 16. that
is, whenever thou give alms, fastest, or prayest. Whereupon it follows
necessarily, that, if Christ the Lord intended a set form of words, when he
directed his disciples to pray, and bad them, when ye pray, say, then,
whenever we pray, we must use that very form of words, and none other. For
the words of Christ are not a permission, as the Ministers insinuate, but an
absolute commandment: neither is the quaestion, as they untruly lay it down,
whether it be lawful to use these very words in prayer, but whether it be
necessary, and that when, or whenever we pray: for that which Christ intends,
he commands: and what he commands, he co^maunds to be done, when, or
whenever, we pray. And these things considered, it is no absurd objection,
(as these Ministers make it) that we never read the Apostles did use this
prescript form of words in prayer. For reading of many forms of prayer they
used, and never of this, we are assured that Christ did not stint them to this
form of words, nor command them when they prayed to use them: for then they
had sinned, when they prayed, and used them not.

Christ Jesus in the same place teaches his disciples as well touching VI.
alms, and fasting, as prayer: and in particular, that v. 17.
when Mat. ^.
they fast, they should annoint their head, and wash their face. Now who is so
ignorant as to affirm, that Christ's purpose herein is to bind them to these
ceremonies? and why not as well, as to ty them to these very words? He says as
well, when thou fastest, annoint thine head, and wash thy face, as when thou
prayest, say, Our Father, etc. yea touching prayer it self, he as well directs,
and teaches his disciples what, or how to do, as what, or how to speak. He
says as well, when thou prayest, enter into the Chamber, and shut v. 6.
the door, as when thou prayest, say, Our Father: As then the purpose of Christ
in teaching his disciples, when they fast to annoint their head, and wash their
face; and when they pray, to enter into their chamber, and to shut the door, is
not to ty them to that very form of ceremony, but to advertise them to beware
of all hypocrisy, and vainglory in these things: so when he teaches them to
pray on this manner, his purpose is not to ty them to the very form of words,
but to admonish them to beware of all vayn bablings, and superstitious
repetitions: and to ask in faith of God the father who knows their wants
beforehand. v: 7. 8.

Lastly, as we are commanded to pray the Lords prayer, (as it VII.
is called) so are we to preach the word of God. But as if a man take 2 Timothy 4.
^.
the scriptures, and read them, or some part of them unto the people, or commit
the same to memory, and so utter it, this is not preaching: so neither is the
reading of this praescript, or repeating it by memory, praying. Indeed in
preaching we must ever make the scriptures our text, and groundwork, and must
speak according unto them: and may take a verse, two, or more, and use them,
even word for word, as they fit our occasion, and may be applied to our
purpose: so in praying we must make this praescript ever (as it were) the text,
and groundwork of our prayer, and must pray according unto it: and may use a
petition, two, or more, or all in, or of it, even word, for word, if so the
holy Ghost (by whose immediate teachings, and suggestions all our requaests
must be put up) do direct us, and that we can apply the same words to our
present occasions, and needs. The same which I have said touching the preaching
of the word, may be added in respect of the administration of the sacraments.

The Apostle writing to the Corinthians about the Lords supper, advertiseth
them, that 1 Cor. 11. 23.
he received of the Lord, that which he delivered unto them. Now he that looks
into the 3. Evangelists, that mention this institution, and compares either one
of them with Math. 27. 26. Mark. 14. 22. Luk 23. 19.
another, or Paul with any of them, he shall find, that the ordinance stands
not at all in the prescript form of words, wherein they all differ each from
others. It is evident that the Lord administered this supper but once: and that
in a certain form of words. And that which the Lord delivered unto his
disciples, these four penmen of the Holy Ghost delivered to the Churches. Now
the great liberty, which they use in respect of forms of words* (wherein they
differ each from others) shows, how little this institution* and ordinance
stands upon such stints: as also how far it is from the meaning of Christ, that
the Churches should be thus short tied in the use of them. The same may be said
of the ordinance of prayer, by Christ given to his Church: wherein the two
Evangelists, that mention it, do use the same liberty: as most likely would the
other two also have done, in respect of forms of words, had they made mention
of it.

But grant, that the words of Christ, pray after this manner, and when you
pray, say, are to be interpreted, as these men would have it, yet do I except
against their service book in a double respect. The first is, that the reading
of prayers upon a book has no justification from them. If it be said, that to
commit a certain form of words to the memory, and from it to utter them, and to
read the^ upon a book, are all one, I deny the consequence: and though I
approve not of the former, yet is the latter far the worse. For (besides, that
he, that reads, has an other speaking to him (as it were) even he, whose
writing he reads, and himself speaks not to God, but to the people, to whom
he reads) in the former, there is a kind of use, though not lawful of the
gift of memory: where in the other book-praying there is no use of that, or any
other gift.

Secondly, it follows not, that because the Lord Jesus might impose a set
form of words to be used for prayer, that therefore the Lord Bbs of England
may impose an other set form so to be used. The consequence is notably both
erroneous, and presumptuous. So bold indeed are they, and so high do they
advance themselves in their ordinances, and impositions. Because the Lord has
separated one day from the rest, and made it holy, therefore they will also make
other holy days: because Christ has set down canons, and constitutions for
the government of his Church, therefore they also will have their canons, and
constitutions: because he has appointed a form of administering the sacraments,
therefore they may appoint another form, yea and that such a one as alters,
and inovateth the very nature of the words of institution. For where Christ
would have the words of institution published, and preached, this is my body
which is given for you, they Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor: 11. 24.
turn this preaching into a prayer, the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, was
given for the, preserv thy body and soul into eternal life etc. repeating the
same also to every several communicant: which Christ would have pronounced
once for all, according to the nature of the ordinance. And thus they will
Ezech: 43. ^.
set their thresholds by the Lords threshouldes, and their posts by his
posts: and rather then they will want rowm for their own, they will pare of
part his, yea wholly dimolish them. If the Lord Jesus appoint one ordinance for
his Church, they will appoint an other; and surely, so they may lawfully: if
they be, as they are reputed, and protend themselves, Lord Bishops, and Arch
Bishops of the Church, and spiritual Lords, over Gods heritage.

To these things I will add a few reasons against this read stinted service,
and so conclude both the matter, and the book.

And first it cannot be an ordinance of Christ, because the Church I.
may perfectly, and entyrely worship God, without it, with all the parts of
holy and spiritual worship; as did the Apostolic Churches for many years
before any such leiturgy was devised, and imposed: and as do many Churches now:
and as appears by that which is done before and after sermons, where no such
stint is read of, what may be done at all times, and in all places, where able
and lawful ministers of the new testament, are. II.


As the administrations of the public prayers of the Church is a principal
duty of the minister, for which a special gift and Isa: 56. 7. Math: 21. ^3.
Act. 6. 4
qualification is required, so cannot the reading of a service book be that
administration, because no special, or ministerial gift is required for it.
III.


The two feet upon which the dumb ministry stands, like Naebuchad-nezzars
Image upon the feet of iron, and clay, are the book of Dan: 2.
common prayer, and of homilyes: the reading of the former (which is the right
foot) serving them for prayer, and of the other for preaching: which feet, if
they were smitten as were the other, with the stone cut without hands, the
whole Idol-preisthood would fall, and be broken a pieces, as that other image
was. And here I would entreat them, that have written, and are persuaded so
much against the reading of the Apocrypha books of the Machabies, and those
which follow them, in the congregation, especially them, which have so
sufficiently dealt against Mr Hutton, and his fellows, to turn the face of
their Arguments general against the Apocryphal service book; and they will
silence that book, as well, and as much, as the rest (like women in the Church)
as they speak.

As it were a ridiculous thing for a child, when he would ask IIII.
of his father bread, fish, or any other thing he wanted, to read it to him out
of a paper: so is it for the children of God (especially for the ministers of
the gospel in their public ministrations) to read unto God their requests,
for their own, and the Churches wants, out of a service book, wherein they are
also stinted to words and sillables: by which also they, and the people with
them, are Ezech: 4. 16.
under a greater death, then if they ate bread by weight, and drank water by
measure.

Lastly if this use of the service book be sanctified of God for the public,
and solemn prayers of the Church, and so deemed by these ministers, and others
the forward people in the kingdom, what is the reason why they so seldom, yea
or rather never, use the same, or any other of the like nature in their
familyes, but do on the contrary lay aside all books save that of the spirit,
by whose alone, and immediate direction they are taught, and according to whose
suggestio^s, they do put up their supplicatio^s unto God? Do we not all know,
that the more forward sort of proffessours would be ashamed of any such book
prayers in their families. And has the Lord sanctified that for his house
which is not holy, and good enough for their houses? will they worship God with
that worship publicly, whereof they are ashamed privately? can private men
bring forth the conceptions of the spirit without the help of any such service
book, and do the lawful ministers of the gospel stand in need of it for the
manifestatio^ of the spirit of prayer given them, for the use, and comfort of
the Church? Mal: 1. 14.
cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and voweth, and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. If these ministers then, and others,
have a better sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving, then their service book (as
their own practice both private, and public (when they have liberty,) shows
they have) and that so themselves judge, see them learn to fear him, that is a
great King, and whose name is terrible, even the Lord of hosts. To him through
Christ the only " master and teacher of his Church, be praise for ever. He,
even God the Father, for his son Christ's sake, show his mercy in all our
aberrations, and discover them unto us more, and more; keep us in, and lead us
into his truth: giving us to be faithful in that we have received, whether it
be less or more; and praeserving us against all those scandalls; wherewith the
whole world is filled,

Amen.
CHristian Reader, whilst I was printing my defense against Mr Ber: Invective,
his reply came forth in a second treatise; to which I have also given answer in
all the particulars which are of weight. And for that I have been occasioned by
the one, and other book, to handle all the points in difference, I entreat the
to compare with this my defense such other oppositions especially as respect
myself, whither in print, or writing, till more particular ^nswer be given.

The principal scriptures, brought on both sides for the present controversy,
expounded and applied.
LEviticus 20. 24. and 26. 11. 12. page 328. 329. Jeremy 23. 22. page 103. 377.
The two parables of the field, and draw net, Mat. 13. p. 116. 117. 118. 119.
120. 121. 122. Math. 18. 17. Tell the Church p. 170. 171. 172. 177. 178. etc. to
235. 238. 239. Math. 23. 1. 2. 3. page 433. 434. 435. 436. Mark. 9. 39. page
77. Ioh. 10. page 385. 386. 387. 388. Ioh. 17. 6. 9. 14. 15. 16. p. 332. 333.
334. Act. 2. 40. p. 330. 331. Act. 13. 1. 2. p. 366. 367. Act. 1^. 2. 3. 4.
199. Act. 19. 8. 9. page: 331. 332. Act. 21. 18. pa. 200. Romans 10. 14. page 380.
381. 1 Cor. 1. 11. page 190 191. 1 Cor. 5. page 158. 159. 190. 191. 239. 240.
241. 242. 1 Cor. 9. 1. 2. p. 11. 381. 382. 383. 1 Cor. 11. 18. page 252. 253. 1
Cor. 14. 1. 3. 22. 24. page 235. 236. 237. 2 Cor. 2. 6. page: 243. 206. 207.
208. 2 Cor. 6. 12. 15. 16. 17. 18. p. 322. 323. 324. 325. 326. 327. 328. 334.
335. 336. 337. Ephe. 4. 11. 12. page 159. 160. 162. 163. Phil. 1. 15. 16. page
119. 435. 1 Timothy 4. 6. page 378. Titus 1. 15. page 251. 1 Pet. 2. 9. 10. page
44. 45. Rev. 2. and 3. pa: 167. 168. 169.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL matters contained in this treatise.
A
OF Antiquity pa: 32. 33. 50. The order of the separated Churches more ancient,
then that of the Ch: of Engl: p: 40. 41. The Apostles commission peculiar. page:
147. 155. 156. Wherein ordinary Ministers succeed them. pa: 156. Neither the
Bishops of Rome, nor Engl: the Apostles successors. p: 405: 364. Authority to
be obeyed p: 18. Differe^tly in things civil, and ecclesiastical, pa: 29: 30.
B.
The Church not constituted, no^ the members admitted by Baptism. pa: 283. 284.
Baptism in Rome, and Engl: how true, and how false. p. 284 285. How Baptism is
a note of sayntship, and of the Church. p: 110 See Sacraments.
Why we reteyn the Baptism received in Rome, and Engl: and not the Ministry.
pa: 390 391. 392. 393. 394. 395. See Ordination.

C.
Christ's headship in a great measure denied in the Ch: of Engl: pa: 261. in the
administration of his prophesy, page: 262. 263. preisthood, p: 263: 264*
kingdom, p: 264: -- 268. Christ's kingdom, and the government of it spiritual
p: 38. yet visible: p: 99. 110* The kingdom of Christ to be administered as
solemnly, and publicly, as his prophecy, or preisthood. p: 228 -- 230. 350.
Of the visible, and invisible Ch* pa: 105. 106: 311 -- 313. Of the gathering
and constitution of the visible Church, p: 220:. 221. 292* 233. See profession
of faith.
Who are true members of the visible Church, pa: 105: -- 107. See saints.
The Church no mixed company, but simple, and uniform, p* 112: -- 121: 337.
Persons apparently, and visibly wicked no true members of the Church,
whatsoever in word they profess, p: 268: 269: -- 274 304: 305: -- 310. Where
also Mr Bern: plea for the^ is disproved. The constitution of the Church, what
it is: and of how great account, pa: 73: 77. 81: 82: 88: 93 94. 95. 98. The
Church superior unto the Officers, p: 200: 201: 217. and how, pa: 218: 219:
220: 223. The Officers are the Churches, and not the contrary, pa: 127: 132:
211. Churches are before Officers, p: 126. 127: 211. 221. 366. 396 397: -- 399.
Without which the Ministers cannot exist, p: 393: 294. The covenant of the L.
makes the Ch: in general pa: 283. 311 The Church of Engl: incapable of it. p:
311: 313: 319: 221 322. 338: 339: 340. Two, or three faithful people in the
covenant of the gospel (or of Abraham) though without Officers, are a Church.
p. 125 126: -- 129: 190. 423. Having interest in all the holy things of God,
within themselves, i^mediately, under Christ, pa: 131. 132 See Ordination.
The Church may censure her Officers, page: 213: -- 220. The properties of the
Church pa: 341. 342 -- 346. etc. The Church to be gathered only by the
preaching, or publishing of the gospel of salvatition received, and submitted
unto, pa: 89: 90: 91: 315: 447: 457* 458: 459. The Church of Engl: not so
gathered pa: 89. 90. 91. 459. 460. Of repraesentative Churches, and that the
new testament acknowledges none such, pa* 194: -- 198. and of repraesentations
in religion. pa: 231. 302: 303. 304. Of corruptions in the Church, p: 64: 65:
81: 82: 260. 337. how to be forborne, born, reformed. pa. 15. 64. 68: 16. No
separation from a true Church. p: 247. How a Church cease, p: 247. 248. 249.
Of the differences betwixt the reformed Churches, and us* and betwixt the^, and
the unreformed Church of Engl: and that they both cannot possibly be rightly
gathered, and constituted, page 41. 42: 46. 47. 48. 52. 301. 453. 454. The
Church of Engl: against which we deal, how to be considered, p: 319. 320. 339.
Neither the Church of Rome, nor of Engl: was ever a true Ch: as was Judah, pa:
277. 278. 299. 120. 121. Much less did they so continue in the height of
Antichrists apostasy (as did Judah in her greatest defection) but were
dischurched, 121. Mr Ber: Reasons to prove Rome for the present a true Ch:
answered, page 278. 279. 280. 281. 281. 282. 285. 286. 28^* The contrary
proved, pa: 288. 289. 290. 291: The reformation by King Edward, and Queen
Elizabeth (though much to be honored) no way comparable to that by Hezechiah,
Josiah, and Nehemiah, p: 294. 295. 296. 297. 298 299. 300. The Church Math. 18.
17. not the Jewish Synedrion 177. 178. 179. 180. 181. 182. 183. 184 185. 186.
Not the Praesbytery, or Ch:* officers, but the officers and people, in the
order set by Christ, the officers, governing, and the people governed, 186.
187. 190. 101. 192. 193. 194. 195 196. 197. 198. 199. 200. 201. 202. 203. 204.
205. 206. 207. 208. 209. 210. 211. 212. 213. 214. 222. 223. 224. 225. 226. 227.
228 229. 230. 231. 232. 223. 234. 238. 229. 240. 241. 242. 243. 244. 245. Of
popish ceremonies, and conformity unto them, p. 25. 27, 65. Of circumstances,
p. 21. 2^ 33* 37. and the manner of doing things, pa. 369* 370. The communion
in the Church most entyre. p. 233. 234. Great care to be taken that it be holy,
and lawful, page 133. 254. 255. Of Compulsion to religion, and how it hurts it,
page: 275. 298. 299. 300. 301. 302. 459. The Ch: of Engl: so (and therefore not
rightly) gathered, after the Romish Apostasy, page 292. 300* 301. 302. 303, 304.
Of Collections, and Consequences, p. 32. 45. Contentions always in the Cl^^
page: 55. 56.
E
Of the power of the Lord Jesus for excommunication, and the reformation of
abuses. pa: 32, ^3. Given to every true particular Church. page: 267. An
essential property. page: 347. 348. 349. 350. 351. Persons not under it with
out. p. 100. 101* Difference between it, and separation, p: 124.
F
Faith, and repentance not to be stinted. pa. 23. 24. All things must be done
in faith, page 18. 28. and in things doubtful suspend, pa: 19: 34. Of
Fundamental truths, and such as are necessary to salvation, pa: 31. 32. 376.
448, 449. 450. 451.
G
The difference betwixt civil, and ecclesiastical, government, and governors,
p* 135. 136* 137. 164 165. 166. 168. See Christ's kingdom.
Church Government a mere Church Service. p. 217. 137. 225.
I.
How w^e, and the Jews one, pa: 196. 211. Their extraordinary priveledges. p:
248. No separation from that Church. p. 250. Their government no pattern for
ours, p: 174. 194. 195. 196. 197. 198. Their Synagogues not as our Churches
now. pa: 427. Excommunication, or dissynagogueing amongst them no divine,
spiritual, and distinct ordinance, p: 187. 188. 189. 190. Of things
indifferent, p. 25. 27. and their unseasonable use, p. 36. 37.
K.
Keys of the kingdom of heaven, given to the whole Ch: page 146. 147. 148.
149. 150. 152 153. and in what order. 399. 400. ^^5.
L.
Laws ecclesiastical in Engl: page 20. 21. bind, and loose the conscience,
page: 264. 265. 39.
M.
Ministry left by Christ, p. 192. 356. Unlawful Ministers not to be
communicated with, what truths soever they teach, pa: 17. 79. 80. 162. 163.
Difference in the administering of doctrine, and disciplyne, pa: 165. 151. 234.
238. The Ministry of Engl: disproved, and the Reasons for it answered. page:
162. 163. 173. 174. 175. 265. 266. 346. 356. 357. 358. 359. 360. 361. 362 363.
364. 370. 377. 378. 379. 385. 386. 389. 390. True ordinary Ministers tied to a
particular assembly, pa: 393. 394. 395. True Ministers cannot be in a false
Church pa: 360. 361. Conversion of men to God no note of a true Minister, pa:
10: 11: 51. 69. 379. 380. 381. 382. 383. 384. 385. The Ministers in Engl: all
of the same constitution, pa: 351. 352. Theires, and the Romish Ministry the
same, in respect of the office, power to administer it, and most of the works.
pa: 358. 359. 411. Preaching of the gospel no part or property of the Ministry
in Engl: but a thing casual, p. 353. 354. 355. Of the calling of Ministers:
wherein the peoples right is pro ved, and Mr B: objections answered. p. 144.
145: 146. 360. 361. 365. 367. 371: -- 376. Ministers by their office not to
celebrate marriage, nor bu^y the dead, p. 438. 439. Their maintenance, p. 439.
440.
O.
Of offense p. 18. 19. 37. 39. Officers not simply necessary for the public
administratio^s in the Church, page 137. 138. 139 -- 144. 165. 166. 167. The
brethren out of office not mere private persons, p: 423. 424. Of the officers
usurpation p. 367. 368. 367. 132. 133. Ordination may in cases be performed by
such, as are no officers, pa. 400. 401. 402: -- 423. Ordination, and Baptism
vn^^tly compared, p* 413. See Baptism.

P
Praetence of peace, pa: 13. 14. 15. Of pollution by other menns ^^nns, and how
it comes, page 244. 245. 249: -- 254: 256 -- 259. Of preaching or publishing
the gospel pa: 70. 71. 72. 73. The true Church gathered by it only. See Church.
How a note of the Church, See word. The co^stitutio^ of the Church, and it
deceitfully opposed. p. 37. See Church. Of profession of faith. and
prosessours: p. 7. Profession makes not a Church page 452. The profession of
faith required by the scriptures, p: 90. 91. 270 271. 272. 274. That in Engl:
compared with it, p. 58. 91. 274. 275. 316. 450. 451. Of prophesying out of
office, p. 235: -- 238.
R
Reformation to begin at our selves, and so to pass to others, p. 24. 133.
Praeposterous reformation in Engl: made, and desired, pa: 300. 301. The people
interessed in the reformation of public scandalls in their Church, (in their
places) as well as the officers. p. 142. 143. 164. 165: -- 170. 242. 343. as
also in other Church affairs. p. 190. 200 201: -- 204. See Ordinatio^, and
Mat. 18. 17. exp.
S.
Sacraments, do not constitute a Church, but presuppose a Ch: constituted. pa:
91. 283. 284. how notes of the Church, p. 317. 342. 343. 344. not given by the
Lord to any parish*Ch: in Engl: p. 319. 320 Of their Ministration in England,
p. 91. 92. 93. 425. Of Saints, and saintship. p. 107. 108: -- 1. 1. Of
succession, see Ordination.
T
Of the Temples by Mr Bern: called their Churches p. 440. 441. 442: 443. 445.
446.
W.
How the Word of God makes, and notes out the Church, p. 89 315. 447. Of the
Worship in the Church of Engl: -- p. 424: 425. 426. 427. 429. 430. The use of
their devised leitourgy is not the true manner of worshipping God; neither can
Mr. Ber: or the Ministers justify it, pa: 425. 426. 428. 429. 466. to the end.
Errata.
page l. For contradictions, read contraries page 42. l. 20. For approbation
read exprobration 62. 15. for svvord, read head. 89. 21. read, with Zerubbabel
94. 29. for discharged, read dischurched 107. 6. for discharging read
dischurching 128. 19. for Joseph, r: Pharaoh 175. 17, for of read or 176. 27.
for quality r: quantity 195. 36. for endeavors, r: endeavourers 209. last
line. for false read true. 359. 1. for Ephesians: r: Epist: 422. 25. r: be in the
433. 16. for the, read your. 435. 9. r: would not allow 435. 16. for
praeservation, r: prevention 443. 14 r: would know the 446. 26. for converted
r: unconverted. 457. 34. for Papists r: popish. 465. 12.
The Printer to the Reader.
I Gentle Reader. Sundry other faults in the printing are escaped, in words,
letters, points; whereof some shall be amended to thy hands; the rest, in the
reading help thy self by the sense, or otherwise. Impute not the Printers
faults, to the Author: but reckon the most and greatest mine, and the least,
and smallest his.


