CROWN OF LIFE Containing the (...) betwixt the Flesh and the spirit, with
Meditations and P^^ers in time of afflictions, directing (...) live
christianly, and die blessedly ALSO A comfortable and heavenly Dialogue
between CHRIST and the SOVLE.

Written to comfort the afflicted consciences of all those that groan^^ under
the burden of t^eir sins.

REVEL. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I (...) give thee the crown
o^ life.

LONDON, Printed by E G. for John Marri^^ and are to be sold at his (...) the
(...) la^e, in Fl^et stree^

TO THE MOST Royal and renowned MAJESTY, of the highborne Princess ANNA of
DENMARK, by the grace of God, Queen of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
etc.
Imperial and incomparable MAJESTY.
THE holy Ghost teaches us godliness most forcibly, by the brevity of our
life, naming it a vapor, grass, Iam. 4.14. 1 Pet. 1.24 Esaias 4.6.
a span long; yea, it may abide any extenuation in the world; Psa. 144.4.
as to be called a bubble, a sleep, a shadow; and the holy men of God, come so
far, as that they compare it to a thought, whereof there may be unspeakable
thousands in one day, yea in an hour. Psalm. 90.9.
King David says, Behold, thou have made my days as a hand breadth, Psalm. 39.5.
and my age is nothing in respect of thee: surely every man in his best estate
is altogether vanity. And another King, My habitation is departed and removed
like a sheepheards Tent, Esaias 38.12
I have cut off like a Weauer my life. And thus it is evident, that man's life
(for its speedy motion in her short way) is as swift as a Weauers shittle, Ps.
103.16.
and passes as the wind. The swiftest thing in nature for motion (the Sun) may
stand still, Josh. 10 13
but man's life does not stay, For even when the Sun stood still a days
journey, man's life went forward. Wise Solomon* called it vain, and not
contented therewith seemed to correct himself, and called it vanity it self.
Psalm. 62 9.
But David his Father goes farther, and says, Man is lighter then vanity,
being laid in a bal^ance. We (so fond we are) increase our count of days, as
the evil servant did; Mat. 24.50*
But his Master came in a day when he looked not for him so did the foolish
Virgins. It is good not to beguile our selves in computation, but to be taught
to number our days, which is a very rare Arithmetique. If there were worlds
in possession of them that are departed, they would gladly give them us for one
day, or hour, which we so little esteem of.

Besides, death often takes violently from us the time to come, yea from them
which are most dear to God. Rachiell dyed in childe-bed, Elie brake his neck,
the Prophet was killed by a Lion, 1 Sa* 4.18. 1 King. 13.24 Job 1.18.19. 2
King. 23.29. 2 Kin. 39.6
Jobs children in their banqueting struck dead, Josiah killed by Pharaoh Necho,
Isbosheth slept at noone, but was slain before he awoke, etc. Neither has any
Liver surer charter of his life, unless he could have a lease of it, as
Ezekiah in some sort had of his by Esaiah, wherein he had very ill success.
Thus we ought to apply our hearts unto wisdom, persuading ourselves that
death is within a minute, that it will easily dispatch that, which no Law,
Prince, or Punishment could do: and if we would every day think we draw our
last breath, we should prepare us, and repair to the word, and go boldly to
the throane of grace, Heb. 4.16.
that there we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need,
knowing that it is a greater benefit to be a living Dog, Eccles. 9.4.
then a dead Lion. For while that we live, there is space for repentance, but
after death there is none. And this Christ allows as a high point of wisdom
in Marie, in that she ha^ made so fit a choice of her times, in bestowing them
on such a thing as should not be taken from her. Luc. 10.42
And here in this little Treatise, I show that those times we bestow on Gods
worship, shall not end with the number of our days, but shall have their
abiding fruit for ever, and shall last as long as God himself shall endure.
The which here I commend to your Majesty's gracious acceptance, having an eye
to the matter rather then to the manner, 1 Cor. 1.
for I would be seen in the simplicity of the Gospel, and evidence of the
spirit, that the power thereof may appear. And now unto him that is able to
keep you, that you fall not, and to present you faultlesse before the presence
of glory with joy, that is, to God only wise, our Savior, be glory, and
Majesty, and dominion, and power, both now and evermore, Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble and loyal rememb^ancer at the thro^e of grace,
Barth^l. Robertson.

To the Christian READER.
MY purpose (gentle Reader) in the frame of this Book is, by short questions
to quicken and put edge on thy understanding, and by meditations to make the
doctrine thine own: which thou must haunt frequently, by chewing the cud, and
so by the holy Ghost, applying the doctrine more particularly to thy self,
which thing no other (although never so effectual a Preacher) can do so fitly;
because each of us is most privy to his own estate. For that knowledge by
hearing and reading, whilst that it swimmeth in the brain, but is not settled
in the affections by meditation, is but a vanishing knowledge. And by prayer,
the gr^ces of God are moystened, which cannot be dry so long as thou
resortest to Christ by fervent supplications. These three thou may use in
the day time, but exercise prayer and meditation, as soon as thou awakest in
the night, joining thereunto the examination of thy heart; for then is the
soul (as it were) at home. Which in the day time had wandered abroad. And so to
read, and not to meditate, is unfruitful; to meditate, and not to read is
dangerous for errors; and to read and meditate without prayer is hurtful. For
without prayer our minds shall be driven from the things under our meditation,
to roue, and wander after other matters, whither our own corruption and Satan
is about to lead us. Wherefore (beloved Reader) I have according to the measure
of grace given unto me, conjoined them three for thy benefit, for in hearing
with others, and reading with our selves, we think we have to deal but with
men, but by prayer and meditation, which is the very life and strength of
reading, we call our selves to account before gods judgment seat for that we
read or hear, laying our hearts naked before God, accusing our selves,
confessing our sins, craving forgiuen^sse for them, acknowledging his mercy,
which we have received, and begging the continuance of the gift; and so as by
these means good ^ffections are bred, so by the same we are carried to practice
g^dlines in our selves. And the Lord bless th^e to his glory, and these to thy
use. October. 16. 1617.

The table and order of of the special heads and doctrines, with the
meditations and prayers contained in the Crown of Life.
CHAP. I. WHerein is contained, that men are not only mortal, but also
altogether ignorant, when, how, ^r in what place, God will call them out of
this present life.
1 That a Christian may learn only out of Gods Word, to live well, and die
blessedly. page 1. A meditation of the Soul, to live forever. page 2. 2 What a
Christian life is. p 2. The Christians godly prayer. p. 4. 3 What is called a
Christian death. p. 5. A pr^yer for a happy departure. p. 5 4 That every man
must die. p. 6. A meditation of the Soul, that we must but once die
temporally. page 6. A prayer unto God, that he would seriously put into our
hearts, that the time of our death is uncertain. p. 8. 5 That God has not
manifested unto us the hour of death, that we might prepare us ever to die.
page 9. A prayer for a blessed preparation. page 10. Four meditations
concerning the uncertainty of our death. First, the time, when. pa. 11. A
prayer of man's vanity. pa. 13. The second meditation, the place where. page
15. A prayer that we may joyfully meet death. page 16. The third meditation, the
state, in what. page 17. A short prayer to forsake the world. page ^8. The
fourth, the manner how. p 19 A prayer of the misery of sin, and to follow
Christ. p. ^0. A meditation of the Soul, not to delay repentance. p. 22. A
prayer when first* we fall sick. page 23.
CHAP. II. WHerein is comprehended the true and right art to die well.
And first of Christian repentance. p. 24. 1 Because we cannot be exempted
from death, we should learn that Science and Art to die happily. p. 25. The
young man's prayer. p. 27. 2 How a man by sound and true repentance, pre^are
himself to die blessedly. p. 2^. A meditation of the Soul for earnest
repentance. p. 29. Another prayer for spee^y repentance. p. 30 3 What true
repentance is in three heads. p. 31. Another prayer for repentance. p 32 4 An
instruction of the first part of true repentance. p. 33. A pray^r bewailing the
corruptition of nature. p. 34. A meditation of the Soul upon the
acknowledgement of sin. page 36. A prayer for the confession of our sins. p.
37. 5 A declaration of the second part of true repentance. p. 44. A meditation
of the Soul of faith in Christ p. 51. The sinners prayer to rely on Christ.
p. 59. 6 Declaring the third part of true repentance. p. 61. A most excellent
prayer to be used at all times. p. 62. 7 That our whole life ought, and should
be a continual repentance. A prayer for true repentance. page 73.
CHAP. III. COntaining six points belonging to a Christian life. p. 76.
The Christians prayer for a holy life and blessed death. p. 79. 1 Point,
diligently to hear the Word of God, learn to understand it, and to divide and
conveniently use and practice it. page 81. A prayer to the same effect. p. 93.
2 Point, daily to comfort himself in his Baptism. p. 96. A Meditation of thy
Baptism. page 97. A prayer for a new life and faith in Christ. p. 99. 3 Point,
often to repair to the Lord Supper with due examination. p. 102. A Meditation
of the Soul for the receiving of the holy Communion. p. 10^* A Prayer when
thou have received the holy Communion. p. 108 Another meditation of receiving
the holy Communion. p. 109 Another prayer after the receiving the holy
Communion. p. 115. 4 Wisely to behave himself in all crosses and adversities
handled in seven rules. p. 120. 1 Rule concerning the cross. page 123. A
prayer willingly to follow Christ in all crosses and afflictions. p. 126. 2
Rule of bearing the cross. page 127. A prayer for obedience in the cross of
Christ. p. 128. 3 Rule, how to bear the cross of Christ patiently. p. 129. A
meditation of the Soul concerning the comfort which Christ does give unto all
those that suffer for his sake. p. 130. A Prayer for steadfast faith in all
afflictions. p. 131. 4 Rule, concerning the cross of Christ. p. 132. 5 Rule,
concerning the cross of Christ. p. 135. A prayer when we have obtained faith
in Christ. p. 138. 6 Rule, concerning the cross of Christ, and the crosses of
this life. p. 139. A prayer for a true and lively faith in Christ. p. 143 And
last rule concerning the cross of Christ p. 145 A meditation of the cross of
Christ. p. 146 A prayer for continuance in Faith. p. 148 5 Point of a godly,
and Christian life is to abide in his calling and vocation. p. 149 A meditation
of the frailty of this Life. p. 152 6 And last, is the Souls meditation
diligently to call on Gods name, by earnest and fervent prayer. p. 158 A most
comfortable prayer to God for the gifts of the Spirit of prayer, and accepting
of our prayers. p 163
CHAP. IIII. Contains how a Christian should behave himself, when God
sends sickness upon him. p. 167
A prayer against sudden death p. 171 1 He m^st learn the true cause of his
sickn^sse, which is ^inne. p. 173 A meditati^n of the Soul, learning to know
the cause of sickness. p. 175 A comfortable prayer in time of sickness.. p.
178 2 Diligently to fe^ke for remission of sin, and to be reconciled unto
God. p. 180 The sick persons prayer, and confession. p. 181 3 To call on Gods
name himse^fe, and to cause the Saints and Congregation to do the same. p. 183
The si^k^ persons prayer and protest^tion. p. 186 4 Not to contemn the
ordinary mean^s of physic the Lord has appointed. p 188 Another pra^er for
the patient. p. 190 5 To be p^tient, if thy sickness continue. p. 192 The
sick persons prayer for patience. p. 195 6 To comfort himself in his greatest
extremity, that he is the Lords dear and adopted Son. p. 196 The sick
persons prayer for comfort in affliction. p. 200 7 To resist Satan's assaults
by a lively faith. p. 204 The sick persons prayer for consolation and victory
over all temptatious of Satan. p. 212 8 To render and submit himself to Gods
good will and pleasure, when the hour of death shall approach, and to offer up
praises and thanksgiving from thy very heart, if thou be restored to thy
former health again. p. 214 A thanksgiving after sickness. p. 216
CHAP. V. Containing a spiritual confutation of all worldly and fleshly
thoughts, which molest men when as they intend the art to die blessedly..
1 How a man should be strengthened against the fear of death. p. 220 A prayer
against the fear of death. p. 222 2 That many, for diverse causes do long for
death. p. 224 A prayer for patience in trouble. p. 227 3 If a man with a good
conscience may pray for long life. p 229 A meditation of the Soul tossed with
the troublesome waves of this life. p. 230 A prayer for health, and Gods
blessing on our labors. p. 232 4 What may move a man willingly to dye. p. 234
A prayer for obedience unto the will of God, and willingly deny himself. p.
237 5 How a man shall keep his heart constant against the pleasant course of
this World. p. 239 A prayer to be kept in the way of life. p. 242 6 By what
means a man may comfort himself when h^e sha^^ leau^ Wife, Children, Friends,
etc. in misery poverty, and distress. p. 249 The dying-mans prayer,
bequeathing all his charge into the hands of God. p 255
CHAP. VI. DEclaring how a Christian shall willingly give himself to dye,
overcome the bitterness thereof, and how in constant perseverance he may
continue to the end.
1 How the faithful Soul shall pacify the terrors of death, and willingly
wi^h joy commit himself unto Death p 260 A meditation of the soul against the
sorrows of Death p. 263 The Sickemans prayer and faith in Christ. p. 265 2 How
the faithful heart shall comf^rt himself, that he with patience shall abide
constant to the end. p. 272 A meditation of the Soul, of faith in Christ's
promises. p. 274 The Sick-mans prayer and comfort in Christ. p. 277 3 How the
Christian may be^ comforted when the streng^h of his faith begins to waver,
and doubts whether he be one of the elect to salvation, or not. p. 27^ A
meditation of the great comfort the children of God have in this world. p 282 A
prayer for steadfast faith in Christ. p. 290
CHAP. VII. Containing spiritual consolations and instructions, that either
the Soul or conscience of man (now ready to die) can object.
1 Consolations against the horrible shape of death. p. 294 A prayer against
Death. p. 296 2 Comfort against that fearesull name of death, grave,
rottenness, and corruption. p. 297 A prayer against the terrors of the grave.
p. 300 3 Comfort against the taste of Death. p 301 A prayer for the me^cies of
Christ. page 306 4 Consolations against groaning and sighing at the last agony
of Death. p. 307 A prayer to Christ to keep us from a troublesome death. p.
309 5 Heavenly and experimental physic against the bitterness and sting of
death. p. 310 A prayer of the Christians steadfast hope of heaven. p. 316
CHAP. VIII. COmprehending remar^able sentences of Scripture, with some earnest
prayers to be powered out for them that are in present peril of death, as
also, how they should behave themselves that are present with the sick person.
1 Containing comfortable speeches and sentences of holy Scripture, which may
be used to the sick, or those in peril of Death. p. 319 A meditation of the
Soul. 336 A prayer for a diligent and steadfast faith in Gods word. 339 2 Some
short and compendious ayds the Sicke-man may have in his mouth at the very
time of death. p. 340 3 What should be their duties which stand by the sick
or dead person, who have already joined their Prayers with him. page 343 A
prayer for those that are about the party departed. 345
CHAP. IX. DEclaring where the immortal Soul goes after death, the
r^surrection of the body, the joys of eternal Li^e, and contrariwise, the
pains which the Ungodly shall have in their destruction.
1 Whether the godly Soul, and in what estate it is after death. page 348 A
meditation of the souls departure and blessedness after death. page 352 The
Christians most earnest prayer to leave this World, and to be with Christ his
Savior. p. 355 2 If the blessed soul long for the resurrection of the body,
that they may be united and glorified both together. p. 358 A prayer of the
faithful Soul for her dissolution. p. 362 3 Of the resurrection from the
dead. p. 365 A meditation of the Soul on the resurrection. p 367 4 Of eternal
Life, and everlasting blessedness. p. 372 A prayer for the joys of heaven.
page 385 5 A consideration of the pains of Hell, and condemnation of the
Ungodly. page 384 A prayer for a safe deliverance from the pains of Hell, and
to live with Christ for ever. page 290 The Souls Request, or a Dialogue
betwixt Christ and the Soul. Fol. 1. Sig. A.
AN ADMONITION to the Christian Reader, declaring the difference betwixt the
reprobate and true Christian in their life and death; and likewise of the use
and benefit of this Book.
IT is true (dear Brother) that all the word of God compriseth naught else,
but that we should live as his children, according unto his word, and dye
Christ's brethren, and faithful servants. Now therefore I have compiled the most
spiritual doctrine, first, of a christian life; and secondly* of a blessed
death.

Of the which, the man that saw God had his greatest regard* Lord* says he,
Psalm. 90.12.
teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. So did
also another, Eccles. 7.3^
What^oeuer thou take in hand, r^m^mber thy end, and thou shall n^uer do
amiss. For what is a christian life, but a continual meditation on Gods
favor, a life in true repentance* exercised in faith, keeping of a good
conscience, and so it cannot go astray; and that a man should never suffer
himself to be in such evil state, wherein he might not be blessed, yea, and
happily dye. What is it then to dye blessedly? Even this, when a Christian not
only consid^reth that he is mortal, and never free from death, but also is
resolved that he must depart hence, and that he shall be inheritour of
everlasting salvation. This is that high Science and Art which Moses speake^h
of, which is not elsewhere to be had but in Gods word* As if he should have
said, Teach us to rem^mber that we shall dye, to the end we may be wise, that
by thy holy Spirit, and grace, and practice of thy holy word, we may so live
that we may have life everlasting.

This holy Art to dye aright was never known by Philosophers, and as yet is
hid from all those that know not Jesus Christ the Redeemer. Indeed Cicero
gessed at it, Orat. pro. Publ. Quin.
where he says, Vita turpis ne morti quid^m ho^estae locum relinquit; that
is, An honest life goes before an honorable death. Yet there is an
vnspeakeab^e difference, Inter v^^am honestam and Christianam, mortem honest^m
and Christianam seue salu^arem; that is, Between an honorable life and a
Christian life, between an honorable death and a Christian and saving death.
Augustus Caesar desired every day (...), to wit, that he might dye well, but
he understood not by what means, only he hunted for name, fame, and renown:
and even so it was with the rest of the Ethickes and Heathens, they knew that
they should dye, but never apprehended the christian virtues faith, and ^ope:
but only infirmity, corruption, and distress, and so departed, as he
speaks of Tur^us, Virg. Aen.
Vitaque cum g^mi^u fugit indignata sub vmbras.

And therefore there is nothing contained in their records but misery and
complaint, of the shortness of life, as that, Totum quod est homo, miseria:
that is, All that a man is, is nothing but wretchedness.

King Xerxes beholding his army, and seeing the number, and considering their
man-hoode and courage, wept bitterly, that after an hundred years, there
should none of them be l^ft alive. And great Aristotle, Omnium ^erribilium
terribilissimum est mors. That death of all terrible and dreadful things, was
the most terrible and powerful. Sundry of them have sought and busied
themselves for a remedy against the fear and terror of death, but could not
come farther, then to make it familier unto them ( as it is indeed) that they
might meet it when it approached; As Seneca says, De not. quaest.
Effice mortem tibi cogitatione familiarem, vt, si ita sors tulerit poss^s
ill^^buiam ire: that is, Make thy self a^quainted with death, that when it
comes thou may meat it. Hence is it that the Aegipt^^ns custom was in
banqueting and greatest mirth, to cause the image of death to be borne, with
this inscription, In hun^ intuens, Herod. in enter.
bibe and fis animo hilari, post mortem enim talis e^is: that is, Lo here,
drink and be^ glad, and remember always that death shall make thee like this
picture. And this was all the^ preparation to a foreseen death.

And so Agag the King of the Amalekites, when Samuel was to cut him in pieces,
said, 1 Samuel 15.32.
truly the bitterness of death is past, as if he would say, I must once dye,
rather now then another time, it must once be done, and then it is gone.

The secure Soul, at her last time grudgeth and fretteth both against God and
Heaven, for after her utmost endeauours and travel, she can come no farther
then this, Ego tenta^us rebus omnibus nihil inuenio in quo quiescam. After all
my manifold trials and searches, I cannot find any one thing whereon to rest
and repose my self. And when she perceaueth the certainty of death, she
breaks out into these words, O te dementem and oblitum fragilitatis t^ae, Sen.
de ^^tur. quaest.
si nunc timeas mortem cum to^at. Fool have thou not remembered thy weakness,
that now thou art afraid of death when it thundr^th.

And as concerning eternal life, Plato, Cicero, and others vex and grieve
themselves: for they acknowledge that man's Soul is immortal, but yet never
dreamed of the resurrection of the body. Yea, and Cicero ioyeth in this, that
once he should come to the assembly of Souls, but whither, he did not know. O
praeclarum diem, Cic. de sen.
^^m ad illum animarum concilium coetumque propr^ficiscar, and cum e^ hac turba
and colluuione de^edam. That is, O happy day, in the which I shall take my way
to the assembly and convent of Souls, and shall depart from this vile and
mischeeuous world. And seeing they lacked faith, the earnest of the spirit, and
hope and constant confidence in God, they held ^hemselues up with foolish
magnanimity, full of distrust and doubt. For that excell^nt Roman Orator
could speak of the immortality of the Soul, but farther light and knowledge
had he not, Quod si hic erro quod hominum animas immortales esse credo,
libenter erro, Cic. de s^n.
non mihi hunc errorem quo delector dum viuo ex torqueri volo. That is, If in
this point Ierre, because I believe the immortality of the Soul, I am an
heretic with all my heart, the which ^rroneous opinion so long as I breathe no
man shall be able to root out of mine heart, or constrain me to forsake.

And farther, did no Ethicke come, neither had more prepaparation and
resolution against deaths approaching, even as the Hypocrites and Infidels in
these our days, which have no faith in Jesus Christ our Redeemer: And
therefore all these wicked and profane creatures, must understand that their
condemnation shall be the greater in the last day, then those Ethick
Philosophers: for they have a greater occasion, and more ample matter, by the
light which now shines abroad by the Gospel; yet they will not rectify their
lives by true repentance conformable thereto. And therefore they have their
noluerunt, for so says Christ, Matthew. 10.14.15.
whosouer shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of
that house, or that city shake off the dust of your feet.

Truly I say unto you, it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom and
Gomorrha in the day of iudgdement, then for that City. He that has ears to
hear let him hear. Reu 2.11.
And therefore above all things, we must consider of the difference between a
Christian man's life and conversation, having faith and repentance, and the life
of the Infidel, Hypocrite, and Ungodly; to the end we may feel and sensibly
apprehend Gods eternal and everlasting mercy bestowed upon us Christians: that
we may (I say) seriously and earnestly meditate night and day upon the
goodness and favor of our God in this specialty showed unto us. Psalm. 1.


As for the first, the Hypocrite has no familiarity with God, nor sight of
heaven: but uses the precious gifts of God after the same manner, as does the
swine the akornes under the tree, being never mindful that there is a God i^
heaven, nor giving him thanks for his temporal food, health, welfare and
felicity, much less meditating upon that eternal food, but he takes his
pleasure and fleshlydelight, remaining on the earth: yea, true it is, that
unreasonable beasts, have a better life then such a reasonable creature,
although he be created according to Gods similitude.

But contrarily, the Christian, faithful and hopeful, acknowledges God his
Creator, rejoices in him, uses all his gifts with thankfulness, loves God
which has done all things so wisely and wonderously well, uses himself in
those both night and day comes to the Lord his God and brayeth after eternal
life.

Secondly, the Infidel (it may be) has heard that God will punish an ungodly
and wicked life, with a wretched and miserable death. Yet never gives place to
penitency and contrition vn^till death lives still in sin, yet can say with
the Pharisie, I thank thee, O my God, I am not like the man, Luke 18.1^.
an extortioner, unjust, adulterer, or even as this Publican: and therefore (
it may be) concludes he shall have eternal happiness, because of his outward
political demeanor, although he has not faith in Christ, the art to die
aright, neither hearty repentance, nor any testimony of redemption, no sweet
hope that God will accept of him, much less is he exercised in the
preservation of faith, and a good conscience to the end. 1 Timothy 1. 19.


The Hypocrite while he is in good temporary estate will brag of
Chris^ianitie, will be a teacher of others to learn patience under the
cross, will boast of his perseverance in time of adversity, but when one deep
calls another, Psalm. 42.7.
by the noise of the water-sp^uts, and all the waves and floud^ of God are gone
over him; then falls all his courage, then is heaven out of his way, and the
earth is sunk under him, there is no attention to comfort, but he begins to
sing Gedeons song with impatiency, Judge. 6.13.
Ah my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this come upon us.

But the faithful and Christian heart makes account, that not by prosperity
and wealth, but by much adversity and many crosses, Act. 14.22.
he must enter into the Kingdom of heaven: and therefore if it be well with him,
he thanketh God for his bounty toward him, is no way secure, but serves the
Lord in fear, and rejoices in trembling. Psalm. 2.11.
And when as it is otherwise with him, then he says with holy Job, shall we
receive good at the hand of God, an^ not receive evil? and lays steadfast
hold on the cross, and has David's melody in his mouth: My soule^ waits o^
the Lord, Psalm* 130. 6.7.
more than the morning watch watches for the morning.

I will wait on the Lord, for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is great
redemption. And if it shall be very heavy, yet notwithstanding he will say
with faithful Paul, 1 Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful, and will not suffer me to be tempted above that I am able,
but will even give the issue with the tentation, that I may be able to bear
it. And if flesh and blood be timorous, and would not willingly undergo the
cross, yet he believes, and is persuaded that neither life nor death, Romans
8.38.39.
etc. nor any other creature shall be^ able to separate him from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord; for to him that fears God, all things
work together for the b^st.

Fourthly, the children of this world remembering that death shall separate them
from their goods, honors, wives, children, lands and possessions, and that
they shall go naked out of this world cry out, O death, how bitter is thy
remembran^e to a man that lives at rest in his possessions, Eccl. 41.1.
unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has prosperity in all
things, and say with the Emperor S^uerus, I have been great, and now it
profits nothing: but contrarily, the Christian Soul does choose the good
part, which shall not be taken away from it, and every minute i^ ready to let
slip these transitory things, and says with that holy King, Lord lift up the
light of thy countenance upon me, thou have given me more joy of heart, Psalm. 4
6.7.
then they have had when their wheat and wine did abound

The unprepared Hip^cr^te when he falls ficke, bethinkes him of nothing else
than how his sickness came to him, what vn^holes^me food he had eat, by what
means he got this drunken surfeit, Mat. 10.30
where he catched that cold, or too much heat, is unquiet and impati^nt that
such mischance should betide him. But the faithful man knows that all the
hairs of his head are numbered, and that the precious gift of his health cannot
be taken away without the Lords special pleasure, and therefore imputes all
unto Sin, My own wickedness has corrected me, Ierem. 2.19
and my turnings back have reproved me. I know therefore and behold it, that
it is an evil thing, and bitter, that I have forsaken the Lord my God, and
that his fear was not in me. And he begins with Paul to say: F^r this
cause am I weak and sick, 1. Cor. 11.30.31.32.
for if I would judge my self, I should not be judged of thee: but when I am
judged of thee, I am chastised of the Lord, because I should not be condemned
with the world; whereby he is taught repentance, and amendment of Life. The
Wicked and Infidells do never work upon their Souls until they be sick;
then first begin they to be holy, and before that time, all their days they
have been enemies to the Word and Ministry. But now must the Preacher be
sent for, and with sugared speeches must be entreated for consolation, etc. But
the faithful Christian is every minute in preparation to a blessed death, and
never suffers himself to fall into that condition and behauior of life
wherein he would not die, and therefore can say with constant magnanimity, Come
Lord Jesus my Joy and Comforter, every hour I attend thee, come when thou
^i't, I am ready. And when never so little sickness ouertakes him, then says
he (with mirth of heart) Now let Thou thie Servant depart in peace. 2. Luke
The Infidel and Reprobate, whenas he lacks counsel and help in sicknsse,
has recourse to Satan, Witches, and to unlawful means, and says most
desperately, If God will not help, then help Devil. But the Christian
believer knows, that the Lord has forbidden all such inconvenient means,
and understands Satan's policy and craft, Exodus 20.3
that it is not for his good, but that his soul should separate it self from
the true SAVIOVR; Yea, 1 Samuel 28.8
he is assured it is an hundred times better to die in constant invocation on
Gods name, then to live under protection of Satan: and therefore uses such
means as the Lord has appointed, he will not tempt the Lord his God, he will
not seek after the ministry of such as God has not promised a blessing
unto, but will say, Mat. 8.2.
Here am I Lord Jesus, let it be unto me according to thy will, if thou will
thou can make me clean, but, Psalm. 40.8.
if not, Lo here I am, thy will be done, I desire to do thy good will, O God,
yea, thy law is within my heart. And to be short, the children of this world
never have memory on Gods word, ( for they have not learned) and cannot
comfort themselves by their baptism, nor that excellent Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, but cause some scurrilous History and false fable to be read unto them,
with such foolishness, whereby they may dispossess the thoughts of death, and
quiet their hearts; but the faithful one is acquainted and exercised in gods
word, divides that word of truth, puts a difference betwixt Law and Gospel,
rejoices in the covenant of mercy in his baptism, seeks comfort in the
other Sacrament, wherewith he was fed and refreshed, and so obtains new trust
and joy from time to time, momentanie he esteems, but as they are he^
counts noth^ng of any i^y or pleasure, but that which is in Christ his
red^emer, that heavenly life, and is glad of that blessed hour. S^condly, how
different is their acceptance and entertainment of death: for the wicked
seeing it by evident experience, that he must dye as others do, complains of
man's great misery, and of the shortness of this sweet and pleasant life; but
makes not preparation by repentance thereunto, but fretteth against God,
inueigheth against his justice, because man has but a short time given him to
live.

Now the true Christian touched with the daily examples of humane infirmity
and corruption, groaneth because of that our first fall, lamenteth for his
sins and wickedness, for the which the divine punishment cease not upon
us, Lam. 3.22.23.24.41.5 6.
lifts up his heart with his hands unto God in the Heavens, who hears his
voice, and hides not his ear at his breathing and cry, 57.
who draws near in the day that he calls upon him, and say^h, fear not,
the Lord, I say, who pleads the cause of his Soul, who redeemeth his life,
and will say, I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me. Mich. 7.9.
He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteo^snesse, O
Lord thou art wise, and thy word is truth. Yea, Psalm. 119.
he attributes the true honor unto God, for he does all things justly and
well, and so prepares himself every hour of the day to a blessed departure.
Again, the Hypocrite when his heart meditateth on death, is afraid for the
terrible visage and countenance thereof; for flesh and blood can do no less,
for death is our enemy, and kills us all, but the hopeful christian opens
the eyes of faith, looks upon death not according to the Law, but according
to the Gospel, comforts him in his Lord Jesus Christ, Ioh. 11.11.
who has changed the bitterness of death, and made it a sweet sleep, and
believes constantly that he shall not dye, but quietly rest, vnthe Lord shall
awake him up by the shout of the Arch-angell, and trumpet of God.

The wretched Hypocrite when he considers how that death shall after a most
fearful manner apprehend him, and make him an ill fau^ured Corpse, which must
be hidden from the eyes, and cast in the bosom of the cold Earth: Then
begins he to sorrow and weep, his courage is gone, and can do no more
than king X^rxes, who hearing mention made of Earth, did say, Missahaec
faciamus, Hie. in polyh.
neque tristiis rerum mentionem faciamus, cum iucunda in manibus habeamus: Away
with these things, for they are sorrowful, and let us to our iollitie and
mirth. But the religious Christian proceeds, plus vltra, a great way further,
bidds fear, adue; looks through the terror of death, and corruption of the
grave; he passes not for the ho^rible dissolution of his body, neither that
he shall be corrupt, and rot in the earth; for he sees a great deal further,
how in the last day he shall come forth beautiful, and pleasant, and be made
like the glorious body of his Savior Ie^us Christ. Besides this, the Wicked
and Profane bethinkes him self on his death, and considers that once he
must die, and that he cannot choose: and here h^s wits fail him, and in this
ex^gent and strait, he knows not whether to turn him, to what way he should
betake him, only he hoysteth up courage, plucketh up a good heart, that ^f it
were once done, and that debt paid ^o nature, then were it over. But the godly
S^ule lifteneth not to temporary magnanimity, ne^ither relieth on the fl^shly
courage and arm, but upon the consolation of the holy spirit, which dwells
in him, which he has tasted by true faith, Phil. 4.7.
which passes all understanding, which also will keep his heart and mind though
Jesus Christ to eternal Life.

Besides, the Infidel when he feels death coming, is at his wits end, has
no counsel, that is, no faith, no hope, yea no certain word to anchor upon, no
confidence to rest on how he may depart from hence, but is r^plenished with
fear and raging tumult within himself; never casts his eyes on the great
Almighty God. But on the contrary, the righteous Christian has fraught
himself with faith and hope, Romans 8.73.
and with unspeakable groans, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the
redempt^on of our bo^ies, to the which he ioineth the true word of God, which
cannot deceive, gives it place and room in his heart, and says powerfully
and gladly, Ioh. 8.12.
Thou Lord Jesus art the light of the world; he that follows Thee, and
keeps thy Word, shall not walk in darkness, but have the light of Life.

Now again, the Wicked, dissembling, and counterfeit Christian, when he is
under the power of death complains that he is forsaken, all his friends,
kinsmen, and brethren, do stand from him, and none will help. But the spark
of Faith in the religious man's heart, says, Lord, whom have I in heaven, but
Thee; Ps. 73.25.26.
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides Thee, although my flesh and
my heart fail, God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever: for
he knows that God gives only help from ^rouble; Ps. 60.11.
for vain is the help of Man. Through God I shall do valiantly, for he it is
that shall tread down my enemies; for he builds and God only, and that if
he be with him, nothing can be against him for he has the holy Trinity
dwelling in his heart, and many holy Angels at his sick bed attending for
his Soul, and abiding to carry it into Abraham's b^s^me.

Now when the Infidel does hear that his Soul is immortal, and that after
this life there shall be another, wherein the blessed of the Father inherit the
Kingdom prepared for them from the foundation of the world, Mat. 25.34.
and that the wicked shall go into everlasting punishment, then he trembles
and quaketh, and would wish it were vn^rue, and desires that he might never
rise again: for his misbeleeuing heart does instruct him, that if it be so, he
is eternally ^ondemned, and there^fore he wishes that he had never been
borne. But the true child of God reioyc^th from his very heart, that there is
another life prepared for him, Romans 5.9.
and he shall be saved from the wrath to come, and therefore sighs to be
dissolved, Phil. 1.2 3.
and to be with Christ, which is far better; and that this wretched life might
be shortly cut off, that the eternal and everlasting might begin: Romans 5.15.
for his expectation is constant and sure, whereby he is assured of a better
life to come, unto the which he was redeemeed.

By such and sundry more A^titheses and oppositions may be easily seen the
difference betwixt both the life and death of the faithful and Infidel: and
therefore we should daily and hourly consider, and never be contented until
then, that we have Jesus Christ our Redeemer and Savior dwelling in us, by a
true and lively faith, accounting him our greatest treasure and goods, placing
all our joy and comfort in him; and that with diligent prayer, and constant
meditation by faith and power of the holy spirit, we may ever love that ^ternal
life, above this temporal, be enemies to sin from our hearts, take pleasure
in righteousness, learn to know a^ight the misery of this sinful life,
neglect the pomp and train of this world, have inward desire and constant
purpose after the heavenly mansions, love the Lord Jesus Christ with all our
s^^lesmind and strength, and daily thirst for his second coming, perseuering
in a Christian calling, and prepared at all times to make a happy departure
from this vale of misery.

And this is that heavenly preparation to a blessed death, by the which we are
distinguished and separated from the misbeleeuing Ethicke, Turk and Jew, and
from the disobydient hypocrite and children of this world; of the which there
are a great number alas on whom the Sun of righteousness has not shined, but
sit as yet in darkness, and in the shade of death, have neither heard, nor yet
can speak of Christ, indeed some might have heard, but with the deaf adder
they shut their ears at the voice of the Inchanter. Others do hear sermons,
but yet did never know Christ for their Savior and Redeemer, because the Word
was not mixed with faith in the heare^s, such are good lip-Christians, but their
hearts are far from him, they boast of faith, but declare it not by their
works, and talk of eternal life: but will not learn the way to come thither.

And if thou would ( gentle Reader) be taught aright, then must thou often
read diligently, hear, and meditate upon God^ Word, exercise thy self daily
in it, and live according thereunto; for now there is ( praised be God) the
holy Scriptures in every man's hand, and sundry and diverse comfortable and holy
books out of that pure Fountain which holy Fathers have penned, by the which
thou may be taught profitable doctrine, lively faith, and holy admonitions
for a Christian life and blessed death, of the which Writers, some are some
what obscure for the Simple-ones, and full of disputations and logical
discourses. And to ease thee of them I have here set down a plain Treatise
for thy instruction, after my long experience and visitation of the sick,
distr^ssed, and ^ss^ulted by S^tan, trial of crosses in adversities, and sense
of the sting of death. Whereby being long exercised of my own proof, I do now
publish unto thee for the benefit of gods Church, whereunto I was much
importuned by many godly and religious persons, I was much helped in this
Work, by that reverend Father Martinus Mollerus, Preacher at Gorli^z in
Silesia; whose worthy works are well known.
entreating me to set forth these comfortable rules, having had so long
trial. Which I did still intend, but was hitherto hindered ( S^than doubtless
envying the benefit and publication thereof) and therefore I the most unworthy
of all Christ's servants, do rejoice only in Gods mercy, and say with Paul,
Cor. 15.10.
No^ I, but the grace of God which was with me, has caused these to come to
light, trusting it shall tend to the praise and glory of God, benefit and
weal of his Church, and to be a spur to every private man unto a Christian
life and holy death: for it is the meaner and weaker sort that it is written,
to their ^dification and salvation. For it often happens, that sundry in a
strange Country cannot have the use of Preachers, neither yet in warfare, nor
sailing, nor yet at home in the time of plague and pestilence can they have
frequent society with the men of God, to be taught by them. And there are men
where no plantation of the G^spel is, sighing and gro^ning for the word of
grace, comfort, and admonition. In these and the like defects, this little
Manuell can supply the place of a Friend, to speak unto them that we be not
hindered in our Christian course, but constantly go foward, that through the
mercy of God we may make a blessed departure, and glad goodnight from this
world; which our good and gracious God g^aunt unto us, for his own mer^^e^
sake, when it shall please him to translate us from this Hadradrimmo^ and vale
of misery. Amen.

THE CROWN OF LIFE.
CHAP. I. Wherein is contained, that men are not only mortal, but also
altogether ignorant, when, how, or in what place, God will call them out of
this present life.
Flesh.
I PRAY YOU show me the contents of the whole Bible, and su^me of all the
Sermons preached by the holy men of God.

Spirit.
That is, to learn to live Christianly, Psalm. 90.12 Eccl. 12.1.
and die blessedly.

A meditation of the soul to live for ever.
O Lord my God, help me in such ways to live in this world, that I may
elsewhere live with thee eternally; Reu. 2. and 3
for what have I in this present world but thee? or what in the heavens but
thee? Psalm. 73.25.28.
It is good for me to cleave unto thee.

Flesh.
What call you a Christian life?

Spirit.
This is a Christian life, that a man should rightly know, first, the Lord his
God, Ier. 9. Psalm. 79. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 28.19 Psalm. 67. Ioh. 17. Ioh.
1.14. Ezekiel. 18.
and secondly himself: first (I say) the only one God in essence or being,
distinct in three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that the middle one
of these three, which is the Son, was sent of God into the world, and there
has taken our humane nature upon himself, to become our Redeemer and Savior*
thereto man must learn to know himself aright, that is, that we are poor,
miserable, and vile sinners in Gods sight, and shall be eternally condemned,
unless we be converted, and lay hold by a steadfast faith on this Son of God,
become new creatures, and continue in obedience to God, and love to our
neighbors, even to our last end.

The Christians godly Prayer.
O thou only one, eternal, almighty God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
threefold in persons, but one in substance, power, and glory, I humbly entreat
thee, teach me to know thee, and my self truly, that I may more and more
increase and grow daily in this knowledge, to the end that I may so address my
short and wretched life here on earth, that it may redound to thy praise and
fear, to the good and benefit of my neighbor, and by no means be hurtful to
my self, always walking as in thy presence, in humility and holiness. Amen.

Flesh.
What call you a happy or blessed death?

Spirit.
To end and conclude the days of this life in true faith, Luke 2. Philip. 1.
recommending thy soul to the Lord Jesus, with an hearty desire and longing
for a joyful sleeping from this world in patience to be with the Lord. 1 Timothy
4.


A prayer for a happy departure.
Lord Jesus Christ, thou only know my time and hour, Matt. 6. Act. 7.
I request thee from the bottom of my heart, to vouchsafe upon me an happy
departure from hence, and to preserve my soul from all anguish and annoyance,
that so I may rest with thee eternally. Amen.

Flesh.
Shall all mankind then die?

Spirit.
Heb. 9.27.
Yes, it is appointed all shall die, and after this life be summoned to their
appearance for judgment.

A meditation of the soul, that we shall but once die temporally.
Hear then (O my soul) if death shall go over all, Eccl.
thou shall not escape: to day this man, to morrow, or soon, must thou. It is
not said, nor determined that thou should die twice, but once. If that it
were permitted we should twice die, then if one had not well and godly
disposed himself the first time he died, he might reform himself at the
second essay. Oh but not so: if thou die il once from this world, thou shall be
carried to everlasting anguish and woe.

A prayer to God that he would seriously put into our hearts that the time of
our death is uncertain.
O Lord my God instruct me, that I may deeply and seriously consider I must
depart, and that my life has sure and limited bounds, and I must be gathered
to my fathers, Genesis 25. Gen 49. Number. 20. Psalm. 39.5.
for behold my days are but an handbreadth in respect of thee, and my age is
nothing in regard of thee: surely every man in his best estate is altogether
vanity, for what man lives and shall not see death? Psalm. 90.48.
shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? My God, Psalm 90.12
teach me so to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom,
whereby I may learn the manner and way to die the death of the righteous, and
blessed in the Lord my God, to whom be rendered all thanks, power and glory.
Amen.

Flesh.
Has not God manifested unto us the hour of death, that we conveniently
might prepare us thereunto?

Spirit.
There are four things (my soul) most uncertain concerning death, which
every Christian daily and hourly should earnestly meditate upon, mortis
tempus, locus, status, modus; for not only is the hour and point of death hid
from us, but also we do not know in what place, by what means, and
occasions, by what sickness or manner, death shall separate us from hence.

A prayer for a blessed departure.
O holy and wise God, thy thoughts are not as our thoughts, Isa. 55.8.
neither our ways as thy ways, Verse. 9.
but as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are thy ways higher than our
ways, and thy thoughts than our thoughts, grant that in a full purpose of
cleanness of heart, I may walk here before thy face, and depart in blessed
time of death, with sure confidence, that nothing can betide me, Rom 8.
but what shall be good and profitable unto me. Grant this, good Father, for
the gracious mediation of thy Son Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior.
Amen.

Flesh.
Seeing then these four things are of so great moment, how may I rightly and
duly consider of them?

Spirit.
After this manner, The time.
for the first: Thou do not know (dear soul) in what day, month, or
year, God will ^all thee from this world, whether it shall happen in the day,
or in the night, even or morn. God might easily have revealed the same, Eccl.
38.
if it had been his heavenly will, but it is of his divine providence and
great goodness, that he has not so done.

Meditation on the sirst, the time.
Behold (my soul) we wretched creatures are so corrupt by sin, and are so
inamoured with this world, that if the day of our death were revealed unto us,
never should we think on God, fear him, or call vp^n his name, never be
stirred up to repentance, until at the very instant time it were appointed we
should die; then would man first apply himself to learn repentance, but come
short thereof, therefore it is not hurtful, but very gainful and necessary,
that we should be ignorant of the hour of our death.

A prayer of man's vanity.
O my God, make me consider how altogether man is vanity, Psalm. 39.5.
who passes so swiftly away, truly man borne of a woman lives but a short
time, and that full of unquietness, he comes forth like a flower, and is c^t
down like the grass; he slieth also as a shadow, and continues not: his
days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have
appointed him bounds, which he cannot pass. And now, my God, thou who of thy
great wisdom have hid from me the day of the dissolution of this my
tabernacle of clay, 1 Cor. 5.1.
help me, that I never let pass any time without true repentance, and seeing
thou have hid from me the time of my departure, vouchsafe on me thy mercy and
grace, that I may so bestow my whole life, that night and day, Psalm. 6.
yea every hour and twinkling of an eye, I may be in a Christian preparation
and readiness to die the death of the godly, through Jesus Christ my Lord and
Savior. Amen.

Meditation on the second, the place.
For the second, The place.
thou know not in what place thou shall end thy days, whether in thine own
house, or in a strangers, in thy bed, or in the field. The sand-glasse of our
life continually runs out, and no man knows, no man is certified when it
has done running: so death is ever present, and follows us at our heels, and
ouertaketh takes us wheresoever it finds us; it attends us every where,
for as the lightning comes out of the East, Mat. 24.27
and shines even unto the West, so shall also the coming of the Son of man
be. If thou therefore be a faithful and wise servant, Luke 12.42.
in every hour thou would expect it, that when thy Lord comes, he may
find thee so doing.

Prayer that we may ioifully meet death.
O my God, make me ever and continually understand, that I am a poor mortal
creature, who can in no place preserve my self from death, seeing it
continually waits in all places, and lurketh for me, make me meet it evermore
circumspectly, with a ioifull and glad heart. Grant this (most merciful God)
for thy dear Son Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Meditation upon the third, thy state or behavior.
As for the third, Thy state what.
thou can not tell (O my soul) in what state or behavior the Lord thy God
shall find thee, whether sleeping or awake, merry or sad, in worldly or
spiritual exercise, quiet or angry, or howsoever otherwise distempered: give
therefore diligent heed (my soul) that thou never be in such case, wherein
willingly thou would not die, for death never loses opportunity, neither
is neglectful to take advantage, and thou know well what covenant thou have
with death, Eccl. 14.
yea moreover (dear soul) as the Lord shall find thee, so will he judge
thee hereafter.

A short prayer to forsake the world.
Keep me (Lord Jesus) from drowsines, idleness, and slumbering in sin, that I
live not inconsiderately, Luke 19.
as the ungodly, which have no hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
but that at every occasion and minute, I may be ready to take my leave of
this world, and reign with thee my Lord and Savior eternally in the world to
come. Amen.

Meditation of the fourth, the manner.
Concerning the fourth, thou art ignorant (dear soul) by what kind of
disease the Lord will call thee from hence, whether it shall happen by
pestilence, malady in the head, ague, etc. by shipwreck or fire, and it may
be God has appointed thee to be overtaken by robbers, wild beasts, or some
such casualtie, yea (O soul) many never intend repentance in all the time and
space they have health and prosperity, until some languishment and sickness
seize upon them: but who knows whether at any time he shall have sickness
and leisure together? Have we not daily examples how many decease by palsy,
by sword, and sudden death, and through sundry other maladies of body, and
before they were ever sick or diseased, or that God suffered them to have the
benefit of their bed and rest?

A prayer to forsake the world, and follow Christ.
O God, how foolish are we miserable and fond creatures? how small heed and
attention give we to daily occurrences? The foul is an unreasonable creature,
yet when it sees another to be killed beside it, she presently swingeth and
flies away, and when it spieth a man to bend his bow and aim at it, there is
no longer staying, but quickly conueieth it self thither, where it may be
secure and safe: Even so (O soul) death breaks in all places many men's
hearts, and they do fall on every side; then fear (O soul) and fly from
sin to righteousness, from hell to heaven, from this damnable and deceitful
world, to Jesus Christ, that then thou may boldly say, Now shoot death when
thou will; for although thou bereave me of this transitory and momentanie
life, Heb. 13.
yet by a strong and constant faith I possess the kingdom of heaven, which
shall give me infinitely more then thou can take from me.

Meditation of the soul not to delay repentance.
Delay not (O soul) thy repentance until thou be sick, Eccl. 12.
but work thy conversion even now with-all diligence: put not off from day to
day thy amendment of life, neither continue in wickedness until deaths
uncertain hour approach.

A prayer when first we fall sick.
O Jesus Christ* my Redeemer, preserve me from a painful sickness, violent
and hasty death, overtake me not in my sins, and suffer me not to die
without repentance, and give unto me (if it be thy pleasure) a quiet and
patient departure, that without great pain and grief I may in my right wits
attain a blessed end, confessing thy most holy name until the last gasp, and
so to commend my soul and spirit with my whole heart carefully into thy
merciful hands, my most gracious and loving Savior and Redeemer, to whom with
God the Father and the holy spirit be rendered from the bottom of my heart all
honor, power, might, majesty and dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

CHAP. II. Wherein is comprehended the true and right art to die well, and
first of Christian repentance.
Flesh.
BEcause we never are vnpursued by death, it is very needful therefore, that
both Young and Old, Great and Small, Rich and Poor, should learn the art of
dying blessedly.

Spirit.
Yes truly, daily examples may teach us so, for consider thy neighbor, like
as he is dead, so shall thou be, yesterday was his, this day for thee, Eccl 38.
to day a King, to morrow dead, yea ( o Soul) death is like a Mower, Eccl. 10.
which walks in a green meadowe, cutting with his Sith all he comes at,
and makes no account whether it be grass, thistle, or rose, neither
considers he how old, how beautiful, or how precious the herbs be, there
are none too strong for him, none too young, no castle for height, nor bulwark
for security can hold him back; he will not be corrupted with silver, and
gold, yea if it were possible that thou could give him the whole kingdoms
and riches of the world, he would not hold off a minute to abide thy time, nor
wait a moment for the performance of thy pleasure and will, now this should be
our daily meditation, diligently to mark and carefully learn, the day both to
live in Gods fear, and dye in his faour.

The young man's prayer.
O my God, how is man verily as nothing? how goes all beauty away as a
shadow? and wretched man knows not whether he shall dye old or young,
neither can any by his riches strength and power, Ps. 144.4.
deliver himself or his brother, help me my God, that from my youth upward,
I may constantly give heed to walk upright in my ways, Ps. 119.1.9
according to thy word, govern me by thy holy Spirit, that my heart go not a
whoring from thee, that my youth never puff me up to brag thereof, Ps.
73.27.
and that I put not my trust in health, strength, honor, riches, or beauty:
grant that I may in my inward mind hear the end of all, which is, to serve
thee, and keep thy commandments: Eccles. 22.13.14.
for this is the whole duty of man, for thou will bring every man unto
judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil: Lord write
this same in my heart, and give me thy grace, not only to understand the same,
but also, to rectify my life and conversation thereby, unto my last end; and
grant that I may die unto sin, and live unto righteousness, to the glory of
thy holy name through Jesus Christ my savior. Amen.

Flesh.
How may I then prepare my self to die blessedly?

Spirit.
The right preparation to a happy death, is in the constant leading of a
Christian and righteous life.

A Meditation of the Soul for earnest repentance.
Would thou then dye blessedly ( beloved Soul) make earnest and serious
repentance, and continue steadfast therein to thy last, for God accepts well
conversion from sin, Wis. 12. Man. 24.
and who so abides to the end, he shall be saved.

A Prayer for speedy Repentance.
Praised be thou my God, who have no pleasure in our death and destruction,
but rather that we should turn from our sinful ways and live, Ezekiel. 18.
Ezekiel. 33.
help me Lord Jesus, that I delay not my conversion to thee, and shift not
over my repentance from day to day, for thou have promised me thy mercy; but
that I might defer my repentance until the morrow, second or third day, thou
have not promised, vouchsafe therefore thy mercy on me this very day, Ps 95.
Tit. 3.
that I may redeem the time lost, by an earnest repentance, and not be taken
in my sins, and trespasses the day following, grant this for the glory of thy
blessed name, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

Flesh.
What is then true and Christian repentance?

Spirit.
Repentance is nothing else, then that a man rise from his sin, and turn
with all his heart unto God, which consists in these three heads.

1 That a man acknowledge his sin, and be sorrowful and grieved for it from
his very heart.

2 That he despair not by reason of his sin, but believe in Jesus Christ,
who has paid and satisfied for him, and rejoice greatly therein.

3 That he witness his faith by a daily and new obedience both to God and Man.

A Prayer for Repentance.
O Lord my God, I know that of my own nature and power I cannot obtain
repentance, neither believe, o my Lord Jesus Christ, I beseech thee waken my
heart by thy holy spirit, Eccl. 1.
and grant my conversion be not hypocritical and counterfeit, nor my says
false and deceitful, but upright and from my heart, and may show it self in
true fruits unto the end: Mat. 13.
hear me gracious God I beseech thee, that so I may attain life everlasting,
through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

Flesh.
Declare the three points of true repentance, and make me understand how I
should daily behave me in observing of them.

Spirit.
The first is, A knowledgement and sorrowing for sin, for without them thy
faith is hypocrisy and not pure, therefore learn to know thy sins, and Gods
wrath due unto them, and lament heartily for them.

A Prayer bewayling the corruption of nature.
O Lord Jesus how afraid is my heart, when I remember the day I shall die, my
God, how sorrowful and troubled is my Soul, when I bethink me of the
fearful day of Doom: I may not have granted me an hours respit from
death, and I know not what moment thou will call me before thy righteous
judgment seat, too little have I been afraid for my sins, Oh how am I
astonished before thy presence; for lo (my God) thy commandments are before
mine eyes, yea written in my conscience, and I know they are the rule and
square of everlasting equity, whereby I should have been taught thy holy
obedience; under pain of loss of Salvation, but O wretched corruption, alas
the miserable confusion and perturbation of all my senses, affections and
powers, alas that great evil, that has overwhelmed us by Adams fall, my heart
alas, can no ways condescend to the performing of thy will.

Meditation of the Soul upon the acknowledgment of Sin.
Ps. 51.
Truly, I confess and feel in my self, that I was borne of my mother in that
hereditary wickedness, the whole head is sick, Esa. 1.
the whole heart is troubled, from top to toe there is no health in me; but
I am altogether corrupted through Sin dwelling in me: Romans 5.
fie on thee Satan, thou murderer of mankind, how wretched have thou made me,
thou have darkened my understanding, made my will perverse and backward, and my
heart altogether obstinate and disobedient.

A Prayer for confession of our sins.
O my God, I know and confess that in me, Romans 7. Esaias 1.
that is in my flesh there dwells no good, but it is full of sinful sores
and biles, and if I had not at any time committed any trespass, yet am I the
child of wrath, by that original pollution, for the which I might and should
be eternally condemned and banished from thy countanance: but alas, not only
this original sin has borne sway in me; but also I have from my youth
despised all thy judgments, Psalm. 25*7.
and commandments, which I have not kept, Ephesians. 2.1.
neither could, such is the deadness of my nature in sin, but, I have
trespassed against both the greatest and the least of them, terribly and
fearfully in my sinful mind and thoughts, sinful words and deeds, in
commission and omission, against thee my good Lord and God, and against my
neighbor, I knew, and yet do, that no sin is so small, no transgression so
mean, Genesis 6.
yea no imagination of my heart so little, but merits eternal death and
condemnation, and woe is me there are yet so many sins, I do not remember
committed in my infancy and greater ag^, which I never esteemed sins, but
rather good works, Psalm. 19.12
( oh who can understand, cl^^se (...) from my secret faults) all these will
be laid before my face in their own colors ( o how black) and will destroy
me unawares as a thunderbolt. What shall I do? whither shall I fly from thy
presence? Psalm. 139.7
if thou contend with me, there is nothing but condemnation for me, o my soul
thou unfruitful tree, Matthew. 3.
o dry stock, thou deseruest to be hewn down and cast in unquenchable fire.
O prodigal and forlorn son. Luke 15.
why have thou thus gone from thy good father, and eaten husks with swine,
tumbling and wallowing in all kind of filthy and stinking sins? what
answer can thou give at the last day for thy whole life time, Matt. 12.
yea for the least idle word? O wicked and hypocritical servant, thou owe
ten thousand pound, Matt. 18.
and many unspeakable thousand times have thou sinned against the Lord thy God,
o thou unrighteous husbandman, Luke 16.
how shamelesly have thou consumed and wasted the gifts of thy mind, and
abused thy precious heart and understanding, cursed are thou, Deuteronomy. 27.
for thou have not kept all that is written in the Law. Woe is me miserable
creature, what have I done? o how wickedly have I done? o thou wrath of the
most high fall not upon me, o thou rage of the most mighty, Psalm. 6.1.
who can endure thee? o misery! o wretchedness! o thou unclean, sinful and
evil sauoured soul! I am weary and loathsome to my self, that I have become
so abominable to my God, yea my God, I am not worthy to be called thy creature,
nor that I should walk upon the ground, and it were no wonder, if the earth
should open her self under me, and swallow me up, so that I should go
living down to hell, o lament and grieve thee miserable soul; o weep and
cry thou wicked creature, yea if it be possible let bloody tears fall for thy
sin, sorrow thou with thy whole power and strength, o woe to thee thou
hard-heart, can no fear nor dread waken thee up from thy dead sleep, cannot
the Lords lighted torch of indignation fright thee? will thou drink all the
cup, yea the dreggs of his fury? Up (beloved Soul) up, address thee to a
better life, least thou be overtaken in thy sins, behold the Lords day is at
thy door, Luke 21.
and comes upon thee as a thief in the night, lo death snatcheth at thee,
and thou know not how soon he shall apprehend thee, therefore speak, and
I will not keep silence, I acknowledge and confess before my God, all that is
in my heart, O that I had water enough in my head, Ierem. 9.
and that mine eyes were fountains of waters, that night and day I might weep
for my sins, yea cause my bed every night to swim, and water my couch with my
tears! o thou (dear soul) lament, shed thy tears as a well, cease not,
neither leave off, for the Almighty is angry for thy sins, Lam. 2.
pardon them, o Lord I bese^ch thee, and grant that when I shall sleep in
death, my body may rest temporally, and my soul may live with thee eternally,
for Jesus etc.

Flesh.
Shall man then in such sorrow doubt and despair for his sins?

Spirit.
No, God forbid; but he should embrace the second part of Christian repentance,
which is, faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, who has satisfied for our sins,
and reconciled us to God his heavenly father, Romans 5.
in this case raise up and encourage thy self, and learn comfort after this
manner.

o most loving Jesus Christ thou most sweet Savior and Redeemer, how heavy is
my heart? how sad is my Soul in my breast? Ps. 43.5. Esa. 38.
My God, thou have broken all my bones like a Lion, I beseech thee, that thou
would not despise my contrite and broken heart, my Redeemer, Ps. 51.17.
give me thy merciful hand, and draw me out of this heaviness, and suffer
me not to sink and perish of too much sorrow: O my God, I thank thee, thou
have touched my heart, in making me understand my sins, and giving me thy
mercy to bewail the^ unfeignedly: O I am become godly sorrowful, not to my
hurt, for godly sorrow works Salvation, 2. Cor.
not to be sorrowed for, where else might I have found comfort for my
disquieted Soul? of what other should I have found rest for my broken heart?
but of thee only, o most dearly beloved Savior, for thou came into the
world to save miserable sinners, 1. Tim. 1.
therefore is thy name Jesus, Mat* 1.
to save thy people from all their sins.

Here am I o Savior, although a very great, yet a Penitent sinner, Lo I
hear thy comfortable voice, Mat. 11.
Come unto me all ye that are laden and we aried, I will refresh you. B^hold
my God, I come and bring with me a sorrowful, broken, Ps. 51.17.
and contrite heart: O revive my dead soul, O heal my sinful^ wounded
conscience, O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, take from
me my sin, Ps. 51.9.
and the guilt thereof, and forgive all mine iniquities; Thou art my Redeemer,
and the only sacrifice by which God thy Father and I am re^conciled: Ioh. 3.
for as Moses exalted the Serpent in the wilderness, so wast thou exalted on
the Cross, to the end, that I and all that believe in thee should not perish,
but have everlasting Life: Mar. 9.
I believe, Lord help my unbelief, yea Lord thou know all things, thou
know I believe in thee, Ioh. 21.
albeit with a weak faith, nevertheless by the same little and small faith: I
put all my trust and confidence in thee, and believe and doubt not: I believe
and know well, that all my bitter and grievous sins, are surely and verily
satisfied for, and remitted by thy blood and death: I know and believe, I am
assured and persuaded, o my Redeemer, that thy pure conception cleanses my
sinful conception; thy undefiled birth purges my unclean birth; thy holy
life sanctifies my sinful life; thy humiliation is my exaltation; thy hellish
sorrows are my heavenly comforts; thy bonds are my freedom; thy contempt is
my honor; thy sores are my salve; the expulsion of thee, is the in-bringing of
me; thy smart and pain, is the joy of my Soul; thy desert is my Redemption;
thy passion and death is a sacrifice for all my sins; thy obedience is
satisfaction for all my wickedness; thy descending into hell, is my
deliverance from the Devil, power and force of hell; Romans 4.
thy resurrecti^on is my righteousness; and thy ascending into heaven is a
seal and assurance that I am heir of eternal Life, and that through Thee I
have already right title and possesion of the kingdom of heaven.

Yea, Lord Jesus, all these have thou merited for me, given and bestowed them
freely upon me, and thy heavenly Father accepts of them, and accounts them to
me in such manner, as if I had deserved all the same in my own proper person,
and as if every faithful ones Redemption had been purchased by himself:
Mat. 9.
be joyful therefore, and comfort thee, thy sins are forgiven, and thou
reighteous before God: thou have a merciful Father in heaven; thou art heir
of eternal Life, thou have the earnest of thy inheritance in thy heart, which
bears witness unto thy spirit that thou art the Sonn^ yof God: Who will crave
ought? here is Christ that has paid and satisfied for thee: Who will accuse
thee? Romans
here is God that pronounces thee Just and Holy.

Meditation of the Soul of faith in Christ.
Do thou meditate on that hurt thou incurredst by the first fall? does that
corruption derived unto thee from Adam grieve thee? O give thanks and praise
to the Lords name, for thou have obtained more in Jesus Christ thy Redeemer,
than thou have lost in Adam the trespasser: o miracle of all miracles! who can
comprehend such things? be glad o my soul and consider narrowly what thou
losest in the first, and what was gotten in the second Adam again.

Behold how Satan is disappointed of his purpose, for he minded to draw thee
altogether, and finally from God, and to draw thee in the pit of Gods
everlasting displeasure, but contrariwise Christ thy Lord has not only
reconciled thee with thy father, quenched his wrath and anger, and purchased
mercy to thee, but also has advanced thee to such unspeakable promotion, Heb.
2.
that thou art become Gods kinsman, for he has taken thy flesh and blood upon
him, thou could never have come to higher promotion and preferment, unless
thou hadest been even God himself. And Satan bethought him to drive thee out
of the garden of Paradise, and so bereave thee of the company and society of
the holy Angels: but quite contrary, Christ thy Savior not only brings thee
to that healie Paradise and eternal life, but exalts thee above all Angels,
and makes thee most honorable in that he took not the Angels, but man's nature
upon him: Heb 2.
Satan also intended to take from thee the food of life, and it so happened,
for the Lord God excluded man by reason of his transgression that he should not
eat of the tree of life in Paradise, Genesis 3.
but now Christ is that nourishment, Ioh. 6.
and tree of life far more excellent and good then that first, which extends
and dilateth his boughs and branches, whereby we come up to heaven, hides us
under him, feeds us of him, and we are satiate and shall have under his
shadow, quietness and rest for evermore. Again, Satan would have carried
thee from thy righteousness, cast thee deeply down into sin, spoiled thee
of thy original justice, wherein without sin thou were first created to Gods
similitude; but on the other side, Christ thy Lord freely gives thee a
constanter, surer, and better righteousness, which is his merit and
satisfaction by Faith imputed unto thee, Philip. 3.
and is that Righteousness which God only accepts of.

Satan moreover, by Adams sin has blotted and defaced Gods Image in thee,
and deadly wounded thee in all thy powers and operations, and left thee lying
half dead, Luke 10.
so that there was no desire or motion left or remaining in thee to satisfy
Gods will, and therefore should die ^ternally, but on the contrary Jesus
has not only clothed thee with his own righteousness, Gal. 3 27. Esa. 55.
Col 3.10.
healed thy soars and wounds by his stripes and death, begot thee again by
the holy spirit, and imprinted his image of new, but also he will at the last
day clear thy mortal body, and make it like to his glorious body.

To be short, Satan's course was to take all thy gifts and heavenly ornaments
from thee, and throw thee headlong to everlasting perdition: but Jesus Christ
opposed himself, and aided thee in such ways, that not only he took this
flesh and blood upon him, satisfied for thee, made atonement for thee,
reconciled thee with his Father, obtained eternal remission for thee, gave
thee his righteousness, his holy spirit, and everlasting life, but also he
promoted thee to be accounted righteous, holy, Gods child, Gods heir, his
brother, his cousin, his bride and bedfellow heir, the Temple and habitation
of the holy and glorious Trinity.

Now may thou say (dear Soul) Omnia benefecit, Mar. 7.
He has done al things well, and therefore o Lord thy name be praised and
glorified for ever and ever. o my God how graciously have thou comforted me?
how mildly have thou refreshed my drowsy and drooping Soul? how sweet is thy
consolation? wherefore now I am quiet and settled in mind, and will say truly
thou art that merciful Gate and Ladder to eternal Life: Ioh. 14. Genesis 28.
Thou art the Way, Veretie, and Life; no man comes unto the Father, but by
thee; thou art the Way, and there is Salvation in no other: Act. 4.
for there is no other name given unto man under heaven in the which we shall
be saved but in thy name: Thou ar the Truth, for he that abides not in thy
learning, has not God; but he that abides in thy learning, has both the
Father and the Son: Thou art Life, for he that believes in thee has
eternal Life, but he that believes not in thee shall not see Life, but Gods
wrath shall abide on him.

The Sinners prayer to rely on God.
O Jesus Christ, Ioh. 1.
who art that right and heavenly door, without whom none can come to the
Father, grant that by a true and constant faith, I may ever depend and rely
upon thee, and by thee mount up to heaven, and there be possessor of that
everlasting inheritance of glory, prepared by thy Son my Lord and Savior, in
whose name I call upon thee, saying as he himself has taught me: Our Father
which art in heaven, etc.

Flesh.
Seeing that now by Christ I am reconciled unto the Father, and justified
before him by Faith, and in my hope already blessed, may I do what I will
until the day of death.

Spirit.
No, by no means ( beloved Soul) for if true Faith be in thy heart, Romans 8.
and thou made a new creature by the holy spirit, thou must think for other
wise, for the regenerate delights in a new life, attentively watches that
he fall not into sin, and is grieved in his heart for his own and other men's
ungodliness, Pro. 24.16.
abhors and hates sin eagerly, and if the faithful man be miscarried and
seduced by Satan, or fall by inborne and natural infirmity, he daily
repents and comfort himself in Jesus Christ, whose seed abides in him:
therefore there is no condemnation to him, Romans 8.1.
seeing by the hand of Faith he always apprehends Jesus Christ, and
therefore did I call new obedience the Third part of Repentance, which
declares it self in a just, sober, godly life and conversation both to God
and man, in thankfulness and love, so may thou daily exercise thy self
in form following.

A most excellent Prayer for all times to be used.
I thank thee my God, heavenly father, for creating me according to thy
similitude and likeness, Genesis 1.
and when I had fallen away by sin, and thereby became the child of wrath,
thou did bestow and freely give thy well-beloued son to be my redeemer,
what shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me, Psa. 116.12
govern me by thy holy spirit, that I may take pleasure in thy Law, for in
vain serves man thee, Matt. 15.
by men's laws and traditions, grant that I do no more live after the flesh,
Romans 8.
but after the spirit, so that I may fight that good fight, always keeping
faith and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.
teach me ever to be of the mind that Jesus Christ my Lord was of, who has
left me an example that I should walk in his footsteps, Phil. 1. 1 Pet. 2.
Ephesians. 6. Romans 12. Ioh. 2. Gal. 5.
strengthen my faith and hope that I may withstand Satan, and not fashion my
self like to this wicked and evil world, for her course tends to destruction,
give me thy grace, that I may ever crucify my sinful flesh, mortify and
daunt the sinful lusts and concupiscences thereof, that I may daily die to
sin, and exercise my self in all goodness and virtue, 1 Cor. 9.
help me my Lord, ever to fear thee from my heart, to love thee with all my
power, Deuteronomy. 6.
and with all my strength, that all my joy and pleasure may be in thee: Psalm.
18.
grant that I thy creature may aright know thee my creator, and be found
faithful, manfull and courageous in seeking thy glory, 1 King. 19.
and in all humility ever call on thee, I may desire thy word more then gold,
yea more then fine gold, and be obedient to thy commandments, Ps. 19.8.10
for in keeping of them is great reward, Ezekiel. 19.
o Lord Jesus Christ inflame my heart with thy love, Psalm. 73.25
that I may esteem thee above the greatest treasure, and that I may consider
what it is to love this wretched world, bow my heart to thee my redeemer, that
I may repute this earth, and the glory thereof to be ( as it is indeed)
nothing, and that I may long and groan for that eternal Kingdom to come, o
Lord keep me from immoderate solicitude and care for worldly sustenance, and
cause me never give trust to this temporary life.

Grant unto me, o my redeemer, steadfast patience under the cross of all
afflictions, constant magnanimity, fortitude and faith in all tentations, and
that in the crosses of this life I despair not, grant gracious father, that I
may humble my self in greatest prosperity, incline my heart to godliness, and
make my will conformable to thy will and pleasure, that I may serve thee with a
clean, sober, obedient, chaste and upright heart, and voluntary denial of my
self.

O Lord my God, let me be taught always by thy holy Spirit, and suffer me not
to fall in my weakness and infirmities, lead me by thy right hand, that all my
thoughts and deeds may be governed according to thy good will and pleasure.

My God take from me pride of heart, and let all my strength and courage be
from thee, let not my mouth speak any wickedness, neither yet boast in my
sins, much less abuse thy name; that I may live temperately and continently,
and not give the members of my body to wantonness and looseness. Romans 12.


Grant, o my God, that I neither disdain nor slander my neighbor, and pass
not the bounds of of my calling, neither hunt after riches by unrighteousness,
neither gape for high honors, that I be not hypocritical nor counterfeit,
give me grace that I despise not the mean and weak sort, but willingly lend
to the needy, and bestow upon the poor, Psalm. 37.8.9.10.
take covetousness from me, and preserve me from Envy, Anger, and Malice,
and all Ungodliness: O my Creator purge me from Vanity, Stifneckednesse,
Foolishness, Obstinacy, Wilfulness, from a Rebellious mind and Misdemeanor.

O my merciful God I entreat thee, for Jesus Christ thy dear Sons sake, thou
would give me an understanding heart, 2. King. 2.
to the end I may exercise my self in all good actions of love, and manifest
my sincerity and truth to all men: assist me, that I may recompense evil
with good, and commit vengance unto thee; benefit and relieve my enemies, and
go before every man in honor, that I may tread the footsteps of the godly,
and follow the^, but shun evil continually; free me from Shame, and make me
so depart this Life, as professed enemy to Sin and Wickedness: knit my
heart unto thee, that I may fear thy name that I may prove and know whether I
am in the right way, Psalm. 86.11.
Making my Faith in good Works to shine before all men: and deliver me at the
last and from evil, that I may contemn these earthly and worldly cogitations,
and only set my thoughts on things that are above, from whence I wait for
Jesus Christ, in whose most blessed name I do come with my prayers unto the
Throne of mercy, craving pardon for my sins, for Jesus Christ's sake, in whose
etc.

Flesh.
Is it sufficient that a man once make such repentance, or as it happens once
a year.

Spirit.
No verily no, for Jesus Christ commanded us without intermission to say,
forgive us our trespasses, Mat. 6.
and we are desired to grow and increase in the mercy and grace of God, 2 Pet.
2.
and of our Lord Jesus Christ, so should we learn to be strengthened in the
holy Spirit in the inward man, and therefore every one that is godly must make
his prayer unto him in a time when he may be found. Psalm. 3^.^.


Meditation of the Soul for Repentance.
Thou must not therefore ( dear soul) only once, or once a month, or once a
year, and after return to thy wonted sins but they whose life must and should
be^ a continual repentance, for the Christian by the holy Sacrament of
Baptism is borne again, and made the child of God, that the old Adam in him
by daily remorse and repentance, should be drowned, perish and die with all
sins and concupiscences, that he may be a new creature to live in holiness
and righteousness before God for ever, Romans 6.
for the way of the righteous shines as the light, that shines more and more
unto the perfect day. Pro. 4.18.


A Prayer for true r^pentance.
O God the father of all mercy and grace, who have called me in Jesus Christ
to everlasting purity, 1 Pet. 4.
and granted that by truth and upright faith I should taste of the sweetness
of thy grace and goodness, become the dwelling place of thy holy Spirit, and
heir of thy heavenly Kingdom, lead me always by the self same spirit, that
I may walk forward in true repentance, striving and wrestling continually
against sin, making progress in piety and knowledge of thee, growing up in
all Christian virtues, as a newborn creature, and that the more thou
prolongest my days on earth, I may the more increase in a stronger faith in
thee, grant that I may escape for my life, and not look behind me, Genesis 19.17
that I turn not to my vomit a^gaine as the Dog, and the Sow that was washed,
Pro. 16 11. 2 Pet. 2.22.
to her wallowing in the mire, so that the last be worser then the first, yea
my God, Luke 11.26
my strength is naught, how easily am I overcome? but thou art he that give
both to will and to do according to thy good pleasure, Phil. 2.13.
so will thou also strengthen, perfect, and accomplish this thy work thou have
begun in me until my last end, forsake me not that I do not leave thee,
take not thy hand and blessing from me, o God, my Redeemer, try me and know
my heart, examine and prove my thoughts, Ps. 139.33.
if I be in the wrong way bring me to the right path, Psalm. 26 2.
that I may walk as the child of light before thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life, that so I may walk and live after thy
godly will and pleasure* through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

CHAP. III. Wherein is contained six points which appertain to a true
Christian life.
Flesh.
NOw seeing I daily increase in repentance, and must look for great opposition
whiles I am in the right way, how should I behave my self, that my faith fail
no^, and that I go not astray?

Spirit.
That question ( dear Soul) is very necessary, for albeit we be
regenerate, and are become Gods children by Faith, yet carry we these precious
jewels in earthen vessels and weak bodies, and therefore Satan ever goes
about like a Roaring-Lyon, 2. Cor. 4.7.
seeking to devour us, and plotteth all his engines against us; the World with
her glistering show gives evil Example, very pleasant to Flesh and Blood,
which also it gladly follows and remembre^h not that the Broad-Way leads to
Damnation, and many enter therein, and therefore (dear Soul) if thou would
continue in thy course, and attain to the end of thy Faith, which is, 1. Pet.
1.9.
The Salvation of thy Soul, thou must daily lay these Six Points before thy
eyes, and have them in thy heart, that thou may carry thy self in life and
conversation thereafter continually.

1 Wait diligently upon the hearing of the Word, learn to understand, practice
and use the same.

2 Remember ever thy Baptism.

3 Often, after due examination, communicate of the Lord's Supper.

4 See thou rightly behave thy self in all worldly crosses or adversities.

5 Abide in thy calling with all watchfulness.

6 Pray continually.

The Christians Prayer for a holy life and blessed death.
Help Lord Jesus Christ me ignorant and unwise creature, earnestly to attend
thy Word, and redress my life thereafter, that I may keep that covenant of
Grace made with thee in Baptism, Ps. 119.9.
and worthily receive the Holy Communion; willingly and patie^tly bear the
Cross; truly and faithfully live in my Vocation; ever in my heart thanking
and praying thee that this my life may be passed over in daily Repentance;
serving Thee and my Neighbor truly, and so continue constant to my death, in
saving Faith in Thee, my God and only Lord and Savior, to whom, with the
Father, and the Holy spirit, three Persons, but one God, be given all honor,
power, and glory. Amen.

Flesh.
Expound unto me (I pray you) these Six heads to the end I may rightly
understand them, and live according thereunto the time I have here to remain.

Spirit.
The first point of diligent hearing the Word, and against Satan's temptations.

Very willingly: first then I say keep thee by Gods-word, and behave thy
self in all thy actions as it directs; Ps. 119.
for it is a Lantern unto our Paths, and a Light unto our Feet, so that if
we follow this Light we may walk without impediment and not stumble; but
learn especially to distinguish this word aright, and mark what difference
there is between the Law and the Gospel.

Gods Law or his Commandments is a doctrine and word wherein God wills and
commands us to be obedient unto him in heart and whole life, that is, Ex. 20.
Mat. 22. Deuteronomy. 6. Leu 9.
That we should love the Lord our God with our whole heart, soul, mind, and
strength, and our neighbor as our self, which things albeit they are
impossible for man either to do or keep, notwithstanding thou shall daily
meditate and weigh these precepts, Romans 3.
to the end thou may learn to know the corruption of thy nature and sin,
and also they may be a rule, after which thou ought to lead thy life, as a
new creature in holy Obidience.

The Gospel is such a Word and Doctrine, wherein God only of mere mercy
gives Remission of sins, Ioh. 3.
and everlasting Life; for all the Prophets witnessed, that in his name Every
one that believed should have Remission of sins: Act. 10.
and therefore never suffer this preaching of mercy to depart from thy eyes,
that thou may find comfort against sin, and Satan his temptations, and
that in all afflictions until death, thou may commit thy self unto God with
joy: but understand (dear Soul) that Both these doctrines are Gods-word, and
are delivered to the Church from the beginning, and must both therein continue,
and neiney^her of them is to be dissolved, therefore give diligent heed to
them both, that thou may rightly divide them, and in time convenient use
them. When thou therefore (dear Soul) daily ponderest on the Commandments,
and thereof conceiuest how disobedient thou art to Gods will, and see that
through Adams trespass thou art so corrupt, that thou can fulfill not one of
the least of them, and therefore that thou by sin deseruest Gods wrath and
everlasting perdition, despair not yet for all this, but thank God for his
commandments, that by them thou art brought to acknowledge thy sins, for
this is the dearest and most precious thing that can be in this world, (
Christ's favor excepted) to know Sin, for Christ and his benefits do never
taste us well, until we be brought to the knowledge of our sins, and perceive
our selves to be under the wrath and fury of the Lord our God.

But if Satan shall come and greatly heap up thy sins, and terrify thee
with the consuming fire of Gods anger, with hell and endless destruction, then
strengthen and quicken thy self with these and such like sentences.

God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son, Ioh. 3.6.
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

verse. 17.
God sent not his son into the world, that he should condemn the world, but
that the world, through him might be saved.

Ezekiel. 33.
Verily, as I live (says the Lord) I have no pleasure in the death of a
sinner, but that he turn from his ways and live.

I will redeem thee from the power of the grave, Hos. 13.14.
I will deliver thee from death, o death I will be thy death, o o grave I will
be thy destruction.

Where sin abounds, Romans 5.20
there grace abounds much more.

This is a true saying, 1 Timothy 1.15
and by all means to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners.

Resist Satan with a steadfast faith, 1 Pet. 5.9.
and he shall depart from thee.

For these sentences are true and more certain, 1 Pet. 1.25.
and sure then heaven and earth, his word is truth. Io^. 17.17.


And if Satan come on the other hand, changing himself into an Angel of
light; 2 Cor. 11. 14.
lessening sin and Gods wrath, persuading that sin is easily forgiven, and Gods
rich mercy soon obtained, beware ( beloved Soul) thou give him not ear but
remember Gods fearful and powerful Law, in the which all sins are so greatly
taxed and accused, that none can be called small, and withal remember thy Lord
Jesus Christ his passion, and meditate thus thereupon.

Fi^ on thee lying Satan, I consider how heavy and grieved my Lord Jesus was,
Matthew. 26.38.42.
when once he was under the curse of the law, and satisfied for my sin, and
beared his fathers wrath for the same, Matthew. 27.46.
I will therefore hereafter be enemy to all sin, and keep me from it, as from
the Devil himself, I thank thee, o God, who have once delivered me from
sin, which is the Devils snare, should I give my self to be intrapped again
in his net? our soul is escaped eue^ as a bird out of the snare of a fowler,
Psalm. 124.7.8.
the snare is broken and we are delivered, our help is in the name of the Lord
which has made heaven and earth. And if Satan shall cast before thee the
course of this world, and entise thee to the pleasure thereof, call to mind
that we should not fashion our selves like unto this world, but be changed by
the renewing of ou^ mind, that we may prove what that good and acceptable,
Romans 12.2.
and perfect will of God is, take heed ( dear soul) for thou know well
how bent and prone thy flesh and blood is to sin, daunt thy self by the
force of the Law, be not seduced, for the way of the world leads unto sin.
Luke 13.24.


Does Satan contend against thee, and allege that thou art poor and
suffer hunger, nakedness and distress, etc. then do thou say man lives
not by bread only, Matt. 4.4.
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, for thou o Lord
give me more joy of heart, the^ they have had when their wheat and wine did
abound, Psalm. 4.7.
and these words cannot deceive thee, Psalm. 89.33.
for he will not fal^ifie his truth.

Vpbraideth he thee that thou art wretched sick, and desolate, etc? though I
be ( may thou say) poor and needy, Psalm. 40.17.
the Lord thinks on me* therefore if I can have but thee my God, I account of
nothing in heaven and in earth, suppose my flesh fail, and my heart, Psalm
73.25.
thou God art the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever: rely ( o my
soul) all thy life time heereon, for he will not alter the thing that has
gone out of his lips. Psalm. 89.34.


If the devil does affright thee with death, gainstand him with a stout and
faithful heart, and say, thy dead men shall live, Esaias 26.19
even with my body shall they live, awake and sing ye that dwell in dust, for
thy deaw is as the deaw of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. And so
I believe the remission of my sins, resurrection of my body, and life
everlasting: this is verily true, and hereon I repose my self, for heaven and
earth shall pass away, Luke 16.17
but his word shall not fall; so that all they that lean to the word and shut
themselves in the word, shall with the word and in the word endure for ever.

A Prayer to the same effect.
Lord Jesus Christ, King of everlasting Triumph, help that I may continually
have thy Law and Gospel before mine eyes, and rule all my Thoughts, Words, and
Deeds, according to them; teach me by thy holy Spirit at every occasion to
put them in practice, that in thy Law I may perceive my Sin and Vildnesse,
with true comfort in my heart, that in all misery and grief I may have these
sweet speeches in fresh memory, that they may be my weapons and a^mour To
kill my Foe, Pro. 30.5.
and my Shield and defense a^gainst the Devil, Psalm. 23.4.
thy rod and staff to hold me up my food and refreshing in al^ trouble
and anguish: grant I may wholly betake me to thy Word, both sleep and rise
therewith, that I may live and die according to thy Word: and if at any time my
heart through weakness shall distrust, assist me then O Lord, that I never
despair, for neither thou nor thy Word will deceive me: I know and do
believe it, O eternal true God, that thou will keep thy Word: therefore shall
I be preserved: I believe and know thou can not lie, therefore s^all I not
be deceived; and although that my heart shall doubt and deny, yet art thou
constant in thy promise, because thou art greater than our hearts, and know
all things, therefore shall I never be confounded, 1 Ioh. 3.20
because I put my trust in thee. Psalm. 25.2.
To thee O God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, be all honor, dominion,
power and glory now and for ever, world with out end. Amen.

Flesh.
What is the second point that concerns Christian life?

The second point (Baptism.)
Spirit.
Secondly (dear Soul) meditate daily in thy baptism, and let it comfort
thee, because God thy Lord in it has purged thee, received thee to be his
child, and in it seals with thee that merciful covenant, that he will be thy
gracicious God and father, and thou shall be his dear Son and heir, yea (o my
soul) thy Lord Jesus in thy holy baptism has called thee by thy name, 1 Pet.
3. Esaias 62. Ier. 14. Esaias 45.
before thou knew him, and has given thee a new name, that thou should
be called a Christian, to witness, that thou were brother to Christ, and
fellowheire, Romans 8.
that thou shall enjoy and be paticipant with him of all whatsoever he has
bought, and merited by his blood, as of remission of sins, righteousness,
and eternal life.

Meditation of thy Baptism.
Therefore so often as thou shall hear or recite the Creed, I believe in God
etc. I believe in Jesus Christ, etc. I believe in the holy Ghost etc. here is
thy surmounting consolation, that thou art in the number of those of whom it is
said, he that believes, and is baptized, Mark. 16.16.
shall be saved, and hereby art separated from Turks, Jews, Atheists and all
Infidels, and other ungodly persons, of whom it is said, but he that will not
believe shall be damned: and finally, in thy baptism, thou obligest thy self,
not to live after the flesh, Rom 8.12. Luk* 1.75.
to fulfill the lusts and desires thereof, but to serve the living God, in
righteousness and holiness all the days of thy life, Tit. 2.12.
according to his pleasure.

Prayer for a new life and faith in Christ.
I thank thee my good Lord Jesus Christ, for this thy unspeakable goodness,
in that thou have not only taken me alive out of the womb, but when I was
dead in sin, made me be baptized, Psalm. 22.9. Ephesians. 2.1.
and thereby enrolledst and registeredst me in thy merciful covenant and
band, did regenerate me by thy holy spirit, Ephesians. 2.12.13.
accept me to be thy son, and inheritor of blessedness, 1 Pet. 3.21.
not that I loved thee first, but thou louedst me before I was o my Redeemer,
Tit. 5.5.
how can I render thanks for all thy benefits toward me; I will take the cup
of salvation and call upon thee, Psalm. 116.12.
I beseech thee therefore, uphold me by thy holy spirit, that I may stand
steadfast in this covenant of grace, whereunto I have had this access,
rejoicing under the hope of the glory of God, comforting my soul therewith:
confirm my faith that I may cleave unto thee always, and abhor and detest
Infidelity and Atheism, serving thee zealously in the spirit, in whatsoever
calling or condition of life I shall live, yea my God, seeing through baptism
I am dead unto sin and borne again, Romans 6.4.
grant me thy grace, that I may walk in newness of life, that my conversion
and giving my members, as weapons of righteousness unto God, may bear record
before thee and men, that I have reciued that Sacrament to my weal and
salvation; conduct me safely through this wearisome valley of misery, never
leave me until thou have brought me to thy fathers Kingdom, which is those
riches and treasures thou have promised me in my baptism, and thereof assured
me, and sealed up the same in my heart, by thy spirit given unto me. Grant me
gracious father, forgiveness of all my sins, that so I may walk before thee,
in true repentance and amendment of life, that so I may live in thy fear, and
die thy faithful servant, Amen.

Flesh.
Show me the third means whereby a Christian life is maintained?

The third point (the Lords Supper.)
Spirit.
Thirdly, ( dear soul) repair diligently and of ten to the Lords S^pper, for
that is the table the Lord has prepared for his regenerate children, that is
the food wherewith he strengthens and refr^sheth his new purged ones, for so
says the Redeemer, Take, eat, this is my body, Matthew. 26.16 Mar. 14.22 Luke
22.19. Cor. 11.24
which is given for you, to the remission of sins; and again, Take and eat all
hereof, this cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

Meditation of the Soul, for the receiving of the Communion.
Now hear ( my Soul) what delicates the Lord thy Savior presents before
thee in this his table, truly not bare and naked bread and wine* but his body
and blood, for the bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body
of Christ? and the cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of
the blood of Christ? 1 Cor. 10.16.
therefore believe I and know, that my Lord Jesus Christ both God and Man,
according to his institution, is present to my Soul, and gives his body and
blood to be eaten and drunk spiritually, by a true and lively faith wrought
in me by his holy spirit, and applying the merits and benefits of his death
unto me ( the manner and way being best known unto himself) yea Lord Jesus,
thou thy self art here my host, and I thy guest, here come I poor creature
out of the wicked wilderness of this world, fraught with trouble and misery, and
bring with me an hungry, thirsty, and languishing, yet a faithful heart,
revive me my Lord Jesus, by this thy table, and strengthen me by this
nourishment, that I may be satiate and safe. Approach heereunto ( my Soul) to
strengthen thy faith and quicken thy heart, Ioh. 20.27.
and be not longer faithless but faithful, be^hold the Lord thy Redeemer
assures thee as with a true token and pawn, that thou of mere grace and
mercy, art appointed heir of all his blessings, and he imputes unto thee,
whatsoever he has procured by the sacrifice of his body and blood, to wit, the
forgiveness of all thy sins, Romans 4.8.
that righteousness which is accepted before God, and eternal life, all these
shall a^ certainly be thine, as if thou in thine own person had hung upon
the cross, and there merited them, yea, and he witnesses hereby, that thou,
for his sake, art counted before God, as righteous, holy, and as beloved, as
Christ himself is: and moreover, by the same Sacrament, through the holy
Spirit, he gives himself unto thee, Reu. 3.20.
to dwell with thee, and sup with thee; never to depart from thee, but work a
new life, joy, and light: yea Lord Jesus, so am I in thee, Ioh. 17.23. Ephesians.
5.30.
and thou in me; and I will stick unto thee my Redeemer, as a living member
to a living body; as a bride unto her bridegroom; for I am a member of thy
body, Ioh. 15.4.
of thy blood and bones; yea I am in thee as the branch is in the vine, and as
a bough receives continual sap and virtue from the trees root; so do I draw
comfort, life, and quickening from thee, and so by a true faith, both in soul
and body, abide in thee, and thou in me, by thy holy spirit; that neither
death, nor life nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor nor things
present, nor things to come, nor hight nor depth, nor any other creature, can
separate me from thy love.

A prayer when thou have received the Communion.
Praised be thou ( O God my Savior) for thy fatherly care over me, for
preparing this heavenly banquet for me, whereby I may quench the appetite of my
hungry soul, and mittigate the thirst of my heart; so that now by this means,
I depart emboldened, and established in grace and faith, and will follow thee
my Redeemer with courage, Heb. 13.9.
will abide constantly with thee and remain in perseverance with thee, through
thy spirit unto the last gasp. Amen.

Meditation of receiving the holy Communion.
Thou have said, Do this in my remembrance (O my God) how holy is the memory
of that? how inwardly am I comforted therewith? for by this sacrament I call to
mind many other Festiual days and times; for in thy Table I remember thy
Nativity, for it testifies unto me, that thou in very deed have taken my
human nature upon thee; and art far nearer joined unto me, than unto the
Angels; for thou in no sort tookedst upon thee the Angels nature, but thou
tookest the seed of Abraham: it likewise represe^teth unto me that thou art
the true Sacrifice for sins, and therefore do I eat the right Pasouer, 1.
Cor. 5.7.
even Christ which is sacrificed for me: as also, I believe and trust, seeing
I am thy member, and that thou art risen from the dead, and live, so shall I
also, so that thou will not leave my Soul in Grave, neither shall death have
power over me; but I shall rise and sing unto the Lord in the land of the
living, and possess that place where thou my head Jesus Christ live world
without end. And all these things are engrafted and sealed in me by thy holy
Spirit of Promise, 1. Ephesians. 13.14.
which is the earnest of my Inheritance, for the redemption of that liberty
purchased unto the praise of his glory, whereby also peace and joy is kindled
in my heart for I receive the spirit of adoption, whereby I cry Abba, Father;
the same Spirit bearing witness to my Spirit, Romans 8.15 16.
that I am the Son of God. And not only that, but I participate the whole
Trenitie, the Father, Son, and Holie-Spirit, who come unto me, Ioh. 14.23.
and dwell with me, so life everlasting shall be bestowed upon me after this
transitory, where I shall continually behold my Lord, my God, face to face:
and finally, I have here an union and fellowshippe with all the Saints: for (as
he said) He that eats my flesh, Ioh. 6.56.
and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him: so has he said also,
that they all may be one, as thou (O Father) art in me, and I in thee, even
that they may be also one in us; for we that are many are one bread, and one
body, because we are all partakers of one bread: how joyful am I of this
heavenly company? how glad am I of thy Saints, to whose number thou have
adopted me; for the which I give thee thanks, honor, and praise for evermore?

Besides this, it is written, as often as you eat of this Bread, and drink of
this Cup, ye declare the Lords death until his coming again: wherein ( dear
Soul) I am ravished to the contemplation of the Third-heauen with Paul,
whereof this thy last Supper is as it were an entry and beginning, for in thy
Fathers Kingdom, I shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and there
feed upon Thee the Bread of Life eternally, and therefore sigh I from the
bottom of my heart, saying even so; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly my Redeemer,
and tarry not: and therefore I am taught to power out hearty thanksgiuings for
all thy blessings, wherewith thou have blessed me in heavenly things in Christ
both for soul and body: as for thy creation, manifestation in the Flesh, Tim.
3.6.
assumption of humane nature, redemption, for thy holy word, for the Faith
thou have endued my Soul with, for thy holy Spirit, which thou have enspired
into my heart, for thy holy Sacrament, for Temporal and Spiritual gifts and
benefits: Luke 1.4.9
How can I in this my weakness comprehend the great things which thou have
bestowed upon me.

Another Prayer after receiving the holy Communion.
Help me Lord ( Jesus my Redeemer) that I may frequent this holy communion,
and joyfully embrace that remembrance of thee: behold I am thy brother, and
fellow-heyre, and have right to thy kingdom: where should I go but to thy own
table? succor me my Savior, that I may greedily desire this thy great Feast:
let my mind never loose remembrance of Thee, but that my repose, quietness,
and faith and greatest joy may be in Thee, and evermore give Thee thanks with
feruencie from the ground of my heart, for all thy goodness and graces, so
ple^tifully showred down upon me, but more specially, for that after this
perishing world shall decay, I am ordained to eat that Bread of Life with all
thy Saints in the Heavens for evermore. And therefore ( beloue^ Soul) when
thou drawest thither, forget not thy neighbor, that eats and drinks with
thee, and sits by thee; for he is the member of Christ no less then thou,
therefore thou ought to love him from thy heart for his sake that loved thee;
and be ready to do him all kindness, as unto thy self, and therefore ( dear
Soul) have respect and care of the needy, and poor, and cast not thine eyes
from thine own flesh, but forasmuch as he nourishes thee with that bread,
and gives thee drink of that cup, should I not minister unto my brother,
fellowheire with me my bread, and refresh him with that thou have given me?
govern me, o Lord Jesus, by thy holy spirit, that I ever may dearly love my
neighbor, and be touched at my heart with the misery of the poo^e and
distressed, to give the hungry meat, the thirsty drink, the stranger lodging,
to cloth the naked, to visit the sick, and come to them that are in prison,
according to my power and measure of thy blessings bestowed upon me, that I
may hear that comfortable voice proceed out of thy mouth at the last day,
verily, I say unto you, insomuch as you have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it to me, and verily I say unto you, inasmuch
as you did it not to one of the least of these you did it not unto me, Matthew.
25.40.45.
Let not therefore, o my God, my charity grow cold, but that I may extend it
with a fellow-feeling compassion to my empouerished neighbors, members with
me of the mystical body of thy son, the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with thee
and thy holy Spirit, be rendered all honor, and glory, power and dominion,
now and ever. Amen.

Flesh.
Show me the fourth means, how to attain to a Christian and godly life,
concerning the tolleration of the Cross, and adversity thereof.

Spirit.
Fourthly ( dear Soul) prepare thee every day, for the crosses and
chastiseme^ts, which the children of God in this world must bear after their
Mr. for we must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God: Act.
14.22
yea ( my Soul) that doctrine of the Cross is one of the most secret and hid
mysteries, into the which man's judgment and knowledge cannot reach, but both
it and all other concealed matters, are manifested in Gods word only, out of
which word we ought to be edified in this point. Now hereof it comes (
beloved Soul) that the cross is heavy for us to bear; we are greatly
affrayd of it, even as though the Lord had left us, or as if he were our
mortal foe, and deadly enemy. A pretty and pithie similitude hereof we have
in the Two Desciples, Luke 24 13
which went from Jerusalem to Emmaus in perplexity and sorrow, to whom the
Lord manifested himself in another form, so that their eyes were held that
they could not know him; Lo ( dear soul) this is a figure of the cross, in
the which the Lord so clotheth and covers himself, that he appears to be
a stranger, yea even to his most beloved children, and so does take solace in
the compass of this earth, Pro. 8.31.
and delight with the children of men, yea sometime he seems so far
against them, that they imag^ne God has forgot all love and goodness to them,
Esa. 64.9.12.
but He will make himself known in convenient time, and fill their hearts
with gladness, and no man shall take their joy from them: Ioh. 16.22.
and therefore thou must learn in this very high point, how to behave thy
self, and diligently to consider these seven following rules co^^cerning the
cross, and thy grief shall not be so vehement.

Flesh.
I pray you show me thee first rule concerning the bearing of the Cross.

Spirit.
All true Christians are thereto appointed of God, for whom he knew before he
also predestined to be made like to the image of his Son, that he might be
the first born among many brethren, so wast thou ordained to Anxieties and
Crosses, not only before thou wast born of thy mother, Rom* 8.29
but also, before the foundation of the world was laid, that thou might
resemble the Lord Jesus Christ, yea thou art flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone, shall thou not then suffer with him? Ephesians. 6.30.
he is thy Master, and thou his desciple, he thy Bridegroom, and thou his
Bride, he is thy Head, and thou art his Members, why will thou then desire to
be in better condition than he was? Look on the Lord as on the Prince of the
Cross, and consider how all the Saints and faithful ones have ever followed
him. Mat. 11.29.30.


Christ goes first, making way with the most heavy Cross upon his shoulders,
and the godly tread on his footsteps, for every one bears his own yoke:
Rom 8.37.
nevertheless in all troubles they are more than conquerours through him that
loved them: and because they are conformable unto Christ in suffering, so shall
they be conformable unto him in glory also.

Prayer willingly for to follow Christ in all crosses and afflictions.
O Lord God, thou who have provided thy son for me to bear the burden of the
cross, give me a wise heart, that I may perceive thy wonderful purpose and
counsel herein, that I may take it up willingly, and follow my Redeemer
cheerfully, and so show my submission and obedience to him here for a short
time, but hereafter eternally, to reign with him everlastingly, to God the
Father, Son and holy Ghost, be given of me and all true Christians, all
honor, power and glory. Amen.

Flesh.
Show me the second rule of bearing the Cross?

Spirit.
This is the Lord Jesus Christ's commandment, Matthew. 11.30.
take my yoke upon you, for he that will follow me, must forsake himself, and
take up his cross daily and come after me, and this precept is not given to
any Infidel and wicked man, Luke 9.23.
but unto the faithful and holy ones. For the cross of Christ is such a
precious jewel, that he will not commit it to the ungodly and incredulous,
yet such an ornament he will not bestow upon proph^ne and godless people,
behold Simon of Cyrene, Luke 23.28.
what greater honor could there come unto him, then that he helped Christ to
bear his Cross behind him? o what commendations shall it be unto him at the
last day?

A Prayer for obedience in the Cross of Christ.
O Lord Jesus Christ, thou who have enjoined that I should bear thy Cross,
give me an obedient heart, that I may with all humility receive it upon my
shoulders, 1 Kin. 3.9.
and in all possible readiness follow thee, according to thy good pleasure:
through the same Lord Jesus Christ, in whose name I call on thee saying, Our
Father, etc.

Flesh.
Show me the third rule, how to bear the cross of Christ patiently?

Spirit.
Jesus our Savior, has three sorts of schools of adversity?

The first is of nurture, when as he reclaimeth his own from sin, 1 Cor.
11.32.
and chastizeth them for the same.

The second school is of probation or trial, when he exercizeth their faith,
Mic. 7 9. Esaias 28. Esaias 28.26 Esaias 44. Romans 8.
hope and prayer.

The third is martyrdom, when he suffers his Saints to be pers^cuted for
his name sake.

A Meditation of the soul, concerning the comfort of Christ, to those that
suffer for his sake.
Hearken ( o my Soul) thou art the Lords Disciple and Scholar, and he will
not fail, neither must thou grudge to be brought unto one of these schools:
for if it so happen that he punish thee for thy sin, as he did King David,
thank him for his correction, It was good for me (says David) that thou
chastizedst me that I might learn thy judgments. Psalm. 119.
And if he put thee to trial as he did Joseph and Job, Psalm. 44.
then bethink thee that hereby he puts an edge upon thy faith, wakens thy
hope, prouokes thee to prayer, Esaias 25.9.
and if he advance thee to that honor, to be persecuted, cast in prison, or die
for his name sake, then rejoice that thou art counted worthy to suffer rebuke
for his name. Act 5.14.


A Prayer for steadfast faith in all afflictions.
O Lord Jesus Christ, thou who wast not ashamed to hang upon the cross with
disdain and all kind of reproach, grant that I never blush to stand by thy
cross with the Virgin Mary, and if thou bring me thereunto mercifully and
maruellously help me to follow thee, Ioh. 19.25.
and be prepared ( if need be) to lay down my life for thy sake, according
to thy pleasure: grant this heavenly father, for Jesus Christ's sake, my only
Savior and Redeemer, to whom be all honor and glory. Amen.

Flesh.
Show me the fourth rule of Christ's Cross.

Spirit.
The crosses of the faithful are a token and signification of Gods love, for
whom he loves, he chastizeth, Reu 3.19.
but the world shall rejoice (says he) but ye shall weep and lament, Ioh.
16.20.
for so judgment must begin at Gods house, and therefore in the days of
Jeremiah, 1 Pet. 4.17.
the Lord began to bring evil on the City which is called by his name, Ier.
25.29.
and he that loves his child, will not spare the rod, Hebr. 12.6.
but if thou art without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, which are his
sons, then art thou a bastard and not a son, behold thy Lord Jesus Christ,
the only begotten son of his father, how angry was his father with him, how
bitterly did God smite him, although it was not for his own sin; but for the
offenses of other men?

A Prayer for willingness to undergo the Cross of Christ.
Lord Jesus help me, that I never withdraw my self from thy cross and
correction; but willingly embrace and kiss the same, as a well ^nclined
child, and heartily thank thee at all times, for whatsoever blows or scourges
it shall please thee to inflict upon me. Grant this (o heavenly father) for the
same my Savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Flesh.
Show me the fifth rule concerning Christ's Cross?

Spirit.
The greater the evil is, the Lord is the nearer, for he will be with us in
trouble, he will deliver us, and honor us, Psalm. 90.15.
yet how hard is it to flesh and blood to believe it, for we suppose that when
sorrow and grief is at hand, the Lord has forgot us, and given us up to
Satan, and to all kind of mischance, o not so ( my soul) for although Satan
be thy professed enemy, and goes about night and day to devour thee, yet can
he not touch an hair of thy head by his will, Mat. 10.30.
yea, how is it possible the Lord should not remember us, for in acceptable
time will he hear us, and in a day of salvation will he help us, Esaias 49.8.
can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on
the son of her womb, yet will I not forget thee, says the Lord; but if it
is for a small moment, that he forsakes thee, but with great mercies will he
gather thee: in a little wrath he will hide his face from thee for a moment:
but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, Esaias 54.7.
says the Lord thy Redeemer: the mountains shall depart and the hills be
removed: but his kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
covenant of my mercy and peace be removed from thee, Verse. 10.
says the Lord, that has mercy on thee: for how should he lie, who is verity
himself, Light therefore is sown unto the godly in darkness, and therefore,
Psalm. 112 4 Romans 8. Psalm. 23.1.
if God be with us, who can be against us. Now then the Lord is thy
shepherd, thou shall want nothing that is good for thee.

A Prayer when we have obtained faith in Christ.
Lord Jesus, I having once the possession of thee, I account nothing of the
heaven or earth, or fullness thereof, but esteem all to be dung and naught in
regard of thee and thy knowledge: Ps. 73.
and albeit my soul and life should be grievously tormented, either with
inward or outward torments and afflictions: thou art my lot, and the portion of
inheritance for ever; grant therefore (O Lord God) my faith fail not, but with
assured hope of glory I may call on thee my Savior. Amen.

Flesh.
Show me the sixth rule concerning the cross of Christ, and the crosses of
this life.

Spirit.
The Cross serves Gods children to their good, for we know that all things
work together for good to them that love God, to them who are called according
to his purpose; Romans 8.28. Pro. 27.6.
and faithful are the wounds of a friend.

And truly it serves many ways to our weal, for it teaches us the
knowledge of our sins, for he does correct in measure, and will not leave us
altogether unpunished: Ier. 30.11.
and therefore the Lord knows that the way of man is not in himself, neither
is it in man that walks to direct his steps: Ier. 10.13.14.
O Lord (says the Prophet) correct me but with judgment, not in thine anger,
least thou bring me to nothing: thus he chastises us for sin, and will not
leave us wholly unpunished, Ier. 46.28.
to the end we may be driven narrowly to epsy our sins and transgressions,
and descend more earnestly into the inward parts of our hearts Again, the
cross sends us to the word of God, when we are frosen in our sins, it thawes
us again; for to whom does God teach knowledge, Esa 28.9.
and whom shall he make to understand Doctrine? them that are weaned from the
Milk, and drawn from the breasts; and truly, temptations make us to run to
consult with Gods Oracle, which is, his Word.

Besides this, it stirs up our Faith, for such grieuances and annoyances
befall us, and we often have the sentence of death in our selves, that we
should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead, who
delivers from so great a death, and does deliver, in whom we trust that he
will yet deliver us, the cross teach us also to pray; for Lord in trouble have
they visited thee, they powered out their prayers, Esa. 26.
when thy chastising hand was upon them. Yea it instructs us to avoid sin,
for so it is said to the man that was cured on the Sabbath Day: Behold, thou
art made whole, sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee.

And finally, it makes this earthly life loathsome unto us, and rayseth an
earnest desire and longing after that which is to come: Heb. 13.14
for here we have no continuing city, but we seek one to come but we look
for a city which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God: and
therefore may it be well said unto us, Arise, yea and depart, for this is not
your rest, because it is polluted: it shall destroy you, even with a sore
destruction; and so to conclude all things, serve the godly, Aug. Soliloq. cap.
28.
to the best yea even their veri^ sins work to their weal; for we always
recover more by Christ, than we loose by sin; so Peter's fall of pusillanimity
made him afterward bolder to avouch Christ.

A Prayer for true and lively Faith in Christ.
Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, imprint this heavenly consolation in
my heart, and preserve me, that I never despair in any kind of grief, but
ever unto my dying day perceive thee to be a watchful, provident, and
foreseeing God for me, who as an expert artificer can work good works of
evil stuff for thy judgments are unsearchable, Romans 9.33
and thy counsels past finding out: yet nevertheless in thine own time thou
bring them to purpose for the weal and benefit of thy own Saints. To thee
therefore (O God) do we thy Saints and servants give all honor, power and
glory, now and ever. Amen.

Flesh.
Show me the seventh and last rule, concerning the Cross of Christ.

Spirit.
Patience, Prayer, and Hope, make the cross light; for it is good that a man
should both Hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord, for
remembering mine affliction and my misery, Lam. 1.26.
the wormwood and the gall, my soul had them still in remembrance, and is
humbled in me: these I call to mind, and therefore have I hope. And so call
upon the Lord in the day of trouble, Lam. 19. 20.21. Psalm. 50.15.
he will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify him, behold then the ancient
fathers, and mark them as an example of true godliness, was there ever any
ashamed, that put his trust in thee?

A Meditation of the cross of Christ.
Yea ( my dear soul) when one bears a heavy burden, if he take it rightly on
him, it will not be so heavy, especially if he have any aid o^ help for to
assist him in his heavy load: so patience, prayer* and hope, as hands and
arms, whereby the faithful heart imbraceth his cross, and goes forth with it,
for patience does all things willingly, and therefore is not wearied, and prayer
steps in before God, and obtains either that the cross shall be quite taken
away, or else lessened: now hope makes us not ashamed, Romans 5.5.
but knows assuredly that God is faithful, who will no^ suffer us to be
tempted above that we are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to
escape, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
that we may be able to bear it, but impatiency offends God, hinders
prayer, and does all things by constraint, lay the Lord Jesus before thine
eyes, and learn of him, 1 Pet 2.21.22.23.
who when he was re^uiled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously, and upon just and
upright Job, If the Lord slay me, Job 13.15.
yet will I trust in him: but woe unto him that has lost patience, what will
he do when the Lord shall visit him? Eccl. 2.24.


A Prayer for continuance in Faith.
Lord Jesus Christ, give unto me long-fuffering and patience of heart, that I
may continue and abide in thy good pleasure and will, I may cast all my care,
grief and solicitude upon thee, for thou carest for me, and evermore expect
better and better at thy hands: for thou only know what is good for me: to
thee therefore be ascribed, from the bottom of my heart, all honor and glory.
Amen.

Flesh.
Show me the fifth point, which appertains to a Christian and godly life.

Spirit.
Fifthly ( beloved Soul) abid in that calling wherein God has called thee, and
observe the same, with all truth and diligence, that thou may in all thine
actions give an account thereof, both before God and man: for God will not that
man here upon earth should be idle, Matthew. 12. 36.
but has allotted unto every one, his several trade and work in their own
measure: for the Lord our God himself is not idle: but works, governs,
vpholdeth, and orders all things, preserves, blesses, hears and helps
every true heart. My father (says he) works hit herto, Ioh. 5.17.
and I work, yea, if God should be idle but the twinkling of an eye, then
should the whole world decay and perish.

So likewise the holy Angels are ministering spirits, Heb. 1.4.
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation: behold
the Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars, how constantly they keep their
course, Psalm. 8.3. Psalm. 19.1. 2.
and perfect their appointment and calling, even so ( dear Soul) should every
man that is whole, every day exercise his calling in his own estate, earnestly
and diligently: for he should learn, preach, govern, correct, defend, spare,
beg, augment, and have care for his household, and those committed to his
charge, as if he were here ever to abide, and never to die, and that he must
do by Gods commandment, and love to his successors: but hereto he should so
live every day, 1 Timothy 1.19.
so keep faith and a good conscience, as if at every moment he were to take
his farewell from this world, and that he may say with Paul, The time of my
departure is at hand, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of glory: which
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto
them also that love his appearing. 2 Timothy 7.8


A Meditation of the vanity of this life.
Therefore ( dear soul) walk worthy of the vocation wherewith thou art called
with all lowliness and meekness, and with long suffering, and see also that,
that thou rather abide in a low estate, which is better then that which the
world climbeth unto, but if the Lord shall promote and exalt thee, be not
proud, but the greater thou art, and higher in authority in this world, be thou
the humbler: for the Lord is high above all nations, Psalm. 113.5.7.8.
and his glory above the heavens, yet he humbles himself to behold the
things that are in heaven and in earth, he raises up the poor out of the
dust, and lifts the needy out of the mire, that he may set him with the
Princes of his people: so the Lord casts down the proud, Eccl. 3.18.
and gives grace vnthe humble, the greater thou art, then the more humble thy
self, and thou shall sinde favor before the Lord, for in lowliness of mind,
Phil. 2 3.
each should esteem other better then themselves, wherefore seek not the
things that are too hard for thee, neither search the things that are above thy
strength, but what is commanded thee, Eccle. 3 21.22.
think thereupon with reverence: for thou must give a reckoning of all thy
behavior, trouble thee not with the thing that is impertinent to thy calling:
for there is much more enjoined thee then thou can accomplish: meddle not in
strange affairs, and thrust not thy self in any calling before God, think
not that thou art appointed unto every one, for such conceits has deceived
many, and their rashness has ouerthrown them; for what profits it thee, that
thou should gape for that which is not ordained for thee, follo^ not thine
own fancy in thy calling, and be not proud when any man shall have need of
thee, and if adversity and pennury shall straight the, yet be of good courage:
because they happen unto thee in thy lawful calling: for who will honor him,
who dishonors his own trade? be always diligent, and crave the blessing of
God which makes thee rich, and he adds no sorrow with it, Pro. 10.22.
truly blessings shall be upon the head of the just, many hunt after riches,
Verse. 6.
and they hurt the possessour, and many are feeble and poor, yet the Lord
helps them of his grace, so that sundry do wonder thereat. Stay thou always in
thy calling, and be not jealous over the wicked, although they increase in
riches, depend thou upon the Lord, for it is very easy unto him to make a
poor man rich, if it be be his pleasure, and for thy good call upon me in the
day of affliction, Psalm. 50.15
and I will deliver thee and thou shall glorify me: ask and you shall
receive, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you,
and for our assurance, the reason follows, for every one that asks,
receives; Matt. 7.7.
he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be opened: but
here is a very glorious and joyful promise, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Ioh. 16.23.
whatsoever that you shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you:
and which of all is most comfortable, before they call, I will answer, Esaias
65.23
and whiles they are yet speaking, I will hear: the proof whereof David had
in his greatest anxiety, I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the
Lord, and thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin, the which he notes with his
accustomed particle of attention. Selah.

The Souls meditation concerning the excellency of prayer.
Now may thou contemplate thy Lord Christ's example, whom thou art carefully
to imitate, how often, how diligently, how willingly, how heartily he prayed,
how he fled to the wilderness, that he might power out his heart to his
heavenly father, and there prayed, not only for himself, but taught his
Disciples, and prescribed unto them, that absolute compendi^us form, the Lords
Prayer, whereby he has put ( as it were) words in thine, Matthew. 6.9.
and in all the hearts of the Elect, whereby thou may present thy self
before the most great and glorious majesty of God, and that thou shall not
wander in thy prayers, he shows thee, how thou may boldly go forward unto
the thron of grace, Heb. 4.16.
that thou may find mercy and obtain grace, to find help in time of
need, and in whose name thou shall make thy supplications, that is, Ioh. 16.19.
in my name, says he, and for their sakes, I sanctifi^ my self that they
also may be sanctified through the truth, yea, in thy Redeemer Jesus Christ,
thine only Saviors name, lift up thy hands and heart, by a true and lively
faith, and steadfast confidence; and so truly, as Christ thy Redeemer is at the
right hand of his father in heaven, as truly are all thy sighs, and groans,
and pains heard by him, and he will grant them, according to his will. And
moreover, thou have to consider what benefits thou s^alt ask, and with what
condition thou ought to pray for temporal gifts, which thou art to request
with this exception and restraint, if it may stand with his blessed will, and
with thy good and salvation: for the Almighty only wise God knows best what
his children stand in need of, and he is so unspeakably good, Luk 11.11.12.13.
that he will give them nothing that can hurt them, although they of
misknowledge and ignorance, do most seriously desire it, yet spiritual
blessings, which tend to thy salvation, should be craved of him with sure hope
and full confidence, such as are our heritable gifts, remission of sins,
righteousness, holy Spirit* and life everlasting, even when it shall please
him.

Who will not then rejoice to pray, when as all our tears are seen, our
groanings waighed, and our words heard, who will not seek there where he may
certainly find all goodness? who will not knock, when he knows he shall be
let in? yea, and in midway we shall be met, and shall receive in our bosom
all things necessary both for soul and body, therefore pray we continually,
1 Thessalonians 5.17.
while we are here; call upon the Lord in all thy actions, seek for help and
counsel of him, in all thy redress and sorrow, fear God, hope in him, believe
in him, and stay for his coming, so shall mercy and grace, blessings and
life, compass thee every where round about, for non^ ever was ashamed that
put their trust in him, Romans 10.10.11.
or yet that had called rightly on his name; Ps. 145.18.19.
for the Lord is near unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon
him in truth, he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also will
hear their cry, and will save them.

A most comfortable Prayer to God for receiving and accepting our Prayers.
I thank thee, my Lord and my God, for these thy unspeakable benefits, that
thou have not only commanded us, to call upon thy name in all distress, but
of thy fatherly love and kindness have given us to understand that thou
willingly wilt hear and grant, in convenient season, whatsoever is good and
profitable either to the soul or body. I beseech thee my good God, power out
on me thy holy spirit, Zach. 12.10.
that Spirit of Prayer, Grace, and Supplications, that I may delight and take
pleasure in calling on thee, and every day bow the knee of my heart before thee
my Father, who art the right father over all thy children in Heaven, and in
Earth: Help me daily to ap^proach more and more unto thee, with all
confidence and trust on the name of Jesus Christ my Lord, that I may call on
him, as a good child does on his beloved father: Grant I may lift up holy
hands without wrath and doubting, that all my Prayers, yea the meanest thought
of my heart, is certainly heard of thee: Lend me patience whenever my help
is delayed; Hab. 2.3.
for I cannot prescribe unto thee time or manner: though thou tarry, I may
wait for thee, because thou will surely come, and wilt not tarry, Heb. 10.38
that I do not slide back, but still live by faith: Let me have thy Grace,
whereby I may serve thee acceptably, Heb. 12.28
with reverence and godly fear; for the Lord takes pleasure in them that
fear him, Ps. 147.11.
in those that hope in his mercy: govern me (my God) and make me remember
by thy holy spirit daily to bethink me of my mortallitie, that I may ever
be in readiness, and may pray at every occasion from my heart for a blessed
separation from this world* grant this merciful father for Jesus Christ's
sake, in whose blessed name, we call on thee, saying: Our Father, etc.

CHAP. IIII. Contains how a Christian man should behave himself when God
sends sickness upon him.
Flesh.
How then shall a Christian man behave himself, when God shall visit him with
sickness.

Spirit.
Thou know not (dear Soul) whether God will visit thee by sickness, or
suddenly (without bodily disease) call thee hence. The faithful Soul should
ever remember the uncertainty of death.
Therefore often have I advertised thee, that thou should not delay
repentance till thou be sick, but daily call on God, yea the selfsame
time thou art in bodily health, stand steadfastly in the faith, and good
preparation, wherein thou need not stand in fear of safety, think upon
that rich, foolish, and drunken Naball, how hastily the Lord smote him that he^
died. Sam. 25.38
Remember that rich man, who denied to Lazarus the crumbs which fell from his
Table, how short* Luke 16.22.
his being here was: Forget not that wretched wealthy man of whom it is said,
Thou Fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of Thee, then whose shall
all those things be which thou have provided: Luke 12.^0
And what should I say more? we are daily taught by evident eyesight, that
innumerable numbers dye before ever they be diseased, truly (before God) thou
art of no better account than other, nor know thou what chance he will
permit to overtake thee: but if it shall so happen, the Lord should call thee
from hence by bodily sickness, and cast thee down on thy bed: thou may
thus learn to dispose of thy self.

1 Learn to know the causes of thy sickness, which is sin.

2 Seek remission of thy sins, and reconciliation with God.

3 Pray to God for a gracious departure, and cause the congregation to pray for
thee.

4 Contemn not the ordinary menanes, and physic, so thou can have the
opportunity of it.

5 If thy sickness continue, strive to be patient, and beware of impatiencie.

6 Have ever this full assurence in thy heart, that thou in thy greatest
malladie and weakness, art Gods dear child.

7 If Satan assault thee, resist him by Faith, so will he depart from thee.

8 If thy time and hour be come, give the^ over unto Gods will and pleasure.

9 If the Lord shall restore thee to thy health again, be thankful even
from thy heart, unto his gracious Majesty for thy recovery.

A Pray^r against sudden death.
Preserve me (O Lord Jesus Christ) if it be thy will, from a sudden death,
suffer me not to dye in my sins, but that I may d^y and night bethink me on
the hour of my death, ever prepared in a saving repentance, in strong faith,
and steadfast hope, that I may blessedly sleep from hence, when it shall please
thee: but if so be thou do not call me by bodily infirmity, here am I in all
lowliness before thee, for I know thou art so merciful and good, that thou
do suffer nothing to betide me, but which shall be good and saving for me:
Grant me but this that I may always be in readiness, as a good patient,
that both sickness and death may redound to thy glory. And this I crave at
thy hands for Jesus Christ's sake, and in his name I call on thee saying: Our
Father, etc.

Flesh.
Now open unto me those nine f^resayd heads, that I may be taught how to use
my self in my sickness.

Spirit.
First, remember well that as death is the wages of sin, so likewise are all
sicknesses, Gods punishments, whereby he brings us to him, when we have gone
astray by sin: Do not (O soul) as the covetous and ungodly and In^idells
do, who when they are ^icke, begin to wrestle and lament therefore, that
their costs are spent, and they cannot have health to earne more; or else, they
begin to meditate how it happened them, whether they have Eat any unwholesome
Meats, or Drunk any hurtful Drinks; or if by other means their malady has
taken them: But remember what the Prophet says, Ier. 2.19.
Thine own Wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backsliding shall reprove
thee. Know therefore, and see that it is an evil thing, and bitter, that thou
have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in in thee (says the
Lord of Hosts) and therefore he who sins against his maker, shall fall into
the hands of his flesh.

A Meditation of the soul, learning to know the cause of sickness.
Hear thou, o Soul, in this point thou should be singularly attentive,
for when the Lord shall intend to call thee, all outward means must obey him:
for when we his creatures will not know the diseases of our souls, then does
the Lord send sickness of body, that we might have greater consideration of
our souls, and be always in repentance, and as our children sometimes me^it
the rod and correction, so do we dese^ue sickness and punishment at Gods
hands, o thou merciful God, if thou should visit us so often with sickness,
as we deserve, we should not be one twinkling of an eye in perfect health:
but it is but now and then, that thou chastizest us, to the intent we should
ever remember and fear thy holy name. And often it comes to pass,
thatinfants and young ones are chastized of the L. so that they make the elder
in years sorrowful, and are moved to lament and pity the poor distressed
souls: 2 Samuel 12.15.
for sickness is an Ambassador sent of God, counselling us to rise from
sin, and not to perish in our wickedness; lest it be said, Woe unto their
souls, Esaias 3.9.
for they have rewarded euilto themselves; mark (dear Soul) how insolently
and carelessly men lead their lives, that are not touched with the cross, or
any sickness at all, they regard not the word of God, neither the Sacraments,
they forget both faith in Christ and prayer, then are their souls in greatest
danger, for the less a father corrects, the more disobedience grows in his
children: so is it with mankind, the greater health and welfare they have,
the more negligent wax they and secure.

A comfortable Prayer in time of sickness.
Lord Jesus Christ, here lie I full sick, and acknowledge that it is thy
fatherly pleasure, that it should be so; for there cannot perish an hair of
my head without thy will, how then should I lose the precious gift of my
health, but by thy pleasure? behold Lord, thou have even made me such an one,
as thou willingly would look upon, and as thou in thy passion wast a worm,
and not a man, Psalm. 22.6.
^uen so have thou made me like unto thee, Psalm. 39 11.
o my God, when thou with rebukes do correct man for his iniquity, like a
moth thou make his beauty to consume away, I thank thee my God, that thou
have corrected me, for I know that it is for my weal, my God thou love
mankind, well and faithful are the wounds of a friend, help me my God, Pro.
27.6.
that I may be mindful of this chast^zement, all the days of my life, and
may fear thee, and depart from evil, which shall be the health to my navel,
Pro. 3.8.
and marrow to my bones, make me circumspect over sin, that some danger or
other, a great deal worse then this, befall not: even for my Savior Jesus
Christ sake: to whom be all honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

Flesh.
Show me how I may have remission of my sins, and be reconciled to God?

Spirit.
Secondly, seeing that now thine outward sickness affrayes thee, and thou art
sicker where thou feel it not, give di^igence above all things, to apply
physic thereto, thy true health is repentance, and steadfast faith in Jesus
Christ, by which thou may attain forgiveness of sin, and a merciful
father in heaven: for by faith thy heart is purified and accounted righteous,
thou receiuest peace and joy in conscienc: so that thou art revived, although
thy body be weak and diseased.

The sick persons prayer and confession, that his sins are cause of his
sickness.
I confess before thee, my Lord Jesus Christ, with a broken and contrite
heart, that I have procured this my sickness by my sins, and am grieved from
my soul and heart, that I have offended thy Majesty, and brought my self to
this mishap, yet (o Lord) thou set not light by a sorrowful soul, look
therefore unto my misery, Psalm. 147.3.
and heal my wounded heart, ^orgiue me all my trespasses, and cleanse me from
my wickedness, whereby I have kindled thy wrath against me, o Lord my Redeemer,
who speak always peace unto thy people, and consolation to the perplexed:
Comfort my Soul, say unto my heart joyful words, Son be of good cheer,
Matthew 9.2
thy sins are forgiven thee, how am I thereby refreshed in my soul, life,
marrow and bones? Yea Lord Jesus, if thy holy word were not my trust, then
should I perish in my weakness: I believe and am persuaded, that by thee Jesus
Christ, atonement is made for me, reconciliation with thy father purchased,
and I am ordained to that heavenly blessedness: to which, thou of thine
infinite mercy bring me, for Christ sake: to whom be glory and honor. Amen.

Flesh.
Show me how I may pray for a gracious departure in time of sickness?

Spirit.
Thirdly, in time of sickness, we should have our recourse unto our God: Psalm.
41.3.
the Lord will strengthen us upon the bed of languishing, and make our beds in
sickness, and therefore my son, in thy sickness be not negligent, but pray
unto the Lord ( as did Ezekiah) and he will make thee whole, Esaias 38.2.
leave off from sin, and order thy hands, aright, and cleanse thine heart from
all wickedness, and see thou communicate thine inward sorrow and grief, Eccles.
38.9.10.
unto the congreg^tion of the Saints of God, that they may join with thee in
prayer: for many sticks make the greater fire. Verily, verily, I say unto thee
(says our Savior) that if two of you shall agree on earth, Mat. 18.19
as touching any thing, what they shall ask, shall be done for them of my
father which is in heaven; for where two or three are gathered together in my
name, Verse. 20.
there am I in the midst of them: and if it be, that thy sickness be so
vehement, and thou so weak, that thou can not pray with thy mouth, make then
sighs and groanings of a true heart, to ascend unto the Lord: for the spirit
helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for, as we
ought: but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, Romans 8.26.
with groanings which cannot be uttered, persevere therefore in inuocating on
Gods name by thy voice, thoughts and cogitations, and by the Church, and delay
not, before that the Lord do look upon thee, and help thee.

The sick man's Prayer.
O LOrd Jesus Christ, thou have sent thy messenger, which is sickness, unto
me, to waken up my repentance, be hold my Lord, I know it is thy will, thou
would have me obedient and converted unto thee, I have nothing to direct
unto thee: but my prayers, and the poor sinful and imperfect sighs of my
heart, out of the deeps therefore I have cried unto thee, Lord hear my voice,
let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplications. I wait for the
Lord, my Soul does wait, and in thy word do I hope: My Soul wayteth for
thee (O Lord) more than they which watch for the morning, if it be thy pleasure
(O Redeemer) and profitable and necessary for my self, that I should live and
be preserved from death and destruction, because that I may live hereafter a
godly, holy, and Christian life, to my last end: but if it shall not be thy
will to prolong my days, but that I must depart out of this world, the^ come
Lord Jesus Christ my Redeemer, receive my soul into thy hands, and give me
place and possession in Paradise, in Abraham's bosom with the blessed Angels,
and all Saints. Amen.

Flesh.
Show me how I should use the ordinary means of Physic, in time of
sickness.

Spirit.
Fourthly, thou may conveniently use ordinary means and physic, then
give place to the physician; for the Lord has created him: Let him not go
from thee, for thou have need of him; but beware that thou have not recourse
unto the Physician, before thou come unto the Lord; for so did King Asa, ^.
Chr. 16.12.
when he was diseased in his Feet: therefore the Lord gave no blessing unto
his Physic, and so he dyed. But especially take heed that you use no
forbidden means, and ask not counsel of Witches, or those which do help by
the means of the Devil, through the abuse of Gods holy name, 2* Kin. 1.6.
for so did King Ahaziah consult with the Idol of Baalzebub (the god of Ekron)
whether he should recover of his disease. Is it because there is not a God of
Israel, that thou sendest to inquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron? therefore
thou shall not come off from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shall
surely dye. Be circumspect also, and seek out the best practiced and
skilfullest Physicians; for man's body is the precious creature of God, and
should be honored and no ways neglected.

Another Prayer for the Sick.
I thank thee Lord Jesus Christ, true Physician of my soul, that thou have
cured my heart, and cleansed it from sin, by that heavenly medicine from
above. I earnestly entreat thee (who have made all things) that thou would
bless these outward helps and means which thou have ordained* Mat. 8.2.
Lord (if thou will) thou can make me whole, and by these ayds restore me
to health: but if thou will not, those cannot help me. Lo, here I am, do
with me according to thy will and pleasure, so that ever respect be had to
thy glory, my weal and salvation; Grant these blessings unto me for Jesus
Christ thy sons sake, in whose name I pray unto thee, saying: Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc.

Flesh.
Show me how I may obtain the gift of Patience, in the time of sickness.

Spirit.
Fifthly (dear Soul) see thou always lay hold on patience, and request the
Lord that he would prese^ue thee from impatiencie: O how precious a thing is
patience, to trust always in the Lords help for it is of the Lords mercy that
we are not consumed, Lam. 3.22
because his compassions fail not; they are new every morning: great is his
faithfulness; for faith and patience cannot be disseuered. Heb. 6.12.
Be not therefore slothful, but be a follower of them, who through faith and
patience inherit the promi^e: ^o if we rejoice in the hope of the glory of
God, we^ must also glory in tribulations, knowing that tribulations work
patience; and patience, Experience; Romans 5.2.3 4.5
and experience, Hope; an^ hope makes not ashamed Behold and immitate thy
Savior Jesus Christ, Pet. 2.21.24.
who has left us an example that we should follow hi^ steps, who his own
self b^re our sinn^s in his own body on the tree, and ever committed himself
to him that judges righteously: so must we take all things patiently, for
this is acceptable with God, and in this must we ^esemble even our young ones,
who when their headakes, come and make their m^anes to their mothers, lays
down their heads in their mothers laps, and cry for help; even so do thou
(my dear* Soul) make thou thy lamentation before the Lord; cast thy burden
upon him, and he shall sustain thee: Evening and Morning, Ps. 55.22. verse. 17.
and Noone, pray and cry aloud, and let him hear thy voice, and exspect him
with patience.

And above all things fly impatience, for it destroys and corrupts all
Christian virtues: it offends God our Lord: it hinders and lets prayer,
and makes us (the longer that it holds) the more vehement we are, so as
Patience is a precious and powerful herb, so Impatiencie is venomous, and
poison to the heart.

The Sick persons prayer for patience.
Take from me (Lord Jesus) that noisome offense of impatiencie; keep me that
it never have dominion over me, least I make the cross thereby heavier; but
plant Christian patience in my heart, that I may continually attend thy blessed
time and leisure; for thy time is the right, and thy season the true season.
Indeed, truly make me continually be steadfast in Hope, and put my whole
confidence in th^e, 1. Cor. 10.1^.
for thou art true, and wilt suffer none to be tempted above his strength. And
this I entreat thee, for Jesus Christ thy Sons sake. Amen.

Flesh.
Show me some comforts if sickn^sse continue long with me, that so I may not
despair in Gods mercy.

Spirit.
Sixthly, (dear Soul) if thy sickness abide longer time than thy expectation
was, think not that the lord has forgot thee; but understand, that in the
greatest crosses thou art dearest unto him; Ps. 55.19.
but the wicked, because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God:
But as for thee, no more than a mother can forget her child, can he forget
thee; Esa. 49.15.16.
for behold he has graue^ thee upon the palms of his hands; yea the sicker
the child is, the greater is the mothers love, and the more diligently and
watchfully does she attend; and so does the Lord with thee: speaks he not
consolation in thy heart? and says, Art thou not my dear Son, and beloved
child? Ier. 31.20.
I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore, with loving kindness,
have I drawn thee: thy Soul shall be as a watered Garden, 12.
and thou shall not sorrow any more at all. I will satiate thy Soul with
fatness, 14.
and thou shall be satisfied with goodness (says the Lord) and therefore the
Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy: Ps.
103.8 9 10.11.13.
he will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever: He has
not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities; for as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy
toward them that fear him: like as a Father pittieth his children, so the Lord
has pity of them that fear him. Lo (dear Soul) thy Father nor mother
have such pity toward thee, as thy Savior; and therefore thou ought to
bemoane thy self thus; Ier. 31.18.
Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised as a Bullock, and accustomed to
the Yoke: Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, thou art the Lord my God:
surely after that I was turned I repented, and after that I was instructed, I
smot upon my Knee* I was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the
reproach of my youth; yet if thou shall be patie^t, since I spoke against thee
(says the Lord) I do earnestly remember thee still: therefore my bowels are
troubled for thee; I will surely have mercy on thee says the Lord.

The sick persons Prayer for comfort in affliction.
Lord Jesus Christ my Redeemer, I complain that my misery vexes me so sore,
and that my sickness endures so long. I request thee thou eternal Word of
thy eternal Father, thou lively comforter, proclayme Consolation in my heart;
that I in my greatest infirmity, anguish, and pangs of death, may understand
that I am thy dear child, and cast my self in thy arms and bosom: turn
never thy gracious countenance from me, yea Lord the time thou did hang
upon the cross, tookest our rebuke and reproach upon thee, and wast destitute
of the help of all creatures: yet wast thou notwithstanding thy Fathers only
begotten Son, and shall so be eternally. When faithful Joseph was in Bonds,
Ge. 41.14.
and had no whit of any creatures favor: Yet wast thou with him, loved him,
and delivered him in due season. When Stephan was lead to death, Act. 7.55.
and stones cast at him, did not thou manifest thy self unto him, when
replenished with inward joy, and full of the holy Ghost; he looked up
steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the
right hand of God. And Lazarus when he lay at the rich man's gate full of
sores: Luke 16.22
yea, and the dogs came and showed greater humanity than man, yet was he
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. O my God, I am thy vvretched
Lazarus, here lie I knocking at thy gate, with my pitiful groans; naked and
full of sores am I, my pain is great, and my torment will overcome me: but I
know assuredly, and heereunto 1000. witnesses have I in mine heart, by thy holy
Spirit, that thou will not forsake me: thine eyes are over me night and day,
as one of thine Elect, I appertain to thy everlasting life; therefore thou art
with me in this my distress, Psalm. 91.9.
I have made thee my refuge and my habitation; o set not mine iniquities before
thee, neither secret sins in the light of thy countenance; for who knows the
power of thine anger, Psalm. 90.11
even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. O let the beauty of my Lord my
God be upon me, and satisfy me early with thy mercy, that I may rejoice and
be glad, all the days I have to live: now Lord I love love thee, therefore
deliver me, and show me thy salvation, for Christ Jesus thy sons sake, to
whom with the holy Spirit, be all honor. Amen.

Flesh.
Show me how I may resist Satan in my sickness, or any other temptation?

Spirit.
Seventhly, if Satan insist in assaulting thee with his fiery darts of
tentations, Ephesians. 6.16.
enter not in deep cogitations and disputations with him: for he is too
crafty and subtle for thee: for of thine own nature, Genesis 3.1.
thou can never gainestand him; remember Adam and Eve, who were deceived by
him, and miserably seduced, although they were in the state of innocence, and
in their pure and holy nature; how can thou then wretched and corrupt sinner
encounter him? But cast thine eyes upon Jesus Christ, and heerewi^hall comfort
thy sick soul, that he in all his tentations abides constant, and was not
overcome; but overcame Satan for thy weal, has given thee freely his
victory, to the end that howsoever he shall double his assaults against thee,
yet he shall go confounded.

Moreover, the weapons which Jesus Christ used against him, are to be
considered of thee, which were places and sentences of Scripture; Ephesians. 6.17.
even so lay thou hand on the holy sword of Gods word, the sword (I say) of the
Spirit, 1 Pet. 5.9. Iam. 4.
and resist him steadfast in thy faith, and he will fly from thee.

If so be he say, thy sins are greater then can be forgiven: Genesis 4.13.
then kill him with the true word of God, and constantly affirm, thou lie
Satan, for where sin has abounded, Romans 5.20.
there grace has superabounded: If he say, that Christ's merits belong not unto
thee, thou art not of the number of the Elect, then exclaim and say, thou
lie Satan: for Christ has said, come unto me all ye that are weary and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest: and gain, as in Adam all die, even
so in Christ shall all be made alive. 1 Cor. 15. 22.


If he shall make Gods indignation and wrath for sin, huge and great against
thee, say without ceasing, Ioh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believed in him should not die, but have everlasting life. And in another
place, God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners,
Romans 5.8.
Christ died for us, and thou have loved them, Ioh. 17.23.
as thou have loved me.

If he shall open hell before thee, defend thy self with this word of God, 1
Ioh. 3.8.
and say: For this cause the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil. Hos. 13.14.
And again, I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem
them from death, o death, I will be thy plagues, o grau^ I will be thy
d^struction.

Does he vpbraid thy weak faith? then say thou, the Lord will not break the
bruised reed, and the smoking flax shall he not quench* And again, Esaias 42.3.
Psalm. 51.17.
A broken and contrite heart, o God, thou will not despise. And in another
place, thus says he, Esa. 57.15. 19. and 66.2.
the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy: I dwell
in the high and holy place with him also, that is, of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the
contrite ones. And therefore he says, peace, peace, to him that is far off,
and to him that is near.

If Satan object thy coldness and drowzinesse in prayer, thou may answer,
Although I do not speak, yet I sigh and groan, which is acceptable unto him.

If he affirm that thy cross and sickness lasts long, and that the Lord has
cast thee out of his mind, thou may answer, Ca^ a woman forget her sucking
child, Esa. 49.15.
that she should not have compassion in the son of her womb: she may
forget, yet will I not forget thee says the Lord. If he object thy poverty,
and that thou art despised of all, yea, of thy dearest friends: then say, Hide
not thy face far from me, Psalm. 27.9. 10.
put not away thy servant in anger; thou have been my help, leave me not,
neither forsake me, o God, my salvation. When my father and my mother forsake
me then the Lord will take me up. In another place: Psalm. 73.25 26.
whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon the earth, that I
desire but thee, my flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.

If Satan say, thou must yet nevertheless die, answer, blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord, Reu. 14.13.
and if he proceed and say, thou shall nevertheless be condemned, for he
will not depart at one repulse: then may thou with all boldness and courage
of Spirit say, Thou li^st Satan, for thou art a liar from the beginning, for
none that believe in Jesus Christ shall perish, but shall have everlasting life.

The sick persons prayer for comfort and victory over all tentations of Satan.
O thou Lord Jesus Christ Almighty, destroyer of hell, death, and condemnation,
and eternal victor and conqueror for me, strengthen me in all my weakness,
by thy holy Spirit, that I may take unto me the whole armor of God; Ephesians. 6.13.
that I may be able to withstand in the evil day; and having finished all
things, to stand fast, my loins girded about with verity, 14.
and having on the breast plate of righteousness, and my feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, 15.
16.
having the shield of faith, wherewith I may be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked, 17.
the helmet of salvation, and sword of the spirit, which is thy word: 18.
and pray always with all manner of prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance.

That thus being in arms, like a valiant champion and Christian soldier: I
may manfully fight under thy banner, and having overcome, may through thy grace
be crowned with glory, wherethou art at the right hand of thy father in the
heavens blessed God for ever and ever. Amen.

Flesh.
Show me how I may conclude my days, and commend my spirit to God.

Spirit.
As for the ^ighth and ninth point (beloved soul) look to the end of thy
sickness, and if thou shall perceive that thou can not live long, then with
all patience thou may say, Act. 7.59.
Lord Jesus Christ receive my Soul, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
thee. Into thy hands (O Lord) I commend my spirit. And continue herein even to
thy last gasp: and when words and motions of thy outward members shall begin
to fail thee, then betake thee to thy inward and most heavenly contemplations:
as of the place whether thou art going, of them that are there before thee, of
the Saints to whom thou shall be welcome, and of Jesus Christ the Door and
Way, by whom thou shall enter, with whom thou shall be blessed eternally. But
if it shall so be, that God shall restore thee to thy wonted health, then
thank him all thy life time, both in heart, and word, and deed, and give
diligent heed seeing thou art made whole, John. 5.14.
that thou sin no more, least a worse evil come unto the^. Wherefore fall
upon thy knees, and often and diverse times recite this Prayer following:

A thanksgiving after sickness.
I thank thee (Almighty Lord God) that thou so kindly and fatherly have
visited and chastised me for my offenses: it is good for me that thou have
humbled me, that I might learn thy precepts. O my God, how often remembered I
thy dear servant king Ezekiah, who said, I shall not see the Lord, Esa.
38.11.12.
even the Lord in the land of the living, I shall behold man no more with the
inhabitants of the Earth: my age is departed, and is gone from me as a
Sheepeheards Tent, I have cut off like a Weauer my life from day even to night;
thou will make an end of me. But I now understand (O Lord) that this my
sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that thou Son of God
might be glorified thereby; for thou have had mercy upon me: thou have
cast all my sins behind thy back: Thou louedst my soul and deliueredst it
from the pit of corruption: how comfortably have thou turned my sickness into
health: I thank thee my God, yea I thank thee from the bottom of my heart,
that thou have raised me from my bed, that I may visit and frequent thy house,
walk in my calling, and perfect my actions. Lam. 3 22.
It is of thy goodness and mercies that I am not consumed, because thy
compassions fail not. O how often should I remember this thy rod of correction?
how wisely should I walk all my days, that I may eschew thy wrath: assist me
(my God) that with the new health of my body I may begin to lead a new life:
grant that I may always praise thy name, govern me by thy holy Spirit, that
I may glorify thee by my life, and not give my membersweapons of
unrighteousness to serve sin, for thou have deliued my soul from death;
which has waited for me, thou art my help and my shield, my heart shall
rejoice hereafter, every moment in thee; for thou have compassed me with songs
of deliverance, I will praise thee in the congregation, in the midst of the
people I will sing unto thee, o Lord: To whom be praise and glory, now and for
ever. Amen.

CHAP. V. Containing a spiritual confutation of all worldly and fleshly
thoghts, which molest-men, when as they intend the Art to die well.
Flesh.
FOr so much as the Christian in his sickness, or in any other estate, should
daily advise himself on the hour of his death, yet notwithstanding, there are
many terrors in men's hearts, whereby they are afraid of Death.

Spirit.
That is natural (dear soul) for our nature in the beginng was not created
to die, but to live, but death is come into the world by sione, for death is the
wages of sin. Romans 5.12.
Yea (beloved Soul) like as death is a consumer of all that have life, so all
that have life, are foes and enemies to death; for seeing man of nature has
but a short time to live, it is no marvel neither yet sin, nor to be
discommended in any man to be af^aid of death and to avoid it by all means
possible. We have a remarkable example in our Savior) Jesus Christ* he began
to be sorrowful and very heavy before death, Mat. 25.37
for he knew that his hour did approach, for albeit there were many causes of
his sorrow and sadness upon the mount of Olives; yet was this one, because he
was a very true man, and had in him all our natural conditions and affections:
and therefore while the Godhead, which is the Word, rested it self, and held
it self quiet in that anguish of his death, and became obedient to admit such
pain, fear and astonishment of death to come over his body, which was without
sin, it s^eweth us that his humane nature had no pleasure to die, yea and
himself says: I have a baptism to be bapt^zed with, Luke 12.^0.
and how am I straightened till it be accomplished?

A Prayer against the fear of Death.
I thank thee Lord Jesus Christ, for that thou have not created me to death,
but to life, and have implanted a love in mine heart to live, I request thee
from the bottom of my heart, teach me to understand that death rule^h over
all, because of sin, and ouercometh me: grant by thy holy spirit, that so often
as death shall assault me, I may be enemy to iniquity, and ever fly and
efchew sin, as death it self: help me, o Lord, that in true faith I may
hold me fast by thee, for thou art life it self, Ioh. 11.25.
and so may freely and boldly say, I shall taste of death (although I were
dead) but live and declare the works of the Lord. Psalm. 118.17.
Grant I may believe from my heart, that by Thee (the Prince of life) I may be
delivered from eternal death, and attain unto that everlasting life, through
Jesus Christ thy dear Son. Amen.

Flesh.
But there are yet some that earnestly crave to die, and long for it.

Spirit.
Yes truly, but it is to be understood that there are tw^ kinds of men which
desire to die. The Infidel, profane, ungodly, often wish to die, and that of
impatiency, because of the great misery wherewith God punishes them for their
sins: for seeing they are without the knowledge of God, and without faith,
they are not participant of the cross of Christ, but despair in impatiency,
grudge against God, and wish themselves not only to die, but also often times
lay violent hands on themselves, as Judah, Saul and Achitophel did: purposing
to put an end thereby to their sorrow and misery, but then is it, that first
they begin to have proof of their wickedness, sweet heavenly Father keep us
from hence.

But the children of God, the more they grow in knowledge, and increase in
faith and love of Christ, the more they are weary of this wretched world, and
long for that eternal rest, and have Paul's wish in their hearts, I desire to
depart, and to be with Christ; Phil. 1.23.
yea, our Savior commands us, Matt. 6.13.
that we should daily crave to be delivered from evil, for therein not only
do we pray for deliverance from transitory distresses of soul or body: but
we ask from our heart, that God would either put an end to this sinful and
wicked world; or else come in a blessed time, and pull us from hence to
everlasting rest and quietness.

A Prayer for patience in trouble.
Now help me Lord Jesus Christ, that I in the abundance of my crosses, may
rightly order my self, and learn of thee how I should bear the weight of my
yoke: Mat. 11.30
preserve me that I never crave my death through impatiency, much less that
ever I shorten the days of my life which thou have given be; but grant that
evermore day by day, I may learn to know thee, to establish and confirm my
faith, and the longer I shall live, the more dearly to love thee, to the end I
may learn to contemn this world, and to long after that heavenly world, which
thou have made to stand in the conquest of Christ by his blood. To whom with
thee and thy holy spirit, one blessed God, I render praise and and glory, now
and ever. Amen.

Flesh.
May a man with a good conscience pray for a long life?

Spirit.
Unto this question S. Paul answers, for Christ should always be magnified
in our bodies, whether it be by Life or by Death; Phil. 1.20.2^.22.23.24.
for to me to live (says he) is Christ; and to me to dye, is gain: but if I
live in the Flesh, this is the fruit of my labor: yet what I shall choose, I
wot not: for I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to
be with Christ, which is far better: Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is
more needful for you, and having this confidence, I know that I shall abide
and continue with you all, for your furtherance and joy of Faith.

A meditation of the Soul tossed in the troublesome waves of this life.
Here may thou perceive ( beloved Soul) that Paul was tossed with two
diverse opinions and thoughts: he longed for rest, and counted it best, esteemed
it also good that he should abide in the flesh longer, and believed that God
would spare him, that in his ministry he might further serve both God and
Man: yet in both these, had this only before his eyes, that Christ should be
magnified in his body, whether it were by life or by death. So does also the
king Ezekiah, 2. King. 20.1.2.6.
to whom the Prophet Amos denounced death: but he turned his face unto the
Wall, and prayed unto the Lord, who added unto his days fifteen years. And
so was also Paul greatly joyed for his brother, and companion in labor, and
fellow-souldier Epaphroditus who was sick, Phil. 2.25.27
near unto death; but God had mercy on him, and not on him only, but on me^
also (says Paul,) least I should have sorrow upon sorrow. Follow these
examples, and thou shall not go amiss; for if thou can be necessary unto
God, and thy neighbor, it is convenient thou should crave a long and sound
life, that thou may be a profitable vessel of mercy, and chosen to good
actions: Nevertheless, submit thee always to his will, and be ready every day
to be dissolved, for time is but lent thee.

A Prayer for Health, and Gods blessings on our Labors.
Everlasting Almighty God, thou art my Life, and Length of my days; my time
is in thy hands; for in Thee we live and move, and have our being. Act. 17.28.
I thank thee from the ground of my heart, that thou has^ to this present hour
su^stayned me, and given me a healthful life, and good understanding, tha^ in
my calling I might serve thee my God, and my neighbor. O God thou see and
know m^ heart, that I am willin^ and very desirous faith^fully and truly
to walk^ forward in my vocation and trade; and that I have no wicked purpose,
no^ false pretense in my heart. I humbly therefore entreat (if it shall stand
with thy praise and glory, and my own salvation) that thou would prolong
my days, and conduct me by thy holy spirit, that I may learn to know thee more
fully, and serve my neighbor more entirely: yet if it be not thy pleasure,
and that thou know it to be better for me, take me hence unto thy self
when thou will; for I wholely renounce mine own will, and submit me to thy
good will and pleasure: Grant this unto me for Jesus Christ thy Sons sake.
Amen.

Flesh.
What shall move every man generally, that willingly he may give himself to
dye.

Spirit.
Obedience; wherein we are obliged unto God: for of him we have our Life: and
God may rightly claim the same again of us: no man of himself came here into
the world; and no man can stay longer than it pleases him: for it is he that
turns man to destrction, Psalm. 90.3.
and says, Return ye Children of Men.

A Meditation of the Soul for obedience to Gods Will.
But beware (dear Soul) least when thy time is come, thou dye against thy
will, and fret against God: say not I am constrained, I would rather live; so
do the Infidells, which build only upon this miserable life: and it fares so
with them as Christ says, Ioh. 12.25.
He that loves his life, shall loose it: and he that hates his life in this
world, shall keep it unto eternal life: and therefore show thy self obedient
to live as long as he will, and dye when it is his pleasure: Let nothing
detayne thee, nor hinder thee of all that are in the world: and thou must
reckon this life, and all the sufferings of this pre^sent time, Romans 8.18
are not worthy to be compared to the future Celestial glory which shall
be revealed in us.

A Prayer for obedience unto the will of Christ, and willingly to forsake this
world.
O Lord Jesus Christ, thou who wast so resolute and ready to thy passion, and
so obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, and did say, Phil. 2.8.
father not as I will, but as thou will. I request thee my Redeemer, give me a
submissiue heart, that when the day of my dissolution shall approach, I may
willingly condescend to thy will: for thou know my infirmity, and that flesh
and blood is afraid to undergo it. Lord bow me to thy word, and conduct me in
thy footsteps; that I may ever commit my self and my life unto thy trust, my
Lord and God, and most comfortable Redeemer, thou art God, and all that thou
do is good, thou never did disappoint any that put their hope in thee:
here I am Lord in thy merciful hand, If I live, I live unto thee, If I die,
Romans 14.8.
I die to thee, whether we live or die, we are the Lords. For I know and am
assured, Verse. 9.
that to this end, Christ both died and revived, that he might be Lord, both of
the dead and living: In whose name I pray unto thee, as he has taught: Our
Father, etc.

Flesh.
It is yet notwithstanding pleasant to be in the world, for beautiful is this
earth which we see, who would not rather abide here then depart?

Spirit.
All the children of the world sing that song, but (dear Soul) be not thou
conformed to this world: say not, this is the course and custom of the world,
but remember that the course of the world tends to hell, but we are the
children of the faithful, and look for a life, which the Lord will give unto
them, that abide constantly in faith before him. But as for the world, the
Scripture determines of it, and says, that the whole world lies in
wickedness, Ioh. 5.19.
and therefore commands that we should not love the world, nor the things
that are in the world; 1 Ioh. 2.15 16.17.
for if any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him, for all
that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the father, but of the world: and the world passes
away, and the lust thereof: but he that does the will of God abides for ever:
And again, strive to enter in at the narrow gate, for wide is the gate, Matt.
7.13.14.
and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go
in thereat: because straight is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads
unto life, and few there be that find it. Now may thou clearly see, and as
in a glass, what the course of the world is, and whither it tends; and mark
how wide and far off it goes from the way of life. Pray therefore unto the
Lord thy God, that he would translate thee from the way of the world, and
place thy feet in the gate of life, that thou may be transformed by the
renewing of thy mind, that thou may prove what is that good, Romans 12.2.
that acceptable and perfect will of God.

A Prayer to be kept in the way of life.
Now Lord Jesus Christ open thou mine eyes, and teach my heart, that I may
accept this true advertisement, and rectify my self according thereto. Alas
thou know, my God, how altogether my heart hangs upon this world, how easily
it suffers it self to be miscarried from that ^ure way of life, and Sa^^an
rests not: but kindlet^ lust and concupiscence in my heart, and ministers one
opportunity after another to sin, and pursues me on every side, to the end
he may devour my soul. O my Savior, enlighten mine eyes, that I may find thy
way, lead me by thy holy spirit, that I go not amiss: confirm my heart by the
power of faith, that I may abide steadfastly in thy known truth, that neither
sweet nor sour, Matt. 7.33.
misery nor death disseuer me therefrom: yea, though life were therefore to be
lost, that I may rather choose to be divided into 1000. parts, then give over.
Lord hepe me, that I may ouercom and keep the victory: O God help me manfully
to wrestle, that in death and life I may continue with thee for evermore. Amen.

Flesh.
It may so be, yet it is very hard, when one has goods and money enough, and
swims in honor and beauty, lives in pleasure and mirth, that he should
forsake all these things, and part from them.

Spirit.
Yes truly, it is hard to the children of this world, who are enclosed in
their own fat, Psalm. 17.10.14.
and have their portion here in this life, and whose belly, God has filled
with his hid treasure, for so says he elsewhere. O death, how bitter is the
remembrance of thee, Eccl. 41.1.
to a man that lives at rest in his possessions, unto the man that has
nothing to vex him, and that has prosperity in all things. Yea, unto him that
is yet able to receive meat. But it is far otherwise with the children of
God, for although they have many of his blessings and goods, and many are
exalted to glorious places and great honors, and have the benefit of the
ground in joy and pleasure, Esaias 1 19.
yet do they not make an Idol thereof; Psalm 6^.10.
and if riches increase, they do not set their hearts thereupon: but thank
God, and use the same aright: for they know they are but worldly goods which
are current here only before this world, but not before God: and incessantly
meditates on his most pure word: what helps it any man, if he possesses all
the goods in the world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? Mark. 8.36 37.
even so do thou, place not thy heart on thy riches, if God do promote thee
to dignity, be thou humble, behold the examples of the Patriarchs, Abraham,
Isaak, Jacob, Joseph, David, Daniel, etc. Yea, and of our Savior Jesus Christ
himself, Pet. 2.21.
and follow thou their steps, esteem ever Jesus Christ thy best and cheifest
goods, so shall thou always easily forgo thy earthly treasure.

A Prayer against the pleasures of this world.
Help me Lord Jesus Christ, that I may use the pleasures and riches of this
world, as a pilgrim* which shall pass to morrow: for surely, every man
walks in a vain show, he is disquieted in vain, he heapeth up riches, and
knows not who shall gather them? and now Lord what wait I for, my hope is in
thee, deliver me from all my transgressions, Psa. 39.7.8.
let my heart desire no more then my daily bread, to my suste^tatio^; cause me
to be contented, keep me that Mammon be not my Master, and that I place not my
confidence in any transitory thing; for it will hinder me in the time of
death: but help me, my God, that I may rightly choose that good part, which
shall not be taken away from me, Luk 10.42.
which is thee my God, my Redeemer and Savior; that all my joy and pleasure
may be in thee. Grant that I may be rich in my soul, honorable in faith,
joyful in thee* so shall I have enough, both here and in the world to come:
that I may willingly leave this world, and gladly without any impediment, be
carried by thy Angels into Abraham's bosom, to rest for ever. Amen.

Flesh.
It is notwithstanding great grief that the Wife shall forsake her married
Husband, and the Husband his Wife and Children, who have lived so long together
in poverty and distress; and now being in p^osperity and joy in their
Callings and Trade, shall now be s^perated.

Spirit.
These are fleshly and incredulous thoughts, by the which Satan often
disquieteth the heart of man; so that there is great pains to be taken before
man will be rightly advised. For we have experience of many men grudging
against God, as though he did do them great unrighteousness, because he
makes them so soon die, and leave the pleasures of this Life; especially when
they have all their affairs to dispose, and put the matters of all their life
time in order. So did that noble Roman GAIVS MARIUS, who (although he had
been Consul seven times in Rome, and was seventy years of age) yet fretted
against his FORTVNA (which was his Goddess) protesting in bitter exclamations,
that there was great wrong offered him, before that all his dessignements had
been accomplished, and brought to pass. But the faithful Children of God do
far otherwise: for they know they are not the God or Makers of their friends,
neither can provide for them, but that they are Stewards and Servants appointed
under God, Luke 16.2.
so long as it pleases him. And man in these his days lays hold on
eternity, but God has so provided for them, that one time or other he will
call them to give an account of their Stewardship, and may no longer be
Stewards. And so he himself will be both Father and Tutour, as he often
names himself in the Scripture, Ps. 68.5.
Defender of the Widow; and Father of the fatherless, even God in his holy
habitation. And so both scripture and daily experience teach us, that many
Widows are in better case after their Husbands death; and many Husbands in
better condition of Life after their Wives death and Children often better
provided and cared for, their Parents being out of this world, than if they
lived, or than they could have done for them, if they should have lived longer.
The Lord deceiue^h not, Ps. 120 3.
he neither sleeps nor slumbers that keeps thee: make the Lord thy Keeper,
and to be thy shade upon thy right hand: for he respects every one that
calls upon his name, and will never be accused of oversight of the godlies
weal and salvation. For although he be high above all Nations, Ps. 113.46.
and his glory above the Heavens, yet he humbles himself to behold the
things that are in heaven, and in earth: Yea (dear Soul) therefore causes
he many Widows and Fatherlesse-Children, that he in them may magnify his
goodness. And therefore this is a sure ground to build upon, that he will in
such ways have care and foresight for them if they will acknowledge him and
accept him for their Father; yea never a one of them shall have occasion in the
last day to complain of his providence over them, and defense of them: for it
is he only that rayseth up the Poor out of the dust, Ps. 113.6.7
and lifts the needy out of the dunghill; that he might set them with
Princes, even with the Princes of his people: yea it is he only who sets
the Poor on high from affliction, and makes them families like a flock. Ps.
107.41.
Settle thee therefore hereupon, for this is Gods undoubted truth.

The dying man's Prayer, bequeathing all his charge unto the hands of GOD.
O Lord my God, thou who have appointed me to be a steward and servant under
thee, and have commanded me to understand my duty: I have (through thy mercy)
been about my business, in all infirmity and weakness of body, yet with care
and diligence, kept my conscience, and saved me from infidelity, now seeing I
can bear charge no longer; but am diseased and tied to my bed, I render unto
thee, that my charge and st^wardship, it may be thou will dispose of it to
another, who may better administrate then I. And if I shall live, let it be a
Chri^stian and godly life, that I with far greater diligence then heretofore,
may understand my self: but if it shall so be, that I here end my days, let
it be a saving and blessed conclusion of my life. Here am I, and commit,
bequeath and deliver all whatsoever I have unto thee, great and small: be thou
father, mother and defender unto them. O thou Judge of widows, and helper of
the fatherless, thou know misery and poverty well, the poor commits
himself unto thee, Psa. 10.14.
thou art the support of the fatherless, yea Lord, it is thou who have care
over them, and think upon them. Now therefore sweet Christ enter into thine
own room and function, Psa. 44.18.
for I give it over, delivering them to thy maintenance and my soul to thy
merci^, withhold not thy tender mercy from me, o Lord, let thy loving
kindness and thy truth, continually preserve me. Lord Jesus Christ, Psa.
40.11.
thou did ordain a prouisor for thy dear mother Mary, raise up also to my
sorrowful wife, Ioh. 9.26. 27.
kind hearted and honest men, which may have attention to her, and whom she may
trust in her faithful and godly affairs: yea, and as thy mother was left a
widow, so wast thou also fatherless, for Joseph lived not long with thee;
therefore thou know both estates: yea, what is hid from thee, o thou
searcher of hearts? yea, o Lord Jesus, thou becamest fatherless; for all the
poor orphans sakes. I deliver unto thee now my fatherless children, there
receive thou them, it may well be, that both I and they shall praise and thank
thee therefore upon that last day. Bless and replenish their hearts with true
godliness; their bodies with soundness according to thy will, their life with
Christian education; and grant them whatsoever may comfort them in this world,
or in the world to come. Satiate them with a long life, and show them thy
salvation, o thou horn of my salvation. Thou gouernest thy children
maruellously, Psalm. 91.16.
thou teach and rulest them evermore, they know thy voice and follow it;
grant them patience and mercy, that they never separate themselves from thee,
and never desist from obedience and true love to thee, and their neighbors*
until thou shall receive them into those eternal and everlasting habitations,
to be with my Savior in heaven for evermore. Luke 16.9.
Amen.

CHAP. VI. Declaring how a Christian man shall willingly give himself to die,
overcome the bitterness thereof, and how in constant perseverance he may
continue to the end.
Flesh.
I Pray you show me how I may quiet the fear of death, to the end I may
willingly (...) adays, which speech i^ had of death: Tush (sa^ they) a stout
heart will overcome death.

A Meditation of the Soul^ against the fear of Death.
But (dear Soul) these are nothing else but fleshly and miserable
cogitations: for our own courage shall never carry comfort to the heart, nor
hope of eternal life. For these wicked men's hearts are notwithstanding
replenished with perplexity and grief; for they know not to whom they should
come to render their Souls. O but the children of God have a far more
forcible and pithie physic against the fear of death, yea a notable secret
revealed unto them from above: which is in true faith and cheerful confidence
in our Lord Jesus Christ: which whosoever has, and thereby shall lay hold on
him, has a preservative and antidote against all the terrors and fears of
death. And why will thou (O my Soul) be afraid of death? know thou whose
thou art, and what thou art? thou art ^arth, and must return to earth; but
Jesus Christ is thy Life, Col. 3.3.
why mistrustest thou? Death is thy Life, know thou whither thou shall go?
Col. 3 3. John. 14.6.
Behold, Christ is the Way and Ladder to Heaven; attend therefore thou must,
and kiss his Son, and thou shall not perish from the way: Ps. 2.12.
for blessed are they that put their trust in him; for having him thou have all
things, and without him, all other things are naught.

The Sick-mans prayer and faith in Christ.
Yea (my Lord Jesus Christ) thou diedst for my sins, thou have reconciled me
with thy father: thou have overthrown death, and meri^ted eternal life for
them that constantly believe, and hold out unto the end. Now therefore there
arises mirth and joy in my heart, and rest and peace, and I count nothing of
death: for by thee Jesus Christ I have remission of all my sins, and am pure
and righteous before God. O he is a good merciful father unto me: I am his
dear child and heavenly heir; and now Lord Jesus I am thine own peculiar,
whom thou have redeemed, not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but
with thy precious blood, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot. And
have delivered me from hell, yea I am thy brother, and fellow heir, and all
that thou have is mine; yea I am thy beloved dear bride, thy pleasure and thy
joy, thy treasure which thou have dearly bought. I am likewise the temple and
habitation of thy holy spirit, by whom I am sealed unto the day of redemption:
yea Lord Jesus thou have so reconciled, and united me, that I am Bone of thy
Bone, and Flesh of thy Flesh: yea all thy creatures should rather come to
naught, tha^ that I should be separated from thy love: what then can death
work upon me? surely nothing else, but that I may more nearely approach unto
thee my God. Therefore respect I not death, but have life in my thoughts and
mind, and speak of nothing else but life: for Christ is unto me both in life
and death again, yea I will sing and say with faithful Job: Job. 19.25.26.27.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the later day upon
the earth; and though after my skin be perished, worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see thee, whom I shall see for my self; and mine eyes
shall behold, and not an others. Though my raynes be consumed within me, Lord
Jesus Christ thou know that I both believe in thee, and by my faith remain
with thee eternally: yea and I also know, that I believe in thee, and feel the
sweetness of my faith, and taste of everlasting life in my heart. Thou art
mine, and I am thine, and I am possessor of all that thou have, as life, with
everlasting peace and joy: what account I then these transitory things? Having
thee, I have all things I could wish, both earthly and heavenly. A way with
this temporal pleasure, and beauty of this life, and all other fading and
perishing things, for thou Lord Jesus art my comfort alone; my goods, and
wealth, my honor, delight, and everlasting riches. I have trusted in thy
mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy Salvation. O how dearly love I thee, Ps.
13.5. Ps. 18.1. Ps. 28.7.
o Lord my strength, o Lord my rock, my shield, the horn of my salvation, and
strong defense. Such faith, such love burns in my heart to thee Lord Jesus,
the which has so possessed me, and encouraged me, that I am afraid neither
of death nor distress: for I am sure that death it self, and all things,
shall work together for my best. Now come Lord when thou will, come I say, I
am certainly and surely persuaded, that in thee, and by thee I shall have
life, and everlasting contentment, then come Lord Jesus, ^ho^ true God,
conclude this life, destroy thou the last enemy, which is death: place me in
my fathers inheritance, whereof I have thy blood sprinkled on my heart, an
undoubted pawn. I am far from home here, and a forr^iner in a strange
country, take me home to mine own, that there I may sit at thy table, with
Abraham, Isaak and Jacob: that as John inclined on thy bosom at the last
Supper* so I may rest my wearied soul on thee, my God for ever. Amen.

Flesh.
I have truly conceived comfort and and life in mine heart, if I could
constantly keep it, but I am afraid my faith will decay in time of trial.

Spirit.
Thou have thine own Lord Jesus Christ, an Almighty promiser, and powerful
performer, unto thee; for (says he) all the father gives me, Ioh.
6.37.38.39.40.
shall come to me, and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out:
for I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him
that sent me, and this is the fathers will, which has sent me, that of all
which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again
at the last day: and this is the will of him that sent me, that every one that
sees the Son, and beleeu^th on him, may have everlasting life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. Hear then (dear Soul) what comfortable
speeches these are, out of the mouth of Verity it self. Would thou have
more to glad thine heart and stir thy courage? Hear the Lord him self
witnessing, who cannot lie, thy faith s^all not decay, thou shall not be lost,
but abide constant to the lad end. And again, I have prayed for thee, Luk*
22.13.
that thy faith fail not, for my sheep hear my voice, and I know them (says
he) and they follow me, Ioh. 10.27.28.29.30.
and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish; neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand; my father which gave them me, is greater
tha^ all, and no man is able to pluck the^ out of my father hand, I and my
father am one: And again Mary hathchosen the good part, Luke 10.42.
which shall not be taken away from her.

A Meditation of the soul, of faith in Christ's promises.
How could the Lord give unto thee greater security? thou have his promise,
that he by the power of his holy Spirit, shall give his word for thee, thy
faith shall not decay: and will not his father hear him, when he prayed for
Peter and for thee, that thou shouuldest not be plucked out of his, or his
Fathers hand; and that the good part in thine heart, should not be reft from
thee? Now therefore art thou sure, both of eternal life, and of thy constancy
and perseverance thereunto, and that thou (through his mercy) may
steadfastly abide unto the end, he will not leave thee, and thou shall not
leave him: yea, thou shall apprehend him, o^ whom thou art apprehended.
Therefore be of courage, and comfort thy self, and say with Paul, I know whom
I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12.
and am persuaded, that h^e is able to keep that which I have committed unto
him against that day. And in another place* I am persuaded, that nei^ther
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principali^ies, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any creature shall be
able to separate us from the love o^ God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The sick man's Prayer and comfort in Christ.
O Lord Jesus Christ, Thou alone art my eternal Portion and Part, which I have
chosen, and am certain, that even when mine heart shall break, it shall not
be taken from me: o Thou Almighty Redemer, who can doubt of thee? o Thou
powerful Shepherd, who shall pluck me out of thy hands? o Thou loving
Savior, 1 Ioh. 4.8.
who art love it self, who will separate me from thy love? Thou have kindled
and raised in mine heart (already) a taste of the sweetness of the everlasting
habitations, and thou have made me have experience thereof, by many and joyful
deliverances. Yea Lord, I perceive the witness of thy holy Spirit in mine
heart, which witnesses unto my spirit, that I am the child of God, and so
fellow-heire with thee thou art the vine and I am a branch in thee, thou art
the tree of life, and I am engrafted in thee: thou art the Bridegroom, and I
the Bride wedded unto Thee, made one with thee, and joined with thee by an
everlasting indissoluable covenant, that neither the Devil or distress shall
weaken, cross or infirmity loose and break for ever. For I am betrothed unto
Thee, in righteousness, Hos. 2.19.20.
in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies: yea, I am betrothed
unto Thee in faithfulness, and I do know thee my Lord. O how burns my heart
to thee! Psalm. 42 2.
O when shall I come and appear before thee, my God in heaven, there to live
with thee for ever? Amen.

Flesh.
What shall the Christian do, when he shall not find such assurance of
faith, but great imbecility, coldness and drowzinesse, oftentimes doubting
whether he be one of the Elect or not?

Spirit.
He should not suffer such doubtings and weaknesses to lodge in his heart, but
remember that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, Matthew. 11.12.
and is gotten by force, and the violent take it by force: yea, thou should
be mindful of the Apostles admonition: 2 Timothy 1.6.
I put thee (says he) in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God
which is in thee, and he will comfort thee with these words. A bruized reed
will he not break, Esaias 42.3.
and the smoking flax shall he not quench; and he shall revive thy soul, by
that comfortable promise, be not afraid, only believe, Matt. 9 29.
thy faith shall make thee safe, for according to thy faith it shall be unto
thee: And therefore be of good cheer, Matt. 9.2.
thy sins be forgiven thee. For daily experience does teach, that the more
one resorts to the word of God, and pondereth upon the comfortable sentences of
the Scripture in his mind, he obtains the greater comfort in his heart, but
especially when he meditates upon this heavenly summons and citation of the
Lord, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all you that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest.

A Meditation of the great comfort the children of God have in this world.
O perceive ( dear soul) how mercifully, and lovingly the Lord calls upon
thee, how he gathers thee, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, Matthew. 23.37.
or as a good shepherd goes after that which is lost, Luke 15.4.5.6.
until he find it, and when he has found it, he lays it on his
shoulders, rejoicing, and when he comes home, he calls together his
friends, and his neighbors, saying unto them, rejoice with me for I have
found the sheep which was lost, Consider therefore that thou art even one of
these who are wearied and burdened, to whom the Lords Proclamation belongs:
and therefore wheere he says, Seek my face continually; answer thou in thy
heart, and say, I will seek thy face continually. Thus the Lord will look
unto him that is poor, Esaias 66..2.
and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at this word Know thou not (dear
Soul) that the Lord receives him that is weak in faith? For a weak faith is
a true faith, when as it wrastleth, strives, and leaves not off, but sticks
unto the word, wherein in the promise is contained. And therefore is it well
said by Luther, In Genesis ca. 26.
If God keep not promise, we have done with salvation: but God will keep it,
and not lie. And therefore albeit our h^arts doubt, we must have our recourse
unto him, who will not change: for the Lord speaks so of himself; I am the
Lord, and lie not. And again, Gods gifts and callings are without repentance.
Consider this (dear Soul) and hold thee fast by Gods word. He appears to be
angry but is well pleased, 1. Ioh. 3.20.
for God is strong, and his Word much more sure than thy own heart. And
therefore learn to understand the Lords Customs: his delight is with the
children of men: he ieast^ and dallieth with them, as Fathers with their
children, yea he withholds his hands a little from them, to prove them, not
for their hurt and destruction, but that they should not lean to themselves, 1.
Cor. 1.9.
but on him who rayseth the dead, and can make the weak and feeble strong and
valiant. He has no pleasure in presumption, but his will is that we should
serve him with fear, Ps. 2.11.
and rejoice with trembling. And we may see in Peter and Thomas, what it is to
be too much confident, and to build upon our own courage and strength. Ier.
17.9.
No man knows himself aright, but all things are naked, and open to the eyes
of him with whom we have to do. And therefore pray continually, that
mercifully he would uphold thee to the end; and be persuaded, if at any time
thou have felt comfort, that God will certainly come again to thee: and if
that at any time he has ioyed thy heart, that he certainly oftener and oftener
will do it for thy comfort. Yea, if in all thy life time thou had received
but only one drop of comfort; yet doubt not, but pray, believe, hope, and have
patience: Hab. 2.3.
the Lord will certainly come, and will not delay, unless thou be altogether
stifnecked and unwilling. Remember the example of the Cananitish woman. Mat.
15.21.
Behold how her Lord ieasteth with her, how he dismisseth her, yea even thrice:
First, he holds his peace, and answers not a word: Secondly, he hears,
but that he is not come for her good, but for the benefit of the Children of
Israel: but the third time he calls her a Dog, as unworthy of his comfort;
but what does she? for the first (in that Christ was silent) she meets him
with a patie^t heart, which well could stay and trust: For the second, she
answers with a faithful heart, that she must have some portion of his
promises: For the third, she meets him with an humble heart, and willingly
will be a Dog, desiring that which appertayned to him, that is, the crumbs
which fall from the table, that is, a very small help, a little deal of
comfort, wherewith she and her daughter would be contented. Here the Lord
cannot hide himself longer from her, but presents a copious measure of
mercy unto her, saying, O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as
thou will.

But if thou shall now say, behold, she was strong in Faith, and I am weak,
thou must understand, that our faith is resembled unto a Fencer, who is in the
lists against another, for he is ever in fear that he shall be overcome and be
too feeble against his Enemy; even so is it with Faith, for when we wrestle
and fight, we think that we are weak, and shall loose the Victory: But it
shall not fall out so, for victory belongs unto faith: let it incline
whether it will, it appertains ever unto her, yea and a weak Faith shall win
the field, and through the Lords strength and power, we shall be kept through
faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.
ready to be revealed in the last time. Remember also the Patriarch Ia^obs
wrestling, how he straue with God, and stuck hardly unto him, and let him not
go, but said, Genesis 32.26.
I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

A Prayer for steadfast Faith in Christ.
Now Lord Jesus Christ thou know I believe, although but with a weak faith,
yet by the self same I put my whole trust and confidence in thee: reach me
thy comfortable hand, and draw me to thee O Lord, I am weak, increase my
faith, stand not far off from me, for thou art mine only hope, to whom else
can I go? Kindle that little spark in my heart by thy holy spirit, that I
may evermore do thy will. Behold, to will is present with me, Romans 7 18.
but how to perform that which is good, I find not. Yea lord Jesus thou art my
Life, my Hope, and Salvation; for having thee I have all things: Now have I
thee, although by a weak hand; now have I thee, albeit my hand be weak, thine
is strong: Let me not go from thine hand, to the end that I let thee not go
from me. Look chearefully upon me, as thou did upon Peter, Marie Magdalen,
and the woman of Canaan, and the holy Patriarch Jacob, drive away darkness from
my heart, and let me enjoy the consolation of thy mercies: here am I as a poor
Dog, and stay for the crumbs which fall from the table of mercy. Behold, I thus
wrestle with thee by prayer. O thou strong Lord, insinuate thy self into my
heart, for by thy strength, I striu^ with thy self, give thy self unto me. I
will not le^ thee pass by any means before thou bless me: I will not desist
before the s^n of consolation rise brightly unto me: and now thou Lord Jesus
Christ, who have prayed for Peter, do sit at the right hand of thy father,
Intercessor for me, that my faith shall not decay. Arise (O Lord) and still the
tempest of my heart, and rages of temptation, that in a lively se^ce I may see
and rast the sweetness of thy word and holy spirit; that thereby I may learn,
that inward joy and freedom from sin and power thereof, by the death and
passion of thy dear Son, my Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: to whom, with
thee and thy holy Spirit, be rendered (as most due is) all honor, power, and
glory, of all true Christians, from this time forth for ever. Amen.

CHAP. VII. Containing spiritual consolations and Instructions against the
terrors, that either the Soul, or the conscience of Man (now ready to dye)
can object.
Flesh.
It may be nevertheless evidently seen that every man is mortal, and
yields unto death.

Spirit.
Men dye (truly) and loose their lives by reason of sin, but they that have
the true comfort of the heart infused by Jesus Christ, and rejoice therein:
They account death nothing else but a passage from this miserable world, to
their own native inheritance: for Christ that dwells in them, has tasted
death for them, taken away the power thereof, and broaken her sting; so that
death can do no more but disseuer the Soul from the body, and bereave us of
this transitory Life. Yet it shall serve (as all other things do) to our good;
for we rest from our labors, and enjoy happiness, because the righteous man's
Soul is in Gods hands, Wisd. 3.1.
and there shall no torment touch it. And Christ himself professes that he
will come again, and receive us unto himself, Ioh. 14.3.
that where he is, there we may be also. Hearken therefore and learn what it
is to dye; for it is nothing else than a passage, and home going to rest, yea
the death of the faithful, is Christ's taking of them unto himself.

A Prayer against Death.
O Lord Jesus Christ, thou eternal true Light, inlighten my heart, that as a
new creature I may look upon Death with new eyes, and not esteem it for a
hurter of me, but for a messenger by whom thou call me from this wretched
world, and translatst me to the kingdom of thy Son, from this valley of
darkness. Even so, Come Lord Jesus with that Chariot of Elias, and take me
from hence: Now let thy Servant depart in peace, Luk 2.29.
who longs for quietness and rest, through Jesus Christ my only savior.
Amen.

Flesh.
Yet Death is very terrible, cold, and evil favored, we become stiff, and
so must rot in our graves.

Spirit.
That is also a punishment which God inflicts on the body for sin, but the
children of God look not to the present show and shape of Death, but look
further off, and consider, how pleasant, how soon, how beautiful, how clear
and honorable their bodies shall rise up at the last day: and corruption shall
put on incorruption: 1 Cor. 15.53.
and this mortallitie shall put on immortallitie. Then shall be brought to
pass the saying that is written; Death is swallowed up in victory, and by
this the holy man Job comforted himself, for he knew that his Redeemer lived,
and that he should raise him up from the earth. O how beautiful shall our
bodies be; there is no star in heaven shall be so clear, never shined the
Sun or the Moon so perfectly, as when the Lord shall change our vile bodies,
that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
working, Phil. 3.21.
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself: for we are the Lords
wheat, ^ Cor. 15.37. Ioh. 12.24.
sown in his ground, which shall rise again, and bear everlasting fruit: So
also is the resurrection of the dead, it is sown in corruption, it is raised
in incorruption, it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power, it is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body, there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.

A Prayer against the terror of the grave.
Strengthen me, o my Lord Jesus Christ, that I be not amazed at the fearful
sight of dead members, nor when I think upon the rottenness in the grave; and
that I shall turn to dust and ashes, but help me, that in a joyful hope, I
may behold the beauty and cleerenesse, which shall not only be in my soul;
but even manifest in my body, that I may be encouraged thereby, gladly to meet
thee, when ever thou shall please to call me, to that spiritual wedding, from
this life unto life eternal, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

Flesh.
It is very terrible, nevertheless to taste of death, ye^ to be put in that
dark hole in the grave, covered with earth, full of rottenness and corruption.

Spirit.
That fear arises of the sense of sin; for death is our enemy, and God
created man to be immortal, and made him to be an image of his eternity,
nevertheless, Wis. 2.23.24.
through the envy of the Devil, death came into the world and he^rein is a
figure; representing the de^sert of sin for the breach of Gods Law, in that we
not only die temporally here, but must eternally perish, be thrust down in
to the dark dungeon of hell, and there be ouerspred with the flames of
perpetual fire, with the rivers of brimstone; if that our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ had not come to our redemption. And of this comes that terror,
and hangs on us until we come to the grave. Even as a man that had been
plucked out of a great fire, or out of some deep and dangerous water: so often as
he thinks upon it, he is afraid: so is it with us, we are greatly
astonished and amazed, when we bethink us on that misery, wherein we should
have been destroyed, had not the death of Jesus come between, by whom our
atonement is made with the Father.

But yet all the children of God should l^^rne a new language, and attend how
the holy Gospel speaks hereof: for it calls the death of the faithful, a
sleep: and their graves, chambers to sleep in; for as Jesus Christ has taken
the punishment of death from us, and suffered the pains of hell, fulfilled
Gods righteousness, and procured eternal life for us; so the holy Spirit in
his Gospel, does take away the harsh and hard names of death, and does comfort
the Lords Elect, with a new tongue, Esa. 26.20.
as when he says, Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee, hide thy self (as it were) for a little moment, until the
indignation pass over. And in another place, Dan. 12.2.
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall wake, some to shame
and everlasting contempt, and some to everlasting life. And again, our friend
Lazaru^ sleeps, Ioh. 11.11.
but I go that I may awake him out of sleep. Also, the child is not dead,
Matthew. 27.
but sleeps, and there arose many that slept, and so in infinite more places.
Here have thou then thy death changed into a soft sleep, and thy grave unto a
warm bed. When thou die thou art said to go to sleep, because he that
betaketh himself to his rest, is in expectation that the next day after he
shall rise; and when they beat the earth of the grave with the shouell, it i^
called to shut the door, and when we rot in the earth, w^e are said to rest and
to hide us until wrath pass over our souls.

A Prayer for the mercies of Christ.
O Lord God, holy Spirit, take thou my heart, and replenish it with the
comfortable mercies of our Lord Jesus Christ, teach me to put due difference
betwixt the Law and Gospel; abolish terror and fear for death, and learn me
that new language of Canaan, that I hear it not only with mine ears; but
pronounce it by my mouth, that I may believe, and in experience prove, that
when the time of my dissolution shall draw near, I shall not die, but sweetly
sleep, until it shall please thee, by thine Arch-angell and trumpet of God, to
awake and raise me up, and so do I lie down now Lord Jesus in thine arms, as
a child in the mothers lap, and commit my soul unto thee, and sleep as long a
time, as it pleases thee, Grant, o God, that my soul may live and reign with
thee eternally. Amen.

Flesh.
Thou say well, yet I see when men are in the agony of death, their eyes
turn in their heads, they become blackish, and they sweat for pain.

Spirit.
That is not only to be spied in the children of this world, who depart with
out repentance, but even in the very faithful, and Saints of God; for so the
sinful and deadly body must feel the sting of death, and undergo the the
punishment and wa^ges of sin: and although we see in the children of God,
such anguish and smart, it is naught; for so they easily overcome all the
miseries and bitterness thereof, for the comfort of Jesus Christ, is so great,
that he is insteede of all things unto them, and that name Jesus so sweet, that
it consumes all the acrimonie and bitterness in death, and causes the
faithful in the very period of death, to taste everlasting joy and salvation.

A prayer to Christ, to keep us from a troublesome death.
Lord Jesus Christ, thou who tasted st the bitter vinegar of death upon the
Cross due unto my sin, and have greatly complained and bemoaned thy self, and
in the days of thy flesh did offer up prayers and supplications, Heb. 5.7.
with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save thee from death,
and wast heard in that thou fearedst, I beseech thee keep me from a
troublesome and pain full death. Fill my heart with lively faith, and a rich
hope, that I be not greatly afraid of death, nor terrified for the sting
thereof: O Jesus, let thy dear and sweet name never depart from my heart and
memory, unto my last breath, that I give up the Ghost, and commit my soul unto
thee, to rest for evermore, Amen.

Flesh.
Is there no kind of physic then a man may use, that he should not taste
the sharp sting of death?

Spirit.
Yes verily, Ioh. 8.51.
for so the Lord thy redeemer has said, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, if a
man keep my saying, he shall never see death. Thou must then learn rightly
to apply this physic, which is Jesus Christ's word; not the word of Moses,
which is Gods law; nor man's word, devils, or witches, but the merciful
preaching of the Gospel, in the which he promises unto all belieuers
remission of sins, righteousness which is accepted before God, the holy
spirits consolation, and life eternal. And this is the word which the Lord
gives to the hearts of the Saints, the which vpholdeth them, and whereon they
rely both in life and death, and find Christ and consolation therein; with
the which they are so detained and comprehended, that they taste not the
bitterness of death because of that sweetness that is in his promise, and comfort
that is in his word.

For Christ is in his word, and the word carries Christ and his power, he who
will have the Lord must have his word, and he who has the Lord himself, the
sweetness of his grace and comfort, shall never see death, that is, shall
never be agashed, or taste the smart of death, and so the Lord himself
expounds it, Verily, Mat. 6.28.
verily, I say unto you, there be some standing here which shall not taste of
death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom. And again, Luke
9.27.
But I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here which shall not taste of
death, until they see the ki^gdome of God, that is, they build upon his true
word, taste Christ, and his comfort in the word, yea, they wind themselves in
the word, as a dead corpse is wrapped in his winding sheet: and so it comes
to pass, they feel Christ and his mercy in his word, and thereby taste in
their hearts everlasting life. O thou precious, pleasant, and excellent
doctrine, which art certain, and cannot deceive. What would you have more (O
dear Soul) and for what stayest thou? Romans 3.4.
Receive that heavenly doctrine in thy heart, use it well, and keep it daily,
yea every moment. Behold how bosting and bragging the world is, having found
physic for an ague, toothach, or for the eyes, how costly and pr^tiously do
they esteem it. How much more should we glory in this our redeemer. Heavenly
and divine physic, which has taken away death, the father over all
sicknesses.

Thou need not inquire of the trial and proof hereof, behold the examples
of the faithful which have used this physic, and by the benefit thereof have
felt no grief in their unspeakable pains, as Saint Stephen, Act. 7.56.59.
Who being full of the holy Ghost and faith in Jesus Christ, looked up
steadfastly into heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the
right hand of God, and they stoned him, calling upon God, and saying, Lord
Jesus receive my spirit. And Paul having this preserving physic, durst daily
brag against death. I desire to depart, and to be with Christ. So did
Ignatius, and so Policarpus, and St. Laurance, with St. Vincentius, and
infinite numbers of others.

A prayer of the Christians steadfast hope of Heaven.
O Lord Jesus Christ, thou have the words of eternal life, Ioh. 6.68.
how does my soul thirst and long after thy consolation, yea, my redeemer! He
that meditates on thy word diligently, he has that true heavenly physic,
which shall never fail in time of death, but fetteth it self against the
gates of Hell. O Lord Jesus feed my hungry heart with thy word, and
ouer-sprinkle me altogether and at all times with thy comfort, for thy word
and thy truth abides for ever: therefore shall I by the means of faith in thy
word, be preserved for eeuer; for he that belieueth thy word, belieueth in
thee, and he that keeps thy word, has thee, and he who has thee, has
eternal life, and he who has life, neither can nor shall taste of eternal
death: for thou art the resurrection and the life, Ioh. 11.25.
he that belieueth in thee, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and
whosoever lives and believes in thee, shall never die. Beleeuest thou this
(my soul) yea Lord Jesus, thou know all things, thou know I believe in
thee, and have thee in mine heart, and that I do comfort me in thy word, rest
and repose my self thereupon; therefore am I certain, that I am one of those
which shall never see death, taste his bitterness, or feel his sting. Grant
me this Lord Jesus Christ, for thy true holy words sake. For unto thee do I
commit both soul and body, help me therefore, even for Jesus Christ his
sake, to whom be given all glory and honor, now and ever. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. Comprehe^ding remarkable sentences of Scripture, with some earnest
prayers to be powered out for them that are in present peril of death, as also
how they should behave themselves that are present with the sick person.
Flesh.
I Pray thee rehearse some sentences of Gods holy Word, wherewith I may comfort
my Soul at the very point of death.

Spirit.
First, every Christian must diligently learn to comfort himself, by reciting
the articles of our faith, which is the compend and sum of all doctrine and
comfortable speeches: but especially, he must learn the three last articles,
I believe the forgiveness of sins, resurrection of the body, and life
everlasting. So the faithful soul must apply the whole articles to himself
in particular, and so appropriate them unto himself, as if there were none in
the world, but he alone, which should have benefit thereby. Thereto the Lord
has appointed the Sacraments to confirm that our faith, as faithful and true
seals, and merciful tokens, whlch he has appointed to these articles. Here
thou may apprehend thy holy baptism, wherein thou have received and
concluded with God an everlasting and inviolable band and covenant of mercy,
and so art washed and cleansed by the blood of Christ: Next may thou comfort
thee by the holy Supper, because thou (as the Son of God) art nourished and
refreshed at thy Fathers Table, and thereby assured that thou art a true member
of Christ, a righteous heir to whatsoever Christ with the sacrifice of his
body and blood has merited.

Besides these things, ^hou may cause to be ^ead or said, these or such
^ike sentences of the Scripture.

The seed of the woman shall bruize the head of the Serpent, Gen 3.15.
and the Serpent shall bruize his heels.

1 Ioh. 3.8
For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil.

Esa. 35.10
And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Sion with songs and
everlasting joy upon their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness; and
sorrow and sighing shall fly away.

Thy dead men shall live together, Esa. 26.19.
with my dead body they shall arise; awake and sing ye all that dwell in the
dust, for thy deaw is as the deaw of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the
dead.

Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, Verse. 20.
and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self, as it were, for a little
moment, until the indignation be passed over.

Naked came I out of my mothers womb, Job 19^25.
and naked shall I return thither, the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

I know that my Redeemer lives, Verse. 26.
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though after my
skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall
see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not a stranger.

Is not Ephraim my dear son, Ier. 31.20.
is he not my pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly
remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely
have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

So verily as I live (says the Lord) I have no pleasure in the death of a
sinner, but that he should turn from his evil way and live.

I will ransom them from the power of the grave, Hos. 13.14
I will redeem them from death: o death I will be thy plagues, o grave I will
be thy destruction.

As the Heart pants after the water brooks, Psalm. 42.1.
so pants my soul after thee, o God.

My soul thirsts for God, for the living God, 2.
when shall I come and appear before God.

Why art thou cast down, o my Soul, 5.
why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise
him for the help of his countenance.

Whom have I in heaven but thee? Psa. 73.25.
and there is none upon the earth that I desire beside thee.

My flesh and mine heart 26.
fails, but God is the strength of mine heart, and my portion for ever.

Wisd. 3.1.
The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment
touch them.

2.
In the sight of the wise they seemed to die, and their departure was taken for
misery; 3.
and their going from us to be utter destruction, but they are in peace.

He that endures to the end, Mat. 24.13.
shall be safe.

Mat. 11.28
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Behold the Lamb of God, Ioh. 1.29.
which takes away the sins of the world.

Ioh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believed in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ioh. 5.24.
he that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into judgment; but has passed from death to life.

I am the bread of life, Ioh. 6.35.
he that comes to me, shall never hunger; and he that believes on me
shall never thirst.

All that the Father gives me shall come to me, verse. 37.
and him that comes unto me, I will in in no wise cast out.

And this is the will of him that sent me, verse. 40.
that every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

Verse 47.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, has everlasting
life.

Ioh. 8.12.
I am the light of the world, he that follows me, shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life.

Verse. 51^
Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see
death.

My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, Ioh. 10.27.28.29.30.
and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life. And they shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hands. My father which gave
them me is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck them* out of my
fathers hands, I and my father am one.

I am the resurrection unto life, Ioh. 11.25.
he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall I live.

In my fathers house are many mansions, Ioh. 14.2.
if it were not so, I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you.

And if I go and prepare a place for you, 3.
I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there you
may be also.

I am the way, the truth, 6.
and the life, no man comes unto the father, but by me.

John 17.3.
This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent.

verse 24
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me, for thou loue^st me
before the foundation of the world.

Neither is there salvation in any other, Acts 4.12.
for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved.

To him give all the Prophets witness, Act. 10.43
that through his name, whosoever belieueth in him, shall receive remission of
sins.

Where sin abounds, Romans 5.20
grace abounds much more.

If God be for us, Rom 8.31.
who can be against us.

He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall
he not with him give us all things? who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods elect? it is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ
that dyed, yea, rather that is risen again, who is at the right hand of God,
who also makes intercession for us.

I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, Romans 8.38.
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, etc.

Romans 11.32.
God has concluded all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.

Romans 14.7
None of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself, for whither we
live we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we dye unto the Lord, whither
we live therefore, or die, we are the Lords.

1 Cor. 15.22.
For as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

1 Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able, but with the temptation also will make away to escape, that you may be
able to bear it*

Phil. 1.20.^1.^^.23.
Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by death, for
to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain: but if I live in the flesh, this
is the fruit of of my labor: but what I shall choose I wot not, for I am in a
straight betwixt two having a desire to be with Christ, which is far better.

Our conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3.20.
from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

This is a faithful saying, 1 Timothy 1.15
and worthy all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief.

I am ready now to be offered, 2 Timothy 4.6.
and the time of my departure is at hand: I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith.

Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous judge shall give me at that day; and not unto me only, but unto
them also which love his appearing.

1 Timothy 6.12
Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold of eternal life, whereunto thou art
also called.

I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy* 1.12
for I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him
against that day.

We are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.15.
ready to be revealed in the last time.

The blood of Jesus Christ Gods Son cleanses us from all sin. 1 Ioh. 1.7.


In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his
only begotten Son into the world, that we may live through him here in his
love, not that we loved God; but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be
the propitiation for our sins.

Here have we no continuing City, Heb. 13 14
but we seek one to come.

As many as I love I rebuke and chasten. Revel* 3.19


Be thou faithful unto death, Revel. 2.10
and I will give thee a crown of life.

To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne, Revel* 3 21
^uen as I also ^^ercame, and am set down with my father in his throne.

Reu. 12.11.
And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony, and they loved not their lives unto death.

Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth, Reu. 14.13
yea, says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works
do follow them.

Meditations of the Soul.
Of these and many other comfortable speeches and sentences (dear Soul)
choose and select some which best may comfort thee. Make them as familiar unto
thee as the Lords prayer; and as some use to provide their winding sheet some
years before they die, against the time there shall be occasion of it, that
their bodies may be enfolded therein. Even so, pick thou out some remarkable
sentences, and learn to understand them, to the end that in time of death
thou may wrappe thy soul therein; for at that time it happens, that the
understanding is mightily lessened, the memory taken away; long Sermons cannot
be heard, Mat. 4 4. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
there is no attention given to perswation, nor Rhetorical allurements, but
one comfortable word which proceeds out of the mouth of God, rejoices,
gladdeth, nourishes, refreshes the heart, life, and soul. But time is too
short to learn these things, when thou art on thy death bed. And therefore
acquaint thy self diligently with Sermons, and preachings, reading, and
meditating on Gods word, that thou may have these spiritual weapons, in the
hour of thy greatest combat. Make diligent use of thy going to Church, and
every time see thou learn that whereof thou wast ignorant before, so shall
thou increase in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, corroborate thy faith,
kindle thy love, augment thy hope, and be provident against that greatest and
last assault of Satan.

A Prayer for a diligent and steadfast faith in Gods word.
O Lord Jesus Christ, open my heart by thy holy spirit, that I may give place
to thy word, ponder th^reon, and weigh it diligently, and make it familier unto
my soul, and not be as a vessel that is cracked and can hold no liquor. H^b.
2.1.
Illuminate my vnderstan^ding, and confirm my memory, that I may ever call
thy joyful comfort to mind, and be that good portion of ground which in an
honest and good heart, may hear and keep thy word, and bring forth fruit
with patience unto the end; grant this O Lord God for Jesus Christ's sake, to
whom be all glory and honor, Amen.

Flesh.
What else is behoouefull to comfort the sick on his bed?

Spirit.
I have set down every where prayers for thee, which thou may use as
occasion serves, and the disposition of thy sickness requires, but the most
special is the Lords prayer, which here also thou should remember, saying,
Our Father which etc. sundry Prayers and Meditions may thou have, out of the
learned and godly Fathers, as Augustine and Bernard, and out of holy latter
Writers, as also out of the book of Psalms, in the which thou may use
these most frequently.

O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, etc. Psalm. 8.


The Lord is my Shepherd, etc. 23.


Unto thee, o Lord, do I lift up my Soul, etc* 25.


Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven. 32.


As the Heart pants after the water brooks. 42.


Have mercy on me, o God. 51.


And so according to the several constitutions of thy Soul, and as thou
find thy tentation to increase, or be diminished, thou may make election
of this or that Prayer, or Psalm in the Scripture. And if it be so, that thou
growest exceeding weak, and that thy speech begin to fail thee, these
sentences which are but short, thou may remember.

Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace. Luke 2.29.


Luke 25.
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.

Psalm. 31.
Into thy hands I commit my spirit, thou have redeemed me Lord God of truth.

Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Act. 7.59.


Abide with us Lord Jesus, Luke 24.29
for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent.

I desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.
and to be with Christ.

Flesh.
What shall they then do that stand by, when as they see the sick take his
last goodnight from this world, and to depart comforted in Soul, and to
attain a blessed end?

Spirit.
They are to lament and mourn, seeing it is a thing very natural, it cannot
be forbidden; but thou must not sorrow even as others which have no hope, for
we that are Christians must admit comfort, ought to be constantly and
certainly persuaded, that our dead are not dead but sleep, that they do not
perish, neither are lost; but delivered from this wicked world, and gone home
to the Lord, and would not for the price of this whole world, if it were
possible, to return hither again; and therefore we should rather be
thankful unto God for their happy dedeparture, and learn of them to live
regiously and Christianly: and remember them who have spoken unto us the word
of God, whose face we should follow considering the end of their conversation,
Heb. 13.7.
and therefore falling on their knees, they may pray as follows.

The Prayer of those that are about the sick person when he is departed.
We thank thee Lord Jesus Christ thou everlasting Prince of life, for
upholding this thy creature in true confession and constant faith, and for
granting him a blessed departure: O how gloriously shall his soul be carried
to heaven to everlasting rest and joy, by the Angels to Abraham's bosom, thine
own celestial spirits attend at his beds side, although with our carnal eyes
we do^ not apprehend them: now does he repose himself in the Lord Jesus
arms, now has all displeasure and grief an end, now shall the Lord wipe away
all tears from his eyes, Reu. 21.4.
and give him everlasting peace and comfort, with joy and s^luation. Now
everlasting joy shall be upon his head, he shall obtain joy and gladness,
Esa. 35.10.
and sorrow, and sighing shall fly away.

O thou blessed Soul, o dear and sweet friend, happy is the case thou art in*
thou have borne Christ's yoke, now art tho^ dead, but yet thou live, o Lord
Jesus have mercy upon us that are living, and as yet remain on the earth, and
teach us to run out the course of this irksome misery, to the end that we
may imitate such faith, and constancy, daily and hourly to be prepared, that
we, as this thy creature has done, may make a blessed goodnight, and follow
him with peace and joy. To reign with Abraham, Isaak and Jacob, in heaven for
evermore. Amen.

CHAP. IX. Declaring where the immortal soul goes after death, the
resurrection of our body, the joys of eternal life, and pains which the
ungodly have in their destruction.
Flesh.
NOw seeing the soul is immortal, what becomes of it? or whither goes it
after this worldly death?

Spirit.
Heareof speaks the Scripture, in these and other places full of comfort and
consolation.

Fear not them which kill the body, Mat. 10.28
and are not able to kill the Soul; but rather fear him which is able to
destroy both Soul and body in Hell.

I desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.22.
and to be with Christ, which is far better.

The Thief on the cross when he was to give up the Ghost, said, Luke 23.43
Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: and Jesus said unto
him, To day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

The Souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, Wisd. 3.1.
and there shall no torment touch them.

In the sight of the Wise they seemed to dye, 2.
and their departure is taken for misery.

And their going from us to be utter destruction, 3.
but they are in peace.

Though the righteous be prevented with death, Wis. 4 7.
yet shall they be in rest.

There remains therefore a rest to the children of God. Heb. 4.


Luke 16.22.
And it came to pass that the Beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels unto
Abraham's bosom.

But now he is comforted and thou art tormented. Verse. 25.


Ioh. 14 2.
In my Fathers house are many Mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you
I go to prepare a place for you.

And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there may you be also.

For we know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, 2.
Cor. 51.
we have a building of God, an house (not made with hands) eternally in the
heavens.

Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whiles we are at home in
the body, we are absent from the Lord.

But ye see me, Ioh. 14.19.
because I live; ye shall live also.

Set your affections on things above, Col. 3.2.
not on things of the earth.

But Jerusalem which is above is free, Gal. 4.26.
which is the mother of us all.

Ps. 16.11.
Thou will show me the the path of Life: in thy presence is fulness of joy; and
at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

A meditation of the Souls departure, and blessedness after death.
Behold (dear Soul) these speeches full of comfort proceeded out of Gods
mouth, to witness that there must be a several consideration had of men's
souls: for the Soul is a Spirit, as are the Angels, and Immortal: and when
the Soul of the righteous shall be sundred from the body, it shall be taken by
the Angels, and carried to God, to live with Christ in Paradise above in the
Heavens, where it shall be in glory, and rest in Gods hand, far from sorrow
or grief: for when the Soul is separated from the body, it is at freedom,
and can do much more without the body than when it is joined unto it, and
imprisoned therein: because the body in this life is very he^uie, and
hinders the Soul from seeing heavens comfort, while it is here upon ear^h,
it can praise God, honor, and serve him, rejoice and comfort it self
therewith, while it is in this mortal and miserable body, much more can it
perfect and do, when it is without sin, and native corruption, and has no
such let and impediment.

Behold therefore (dear soul) what is more acceptable and precious? who will
now be affraide of death? but on the contrary, the Soul of the Unfaithful
and Ungodly, is delivered to Satan, and carried incontinent to pain (as we
may see in that Richmans Soul) where it shall remain in trouble and misery,
Luke 16.
anguish and smart, and Woe unspeakable, without all mercy and comfort, for
ever in stink and darkness, where there is weeping and guashing of Teeth, to
the last day, at what time their misery shall first begin to be exceeding
great, and never shall cease.

The Christians most earnest Prayer to leave this world, and to be with Christ
his Savior.
Lord Jesus Christ, my Hope, and Joy, how heartily longs my soul for thee,
yea ^uen as the Heart pa^teth for the waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after
thee (O God) my Soul thirsts for God, Ps. 42.1.
for thee (O God) the Liuing-God. When shall I come and appear before thee, O
how weary am I of this loathsome vale of misery, in the which I endeavor to
serve thee my God in great weakness, I may say, Phil. 1.23.24.
I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ
which is far better: Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is very profitable
that I may bring forth fruit, yet what I should choose I know not. Lord Jesus
thou everlasting wisdom, which know my time, my days are in thy hands:
even come, take me to thee when thou will, my heart longs for rest, yea for
that everlasting quietness, from this darkness to light, from sorrow to joy,
from the troubles of this world, to peace, from loathsome misery, to glory,
from imperfection to an accomplished perfection. Lord Jesus, thou know all
things, and do know that my soul does heartily love thee, and has an
inward desire to behold thy countenance. Behold ( most loving Redeemer) the
tears of love which fall from my eyes, and consider how I weep for mere joy:
my heart is sick for love; it sighs, Song. 8 6. Song 2.5.
groa^es, and longs to be at home with thee, to rest it self in thy bosom.
O my Lord and God, how well shall I be then? How highly shall my soul cry
out, greatly ioying and prai^ing thee, Mat. 17.4. Luke 23.
saying, Lord it i^ good for me to be here, Lord remember me in thy Kingdom,
and say unto my soul, thou shall be with me in Paradise, there to rest for
ever, Amen.

Flesh.
Does not the soul then long for the body, seeing it knows it is rotten in
the cold ground, and expects the day of resurrection and everlasting life for
it?

Spirit.
I must confess that such thoughts often make men sorrowful; but we must
understand that our souls after their departing are with Christ, and must have
much more understanding and knowledge, and far cleerelier know Gods
wonderful righteou^ counsel and will; and therefore are persuaded that no
mischaunce can befall their bodies in the earth, but that they shall plea^antly
and softly sleep and rest, and all their bones dust and ashes shall be so kept
through the Almighty power of God, that they shall never be consumed and
brought to naught, but shall questionless (and without all doubt) rise again.
Secondly, the souls of the godly are in such place and joy, where is no
unquietness or vvretched desire: foralthough they bethink them of their
bodies, and would have that righteous day of doom approach, Reu. 6.10.
saying; How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth? Yet such thoughts are without sorrow, and
appertain to their joy, Gods glory and praise, unto the which they always
submit their wills, and as the children of God in this wretched life, they long
for their dissolution, and sigh for the coming of Ie^us Christ; and he that
does not so has not a sound and true love to Jesus Christ: yet the blessed
souls which are with Christ. desire that all sin in the wo^ld should come to
end; and that everlasting persecution should then begin, but that their desire
should carry sorrow, or any painful longing upon them, it is not possible:
for they rest with the Lord our God, and from this world, for there is no time,
nor difference of day and night, and where there is no time, there can be no
heavy longing for, Psalm 90.4.
because a thousand years in his sight ar^ but as yesterday, when it is past:
and as a watch in the night. And again, One day with the Lord is as a thousand
years. 2 P^t 3.^.
As one day therefore ( dear soul) let such thoughts pass, and cast thy self
under Gods powerful hand, who is thy Creator, thy hope and rest, defendor, and
contenting perfection, both in this life, in that eternal which is to come.

A Prayer of the faithful soul for her dissolution.
2 Timothy 4.
Now Lord Jesus Christ, thou who see and know that I have earnest love of
thy manifestation. I request thee with all my power that thou would through
thy defense abate the ungodly and sinful ways of the world, and show
righteous doom upon Satan, and all our adversaries, and let that everlasting
glory of our joy come when thou shall be all in all. 1. Cor. 15.
Yea Lord Jesus, Romans 18.20.22.
the whole creation groaneth and trauaileth in pain together, waiting for the
deliverance from the bondage of corruption, and vanity unto the which it is
made subject; waits, I say, for the manifestation of the Sons of God, when
they shall be delivered unto the glorious liberty of the Children of God.
Should not we then very earnestly long for the loosing of our bodies? but if
it be thy holy will O Lord Jesus, and that thou have so concluded in thy
counsel that I shall here abide to thy joyful coming again, even so be it
my God and my Redeemer. O with what joy of heart shall I hear thy trumpet! how
gladly shall I leap and meet thee in the clouds; but if thou call me from
hence before, and take my soul unto thee to that peaceable Paradise: Lo here
am I, and willingly come, and shall not cease with all comfort to cry unto
thee, and say, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus, R^u. 22.20.
come to judge the quick and the dead, Amen.

Flesh.
Thou beleeuest then certainly that this our body shall rise again, and live
with the soul eternally.

Spirit.
Yes truly, that I believe, and therefore confess in the articles of my
faith, and say, I believe the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting.
For when our Lord Jesus shall come again upon that last day to judge: Mat 25.^3
and all the holy Angels with him: then shall he set upon the throne of his
glory, and before him shall be gathered all Nations living and dead, small and
great, Reu. 20.12.
good and bad, shall stand before him; and the Sea shall give up the dead which
were in it, and death and hell deliver up the dead which were in them, and the
soul in a moment shall return to the dead body thereof, 1 These. 4.17.
and come living before the Lord. Then we which are alive and remain, shall
be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air:
where he shall separate them one from another, Math. 25.32.33.34.41.
as a shepherd divides the sheep from the Goats, and he shall set the
sheep on his right hand and the Goats on the left, the^ shall he say to them
on his right hand Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world, then shall he say unto them on his
left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into ever lasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, and these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but
the righteous into life eternal.

A Meditation of the Soul on the resurrection.
Now (dear Soul) thou may meditate, not only hereupon, which is the
undoubted truth of God, but for thy farther certification thou may ponder on
these following points, Thy dead men shall live together, Esa. 26.19.
with my dead body shall they arise, awake and (...), ye that dwell in the dust.

Mat. 22.31.
As touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was
spoken unto ye by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaak, and
the God of Jacob, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living?

And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, Dan. 12.2.
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.

I know that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.25.
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though after my
skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, 26.
whom I shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another for me.

Verily, verily, Ioh. 5.25.
I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear
the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. etc.

Now may thou diligently mark ( dear soul) how easy it is unto the Lord
to raise the dead, Ioh. 17.
for it will done by a word, as we may see when he raised the widows son of
Naim, which was dead, he only said, Young man, Luke 7.14.15.
I say unto thee arise, and he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. So
raised he the Ruler of the Synagogue^ daughter in Capernaum, saying,
Talithacumi, which is, being interpreted, Mar. 5.41.
Damsel, I say, unto thee, arise; and after this same manner also, did he to
Lazarus in Bethania, who had now la^en four days in the grave, for he cried
with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth, and he that was dead, came forth bound
hand and feet with graue-cloths. See now (beloved Soul) although to the eyes
of man it appeared to be impossible, yet with the Lord our God nothing is
impossible. Luk 1.37.
For as a mother knows well in what chamber or bed she has laid her child
to sleep, and thither comes in the morning, awakes and takes it up: even so
the Lord our God knows where our bodies do sleep which were his own temples
and habitations, unto whom it shall be far more easy to make us alive, then
to a mother to waken her sleeping child. Besides this, we have our Lord Jesus
Christ the head of his Church, not only that he should be an example unto
us, but also that he should go before us, as the beginning of our
resurrection; for he died for our sins, and lay in the grave, and the third
day rose again for our justification, 1 Cor. 15.16. Rom 4.25. Ioh. 4.19.
and therefore with loud voice says unto us all, because I live ye shall
live also.

Flesh.
Shall then eternal life be such as cannot be comprehended by man, nor
understood in this world?

Spirit.
Yes truly, thou say well, Of the joys of heaven.
for so it is that the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.
Eternal God, what peace, what joy, what glory, what pleasant being shall they
have? who would not daily meditate hereupon? but who would not wil^lingly
enjoy the same? who would not willingly speak and commune hereof? but rather,
who would not fee^e and possess the same, oh if there were any that could
teach us the glory hereof, whereof our narrow heart and shallow soul is not
capable of, how would we be glad to hear, and joyfully long for it! Certainly
(dear Soul) if neither Esaias that excellent. Prophet, nor the Apostle Paul,
Esaias 64.4.
who was ravished into the third heavens, and saw things unutterable, could not
declare the meanest jot of it, but he^^ him dumb, then may the glory, peace and
joy be there exceeding great: yet notwithstanding, the holy Scripture portryeth
in some places, by notable sentences and speeches, the supereminent goodness
thereof, so far as our tenuity can comprise.

1 Ioh. 3.2.
Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we
shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for
we shall see him as he is.

Then shall the righteous shine forth, Job 19. Mat. 13.43
as the Sun, in the kingdom of their father.

Dan. 12.3.
And they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and
they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.

And GOD shall be all in all. 1 Cor. 15.28.


And we shall ever be with the Lord. 1. These. 4.17.


Who shall change our vile body, Phil. 3.21.
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.

For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, Mat.
22.30.
but are as the Angels of God in Heaven.

And I John saw the holy City, Rev. 21.2.3 4 5.
new Jerusalem, come down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a bride, and
adorned for her husband, and I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying,
Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they
shall be his people: and God himself shall be with them, and be their God,
and God shall wipe away al teres from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for
the former things are passed away. And he that sat upon the Throne, said,
Behold I make all things new, etc.

Reu. 21.22
And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the
Temple of it.

23.
And the City has no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in it, for
the Glory of God did enlighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

24.
And the Nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it: and
the Kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor to it.

And the Gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: ^5*
for there shall be no night there.

And they need no candle, neither the light of the Sun, Reu. 22.5.
for the Lord gives them light, and they shall shine for ever and ever.

These words (beloved Soul) are short, but replenished with unspeakable
comfort: and although the Scripture had been more large herein, yet our weak
and infirm hearts are such, and our understanding so small, that we could not
comprehend it: and therefore the holy Spirit by these speeches opens but a
little window, through the which we may see a little glance, to the end we
may know what we should believe, and hope for, and what to comfort and rejoice
us withal. But when we shall come thither, and possess such joy and such
gladness, then shall we say one to another as old Elizabeth said unto the
Virgin Marie: Luke 1.45.
O blessed art thou that beleeuest, for there is a performance of those things
which were told thee of the Lord. O eternal Life, O pleasant Life, O
perpetual Joy and Peace, O everlasting Jerusalem, City of the holy God. O
how precious, how beautiful art thou unto me! thy pulchritude surmounts, and
there is no blemish in thee. My heart longs for thee, yea for Jerusalem my
Mother, For Jerusalem my native Land, and for thee Jesus Christ; thou which
art hid there, my Life, Lord, and everlasting Shepherd.

O holy Life, O blessed Life, which the Lord has prepared for them that love
him, in the which shall be no death, for man shall see God face to face, for
our hearts shall be superaboundantly satiate with the food of Life. Oh the
oftener I think upon thee, the sweeter thou appearest unto me.

O how well will thou be, my Soul, when thou shall be loosed from this
earthly body, and so pass in freedomevnto heaven, how welcome shall thou be!
how kindly shall thou be received? thou shall come to great rest and security:
thou need not stand in fear of any foe or death: Thou shall evermore
behold the face of thy God and Redeemer, Ps. 45.2.
the bea^tifullest among the children of men: hear thou not him ( my Soul)
calling on thee? Song. 2.20.
Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away: for lo the Winter is past, the
rain is over, and gone: Arise my Love, my fair one, and come away. Come unto
me my Elect, I have pleasure in thy beauty; come and rejoice before my face
with the Angels, whose society I have promised thee: Come out of all thy
distresses and fears, and enter into thy Fathers rest. O rejoice my Soul, and
be glad thou beautiful daughter, for the King has pleasure in thee. O thou
sweet Life, show me thy Ports, and thy gates, ^hy walls and thy manifold
Mansions* Reu. 21.^8.19.
Thy Walls are of precious stones, and thy gates are costly Pearl, and the
^treet of the City is pure ^old, as it were transpa^ent glass, in the which
is sung perpetually a Halleluiah: thy light is God, the God of light, the Son
of Righteousness^ never go^th down in thee. There is a feast and banquet where
all wearied Pilgrims refresh themselves. Ioh. 17.24
O how pleasant is the harmony which shall be heard there! O then shall I find
the accomplishment of that promise! Father I will that these that thou have
given me should be with me where I am, that they may behold the glory which
thou have given me, for thou louedst me before the foundation of the world.

A Prayer for the joys of Heaven.
O thou Fountain of Life, O springing Well of all comfort, when shall I drink
abundantly of that Water of Life, which is thy consolation? when shall I
appear before thy ioyefull countenance? when O LORD shall I see that day of
salvation, Ps. 118.24.
wherein I may rejoice and be glad? O how light, clear, and joyful shall that
day be, wherein there shall be no evening. Math. 25.
Enter my soul into thy fathers rest, where I shall have that holy Tri^nitie,
one everlasting God in three persons. Come my light and Redeemer, and deliver
my soul from from this miserable prison. O everlasting peace, Phil. 1.4.
which passes all understanding, wherein the holy ones soul does repose it
self, there is that eternal life, which is, to know God our Lord, and to see
God face to face: happy are they for ever, which are disburdened of this
cumbersome and miserable life, and are come to that heavenly, eternal, and
joyful life, to live with Christ for ever, Amen.

Flesh.
What shall then become of the reprobate and ungodly?

Spirit.
They shall enter both soul and body into everlasting pain: Of the pains of
Hell.
for as the joy of the godly cannot be expressed; so neither can the pains of
the wicked and condemned be showed, for there is such poenarum multiplicitas,
acerbitas, ^eternitas; that is, first, the pain of the condemned shall be so
great and manifold, that none can declare it, for they shall be cast into utter
darkness, Mat. 22.13
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. They shall be tormented in the
flame, Luke 16.24
The Lord shall rain upon them snares, fire, and brimstone, and a horrible
tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup, their worms shall not dye,
neither shall their fire be quenched, Esaias 66.24
and they shall be an abhorring unto all the people.

A Meditation of the soul on the pains of hell.
Behold with these and such like phrases the Scripture gives us to understand,
that unspeakable and inconceivable misery the wicked shall come to, with
that grievous society of the devil, who shall joy in tormenting them, which
the religious should often meditate upon.

Secondly, there shall be Poenarum acerbitas, for that their pain shall be so
bitter and hard, that the condemned cannot endure, and yet they must needs
suffer it eternally; for they shall seek death, Revel 9.6.
and shall not find it, and shall desire to dye, and death shall sly from
them; for there shall be neither life nor death, but betwixt life and death
shall they be tormented for evermore. Even as a red hot coldron upon a flaming
furnace, so shall they be in fire unspeakably tormented, and abide in such case
for all eternity.

Thirdly, Poenarum aeternitas, for their manifold and bitter torments shall at
no time come to an end, for so it is said, they shall go to everlasting pain:
Mat. 25.
for were it of a long continuance, and so have an end, would be some comfort
in their expectation, but eternity is endless, Esa. 34.89
for it is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the streams shall be turned
into pitch, which shall not be quenched night nor day, yea, their plagues shall
ascend in all eternity, Revel. 14.
and shall have no end day nor night. Consider (dear Soul) that if one should
lie in a costly bed, or well-ga^nished hall, and there be delicately
entertained with nourishment, if he were notwithstanding tied to his bed, and
should never come from it; truly he would not desire to live in that
condition. But the damned as they have no pleasure, but swim in the
everlasting fire of hell, in eternal anguish and woe, in terrible stincke and
darkness, in the which they shall not receive one drop, whereby they might
cool or refresh themselves. O then hearken, thou poor miserable child of the
world! meditate hereupon, thou love the world and pleasures thereof, and
say, it is good to be hear, behold the time comes, and truly is not
far off, when thou shall say with the rich man, Oh, I am greatly tormented in
this flame! yea, thou shall lament and say with a blasphemous mouth, It is not
good to be here, but there: yet must thou stay, and that evermore, ever
burning, and never consumed; from the which God of his infinite mercy deliver
us.

A Prayer for a safe deliverance from the pains of hell, and to live with
Christ for ever.
O Lord Jesus Christ, give me ears to hear, and an heart to understand, that
I diligently hearken unto thy true servants and messengers, to the rectifying
and bettering of my life, and always separate my self from the children of
darkness. Help me, that I conform not my self to this wicked world, and so
be cast down to the lowest hels torment: govern, teach, and lead me by thy
holy spirit, that I may learn christianly to live, and when it shall please
thee, to dye blessedly; that I come not in the place of everlasting pain and
torment, but with thee Lord my Redeemer, thy Angels, and all thy Saints, may
enjoy and possess that endless and everlasting life, purchased by the blood
of thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb unspotted and undefiled, to
whom with thee and the holy spirit in the Church, be everlasting glory,
praise, and dominion, for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
A Morning Prayer for Christian families.
O Lord God, dear Father in Christ, we do acknowledge that this night we have
received one of the greatest temporal blessings that can be bestowed upon
Mankind, the fast sleep and sound rest of our bodies: entreating thee this
day, and evermore, our minds do not sleep in sin and darkness of the
world, from that second sleep in the grave, Restore us we beseech thee to
everlasting life, that both body and soul may be together partners of
blessedness. O thou true light, which enlightenest every man which comes
into the world, shine in us that we may see thee, and walk as the children of
life in all our ways, that as thou have raised these our heavy and burdensome
bodies, so lift up our minds to thy knowledge, that we may live the rest of
our lives in all lowlines, meeknes, chastity, charity, patience, godliness,
warines, and circumspection, as to render an ac^ount unto the^ who shall judge
the quick and the dead, and the world with fire. Strip us therefore out of the
old corrupt* Adam, and cloth our souls with thy righteousness, make our
^yes to be fixed and settled on that thy great and free mercy, in electing us
to be thy children before the foundation of the world: when others, as good as
we by nature, are rejected, in that thy hidden counsel which is made known
unto our spirits, by thy holy spirit, working faith in our hearts to believe,
and so to be justified before thee. O thou our life Jesus Christ! work more
and more the death of sin in us, and give us freedom of conscience, that we
may labor to serve th^e, with perfect heart and willing mind, casting aside
carelessness and unfeeling of our sins, dullness, and deadnes of soul, we
may see and sigh for our offenses, with a continual remembrance, and
effectual con^^deration, we shall not always live here in this wretched
world, but must appear before thy tribunal seat of judgment, and receive
according to our deeds, good or bad: give us feeling of that unspeakable and
eternal weight of glory, which shall follow our serving of thee hear. Yea, set
before our faces the dreadful and fearful torments of the pit of hell, which
the disobedient and wicked shall fall into: To the end we may have a true
hatred of sin, and love to righteousness, this day, and all the days of our
lives. Bless thy word with fruit unto our souls, and send out faithful
laborers into thy haru^st, grant that we may be prepared when (...) hearts,
with open consciences, there to give an account of whatsoever we have thought,
done, or said, when the faithful and obedient shall possess the kingdom
prepared for them: but the sinful and careless livers shall drink of the Wine
of the wrath of thee the God, who is a consuming fire, and the smoke of their
torment shall ascend for euerm^r^. Father of heaven knit our hearts fast unto
Thee, an^ while we have time give us grace rightly to meditate and think
thereon: continue the word of thy grace among us, and make it bring fort fruit
according to this pleasure, that we may strive to reform our wicked lives
thereby. Keep us from hardness of heart, security and hypocrisy: stay our
inordinate affections, and perverse perturbations, and renew us more and more
again, to thy image lost in Adam. Oppress us not ( dear Father) with the
unspeakable and infinite weight of our sins in the time of ignorance, willing
and known offenses. Preserve thy Church universal, the great and m^ine member
therein our dear and dread Sovereign K. JAMES, the Queene^ Majesty Prince,
and their Royal progeny; bless the nobles and magistrates, cloth them with
righteousness as with a garment; increase in this thy Israel true Levites;
give them wisdom and discretion to cut thi^ word aright; bring the remnants
which are thine to thy fold; be gracious to our friends and kindred in the
flesh; lighten them with the knowledge of Thee and thy Son, that they may
glorifi^ thee all the days of their lives: Comfort thy afflicted members
whereso^uer, and in whatsoever cross. Grant peace in (...) days if it be thy
pleasu^e* And because (gracious God) the night ^s now upon us, which thou have
appointed (...) rest in, let the bed strike i^ our hearts, that the grave is
almost ready for us: which of us can tell whether these eyes of ours once
closed up shall ever open any more.

Now therefore into thy hands we commend and bequeath our bodies and souls;
and be thou present with us, before us by the insight of our minds, that we
may not be absent from thee, no even in our sleep, with all purity and
cleanness, that nothing disquiet or disturb this rest, but all things may be
still and calm through that peace of thine in Jesus Christ, in whose name we
call upon thee as he has ^aught us saying: Our Father, etc.

FINIS.
THE SOVLES REQVEST: OR, A most sweet and comfortable Dialogue between CHRIST
and the SOVLE full of heavenly and spiritual consola^ion^ to (...) up the heart
cast (...) for sin, and sense of Gods wrath.

PSALM^ 27.8.9 When thou saydest, seek my face (...) said unto thee, thy fa^e
Lord I (...) Hide not thy face far from (...) servant away in anger, etc.

LONDON, Printed by Edw: (...) John Marriot, and are to be (...) at his shop at
the White flowe^ (...) ^uce, near Fetter^lane end, in Fleet Street. 1618.

TO THE WORshipful his approved good Friend Mr. William Howpill, grace, mercy,
and peace, in our Lord Jesus Christ.
LVke the Evangelist writes his Hist^rie of Christ, God, Luc. 1.3.
and Man, and dedicated it to Theophilus, a lover of God. 2 Job. 1.1.
John the Apostle writes to the elect Lady of Chri^stian love. And who should
have more interest in this my small Dialogue of spiritual comfort, then they
by whom the bowels of the Saints are so often refreshed? Phi^. 7.
Life it self is tedious, where the taste of the assurance of mercy is
absent: what peace can please where the peace of conscience reigns not, and
that love of God is not shed abroad in the heart, Romans 5.5.
by the holy Ghost which is given us, where forgiveness of sin is not sealed in
the soul, filled with joy which no man can take away; what dainties can like,
when we eat not that fatted calfe, Luc. 15.23. 1 Cor. 5.7. Mat. 22.12 Revel.
2.17.
and pascall Lamb Jesus Christ: that cl^athed with his righteousness, as with
a garment, we may enjoy that hidden Manna, and tree of life, which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God: Ibid. verse. 7.
quenching out thirst with those pure waters of life. Of the which, according
to the measure of grace given me, I have briefly written, which I recommend
unto your Worship. And I beseech the God of all comfort, according to the
riches of his mercy, he would make you feel, and fill you with all heavenly
consolation, that you may (glorying in the Lord) look for that blessed hope,
and the glorious appearing of the great God, Tit. 2.13.
and our Saui^ur Jesus Christ, to your immortality. To whom be all power and
praise in the Church for ever: 2 Timothy 4.8.
Amen.

Your Worships in all christian duties, Bartholl. Robertson.

THE SOVLES REQVEST: OR, A most comfortable Dialogue, betwixt Christ and the
Soul, full of spiritual and heavenly consolations to raise up the heart, cast
down for sin, and sense of Gods wrath.
CHRIST. O My Beloved Soul, why art thou so sad, and frettest in thy breast?
know thou not that thy afflictions are so sanctified by my spirit^ that even
thereby thou art made partaker of my holiness, Heb. 12.10 Heb. 12.14 1 Thessalonians.
1.6. Gal. 6.14.
enioyest the sweet fruit of righteousness, and obtainest a greater measure of
joy in the Holy Ghost; that thereby thou art crucified to the world, and the
world unto thee, have I not put sweet wood in these bitter waters, to make them
sauoury, destroyed that death that was in the pot of thy troubles, by the meal
of my mercies, greeueth it thee to wade in the waters which I have swimmed in?


The SOVLE. O Savior, give me that most precious and dearest, give of all thy
Holy Spirit the Comforter, that I may offer a voluntary and free sacrifice of
obedience to thee. Give me that thou ask, and ask what thou will. Alas, as
of all other kind of sin, so have I in my self sufficient matter and seed,
to breed this corruption, for in my feeling I cannot see comfort in my
sufferings, in so exceeding great measure is my understanding corrupt, and
affections disordered.


CHRIST. I Work the sense of sin and mercy by degrees in my children, and the
yielding to one draws on another. Take heed least at any time there be in
thee an unbelieving heart to depart from me the living God: Heb. 3.12.13.
lest thou be hardened through the decei^fulnes of sin. To see the length,
height, breadth, and depth of my mercy, is to behold thy sin* and natural
pollution; but let not thine ^eart be eaten up with grief. Look always to
my mercies, thine enemy indeed is a Lion, and so am I: and that of the Tribe
of Judah, of thine own flesh: he is a Serpent; I am that brazen Serpent to
sting all the fiery invasions of sin, death and condemnation, if I be here
so to help thee, what shall I do in glory, when I come with thousands of
Angels? have thou no knowledge of salvation? fear thou thy sin, is there
nothing but doubtfulnesse, dullness and deadness in thee? thou must know
whatsoever knowledge, experience and power is in me, the same is made thine. 1
Cor. 1.30.
I am my Fathers counselor, and am thy wisdom, the Teacher and the thing
taught, I have no holiness in my self by the flesh, by being borne of my
mother, yet do save great sinners: seek then righteousness out of thy self in
me, who being no sinner, was accounted a sinner, and punished as a sinner for
thee, that thou having no righteousness, might be accounted righteous, and
rewarded as righteous through me, who am thy righteousness, Hebr.
the author and finisher of thy salvation: so that albeit of thy self to
persevere, it seems impossible, yet with me it is both possible and easy.
And as for the multitude of thy sins, whereof thou complainest (and thou
do well) Marie-Magdalen had seven Devils, yet first honored with the sight
of my Resurrection. Moreover, Matthew, a notorious and infamous Sinner, crowned
with the dignity of an Evangelist: and Paul (whos^ clothes took a
Purple-dye, and Crimson color in the blood of the Saints) is one of the chief
and glorious Apostles. Thy natural corruptions I do change into the power of
a supernatural grace: thy wounded spirit unto a peace of mind. I am the Lord
of the whole earth, and the heir of heaven, yet had not wherewith to help my
necessity. A Lord of Liberty, and yet put in Prison, and yet am thy
Redemption, who will not suffer thee to be overcome; and will wholly free thee
from sin, and anguishes in the life to come. I cannot lie, believe my Word,
whereby I am evidently set forth, Gal. 31.
and crucified before thy heart. Attend Prayer, which works a feeling of thy
faith in me. To Heaven (I tell thee) I have a twofold title, one by
Inheritance, which I reserve to my self alone; another, by purchase and
conquest, which I have given thee freely, and will thou not rely on these my
Mercies?


The SOVLE. LOrd Jesus, I do often call to mind the things thou have done for
thy glory and my Souls health, the matter of my thankfulness: but I do
persevere in sin, and deserve not the least crumme of Mercy that fall from
thy Table any more.


CHRIST. IS there nothing to be obtained of Me, unless thou bring of thy own
to present me withal? Is not this to discredit my Mercy, and to bring credit
to thy Merits, and rather to bind Me to thee, than thee to Me. Is there not
with me plentiful Redemption: If thy sins be great, my redemption is greater:
thy merits are beggarly, my Mercy is a Rich Mercy. If thy peril be not come
even to a desperate case, and past hope of recovery, there is no praise of
redemption: for herein is the power of it, that when all sins have gone over
thy head, and all creatures, Sun, Moon, Heaven, and Earth, etc. come as it were
in judgment against thee, yet a clear and full ransom shall be given in thy
hand, therewith to purchase thy deliverance beyond all expectation, and so as
it were to fetch something out of nothing. And when I put to the ordinary
means, it is not to withdraw my help, in using the means, but train up thy
faith, that after I may make known unto thee, I have a help beyond all helps,
for I come to them that calls not for me: the possessed, that would not, do
I cure; and the dead, that cannot, do I raise. Beleeuest thou this?


The SOVLE. LOrd, my sight is very dim to behold Thee, that Serpent exalted
in the Wilderness: my Faith is as smoking Flax, Blow on it I pray thee (by
the wind of thy Spirit) an^ make it burn more clear. My sins and conscience
arrest me, and summon me before thy justice; and thou (my Judge) art greater,
who know all, and righteous are thie judgments.


CHRIST. THou (poor Soul) pourest out the sense of thy inward sight on the
wrong object: Thou gazest on Satan, the false accuser of the brethren: and on
S^nne, thy guilt, but beholdest not Me, the Lamb of God, that takes away thy
sin: I am not come to call the ^ighteous, but Sinners ^o Repentance. Mat.
9.12.
If thou be grieved for sin, I am for thee; The whole need no Physician, but
the sick. I will bind up thy sores, and heal all thy wounds. Soul be of
good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. I inuit all the Weary and Laden
to come to me and I will ease them. Mat. 11.28
Feel thou the burden of thy sin, I am for such as thou art, with a
troubled and aching conscience? Esa. 44.22.
for I put away their transgressions as a thick Cloud, and Sins as Mist, I
do cast them in the bottom of the Sea. Mic. 7.19. Esa. 43.25.
I put them away (I say) for my own Mercies sake: for what art thou but dust
and ashes, yea a wind that goes and returns not? But I thy Advocate with thy
Father, even thy own Jesus Christ, Heb. 7.25.
the righteous, who am perfectly able to save all those that come unto God by
Me, who am Everliving, to make intercession for thee. For by my own blood I
have once entered the Holie-place, and obtained eternal redemption for thee.
Heb. 9.22.
Why look thou to thy sin and wages thereof? I even I was made sin for
thee, who knew no sin, that thou may be made the righteousness of God in
Me. 2. Cor. 5.21.
I was wounded for thy transgressions, and broken for thy inquities: the
chastisement of thy peace was upon me: With my stripes thou art healed, Esa.
53.5.
and now I do require this, Who does lay any thing to thy charge? Romans 8.
it is I that justify thee: Who shall condemn thee, it is I that died or
rather which is risen again for thee, who am at the right hand of God, and
makes request for thee. Have not I lead captivity captive, Col. 2.25.
spoiled principalli^ies and powers, and made an open show of them, and
triumphed over them in my Cross? 1 Co^. 15.25.
O Death I will be thy Death, O Grave I will be thy destruction: yea, O Death,
where is thy Sting, O Grave, where is thy victory? O but I pitifully
complain, Ps. 81.13.
O that thou would hearken unto me! for then thy prosperity would be as
the flood, Esa. 48 18.
and thy righteousness as the waters of the Sea, Hos. 6.4.
and now what shall I do unto thee? How shall I entreat thee? What can I do
unto thee, that I have not done? I beseech thee, 2. Cor. 5.20.
I beseech the (I say) be reconciled unto God; for my father so loved the
World, that he has given Me unto it, that whosoever believes in Me should
have everlasting Life. And I my self ( trust Me) have set out my love to thee,
that when thou wast a sinner, I died for thee: much more being now justified
by my blood, thou shall be saved from wrath by Me. Rom 5.8.
When thou wast an enemy, thou wast reconciled to God, by my death; much more,
being reconciled, thou shall be saved by my Life. I was partaker of thy flesh
and blood, yea and became a Worm, Ps. ^2.6.
for all creatures (almost) to tread upon me. For thee I was made obedient to
death, yea to the death of the Cross: Many more degrees did I The Son of
righteousness go back, that thou may be certified of eternal life, than
the Sun did in Ezechias time, to assure him the lengthening of his temporal
Life. Let nothing shake thy faith, how weak soever it be. Come to Me, have
Milk and Honey, and of the Well of the Water of Life freely: Reu. 21.6.
Take here Eye-salue, that thou may see, and amend that blindness thou art
in, and look to my everlasting mercies that endure for ^uer, sins past
cannot hurt thee, if sins present do not like thee, and in finne thou take
no pleasure.


The SOVLE. O T^y lips are full of grace, thy words sweeter then the honey and
the honycomb, O that I might eat them, thy word spoken to me now, is like an
apple of gold with pictures of silver. Pro. 25 11.
I wash my garment in thy blood, by it that handwriting that was against me is
cancelled and anulled: but this scruple rest, that I do evermore yet sin,
this body of sin dwelling in me, is so pregnant and powerful, I fear it
will bring forth the fruit of the flesh, which is death and everlasting
condemnation.


CHRIST. WHy do thou attribute ^o much strength to thy poisoned nature, and
derogatest srom mine infinite mercy and grace? thou will not, nor can not
deny, but God has given me a perfect Redeemer unto thee, he has sealed on
thee the assurance thereof, by his holy Spirit: the Word and Spirit have begot
faith in thee, by which thou have begotten joys in heavenly things. This joy
has wrought a sincere heart and well willingness to please God, accompanied
with love, unfeigned, to my father above, and brethren on earth: thou have a
care t^^ obey the Commandments, and a renewed fear to please God; ^hy sin
rebuked works (I know) in thee a mourning spirit (are not thy ^eare^ in my
bottle) yea, and true meekness and hunger after me? Psalm. 56.8.
all outward benefits turn to thy blessings, as seals of my favor, thy
crosses are no curses, but being sanctified turn to thy good, in faith
patienly possessing thy soul, thou do wait and look assuredly for my
glorious kingdom, after this life it is not thine actions, it is thy
affections I respect, desire thou to be righteous^? then art thou righteous.
Meanest thou to leave thy sin^es, I repute thee as if thou had left them?
would thou not fall? I esteem thee as a valiant Worthy, who never was
vanquished: For if there be a willing mind in thee, it is accepted according
to that thou have, and not according to that thou have not, 2 Cor. 8.12.
thou art blessed that feel thy wants, and desire to have them supplied. I
have given thee a sight of thy sin, a sorrow for it, a feeling of the
forgiveness of it in my blood, a power to crucify it, and lay hold on my
righteousness by my resurrection, a hope for strength from the same to
sanctification and perseverance to the end. What now, had thou these in thy
nature, whereby thou wast dead in sin? no not so, it is my grace which in thee
is not in vain, howbeit thou have received but the first fruits of the spirit,
which are but as a handful of corn in respect of the whole field: See, though
thy spi^ituall growth be slow, yet it is certain and goes surely, neither
begun nor continued by thee, but by my spirit. Be persuaded therefore that I
who have begun this good work in thee, will perform it until my day: for
with me there is no change, Phil. 1.6. Iam. 1.17.
nor shadow of change, and therefore as my gifts and callings are without
repentance, so will I fulfill the desires of them that fear me. Psalm. 145.19.



The SOVLE. I Must grant, and do not deny, thou have loved me (dear Jesus)
and given thy life for me, Gal. 2 20. 1 Ioh. 5.10
else (God forbid) I should make thee a lier for thou crauest no other thing at
my hand, but that I should beleeu^ and have faith: for the assurance of thy
love, I should sin blasphemously, if I should not believe thy Word, both
confirmed by thy self, and ratified by thine oath, though I do else sin,
and sorry am I for it: yet will I not thus blaspheme, nor add this to other
unworthiness, for this mistrust will weigh down all the rest: for none is
damned for sin, if he do not join to it infideli^y: that sovereign salve
of thy blood does cure all sores of sin, but not this, because it does refuse
the cure, and (as it were) pulls off this precious plaster when it is laid on
it, beside this distrust of thy love (dear Christ) tormenteth the mind, and
sets the conscience upon the wrack, when as men have no other assurance of
thy love, but only so far forth as they find themselves worthy of: making
no other ground of thy love, but their own deserts, thus ouerballanced with
the unsupportable weight of sin, they sink in desparation, when I sin I am
grieved at the very heart, because I have displeased thee, yet my sins do
not make me doubt of thy love toward me, founded not upon my worthiness,
but upon thine own free mercy, grace and good will, for how should I love
thee, if I were not persuaded of thy love, yea, I love thee, 1 Ioh. 4.19.
because thou louedst me first: and I know, that, as love is the fulfilling of
the law, Romans 13.8.
so want of it is transgressing of all. For love is strong as death, jealousy
is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are coals of fire, Cant. 8.6.
which ^ad a most vehement flame. But yet alas (poor wretch) I fear my
sins do bereave me often his thy spirit, I feel for this time, I grieve the
spirit, 1 These. 5.19.
and quench him utterly.


CHRIST. I Have once given thee my spirit, I am faithful and just in all my
ways, Ps. 145.17.
and my Father is faithful, by whom thou have been called unto my fellowship.
1 Cor. 1.9.
I am not as a man that I should lie, neither the Son of a man that I can
repent; thou have received my spirit, that thou may know the things given
thee of me; 1 Cor. 2.12
for he had knowledge truth, and faithfulness: and so, because thou art a
Son, my father has sent forth his spirit in thy heart, which cries Abba,
G^l. 4 6.
father. This is the spirit of thy adoption, and the same spirit (because of
thy weakness, and that thy faith is mixed with doubting) is the earnest of
thy inheritance, purchased unto the praise of my glory, Ephesians. 1.14
by whom thou art sealed unto the day of thy redemption: a seal to secure
thee concerning the covenant I have made with thee in my blood, that it never
shall be revoked; far surer then that scaled with King Ahassuerus Ring.
Ester. 8.8.
For to this effect had my father sealed me also, that thou should never
doubt of my meditation, Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. John 1.32. For being reconciled by
my death, my father gives thee his spirit in hostage and pledge, that he will
not miss a day in performing his promise, and in assurance of eternal peace.
Thou can not deny but my spirit (which rebukest the world of sin) wrought
in thee a general astonishment for sin, Ioh. 16.
a special grief for special sins, a renewing of the affections, arauishme^t
with unspeakable joy of my free mercy and peace of conscience, which passes
all understanding; the understanding englighteneth, the judgment reformeth,
and godly anger. Ephesians. 3.18
This is the life of God in thee, for they who have received the spirit, are
led by the spirit, great weakness is joined with thee, Collos. 3.4
but thy life is hid with me in God, and when I thy life shall appear, then
shall thou also appear with me in glory: and as I said, a little while ye
shall see me, and after a while ye shall not see me, for I go unto my father:
So is it very gainefull for thee (beloved Soul) that there be an interposition
betwixt thee and me, that a cloud and dampnesse should overtake thee, yet
shall thou not be tempted above that thou art able to bear, bu^ with the
temptation will give thee the issue. A mild rod shall serve thee, even the rod
of the root of Iesse, Number. 17.10.
which flowreth among the other rods, that so the sweetness of the flower, may
mitigate the sharpness of the rod. I do often humble even my dearest
children by masking and disguising my self unto them. The eyes of the two
Disciples going to Emaus were holden, they did not know me speaking with them.
The Spirit does live in thee, when his graces are dead in thee, neither does
feeling joy and practice always follow Faith. I am holden, and thou art saved
by Faith, and not by feeling. I teach thee humility, and not to glory but in
infirmi^ies: 2. Cor. 11.30.31.
for Paul (for all his Revelations) was afraid of Aretas, and let down in a
basket. Elias (who commanded as it were the Heavens to rain, and not to
rain) hid himself in a cave from Iesabell. 1. ^i. 19.9.
Jacob was afraid of his brother; Abraham of Pharaoh, and the Philistims in
Gerah. O how dearly loved I them: but when the star appears again, Mat. ^.
the wisemen reioiced with an exceeding great joy. Rachel had Labans gods,
which made him more eager to seek them, I may frown for a while, yet not
always retain my anger. No truly, Ps. 103.9.
I am not angry at all as a Judge to punish, but as a Father to correct, a
brother to admonish. I cannot cease to love my own members: Does any man
strike his own flesh at any time? Thou art one of my members, ingrafted in my
body by my Spirit, and a lively faith. I have said (and do not repent) thou
that beleeuest in me art delivered from the power of darkness by my Father,
and art translated into the kingdom of Me his dear Son.


The SOVLE. THe words that thou speak (sweet Redeemer of Mankind) are
Spirit and Life, but thou speak of affections reformed, which I find not:
How cold are my Prayers, O how hard is my heart, it cannot power it self out
like Water before Thee, it cannot admit any impression of thy Word, or finger
of thy spirit, my wavering faith is not confirmed by it, I lack that heavenly
light to discern of my troubles and crosses aright. Finally, I have little or
no comfort in thy Word, wanting the apprehending and apply^^g faith (the hand
of my Soul) O Son of David have mercy upon me miserable sinner, O sweet
Samaritan, take me up which am half dead.


CHRIST. THou have redemption in my blood, Col. 1.14.
even the forgiveness of thy sins: for they shall never be imputed unto
thee, neither here nor elsewhere; neither do they reign in thy mortal body,
but thou have a serious reluctation against them, neither thy unworthiness
makes thee incapable of the greatest mercies, they are of my mere and free
love and grace, thou art not the object of thine own faith: but I, my merits
and obedience, who am by faith united unto thee, as a head to a member, then
look upon me, I am in thee, and thou art in me: that which God has conjoined
who can separate it? or who can pluck thee out of my fathers hand? my father
and I am one, and my Spirit which has wrought in thee that desire of profiting
by the Word (whereof thou so heavily complainest) will make thee reap manifold
fruits of the immortal seed of the Word, in due season, which is sowed in the
furrows of thy heart. I do feed thee, for a time, with a sparing hand, to
sharpen thine appetite, wait and trust on me, and I will comfort thy heart.
Psalm. 27.16.
truly flesh and blood has not revealed the hardness of thy heart unto thee,
but my spirit, which works the sight of thy corruptions. Esa. 63.^7.
I which have begun this good work will perform it. Phil. 1.6.
It is good for thee that thou bewailest thy defects and wants, quench not
these motions, of my spirit in thee, prayer is my gift, it is I that work both
the will and deed, Lam. 1.22.
it is I that mark thy many sighs and the faintings of thy heart; yea, and my
spirit does make request for thee with sighs that cannot be expressed, when
thou hold thy peace, or little know of it. The sacrifice of God are not
words, Psalm. 51.17.
but a contrite spirit, a contrite and broken heart I will not despise, I know
thy thoughts before thou think them, Psalm. 1 39.2.
thy sighing is not hid from me, I do hea^e thy desire, Psalm. 38.9. Psalm.
10.17.
it is I that do put up (as Mediator) betwixt thee and my father, thy prayers
unto the golden viols, which are full of the precious odours of my merits,
thereby perfumeth and makes them an offering of sweet smelling savor unto him,
Reu. 5.8.
and purges their corruptions in my blood, and unto my throne there is a
purple ascent, the perfectest bewty is the perfectest mixture of red and white,
afflictions staineth not, but adorneth the beauty of my graces.


The SOVLE. I Am not so washed I see in the lauer of regeneration, but that
there remains in me slaines of that scarlet engrained die of my corruption.
I am not wholly spirit, as the carnal man is wholly slesh, but (...) at civil
wars within my self. In the spirit, I serve the Law of God, in the flesh the
law of sin, (O dear Jesus) grant me thy spirit and grace, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
that I may avoid the occasions of sin, I may make conscience of my l^ast
sins, I may carefully watch over my heart, that I be not surprised at
unawares, I may rest in thy promised assistance, and not in mine own power,
and have recourse unto thee by fervent prayer, craving thy aid, that I may be
enabled to stand in the day of temptations: but alas (dear Savior) it vexes
me greatly, that I do not much (Lord thou know) feel my faith nor the
fruits thereof: which makes me (I know not what) to think that I have no
true faith, or if I have, it is yet in the infancy thereof.


CHRIST. FAith is the eye, hand and foot of the Soul: for by it, it comes,
sees, and lays hold on me: seek light in the Word (which is Truth) by
prayer, that thou be not deceived, and follow the same light so far as thou
shall be warranted thereby, the conscience makes the assumption, but examined
it, by my word, lest thou fall in error? and for to learn (dear Soul) to
discern betwixt the punishment for sin, and trial of thy faith, patience and
purging of Sin: for I often afflict inwardly the soul with deep sense of
sin, and the body with crosses outwardly, not to prosecute sin in thee:
Ier. 51.7.
for then it should follow, that as the wicked (mine enemies) exceed in sin,
so should they exceed in afflictions also, but thee I lead as a loving Spouse,
with cords of aman, Hos. 11.4.
even with bands of love, for whom I love I rebuke. For I am good, a strong
hold in the day of trouble, and know them that trust in me. Nah. 1.7.
Nourish this in thine heart, it is more certain and durable then heaven and
earth.


The SOVLE. O My sweet Savior, thou have taken my feet out of the mire I
stuck i^, Psalm. 4.1. Luke 1.49.
and put me at more large liberty of mind, thou that art mighty, have done for
me great things, and holy is thy name, thou will perform thy work toward me,
O Lord, Psalm. 138.8.
thy mercy endures for ever, forsake not the work of thy own hands, thou
have delivered me from great dangers, 2 Cor. 1.10.
and do deliver me, and I trust that yet thou will deliver me. Help me,
that I give no place to these misconstructions in my heart: I will not say with
Job in his impatiency, Thou have set me as a mark against thee to shoot at,
Job 7.20.
and so confound this process of my afflictions in no right discussing them: I
will entertain by thy grace my privy checks, whereby thou knockest upon mine
heart, o open thou it wide and fill it, o thou that have the key of David, oh
my faith, my small faith, how feeble and weak art thou? thou do not answer
nor satisfy my heart, by apprehending and applying straightly into the arms
of my soul (O my poor soul) that savior of mankind Jesus Christ.


CHRIST. REason not (most beloved Soul) so unsoundly faith is in thee, albeit
it show not in actions, and fruits, by which it is sen^ibly discerned; for once
wrought in thy soul, it always continues; a sounding man is not dead, by the
sickness of the soul in sin, or outward violence of temptations it seems
deprived of love, hope, patience, etc. but by prayer, word, and spirit, it
soon reuiueth; weather-beaten trees in winter are naked of fruit and leaves,
yet live, and suck nourishment of the earth. When the sweet shewers of my
spirit shall distill upon thee as in the spring, and the warm sunneshine of my
Fathers love appear to thee, thou shall grow green and new in holy actions.
Fire covered with ashes is no^ extinguished. Is man without reason, because he
has no use of it while he sleeps; drousie, securely, hardness of heart,
and dullness of spirit ouertaketh sometimes my best servants, whose souls
seem so sick in the sense of sin, that there often appears no sign of life.
Prescribe unto me no time, but wayt my leisure, and I will surely help thee:
thou can not discern now of faith and infidelity, love of me, and rebellion
against me, betwixt sanctifications, and the heavy mass of filthy
corruption. Be persuaded, that though thou have no present sense and feeling
of righteousness, Romans 11.29
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: Yet, if ever thou had them truly in any
degree, they are not taken from thee, intermission is not ab^uption, I will in
my time finish my work. Phil. 1.6.
The woman with child feele^h not the motion thereof always, but having once
felt it she is persuaded she is with child; so by the seed of the word,
faith is begotten and sense of pardon of thy sins, yet after a while thou
may wound thy conscience by sin; for i^ pleases me thereby to exercise
thy faith, and manif^st my power in thy weakness, yielding to my self the
praise of thy salvation. In this case prop up thy declining faith, call to
mind how often I have shown thee my merciful countenance, so do the Saints,
Psalm. 77.5.^^.11.
they remember my works and my wonders of old, upon them, and in them. Set
before thy eyes my servant Job, who did comfort himself in his greatest
extremity with his friends* and in his perplexity with himself, by calling to
mind the bypast fruits of faith, and wonted works of sanctification, which
he had observed in himself in former times; and concluded of them, Behold my
sign that the Almighty is witness for me. Job 3.12.35.
Learn wisely to distinguish betwixt the habit and act of thy faith, for it
is the ground of things which are hoped for, Heb. 11.1. 1. Cor. 2.9.
and neither the eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor heart can conceive
them. Remember it is a kind of infidelity to believe only things subject to
sence^ and understandings, where feeling cease, then faith begins the
chief work; thy best faith shows it self when thou have no sense, but
rather discern and feel the clean contrary, as to behold my love through
the vizard of my anger, and say, Job 13.15.
Though thou kill me, yet will I trust in thee: for faith is not founded upon
thy feeling but upon my gracious promises, immutable goodness, and infallible
truth. If once thou have tasted of mercy (the which I know, and thou art
persuaded thou have done sundry and diverse times) whatsoever thou apprehendest
in thy present feeling, yet faith concludes thou art still in favor, Ioh.
13.1.
For whom I love, I love to the end, and of my own will, I did beget thee with
the word of truth, James 1.18
be not therefore faithless, but faithful. Ioh. 20.27.



The SOVLE. MY spirit is refreshed, as the thirsty ground, O give me more of
the pure river of that water of life, Revel. 22.1
pure as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God, and of thee the Lamb.
This water thou give me, is a Well of water in me, springing up to eternal
life. Ioh. 4.14.
But (O my God) my God, I make my moan to thee, of the weakness of my faith!
I do not fully assent, unto that I know, I am not surely persuaded of my
salvation, but assaulted with doubting, that thy promises do not belong unto
me, and that by my manifold sins, I may be separate (which God forbid) from
thy love.


CHRIST. TO have true faith is not to have a perfect faith, never shaken with
any temptations, for there was never such faith in any man in the world; for
the most perfect, are partly Flesh, and partly Spirit; the fruit of the Spirit
is faith, the fruit of the flesh is doubting, which ever fight one against
another: Romans 1.17.
but there are Babes in me growing from faith to faith, Heb. 10.22.
till they attain to that f^lnesse of pe^suasion, yet this weak faith is a
true faith, as never so little gold is gold, and sufficient to save the
believer: for my promises are not made to a strong faith, but to those that
have a true faith: Ioh. 3.18.
for he that believes shall be saved. I have no respect to the Quantity and
apprehension, but Quality: if it be true and lively, a little man is as truly
man, as a great Giant. My Apostles were ignorant in many things, as, that I
should redeem mankind by my death: Mat. 16. Mat. 18.20 ^8. Luke 9 45 Luke 24
11 Mar. 9.32. Ioh. 13.36 Ioh. 14.5. Act. 1.16. Mar. ^0.37
when I told them I should be crucified, they understood it not; they knew not
that I should rise again: and being taught it, thought it a feigned thing:
Were ignorant of my ascension and kingdom: for they dreamed of worldly
preferment. See now (dear Soul) how weak and small this their faith is, which
also is evident in that my reprehension. Wherefore are ye fearful, O ye of
little faith? And yet notwithstanding, I compared it to a Rock, against which
the gates of Hell should not prevail. Yea (dear Soul) all the power of Hell
shall never prevail against the smallest measure of faith: Phi. 3.13.
the weaker it is, the stronger is my power in sustayning it: the more Satan
wins thee, the more effectual is my intercession that thy Faith fail not:
the feebler thy faith is in apprehe^ding me, the more powerful is my Spirit
in apprehending thee, and in joining thee inseperably with me. I will not
condemn the least measure of my grace bestowed upon thee, neither take it away
after it is once bestowed; but rather to him that has will I give, Mat. ^5.29
until he have abundance. He that has one tale^t, shall have it double. I
do reprove for small faith, but never for weak faith, no not him, who in the
sense of his weakness said unto me, Mar 9.24.
Lord I believe, help my unbelief.


The SOVLE. O Lord increase my faith: Luke 1.68.
Blessed be thou Lord God of Israel, because thou have visited and redeemed my
Soul, and have raised up the horn of salvation unto me; that being
delivered from my enemies, and the hands of all that hate me: I should serve
thee without fear all the days of my life, in holiness and righteousness
before thee. O how great is that peace of conscience and joy in the Holy
Ghost, which may be tasted, but cannot be uttered! Now will I not dispute
against my self longer for my actions, for being displeased with my person, I
cannot be pleased with my doings: The body of sin shall never be from me
while I live, the skum thereof is ever boiling in me, foming out stinking
savor in my mind. I am weary of my sin, yet there is no time too late to
repent. I will not count what I have been, but what I would be: My works
will do nothing in the matter of my justification, which from thee, and in
thee, is freely given me. I cannot resist Satan, it is not possible I can
encounter him; but in thee I am more than a Conqueror over them all: Never one
fulfilled the Law but thou, and that thou have given me: My conscience serving
the Law of Grace, is a glorious Prince to triumph over sin.


CHRIST. O How fair art thou now my Love; Cant. 1.15
how fair ar^ thou; Thou have Doues-eyes: Thou have seen thy shadow in the
Water of Life: I have brought thee ^o the banqueting house, and my Banner over
thee is Love; Ibid. 2.4.
So much right have thie sins against thee, as how much they could do against
me: thou art in me, and I in thee. I have become sin for thee, and Death
(like a Humming-Bee) has lost it sting. I will tell thee (dear soul) the
Wife is not suable, but the Husband. I have made all thy enemies sufficient
answer, who shall judge thee? I am Judge and acquit thee. Lo, hear my
sentence, I will not thy death: To excuse thee I am better than the best man of
Law ever was. I was accursed for thee: I am thy Law and liberty: for sin, I
am thie Righteousness: against Satan: thie Savior against Death, thy Life.
Lay down thy head in my lap with my beloved John, and take thy rest.


The SOVLE. MEe-thinkes I hear ^he voice of my beloved; behold, he comes,
leaping over the Mountains of my sins, Cant. 2.8.
skipping upon the Hill^ of my griefs. Have mercy upon me, heal my soul,
for I have sinned against thee; forgive all my i^iquities, and heal all my
infirmities: yea, thou healest those that are broken in heart, and bindest up
their sores. Why art thou cast down (oh my Soul?) and why art thou disquieted
within me? Wait still on God, for I will yet give him thanks; he is my
present help, and my God: Yet (my Soul) keep thou silence before God; of him
comes thy salvation: He is thy strength, therefore shall thou not much be
moved. Henceforth (sweet Jesus) I will not measure thy love, by my sense and
humor, neither can any temptation ouer-take me, but such as has fallen in the
nature of man, which have all found mercy at thie hands, that thou might
be feared. Avoid Satan, I am not under the Law, but under grace: My sins
are not only pardonable, but pardoned; and from this time my conversation is in
Heaven. But (alas) I do yet daily, hour^lie, and e^uerie minute sin against
thee; Genesis 6.5.
yea and every imagi^nation of the thoughts of my heart are only evil
continually. Because of my corrup^ion I am unworthy, and unfit, for the
kingdom of heaven. And where is then that weak faith which tho^ erst
requiredst in me.


CHRIST. I have fulfilled the law, that thou, by me, 2. Co. 5.21
might be made my Righteousness; for I did always the things that pleased my
father, to abolish thy cor^ruption: Have I not, Ioh. 8.21.
for thy sake, sanctified my self? In me are all the promises of God are, 2.
Cor. 1.
yea, and Amen. unto the glory of God by thee: For it pleased the Father that
in me, all fullness should dwell, in whom thou also art perfected; for there
is no condemnation to them that are in Me. I am thy Advocate to plead thie
cause, yea rather my own cause. The question is not of thie worthiness which
thou renouncest, but of the merit of my obedience, and value of my death unto
thy salvation; thy faith depends not upon thy adversaries testimony: It is
enough that thou feel by my grace, that thou beleeuest, yea that thou may
the rather persuade thy self of Faith, because he says Thou have none:
knowing that Satan is not only a Murderer from the beginning, Ioh 8 44.
and abode not in the truth; but also a Liar, and the Father of it. He is a
notorious Deceiuer, vnwo^thie of credit, so of^ sil^nced by me and my
servants. Mar 2.24 Act. 16.^^.
Content thee to have a competent knowledge of the Mystery of thy Salvation by
Me. And whereas thou (afflicted Soul) desire nothing more than to believe,
though thou feel not a present operation of comfort by faith, yet that desire
argues a secret sense, which thou now can not easily discern, with
assurance of better estate in time to come; Esa. 65.13. Mat 5.6. Luke 15.3
for thou art blessed that hungeredst for righteousness, I will surely fill such
with good things.

This secret seed of faith nourished by my Spirit in thee, witnesses Satan's
ejection out of thee by thy resistance, which is a part of a former work in
thee. Disquiet not thy heart, for that thou want; make use of that thou
have, which though it seem little to thee, yet is more tha^ Satan is able to
overcome. He that fights is not yetcaptiue: he that stands against his
enemies face is not vanquished: yea, thy holding out in so great weakness,
argues, that thou stand by a greater strength than thy own, and shall in
the end triumph: Romans 8.10
For though the body be dead in resp^ct of Sin, yet the Spirit is Life for
righteousness sake. The Sins t^erefore proceeding from thie Corruption, Romans
7.17.
are not thine, but Works of the Flesh, wounded unto death by My Death; and
shall be abolished finally by Death, which shall end the battle betwixt the
Flesh and the Spirit. The Sun and Moon do not perish in their Eclipses, no
nor loose Light for ever. Neither the sense of my goodness in thee shall loose
his virtue for ever. I found thee when thou soughtest me not: I will return
unto my own work. I send blessing with cros^es, least thou should
despair; and crosses with blessings, least thou should presume. Grieve
thee not at my wise Dispensation.


The SOVLE. I Find (dear Redeemer) an interchangeable condition of Sorrow
and Comfort, of Faith and Fear. I have had some affection to hear, knowledge
of thie Will, purpose of amendment, in zeal^ of Spirit called upon Thee: but
n^w I am in such agony and conflict of conscience, that my Sins at all
times, yea in my Prayers, yea while I begin to speak with thee ^ow (sweet
Jesus) so lively present themselves to my inward sight, that I am almost ag^st,
and at my Wits-end.


CHRIST. AS the sense of an aguish Man is corrupt, so is thie judgment: in
Temptation, things that are, seem not to be, or not such as they are: Heb.
10.32.34. Job. 29.3. Ps. 77.6.12
spiritual things must be spiritually discerned. When Men are diseased (dear
Soul) it cannot thereof be concluded, that they were never in health: none
can say they are a sleep, which are so indeed. Prese^^ discomforts take away
the sense of mercy for a time, but in heaviness and anguish of thy Spirit,
remember comforts past, and assure thee of my return in due time. The day was
when thy assurance of my favor was such, as Sa^han himself could not then deny
the testimony which then my Spirit did bear to thie Spirit, Kom. 8.16
greater than either the testimony of Men or Angels: for I loved thee before
the foundation of the World was laid: Be not cruel unto thy own bowels: Why
would thou conspire with Satan against thy self? rather resist him, 1. Pet.
5.9
being steadfast in Faith: Resist him (I say) and he will fly from thee; for
he cannot work any thing in thee, but by thy own consent: no motion shall
hurt thee whereunto thou give not consent in heart, thou have no sin whiles
in heart thou longest to be free from it: thou want no goodness, which in
heart thou couetest t^ have: Romans 7.
It is Satan's nature to contradict my spirit: for thus he does distress and
anguish afflicted souls, holding them in the cogitations of their sins, and
suffers them not to see the length, breadth, height and depth of my mercies;
Ephesians. 3.18.
neither to know that my l^ue which passes allvnderstanding, that thou may
be filled with all the fullness of me, who shall once determine these
conslicting days, where I which am in the mids of the throne shall feed thee,
and lead thee unto living fountains of waters, Reu. 7.^7. and 14 13. Heb. 10.37
and shall wipe away all tears from thine eyes. Cast not therefore away thy
confidence, which has so great recompense of reward. And to use thine enemies
weapons against himself, he seeks by torment of mind, to drive thee to
despair. This is the most evident and sensible testimony of grace and favor
with me, if thou feel i^ thy self the conflict of the flesh and spirit, that
is, of faith against unbelief, and of me in thee against his power: and which
is more, thou must know the work of sanctification begins in the heart, and
thence flows into our whole life. Now thoughts, meditations and desires are
deeds before me, and the fruits of faith are testifications of my spirit
dwelling in thee, more pregnant and euiden then they may, or dare be by Satan
himself denied. Strive not so to that thou have not, as thou forget that which
by my grace thou have already, but assure thee of the continuance of it: for ^e
that believes makes no haste, but lives by faith; good things to come thou
must hold in hope, Hab. 2.3.
and pursue them in peace for yet a little while, and I that shall come, Heb.
10.37
will come, and will not tarry.

(...) and covenant made in the sprinckling of my blood. My people after their
calling, may fall in many foul sins, for this cause have I commended my mercy in
the Law for many and several sorts of sins. Exodus 24.6.7.
The Jews in Esaias days, were as Sodom and Gomorrha, yet I said, though
their sins were ^s crimson, Esa. 1.10.
they should be white as snow. I exhorted them to turn to me, Esa. 31.6.
which had deeply revolted: yea, when they had rebelled and vexed my holy
spirit, yet I desired them to pray unto me and forgave them, Esa. 3.7.10 15.16.
and did I not hear Ephraim bem^aning himself thus? thou have chastized me,
and I was chastized as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: Ier. 31.18.20.
turn thou me and I shall be turned, thou art the Lord my God. But since I did
speak against him (as now thou do against thy self) I do earnestly
remember him still, therefore my bowels are tro^bled for him, I will surely have
mercy upon him: surely I am jesus Christ unchangeable; was yesterday, is to
day, and shall be the same for ever. Heb. 13.8.6.
I am thy helper, fear not what man can do unto thee: when sickness is at the
highest, then there is greatest hope of diminishing; he cannot bedrowned which
has his head above the water, I am thy head in heaven, who have bruized the
Serpents head on earth.


The SOVLE. OH I feel if thy spirit make me free, Ioh. 8.36.
I shall be free indeed: create in me a clean heart (dear I^^us) and renew
a right spirit within me; restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and
establish me with thy free spirit; let my prayer be directed in thy sight as
incense, and the lifting up of my hands, as an even sacrifice, Psalm. 141.2*
Psalm. 119.108.
O Lord I beseech thee accept the free offerings of my mouth, teach me thy
judgments, Zach. 19.9
Rejoice greatly my Soul behold thy King is come unto thee, he is just, and
having salvation and he is lowly. O open ye the gates of my soul, and let in
the Prince of glory: Thou that dwell in the heavens do look unto me
that am poor, Esa. 66.2.
and of a contrite h^^r (...) and I tremble at thy words. I was very sore
^^flicted, o Lord quic^en me according to thy word. Psalm. 119.10. and 119 52.
I have remembered thy iu^gements of old, and have been comforted. I live, yet
not I now, but thou liu^st in me, thy father that gave me unto thee is greater
then all, Gal. 2.20.
and none can take me out of thy hand. Ioh. 10.29.
To thee therefore that loves me, and washes me from my sins in thine own
blood, and have mad^ me King, and Pri^st unto Thee, only wise God, my
Savior, be glory and Majesty, dominion and power, now and for ever. Amen.


FINIS.

