A TREATISE OF THE TWO SACRAMENTS OF THE GOSPEL: BAPTISM AND THE SVPPER OF
THE LORD.

Divided into two Parts.

The first treating of the Doctrine and Nature of the Sacraments in general,
and of these two in special; together with the Circumstances attending them.

The second containing the manner of our due preparation to the Receiving of
the Supper of the Lord; As also, of our behavior in and after the same.

Whereunto is Annexed an Appendix, showing; First, how a Christian may find
his Preparation to the Supper sweet and easy: Secondly, the causes why the
Sacrament is so unworthily Received by the worst; and so fruitlesly by the
better sort: with the Remedies to avoid them both.

By D. R. B. of Divin. Minister of the Gospel.

Math. 3.11. I indeed baptize you with water, but he that comes after me, who
is worthier than I, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, etc.

Esaias 25.6. And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people
a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things, etc.

Printed at London by Tho. Cotes, for John Bellamie, dwelling at the three
Golden Lions in Corne-hill near the Royal Exchange. 1633.

TO THE HONORABLE AND MY GOOD Lady, the old Lady Barington, Grace and Peace.
MADAM.
FOR sundry causes this Treatise of mine seeks your patronage. One is, That
interest of love and respect, which a long time (not my self alone) but sundry
of our name and Tribe have received from your Ladyship. Another is, your loving
acceptance of such former service of mine to God and his Church in this kind,
as has privately come to your hands: wherein you have ingenuously professed
your self to be a daily travailer with some fruit. Likewise that honorable
esteem which I have ever borne and bear to the memory of that noble and
worthy Knight your deceased husband, was not a little moment in my thoughts:
Not to speak of my acquaintance with some of your religious Race, of whom I
say the less, as persuaded that they seek the praise of God, not of man.
Besides all these, I add this: That my hope is, that from your patronage and
protection, some of your own rank, and more of your inferiors, (who look
after books as much for the grace and allowance of their betters, as for the
worth of their matter) might by reading thereof, be drawn to love them for the
true good which they have gained thereby.

Yet I must not deny, but there is a greater motive than all these: Seldom
have I seriously conversed with your Ladyship at any time, but I have observed
some carfulness in you to be settled upon some good evidences which might
secure you of pardon, and favor with God. A solemn object! I confess; the
very thought whereof as you may bless God for, so much more you shall have
cause to praise him, in vouchsafing you! Which shall come to pass, if (as
always, so) especially in this last act of your life, you shall give all
diligence by reading, meditation, and prayer, to make it sure to your own
soul. My desire therefore being, that I might confer somewhat hereto; and
sithence God has cast your eye and affection upon my labors, (which do
cheefely aim at this mark) I beseech the Lord so to guide your spirit in your
perusal thereof; That (whatsoever you pass over besides) you may take
special mark of those grounds of Humiliation, selfe-denyall, and faith, which
most concern the maine point of assurance. Neglecting no occasion, if by any
means you may atteine to the resurrection of the dead, and the whilst may be
satisfied with peace and joy through believing. That so, your heart daily
growing more tender, and confident upon the bare word of the promise (you need
no other support) your whole heart and conversation may be molded into a new
creature, according to the measure of mercy!

I will not delay you with discourse about the contents of the ensuing
treatise; that were but to prevent both the Epistle following, and the Book it
self. As touching helps for your comfortable receiving (which I have noted
you to speak seriously of) I cannot doubt but your Ladyship has many, (though
I know not any who have travailed in this kind with me, to unite the full
doctrine and practice of the supper in one.) But for as much as it is
behoovefull upon such occasions, not only to hear in public, but also to
have some real subject at hand which may present the Truth to a desirous
heart, and releeve memory; therefore I doubt not but this Treatise may ad a
furtherance thereto. If, as the Lord has with much labor and 6. or 7. years,
thoughts (at times) now brought this poor fruit to the light, so he please to
add a suitable success unto it, in his peoples practice: I shall have no cause
to repent me. It is the Lord, who as he is tied to none of our tongues or
pens, so yet has bound himself to our faith, prayers and diligence. To whom
therefore commending the issue of your Ladyships endeavors herein, together
with the prosperity of your self and yours, an happy end of your long
pilgrimage, and peace to Israel, I rest

Your Ladyships bounden D. R.

To the Judicious and well affected Reader.
GOOD Reader, I have ever esteemed the Lord Jesus, the newbirth and nourishment
of his Church, to be (of all other Arguments and Treatises of Divinity) the
most eminent and essential either for such as preach and write, to insist
upon; or for those that hear and read, to improove to themselves, by knowing
and believing. And sithence our good God has not contented himself to
vouchsafe to his Church this great gift of Christ, only by the word of
promise: (which yet, being grounded upon such unshaken Foundations, as his own
decree, the death of his Son, and the faithfulness of his dispensers, might
well claim the obedience and consent of faith at our hands) But also has
added the Sacraments as seals of this his covenant, and as the utmost
assurance of his good meaning; moreover annexing the Spirit of promise and of
seal, to them both, for the better applying to each soul in particular, his
part in these good things which he has beteamed her: I have thought it fittest
(having now leisure more than enough to choose my argument) to light upon this,
of Christ Sacramental: as giving me hope of doing the most comprehen^ ^^e
good, and becoming most advantageous to the ^^^^ch of God, both for the
understanding and use of that ^^^trine.

Every man desires to have that which he buyeth or enjoys, when the commodity
is at the best: When men would either show or buy wares or cattle in the
Market, they desire to set them forth at the best; and when they are in best
case to attract buyers: we love to behold the faces of them we love, when they
are at the best, for health of body and spirit: and if we were as wise to
improove every thing to the best, as we are willing to get it at the best; sure
it is, we love to get nothing at the worst, which may be come by at the best.
Now then the Sacraments exhibit Christ (as I may say) at his best: And as
Pharaoh's daughter is invited to come and behold Solomon, when he was clothed
with all those costly ornaments and glory where with his mother made him glad
on his crowninng day; so do the Sacraments offer Christ a greater object than
Solomon even in his best Grace, in the richest and royallest robe of his
righteousness, in the best of his Peace, joy, and contentation which God can
bestow him in; Whose heart should not then esteem him at this best of his,
with best judgment and affection? Not by foolish or Popish comparison of one
ordinance with another; But by considering that each ordinance with another is
better than another alone, and so the Sacrament with a word, is above the word
alone, because it contains the word and has more besides in it, even Christ
at his best, in the fullness, length, depth, and all treasures of breeding and
nourishing grace, not only in himself, but made over to my soul by the
Father, grace for grace to me: my Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
and Redemption.

Alas! dear friends! What were the knowledge of this Lord Jesus, as he is only
the second person in Trinity and the eternal Word of the Father? If the depth
of that mystery contained in Heb. 1:3. (To wit, that Christ is the brightness of
the Fathers glory, and the engraven form of his person) were fully understood
by a man, (as who doubts but such knowledge were excellent?) yet alas! it falls
short of that excellent knowledge which Paul speaks of Phil. 3: Of Christ
Jesus my Lord, who has given himself for me, loved me, by which the world is
crucified to me, and I to it; this only is that to which all other is dung and
dross. Nay further, put case I knew him, as the true Mediator, in all three
offices, and namely the true only Priest and satisfier for the sins of the
world: Were this that excellent knowledge of all other, except he were
crucified also in the eye and to the spiritual gain of my soul, as my Lord
and God, and as my satisfaction, and the treader of the wine press of the
fierce wrath of God, Esaias 63.1, that the anger of God might be pacified to me?
No verily. Nay lastly, put case this knowledge of Jesus Christ my satisfier,
could possibly be severed from the knowledge of him my Sanctifier also: and
that Christ my birth, could be divided from Christ my Nourishment; my support,
health, growth, and fruitfulness; could this knowledge be counted the most
excellent? Were it not a rending (rather) of one piece of Christ's garment from
another, yea a pulling of one especial part of him from my soul, and breaking
of so precious a Diamond in pieces? What excellent things then must those be,
which present the Lord Jesus in all these three, the beauty of his person, the
benefit of his satisfaction, and the grace of his Sanctification; and that to
me, with seazin and delivery? That offer him (as I said) at his best? This do
the Sacraments, and therefore of how great esteem should they be in the Church
of Christ?

I confess if I presented Christ to thy view (good Reader) in those dark
Sacraments of the Old Testament, or no otherwise than John Baptist could, I
should bring thee a burgaine at the worst hand. For, although Christ were in
them also, yet with such poor convincement, that I may safely say: The body of
receivers, who beheld the covenant of the Law as a covenant of works and
Righteousness thereby; did receive the Sacraments as a curse rather than a
blessing upon themselves: and bred worse blood in themselves thereby, than
before they had. For why? They renouncing the right covenant of righteousness
whereof they were seals, (as it is said, that Abraham received circumcision as
a seal of it) and mistaking the law, as if it required a possible obedience
from them, to merit life; what did they but curse themselves and say, Cursed be
he who thinks he can abide in all things written in the book of the Law to
do them? And not being able to do them, but deluding themselves, and taking
the Sacrament upon it; what did they in effect, but seal up that curse to
themselves and their seed? But lo, in the Sacraments of the Gospel, is
offered thee a better ministration of the spirit of the Lord Jesus, in the
seals of that righteousness which comes by faith: and therefore a curse is
turned into a blessing. For as the covenant is, which thou come in, so is
the seal which thou receivest, both are blessed, and thou coming in faith
unto them, receivest from God blessing under seal: so that he has blessed
thee, and thou shall be blessed. And is not this the Lord Jesus at his best?

Moreover if I presented thee only Jewish Sacraments, what great thing should
I offer thee? Surely Christ in a dark corner, circumcision in a private
family, the Passover in an household by it self: But lo, I present Christ unto
thee not with a veil before his face, which is obscure: but in a Mirror, with
open face, transforming thee from glory to glory. I say a Christ Sacramental,
not offered by a Priest to God in a Mass, and in a corner of the Church, with
a boy to mumble an answer, but in the open view of his Church and assemblies
of his Saints. Look not here for Popish, Anabaptisticall, Brownisticall or
Scismaticall Sacraments huddled up by a false Church in their houses, barnes,
or corners, (though I tax not corners where the Church is present as the
Martyrs were in woods: but in the midst of his people, where Christ the Lord
of Sacraments is present with his own, met in his name, even in the beauty of
his holiness. So that as he suffered not in a corner of heaven, or earth, but
upon an hill before his Church, and refused not the world to be witnesses; and
was lift up as the Serpent in the wilderness, in the public view of his people;
so, that thou professest to be a dove of his flock, and one of the youth of
his womb, Psalm. 110. May fly to his loover and windows, and come into his
Temple with frequency as the dew falls upon the grass, saying, How amiable are
thy Tabernacles O Lord of hosts! My flesh longs and my feet desire to see
and stand in the courts of thine house. Even in the chambers of my Mother! and
in the Garden of thy spices, even there give me thy love: There let thy
Northwind of Prayer and blessing blow thy savor into my nostrills, that after
thine ointments powered out there, the Daughters my followthe! And is not this,
Christ at the best?

But to proceed a little in this argument (for I have locked my self out of
the hall, and therefore must stand a while in my porch rather than no where)
what better proof of the Lord Jesus at his best, than this, that he is offered
to thee in no less mystical union for the end of a more mystical one? I
mean as united to poor bread and wine, that he might also unite himself in
the whole grace of his Sacrifice to thy soul and body? What better und easier
conveiance could thou wish than this, for so feeble and weak a spirit as
thine is? When once that people which followed Christ sitting upon an Ass
Colt, and riding as a King to Jerusalem, cried Hosanna, and said, Blessed be he
that comes in the name of the Lord: Think we not that they saw Christ at the
best? Why did they else, (except they had beheld his spiritual Kingdom) cut
down Palms and strew them in the way, stripping themselves of their garments
to set him thereon? Surely they were not so offended at the meandness of his
palfrey and baseness of the outside, but they saw in this his riding, a clear
representation of his glorious grace, and the Majesty of his person. So
should thou, in this union of Christ with base crummes of bread or drops of
wine, behold a more spiritual presence of Christ, who cares not for such
creatures, but for thy soul; and being far from stumbling at the baseness
of the Ass, or Elements, raise up thy soul to a more heavenly sense, of the
Lord Jesus coming into thy heart and spirit, bringing thee to God, and uniting
thee to the fountain of thy blessedness in a far closer manner than ever
Adam was. And is not this union, the Lord Jesus at his best? yes verily.

From this Sacramental union, proceeds that exhibitive nature of Sacraments,
carrying the Lord Jesus into the soul of all the elect that communicate. For
to what end is union Sacramental, save that the Sacraments being thus
possessed of the Lord Jesus mystically in them, might exhibit to all, and
effectually carry into the bosoms of the elect, the power of this Lord Jesus,
and convey as Vessels, channelles and Pipes, that grace which they contain? I
do not mean that by virtue of the work wrought, or by the force of Divine
institution, there is any natural holiness put into them, or magical power
of enchantment, to take hold of the soul. No, in no wise: for how many
thousands are there both young and old, who after the enjoying of the
Sacraments, do put most woeful bars in their own way, that the power of
Sacramental union might never come at them? So that when the Covenant comes to
be dispensed unto them, they fare as persons utterly disabled to receive it.
Nay, neither dare I think that by virtue hereof, its of absolute necessity
that all Elect Infants must receive conversion of grace, just in the act of
their Baptizing: for what were this but to ascribe more to the Seal than to
the Covenant, yea to invert their order, and to ascribe greater power to an
ordinance, (under which they walk 20, 30, 40. years carelessly, without
discovery of any grace at all) rather than to the lively power of the Covenant
preached and working from that time forth, an apparent change? So that although
in charity I am bound to think no other, save that all such as receive
Sacraments duly, concur with the grace of the Spirit for future improvement:
Yet to tie the Lords hands behind him, and to make the Lord of Sacraments to
become their underling, as if he had put himself out of Authority and office,
wholly to be subject to his Sacrament, what indignity were it for the ordainer?
No not so: But so far, so often, and where it shall seem good to himself to
make use of his Sacrament for the good of his Elect (for whose good they serve)
there doubtless these Ordinances do both present and confer the grace which
is put into them? Else to what end should they have it, except they might
convey it? Now sum up all, and answer: Is not the exhibitive power of the
Sacrament, the Lord Jesus at his best? Is not a real tender, better than a
bare sign, or a promise only without performance? He that promises an
hundred pounds to lend or give to his poor friend, and presently tenders the
money, that he might be before hand, does he not lend or give at the best?

Nay, more than this, not the Sacraments only are thus exhibitive of Christ to
the soul: But by virtue of the union I have spoken of, the Lord Jesus himself
is there present (where his institution is duly observed) to be the Baptizer
of his members, and to be the steward and nourisher of his family: that is, to
bestow himself upon the soul. Touching Baptism first, true it is, That our
Lord Jesus himself never baptized any outwardly: howbeit as then, so much more
now being ascended, he it is who in the outward Baptism of the Minister, does
give gifts unto men, and does still baptize all his, with the holy Ghost and
fire. A poor sinful man does what he can do; but further he cannot go: He
dives the infant into, holds it in, and receives it out again from the water,
baptising it in the name of the sacred Trinity. But this our great Baptist, he
is all in all for the doing of the work. It is he who casts in the salt of his
divine healing power into corrupt and (of themselves) accursed creatures; and
Element; and element; he removes the curse, death and barrennes of the waters,
utterly unable to engender; he takes off their base uncomelinesse: he darts and
plants in them the efficacy of his own death and resurrection both for merit
of pardon, and of holiness: he sanctifies and clenses them, that they may become
hallowed and purging instruments; And as a planter takes the sien of the
Apple Tree, and pitches it into a Crabtree stock: so the Lord Jesus takes the
precious sien of his own Righteousness, the Power of his own death and
grave, the strength of his resurrection and exalting, and pitches both into
water: so that water becomes Christ-water, Christ's death and life, so that the
soul is washed with the one as the body with the other; The soul (by faith in
the covenant) feel her descent into the water, to become a spirit of diving
her into the laver, and blood, and grave of the Lord Jesus: her being under the
water, to become the spirit brooding and fructifying the water, to become a
seed of life abiding in the womb of the soul, to regenerate it to the life
of Christ; Her arising up from the water, to become a spirit of Resurrection
(as Peter excellently speaks 1 Epist. cap. 3. verse 21.) and a baptising of
the soul with the activity and raising of her up with Christ, from her death,
grave, baseness and misery, unto immortality and glory. Yea in all three the
soul feels the power of a new and omnipotent creation of her to God,
ingrafting her in God, never to be pulled from him any more as at first. And as
the spirit whereby the Lord offered up himself was, so is the power of the
same spirit to the soul, begetting and renewing it; Eternal also: so that the
never dying power of baptism keeps the branch of the vine thus one put in, to
abide for ever ingrafted and planted into the person of Emanuell: so that
himself the stock shall as soon wither, as the soul which by faith is in
him shall perish. No more baptisings shall need than one, because Christ ever
lives in the soul, and recovereth her by his unrestrained influence, from all
her swouning, decays and wanzings, to her former integrity: no more Barks are
required after shipwreck save this one. Now, if Christ himself in person (not
the poor Minister with all his acts only) be the true Baptist: can it be
otherwise, but Baptism must needs be the Lord Jesus at the best?

Lastly, to add one word also of the Supper: The sinful tongue and hands (I
say not of a wicked Mass Priest) but even the best consecrater of the
Sacrament, that lives, cannot bless sufficiently: But the Lord Jesus our
steward, he is the Administer of it completely; he is the true consecrater, yea
the food and feeder of the Souls of his own, with his precious body and
blood unto eternity. None whom the Father has given him to be his living ones,
can decay, pine, or wither under his hand while he lives to make them
Provision. He told his Desciples, he would eat and drink no more of the
fruit of the Vine, till he drank it in the kingdom: meaning, till he
spiritually without mouth or hands, did present himself with his Church
Sac^amentally, there to feed them: But in that sense he promised to drink it
with them, to the worlds end He it is then who as the Master of the feast and
the feast also, welcometh, provideth for, and encourages his guests, to eat
good things, and to delight in fatness: He it is who not only in the
Ministers person still consecrateth, but by his might and strength, derives all
his blood, spirit, marrow and nourishment into the bones and veins of his
poor members, by his union with the elements; whereby he saves and sustayneth
all his true borne ones that cry after his breast and succor; he cannot suffer
them to lack. And as himself in diverse phrases expresses, he feeds them in
his Pastures, leads them to the waters, he cherishes them as his spouse,
nourishes them as his branches, and by him as the door, they go in and out,
finding pasture. For he has made himself one with bread and wine, that man
not living by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God: may, in and by these Elements, draw a secret foyson and increase to the
soul, and be therein sustained with faith and the fruits, as after in the
Treatise (God willing) I shall more fully declare. He whose flesh once eaten is
immortal, yet offers himself often for the relief of daily defects. And is
not this the Lord Jesus at his best in this Sacrament also?

Endless it were to recite all which might convince thee of this excellency of
Christ Sacramental. Who would not confess that friend to show his love at the
best, who should most draw near to him in his greatest troubles? And is not
Christ Sacramental for the nonce? To what end then does he offer thee his
blood and bid th^e drink it, save to conform thee to a sweet meekness of
spirit in suffering, and to a fellowship in all his Afflictions, with
confidence of overcomming in his strength? Again, if a man should promise to
do thee a kindness, would thou not interpret his kindness at the best, if
it lay in such a kind, as should supply thy peculiar want? What kindness is
counted of, like that which is most se^sonable? That which releeves not some
defect, may be thought superfluous. Even so is Christ Sacramental: a relief
of each souls personal, peculiar diseases, wants, decays, distempers. Like
to the man of Baalshalisha, 2 King. 4.42. who brought loaves of Corn and
presents to the Prophet, when there was a necessity of famine, and a multitude
to be fed. But I end in a word: Wherein can it more clearly appear that the
Lord Jesus is offered thee in the Sacrament at his best, than in his blessed
fullness? If thou should visit thy friends house, tell me when should
thou most think thou came at the best, than in the midst of a feast? So I
say here, The Sacrament is the Kings feast at the marriage of his Son: The
feast of the hills, the feast of God, and heaven a full feast of all refined
wines, fat and delicate things. If Gods ordinary be so good, is not his feast
of Christ, Christ at his best? Wherein thy soul may fill it self for the
present and for afterward with choice Deinties, as the Aramites camp, and the
fullness thereof filled the leapers.

But, now what is the upshot of all? Oh! sad mourning! That we are at our worst
when Christ is best! Oh mourn that after 70. years liberty of the word and
Sacraments in the Church: yet by the sin of man, such mysteries as these
should lie by, disesteemed, because unacknowledged? True it is, as once it was
a deep conceit with the Jew, that his Messia must need be some special
person: But when the true Messia indeed came, they knew not what to make of
him; he was a strange wonder unto them. So now, it deeply dwells in most men,
that in the Sacrament some mystical thing lies hidden: but when they come to
it, they receive they know not what: The cause is, their carnality, and
sensualnesse, which is offended at the spiritualnesse of them: which makes them
allege, oh they are dark matters, and for great Divines, not for such as
they, to meddle withal. And thus in time, corrupt ease breeding error: that
error grows to prove religion: and as at first men thought them difficult,
so at length its their best devotion, to rest in blind and superstitious
reverence of a thing unknown. As those Athenians, who set up an Altar, to the
unknowable God blind devotion being the mere falling short of faith. If this
disease had infected popery only, it had been well: ^u^ this Popish leaven of
carnal Sacraments which sowred the first reformation with a consubstantiate
Christ: has tainted us with as dangerous an error, even to rest in a carnal
devotion, and the opus operatum of a devout blind receiving, counting it the
top of religion.

Alas! poor souls. To what purpose do we so crake and boast of our
Sacraments of the Gospel, that they are above those of the old Testament in all
respects (as indeed thy are) when as its clear by good experience, that
setting aside some places enlightened by the word, our Sacraments to the body of
our people, are as dim and dumb representers of a Christ already crucified,
as to the Jew, they were dark pretendings of the Messiah to come. Oh! How
woeful a fruit of darkness is this, that people now in this midday of light,
are so bafled, that it fares with them as if it were twylight? Is it not
fearful, that when there is so great odds in the season, there should be so
little in the persons living in them! because blindness makes all seasons alike,
both of darkness and light? How fearful is it that our eye should be so evil
to our selves when Gods is so good? and that we should be such Almners of Gods
bounty to our selves as if we still served an hard Master, what is this but to
betray God to the blasphemy of Hypocrites, profane ones, and ignorants?

This little understanding of these mysteries, among men in this age of ours
(wherein men's frequency of receiving seems to strive with their
unfruitfulnesse) has been one occasion of my publishing this treatise. That
(if possible) that excessive exalting of the Sacraments in Popery, above the
word or any other piece of worship, through their Superstition: might be
equalled among us Protestants in the Church of God, with as truly honorable
an esteem thereof, and that from knowledge and experience of their worth.
Considering partly the little care of teaching their doctrine in Congregations:
and partly the cold preparation of such as receive; and partly the resting of
men in their performances only without power or fruit: I could not see wherein
I should do greater honor to God than to enhanse the knowledge of Christ
Sacramental, and to incite others to do it, whose learned and habituous
abilities can far better perform it? And surely it stands us all in hand,
least signs of contradiction deface) to our uttermost to vindicate the
excellency of our Sacraments. That those rich legacies which the sin of man, or
that man of sin, with his Accomplices have so long kept hid from the true heirs
and owners thereof, may be cleared unto them, to be their just portion and
claim. Beseeching the Lord, that as he shall vouchsafe us clearer light of
knowledge, so (as our Church Liturgy commands us to pray) that ancient
Discipline of Gods house might prevail among us! I mean, That whereas the
number of ignorant scandalous and unprepared ones, as much exceeds the number
of prepared, penitent and worthy Communicants, as the army of the Aramites
exceeded the Israelites two flocks of Kiddes: by this means, it might please
God, the number of the latter might as much exceed the former.

For my own part, (to return to my matter) I bless God, that while it was my
lot to have a nail in the Priests Sanctuary; next to the preaching of Christ
in the promise, it was my poor care and course both by Catechism and Sermons,
to discover him in his Sacraments. Which labor (as weak as it was) I have so
little cause to repent of: that now I am encouraged in my self to recollect
and compile those scattered meditations into some method and view, for the
benefit of others, that heard them not. A great motive whereto was also this,
that as while they were preached, they found full as much approbation, as any
part else of my labors: so, since; they have provoked the desires of many more
than I can mention, that they might not with my self lie by, and be buried in
forgetfulness. Add heereto, that now in this vacancy of better service, I
could not easily quit my self of that idle unfruitfulnesse which too soon (as
rust) is ready to grow upon us without some service done in this kind.

To you then I address my speech, in the conclusion, dear friends who have
been taught by, and now are made partakers of my labors: Beseeching you, and
the Lord for you, that by the lively resemblance of these things which you have
bin long molded in, and shall be here presented withal; you would give
Testimony to this Truth, as the Truth is in Jesus. That is, that by your
spiritual prospering in the grace of the Lord Jesus Sacramental, ye would
commend this Doctrine of the Sacraments, especially of the Supper. So shall I
have cause to say, That you are my Epistle written in your hearts, known and
read of all men, and manif^sted to be the Epistle of Christ, not written with
Ink in paper, but with the Spirit of obedience and love, in the fleshy Tables
of your heart! Oh how shall you then safeguard me not from the evil tongues of
men (which I fear not) but the contradiction of hypocrites, and the foul
aspersion of an unprofitable Minister of Christ? In which happy wish I cease
troubling you, and commend your reading hereof to the blessing of God. Farewell.

The Contents of this first part, which has eight Chapters.
CHAPTER. I. Showing the general Circumstances belonging to Sacraments. P. 1
CHAP. II. Showing the agreement and disagreement of Sacraments, old and new
with each other: and then of the two new with themselves, that of Baptism with
the Supper. P. 11. CHAP. III. Treats of the substance of a Sacrament, and
here the description and parts thereof are examined. P. 28 CHAP. IIII. Of the
public exercise or Celebration of Sacraments, and the acts therein of the
Minister and people. P. 64 CHAP. V. Of Baptism in special: The Description of
it: the several parts thereof handled, and the true use of Baptism annexed.
P. 70 CHAP. VI. Of the Supper of the Lord: The Description of it: of the first
branch thereof, viz. the Sacramental Acts thereof. P. 105 CHAP. VII. Of the
second part of the Description, viz. the Grace of the Sacrament of the Supper.
P. 146 CHAP. VIII. Touching the Sacramental Acts of the people: (referred to
this place) and so the third and last general part of the description: The end
of the Supper. P. 172
The several branches of each Chapter, the Reader shall find set down in
their order, in the Margin of each Chapter.

The Contents of this second part, containing 12. Chapters.
CHAP. I. Treats of Sacramental Trial in general, the duty of it, with the
Necessity, Reasons, and Uses, of this Trial. page 1 CHAP. II. Of the several
objects of this our Trial, and first of the Trial of our estates toward God.
page 32 CHAP. III. Of the trial of our selves about our wants. page 49 CHAP.
IIII. Of the trial of our selves about our Sacramental graces; What graces
these are: And of the first of them, viz. Sacramental Knowledge. page 62 CHAP.
V. Touching the trial of faith for the Sacrament. page 81 CHAP. VI. The trial
of our Repentance for the Sacrament. page 108 CHAP. VII: The trial of our
Sacramental Love. page 140 CHAP. VIII. The trial of Sacramental Desire. page
193 CHAP. IX. Treats of the necessity of Communicating, and of the due
carriage of a Communicant in the act of receiving. Where of the remembering of
the Lords death till he come page 209 CHAP. X. Of the carriage of a communicant
after his receiving. page 214
Appendix.
CHAP. XI. Six Rules of direction, how a good Receiver may without difficulty
from time to time, prepare himself to the Sacrament, and receive comfortably.
page 232 CHAP. XII. The causes why the Sacraments are not received and enjoyed
either by the common sort worthily, or fruitfully by the better sort of
communicants, with the remedies. page 239
The special Contents of each S^ction, let the Reader look for in the
marginall Notes of each Chapter.

To the Christian Reader.
GOod Reader, I could not but advertise thee of some cautions in the method and
manner of thy reading of these Treatises: and here I would frame my speech to
two sorts; the one weaker and more ignorant; the other such as would think
themselves more judicious. To the former I say this: First, that whereas weak
ones lighting upon a book of this nature, cloven in two and divided; are ready
to enquire whether part is more necessary, and as they fancy, so to take what
they list, and leave what they please; falling upon that part which they think
neerliest joined with practice, passing by the other as less needful.
Therefore I advise all such to use a better order in their reading, and (as
Joseph's servants did in the search of the sackes,) to begin with the eldest and
first, and to end with the last; to read in order, from the beginning of the
fo^mer Part, to the end of the latter: by which means it shall come to pass,
that understanding their grounds distinctly and wisely, they shall proceed to
practice with far greater light and savor, than otherwise they should do by
their confused reading. I observe also another folly in weak ones: That when
the occasion of the Sacrament is offered, they commonly catch up some book of
that Argument, and while the pang lasts, spend their devotion upon it, till
they be weary; but no whit bend themselves to read those things which chiefly
concern them: and although they should light upon some such point, yet the
discourse being coherent, and they very unsettled, can scarce read over half
one point: Therefore my counsel to such is, To turn their sudden pangs into
an ordinary habit; that is, to devote themselves to a diligent reading and
coherent perusal of the things, as they are handled, without slightness and
needless interruption; whereby they shall both meet with such things as do
most concern their estate, and shall be able (by taking note thereof) to turn
to them at their need, and not to be to seek of them, nor wander in their
reading at uncertainties; which will cause their reading to be sweet, when
they feel gain to ensue thereby.

The latter caution to the more judicious is this, That whereas some of them
affecting to be thought so, when they meet with a book of this nature, partly
containing contemplation, partly practice: These (I say) are in another
extreme, and thinking the latter to be under their curious brains, do quite
pass it over, and if they think to get some new point, of deeper nature than
ordinary, or some distinction formerly unknown to them, out of the
contemplative discourse; that they will fasten upon and study hard: laboring
indeed rather to pride themselves with ostentation of some novelties or depths,
than to edify themselves with any practical and savory truths, as they are
in Jesus. To these I say this: That although I have been willing to handle the
Theory of this point of a Sacrament, (both because its little looked after, and
also for satisfaction of sober desires of knowledge;) yet my chief scope was,
rather to draw men to love and embrace the Sacraments, for their true gain and
spiritual commodity, than to humor any frothy brain in mere discourse, to
puff men up withal. In a word, if the well minded Reader shall purchase any
thing toward more sound understanding, by these my Collections, I shall be
glad; but much more glad, if I should find, that this knowledge of theirs, did
drop as dew, and soake into their hearts and affections, to season them with a
pious and conscionable regard of the Sacraments, a more due reverence in
preparing themselves to the Table of the Lord, and a more careful survey of
themselves after their Receiving, that so their whole course might be much
better, and their former errors rectified and reformed.

Now as touching the scope of this latter part; understand, that look what in
my former preface and Treatise, I have endeavored, for opening the Doctrine;
that I desire to do in this part, for the stirring up of practice in men, in
due preparing themselves, and meet receiving of the Supper. And seeing it is
so holy, solemn, and hazardous a work, it imports us to look well to our
selves in our partaking thereof. Sacraments (my brethren) are no morrall acts,
such as the managing of our earthly affairs, buyings, sellings, companies,
recreations and callings are (which yet are holily to be performed) but holy
things in their nature, eminently spiritual and religious in themselves. They
contain Christ Jesus for the sealing up of birth and prosperity of the soul.
As the grace is exceeding spiritual, which they exhibit to believers: so is
the curse as poenall, which they threaten to the abusers. In no one thing do
we either more abundantly advantage; nor in any one more endamage our selves,
as we go to work. Spiritual ordinances are both spiritually violated, and
spiritually punished. Hoping that this short item, through mercy shall prevail
as much as a longer with the wise, and craving grace from heaven upon us both,
I bid thee farewell.

A TREATISE OF THE TWO SACRAMENTS OF THE GOSPEL: BAPTISM, AND THE SVPPER OF
THE LORD. The first part.
CHAP. I. Of the General Circumstances of Sacraments.
I Begin with these, because the doctrine thereof may afford light to the
ensuing Discourse. And the Circumstances which I would touch upon are these
six. Circumstances 6.
1. The Name [Sacrament.] 2. The Antiquity. 3. The Necessity of their
handling in the Ministry. 4. The Number. 5. The Publiquenesse. 6. The Time
thereof.

Name.
of a Sacrament, it is of ancient use in both Heathen and Christian Authors.
The Heathens applied it to signify a sacred and holy service about these Idol
worship, and especially to an oath, which they honored as a sacred and divine
band. the Latin Fathers, especially the eloquentest, Tertullian, Cyprian,
Ambrose, etc. use it in the same sense for an holy religious complement or
performance: in which sense (although especially they aimed at our two
Sacraments) yet they also called any other as well by this name, as if we
would call the mystery or doctrine of Christ, a Sacrament; or the Church
liturgy a Sacrament, or any other public or private ordinance, a Sermon, a
fast, or the like. This we see was a very large and general expression, The
abuse of it.
which some modern Divines following without due judgment used, confound
divine mysteries and Sacraments, calling each sign or type a Sacrament, and
consequently grant that error, which the Fathers upon due deliberation would
have disclaymed, viz. that the old Church had more Sacraments than we. Yea
hereby the latin vulgar Translation of the Bible (falsely called Ieromes, and
magnified by Papists) usurpes liberty to abuse the Text: and though not
always, yet for the most part the Translator when he meets with the word
[Mystery] there he thinks he has found a Sacrament, as in Ephe. 5.29. Ephe.
3.2. and first of Timothy 3. the last verse, in all which he translats Mystery
by Sacrament. And that so corruptly, that even things not sacred for
spiritualnesse, but only for ordinance, are called by him Sacraments. By which
reason, the investiture of a King, and his anointing or coronation, might be a
Sacrament: which yet is a civil performance, although sacred for the
ordeyning. For a thing may retain his temporal nature still, although it
receive a mark of sacredness for prevention of corrupt abuse and violation.
And thus (in part) crept in that multitude of Popish Sacraments into the
Church. Whereas if men had not been thus lascivious and bold in using words of
their own invention, general words for peculiar meanings, much corruption
about Sacraments had been prevented.

The right use of this name.
Now although we still retain this so unavoydable and received term of
Sacrament: yet we must correct the abuse, and use it properly. And whereas
sometimes (by use of speech) we mean by this word, the Act of God and Christ
in ordaining or concurring with it, or the act of a Minister or people,
consecrating and offering it, or receaving it: and sometime the external
Symboles, or solemn action of the Sac^ament: yet here we do most truly apply
this word to signify the whole complete performance of this holy institution,
as it comprehends all these relations.

Antiquity.
this I say, no man can tax the Lord that he ordained them no sooner. For it
is he only in whose hands times and seasons are: Act. 1.7.
he knows when the Church is aptest and capablest of the Sacraments, and
therefore best knows when to appoint them He could have given them first to
the Church in Adams house, or Sheths: or after the flood to Noah's or Shems. But
his wisdom was to settle the first Sacrament of Circumcision in the family of
Abraham. Genesis 17.10. Age of Circumcision. Genesis 12.2.
The covenant of God was doubtless known to many families before: but more
fully to Abraham, in whose seed all the Nations of the earth should be
blessed. When therefore the season of revealing the covenant more clearly was
come, then was the season of revealing the Sacrament of Circumcision, of the
foreskin of the flesh to be cut off, as a seal thereof. Abraham desired to
see the day of Christ and saw it: therefore he was to see the seal also. Now
why God kept it so long from other families, his wisdom is the chief reason:
although this I may add, that no family continued the constant memory of the
covenant without interruption, either before or after the flood, till Abraham's:
from whom (though with much eclipsing oftentimes) no doubt, the truth of God
^^scended from age to age, less or more, without utter intercision; sa it
formerly had in the ages before. So then although we go no further than
Abraham's time (although some Heralds fetch the pedigree of Sacraments from
Adams innocence, affirming that the Trees of life and of knowledge of good and
evil, were both positive or negative Sacraments, Age of Passover.
I leave to determine) yet surely the institution of the first Sacrament will
be near 4000. years old. Long after this even above 400. years, Age of
Passover.
it pleased God to add the latter Sacrament of the old Testament, to wit, the
Passover, even at (and by occasion of) the departure of the Children of Israel
out of Egypt. Why there should be such distance, and why one so long before the
other, God knows; only this I say, There was greater necessity of
Circumcision than the other, to be so soon ordained, because that being the
seal of the covenant for the essence of it, it was weightier than the other
which concerned only the better being and confirmation of it yearly. But even
this of latter institution is now above 3000. years old.

Age of two Sacraments, of Gospel.
And touching the ancientnesse of the two Sacraments of the Gospel (whereof one
exceeded the other little more than 3. years) we know that though their birth
is not much above 1600. years since, yet since they were in the two former
Sacraments of the old Church, as Paul calls the one Circumcision not of the
flesh but of the spirit, meaning Christ our Circumcision; 1 Cor. 17.
and the other of the Supper, he calls Christ our Passover; therefore we
esteem the antiquity of the one by the other. To be sure the youngest of them
all, far exceeds the forced Sacraments and all other devises of Popery.

Abraham's days; the one in the infancy, the other in the more manifest
appearance of a Church. We are not then so modern as our adversaries would
make us, from Luther. Oh! how it should confirm us, that Abraham, the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles believed in the same coven^^^ and seals
which we do?

esteem of them too little. Whereas if ancientnesse can make them honorable,
we cannot think too highly (so we do it not superstitiously) of the
Sacraments. An old man we behold with reverence; old coins, books,
(manuscripts) monuments, buildings, have a face of honor in our eyes; we use
to prove a man noble because descended of an ancient house: How much more
then the Sacraments? Our Lord Jesus to smite reverence of his person into the
Jews, told them before Moses was I am, so before Popery was, the Supper,
Baptism were in their integrity: nay in the old circumcision Baptism was; and
in the old Passover the Supper was: as Moses, is said to speak of Christ, and
the legal covenant to include the Evangelicall; so did those Sacraments teach
these. Oh how then should we esteem and honor them!

Of their teaching in the Church.
the Necessity of the due teaching and opening of the doctrine and use of
Sacraments effectually in the Church: A thing very much neglected for the most
part. The which needfulnesse may appear by this, that it serves to prevent a
threefold inconvenience.

The first is woeful ignorance. Three causes of teaching the doctrine. First,
Ignorance.
Scarce any one point of Doctrine there is in all Religion in which people are
blinder than in the true nature and use of the Sacraments. They think that
because Sacraments are given as glasses to behold Christ in, therefore they are
clear enough of themselves. But as the clearest Crystal glass can show no
face, while it is locked up in a cofer, or the backside only looked upon: So
till the Sacraments are brought forth and opened, their light is smoothred.
Parables were used by our Savior to clear doctrine, Meth. 13.44.
howbeit they were riddles to the Disciples themselves, till expounded. And
sure its a question, whether the want of Instruction about the Sacraments, make
the people so ignorant of them; or their ignorance causes the Ministers
labors so unprofitable, by the confirmed custom thereof in the people.

Secondly, to prevent superstition in some Pope-holy persons, Secondly,
Superstition.
who are so leavened with superstition, that they think the Sacraments are
holy things even by the work wrought, without any relation to the Covenant; not
knowing them to be the New Testament of Christ in his blood. Luke 22, 19.
Also they think that the Easter Sacrament is holier than others; That its too
presumptuous for them to come to them often, because they are so holy: Such
matters must be seldom used, least they wax common; and many such Popish
dreggs abide in their hearts.

Thirdly and especially, to prevent unpreparednesse. 3. Vnpreparednesse.
Generally our nature is awck to this work; even the better sort need a help
and manuduction to it: and as for others, though well disposed, yet for lack
of help in this kind, they do necessitate unto themselves a great rashness,
unreverence and unfitness to this duty, growing to a custom in doubtful and
unfruitful receiving. Of the use hereof, more in the second Treatise, in the
point of knowledge Sacramental.

Number.
There were never more than two in the Church of the old Testament, neither
has the New any further liberty: So many and no more the Lord has bequeathed
to his Church: Only 2. Sacraments.
And those two are not Sacraments of some special graces; but of whole Christ,
our wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30.
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: in one word, of the grace of
God, either for the sealing of the real being of it, and the begetting of it
in us, or the nourishing of it: One Christ is still the body of the Sacraments.
God has not clogged his Church with multitude of Sacraments, least he should
divert his people too much by outward objects from holy things. Scarce one of
many is fit to profit by Sacraments; but to cleave to the bark of them,
leaving the substance. Here therefore that is verified, God neither is wanting
in necessaries, nor exceeds in superfluities: So much and no more as may serve
for our good, he has thought good to bestow; choosing rather to supply number
by power, efficacy, and extension, than to clogge us with too many. It was that
which the Lord shunned even while that world of Ceremonies lasted, much more
now in these days, wherein he calls for spiritual worship; Why so few?
he yields two for relief of our infidelity, but no more, for prevention of
our curiosity, will worship, and sensuality.

Against Popish Sacraments.
It came not from the Lord to ordain one Sacrament for the Clergy, as Orders;
a second for the L^^y alone, as Marriage; a third for Catechized ones, as
Confirmation; a fourth for sick ones, as Unction; a fifth for lapsed ones, as
Penance: these are no Scripture but tradition Sacraments: and by like reason,
if once we transgress Gods bounds, we might devise one Sacrament for the King
and his Nobles, a second for learned ones, a third for ancient ones, a fourth
for younger ones, for strong or for weak, etc. But the Lord has allowed in
these two, all Christ; either to breed grace in the soul, or to nourish it: He
has not given us Sacraments of humility, of patience, of self denial, of
mercy and the like: but in Baptism and the Supper he has ordained one Christ
to breed faith, and to nourish it to beget sanctification, patience, love, and
to confirm them, to seal up the covenant of Grace in both, to all sorts,
Prince, people, rich, poor, old, young, learned, idiots, weak and strong; so
that as few as there are, yet the Lord enlarging them to so manifold supplies
and uses, we have more cause to bless him for not oppressing us with a burden,
than to accuse him for defectivenesse toward us.

To teach us, seeeing we have so few, The Use:
to emproove them well, and cleave fast to the fruit and the power thereof, and
by faith to draw out the strength thereof in both those regards for which God
gave them. But to praise God especially for ridding of us from that Popish yoke
of Sacraments before named, as most repugnant to Gods ends and to Christian
liberty, yea, as bringing in a yoke upon the neck of the Church, most
intolerable to bear. Many things breed distraction, few things cause more
union. If a man have but one or two children, his love is more united. If a
city have but one or two Bulwarks, they will apply them thoroughly; So let us.

Publiknesse.
of Sacraments. Sacraments are Legacies of Christ to his Church, and Pledges of
Communion of Saints, therefore to be the acts of an Assembly lawfully met; As
Paul speaks of the censures, Sacraments must be public.
When ye are therefore met together, 1 Cor. 5.4. 1 Cor. 5.4.
with my Spirit; Let such a one be given to Satan; even so he speaks of the
Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.20. 1 Cor. 11.20.
When ye are therefore come together, etc. Noting the solemn publiquenesse of
them, when they may be so enjoyed. Christ has appointed them as marks of
Communion: therefore the Church, Acts 2. and 4. Acts 2, and 4.
is said, To abide together in mutual fellowship of breaking bread and prayer.
So that each member must fetch his or her special portion of Christ's
Sacraments, from the communion of Saints. Therefore let us abhor Popish
Mass Priests who with their boys or Clerks, offer up three or four private
Masses in three or four corners of the Church at once; as we deny them the
name of this Sacrament, so we say, like Sacrament like Celebration, both are
abominable.



Psalm. 110.2.

The season.
of Sacraments. In which I will be brief, because somewhat will be offered
again to speak in the doctrine of them. Only thus much; As in the old
Testament, the Lord appointed a set day for Circumcision, (noting as some of
the Fathers say) the Resurrection of Christ; so in the Gospel, Baptism has
no rigid season, yet a proportionable. Genesis 17, 12.
there ought to be a proportion. Not that we are so tied to a day as the Jews
were, but yet, to declare our reverend esteem of the Ordinances. For, as we
are not overmuch to hasten Baptism, which some do without just cause, so
neither too much to protract it, in respect of honor to the Ordinance. The
Lord esteeming it one part of his honor, when his worship has a predominant
respect with us, above our own affairs or ends. Touching the Supper, although
the Lord Jesus instituted it at night; yet that being for special reason, The
season of the Supper altered justly.
because the Passover was then to be eaten, binds not the Church, but may be
altered. Which I speak to rectify some men's consciences in point of
tenderness. For, to the end they may disproove some supposed abuses in the
Sacrament, they argue from the circumstantiall practice of our Savior; not
seeing how many ways crazie their argument is. For is it not a jarre with the
nature of a Supper, to eat it in the morning? Yes, doubtless, the Church has
her liberty in all such Circumstances as do necessarily concern worship: So
that she use it to edify, and not to destroy. It is good to defend truths upon
warrantable grounds, least when we rest upon unwarranted ones, when they
fail, we fail, and suffer the truth to perish.

As touching the frequencie of the Supper (which borders upon this point) no
doubt of it, The freque^cy of the Lords Supper.
the Lord would have his people not only to have an ear to hear him where he
has a mouth to speak; but also a mouth to eat where he has diet to impart.
And how can a man comfort himself in his hunger at any time, who, when God
offers his dainties, turns his back upon him? I am not so punctual as to
condemn them, who upon any terms receive not: perhaps special
unpreparednesse in a journey, when its sudden: or after a journey, or when
Sacraments hold a week together, or in some unavoideable, perplexing
occasions, may fall out to excuse: But the charge of God, is for frequency. He
says not, As seldom as ye do this, but as often as ye do it: speaking to them
who did it daily, Acts 2. and 4. Continued daily in breaking of bread and
prayer.

fast but in Lent, that they never repent till they die. Gods peoples wants
pinch them so, that they can neither fast, repent, or receive too often. And
when thou see others of thy brethren to communicate often, and thy self
depart, does not a voice tell thee, that either thou think it too hard to
prepare much, or need not so much as they? What is this save to condemn the
generation of the righteous? Or to justify thy self above them?



The rigid season of Baptism at the day of Jewish Circumcision is removed;
howbeit, either to over-hasten, or to prolong, or so neglect such a season of
Baptism as the Church deemes in her judgment to testify our reverence; and
to prefer to it base ends of our own, is a contempt of the Ordinances; which
(though I am far from thinking any prejudice to the infant, yet) its a gross
blemish in the Parents. Concerning which I shall say more in the particular
discourse upon that Sacrament. Let us so order our selves in the worship of
substance, that we neglect not the very Circumstances: for although the
circumstance be not worship in it self (because undetermined) yet when we
tender any, we worship God in it, and therefore had need to look to our
selves, that we be as spiritual and careful in it as we can, that it may
help the chief substance of the worship. And this may serve for the first
Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of the agreement and difference of Sacraments.
NExt we are to treat of the consent and dissent of Sacraments, and first of
the old and new. Touching the which: first of the consent, Papists enemies of
consent.
then of the difference. In the former we have the Papists our maine opposites:
affirming that the old Sacraments were signs and Types only, not conveiers of
grace: and so in effect were no Sacraments: for that which seals not up
grace, can be no Sacrament; signs only are no Sacraments. Paul, who
sometime, as 2 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 3.
does abase the Legal Ministry under the Evangelicall, yet he does it not to
disgrace their Ordinances, but that he might confute the Jews of his age, who
by their overprizing the Legal, set Christ and his Ministry at naught. But
such fear the Fathers had none; for few ever dreamt that the old Sacraments
excelled the new; and therefore their excessive hyperboles of the one, and the
extinuations of the other, they prove an occasion to our Adversaries to
justify their errors by them. (meaning holiness) as who say that the grace
of Pardon is less than the grace of Holiness.

Their colors answered. John 6, 31, 54.
True it is, the Papists have colors of Reason out of the word for themselves.
For, (say they) Christ tells the Jews, But he that eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood, shall live for ever. I answer, This shows that the Sacraments of the
Gospel have more efficacy than the other; or rather, that those Jews abused
those Sacraments, and therefore perished: but, not that those Sacraments were
only shadows, and no substance; For, all their bodies fell not in the
Wilderness; and under the Gospel, Paul affirms the same of the bad
Receivers, 1 Cor. 11, 29.
That they eat and drink their own damnation. Therefore our Savior compares
not the Sacraments, but the Receivers; and that in their likeness one to
another, urging the Jews to a more spiritual receiving of Christ, than their
Fathers received Manna. Paul calls the old Sacraments, beggarly and sterven
Elements: Gal. 4, 9.
But we must know, he speaks of them as now abolished, not of themselves; or
else, of their opposition to Christ, as they held the Embracers of them from
the substance of the same, which is Christ. Bellarmine so vilifies the Baptism
of John, that he says it was no Sacrament, but only a preparative to it. For
(says he) John himself said, Math. 3, 11.
I Baptize you with water, but Christ shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost.
But that text compares not two Baptismes but two Baptizers with each other. He
says not his Baptism was none; but that the Baptism of Christ should be
attended with greater power than his, because it should attend a more powerful
preaching of the Mysteries of the Gospel. But yet the substance was one in the
Baptism of John and Christ; John Baptized to remission of sin as well as
Christ; else Christ's Baptism by John was no Sacrament; and there must have
been another institution of it after, which was not; and the Baptism of the
Apostles in Christ's life time was no Sacrament, because as yet the Holy Ghost
and Fire was not fallen upon them; all which are ridiculous. Yet I cannot forget
one objection which is common to them with the Anabaptists, taken out of Acts
19, 15. Acts 19, 15.
where its said that those twelve disciples at Ephesus who had been Baptized
into the Baptism of John, were again Baptized into the Name of Christ. Which
I confess in show exceeds all other Objections. Many answers are framed by
sundry men; some thinking their Baptism of John to have been received by some
that had no calling to do it; others say, That by Baptizing into Christ, is
only meant a receiving of the Holy Ghost: But the true answer is that which
Beza confesses himself to have received from that noble and learned man
Marnixius; that is, that those words in the fifth verse are not the words of
Luke, as if he related that Paul baptized them the second time; but the
continued words of Paul, saying, That forasmuch as John did not baptize save
only into the Name of Christ, and such as heard him, were really baptized
already into Christ, therefore there should be no need of rebaptizing them.
Only he would lay hands upon them that they might receive the extraordinary
gifts of the holy Ghost, which John's Baptism could not help them with. A most
acute, and no less true and full answer.

We therefore abhor these errors; Conclus.
opposing to them the clear Text of Scripture. Paul says of circumcision,
Romans 4, 11.
it was the seal of the righteousness of faith. Than which, what can be said
more effectual of Baptism? And in 1 Cor. 10.1.2.3.4. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3.
he tells the Jews that those in the Wilderness had the same Sacraments which
they had. Which is plain by the argument of the Apostle; which is to convince
them of certain gross sins, as Rebellion, Uncleanness, Lust. Now whereas
they might have alleged, We are under greater privileges than they: he
prevents them thus, Nay they had the same with you: The red sea was their
baptism, the like was the cloud which directed them; and their Manna and water
out of the rock was to them the same spiritual meat and drink which you
have. If then they escaped not punishment of such enormities, look not you to
escape. Many other Texts might be urged, all to evince this truth, that the old
and new Sacraments, for substance and signification are one; even as their
sacrifices were one in substance and sense, with Christ crucified. The Lord
being very careful that as his Church should never lack the best helps to
heaven: so they should not have new and diverse in substance, but the self
same, that they might know the way to God and heaven was still one and the
same; and so go on in their course comfortably without fear or staggering. I
conclude then that for substance there is one Christ, one faith,
reconciliation, redemption, sanctification and eternal life; the old and new
Sacraments were one.

The second their Differences in thtee things. First, Clearenesse.
But secondly, the old and new differ exceedingly, notwithstanding this their
samenesse of substance. And that both in their clearness, number and efficacy.
Touching the first, it will not be dark to conceive, if we consider that a
Sacrament is a relation to a covenant. If then the Covenant of the old Church
were dark, how much more the seal annexed? A seal (I grant) in her nature is
a thing of great assurance and evidence: how be it, as we see in men's sealings,
the seal can be no more evident, than the covenant; if that be confused,
partial, and obscure, the seal applied to it, can but be dark. Now the
covenant was dark, because the foundation of it, which was and is Christ, was
dark. They had heard and knew that God had made a covenant, both with mankind
in Adam, and more nearely with the Jews in Abraham, Sacraments in the old
Testament obscure.
and had annexed Circumcision to it. They knew that this Covenant was twice or
thrice renewed by Moses, and after by the Prophets: but the ground of it in
Christ the Messia being a twilight, a mist unto them, the covenant needs must
be so, and the seal suitable. Alas, how few that heard of the covenant in the
blessed Seed, could conceive it to be a spiritual one, and not rather a
carnal? How few knew what the person of the Messia should be? How did they
abhor any thought of humility in him? As for his divinity and union, how
could they dream of it? much less came they to see the atchieving of this
redemption by his satisfaction, death, resurrection; and least of all did they
see either the mystery of election in Christ, or the Fathers wrath pacified in
the offer of grace, and the gift of faith to embrace it. But their eyes were
held, that (except some few choice ones) they neither saw the scope of
Sacrifices, Sacraments, or other Ordinances. Luke 24, 16. Because the Covenant
was so.


Now if the foundation of the Covenant were hidded, how could the Covenant be
clear? If that were dark, how could their Sacraments be clear? True it is,
that as a in picture of a King rudely drawn in a shadow, there is truly a
King portrayed: yet till his lineaments be fully expressed in colors, few can
reach what it means. So here, When a man is a far off, we see him to be a
man: but till he draw near our view, we cannot see, salute and agnize him such
a one. So it is here. Ad hereto, that the law morrall (nor to speak of the
other) was (as it were) a veil to the eyes of the Jew, The Law was as a veil
of darkness.
that he could not see what was within the veil; as Paul says, 2: Cor. 3. 2
Cor. 3.14.
For although the Lord gave it as an help for the present, fittest to curb
and bridle the rebellion of fierce spirits, and hard hearts, who were not yet
fit to have any more spiritual things put upon them. Yet alas! The very
interposition of it between them and Christ caused a woeful confusion and
darkness to come upon them. The law had in it enough to convince them of
utter inability to perform it: but alas! which of them did so apprehend it,
and not rather as a rule of such obedience as they could perform themselves?
Now then what a confusion did this cause in them, in the true Coherence of Law
and Christ? What a disorder wrought it, and what a mistake in their minds,
imagining that the Law was indeed this Covenant of life which they might obey,
and so doing they should fare well? Alas, what a poor preparative was this to
Christ? How did it overthrow the Covenant of grace in him? without which the
Covenant of works or obed^^nce is deadly and damnable? So that we see that
the Covenant being so dark, hidden and perplexed, the seals must needs
follow, and be dark also?

But it is far otherwise under the Gospel: Clearer in the new.
That does with open face exhibit and represent the Covenant of grace in the
discovery of Christ the mediator; his anointing, his person, union, and
satisfaction, the purpose of the Father, the free offer of grace in the word of
reconciliation, the promises, and the mean of applying them; Christ being
already come, and having done all requisite for us; lo, the Covenant
stablished in him by God with his Church, is also manifest: The Law is clearly
understood as a leader of all unregenerate ones to Christ: as a rule of
direction to the regenerate, made easy and sweet, the obscurity and confusion
of Covenants is remooved; the Covenant of obedience is subordeined to the
covenant of grace; and the Covenant of grace is declared to be free, full,
faithful and eternal to all the elect and believers. Hence then the Sacraments
of the Gospel become clear, evident and manifest; not that those other add
not an assurance to the Covenant, but because (they serving to no other end but
to ratify the Covenant) cannot seal any further than according to the extent
of the Covenant.

Why God kept the old Church dark. Ephe. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Now why the Lord for so long a time, should see it good to give to his Church
of old, the same Sacraments with us; and yet to conceal the Covenant (to which
they belonged) from the clear understanding of the most of those times; partly
it was secret to himself and hidden, and partly is revealed. The hidden cause
is his good pleasure: The same which hid it from the world wholly, hid it thus
in great measure even from his own for so many generations: as appears by
this, that when Christ indeed came, he was so little acknowledged by his own.
The other is more plain: So was the Lord offended by that wilful disobedience
of man which defaced the light of his Image, that he justly suffered the most
part of men to be quite bereft, and the greater part in this Church to be
blindefolded in the matter of their redemption. To which I add, That the
wisdom of God was such, that he s^w it meet to reveal Christ and his
Covenant in him, and the seals thereof, not all at once but by degrees. This
is called the dispensation of time which God only reserves to himself. Act.
1.6.
Four thousand years he withheld the Messia from the Church; and why?
Because the fullness of time was not till then, in his wise disposition. There
was more light in Moses time than in Abraham's, and in the Prophets than in
Moses; but the fruit of the Covenant was carried still in the womb of time,
till the fullness of time came, and then the birth of this fruit was fulfilled.

Touching the second, the number. The second, Number. In old Testament more
Resemblances.
The old Church and we differ in that also, yet here I must put a caveat. All
the Fathers and other writers agree that the old Church had more Sacraments
than the new has. But how? Surely the Sacraments (for being) were no more than
ours, than two I mean; but they had more Elements of resemblance then we. And
that in two respects. First, there was a multitude of signs wherewith the old
Church was clogged and burdened (to keep them the better within the bounds of
true worship, Col. 2.14.
from Idols and will worship) which yet were so far from helping, that they
by account rather hindered the Sacrament. For indeed all the ceremonies, the
sacrifices, the Altar of incense, the law of the first borne, and almost what
not, did more or less concern and typify Christ as well as the Sacraments,
although they were a little more real, especially circumcision which was
imprinted on their flesh: yet I say (as one has well expressed in the whole
frame of ceremonies) all did relate in one respect or other, more or less to
Christ. How then could it be avoided, but such a multitude of semblances must
detract from the peculiarity of Sacraments, which the Lord authorized with
far more signification and efficacy than the rest? The number therefore of
shadows hindered the people from discerning Sacraments in their distinct and
special use, from other inferior ones. But secondly and specially, even the
same Sacraments for realnesse, yet held not countenance and color, but
admitted (according to succession of time) diverse elements. Which argued their
impotency and changeableness. Thus Circumcision admitted two other compeers,
viz. The passage of the red sea, and the cloud over the Tabernacle in their
travel, raining and wetting their bodies. 1 Cor. 10.
The passover admitted two other, viz. Manna, and the water of the Rock,
which was (as Paul says) the same spiritual drink and food that we have in
our Supper. So then we must not think they had more Sacraments for sense,
kind and signification: but more Elements reiterated, and added (passage wise)
transeunt ones added to the standing, which (in the absence of the others,
intermitted in the Wilderness) might stand them in steed. Now mark, the
fewer, more standing and less mutable Sacraments are, the stronger they be,
and contrariwise the weaker. We know if Physicians distrust their receipts, they
prescribe the more: if builders dislike the slightness of their Timber, they
put the more pieces into the building. So here.

Fewer under the New.
But under the Gospel its otherwise. God has delivered his Church under the New
Testament, from such multiplicity of Sacrments. Esa. 49, 11.
Only the popish Church the mother of darkness, ignorance and confusion,
compasses herself with her many sparkles, and Sacraments, showing thereby
what an enemy she is to the truth of God, and to the privilege of
Evangelicall Sacraments. For, as she has darkened the Doctrine of the
Covenant, the freedom and onelinesse of it, so its just she be left to darken
her Sacraments, to abolish the Supper, to defile Baptism, and to mix a
multitude of bastard ones to pollute the legitimate. Now therefore the paucity
of our Sacraments argues their pith and comprehension; as we say things united
are the stronger. Our fewer, more durable and constant Sacraments do more
fully and exactly exhibit the Lord Jesus than theirs so manifold and often
repeated could do. And as theirs so changed, betokened their vanishing away
(as indeed they did) so ours once and no more instituted argue that they are as
durable as the Church, and of themselves contain whatsoever Christ offers to
his Church to partake from him, either for being of welfare of soul and body.
So that the Papists by their multitude of Sacraments do exceedingly alay and
weaken that excellency of them which they would lift them up to. God grant it
may be a sign of their vanishing, and that speedily; as certainly they are
some of that dross which must be consumed with the breath of his mouth,
before his own shall be purged and restored to their integrity.

The third efficacy.
But thirdly and especially we and they differ most in the efficacy of the old
and new, which (as I said) flows of necessity from the difference of
clearenesse in the old and new Covenant. Efficacy always attending truth, Old
Sacraments weak First by their darkness in two respects.
the sealing power of the Sacraments of the old Testament must needs be weaker,
because the truth which they sealed was darker. Which want of power I do not
ascribe to the defect of true relation or union Sacramental; or as if I denied
their Sacraments to be spiritual: for whatsoever sacrament is not Christ's and
has not the spirit of Christ annexed to it, is but a counterfeit. Circumcision
therefore was Christ Sacramental, and so was the passover. But the one sort
was only a seal of a thing to come in time, the But to be sure, Heb. 11. ult.
God finished their days without the promise seen and fulfilled, that they
without us should not be perfect. I may ad one thing more out of Act. 2.17. and
Joel 2. compared; That the weakness of dispensation and (as I may call it)
barrenness Barrenness.
of power in the ministry of the Word among the Jews; made the Sacraments also
as barren in their grace and sealing power. We little read in the old
Testament of such numbers of converted ones as after the ascension: therefore
no doubt Circumcision was as weak in the grace thereof, Act. 2. end.
and the sealing power of it. The Gospel has more fullness of seed, and
begets more unto God, than the Law could do: and therefore Baptism is a far
fuller Sacrament to confirm the soul in her new birth than the other was. So
for nourishment: The Gospel exceeds (by many degrees) the ministry of the Law
in Point of her building up and nourishing the soul in the grace of the new
birth: the Gospel has filled the breasts of the Church with far more milk,
and stored her with far more provision than the old Testament could do: For
thereby the Spirit is powered our upon all flesh. Joel 2.28. Esa. 44, 3.
Look what difference there was between them and us, for the fullness of
bodily food, that (in a sort) may be said for spiritual fullness. How many
Creatures for kind, or for Circumstance (as in case of blood, or strangled)
might not they touth, the Hog, the Conie, the Hare, and many other both beast
and foul, tame and wild; which to us are clean and sanctified? How much more
does the Lord afford us fuller feed of the Sacrament of the Supper than their
passover? Even as a feast exceeds an ordinary? Therefore Paul calls theirs a
ministry of the letter, ours of the Spirit; not because they had not the
Spirit, but in comparison of the fullness and power of ours.

The new more effectual.
Now for us, our Sacraments are far more effectual. The very change of the old
into new argued the excellenter efficacy of them. As the train of a Prince
personally riding in progress is richer than an Herald or Harbinger. The
Sabbath (we know) was changed at the resurrection, to honor it: So the
Sacraments at his anointing to his office, and at his passion, to magnify
them. How should they so do, if their Train were not greater? I mean if the
spirit of Christ and his sealing, persuading, settling, comforting, pacifying,
power were not greater? Also, except that blessed train of his Graces more
glorious and plentiful, as humility, heavenly-mindednesse, patience, hope,
love, zeal; ability to walk with God more closely, to discharge our callings
more fruitfully, to suffer more willingly, to live by faith more setledly, and
the like gifts of Christ Sacramental, attended them? Hence is that of Austin
so common, Our Sacraments (says he) are in efficacy greater than theirs, in
profit more gainefull, in performance more easy, and in number fewer. Beside
ours, in their understanding are most sublime, in observation most pure, and in
signification most excellent. They lived in the Porch of Sacraments, we in the
Parlour. Let us take heed, least, as they in their age, when no Nation under
heaven enjoyed any Sacraments, save themselves; were so puffed up by their
privilege, that they disdained all as Dogs in respect of themselves,
cleaving only to the bark of these Ordinances, without any seeking after the
Spirit and power of them: and so opened a way to Gods wrath, to bring into
their steed the Gentiles, who always thirsted after them: so let us fear
least we stand so much upon our dignity above theirs, that in the mean time
there shall be found even among us, baptized ones, and communicants far more
blind, profane, careless, than the Jew was; yea and some of us who go for
better, be found as formal, barren, as far from the Covenant, as estranged
from forgiveness, and as destitute of the life and sealing power of Baptism
and the Supper, as they of their Circumcision and Passover. If it be so, our
dignity shall so lift us up to heaven, that it shall throw us down to hell;
and I will not only say, the Lord will not be pleased with us, as with them, 1
Cor. 10.5. 1 Cor. 10, 5.
but as it is, Heb. 2.2.3. Heb. 2.2.3.
by how much more powerful grace is put into his Sacraments, and by how much
more eminent ways and ordinances he has honored us: by so much the more
shall our condemnation for our unbeleeefe be more fearful than theirs, who
had so dim a Covenant, and so weak Seals in comparison of us. Rather let us
labor to enjoy the privilege of our privilege above them, in carrying about
us that evidence of faith, and that peace of conscience, and that joy of soul,
which our Sacraments seal up to us; that we may be as much better than they,
as our Sacraments excel theirs in efficacy: and then that kingdom of Christ
within us, as well as that without us, shall be a kingdom not of words only
and signs, but of power also. And so much of the former general of this
Chapter.

Agreement and difference of the 2. new Sacraments.
Touching the latter, how far Baptism and the Supper do differ, or agree;
briefly understand that as they agree in Circumstances concerning Sacraments
in general, so also in the definition of a Sacrament, wherein (as specialls
contained under one Kind) they communicate. They are both ancient, (and within
three years one as ancient as the other:) they are both alike public, as
being equal legacies of the Church militant: they have both one founder
(although the one by mediate Commission, as Baptism by John the Baptist by
extraordinary calling, the other immediately by Christ himself:) they both
agree in the Name, Necessity of a Sacrament. Again, whatsoever is true of the
definition of a Sacrament, is equally true of both these, as in the next
Chapter shall more fully appear. For why? In both the Lord conveyes spiritual
grace by visible resemblances set apart by himself and furnished with power to
that end.

But in a word, that I would say of their mutual agreement Their Agreement.
is this; First, they both agree in the offer and representation of whole
Christ jointly and undividedly to the soul. Touching the first: 1 In the joint
offer of Christ.
Know, that when we call the Sacrament of Baptism, the Sacrament of entry and
ingrafting of us into the body of Christ, and of begetting us to Christ, yet
we divide not Christ imputed from Christ inherent; we must not think
Baptism gives us an estate in Christ for justification only, for it estates
us in Christ wholly, both for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption: though justification makes us truly the Lords, yet because the
Sacrament conferres whole Christ, therefore it conferres him as God offers and
the soul needs him, that is, both for justification and sanctification, Christ
our pardon, and Christ our life: for without both equally ours, all Christ is
not ours. A special point to be noted for the better understanding of the act
of faith in applying Imputation and Sanctification both at once to the soul,
(of which point I treat elsewhere.) So again, the Sacrament of the Supper
conveyes Christ to the soul wholly and undividedly, Practical Catechism.
not only for the increase of our Sanctification, but our Justification also.
Part 3. Article 2.
For although Justification as it is a benefit of Christ, receives no increase:
Yet faith Sacramental in apprehending it receives increase. And thus both
agree in conveying whole Christ to the soul.

Secondly, 2 Sealing Christ.
in respect of their sealing up of all Christ to the soul, (of which in the
next Chapter,) for, except both concur in sealing, neither of both do seal
him: True it is, that some further thing is offered to the soul in the Supper
than was in Baptism, but yet because still one Christ is offered in both,
therefore increase of grace cannot be sealed up where ingrafting and begetting
has not been already conferred by spiritual Baptism. Neither without other
give whole Christ (if both may be enjoyed) although each give him wholly because
Christ is inseparable from himself: the whole soul is in each member which is
in the whole body; yet if we divide the toe from the foot, there will be no
soul in the toe. Take Baptism from the Supper, and the Supper can be no
sealing Supper: for how shall life be increased in a thing which never had true
life begotten in it? I conclude then, The Sacraments of the Gospel although
they are two, yet do not cut Christ into two parts (as the Child which Solomon
bid to be divided in two parts) but still offer one Christ to be communicated.
Both those harlots could not have one and the same child: but all Christ's
members have that one Child, Jesus Sacramental; although for several ends (as
by and by shall appear) one serving to create him, the other to enlarge him:
yet both agree in exhibiting one Jesus. Of the use anon.

Now lastly, touching their disagreement, Their disagreement, in five things.
as it stands in many lesser thing, so in the particular ends especially; for
the former, they are these five, 1. Order, Order 1.
2. Frequency, 3. Opportunity, 4, Elements, 5. Subject. For the first. The
order of them, is, that baptism goes before, and the Supper follows, even as
being goes before prospering. Yet I deny not but thousands have believed ere
baptized; but now I speak of the order of the seals, not otherwise. Which
discovers the folly of such as would defer baptism to the last period of
their life, out of an error, both that it conferd grace by a virtue inherent,
and that it pardoned sins only past. By which folly some bereft themselves of
Baptism finally, by sudden death. Secondly, in frequency. Secondly frequency.
Baptism it but once to be administered, the Supper often. We are but once
borne. And therefore the rebaptizing of Anabaptists is a cursed profanation:
not only in respect of their condemning Infants baptism in general, but of
repeating baptism administered, although by or in a false heretical Church:
for even such baptism must not be doubled; if the mystery of the Trinity and
the Doctrine of Christ be maintained in any generality, although with much
corruption. The like I may say of those that denied to restore them that were
once lapsed, upon pretense that then they must be rebaptized; and also them
that presumed to rebaptise such as they received again into the Church, after
their repentance of some notorious heresy, or odious practice which they had
fallen into or committed. Noe, we abhor such scurfe, affirming one Baptism,
and that one, once to be given to the Church for true sealing up the
ingrafting of the soul into Christ when it shall believe the Covenant.

Thirdly, in opportunity or season. Thirdly season.
Which I speak not positively but upon supposition of the Churches wisdom
and liberty in determining the season of the Supper to be in the morning,
leaving the season of Baptism indefinite as occasion serves. And that,
because the one being administered to grown ones, requires fit and due season
to quicken them up, which in the other is not requisite. But for all this, I
do affirm no necessity to be in this season of the Supper, seeing its in the
Churches power to alter the morning to the afternoon; and if we should so
receive, I dare not impeach it, so it be done without confusion. The fourth is
the Elements, Fourthly the Elements.
the one having Water, the other Bread and Wine; both serving pertinently to
the uses they were made for, and neither having in them any fitness to
resemble each others use; water being no more fit to nourish, than bread to
wash, but each suiting properly to his end. The last is the Subject; Fifthly the
subject.
the one the Infant, the other the grown, and such as are of discretion. Which
I speak not as if the Church may Baptize none but Infants: for as it does
baptize them as lawfully, in the faith of the Parents, and in hope of their
own (when they come to understand the Covenant) as it offers the Supper to
actual believers; so yet if any such be brought into the Church as never was
baptized, being (as falls out) of twelve, twenty, thirty years: the Church
is bound upon the due examination of such, and confession of his faith, to
baptize him as well as an Infant. But for the other Sacrament, to admit
children, (though under color of ripe knowledge and grace above others) its
not a fit thing, in respect of scandal and opening a way to the profanation of
Sacraments by others of like age: not to speak of the rashness of it, in
ascribing that to raw youth, which requires settling of judgment and soundnes
of affection. But of all other differences, Addition.
the particular ends are greatest; in which the two Sacraments are
irreconciliable. The one so serving for the Breed of a new Creature; the other
for the Supper thereof, See Chap. infra.
that neither can or ought to be applied to others end or use; as in their due
place shall be spoken.

The use is; In three branches.
to avoid the blind devotion of Idiots, who not looking at which is which,
but confusedly at both as objects of holiness and devotion, go no further to
consider Sacraments in their distinct ends. Much like Papists who use
Holy Water and the bread of their Pix (because hallowed after their manner) to
any ends they first light on: as to sprinckle a sick man, to scare away
Devils, yea, putting the Host into a dead man's mouth. Any thing serves to any
end among such Merchants, and Hucksters of holy things. And how few (think
we) are there to be found in many Congregations, who can discern between
these two Sacraments in their particular ends? Save that they see they be two
solemn performances, having diverse Elements and Acts belonging to them: else
they know no ods, but put them up shufflingly in the bag of their devotion,
being unable to give a reason why themselves were baptized, when they were
infants, or why being elder, they receive the Supper?



Pet. 3.21. 1 Pet. 3, 21.
which shall quench the fiery dart of his temptation, and scare him from thee,
better than all Popish Holy water. Again, does the Devil tempt thee to
believe thou art an hypocrite, because thou have a dead heart, thou growest not
in Grace, thou art sunk from thy first love, fallen to the world, pleasures,
vanities, lusts of thy uncleanenesse, waxen unprofitable, and revolted from
God? What shall now help thee? That thou art baptized? No, hold that close
also, that thou may plead the other rightly: But in this case fly
especially to the Supper, and allege thus. I am sunk too far into a formal
course, and the custom of the world, but yet Lord to thee I appeal, that in
truth I have coveted thy Sacrament of Restorative and Nourishment; I have come
with hunger to it for the repairing of my losses and decaies, and departed in
good hope and comfort of recovering life and vigor again: and therefore in
despite of Satan, I will hold to the end of this Sacrament, which is, to seal
up comfort to the afflicted, and strength to the weak, and recovery to the
decayed, and raising to the fallen: therefore from hence I will fetch it by
virtue of the promise.

We receive grace for grace, John 1.17. John 1, 17.
And this for the second Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the substance of a Sacrament in general; The Description of it
propounded, and examined.
Substance of it.
HAving spoken of the Circumstances, the agreement and disagreement of
Sacraments: Next we come to the substance and nature of a Sacrament; Which
will be understood the better by the description and particular handling the
parts thereof. Description of a Sacrament in general.
A Sacrament then is, an Ordinance of God, wherein, by some materials duly
appropriated and united, and by some acts duly administered, the Lord signs,
and seals up to the souls of the Elect, the truth of his Covenant, and
receives a reciprocal seal from them of their covenant with himself.

For the clearing hereof, I would have the Reader conceave, that in this place
I take the word Sacrament in the greatest latitude; not only for the substance
of it in it self: but also as it is administered and performed in a solemn
manner, between God and his Church. So that hereby two things arise to be
considered. Two Generals First, Substance. Secondly, Administration. In the
Substance four things.
1. The Substance of a Sacrament in all her constituting c^uses. 2. The due
administration and performing thereof in the Ordinance. Touching the first, we
are to consider these four causes. 1. The efficient and supreme cause of a
Sacrament. 2. The m^^erials of it. 3. The true formal cause. 4. The final.
Where first, the general end, Sealing. Secondly, The branches, two: First,
Gods sealing of the truth of his Covenant to us. Secondly, returning back
again our own covenant sealed to him. In the latter member also, viz. The
Administration, we consider the acts of Ministers and people, and the
spiritual dispensation of God in these externals, attending thereon, for the
ends mentioned. Of the first of these in the first place.

1. The Author of the Sacraments, all, and each, Old and New, is one
unchangeable, Eternal and only Wise and Gracious God. And no wonder: for
first, First, the Author God. Proofs of it.
In his bosom of eternity lay hidden that purpose of entering Covenant with
man, fallen from the grace of Creation. Deuteronomy. 7. and Chap. 32. Deuteronomy. 7, and 32.
Hos. 2. Ezekiel. 33, etc.) can come from any other Author save the Lord: as the
blessings of rain, dew, plenty, health, long life, success, ( Deuteronomy. 5.29
Deuteronomy. 5, 29.
) and the like; who shall dare usurp the authority of Seals and Sacraments,
which are the most eminent annexes to the Covenant of all other? then that God
alone is the Author of a Sacrament. Conclus.
As indeed the Scripture does witness: The Lord only, Genesis 17. Genesis 17.
appointed Circumcision: The same Lord, Exodus 12. Exodus 12.
ordained his Passover: the Lord extraordinarily gave commission from heaven
to John to appoint Baptism: Luke 3, 1, 2, 3. Luke 22, 18.
and the Lord Jesus with his own sacred presence and hands ordained the Supper
before his death: Seeing after his Resurrection he could not, being partly an
act of humiliation:) and so all Sacraments were given by the Lord, in their
several kinds, for their several uses, as in the next points shall appear.
And to say the truth if it be once granted that the Lord is not the sole
ordainer of Sacraments, what a wide door must of necessity be set open for
both usurping Ordainers and counterfeit Sacraments? Where should the period be,
or why should not hundreths as well as three or five be admitted to the heap?

Nehem. 7, 63.
nor be bookt in his Records, nor have his stamp set upon them, Math. 22, 21.
we say of them as our Savior of the Penny, Give unto Caesar that which is
his: So give to the Pope his Unction, throw him back his Sacramental Orders
and Penance, we abhor whatsoever savors not of God, as copper coin. Yea,
and we loath whatsoever of Gods first ordaining, they by their abuse have
corrupted, namely, as corrupted: and seeing God and Christ never gave us a
Sacrifice for a Sacrament, we abhor to meddle with it as a Sacrifice
propitiatory for the quick and the dead; and for their Baptism we loath it
also as administered by them, as an horrrible defiling of Gods Ordinance;
professing to depart from their Sacraments, both for their new inventions, and
for their adulteratings of the old; and bid them take them as their own, for
now they have used them thus, they are no longer Gods. As for their distinction
of Apostolical and Divine, we take what they grant; if they be not Divine,
although an Angel from heaven did ordain them, we should abhor them: How
much more when their Pope, or their Clergy, or the body of their defiled
Church? For were their Church a chaste Spouse, she durst as well forswear her
husband, as cast off subjection in embracing his Sacraments, and usurping power
to appoint other, which is so far beside her commission, that she may as
safely devise a new Covenant, Scripture, and Doctrine, as do it.





Iosia, 2 King. 21 23. 2 King. 21, 23.
said to the people, Keep the Passover to the Lord your God according to all
that is in the Book of the Covenant: so here I say, Receive to the Lord, be
ruled by him in Preparation, in action, and the fruit of both: Its only in
him that ordaines, to order also and prescribe the due manner of using them.
Take we this item with us, (before we come to the Doctrine of right receiving)
that it may set a spur in our sides to quicken us to due preparation and
using of them; for he who gave them to his Church, will most severely punish
all ignora^^, rash, unbeleeving, unrepentant, uncharitable, indifferent comers
to his Sacraments: and every such one stands to Gods Tribunal, as we shall
hear in due place.



The second thing is the matter of a Sacrament. In the which point two branches
offer themselves to be considered: Secondly, Matter. Two things. First,
Necessity.
First, The necessity of it: Secondly, The simplicity. Touching the former;
Elements must be sensible. I mean no absolute necessity, but such as the
sutablenesse to providence to the impotencie of our nature requires. Such is
the woeful blindness and dullness of our understanding and unbeleefe of our
hearts, to conceive or apply to our selves the Mystery of Christ, that (except
the Lord should suffer men to vanish wholly in this their wretchedness) he
must of necessity step out of his spiritual ^^^rse, and temper himself to
our infirmity; declaring spiritual things by carnal. And he does by this
means condescend to us, First, Our weakness requires it.
least we should be offended with the hard things of his kingdom; but might
even see, touch, taste them: and by speaking to all these senses at once, he
might convey the savor and faith of them, and in them familiarly to us. He does
catch us (as it were) by this wise craft, which though it bewray much dullness
in us, yet no less deep wisdom and love in God.

And this course he has taken in all times past with his Church; for when any
promise, charge, threat, or act of his has passed to corrupt man: he has
been feign to second it with some sign and outward warrant to the sense, to
confirm them in the truth of it, who were Actors or beholders thereof. When
the Lord sent Moses as a Savior to Israel, and to Pharaoh, Exodus 32. and 4.3.
Judge. 7, 38. Esaias 38, 21. Ier. 13.9. and 24, 2, 24. and 25, 15. Ezekiel. 12.3. etc.
how did the Lord both ratify his calling, and threats, by miraculous signs?
So Gideon and Hezekiah; so the Prophets in their errands: as those Stories of
the rod becoming a Serpent, the dry and wet Fleece, the rottten Girdle, the
Pot with the scumme, and flesh sodden together, do witness. Not to speak of
those many Shadows and Types of holy things in the Worship of God, there
being scarce any one material thing in the whole Mystery of Christ, which had
not some one, perhaps more spiritual resemblances. Yea, we see in the new
Testament, how the Holy Ghost does parallel many passages of History to
spiritual Mysteries; as Hagar and Sina to resimble legal bondage, Gal. 4, 24.
Jerusalem, to typifie the opposite liberty, the water that supported Noa's
Arc, to express Christ and Baptism: which, although I speak not to equal
Types and Figures to Sacraments, (which are of a far higher nature) yet
generally, they serve to show what the infirmity of our dull nature does call
for at the hands of God, to vouchsafe these Sacraments.

Unto which another respect may be added, to wit, Secondly, For prevention of
Idolatry.
prevention of will worship. As the Lord gave the Jews an earthly tabernacle,
and a material instruments of worship, warranted by his own Will, to
restrain the carnal part from devising Idoll-inventions to serve him by: So
Sacraments serve in a sort, to curb our base hearts from the like errors. For,
if even these be not sufficient to stop our folly in this kind, which will
know no God, or worship further than we see him; then what would we have
devised to our selves, if God had not allowed us these? Let the many additions
of Popish Sacraments, and Sacramentalls, Images, Idols and the Crucifixe, etc.
be evident proof hereof.

Manoahs Angel ascended in the smoke of the sacrifice; Judge. 13.20.
so let us incorporate and indoctrinate our feeble minds and souls into the
evidence of these divine proppes of the Sacraments. As our Savior said to
Thomas, John 20.17.
Put thy hand into my sides and the print of the nails; (he being content that
his exalted estate should admit such scars to convince him) so in this
Sacrament he shows us his marks, bidding us to be not more formal and
hardened; but faithful. The more ways the Lord seeks to encounter the dull
conceit and the stupor of our understandings, yea the blunt edge of our
affections in holy mysteries; the more naturally and familiarly he deals, that
he might surprise our earthlinesse, sensuality and heaviness of spirit, slow
to believe these heavenly things; I say, let us be the more teachable and
pliable to his discipline: Let the impression of his Ordinance pierce more
deeply into us, and work a more through conquest of our hearts to the
obedience of him. A pen of a Diamond has tenfold that force to engrave a
Figure in glass or metal than some ordinary tool: So when the Lord seeks
to send instruction into us many ways at once, by all the senses, eyes, taste,
touch, as well as by the work of the bare word: oh! let us beware least our
resistance of Spirit, and hardness of heart, discourage him quite from any
further dealing and tearting with us! John 3.12.
If when I teach you carnal things (says our Savior) for so it was his
course to teach nothing save by Similitudes, Parables, and sometimes real
objects, as by setting a little child before them, and washing and wiping their
feet himself, (in that lesson of Humiliation and Self-denial) Ye understand
not: Mat. 13, 2. John 13, 4.
how shall ye conceive heavenly? Meaning, if those things which were used as
the more clear to express the more dark; were yet as dark to them as the
things themselves? What way should be found to beat in instruction into such
dullards? Bray a fool in a mortar, yet shall not his folly, depart from him.
Prove, 27, 22. Secondly, Simplicity. Question, Why the Elements so trivial.


The latter is the simplicity of materials in the Sacrament. A question may be
asked, why the Lord should appoint so homely, trivial, and common Elements? As
we see water in Baptsme is a common thing, bread and wine usual ordinary
creatures, nothing in them strange, far off, precious or solemn to the
sense. Why rather chose he not to describe the price of those graces, offered
in the Sacraments, by some rare and costly objects? Answer. This indeed sounds
best to our superstitious and fantastical hearts: as to Naaman, when he heard
of Iordans waters, by and by, 2 King. 5, 11.
the better waters of Abana and Pharphar were presented by carnal reason. But
as God had another purpose to him in the healing of him by waters; he meant not
to magnify the one above the other, but rather to magnify his power and grace
above them both; so here. More distinctly these two maine causes may be
assigned for the meannes of the Elements. 1. The generalnesse. 2. The safety
of them. For the first, water, First, For the generality.
bread and wine are Elements, generally to be come by and provided with ease.
Rare is that country that wants them; now it was meet that the most geneall
materials be appointed for Sacraments, least else the preciousnesse and
difficulty of getting them, should either hinder the use (at least frequently:)
for many congregations are so brutish at this day, that they shun often
communions for the matter of charge) or else give occasion to the curiosity of
men to devise diversities of supplies, and so to bring in a confusion. But the
Elements being so general that scarce any country is to be found that wants
them (and if some odd ones should, yet the use of roots (serving for their
bread) is the more pardonable, this danger is prevented. The 2. and more chief
is, prevention of carnal worship, Secondly, safenesse.
that the Ordinance may be preserved more safe and entire from sensuality and
pomp. If the Lord had appointed a feast of pomp and state, costly junkets,
rich attires of Priests to usher and serve in some rare costly cates, either
natural or artificial, as at this day the Papists boast of their brave
Sacraments, and rich setting them forth with embroydered attires, Exodus 32.3.
sumptuous Canopies, Pixes, Processions, and Pageants; lo, all the glory of
spiritual Sacraments would turn into outward pomp and ostentation; as we see
Ahaz more solicitous of the state of his Altar which he offered upon, 2 King.
16, 10.
than the substance of worship and sacrifice. No sooner was poor Moses gone
out of sight, but the Israelites must have a Calfe of gold to look upon, to
offer unto, to feast, and play and dance before it, this pleased their
Idolatrous humor well. And even just so, it well pleases the carnal humor of
Papists to have such places of worship so painted, and embellished, such
materials in this worship, as might amuze their fleshly eyes and senses, eat
up their spirit and inner man, check the life and savor of faith, and please a
lazy and sensual heart with shows and shadows, that they may depart as
wise as they came. Contrarily the Lord strives to provoke us to serve him
spiritually; and therefore sets mean objects before our sense, to the end we
may know, that there is some further object there for us to look at, than the
bare Elements. That so, by how much this feast comes short of men's banquets, by
so much the more the heart might not rest upon outward receiving, but seek a
supply of outward, by inward and spiritual dainties, not seen: and seek the
things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Even as a
father seeing his child proud of fine clothes, Col. 3, 2.
make him a suit of sackin or leather, to take down overgreat delight in
himself; so here, to crack the pride of carnality the Lord clothes his
Sacraments meanly; and so pulls up the heart to himself. Its noted, Luke 22.19.
Luke 22, 19.
That after Supper Christ took the Cup, etc. And why? Surely, that the body
being already full, might the less look after nourishment, remembering a far
greater work was in hand.

What good does gold or pomp do in a Church? If God be a spirit, give him a
sound heart, a righteous life, and then small pomp may serve; great
sacrificing dishes of plate are not necessary; I speak not against comely
decency in the worship of God; who is as truly a God of Order, as one that
loathes carnal bravery.

Peter being hungry, yet dwelt not in the Kitchen, but in his Chamber was rapt
up in such a trance as presented him a sheet full of Gods provision, bidding
him, Arise and eat: Act. 10, 10.11.
so should our souls be far from dwelling upon the creatures, and arise and
eat Gods Provision with an heavenly heart by faith: Behold the Sheet of God
let down from heaven, in which Christ's delicates and feast upon the hills,
Esaias 25. is offered to us; discern these a far off, Luke 17.37.
as an Eagle would do a Carcass, and ceaze upon this prey; lie not like a
Dorre in the dunghill, only resting in the Elements, which alone are beggarly
rudiments: but the body is Christ. Col. 2, 17.
We use to say and answer, Minister and people, Lift up your hearts! We lift
them up to the Lord! Oh! that as we have spoken well, so, there were such an
heart in us! That as we see all things in the Sacrament, drawing us from a
carnal religion, and all external pomp, as far off as our base Trades and
business of the world: so we might be ashamed to have our spirits taken up in
them, while heaven is offered to us.

From the matter of Sacraments, Thirdly, their form.
we come to their form and inward excellency: which is nothing else, save the
Impression of God, stamped upon them by his own hand for special
signification and use. Now the whole workmanship of Christ about the form of
Sacraments may be reduced to this double head. First, Appropriation. Secondly,
Union. Two Generals here. First, Appropriation.
The former of these is precedent and preparing to the latter; and its such a
work, as concerns the remote signification of Sacraments: The latter more
belongs to their exhibiting and sealing power; but both essential to the being
of a Sacrament. To begin with the first, Appropriation has in it, these two
maine acts. In it two things. First, Propriety.
First, Propriety to signify. 2. actual ordaining to Sacramental use.
Touching the first; The Lord in making a Sacrament, beholds the material
Elements in their natural aptitude and peculiar Symbolicalnesse to express
such a thing. To open this, Consider that things are said to be apt and
peculier to resemble, either by a made aptness, which is not in the thing it
self, but put upon it accidentally: or else is apt by an agreeableness in it
self, so to do. In Latin we would thus distinguish them, Propriety double.
First, Accidental.
[ Apta facta, or, Apta nata:] of the first sort are all such things (whether
Real or Nominall, or Notionall,) as have their signification from an outward
consent of them that impose this aptness. As I know when I hear the name of
London, York, or Dover, what places are, and what are not signified and meant:
Why? How comes my conceit to fasten upon such a city by the mention of such a
name? Surely from no natural aptness in the names to signify one city rather
than another; but by imposition and consent, or custom, which is as good as a
natural aptness to decipher such a place: men will so call it, therefore it
prevails to be apt to it. Of this kind are all watch-words, Dan. 3.5. Dan. 3,
5,
When the noise of all kind of Music sounded, then was it thought a fit
season to fall down and worship the Image. Why? It was so consented and agreed
upon. Such is not the aptness here meant. A second therefore is natural,
Secondly, natural.
when a thing has peculiar aptness in it self to resemble; although the
things are of never so different kind, yet in their kind, they concurring in
one third notion; look what is in the one, does, or may incline to describe
the other, even of it self. And thus a shadow is apt to express shortness
or changeableness of man's life: Sacramental matter is apt naturally.
a deep well apt to resemble the depth of a man's heart; so water is apt to
express a cleansing, bread a strengthening food, and wine a ^efreshing of the
heart. And this latter is the aptness which our Savior beholds Elements in:
such a peculiar aptness as might alone carry the mind of the beholder to
that which is signified. And hence is that of Austin, Except Sacramental
signs had a Symbolicalnesse with the things they represent, they could be no
Sacraments; meaning, they could not be so apt to resemble. For howsoever the
Lord might by his power have made any sign to become a Resemblance, and that
because he so pleased; yet, seeing in this he sought not the declaring of
what he could do, but of that which is best for the convincement of distrust,
and dullness of our nature, he rather chose such Elements as might out of their
own congruity, resemble things spiritual. Appropriation then requires a
natural aptness to resemble.

The latter and maine piece of Appropriation, is divine, Secondly, Application
of Elements by divine institution. Proof of it.
and peculiar application, not only in general to serve for holy use, but in
special to note out, typifie, and describe to the soul the Lord Jesus
Sacramental, for breeding and confirming the soul in grace. Now this is a
further thing than the former; determining the property of the creature and
the fitness thereof to resemble, unto this special resembling of Christ
Crucified in his washing quality, and his nourishing property. Although there
were never such aptness in a creature to do thus in it self, yet it has
nothing to do to meddle with a Sacrament, except the Lord do specially
appropriate it to serve for such a purpose; and then it begins to have in it a
Sacramental proportion, and power to raise the soul from earth to heaven,
whereas else it self being earthly, it were more likely to nail down the
heart to it self and to earthly thoughts and affections; But so potent is the
work of the Ordainer, who has put this peculiar property into it, that
although it be but a creature, yet it carries the soul from earth to heaven,
in a most familiar manner. And mark, how this stands in the power of the Word.
We know that the common blessing of the creature to feed and cherish the
body, comes from the Word: Man not living by bread, but by the Word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. How much more then must the virtue of the
Ordinance come from God to make this carnal nourishing creature, to be a
spiritual nourisher? Hence it is that Austin says, Accedat verbum, etc. Let
the Word come to the Element, and there is a Sacrament. This Sacramentalnesse
of the Elements stands in a word.

Illustration of it. 2 Cor. 4, 6. Genesis 1, 4.
God that said, Let light shine out of darkness; Let there be day, night; Let
the earth bring forth fruits, grass, etc. effected it with a breath: so the
word of Ordinance; Let Bread and Wine be representers of the body and blood,
the merit and efficacy of Christ Crucified, to replenish the souls of the
faithful; has caused these Elements for ever to have such power to represent
these things; so that no age or time shall ever prevail to wear out this
Impression; yea, and not only to represent them in their kind, but also in
their fullness. So that as it was one charge concerning the Pascall Lamb, that
he must be wholly eaten or burnt: so by this Appropriation the Sacramental
signs do resemble fully, as well as properly. And as in the compound of Bread
and Wine, there is not only a supply of dry, but also of moist nourishment,
that so both hunger and thirst may be satisfied, and the body both made strong,
and cheerful to service: so by the Ordinance, these signs convey Christ in
his Sacramental fullness of nourishment, so that nothing is lacking to the
soul which Christ can supply it with, if it believe.

Reason for it.
Now to return, take away this third act of Christ's Word and institution,
giving this peculiar power to the signs to resemble the ends of the Sacrament:
Tell me, what is there in the world, which has in it an aptness to resemble,
but might be a Sacrament? Whereas now we see not aptness, but Approbation of
Gods Word, determining such an apt thing to such an apt use, is the very life,
blood, and marrow, of a Sacrament. There is no doubt, but as the Scripture
teaches, a Christian wise man will pick out holiness out of each resemblance;
an housewife that is godly, will not boult out her flower from the bran, but
her heart will carry her to our Saviors words, Satan has desired to winnow
you, Luke 22, 31.
etc. An Husbandman will not use his Fan or Floor to dress or cast his
corn in, but he will muse of that final separation of the dross from the
Wheat. But there is great odds between a voluntary act of our own devotion,
and an obedience to a Sacramental charge. As the Text says, Luke 4. Luke 4.27.
There were many Leapers in Elisha's time, and many Widows, but not many to
whom he was sent: So the world, yea, the world is full of resemblances, but
not of such as Christ has set his stamp upon to be Sacramental. The setting
of a young child before the Disciples, and the washing of their feet with his
own hands, were Christ's acts (still at this day apishly followed by the Pope)
but neither appointed to be Sacramental: but only natural resemblances (to
an holy heart which has a gift to make use thereof) of a spiritual grace of
humility. Appropriation then especially stands in ^^is determining of the
Elements to such an use by the word and ordinance.



Supersedeas from all such inventions. All Popish trash of forged Sacraments
here falls to ground.



The causes of which are these, 2 Causes of our dullness herein.
either that we are not those new Creatures in whom God has renewed the
powers of understanding and affection; and therefore want the discourse and the
spirit of relation; in a word, want the operation of a new Creature, which is
faith stirring the soul to a lively meditation of Christ, by the word, the
ordinance and promise of God: (and then what wonder if Sacraments which should
be the most active means, become all a-mort, dead and dumb with us, and we
being held and taken in all our lims at once, like numb^^alsie-ones, can
neither stir hand or foot toward Christ!) Caveat thereto.
To prevent this, it were good counsel to trade our spirits to heavenly things
even by earthly occasions, as well without as within the Sacraments. He shall
not find his spirits so flat, loy, and lazy in meeting with Sacramental
Christ, who inures his dead heart daily to an holy nimblenesse in comparing
earthly things with heavenly. He that cannot see a Pismire but he will think
of providence: Prove. 6.6.
not a garish harlot dressing herself for an adulterous wretch, but will tax
himself, for his less loving Christ: she that cannot lay a leaven, Matthew.
13.33.
but thinks of the kingdom of Christ: and in a word, has a gift to be
heavenly, and to turn ordinary properties of the creature or common occasions,
to holy meditation: he shall not have his heart in another world, when the Lord
presents unto him the Lord Jesus, by Sacramental resemblances. And thus much
for the first.

The second part of the form of Sacraments, is union. The second part of
form, Union.
Which yet comes nearer than the former, as more closely conveying and
exhibiting the Lord Jesus to the soul. Yet, we must know the former makes way
to this; the aptness and special application of signs to this use, helps
much the mind to conceive: but this is the more immediate object of faith to
fasten upon Christ, that the Sacraments are no longer the bread of the Lord,
but bread the Lord, wine the Lord, and water the Lord. And this Sacramental
union is an act of Gods ordeining Spirit and Authority, by virtue whereof the
Lord Jesus, in all his merits and efficacy is not only resembled and presented
by apt likeness to the mind, but really made one with the Elements, that by
them and with them he might be carried into the soul inseparably for assurance
of union and Communion with God. Hence it is that the Scripture speaks in such
a phrase, This is my body, This is my blood of the New Testament: Luke 22, 19.
1 Cor. 5, 7. Ioh. 6, 32.
yea in the Old Testament, Christ is our Passover. The Rock was Christ, I am
that Manna which descended, etc. All which phrases denote a realnesse and union
with the Elements, true and unfaigned. And indeed all divine unions are Real:
All unions real.
although they differ in their several kinds; yet by virtue of the ordinance
and the power of him that has so made them, they are no shadows of empty
things, no dumb Pageants as we may see in other unions. Sorts of them.
There is an intellectual union in nature between the mind and object; in
which respect we say, the mind is all things, meaning in and by this
comprehension and union. The object and the mind are one by virtue of this
power of God in the soul, not because thy are substantially one, but
notionally. Yet this notion is realnesse in her kind. Man and Wife are one
flesh, no more two but one: how? by virtue of divine institution: this union is
real and true, yet not merely Physical and natural oneness, but in the
kind of it, a matrimonial union. The like may be said of all civil unions of
the family; which by virtue of the ordinance of God assisted by law and order,
become bodies united. I do not allude to these as if they did hold in all
points: but for two causes. First, to show the power of divine ordinance to
unite and make things one. Secondly, to show that the disproportio^ of the
natures of things united, either for kind or distance, is no let to reallnesse
of union: in a word, its the ordinance of Christ, which has an indeleble and
irreversible power of the conjoyning of the Lord Jesus to the Elements, in a
real and sacramental kind (so far as serves the turn) not to subject
Christ to a base creature, but to subject the creature in her property to be a
close and near uniter of the soul with Christ, to whom else (through the
incapablenesse of flesh) it could not so easily have been knit, and made one
withal.

All unions serve to make God and the soul one.
This point will the better appear, if we go a little further, and show that
even the greatest and deepest unions that are, serve to make way for the union
and communion of the soul with her first original, hereafter in glory, and
here in grace. The very personal union of the Trinity, how should it be better
conceived than by the mystery of redemption? wherein God could not possibly
have satisfied God, nor man be brought and united to God, except there had
been a personal union, that is, a samenes of deity in the differing of
persons. The like is true in the union of Christ's Godhead with the nature and
flesh of man: why was it, but to serve Gods holy purpose to reconcile and unite
flesh to God by the person of Emanuel? So also, that spiritual union of the
whole body and soul of a believer with Christ, why is it, but to prepare it
for eternal union with him? The union (or communion rather) of the members of
Christ into one body and being, to what serves it but that the whole Church may
be one with Christ and her head, that by him she might be one with God
himself, who shall be all in all in glory, wholly possessing and possessed? So
also wonder not if this inferior union of Sacraments, be so real and close:
seeing its clear, the Lord in this, condescending so low to the Capacity of
man, unites himself no otherwise to the Elements, than that in and by them as
channels of conveyance, he might (when and where he sees it good to use them)
derive himself into the poor believing soul in a fuller assurance of
Communion with her? So that our Savior says, Mervaile not that I said unto
you, he that eats and drinks my flesh and blood, Ioh. 6, 43.
shall abide in me, and live for ever. To man such a union is impossible
between a creature and the Creator, between baseness and glory: But it is
the Word and ordinance that causes it; and which has settled this Sacramental
union indissolubly, that our souls might fare much the better, and the union
of the soul with Christ himself might be more familiarly conceived.

of a Sacrament will suffer. For the former: A further opening of this by two
things.
The nature of the things united will not admit either a local or a Physical
union: They will and may admit a spiritual one. First not a local: viz. That
as the Bread and Wine are locally present, so that the Body and Blood of the
Lord Jesus be also locally present; this I say the nature of the Lord Jesus his
Body will not admit: 1. What they admit not, viz. a local or natural.
For although it be a glorified body, yet it is a true natural body, and
therefore limited, and so cannot Consubstantiate with the Elements in all
places, where they at one and the same instant, are present to the sense of the
receiver. Which confutes the Lutheran error, of local Presence, as if of
necessity there must be a corporal Presence, or else those words [This is my
body] cannot be verified: No, we deny it, because it r^sists the Nature of
the things united and present. Secondly, neither will their nature admit a
physical Presence or union; that is, such an union as by which the proper
forms and beings of the things united are lost, and become under a new form
of mixture or composition. For the Natures of Christ and the Bread are
incompatible in point of mixture or compounding, because the one is a
spiritual, the other a corporal thing, which admit no such mixture as
corporal things of like nature do, as wine and water. So then if this union
be not mixed, it is much less Transubstantiate: for in that, the one does not
mix with, but evacuate and disanull the other, leaving nothing of substance
behind.

But, the nature of these Elements admit a spiritual union: 2. What they will
admit, viz. spiritual union.
nothing hinders why the things which are furthest distant or remote in place,
may not yet be present in truth and realnesse: for the sound of a Canon-shot
40. miles off from my ear, yet is present by the mean of the air bringing it
home to me: and the body of the Sun, of light and warmth, distant far from
me, yet by the air which carries the beams of it, is present and made one
with my bodily touch and feeling. And again, nothing hinders why two things
physically disjoined, may not yet spiritually be one, and joined together, by
virtue of the power of the ordainer. In a word, the Nature of the things united
will admit a real union, although no corporal unnion, either local or mixed,
and much less transubstantiall: therefore the things united in the Sacraments
are only spiritually and really united.

Its such an union as the end of a Sacrament will suffer.
But the end and purpose of a Sacrament cannot admit any other union betwixt
the signs and things signified, save spiritually real. For then must we
destroy the scope of a Sacrament in a double respect. 1. Of relation; 1
Relation.
for except there be maintained in the Sacrament distinctnesse of Terms, and
Relation of one to another: so that a bodily thing may signify and intimate a
spiritual: and a spiritual be represented by a carnal, yet each distinct in
their nature: the Sacramentalnesse perishes; simbolicalnesse and resemblance
being wholly extinct by mixture and confusion of things united. Then secondly
of materialnesse. 2. Materialnesse.
For if we admit such an union as is transubstantiate (which indeed is no union
of two in one, but an excluding and swallowing up of one by another) what shall
remain of the Element behind? If they answer, the accidents of them. (This
being premised that its impossible accidents can subsist without their subject)
I answer, meerenesse of accidents take away materialnesse or corporalnesse, and
therefore disanull as much the substance of a Sacrament, as if we should hold
that the Elements could swallow up the things signified. But secondly, the end
of a Sacrament will easily admit such an union of things, as whereby the Lord
Jesus and all his good things may be conveyed to the soul really, and this
being as much as a Sacrament serves for, and concurring equally and fully with
the scope and purpose of it, whatsoever is more is superfluous. And therefore
resisting that end, must needs be a false and erroneous union, not from God.

Romans 8. 1 Cor. 2.
which only conceives it. Carnal men cannot judge of spiritual things,
because spiritually discerned. If we would know either what this union is not,
to wit, popish and carnal, and local: or what it is, to wit, real yet
spiritual: then judge what either the nature of the things united, or the
scope of a Sacrament will admit; and there rest, go no further. If then it
seem strange how a thing may be as truly real spiritually, as carnally: seek
the Spirit of God who is the knitter of this knot, and that will teach thee,
that the power of the word which appointed light to be, and it was, and the
evening and the morning to be a day, and it was, and man to be, and he was: did
also ordain the Body and Blood of Christ to be really one with the Elements
without locallnesse, or mixture, and therefore so they are.



To the end I may perceive there be true Materials in the Sacrament, and not
only bare accidents without a substance, the outward sense is trial
sufficient: sight, touch, and taste, will not easily err about their own
objects, as our Savior tells his Disciples, Look upon and handle me, for a
spirit has no object of Touch, Luke 24, 39.
flesh, blood, and bones, as ye see me have. Again, if the question be of a
spiritual being or body, and blood of Christ: let sense and teeth go, there
faith and the Spirit of Christ must convince it, if that feel the beams,
warmth, and see the light and taste the influence issuing therefrom: then
certainly they are there, for the Spirit cannot be deceived about her own
object. Only this I add. Neither of these can be severed from other: for by
the external, the Lord has appointed to convey the spiritual, and not
without them; and in that relation of each to other, even the meanest ought to
be honored; and the outward sense ought to be so busied about the objects of
sense, as thereby to help, succor, and strengthen the weakness of faith in
the object, that is, spiritual. More of this in the Act of Receiving.

Boner, whether Christ was not blood and bone in the Sacrament: made him a
merry answer (let me so disgrace Popery, that yet I may speak with reverence)
yes my Lord, I think not so only, but that there he is boots and spurs and
all. Meaning, that such is Popish excess and ridiculousnesse in this, that it
deserves to be esteemed in the Church as a laughing stock. And sure it is, (as
themselves also say) they receive not from God a Sacrament of Union, but offer
up to him a sacrifice of their own for propitiation) I say the Papists by this
foppery, under color of magnifying the Sacrament do quite destroy it. Mark
then what I said before: Union still must be conceived according to her kind,
not corporal, but mystical and by ordinance. As then its a truth, except the
Elements and the Lord Jesus were one, no bad receiver could be guilty of eating
his own condemnation: so yet, if this union be conceived as transubstantiall,
it is impossible it should be Sacramental. For Sacramental union still is
symbolicall, which its impossible to conceive in things changed into a natural
samenesse and substance. As we know, in common speech we say, No like thing is
the same, because a like thing is like to another. Identity then in Christ and
the Elements disanulls Sacramental union, and therefore the Sacrament it self.

This error of theirs as it came from the forge of carnal reason first, and
the savor of the kitchen, How popish error grew.
so it received varnish from the erroneous conceiving of Scriptures and Fathers
expressing Sacramental union. As, when our Savior says, This is my body, and
Paul, The bread we break; is it not the communion of the body of Christ? from
which and like places they presently cry out, Lo ye: the bread is his body.
So when the Fathers (especially those who were the greatest orators) do
hyperbolize in the praise of the Sacrament, calling it the bread of life, and
an ineffable union, and that after consecration, the bread by the omnipotency
of the Word is made flesh, etc. they abuse the scope of the Fathers (which to
themselves was good) because although they meant no other but to magnify
Sacramental union, yet the excess of their speech occasions the error of
corporal union to prevail. Let us loath their Idolatry and superstition.

Adam lost? and recover it in a far fuller and nearer union with Christ, and
by him, with the Lord? Oh! this is the scope which all unions (and especially
this Sacramental) have to unrivet us from base unions and fellowships with
things below, that so we might settle our hearts upon him, whom to know and
believe to be our God reconciled, is happiness: and to be united to his
natures, in one mystical being of holiness, is above all earthly fading
comforts! Oh! has the Lord joined himself to the creatures, that we not
resting in them, might by them be carried to him in whom true rest and peace is
to be had? How should we despise to be one with money, with pleasure, with man's
acceptance, with other carnal objects, and say, since I came to see the
excellent union of the soul with God in Christ, I see nothing below but seems
base to me, and such as I am loath to unite and give over my self to it to be
servant to it, to be possessed by it, or to possess it: I will use all other
things, and enjoy the Lord. None of his good things, can be made mine without
union: therefore as I seek them and the increase of them in the Sacrament, so
I will especially seek union, and make much of the Sacrament for the
purchasing of it.

1. To discern it.
For the first, Turn we all our cavilling and carnal reasoning (which is
endless (for carnality comprehends not mysteries) into a quietness and
stillnesse of believing: forsake the swift rolling torrent of never satisfied
sense, and embrace the softly and still stream of Siloam; cut all knots in two
by the ordinance, and thereby determine all endless reasonings of Popish
curiosity: spend that time in admiring this mystery, and in longing to be
partaker of that which is by it resembled, I mean union of thy soul with
Christ. If this be so mystical, how excellent is that to enjoy by faith? Oh!
Till union be made, nothing is thine. Behold not with a carnal eye, say not
with those Jews, Ioh. 8.22.
how will he give us his flesh? will he kill himself? If reason may prevail,
the Sacrament (setting aside a little blind devotion) will discover no more
Christ to the soul, than bread and wine in a Cellar: Its the power of God
uniting Christ, regeneration and nourishment to the soul; not a few qualities
of Christ, but whole Christ to the whole man: And the Sacraments obey him
herein: representing whatsoever he has united to them: No devil, no
instrument of his, no Pope can sever these two each from other: The Sacrament
they may quite destroy, but this union they cannot take from the Sacrament. The
spirit of the ordinance it is, which makes it abide so irrepealable. Do not
then sever those things by unbeleefe which the Ordinance has put so close
together: wander not, descant not, go not into heaven, nor down to hell with
a papist to consult and ask, Romans 10.15.16.
How should this be? But know, the word is near thee, in thy ear, yea hand,
eye, taste; the virtue of the ordinance makes whole Christ as near the
Elements, as the quality of clensing and feeding are near them. Destroy the
one and destroy the other: If the one be natural, the other is spiritual, and
from an higher union: if it be against sense to divide the one, its sacrilege
to sever the other. True it is, the things thus united are far distant in
place; but yet the power of the eternal ordinance can easily unite them. And
shall not the gift of faith unite the soul to the Lord Jesus by these Elements
as well as the ordinance for ever unites the Lord Jesus and the Elements?
Beware then least we sever what God has united! It is not the farrenesse off
of a thing in place which can hinder union; The Lord Jesus his body in the
grave lost not union with the divinity by the distance of the soul in
paradise: because the relation was indissoluble: the virtue of Christ crucified
is united to the soul, if it believe, although his body keep his place in
heaven. Faith in this kind is not unlike to the hand of the Mariner in
sounding the depth of the sea. His hand cannot touch or fadome it; but by
virtue of the line and plummet which he lets down and holds in his hand, he
feels the bottom, and gages the depth, be it never so remote. So the hand of
faith holding the cord and plummet of the word and promise, feels a bottom of
Truth and unites it self to Christ. For the second, 2. To apply it.
from this discerning power go to the applying; get this grace of faith to
unite Christ Sacramental unto thy soul: Say thus, Are water, bread, wine,
inseparable from Christ? why so? Does God care for oxen (as Paul says) or
cares he to be one with bread and wine? 1 Cor. 9.9.
Are these the subjects of his delight, poor, base, corruptible Elements? 1
Cor. 6.19 Heb. 12.23.
No no, those lively Temples of our souls, and spirits of just believing ones,
are the places of his delight: Oh! then say so, Lord, this union serves for a
better, that thou and my soul be one by the convey of the Sacrament, that I
might eat, drink, Psalm, 24.7.
enjoy thee! Oh lift up thy head my door, be thou lifted up in me oh eternal
gate of my soul, that the King of glory may come in! Let faith unbolt and set
you wide open, that Christ may enter and take you up for his habitation, and be
your head as the husband is the wives to procure her all good, as a Prince in
his government, as a Master in his family, nay as the soul is in the body,
Ioh. 17. Ioh. 17.26.
ult. to act, rule, frame, purge them; to increase the power of faith in
adoption, reconciliatio^: to enlarge the graces of his spirit, love,
meekness, patience, thankfulness: to fill the conscience with joy, hope,
peace: to cause these to flow out of the belly of the soul, as waters of life,
unto eternal life: yea, not only better hearers, worshippers of God: but more
wise to rule, more faithful to obey, righteous in buying, selling; exemplary
in our Christian practice, harmles, upright, sober; to purge us of our wrath,
uncharitablenes, unmercifulnes, unprofitablenes, that the Lord Jesus
Sacrame^tall, in the spirit of him, may become more lively, powerful and
fruitful in us. Oh! pray, and give the Lord no rest till he have bred faith in
thee to these ends.

upon thine eyes, stand before thee: but instantly thou feel an union with
those lusts which those names and notions present to thee: thy spirit savors
drunkenness, covetousness, uncleanenesse, and pride. Only the Sacraments are
offered to thine eye by the Lord, in which Christ is nominated, nay actually
exhibited, and united: and here the union is so strange a thing from thee, that
any other base object will sooner offer it self alone without any other
occasion, than the least apprehension of Sacramental Christ come into thy
thoughts or affections, either to believe in, love, joy in, or much less to be
knit unto, and made one with; that all his excellency and grace might be thine,
and that fatness and sweetness of his might be conveyed by faith into thy
soul. How shall thou be able to answer this sensuality and estrangement of
spirit from the Lord Jesus? Justly may yt curse light upon thee, 1 Cor. 16.22.
The 4. is the end twofold, primary or secondary.
which Paul pronounces upon al such as love not the Lord Jesus. Thus much for
the form of a Sacrament be also spoken.

I proceed to the last general in the definition, which is the end of a
Sacrament. And that is double, either concerning us from God, or God from us.
Both (as I noted) are the scope of a Sacrament. The reason whereof is, because
the Sacrament intends full as much, and neither more not less, than the
covenant does: (I mean the covenant of grace.) But the covenant of grace is
reciprocal: That God be our God, Both essential: Genesis 17.1.
and we be his people, that God be our God all-sufficient and we walk
uprightly before him. I do not mean by reciprocalnesse, any equality in
working: as if our obeying, or uprightness could work God to be ours, as his
being ours, works us to be upright: But that indifferently the one as well as
the other part and condition is interchangably requisite on our parts, as well
as the Lords. As then the seal of the covenant assures the one, so must it the
other; it must secure the Lord of our upright walking, as well as us, of his
being our God: both must needs go together. Yet I mean not that the
Sacraments do equally seal up both: for Gods sealing grace to us is strong,
our sealing back to him of duty, is weak: the Sacrament is the Lords, and
therefore principally aims at our good: yet I say God looks for it that the
same messenger of his unchangable love to us revived at the Sacrament, should
carry back to him our revived covenant of upright walking. The Lord so comes
to his oath and seal for our security, that he looks we also come to the
oath of Covenant with him: he will not be tied, and we be loose. First then
of the former of these two ends, Gods end concerning us.

What God covenanteth.
Touching which, let us conceive what God covenanteth, and so we shall see what
the Sacraments do assure. Touching this point, of the offer and Covenant of
God, I having elsewhere largely spoken, Practic. Catech. Part 2. Artic. 3.
therefore I do here refer my reader to that discourse, to spare a labor.
Only thus much in a word; when Adam had lost his integrity by disanulling the
covenant of creation; the Lord had it in his bosom, what he would do with all
his posterity: if he had quite destroyed them all, it had been but just: In
this demurre, grace cast the skole, and brought him (out of his mere good
pleasure) to purpose to recover a Remnant out of their ruin. And as he meant
this within himself, so he thought it meet, to express so much to us, not by
including some and excluding others, but by a free unconditionall offer of
grace (in respect of any thing in man) to covenant with him to be his God, and
to become propitious and favorable again unto him, as if he never had been
offended. This covenant he establishes with us in the Blood of his Sons
satisfaction: requiring of us, to believe that thereby his Majesty is
reconciled with us, and that therefore we be reconciled to him: This he urges
us to believe nakedly, upon his bare word and covenant, and that we seek no
starting holes; but set too our seal, that he means no less than his words
import, for his Sons sake, that he will be our God and forgive us. Now there
is weight in the promise alone, sufficient to overpeize our infidelity: But
such is the baseness of spirit in us, being disabled by our fall, that neither
can our feebleness reach it, or remember and represent it to us in due sort:
and much less our guilty, slavish and treacherous hearts (which muse as they
use, and think God like themselves, to hate them whom they have hurt) can
believe it.

Here the Lord not content with the bare offer and Covenant of grace in
Christ: rather than he would leave any (who is not wilfully an enemy and hating
reconciliation) unconvinced of his unfeignednesse of meaning to do as he
speaks, What the Sacraments do assure.
condescends so low, as to stoop to our weak, forgetful and base hearts: and
therefore comes (as the author to the Hebrews speaks, cap. 6, 17.18. Heb. 6,
17, 18f
) to join an oath to his Covenant; That by two things in which it was
impossible for God to lie: we might have strong consolation in our taking
refuge, upon pursuit of our conscience, Satan, or any enemies. Now what is the
oath of God in the Gospel? Surely no other save his seals, that is, his
Sacraments (which I take to be no small cause why the Fathers devised the Name
of a Sacrament, that is, an oath.) This oath or seal (call it as you will)
must be that uttermost security which the Lord can or will reach us forth in
his Gospel, to take away our distrust and slavery; That as among men in the
greatest Controversies, an oath is beyond all expectation able to decide the
doubt: so in this matter of Gods open and hearty meaning in his covenant, if
the soul question it, he desires that his oath might put an end to our
unbeleefe. The Lord (to speak with reverence) taking a kind of corporal oath
in the Sacrament: I take these Sacramental Elements united to the Crucified
flesh of my Son to witness: that as surely as nothing can sever from the
one, a cleansing, feeding, cherishing quality to the bodies of the creatures to
whom my word has so appointed them; so, nothing shall separate the quickening,
comforting, and refreshing quality of my Sons satisfaction, (that is, my love
and grace) from the souls of them, whom I have ordained it unto; I swear and
vow, my Son is theirs, as truly as the bread they eat, and the wine they
drink.

Let us then collect out of this that has been said, a threefold end of
Sacraments; 1. To be Glasses. 2. Memorialls, 3. Pledges and that of best
assurance (if oath and seal be sufficient) of the true meaning of God to the
Soul in bidding it be reconciled.

The last of these three is the chief, Three ends of them.
yet there is use of the former two. Of which seeing partly I have spoken, and
partly shall speak, therefore here the less. Touching the first, then; that
Sacraments are as Glasses to the Soul; I spoke before in that point of the
matter of Sacraments: 1. To be sses.
noting that the Lord chooses things of most ordinary familiarnesse, to help
the feebleness and carnality of our minds. And in the like respect, the Lord
has given them to this end, that they might be looking glasses: that as in
them each part of the face may be clearly discerned; so in this mirror of the
Sacrament (for that of Paul is as proper to the Sacrament as to the promise, 2
Cor. 3. ult. 2 Cor. 3. vlt.
that with open face we behold the Lord) we may fullyer discern the very
letters of the covenant, which before seemed dim. Spectacles (we see) are of
use to cause a weak eye to see clearly, by multiplying and enlarging the
character or object. And the perspective glass will so extend the object a
far off, that a man may perceive (a two or three miles distant) a little
cottage under a dark wood side with all the proportion of it, not a door,
wall, or window of it excepted. Even so is it here. The Sacraments are
glasses* yea perspectives, which discover to the dim eye of the soul, all that
fullness of Christ, which the only promise could not* ye^ its as a picture at
large, showing the soul all the dimensions of mercy of Christ, his length,
depth, height and breadth, which is (as Paul calls it) the fullness of God.
That as the Prophet speaks of the writing which should be written in great
letters, that he that runs might read it: so here. 2. Memorialls. Habak. 2.2.
For the 2. Memorialls of Christ, I shall more fully handle afterward, when I
show the duty of the Communicants behavior in the act of receiving. Here this
may be sufficient, to signify, that as Monuments, Marble Pillars with engraven
characters, serve to bring to the memory, the lively impression of things
fallen out or done time out of mind: so the Sacraments serve to be memorials
to our forgetful minds, to make lively and fresh the memory and impression of
the Lord Jesus crucified, together with the power of his death and
satisfaction: So that no injury of time, weakness of memory, or craft of
Satan, might ever be able to wear out the print of such a divine gift and
favor, as much worth as the salvation of mankind. See at large in the place
quoted.

3. Pledges or seals.
But thirdly, and chiefly, I add, for pledges and seals of security to the
soul doubtful about the meaning of the COvenant. The other two make way in
the mind for this: but this is the last and final end of Sacraments in Gods
ordination* To add a word or two to that I have said of it; the Lord by his
Seals seeks the uttermost security of the staggering soul, in his true and
faithful meaning to save and sustain it here, during the kingdom of grace.
These Seals he appoints frequently to be offered and received; that as the
weak soul finds her self to stand in need, so she drinking at these
brooks, might lift up her head. Illustration.
To make my meaning more plain; we see among men for sundry causes, it is meet
one secure the other of his faithfulness. If men be suspected for restoring
what they borrow: we see they are feign to lay in a pledge with the lender to
secure him of his own. When Abraham sent his servant upon a weighty errand
far off, Genesis 24.24, 2, 3
he caused his servant to put his hand under his thigh, and bound him with oath
to deal behind his back, as if he were in his presence: So God do and more,
if thou fail of ought which lies upon thy trust and fidelity: Even so does the
Lord abase himself to us in Sacraments, seems to yield to our infidelity, as
if it were excusable, and to make himself obnoxious to us, who is free and
bound to none: he is content to clear his fidelity by laying a pledge in our
lap, and by securing us of his faithfulness by oath, the end of all strife. Nay,
to speak more fully, the Lord in the assuring of the bargain of his grace, does
much like to an honest man willing to sell his inheritance. Finding out such an
honest chapman as gives him content, he offers him the Land upon a price,
declares the goodness of it, tells him its richly worth his money. Having thus
presented the object to the free choice of the Chapman: Lo, the Buyer moved by
the sincerity of the Seller, and the goodness of the pennyworth, consents to
his price, and contracts with him for the Land. They both are firmly agreed,
neither suspecting other, their words seem as deeds each to other. But in the
upshot the Buyer considers, while the Seller and I live, and there shall be no
question between us, all is well: but if the Seller die, and leave me no
security for my own, what availes, it me to pay my money? Who knows what may
befall, besides either of our intentions in so bad a world as this? Hereupon
these ingenuous dealers treat further, and the Seller taking great content in
the buyer, tells him, I see you are willing to deal with me, to believe my
honest contract, and I find few so true in paying for their purchase as I see
you are: your money I have received, and therefore you shall well see I will
not be more backward in security, than you are in payment: Go to the learned
counsel you can meet with, get him to draw the Covenants as sure and strong as
can be, and look whatsoever shall be demanded, I will make good, and I will
settle the land upon you as strongly as Law can ^evise to settle it.

In like sort deals the Lord with a believing soul: I see thou have a good
desire deal with me for my grace and pardon in Christ, thou have received my
report, believed my promise, for the faithfulness sake which thou perceivest
to be in me: howbeit I see many doubts rise up in thy mind to unsettle thee; I
see thy sensuality is great, thy heart wavering for time to come; I am absent
from thine eye, and Satan buzzeth fears into thee of my unfaithfulnes: I have
therefore resolved to assure thee (to the uttermost) of my simplicity, and have
added to my Covenant a further ratification of my Sacraments. I here give thee
a pledge, an oath, a seal, I choose the Symbols of the flesh, water, and blood,
of my crucified Son, the very instruments by which he wrought satisfaction
for thee; as verily as this Sacrament offers thee these united Elements, which
be as a mark and print of the very nails and wounds that pierced and slew
him, and wrought my angry soul to be appeased: so verily, do I in particular
tender them to thee, and make them thine, so that if thou be frustrate, I am
content to cease to be faithful, and shall become a lier: Behold therefore in
my Sacrament, all my Son, and the utmost security which I am able
(externally) to give thee, and to make him thine as surely as my Gospel can
make him. Thus, I say, does the Lord, and joyne^ the Spirit of his Son,
(called his sealing Spirit) to the Spirit of promise before given: That the one
with the other, the seal with the Covenant, might be above the Covenant alone,
and so leave the poor soul in peace and security, as concerning his
faithful Covenant to save and sustain the soul in all her fear and
doubtfulnesse, and to take refuge with strong consolation.



Ephesians. 4, 21.
till they know the truth as it is in Jesus Sacramental: till they find and
feel Gods end of Sacraments to be fulfilled in and to their own souls in the
sealing and securing power thereof. Oh! John 4, 10.
Did thou know the gift of God in a Sacrament, how the Lord has hung it to
his Covenant, as a seal of uttermost assurance of Christ thy peace and
welfare, how would thou both address thy self to it, and set thy seal of
faith to it? As concurring with Gods end, and receiving full security to thy
doubtful soul of Gods being thy God, reconciled* and als^fficient? Oh! look
to it as thy life! Heb. 6, 14, 15.16.
Shall an oath among men decide all, and shall God stake pledges, swear, seal
up his Covenant with his own hand; and shall thou dare to remain
(notwithstanding) at as dead a point as if he had never wet his finger to give
thee contentment? Oh! how shall thou endure that wrath of his, which shall
burn forth against all that give him the lie, 1 Ioh. 5.10.
holding their own against him and his Oath, and receiving his Word as a vain
thing? Doubtless if his wrath shall smoke against that soul which having
heard his Law and Terrors, shall cry peace to it self, and say, none of these
plagues shall befall me: Deuteronomy. 29, 19.
What wrath shall break forth against him that hearing the Lords Oath, and
beholding his hand and seal to his Covenant, shall tread it under feet, and
add drunkenness to thirst by unbeleefe, in stead of adding assurance to
faith, a seal to a Covenant. Let us teach our selves by the practice of men.
If a man having received the uttermost witness and security which the Law of
the Land can give him, applies it in special to the securing of his heart, and
rests in full persuasion that his money is not lost, his purchase is good, what
shall thou do toward the Lords security? For tell me I pray thee, wherein
rests the security of a Purchaser? Is it not in the spirit of the Law of the
Land? Does he not tell himself, This is thine, the strength of the law of the
Land is thine, thou art on sure ground, the Law must be no Law, ere the right
be no right. Sleep therefore securely, enjoy thine own, fear nothing: Such a
Law there is, by virtue of which, (the general equity and provision of the
Land, and the security of every men) thou may buy and sell upon it, that
thine is thine own.

Gods security best.
And is not there a greater and stronger spirit to secure thee in the matter of
thy salvation, offered in the Sacrament? Is there not here the Spirit and seal
of the Lord Jesus to secure thee? Will not this Spirit deliver thee into as
firm a Tenor and Possession of Christ thy pardon and life, as the other of a
piece of land? Shall a clod of a field, and the ringle of a door, the seazin
and delivery of a house and land thereby, leave thee better satisfied for the
temporal right, than the Spirit of the Death and Resurrection of the Lord
Jesus, for thy spiritual? Look to thy self and beware. Weakness of
unbeleefe the Lord will pardon: But if thou despise his merciful releefs of
this weakness, and turn it to wilfulness, beware least thy wilful falling
prove not a falling sickness, and thy weakness become not such a disease in
thee, as the Lord will have no regard to cure thee of, but leave thee to thy
contempt, to thine heart of infidelity, that cannot believe. Rather be exhorted
to seek the Lord in his gracious way of assurance, bewail thy impotencie, and
say, Oh! Lord, except thou add thy Spirit to thy Seal, as well as thy Seal
to the Covenant; my cursed spirit is as prone to break all bands in sunder as
any man's. With thee Lord weak means of believing, shall be strong, without
thee the strongest are weak; how much more then can thou made the strongest
to become strong? I deny my self, I set my boat upon thy stream to be
carried by thee; Lord sanctify thy Sacraments to become unto my soul the
utmost assurances of thy Grace, and carry me so into this assurance, as that
being rid of my fears, I may ever bless thee for the fruit of thy Sacraments.
Thus much for the first end.

Touching the second (to add a little to that I said formerly) I call this ^n
occasional or subordinate end of the Sacrament: Secondary end. The secure God
of our Covenant.
viz. That we might renew our Covenant with God. Wonder not that the ends of
the same Ordinance differ in weight; for as in Sacramental graces, faith and
love, we say all are essential to a good receiver; yet not equally necessary to
the act of receiving: so here, both these ends are intended more or less,
although Gods sealing of Covenant to us, be chief. Briefly then; the Lord
expects that the soul being made partaker of his Christ, in the feast of the
hills, as Esaias 25. Esaias 25, 12.
I mean with the fat things and refined wines of his Supper; and feeling his
love sealed to her there, in reconciliation, and renewed holiness, do occasion
her self thereby, even while the benefit is fresh, to revive her love, and
reassure the Lord of her fuller purpose of heart to cleave to him. And how?
Surely in better living by faith, better affections, zeal, fruitfulness,
courage; better mortification of lusts and denial of self; better and closer
watching of the heart, Act. 11.23.
and walking with him in uprightnes, as our God alsufficient? For why? If there
be mercy with him that he may be feared, much more is there renewed mercy with
him that he may be doubly and renewedly feared? Psalm. 130.4.
And how can we (without hypocrisy) long for the Sacrament ere it come, upon
pretense, that our spiritual dark, dead hearts will be revived, and our
appallings in grace, cured, and new strength added; and yet having our turn
served, leave God to himself, to go seek the fruit of our being satisfied, with
the pleasures, apples, and flagons of his House? How do many complain between
whiles of their damping, coldness, and desertion? what should then such do, 1 Chronicles. 4, 9: Judge. 1, 8.
but with that holy Iabez or Othniel vow and profess to the Lord, that if he
will make the Sacrament a day of feasting and joy, and send us from him
welraised up; then will we be the Lords, and not suffer his oath and Sacrament
of sealing, to pass away from us, without a restipulation, and reciprocation
of double affection, duty and thanks. But return him the strength of his
cost, in his own service.

Job speaks, That they shall never enjoy the floods of honey and butter: Job
20.17.
never come to that welfare and increase of God which he bestows upon his
careful servants, who keep touch with him, and come to him, as well for Gods
glory as their own good. Except thou keep those things close together which
God has united: his Seal to thee for comfort, and thy oath and vow to him for
better service, thy Sacraments are liker to prove thy bane than thy gain.

heart to return to thy Christian course with closeness, and keeping of
Covenant. Borrow from the present experience of mercy in the Sacrament, an
hearty purpose to shake off the usual enchantments of Satan, and the error of
the wicked, 2 Pet. 3. ult.
which have plucked thee from thy steadfastness formerly: beseech the Lord to
ratify thy covenant which thou have so often broken; and pray him, that by this
(if by any occasion) thine heart may be pull'dup to David's practice, Psalm.
116.10.
who finding himself in a sad time, delivered from the anguish of his spirit,
resolved to pay his vows for it, in the mids of Gods House, and said, What
shall I give to the Lord? If he could take up the Cup of salvation and praise
the Lord* how much more should thou take the Cup of salvation which the Lord
purposely puts into thine hand? Yea, thou should say, Psalm. 119, 57.
Oh Lord my portion, I have determined to keep thy Law? Yea, and I have
sworn, and (by thy strength) I will keep my oath, even to obey thy
Commandments. Surely if men can break into so many vows and promises by
occasion of a sickness, or straight, that if God set them at large, they will
so, and so requite him (which yet prove broken vows for the most part) then
what vows should received, sealed mercies produce from us (except we be base
hirelings and hypocrites) where the Lord himself is before hand with us, in
the grace of the Sacrament? yea, while the smoke yet goes up, how should we
ascend in it as ( Manoas Angel) to heaven? Judge. 13.20.
Surely those Papists who abuse Gods Sacraments to cursed ends, as to combine
themselves in hellish plots and cruelties, and to adjure each other to secrecy
(which is as far from the end of a Sacrament, as if one borrowing his
neighbors horse to fetch his rent, should abuse him to take a purse) yet even
their wickedness shall not be much worse than theirs, who vow better
obedience, and take the Sacrament upon it, and shall yet forfeit so solemn a
band, and return to their vomit. But for this last branch, and for this
Chapter, thus much.

CHAP. IIII. Of Sacramental Acts, and the use thereof: and of the celebration
and sollemnitie of the Sacraments.
Why Acts requisite?
HAving spoken enough of a Sacrament as touching the constitution thereof; it
remains that we finish the Description by adding somewhat touching the
actual celebration of Sacraments. For it is impossible that the excellency of
their nature, of which we have treated, should reach to us without a
communication and imparting them to us. The Lord himself who ordained
Sacraments, is the holder out of them also to the soul. Now seeing the
Sacraments contain, partly things spiritual, partly carnal: the former
whereof are to be carried and conveyed by the mediation of the latter: it
follows that the external Elements must be conveyed, by external and
sensible agents, to sensible objects, by sensible Rites and administrations.
The Lord himself the Agent, is a Spirit, and treats not with us immediately,
either by word or presence. Needs must he therefore set forth a deputed
Instrument to be for him, and that is his Minister. Again, the souls of the
faithful are invisible, therefore cannot immediately be touched; therefore
their bodily and personal presence is required; that so the conveyer, and they
to whom the things are conveyed, may meet and consent together. And, as
formerly I said, that the things offered by God to the Church are spiritual,
under outward Elements; so the offering thereof to the Communicants is
spiritual, and by the Spirit of Christ; yet this spiritual offering is made
by outward Acts and Administrations, which I call holy Rites, appointed by God
himself, and passing between the Minister and people, that so the gifts also
offered, may therein pass and be conveyed. First then a little of the Persons,
and then of the Acts, requisite to celebration of Sacraments, that the Lord and
the soul may meet each other.

The Persons are two (we see) the Minister and people. 1. Persons which are
two. 1 Minister.
The Minister then is such a sacred person as is lawfully from God by men,
appointed as a Sequester between God and the Congregation: serving to this end
to be between God and the people, for the conveying mutually of good things
between each other, and by name, the good things of Christ Sacramental. In
whom we must consider both his calling, and person he sustaines. Touching his
calling, he ought to be a man truly separated from men, and this life, to God
and holy use: In whom. 1 Calling. Heb. 5.4.
he must be called by God, as was Aaron, and lawfully warranted by men, as the
voices of God to the Congregation, that he is meet for such use. He must be of
competent understanding, Ephe. 3, 2, 4.
and skill in all the Mysteries of Christ and godliness. He must be of
competent gifts to teach, 1 Timothy 3, 2.
utter and express the same to the people: For how shall he exhibit those
Seals as from God, which he neither understands in the ground thereof, to wit,
the Covenant of grace, nor yet the Doctrine and Nature of the Seals he
offers? How fearful a derogation is it to the Sacrament, (in which all things
should be Symbolicall) when he that is in Gods stead to the people, shall
neither know the nature of the Covenant, to be able to preach it, nor of a
Seal, either to teach or deliver it? What a confusion is it for the Minister
so unqualified to occupy the room of God himself? As if the Lord sealed a
Covenant to his people, and a Seal which he knew not the meaning of. The like
I may say of the life of the Minister. Seeing the Lord is holy, 1 Timothy 3, 2.
Heb. 7, 25.
and offers holy things, and such an high Priest, it behooves us to have as is
holy, blameless, and separate from sinners: How necessary is it that the
Minister be also in this symbolicall? That by the grace of his person the Lord
may seem to draw his people to an holy carriage in the Sacrament, saying, Be
ye holy, who bear the vessels of the Lord. Esaias 52, 11.
What a Trumpet of profaneness is it to the people, and a mean to abhor
the Sacrifices of the Lord, when even that sacred person which offers the holy
things of God, is himself profane? Hag. 2, 12.
What an opinion might it breed in the ignorant (seeing such a sight) that God
is like themselves in putting no difference between the holy and profane?
Psalm. 50, 21.
But if our duty and work be done any way, it skills not how? as if all were
alike in Gods account.

2. Person.
The second thing in the Minister thus duly called, is, the Person he sustaines.
That is laid down in the old and new Testament, Exodus 29, 9. Exodus 4, 16. 2
Cor^ 5, 20.
clearly. In the old, when the Lord bounded Moses and Aarons office, he says,
that Aaron should be, or serve for all uses between God and the people in
point of worship and spiritual respects. And Paul, 2 Cor. 5.20. says, We are
Ambassadors for God, as if by us God and Christ besought you, etc. Note then,
there is a double relation in the Minister, as in all, so especially in
Sacramentals: one whereby he conveyes to the people from God his gifts and
graces, and Ordinances. Another, whereby he returns from the people of God,
praises, duties, and acknowledgements.

Mat. 6.23.
If the eye be dark, which should be the light of the body, how great is that
darkness? If to dishonor the Profession of God be so horrible, 1 Samuel 2, 12.
what is it (as Hophni and Phinees did) to make loathsome the very sacrifices
themselves by a notorious debauchednesse of manners and life? Will not God
loathe such agents for him, whose pure Angels are unclean in his sight! Job 4,
18.
Oh! ye profane Idols, Epicures, malicious and heretical, avaunt from the
presence of this holy God of Sacraments; pollute not (for so ye do as far as in
you lies) the Sacramentalnesse and symbolicalnesse of the things of God by
your unsutablenesse. If Heathen Poets cry out against ye, and bid ye get ye a
far off; what shall the Lord do, who will be sanctified in all that come
near him? Levit. 10, 3.
Remember Nadab and Abihu! But a Question ought to supply) yet it is not
thereby disanulled. The pollutions of Ministry and Baptism, disanull not the
Sacrament: The grace of our Lord Jesus not being pinned to the sleeve of an
unworthy man: no more than a Sacraments consecration rests upon the present
intention of the Priest (whose mind may then intend some other thing,) but the
grace and truth of the ordayner.

Ier. 31, 33. John 17, 17.
Sanctify them in thy truth, thy word is truth. He says not, Sanctify them
in the Minister. Rather I would allude thus, as a wooden pipe may afford most
pure water, running through it: so also the Lord can and may afford to his
people the pureness of Christ, and good of the Sacrament, through a wooden,
as a golden pipe. If lastly it be demanded, But what if he cannot teach the
Doctrine of the Covenant? Is it not then unlawful for us to receive the Seals
from him? I answer, It is not lawful for him to offer them: But its not our
duty to reject the Sacrament for his cause. Rather seek instruction where it
is to be had, and then come and receive: communicate not with his sin, nor be
led by the blind, least both fall into the ditch.

The acts of the Minister.
Now touching the Ministers acts in celebration; consider, that in them the Lord
offers his Chrrist with all his good things to his Church, The Lord Jesus
baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire, Mat. 3, 11.
then when John baptized with water, Mat. 3.11. And this he does while the
Minister cleaves to the words of institution as God has prescribed. For when
the Minister corrupts the form, the Sacrament is corrupted; if he deface the
words of instruction by any other of his own, the Sacrament begins to be his,
not the Lords. Addition to the words of institution defiles, but detraction
from the words of instution destroys the Sacrament.

They are,
and all his benefits: Its he who by those acts does impart the grace of the
Sacrament, as the Ministers imparts the Elements. And those acts are,



The second person is the Congregation; who also are bound to answerable acts
in accepting and embracing the offer of God in the Minister. Of which also in
special we shall treat in the two next Chapters: there it shall be
sufficient to signify, that as all acts Sacramental are as essential to
Sacraments, as the materials themselves; so, the want of Sacramental
receiving, disannuls the Sacrament, as well as the want of offering. So that
the people also have their parts to act herein. Theirs are these legacies, to
them they belong: They are therefore with all holy preparation of themselves,
and theirs, Exodus 12.4.
by prayer, to offer themselves to the Lord in the Congregation, presenting
themselves, souls, bodies, with such comely, chaste, reverend and holy
thoughts, affections, and behavior, as may testify them to be meet guests of
such actions; before, in, and after the actions, demeaning themselves, so as
they may sanctify the Lord thereby, and not pollute his name, who draws so
near them in these mysteries: yet this I add, as in the former, that although
such carriage is that which the Lord commands, and will severely be r^venged of
the contrary; yet, if through the sin of man, and decay of Gods Order, such
shall be admitted as do contradict this rule; that we do not think this
eyesore and defect to disanull the Sacrament. But with mourning and heavy
hearts, both for the sin and sacrilege of such receivers, and givers of the
Sacraments: to look up above both, and with so much the more serious preparing
and sanctifying of our selves to come to the Lord, believing that the
profaneness of the vile shall not hinder the faith of the well prepared:
sithence we come into the presence of that God of piercing eyes, who can pierce
between the joints and marrow, and both behold the humbleness of believing
souls, Heb. 4, 12.
to reward them, and discern the impudency of the contrary, to accurse them;
and yet not thereby to prejudice the comfort and hope of them that are truly
prepared, and abhor to come in their sins. And of this Chapter also thus
much: which I have divided from the ^ormer (though concerning the same
description) because I saw that Chapter to grow somewhat larger than the rest.

CHAP. V. Of Baptism; the Description of it opened, and the use thereof
annexed.
HAving thus treated of a Sacrament in general, we come to the particular
Sacraments of the Gospel, and first of Baptism. For although our chief scope
be the Supper, yet because the other is much unknown, and therefore neglected:
we will take it (in our way) to some consideration. Three things on it.
First, by showing what ^ue performance is required to it. Secondly, what the
grace of it is. Thirdly, what the use of the Doctrine; and all these in one
Description, whose parts all be examined.

Baptism then is the first Sacrament of the Gospel, What it is.
consisting of Water, which is Sacramentally Christ; or wherein by water duly
applied: not only the presented party is made a member of the visible Church;
but also, sealed up to an Invisible union with Christ, and thereby interessed
in all those benefits of his, which concern the being of regeneration.

By calling it the first Sacrament, I point at the precedencie and order of
Baptism. The which al those names of Baptism, The first branch.
both in Scripture, and elsewhere do approove. Its the seed of the Church, as
the other is of food. It issued first out of the side of our Lord Jesus upon
the Cross. Its the creating instrument of God to produce and form the Lord
Jesus to a new creature, and to regeneration in the soul: Tit. 3, 5.
Its called our Union with Christ, our marriage Ring, our military
Presse-money, our Matriculation, Cognizance, and Character of Christ, our
emplanting or engrafting into him, and his Body, Romans 6, 3. 1 Cor. 10.2.
our Ship, our Arc, our red Sea, our putting on of Christ. For as all those
go before our Nourishment, Communion, Cohabitation, Service, fruit, Manna, or
food from Heaven; so this Sacrament must go before the other. Breeding;
begetting, and bringing out of the womb, does not more naturally go before
the feeding of the Infant by the mothers breasts: than this womb of the youth
of the Church, Psalm. 100.3.
goes before the breasts and milk thereof; the Church being no dry Nurse, but
a Mother of her own, the sons and daughters of her own womb.

to the Lord Jesus, as to give the milk of his breasts, to still-borne ones;
or to set them into his stock, who are rotten and dead twigges; 1 Pet. 3.21:
as if the bare outward washing of the flesh were sufficient to regenerate, and
give title to nourishment. This is to dissemble with God, the Church, and our
souls; and to turn both Sacraments to our perdition. Beware al such mockers,
least the Lord be froward with them, that fight against the God of Order: least
in stead of finding nourishment before breeding, as they rob God of his Order,
so they meet with wrath and judgment, before mercy and salvation; yea, least
God accurse their single emptiness of Christ, with such a double barrenness,
as will admit no conception or birth:

1 Cor. 1.25.
Let us beware of such wilworship. The foolishnes of God is stronger and wiser
than our best strength and wisdom.

The Second branch.
Secondly, I add [consisting of water which is Sacramentally Christ.] Touching
Sacramental union, I treat nothing. Only note, that although the Grace of
Christ must neither be equalled nor tied to a dumb creature, yet he has freely
yielded to unite himself with his creature, so often as he pleases to use it for
the good of his own, and for his glory; and, that to this end, that we might
learn to adore him in all such Ordinances by which he draws near to us for
our comfort, and to set a mark of honor and esteem even upon those mean
things which his wisdom has devised for the relief of our dullness,
deadness of heart, and infidelity.

Act. 10.15.
That which God has not thought common, beware we of thinking so. Has he
taken water, and joined it with a kind of equal necessity with himself in
this kind of conveyance? Has he said, He that believes, and is baptized, shall
be saved? and Except a man be borne again of water, Mark 16, 16. Ioh. 3.5.
etc. And shall not we fasten both our eyes upon Christ and water? Christ
Sacramental in and by water? Better with it for our ease and help, than
without it? Shall not he who despises water (appointed to such an inseparable
holy end) despise the ordayner of water? Shall we take his name in vain,
Exodus 20.7.
by slighting that by which he makes himself and the power of his Word and
Spirit manifest to beget the soul to him, and be holden guiltless? When
Christ has put both in one, Matthew. 19.6.
shall we dare to say, the one is strong, the other is base? Shall we slight
it, slacken our haste to it, our holy preparing of our selves to it, our
abiding at it, our offering up prayer for blessing it, our making it the joint
object of our humiliation, faith, reverence and thanks? Far be it from us,
so to abhor that Popish hyperbolicall esteem of it, and the merit of the
work wrought of it; that we run into another riot to disesteeme it?
Doubtless he that cares not for Christ in the word, Christ in the promise,
Christ in the Minister, Christ in the water, Christ in the bread and wine,
Christ Sacramental; cares as little for Christ God, Christ flesh, Christ
Emanuell. By these he comes near us. And he that despises you despises me,
Mat^h. 10, 40.
and him that sent me. Beware we of such contempt, even in the secretest of our
thoughts and affections: and let Christ in the water be honored as Christ, for
that sweet union and fruit which he brings to a poor soul thereby. 2 Kings
5.14. Ioh. 5.2. 1. General in the descript. Persons.
If Jordan be precious when God will use it; for the Angels healing by it: much
more this.

The next point concerns the due acts and performances of meet persons, in
the applying of water. The persons are, the parents, the Congregation, the
Minister, and the infant: The acts are the mutual carriages of these toward
each other Sacramentally. Touching the which, in brief thus (being loath to
digress much from the stream of the point.) 1. Parents duty. Psalm. 51, 4:
Luke 9.2.
the better if sanctified) both of the woeful pollution of nature which by
themselves their child has contracted: to bless the Lord for merciful
dispensing with it in the penalties deserved to be inflicted even outwardly
upon it, (for the deformity of sin) in the marks thereof, maimed, blind,
halt, lame, monstrous: yet in this not satisfied, they ought to behold the
inseparable inward defilednesse of the infants nature and spirit: the more the
Lord has done his part, the more tenderly to commiserate the wretchedness of
the inner man of it deprived of the image of God by original sin; to mourn
and sigh for it to God by deep groans and confession: to pray, and be
instant with God for the pardon of it, the purging and the sanctifying of it:
Romans 6.3.
not to abolish, but to kill the poison of sin: to remember that the child of
it self has neither sense or favor in Baptism; Ephe. 2, 11, 12.
no nor right thereto, of it self, (it being the priveledge of the Church)
further than in and by themselves, and their right to the covenant, 1 Cor. 7,
17.
it partakes an holiness.

Genesis 17, 7. Exodus 20, 6.
In this strength they are to plead their own right for their child, to beseech
the Lord not only to vouchsafe it his outward livery and cognizance of a
visible member; but further to extend the efficacy of Christ crucified: Christ
as presented in the water, to the inward ingrafting it into his invisible
Church, when and how he shall please; if it dye soon, by baptizing it with the
spirit of Election and Adoption, Sanctification, and renewing of the holy
Ghost, ere it depart; If it live, continuing upon it, the power of baptism by
attending upon the ordinance of the word, and upon the offer of the covenant of
grace, that by it in due time, it may be admitted to the condition of faith,
and faith it self by the calling of the Gospel; and so receive the seal of
it in due time, with assurance and comfort. nor vanity, nor superstition, nor
profaneness, but rather edification and holiness, savouring of the graces
offered by the Sacrament.

Matthew. 3, 6.
mean time, senseless of their own misery, and their deriving of it to the
child: resolved to suffer it to lie in it own perdition, for ought in them
lies. They please themselves in the feature of it, or in some circumstances of
other content, a son, an heir to the wealth; look at pomp, or cheer,
feasting and mirth, (who rather should houle and weep for themselves, Iam. 4 9.
and theirs;) and after they have sought their own ends, at last bring it
forth, rather to a Church-complement (as they basely account) and for an
Eclesiasticall ceremony of water, than a spiritual Baptism of regeneration:
and so afterward spending the time in mirth and jollity; but suffering the
child both elder and younger to run riot, and become worse the child of Satan,
than ever before, and to wear the livery of God in despite rather than
service to him. Oh! how fearful an account have these to make? And although I
deny not, their child is baptized visibly; and their sin cannot bar the
Lords covenant of grace (if he please to call it) yet, what woeful accessaries
are they to the woe of it? How much better is it to be childelesse and barren,
than to be fruitful under such a curse? And it were to be wished, that even
such parents as scorn to be thought profane or only civil, and carnal
Protestants, were not guilty of this neglect. As one said of Herod's killing his
son with the infants: Better to be Herod's swine than son: So of these.

The second person in this work is the assembly. The second person* Assembly.
Her duty.
Hers is the legacy of Baptism: her part is as the Church of Christ, to bring
it forth duly when it shall duly be demanded. Also to present themselves
there in public with reverence, both at word and Sacrament: to recognize the
former grace of Baptism offered themselves, that they may be stablished
therein; or else by remembering their own breach of vows, to be abased by the
occasion: to present the infant to God by the Minister: to look up to heaven
for it by humble confession, Prayer and thanks, and so to confer the mark
and seal of the Sacrament upon it.



The third person. Minister his duty.
The third person is the Minister, deputed by God and the Church, to stand
between them as sequester of blessings, and duty: from God of blessing, whose
baptism he offers, and whole person (in his acts) he resembles; from the
people of duty and service, in their name, bringing forth the Sacrament to
public use. Before both he must behave himself with gravity and holiness:
separating the Element, and touching the laver with the blood of the lamb, 1 Timothy 3.15. and 4 12. Exodus 40.9.
that it may be sacred: blessing the fountain by prayer and praise of his
lips, beseeching the Lord to assist, to sanctify, and to baptize the party
with the Holy Ghost and fire: Matt. 3.11. Matthew. 28.27.
and so by the words of the institution, In the name of the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, receiving the child and dipping it in water, to pronounce
it openly to be a real member of the Church of Christ. A great work, and yet
there is a greater, even to be an able Minister of the covenant, ^ Cor. 3.6.
and to understand the doctrine and use of baptism competently, to teach it
sensibly to the people, that he may not as a dumb Idol, bring forth a thing
to the people which himself knows not. I have spoken of the use before: only
this I add, That although any of these three persons fail of the Sacramental
duenesse and service, I do not infer a nullity of the Sacrament (so long as
the institution is preserved) but a necessity of sin in such offenders: for
whose cause it might be just with God to punish the children: howbeit by
virtue of his Covenant and election, Romans 11, 28.
he is and will be the God of his own, and the sin of man shall not infringe
the mercy of God, in due time, from calling to himself and converting even the
children of such sinful ones, freely to himself, in the Ministry of his
Gospel.

Touching that I have said of Sacramental dipping, Digression to dipping.
to explain my self a little about it; I would not be understood as if
scismatically I would instill a distaste of the Church into any weak minds, by
the act of sprinkling water only. But this (under correction) I say: That it
ought to be the Churches part to cleave to the Institution, especially it being
not left arbitrary by our Church to the descretion of the Minister, but
required to dip or dive the infant more or less (except in case of weakness)
for which allowance in the Church we have cause to be thankful:) and sutably
to consider, that he betrays the Church (whose officer he is) to a disordered
error, if he cleave not to the institution: Dipping, the meetest act.
To dippe the infant in water. And this I so aver, as thinking it exceeding
material to the ordinance, and no slight thing: yea, which both Antiquity
(though with some addition of a three fold dipping: for the preserving of the
doctrine of the impugned Trinity, entire) constantly and without exception of
Countries hot or cold, witnesses unto: and especially the constant word of the
holy Ghost, first and last, approves: as a learned Critique upon Matthew,
Chap. 3. Verse 11. has noted, that the Greek tongue wants not words to
express any other act as well as dipping, (...). Causaub.
if the institution could bear it. And sure it is, if the Lord meant not as
(he says) that the infant should be dived to the bottom, yet he much less
meant he should be sprinkled only upon the surface: But rather between both
extremes, he should be baptized, which word signifies the true act of the
Minister, to dip or dop the body, or some part of it into the water: And the
essence of Baptism, in the very symbolicalnesse of it, urges no less: For
what resemblance of ingrafting, putting on of Christ, is there in sprinkling?
what typicalnesse is there of our descending into and ascending out of the
water, both which are expressly spoken of Christ in his baptism of Jordan? What
resemblance of our burial or resurrection with Christ, is there in it? So that
I doubt not, but contrary to our Churches intention this error having once
crept in, is maintained still by the carnal ease and tenderness of such, as
looking more at themselves than at God, stretch the liberty of the Church in
this case deeper, and further than either the Church her self would, or the
solemnenesse of this Sacrament may well and safely admit. I do not speak this
as a thing meet to disturb a Churches peace: but as desiring such as it
concerns in their places, to look to their liberty and duty in this behalf.

The fourth person, the infant.
The fourth and chief person, yea equal object of Baptism is the party
baptized. For not only the Church may and does baptize her infants: but also
(adultos) grown ones also, if any such being bred Pagans, and brought within
the pale of the Church, shall testify their competent understanding of the new
covenant; and profess their desire to be seized with Baptism, for the
strengthening of their soul in the faith thereof: profess it I say, not basely
and slightly, but with earnestness and entirenesse; cutting off their hair
and nails, and abhorring their Paganism. A short touch of the baptism of
infants.
But the truth is, the exercise of the Churches baptism is upon infants: Here
the Anabaptists rise up, pleading the corruption of such baptism, and urging
the first baptism of catechized ones and confessors of sin, and cravers of
the seal, upon the work of the Ministry foregoing in knowledge and faith,
which can be incident only to Adulti, or grown ones. They allege that we
seal to a blank, to no covenant, and therefore its a nullity. Sundry learned
men have undertaken to stop their scismaticall mouths and to answer their
peevish Arguments: my scope tends another way in this Treaty, so far as my
digression may be venial. I say this, for the settling of such as are not
wilful, that I take the baptism of infants to be one of the most reverend,
general, and uncontroled traditions which the Church has, and which I would
no less doubt of than the Creed to be Apostolical. And although I confess
my self yet unconvinced by demonstration of Scripture for it, yet, Reasons for
it,
1 Cor. 7, 14,


How it is capable. 1* Pet. 3, 21.
because the Sacrament of Baptism is here handled by us, not as half a
Sacrament (only including a washing of the flesh) but an entire Sacrament,
holding out and giving an invisible grace by outward means: By what authority
shall we say, an infant may be presented to that, whereof it is not capable? To
that I answer. believing parents, are of the number of those that shall be
saved (though dying in their infancy) none of our reformed Churches will deny.
It is enough therefore that such before death do partake the benefit of
Election in Christ, together with the benefits of Christ in regeneration,
adoption, redemption and glory; Now that the Spirit can apply these unto such
infants, is not doubted of: though the manner thereof to us be as hidden and
mystical thing: yet so it is, the Spirit of Christ can as really unite the
soul of an infant to God, imprint upon it the true title of a son and
daughter by adoption, and the image of God by sanctification without faith, as
with it. Now, if the thing of baptism be thus given it, why not baptism? Nay,
I add further, I see no cause to deny, that even in, and at, and by the act of
baptism, (as the necessity of the weak infant may admit) the Spirit may
imprint these upon the soul of the infant.

Esaias 65.1. Iam. 4, 8. Psalm 119.10.
that he who was found of thee, when thou soughtest him not, will much more
draw near to thee when thou art feign upon him, and seek him with thy whole
heart? What a mercy is it, to know the Lord to be a provoker of the soul to
embrace that covenant, the seal whereof he is content to bestow before hand,
for the hope of time to come? Who should so play the Traitor in cool blood,
(having found the Lord so faithful in his love) and to cavil thus, I was
baptized and made my covenant when I knew nothing, nay I did make none my
self, but others for me! Let them look to their stipulation and promise, I
made none! Can any Treacherous wretch so requite the Lord? Rather (if any spark
of love be in thee) will thou not break thy heart by this early mercy before
hand? Will thou not say, what a shame were it for me to give over him now in
the pursuit of his grace, when he has formerly laid a pledge in my bosom of
his gracious meaning to forgive and save me? Were it not just I should be left
to perish with my baptism of water, barred from the true seal of Gods
covenant: Oh! be vigilant, and studious to redeem the opportunity of grace,
and to follow all means for the obteyning of grace! Kill all base enimity and
treachery which suggest the Lord to be thy foe: say thus, Judge. 13.23.
Surely if he had meant to destroy me, he would never have done any such
kindness for me: but this preventing freely, assures me of his blessing upon
my attending the means to get vocation and faith. Oh! be not faithless, but
faithful! Suffer no base ease, self-pride, security, infidelity to clog thee
and hold thee in chains: John 20, 27.
Do thy work the better, and neglect no help, seeing thou have thy pay
before hand. But to conclude, if the false and hollow are so culpable: what
shall be said of such as abuse the livery of Christ, to debauch themselves in
all kind of profanenes, pride, drunkenesse, riot, uncleanness, swearing, abuse
of the Lords day, and that lawlesly! How much better were it, they had never
seen the sun, than by their contempt of this long suffering of God, to heap up
wrath to themselves against the day of vengeance! besides the unspeakable
scandale they give to Atheists.

From the personal acts, I come to the second General: The 2. General grace
of it. 2 Fold.
viz. the Grace of the Sacrament of Baptism; which I illustrate by a
Diversity: viz. that it serves also for Admission into the visible body of the
Church. This then is the common favor of Baptism; viz. matriculation, and
outward incorporating into the number of worshippers of God, 1 Common,
and into visible Communion. This is as the porch into the house.

The Lords scope in Baptism is an inward grace, but this general privilege
is to all equal: viz. A badge of an outward member: distinction from the
common rout of the world, Romans 4, 11.
out of the pale of the Church. The Lord appointed Circumcision as a seal of
the righteousness of faith cheeflly: yet as an overplus he allowed it to be the
Differencer of all other Nations from the Jews. Genesis 17, 12, 13
It was as a fence and wall of separation from them in all their converse. So
is Baptism now, a mark or badge of external Communion: whereby the Lord
settles a right upon the person to his ordinances, that it may comfortably use
them as his own privilege, and wait for the inward prerogative of Saints by
them. And yet this (as much as men boast of it) is but a shell in respect of
the other. There is an outward implanting of the wild Olive into the sweet
Olive; that it may be exempt out of the state of Aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel: But there is a better use of it, Heb. 12, 25.
to bring us to mount Zion, Heb. 12.25. to the souls of just men, to the
Assemblies of Saints. The first is not to be slighted: the latter to be rested
in and honored. Genesis 17, 15.
Therefore he who rejected Circumcision, was to be cut off from his people:
voluntary cutting off was punished with necessary.

Act ^7* 30. Ephe 3, 5.
Word, Covenant and hope (ordinary I mean) giving them up to be a kingdom of
Satan, for the Prince of this world to rule at his pleasure! Not to speak of
the Jews whom God has left to the obstinacy of their rebellion, contempt of
Christ and his covenant and seals. How should we mourn for them, and pray
for their conversion and the fullness of the Gentiles?

Ephe. 4.13.
and our excommunication from his people? It is not our outward baptism which
can releeve us; Only it shows how deeply our nature is sunk and revolted
from God: and how gracious the Lord is in this his Sacrament, to give us by it
an unconditionall free title to mercy and forgiveness, whereas he has
debarred still an huge part of the world from Christendom.

whether the Lord mean as he says, in his covenant and offer to be reconciled
to God, to believe that he is ingenuous and faithful therein: seeing that by
Baptism he has taken away that objection, wiped away the shame of Egypt, and
the reproach of uncircumcised ones: granting a second privilege to them, and a
title to hear, pray, worship, believe; that by this he might pluck them not
only from Infidels; but much more from that infidelity and Atheism which
estranges them from God: and might make them true free-denizons of his kingdom
in grace and glory by regeneration.

Romans 1. Ephesians. 4. Oh! Romans 1. Ephe. 4.
how do they cause Pagans to abhor the hearesay of baptism and Christ? as
some Indians beholding the Spaniards in the east parts, cried out, If these
were Christians, they would still keep their God to themselves: and an heathen
Physician spoke somewhat like, If these be Christians, my soul be with the
Philosophers. Surely their foreskin is still upon them, Ier. 9, 25.
yea they have drawn it up again as ashamed of their Baptism.

But the chief thing here considerable, The special grace of it, is Christ
our new birth.
is the true grace of the Sacrament of Baptism, which point is one of the most
material both for knowledge and use, of all the rest. Conceive then, the Lord
Jesus being wholly given of God in each Sacrament (though for diverse ends) this
former Sacrament offers him wholly, in point of our new birth, or the new
creature; Christ in all his breadth, height, depth and length; Christ for
being, and regeneration. Perhaps for the simpler sort it might be enough to use
the Apostles words, of him are we, who is made our wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30. or to add thus much, All Christ
is given us, 1 Cor. 1, 30.
either for our calling, or for our imputation, or for our sanctification.
Howbeit, for my own exercise in part, and for the clearer view of Christ
sacramental in the water: I would add a little more, desiring the weak
reader to pardon my distinctions, as more meet for such as better conceive (or
would at least) the gift of Christ in his extent and fullness. Distinction of
it to be marked.
The grace then of Christ bestowed in baptism, is either first grace, or
consequent upon it. The first grace I call, either that which makes us
accepted, or that which is freely given to in here and abide in us. Concerning
the former kind: Grace accepting is either grace of means serving to atteine
acceptance, or the grace it self atteined. The former, of means, in one word
is the grace of vocation in all the passages thereof, preventing, assisting, and
perfitting this acceptance of the soul. The grace it self of acceptance
atteyned, may be distinguished into grace either of maine essence, or of
privilege. Grace of maine essence is double, either justification of our
persons from sin of guilt and blemish; or of curse (wherein Gods acquitting
us in judgment by remission and pardon, properly consists:) or reconciliation,
by which being pardoned we return to grace and favor again as before, our
blood being restored, and we beloved. Then secondly, grace of privilege is
double: positive or privative. Positive privilege in a word is our adoption:
which (besides favor) restores us to the former condition (yet much bettered)
of children, sons, daughters, heirs: and so to the privileges of a believer
according to the several occasions of his life and course. Privative in a
word, stands in redemption: that is freedom from all the evils, dangers,
enemies, crosses, within without, bodily, ghostly, which threaten annoyance to
our happy estate in Christ. Thus for the 1. sort.

The second are graces inherent in us; in a word, Sanctification of the whole
man, body, soul, and spirit, standing both in Conscience and conversation. And
this is double, either mortification and consumption of the old man, Gal, 5, 24.
renouncing him with his affection: and lusts, and crucifying the^ all with
Christ's or else quickening up of the soul in the bent, frame, intent and
stream of it, to the life of God and grace. Thus of the first grace. The
consequent upon this is, the proper issue and fruit of each of these first
graces which they leave behind them in the soul: The proper issue of vocation,
is union and bringing to God by the instrument of faith. The proper issue of
justification is peace and quiet of conscience. The fruit of reconciliation is
holy Complacence and contentment or joy of the Spirit in God her Savior, as
Mary speaks. The fruit of adoption is, Luke 1, 47.
the honor, liberty and excellency of believers, with the Spirit of children,
confidence, and calling God Abba, resting upon him for all good things; a true
right to earth, heaven, and all therein: All things being ours, we being
Christ's, as Christ is Gods. 1 Cor. ^, 22.23.
The fruit of redemption is assured ^ecurity of heart from evil, conquest and
triumph in Christ, true deliverance of soul from Satan, to God and for God in
all obedience. The fruit of sanctification, is the blessed guard and furniture
of Graces resident both in the mind, as light, pureness, wisdom,
discerning: in the will, all habits and uprightness, integrity,
cheerfulness, faithfulness: in the affections, of love, hope, fear and
zeal: in the conscience, sensiblenesse, tenderness, quietness: In the whole
man, serviceablenesse to God in the conversation and whole course of it. This
short draught I have the rather inserted in this due place, to give light and
order to such things as I have handled in the three Articles of my second part,
and the fourth, fith, and sixth Articles of the third part of my practical
Catechism, that the Reader may see how all those good things issue from Christ
distinctly: I mean, the use of means, the strength against lets, and the
right to all privileges both conditional and actual: But especially to lay
down a view of Christ our union and communion Sacramental.

But, The expressions of the holy Ghost.
it shall not be amiss to touch this point as the Holy Ghost in the word
expresses it. Sometimes therefore he expresses it in general terms, and
sometimes in particular. Generally he calls it the holy Ghost and fire. See
Matthew. 3.11. Matthew. 3, 11. Matthew. 3, 16.
meaning the Spirit of Christ in the efficacy of his grace, which should purge as
fire; Even as our Savior Christ is said to have the Spirit descending at his
baptism, and lighting upon him: meaning that he thereby received the unction
of the Spirit, and the gift thereof: even the oil of gladness above his
fellows. So also its called by the name of new birth, Ioh. 3.5. Heb. 1, 9.
Ioh. 3.^.
Except a man be borne again of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter, etc. So
the washing of regeneration, Tit. 3, 5.
and renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. And so also it is said to save or
deliver from wrath, as the Arc from the flood, 1 Pet. 3.21. In particular,
this regeneration is distinguished, into the washing or purging of
justification by the merit, or the washing of sanctification by the efficacy of
Christ's death: 1 Ioh. 1, 7. See Acts 22.16. Ephe. 5.26.
The former we have in 1 Ioh. 1.7. The blood of Jesus purges us from all
sin: The latter see, Ephe. 5.26. That he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of water by the word: To present it without spot or wrinckle in his
glorious presence, Gal. 3, 26.
etc. Both these are expressed, Galathi. 3.26. They who are baptized into
Christ have put on Christ: as their garment both of covering in the one, and of
warmth in the other: all Christ in both. But there are two phrases in the
Scripture by which the holy Ghost delights to describe the grace of baptism:
The one by remission of sins, the other by dying unto sin and rising up unto
righteousness, Of the first there is frequent mention, Luke 3.3. John baptized
to the remission of sins. Luke 3, 3, Acts 22, 16. Romans 6, 3, 8.
Act. 22.16. Wash away thy sins and be baptized. Of the latter Paul speaks
much in Romans 6. from the 3. verse to the 8. So many as are Baptized into Jesus
Christ, are baptized into his death: Therefore we are buried by baptism with
him into his death; that like as Christ was raised up from death by the glory
of the Father: so might we walk in newness of life. For if we have been
planted together with him into the likeness of his death, we shall also be to
the likeness of his resurrection. And note this further, that as the holy
Ghost expresses the meriting causes diversely, now by one, then by another part
of his mediation: so sometime he applies that his merit to one fr^it, sometime
to another: yet so that by one merit we understand all, and by one effect of
it, all the rest.

Take a Text, 1 Pet. 3.21. 1 Pet. 3, 21.
The like figure whereunto, baptism now saves us: not the washing of the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience in the resurrection of
Jesus Christ. Mark, the resurrection of Christ, being the compleatnesse of his
satisfaction, and the declaring of it, is made here the meriting cause of the
grace of Baptism: But by it, all the satisfaction is meant: And the effect of
this Baptism is called, The answer of a good conscience, which is the peace
and security of it, properly issuing from pardon of sin and guilt: yet in and
by this, all are meant, both justification and sanctification. The self same
phrase is used, Heb. 10.22. Heb. 10, 22.
Having your hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and your bodies washed
with pure water, that is, with peace. For this blood, Hebrews 12. cries
better things than that of Abel. The phrase of sprinkling compares Baptism to
the Israelites sprinkling their door posts with the blood of the Lamb. If
they had not done it, Exodus 12, 22.
they had been in danger of slaying by the Angel. But having done it, Heb.
10.24.
their heart was at quiet and peace through the promise. So baptism is a
better sprinkling of a better blood, upon a better object, to a far better
peace, even peace of conscience, as being passed from death to life. By all
these places not unmeet to be conferred together, we see, that whole Christ
crucified, Christ in water, Christ in our Regeneration, Christ in our union,
and by it all his benefits are the extent of the grace of baptism. And that
the Minister standing in Gods stead, applying water to the Baptized, does by it
apply the power of the Lord Jesus by the Spirit accompanying the same, to
create a new birth of Grace and life in the soul. The which work of the
Spirit I shall more revive in the first use of this point.

2. Things. 1. Behold the truth of the word.
Behold the truth of this offer of the Lord Jesus in the water by the help of
the word; and not so only, but what the word of Regeneration can work of it
self in the soul, and therefore much more can further it by the Sacrament.
Secondly, by and through this Word apply the merit and power of the Sacrament
to thy soul in particular. For the former, know, although a Sacrament be above
a word, yet it is so, by a word, and with it, and not else. Behold not a
Sacrament without a word, for then thou see a meare empty vanishing Element.
Behold it in word, and thou sest no less than Christ in the water, true
regeneration offered thee. Take all those Texts I cited before: look up to God
by prayer, to see the truth of them, Ephe. 4, 22.
as they are in Jesus; to rivet every of them in special into thy spirit, that
so thou may feel a bottom to thy faith out of a word: Labor to see what
makes this word so powerful, even the truth of a promiser, the merit of a
satisfyer: who died, shed his blood, was buried and rose again by the power of
God, that he might fill a promise with efficacy, and persuade thy heart, that
seeing all that he suffered was for thee to make himself thine in remission of
sins, and renewing of the holy Ghost, therefore the promise that offers this
to thee, in the Sacrament, is sound and effectual. Read and ponder that place
I named, Ephe. 5.26.
Ephe. 5.26. Washing of water by the word. And so be resolved if the word of a
true God tell thee, That he will wash thy soul by Christ in the Sacrament, it
shall be so, it cannot be otherwise: and if he have said, Christ in the water,
water is spiritual birth, regeneration, renewing, purging, burying in the
grave with Christ, rising up with Christ; then so it is. This word will give a
bottom to thy feet to stand upon, while thou reachest out with thine hand to
take Christ; so that thou shall not stagger. Consider that the same word which
has held Christ and water in so strong an union, can also hold thee upon sure
ground. Alas, men's going to work without a word, marres the power of Baptism:
and causes the soul to be present with any object, more than with Christ in
the water.

It goes with the Spirit.
Further, be assured this word of Christ in his promise of the Sacrament never
goes alone: The truth of it always is annexed to the Spirit of Christ in the
water. All the word is full of this; tells us, the Spirit is that which assists
the Sacrament. The Spirit quickneth, 1 Ioh. 5.6.
water profits nothing alone: It is the Spirit which must join with the word,
with water, and unto Christ to both in the soul, or else the things of the
Sacrament are as far off as heaven and earth. But the Spirit of Christ
crucified, water and blood, meeting with the Sacrament, fetches out all the
power of Christ into the soul, and makes the promise of blessing effectual.
Hence it is that nothing is so common in Scripture as the Spirits concurring
with Baptism. Matthew 3. Matthew. 3.11.
He shall baptize with the holy Ghost, and fire. Tit. 3.5. Water of
Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost. Tit, 3, 5.
As it attended Christ's baptism, so it must ours if it be efficacious, else
not.

These two things being forelaid, bring forth thy faith in the word and Spirit
of the Sacrament, both for thy child and thy self, These two things brin faith.
for begetting or reviving of Christ to regeneration. And as the hand puts on
the apparel upon the body, yea, as thou beholdest the Minister to dip thy
child in water; so, concur with him by faith, and behold God the Father,
putting the Lord Jesus upon thy soul and the soul of thy child, for pardon,
peace, joy, confidence, security, grace, and holiness; and fasten upon the
Word, and draw thereby the Spirit of Baptism to help and satisfy thy soul
with Christ in all these. As thou would put on a garment upon thy naked
body: How this? 1 By the stripping of thy self.
so be stripped and empty of all good and grace in thy self; feel in thy soul
an utter absence of life, of sense, motion and power toward the inner man of
grace: Lie before the Lords Sacrament, as a forlorn wretch. Say thus, If thy
baptism Lord be for my regeneration, what am I without it? A dead dog, a
very lump and mass of sin, and curse, utterly void of the least dram of
life, savoring nothing but earth, vanity, lusts, world, pleasures; a very slave
to these, and a very carcass of all goodness, and being of God. Oh Lord!
strip me stark naked, pluck off my mufflers, shame me, drive me out of my
self as one poor, miserable, blind, and naked. This is the first work of
faith, to put off the souls rags, and to void all conceit of life, hope, or
grace in it self, and to set it before the Lord as Adams red earth lay before
him, when he was to breathe the life of Creation into it. Now the Lord is
creating thee anew by his Sacrament. Remember, Creation is of nothing, Baptism
never made new creature, where it finds any thing of ones own. Baptism should
then not create, but rather draw somewhat out of our own principles, to make
us somewhat, to which we bring matter of our own. Oh! people come to the
Sacrament full of their own devotions, and look that God should make them new
creatures of their own stuff: this were to patch and soden our old, not to
create a new man in us.

Apply our selves to the Word.
Secondly, being thus nothing in our selves; apply we our selves by the word to
the work of the Spirit, of union Sacramental; bare, poor, empty water, which
has in it self no Sacramental substance, yet by the union of the Spirit of
Baptism, incloseth the Lord Jesus to regeneration in it: If thou can say,
water is not a more beggarly Element in the Sacrament without Christ, than thy
soul is empty, unsubsisting without regeneration: Look to the Lord by thy
faith, and pull hard at him for the Spirit of Baptism to renew a life, a
spirit and being of pardon and holiness in thee. If while the word lasts, and
the Spirit of Baptism endures, (even to the worlds end) Christ and water shall
never be sundred from the Sacrament: Believe thou as firmly, that Christ as
water, shall never be severed from thy poor soul, that lies humbly before
him, destitute of all life in thy self, and lost for ever, except Christ be
thy life and succor; I say the Lord Jesus shall never be wanting to such a
soul, in the point of regeneration. Plead then thy cause strongly with the
Lord; behold here is Christ in water. What lets why thou may not be
baptized, Act^ 8, 16.
as Philip said of the Eunuch? Shall water ever lose her cleansing? Were it not
madness to think so? And shall Jesus Christ then lose his power to cleanse
the soul? Has he not annexed his cleansing to waters cleansing? Is it
possible that all the devils in hell can dissolve the Sacramental Union of
Christ and water? Oh Lord, why is this Union, and for what serves it? Is it
good for any thing, save as it is Sacramental? Was it Christ before? Is it
Christ after? No sure, but during the Sacrament only. And why so? Surely to
teach me, all this Union is for me. Christ water serves for my souls washing.
He delights not to be one with a base Element for it self; but that in and
with a creature of a cleansing quality, he might flow into my soul with his
renewing Spirit! Oh Lord, I believe thy word! Lord let thy Spirit convey thee
with water into my soul! Be it, Oh Lord, as thou have said! Separate not thy
Spirit from thy Sacrament, but give it the power of begetting me to the life
of faith and a new creature.

3 Abhor carnal reason. Ioh. 3.9.
Thirdly, look off from all thy carnal reason, and the silliness of the
creature: Say not with Nicodemus, How shall this be? Consult not with flesh and
blood: cavil not, 1 Ioh. 5, 8. Mat. 3, ult.
ask no further sign, thou have three in heaven, and three in earth, bearing
witness to Gods truth: Water is one of these; it is the instrument of the
Spirit; though it be on earth, yet that is from heaven, call not for a voice
from heaven the second time; its enough that in the Baptism of Christ, it as
manifest: Hold close to the Word and Promise: Go teach and Baptize; and lo,
Mat. 28, ult.
I am with you till the end. Let all conceits of Reason vanish in the truth of
God: and when corruption has done all it can; yet roll thy self upon the
promise, and by the Perspective glass thereof, thou shall see that grace in
the Sacrament which else is invisible to flesh, and covered under the ashes of
unbeleefe. Let all be qu^sht with this, My soul, God has said it, I see
nothing but water, but there is Christ with water to regeneration.

Lastly, cloze with the Spirit, and meet it at the Sacrament. 4 Close with the
Spirit of the Sacrament.
If thou meet it not there, its because thou bring not faith with thee: for
that is there for ever inseparably. Groan in thy spirit unto the Spirit of
Christ, that thee may sustain thy bottomless heart in her desire after the
grace of the Sacrament. Say thus, Oh blessed Spirit of Baptism, remember thou
were given by the Lord Jesus at his ascension for thy Church, Ioh. 7.56.57. Now
Christ is glorified, Ioh, 7, 56, 57,
now let thy Spirit be given to bring the life of the Sacrament into me! Once
when the world was a Chaos, the Spirit of creation fostred and brooded the
waters, and brought forth order and matter for each part of the world! Oh now
come down with thy fire, and warm this water, make it effectual, for the
scattering of my darkness, error, rebellion, corruption, Genesis 1, 2.
and the purging of old Adam, the mortifying and consuming of my concupiscence
and lusts! And then travel again with me in this thy ordinance, till Christ
and the new creature be formed in me! Make me thy offspring, Gal, 4, 19*
and generation: breed the thoughts, affections, and disposition of the new
birth in me! Oh make this fountain and laver blessed and fruitful to be the
seed of Christ in me! Once thou did so work with Jordan, that the washing
of a Leper, 1 King, 5, 12*
caused his flesh to return as the flesh of a child. Take away my leprosy
also, Ioh. 5, 3.4:
and make me as a little child! Once thy Angel so stirred the Poole, that who
so stepped in next was healed, of what disease soever he was sick! Oh, stir
this poole also, make it an healing water, put into it the virtue of him, that
with a word spoken could cure all maladies. Heal mine Lord, by this poole* if
an Angel could heal a lame leg, a blind eye, a deaf ear; thy Spirit can
heal worse diseases, the disease of my nature, the distempers of pride, envy,
worldliness, self-love, impatience, 2 King, 2, 14.
infidelity, and what not! As Elisha having the cloak of his Master, with the
promise of his Spirit, smote the waters and caused them to go this way and
that, till he went o-over dry; so do thou cry, Where is the Lord God of
Baptism? The Lord Jesus in the water, the Spirit of regeneration? Oh! let the
Arc carry me safe and free from the gulf of wrath and destruction! 2 Kin.
2, 21.
First, O holy Lord, let thy Spirit cast his salt into these waters, which my
sin has made barren and accursed, (even as all other creatures) and
sanctify them by union, and put a blessing upon them, implanting the root of
the Lord Jesus into my soul by dipping me into them, that so as verily as I
behold my child's face, and my own flesh cleansed from spots by outward water,
so surely we may find our souls and spots thereof to be washed by the blood of
Christ (this true laver of the new Birth) unto remission of sins, and
eternal life! Thus much of this point, I now come to the third and last.

The 3. general. The end of it.
The third general in the Description is, the end whereto Baptism serves. And
that is, the sealing up of all the grace (mentioned before) to be the souls
own, in assured persuasion and possession. I say not that this is the end
which all baptized ones attain unto: nay, not all, who yet by the word and
faith do attain some comfortable fruit of Baptism. But this I say is the end
which God intends in the Sacrament: To seal up the soul to an assured feeling
and real partaking of those holy things of Christ, which are here offered. I
mean not that this sealing of Baptism is inherent in it, To seal our
regeneration.
so as if the Spirit of regeneration were but an attendant to Baptism: no, in
no wise: but this; where the Lord means to bestow upon a believing soul
(which though it relies upon his Word and Promise, yet finds many doubts and
fears) this grace of knowing it self to believe, to be regenerated, to be
elect, to be heir to heaven: (which reflection is the work of the holy Ghost)
there the Lord uses the Sacrament of Baptism to be the instrument of this
assurance, and to make up the evidence of the word, full and effectual. For
even as the seal annexed to an evidence, makes it past question (as I said
before) so does this Seal added to the word, perfect the evidence of it, and
therefore we may truly say, carries in it the last, best and uttermost
evidence, which the Lord has to bestow upon the soul, to put her out of
question.

To repeat things spoken already, is not my purpose: By looking at the Covenant*
only apply the general to particular: The seal of Baptism looks at the
extent of the Covenant: Thou know what it is to have the Lord to be thy God
in Christ. I spoke (even now) at large of the grace of Baptism. The self same
is the extent of the Covenant; it reaches not one inch shorter, than that I
spoke there. Now mark, as large as that is, so large is this Seal of
Baptism; and the Lord keeper of the great Seal is the Spirit of Christ: he it
is who brings it forth to the soul that needs it, and hungers after it by the
taste of the graciousnesse* and sweetness of God in the Covenant. And he a^kes
the soul, and says: Poor soul, have not I often convinced thee by my promise,
of my faithful meaning? Have I not said, I will never fail or deceive thee.
Yes Lord, but I am sold under carnal sense and infidelity: Well, but what
say thou if I bring forth the marks, the wounds, the water, and blood of the
Lord Jesus side, and sprinkle them upon thee? when Tamar knew not how to
convince Judah, lo, she sends him the cloak, staff, Genesis 38, 25.
and signet, asking him, Whose they were? and when he saw them he was
convinced. This course was better than words, it had a real relation in it. So
here the Spirit brings out the very instuments of assurance, and lays water
upon thy flesh to secure thee, Christ in his life and death is thine: and shall
not this be a real relation above the naked word unto thee? Yes surely if
together with the outward presenting of the things, he also clap the Seal upon
thy soul, and leave a print upon thy soft heart, which may assure thee he has
been there, to fetch out thy slavish fear and infidelity. Ephe. 1, 13.
Read Ephe. 1, 13. where this Spirit is called the sealer of the Promise: its
called the earnest of our Inheritance, and purchased possession. Read also
Ephesians. 4.30. where it is called the Sealer of our redemption; Ephe. 4.30.
By which phrases, all the whole grace of Christ is meant, viz. That the Spirit
in Baptism seals our Vocation, our Justification, Adoption, Sanctification,
and the rest, one as well as the other.

John's baptism at Ephesus, Act. 19, 2.
were asked by Paul, If they had received the holy Ghost since they believed?
They answered, They knew not so much as whether there was an holy Ghost or no.
So may I say of our people: Alas, they are so far from the Seal of Baptism,
that they know not whether there be any such thing or not? They know not that
God has any Ordinance of so high nature or no, as this, to convey assurance
into a man of his regeneration: And how can such choose but live a sad, drooping
course?

grace laid in one hour in your bosom? Have ye no steppings in of Satan,
flesh, infidelity, revolt, had world to unsettle ye. I will not judge you: but
judge your selves, and enquire, whether that sudden peace of yours be not
rather such a one as savors of presumption, or of a desire to be troubled no
longer about the matter, than solid and profound: Fear the worst, the best
will save it self. Tremble to think God should have an Ordinance in store,
which you stand in no need of. If it be so, then such as need it, shall have
it, but you may miss it well enough.

Ester) and what with their deapth of melancholy, Ester 4.16. and 5, 2.
hardness to be persuaded; as also their deep bondage by unbeleefe; they will
not hear of such a possibility of sealing assurance, but either think it a
fable, or far from their reach: and therefore set down their staff, that
(if unbeleefe and staggering can do it) all their days must be miserable. The
Lord has removed them far from prosperity, and put out their light. Oh,
Lam. 3.13. Deuteronomy. 32.6.
unthankful ones! Do ye thus requite the Lord for his Sacrament? Is this your
meditation, application of the sealing power of it? Is it too good for ye, with
Ahaz, to receive a sign from God! Do ye not need it? or, Esaias 7.12.13.
are ye so saped in bondage and anguish, that ye heed it not? Why then yield ye
purposely to it? Why strive ye not to lay in for any grace which God has for
ye? What service shall God have from ye without it? If ye slight this comfort,
must ye not needs slight obedience? If God should streighten ye in seeking it,
and hold ye off; yet is there any such employment, so precious as this. Oh!
poor souls, if lamenting would do you good, what need have ye of it? Oh!
consider and come out of your dungeon! Tell me, when our Adversaries the
Papists laugh and scorn the Doctrine of assurance, say its impossible: do you
favor them? Sure I am, in your conscience and conversation, ye are of another
stamp: and do ye not tremble that you should dwell next door to such, and
fall into the same stream of their error? 2 Pet. 3. ult.


Phil. 3, 11
who so long since thy Baptism, when thou thoughtst no other, but thou had
been forgotten, yet has remembered, or offers to remember thee with the fruit
of thy Baptism: who could have dreamt it? Once, Ioh. 13, 7.8, 9.
when Peter heard Christ offer to wash him, he told him, he should never do so
mean an office to him. But when our Savior replied, What I now do, thou
know not, but hereafter thou shall know; then he changed his mind. When
the Lord gave thee Baptism in thine infancy (which was a pledge of further
favor) he showed thee mercy. But lo, he had a deeper reach; and in due time,
thou should know it; and now he offers it thee: No Sacrament passes thee,
but (if thy heart and mind be matches) he revives the print of thy Baptism
unto thee. Oh! Why is not thy heart broken at it? Lord, I have lived loosely,
and basely, this twenty, thirty, forty years, since thy baptizing me: Showing
that I was not much the better for it: And now should thou at last send a
shower to fetch up the seed of regeneration, Iud. 14, 14.
from under this dry clod; Out of the eater, bring sweetness? and create thy
self in a womb so old, barren, and past all hope of new birth?

Genesis 18.12:
Sarah laughed (the text says) when she heard of such news: But truly Lord my
heart has cause to rend in pieces to see such mercy. Oh Lord, I see with thee
a thousand years are as one day! 2 Pet. 3, 8. Romans 4, 17.
Thou call things that are, as if they were not? Thirty years of
ignorance, saped in the world, carnal, civil, saples under the do^trine of
thy Grace and Covenant, (it may be also) a swearing, drunken, unclean wretch
(to be sure a son of old Adam) still an hypocrite and unbeleever. Oh! should
thou now (ere I die) prevent hell for me, and cause that word of Regeneration,
which never afforded any favor to me; now to show me, that thy Sacrament forty
years since cast upon me, has not lost her strength and efficacy? Oh Lord!
methinks now I see plainly why thou were aforehand with me; Even that I might
be ashamed I should be so behind with thee: That being on the surer hand, I
might ply thy Covenant the more earnestly! Oh Lord, if thou had not prevented
me with the grace of the Spirit, I had slept in death! and in thy livery, lived
and died a Traitor. But now, since thy Covenant has entered into me: behold, I
see well thy Sacrament has added some strength unto my unbeleeving heart; and
laying all thy dealing together, I perceive thou meanest to heap hot coals of
fire upon me, that I might at leisure, (ere I go to the pit, and be no more
seen) know and feel that blessed use of Baptism, which I never saw. Oh Lord,
I know there is a sealing power in it! Its an annex to thy Covenant. No sooner
did that allure me to believe, but thy Spirit joined it self to me, to second
it, to strengthen my fainting heart, and then I saw, If thou had meant to
destroy me, thou would never have spent one cord upon me! Iud. 13, 23.
But seeing thou meanest to save me, all shall do me good, promise and Seal,
and so I have found it Lord, and bless thee in the view of such experience!
How many hundreds of my age, education, and fashion, have quite given thee over
in the covenant they made in Baptism? But now, I do adore and wonder at this
unspeakable love of thine toward me; Oh let it never be forgotten.

Pet. 1. ult. which must do it, 1 Pet, 1, 22:
as, Iam. 1.16. Of his free will he begat us by the Word of truth. Iam, 1, 16,
Try thy self then by the usual acts of the word of Regeneration, and so
thou may gather that this Spirit belongs to thee. This is no place for me to
digress: I will cull out only two or three things which may serve for this
use. Deceive not thy self, and God will not deceive the: Did thou ever then
feel in thy self that this immortal seed, cast into thy ear, did so descend
into thy heart, as to work any immortal hope in thee? 2 Timothy 1, 11.
The Gospel reveals immortality and glory to the soul: Did it ever bring to
light any such thing to thee? Did it ever conceive in thee a sensible distaste
of all hopes below, and raise thy affections above? Did it ever cause the
things of the earth, long life, health, success, wealth, money, pleasure, to be
despised in comparison of the hope which is set before thee? Came thou ever
from the word, another man in thy aim, appetite, savor and love, than thou
wentst? Did thy heart ever burn within thee there? And when thou came with
earthly, base thoughts, did the Lord so dash them by heavenly doctrine, and the
hope of Christ, that thou returnedst to thy house with a distaste of thy self
for them? Were thou ever so touched and taken with the promise of the word,
that thou were loath to forgo it, for any delight? In particular, try thy self
thus, Instances of the words working.
1. Has the word of the Law cast a destroying seed of death into thee, and
taken a way that life of old Adam, and jollity in sin? Has it defaced thy old
Image, discovered thee to thy self to be an Alien from the Life of God, and
commonwealth of Israel? the son of an Hittite and Amorite, as odious as one of
thirty old would be to thee, who never was baptized?

Genesis 25, 22.
Have thou with Rebecca (in this combat) gone to God with thy complaint of the
infinite lets that have held thee from bele^ving? And has the Lord by his
Promise and persuasions, fastened thy anchor of soul upon his bottom of free
grace and truth, renouncing thy own hopes, fears, performances? So that now
thou have him close bound to thee in his word, from ever forsaking thee? Then I
say to thee, thou art he whom the word has breed Christ in, and formed life in
thee by faith. What wants then? Oh! thy heart is fickle, and too weak to buy
and sell upon the bare word without wavering! yea, thou have much ado to get
victory over thy uncertain heart! Well, no wonder. Thou see nothing, and to
resist sense, is a great work: yet, be faithful with God, and give not over
his promise, and by due cleaving to the bare truth of the Lord, beg further
light, and rest not in thy measure, much less yield to any love of sin to
darken and defile thee: And so doing, I assure thee, that to thee, (and to none
but such) the seal of baptism belongs: thou shall find the Lord will by his
Spirit convince thee deeplier; the Spirit of Baptism shall bring forth Gods
pledges, show thee them, Ioh. 16, 9.10.
convey into thy faint heart, strength, confidence, and courage of faith, and
set thee above thy distempers, as if they had never annoied thee: If, I say,
he have purposed such a decree of grace unto thee, he will effect it in time:
else know, that (howsoever) yet thy service is blessed, and thy faith has
br^^d the life of regeneration in thee.

To young Novices.
And first I direct my speech to young novices under the means: Slight not off
the first incklings of this sealing Spirit. The 1. lays and heates of the holy
Ghost and fire, do usually break forth in youth. Consider, its not a days
work, nor a thing easy to settle the Spirit of sealing upon thy soul; there
be many steps to it. Oh! look to it, ye young beginners; One cause why old
Christians walk so heavily, is because they never heeded, or hatched the first
motions of the Spirit in their beginnings! If then the Spirit of God do call
and stir in thee, by early affections, love, zeal, enquiry; answer, Speak
Lord, for thy servant hears; put him not off by ease or bondage; 1 Samuel 3, 9.
If such a thought come, as this, What a dram of Grace and Life of Christ is
worth, or what vow thou made in Baptism, and how retchlesse thou have been
to keep it; dally not with such items, shake not off, either pangs of terror,
by lusts of youth, or pangs of hope and love, with ease and sloth: for so the
Spirit of sealing is fore-stalled, and the fair forwardness thereto, will
hardly be recovered. Put in thy foot presently upon the Angels stirring the
poole; Ioh. 5, 4.
if thou have an heart, none shall prevent thee here, as there. If these seeds
were not choked and these buds cropped, they would prove the assuring, sealing
Spirit of grace in due time. Through contempt of it, the Lord leaves youth to
that hideousness and ripeness in sin, yea a spirit of desperate
debauchednesse in drinking, oaths, Rev. 22.11.
and villainy, as would not be believed of such youth.

To elder one^.
to let ye know that ye are the Lords. Lin not till the Lord has sealed ye
for his own: set his mark upon you, not to be blotted out: Look up at each
Sacrament, each Baptizing ye see, to the Lord; that (which in the former point
I speak) as he has applied the grace of Baptism by the promise unto you, so
now he would apply is Seal of assurance unto you by his Baptism. Let not
such a mercy be there to be had, and you not aware of it. Think it not too
good to receive, if God will grant it. What is freer than gift to an unworthy
one? Lord, I have long sat waiting for it, both by promise and Sacrament. At
length when I little think, let thy Chariots come to my door as Joseph's to
Jacob, Genesis 45, 28. Luke 2, 29.
that I may say, Its enough: Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace.
I would not be to seek of this again for the world. Say as Peter, Wash not
feet, but all parts, thoroughly drench me in this laver; Ioh. 13, 9.
urge the Lord, Oh! though I am the unworthiest of thousands to enjoy it, yet
it is as easy for thee to set thy Seal upon me, as for me to print soft
wax; to put on Jesus Christ upon me, Romans 13, ult.
as for me to put on my clothes: Let not my soul be sad and doubtful all my
days, for that which its so easy for thee to give. Let me have that Seal
Lord, and it shall be above all securities of land and lease: clothe me with
this Robe, and all other shreeds shall be base unto me. Remember how long I
have waitd for thy salvation Lord, Genesis 49, 18.
as one that longs for news from a far country, Oh! they shall be welcome!
And for my part, I confess, except thou help in the work, and apply thy
Seal, all my hearings, all thy Ordinances, Word, Sacrament, Promises, shall
leave me as they found me; not one of the benefits of Christ can relish my
heart, nor go into my spirit, except thou draw it in to me. Oh! how woeful
shall it be, Ioh. 6.44.
to see all my labor as water spilt upon the ground?

To relapsed ones.
Give not the Lord over for all that: Be not sullen and discontent with him,
nor thy self. Mourn and spare not, that thou should no more watch to such a
trust as the Lord has put into thee: That either thou should be weary of
clinging to the promise: That Christ should not be to thee yesterday, Heb. 13.8*
too day, and the same for ever: That either by fear of holding out, or
presumption of thy own, or ease, or worldliness, or especially that body of
death, thou should give way to new contents, the devils painted bables, and
the fashion of this base, declining, formal, hollow world. But be not hereby
discouraged and desperate with thy self: Shall a man fall, and not arise?
Look back to this Arc and ship of Baptism, Ier. 8, 4.
whence thou art fallen: No new baptism shall need; the old (if ever thou
were baptized truly) shall serve; lay then hold of that, and be comforted. I
knew an holy woman who never found her self ecclipsed and damped in her
comfort, but she found comfort by her Baptism; but she was in indeed a very
sweet pattern of humility, and of acquaintance with God in all his
Ordinances. If thou consider well, Baptism is thy second boorde after
shipwreck: do but lay hold upon one broken piece of this ship and say, Lord,
I have been thine, save me: Psalm. 119, 94.
I have felt thee sweet in the Promise and Seal, though now it be otherwise
through a dead heart; do but crawle in the waters, and touch a brim of this
ship, and lo, the Pilot will receive thee in again: not to make a trade and
falling sickness of often revolting, but to make thee more wary and fearful,
never to provoke the Lord in like matter, through his grace sustaining thee.

The fruits of the sealing of Baptism.
The sealing Spirit is a spirit of singular peace of conscience, and joy in the
lively hope of salvation; liberty with God, fullness of faith and persuasion,
confidence in prayer, pureness of heart and life, and so of the rest. Do
thou walk thus? Approove thy self in some truth herein. Touching the first, 1
Pet. 3, 21.
S. Peter tells thee, baptism is the answer of a good, that is, an excusing
conscience. What is that? If it be demanded, whether it be broken, humbled,
believing, pardoned? It answers, yea Lord, thou know it. Have thou peace
thereby? Do thou walk with it daily, Romans 5.1.
and nourish it? If so, this peace will be as Armor to thee. Ephesians. 6.15.
Paul, Ephesians. 6.15, calls it the shoes of peace, for as by them our tender
feet walk safely upon the flints, and rocks, and gravel, which else would
cut and wound us: so by peace, we have safety in troubles, count them all joy,
Iam. 1.2
and are not unsettled by them in our course; If so, then also this peace will
rule our hearts and minds: We will be kept in awe by it, that rather than we
would lose and forfeit that, Phil. 4, 7.
we would lose any jewel: so dear it is and so hard to recover. Oh! if so,
then we shall not be moved in all the tumults of this hurrying world, the
malice of Tyrants, the declining of Hypocrites, the great jollitie of
Timeservers, the scuffling for honors and great things: but this peace shall
calm us. Again, if this peace of heart by justification be in us, it will
present us with an holy complacence in our estate, a sweet content in God above
any other object: as one that has found a Pearl, has a fuller contentment,
than in the corn, cattle, and trifles formerly possessed; this comprehends
all and drownes them: And the heart of such a man is at ease, he carries more
about him than they who have large possessions. So, there is not only a
quietness from former war: but an excellent reflection of welfare, such as
was in Adam ere he sinned; and in this, better, that he desires not to change
it for any other. And lastly, to this present sweetness and joy, there is also
afforded to such a soul, an undecaying taste of the glory to come; a lively
hope and waiting for it, as one who has an earnest in hand of a full sum,
waits for that sum to be wholly paid at the day appointed. So is it here.
The peace which works sweetness of spirit for the present, enlarges it self
further, and gives the soul a taste of that eternal joy which it shall
possess hereafter, when it shall put off this corruption, and earthly
tabernacle for one not made with hands.

Heb. 10, 22*
which carry the ship an end. Is it so with thee? Art thou free (in good
measure) from a life of sense, from judging things of God by the outsides?
Can thou rest in this, that although thou neither hear voice from heaven,
nor seeest shape, yet there is a Sun within the clouds? There is a God, and all
the fidelity, truth, and love is still in the promises, which ever was without
shadow of turning. Art thou by this faith, carried above those fears, doubts,
distempers, Romans 5, 2, 3, 4.
which (when the coast was mistie) thou were annoyed with? Walk thou now
with cleerer comfort, joy, and persuasion of Gods love, providence, promises?
Is thy heart as the Arc above the rocks? Genesis 7.10.
Is it far otherwise with thee in the frequencie, the dismalnesse of thy
unbeleefe, than formerly? Are thy buffetings, temptations, lusts, well blown
over? Then hold and nourish this fruit in thee, knowing it is no common thing.
But Oh Lord! where is the man to whom I speak this?

Heb. 12.1. Heb. 12.1.
vexed with the fiery darts of Satan and his noisome buffetings; tossed with
strong lusts: Was the work of God irksome, painful to thee, hardly drawn to
it, soon unsettled? How is it now? 2 Cor. 3.17.
The Spirit of sealing is a free Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.17. The Lord is a Spirit,
where he is there is liberty. Do thou now walk in and out with the Lord as
a son in the house, Luke 1, 6.
well provided for? Rid off thy old chains; enlarged to run the
Commandments of God with cheerfulness. Have thou freedom from thy old
fear? Psalm. 119.32.
Has the Lord both overthrown the court of sin and bad conscience, and all
the officers of it? Can thou meet the Bayliffe securely? Can thou as a
free man, Gal. 5.1.
look upon Satan, hell, death, without horror? Nourish it and be thankful
for it.

Romans 8, 15. Verse 26. Zach. 12.10.
Dare thou call God Father by good proof and trial? Does the Spirit of God
teach thee to pray? Does it purge out thine own spirit of self, of gifts, of
form, and teach thee to pray wisely, with feeling and groaning under thy
corruptions, seeking more mortification of heart and spirit? Art thou so
fervent, and frequent as one that knows his welcome? Can thou lay in daily
for thy self and others? Bless God for thy portion, and prise it.

Deuteronomy. 33.16. Tit. 1.15
and use of all ordinances blessings, and administrations of God toward thee?
Art thou able to say, To the pure all things are pure? Do thou grow more
fruitful and plentiful in holiness, all holy means (meditation, fasting,
conference) holy duties (compassi^n, mercy, love, piety, sobernes,) holy
graces, 2 Pet. 1.5, 8. 2 Pet. 3, ult. 1 Cor. 15, ult.
(as faith, hope, patience?) Do thou add grace to grace, so as thou may
not be unprofitable? but grow, be rooted and settled? still then I say nourish
these. I assure thee, this world is not for such matters; bless him that has
called thee out of it: and in the strength of this seal of Baptism, walk on
(as Elia did) to the mount of God. 1 King. 19, 8. Ephesians. 4, 30.
Grieve not this sweet Spirit by any lusts, or root of bitterness; keep the
world under the girdle of this Spirit, provoke him not to forsake thee, but
having felt his sweetness, let him not depart from thee, till he have
conducted thee into the land of righteousness. And know, if this Spirit be given
thee, thou keep a costly thing, which not all they have (who yet believe) in
this measure: deceave not thy self about it, and if thou have it, nourish it
carefully. For as the traveller, who has nothing to lose, is careless of
thieves; so know, thou that have such a charge, had need be jealous, least
Satan, the world, and thy evil self rob thee of thy treasure. Ephe. 6.18.
And this be said of this 3. general also of the end of Baptism: and so of
the whole doctrine and use of Baptism (the more largely, because I shall touch
it no more, as I purpose to do the other) Oh! how is it to be lamented, that
the knowledge and use of it, is no more understood by our Ministers and people!

CHAP. VI: Of the Supper of the Lord. The description and parts of it. And
first of the Sacramental Acts of it.
I Come now to the Doctrine and discourse of the Supper of the Lord: wherein,
as I foresee, that those things which do peculiarly concern the handling of
it, will take up much more room than the former of Baptism, (as being the
Sacrament of grown ones, and therefore having in it more life for present
administration and use, than the other of Infants:) So also, I see much labor
is spared me in this latter, because of those generals which unavoydably have
been handled in the former; I say so far as those things do agree to the
Supper, subjects only being changed. So far then as ought has been touched
before, of the Order, the Constitution, the Acts, Grace, or Sealing of
Baptism, which may suit and agree with this of the Supper, let none look for
the Repetition of it: only in such grounds, I will content my self to point
to the special application in few words, and dwell the longer upon things,
peculiarly proper to the Supper. And those are these three: The Acts to be
performed; The distinct grace offered in it. The special end of it, which
stands in the sealing power, and the object wherabout its occupied.

Description of it.
The Supper of the Lord then, (to describe it first:) is the second Sacrament of
the Gospel, consisting of Jesus Christ exhibited in the Bread and Wine,
wherein by certain Acts, duly performed about the Elements; whole Christ-body
and Blood is conveyed to the Soul, for the sealing up of her Growth, and
increase in the Grace of the Covenant.

1 Branch, of the order. Use
First, I point in a word at the order. In the first Sacrament, I noted the
impudency of such as will invert Gods order; Now in this I tax the Distrust of
such as profit not by the connection of this to the othet. Who so then have
truly tasted of the Grace of Baptism, and have lain in the womb thereof; Let
them come in, and humbly, yet confidently, plead for the succor of this second.
For the Lord who has no superfluous nourishment for Bastards; yet wants no
necessary relief for sons and daughters. The Lord is not as that worke-man,
who having built the bouse leaves it at Randon to whose will, to mend; it may
drop down to the ground for him, its none of his: But the Lords buildings
are all his own, and he compts it no less perteining to himself to keep it
in Reparations, than first of free grace, to make it an Habitation of his own,
by his Spirit. 1 Pet. 2, 2:
Yea, the newborn Babe, whimpering for the breast; pleads not more
effectually with the tender mothers heart, to give it, than that Soul which is
really bredd the Lords, has liberty to cry, Psalm. 119, 97.
Abba father, sustain me, preserve me: I am thine Lord, save me, maintain
thy lot and portion in me, as by all holy Ordinances of support, so by this thy
Sacrament, as most peculiar to that end. Lord of thee I am, 1 Cor. 1.30. Blood,
Flesh, Bone, all I am, I am from thee: maintain the Creation of thy hands by
all means, against all enemies, in all spiritual welfare and prosperity, meet
for thy glory, and the good of thine, so far as all thy Promises, and
Privileges (belonging to the members of thy Body) can effect it. Remember, it
will be as great a dishonor for thee, to leave the workmanship of thy hands, as
if thou had begun to build and given over thy work at the first.

Secondly, I say, it consists of Iesus-Bread and Wine: 2 Branch, The co^pound.
Sacramental union has been touched already. Here I add, that the Lord
Jesus, who unites himself to his Word of Promise to his Believing ones,
bidding them, Eat good things, and d^light themselves in fatness; Thereby,
Esaias 55.2.
putting into his Word the spirit of nourishment, refreshing, and support to
the Soul, does also unite himself to Bread and Wine, (both Unions are
Spiritual, both Verbal and Sacramental, yet Sacramental including the
Verbal is above it) to convey Spiritual refreshing more fully, more
immediately, more lively into the Soul, than by the former alone. As if he
should say, Oh! poor Soul, I am content to unite my power and fullness of
strenght and comfort, not only to my Word and Promises, but even to my
Creatures also, (and yet think it no abasement neither) for thy good: I know
thou have as great need of a sign of my good will and love to uphold thee, as
ever thou had of my Creating power to form mine Image at the first in thee:
If there were use of both Word and Water to become a seed of Regeneration to
create thee: there is as great use of the same word, and Bread and Wine to
cherish thee. Ephe. 5, 29.
No man ever hated, but preserved his own flesh: To show then how dear thou
art to me (even as the wife to the husband) lo nothing shall ever part thee
and me, which I can do for thee: I that was with the former to breed thee,
will be with the latter to feed and nourish thee: no necessary aid shall be
wanting, Psalm. 84, 1^.
for all ends meet, as well to keep thee fat and wel-liking in goodness, as to
make thee good; I who created thee of nothing, Esaias 57, 1^.
yea of worse then nothing to be mine Image, will not fail of good to make
thee better: therefore acknowledge my love and faithfulness in both.

Against two sorts.
as if the necessity and Sacramental union of one, were not as essential and
thankworthy as the other. Papists first, although they magnify both Sacraments
too far; yet debase the Sacrament of the new birth, under the other, which
they call of the Altar: Here they put all their confidence, and lay all their
treasure; Christ shall not only be united Sacramentally to it, but even
Transubstantiated into it: its their Pandora, to which they have brought all
their base additions to adorn and set it forth: whereas the union with both
these is one and the same for their several use: and if not equal, then none
at all.

The materials of it.
Now I come to the materials: and first of the Elements, to wit, bread and
wine: whereof, because I have spoken somewhat before, therefore here I will
content my self only to treat a little of these four particulars. Four
things.
First, the sensiblenesse. Secondly, the aptness. Thirdly, the simplicity.
Fourthly, the fullness of these two Elements.

The first sensiblenesse.
Touching the first, seeing the Lord would have these Elements so plain and
sensible resemblers of heavenly nourishment, how sensibly should our souls be
lifted up by them to the things resembled?

Moses, Deuteronomy. 8.2.3. etc. tells the Israelits, that the Lord had so palpably
discovered himself to them in the Wilderness, that for shame they could not
but know, believe, and obey him. The Lord (says he) has revealed himself to
all your senses, ye have heard his terrible voice in the mount, ye have seen
the rock gush forth water, a Table spread in the Wilderness; all other
wonders, you have felt him on your feet, your shoes not waxing old; worn him
upon your backs, your apparel not tearing: and shall the Lord be still a
stranger? So I may say here! you grope him, Act. 17, 27,
touch and taste and see him in Sacramental bread, and do ye remain
distrustful?

Objection. But they seem not to have any such power in them.

Answer. They are, I confess, as the craggy hill which Jonathan and his
Armorbearer went up, upon all four, when they were to go fight against the
Philistims. We know what Jonathan said to his servant: Be of good courage, 1 Samuel 14, 1^.
if God give us a sign that our journey is from him, we shall prevail. So I
say, this hill is craggy, and there is small likelinesse of overcomming if we
look to carnal reason: But seeing these Elements or rather the Lord in them,
say to us, Come up, be we of good cheer, believe and go up, the Lord is with
us, and has given us a sign, that we shall prevail, as unlikely things as
these may seem, to resemble and convey Christ our nourishment unto us.

Secondly, as touching the aptness of Bread and wine to exhibit the
nourishment of our Lord Jesus: 2. Aptness.
we may consider how like to himself the Lord Jesus is, both in his word and
seals, rather aiming graciously at the most easy, peculiar way to let in
Christ, than dealing in some dark course, little to the purpose for our good.
He knew it was no easy thing for flesh and blood to be subdued to the Sacrament
of Christ our nourishment: therefore he offers him most aptly and fitly unto
us, that like might carry us to like: As he says, 1 Cor. 14.19. I had rather
speak one word in the Church to understanding and edifying, than 1000. in a
strange language. So, 1 Cor, 14, 19,
the Lord had rather give us one or two signs of our spiritual refreshing,
with propriety and facility, than a 1000. with darkness: And why? because he
knows they are mysteries which he offers both in word and Sacraments. If
then he should speak to us in strange phrases, a far off* or offer us
Sacraments of things intricate and obscure, how should we conceive him when a
dark thing is opened by a darker? 1 Cor. 14, 8.
If the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare to the battle?
Sacraments are Gods legacies: If then wise men would not leave legacies unapt
to their children, as Books to an Idiot, or shop and tools to a Student; but
wife and apt gifts according to the use of such as are to enjoy them, how much
more the Lord?

^ Tim. 3, ult.
Christ incarnate, crucified and ascended, to be the life and support of his
Church. Rather they maintain this principle, That ignorance is the mother of
devotion, and wrap Christ again in his swathe bands of darkness, that no man
may conceive him: yea, when they have so handled the matter, that the people
are carried furthest from Christ, both in doctrine and seals, then are they
quietest and their hearts most at peace. A sign that Satan the God of this
world dwelles among them and keeps all locked up in peace, 2 Cor. 4, 4.
minds, consciences and affections, so that the light of Christ might not
enter, but rather all profaneness, Idolatry might bear sway. As for the
aptness of nourishing Elements, what show is there left in their Sacrament of
their Altar, either in the matter, (which they have taken in part from the
people) or in their administration (which stands in Heathenish obscurities and
rites of no significancy:) or in their scope, (which is to give God a
sacrifice, not to take from him any nourishment.) Therefore let us abhor
them: and both bless God that he has not quite suffered us to be drowned in
their darkness: beseech him to purge us more and more in these ordinances,
and especially grow more capable by them: for if these Glasses will not help
us, we are not dim, but blind.

I proceed to the third, the simplicity of them. 3. simplicity*
We see by what homely naked Elements the Lord Jesus resembles this spiritual
nourishment: not by costly bread, spiced and delicate, nor by compound and
costly drinks (such as some nations, Turkish and others use at this day) such
as might better suit with the palate, than ought else: nor yet with costly
state of Celebration: but homely bread and common wine: yea, and that when the
bellies of the Disciples had been filled. To the hungry and thirsty, meat and
drink is welcome for it self: But our Savior offering these to full stomachs,
would have them to know, that other things were by him intended.

The use is to confute all Popish bravery in the administration of this
Sacrament; their apish ceremonies and tricks used to set forth Gods
materials, as if he were too simple for them: Oh! They must have so many
pompors Rites of Altars, Adoration, Circumgestation, as if Gods naked Elements
were base things. Nay their cursed transubstantiation, as it offends in other
higher respects, especially in turning a base creature into the similitude of
God: and so destroys all Sacramental relation: so also against this in
special, that it destroys the plain homeliness of Gods invention, thinking
that except bread and wine turn flesh and blood, their goodly Idol is
disparaged. An abuse properly to be taxed in this place, for in the other
Sacrament, they maintain no such Transelementation of common water, into the
water or blood of Christ.

Sacrament, and see the Lord Jesus offered under such bare and poor
creatures; that God sets him above all outward glory of the earth, and would
show thee his glorious grace in the true luster thereof, so that no base thing
should eclipse it; Be then, or strive to be as Christ would have thee, wholly
spiritual, Col. 3, 1.
and set thy affections upon thy treasure, where Christ sits: look not upon
the outside, behold not the rags and clothes of Christ risen; Luke 24.5.
but hear the Angel, saying, Behold he is risen, he is not here. That Lord
Jesus whom here thou see in his spiritual grace, far better than any
carnal bravery can express, a naked simple Christ present to the naked,
plain and honest eye of faith: I say, him thou shall one day behold at his
second coming, confounding all the pomp of the world, so that not a stone
shall be left upon a stone. Say with Paul, If I were to know Christ upon
earth, Matthew. 24, 3. 2 Cor. 5, 16.
yet would I not in the flesh.

Fourthly, the fullness.
Fourthly, for the fullness of these Elements. For we see that our Lord Jesus
would separate and sanctify, both as well as one, to typify full nourishment:
Bread is the staff of life; wine the cherisher of the Spirit: Both make full
nourishment, and therefore well succeed the Passover which was wholly to be
eaten or burnt. Exodus 12. Use.
To teach us to abhor that cursed Popish stelth and sacrilege in taking the
Cup from the people, pretending that the other of bread conteines it: For what
is that to us, that God can exhibit the power of both in one? We look in the
Supper, not what his unlimited, but his revealed power is: he will so work by
power as he is pleased, and wills to work not otherwise: Therefore in
reversing the sign, they do quite disanull the Sacrament. Other uses shall be
added when we come to their proper places to treat of the second general,
Christ nourishment: and how we ought to come in the sense and trial of our
wants to the Supper.

Of the acts of the Supper.
Now I come to the outward acts of the Supper. Ere I speak of them in special,
this I add to the former, that all acts and rites of this Sacrament are then
duly performed, not only when persons are duly qualified to give and receive:
but also when the Institution is punctually followed, because that is our Canon
to go by in this kind, which neither Minister nor people must transgress,
either by excess or defect. For if once any liberty be allowed men to chop or
change herein, certainly there is not greater variety in dressing our bodily
diet (each stomach affecting her own way) as there would poove diversity of
fashions in giving and receiving the Sacrament. Therefore one ancient
institution must overrule all persons, times, and administrations. And look
what I said before about the choice of Elements, and such like things: the same
I say of the administration of that Sacrament, that all must fetch their
warrant from hence. I do not mean that each circumstance of action, which our
Savior or the Disciples performed; is necessarily included in the Institution:
No, there may be sundry personal acts done in this or any other service of
God, which when they are done, become worship, and yet are arbitrary to do or
not, as the persons are disposed; only plain and unavoydable respects of
defilements, and true scandal, are to be avoided: But by [Institution] I mean
those essentialls of matter and perpetual rites about it, which our Savior
himself and his Disciples performed. These I affirm are indispensable, both
one and other: It being as sinful to offend in the due form of Baptizing, as
in changing the Element: and so, as unlawful to alter the words of Institution
in giving the Supper, as in changing the Elements, or in taking away their
number. And hence it is that Paul, 1 Cor. 11.20. 1 Cor. 11, 20.
being to correct the foul abuse crept into their Supper, by Love feasts,
calls them to the Institution, wherein seeing no such thing could be seen,
therefore he pares it off as superfluous. In like sort the Church of Christ
has abhorred all such additions of trash and humane invention, as crept in, in
their ages: as Cream, Salt, Oil added to water; detraction of the Cup in the
Supper, disanulling of the union, and turning the material of a Sacrament into
the form, so that there should not be a difference in the thing signifying
and signified: and so at this day we renounce the errors of the Greek Church,
mixing water with wine, and their old abuse of fire in Baptism to mark the
face of the infant: and infinite others of the like sort: some of which defile,
others disanull the Institution, both infringe it. Yea, so solemnly ought the
Institution to be performed, that by virtue of it, other vices and errors of
persons (not so avoydable) are to be tolerated and excused from annulling the
ordinance, though they are foul eye sores. The use whereof is, first, to
prepare way to speak of the several Acts following in this our discourse,
with better savor: to teach us to observe them the more strictly, and to
profit by the use thereof. Secondly, to make conscience, as near as possibly
we may, of the punctual institution of Christ, abhorring all other, as the
way to superstition and confusion: and believing that all the grace and
blessing belonging to the Sacrament (next to the ordeyner himself) depends
instrumentally upon the sacred and inviolable institution of the Lord Jesus.

Now to the particular acts, and first of the Minister, then of the people, to
repeat nothing before said of his qualification; Note, That the Minister being
in Gods stead between him and the people, is to act those, all and only acts
which the Lord Jesus himself did, at the Celebration of the Supper: not as if
he shared with Christ in the power of either ordeyning or sanctifying the
Elements of himself, since all which he does is both in the name of, and for
the use of his Master, for whom he is only to make way in the hearts of the
people: But as a Minister, he is for and in place of Christ himself, Christ
being in him, (or the Father himself in Christ rather) the doer of all, as the
Prophet of his Church. And the acts he is to discharge, are four. Taking,
blessing, Breaking or Pouring out, and Distributing of the signs of both kinds.

1. Taking.
First, touching the taking of the bread and wine, it contains these two
things. First, the culling out or choosing. Secondly, the settling of them
unchangably to their service. For the former, The Lord Jesus, Luke 22.1^.
Luke 22.19.20. took bread, and likewise the cup: that is, out of his
wisdom, he chose out from among all other creatures, these two, bread and
winee, to decipher the spiritual nourishment of his body and blood: so that by
this choice, they have the prerogative to do that which no other creature
besides may. 2. things. 1. Separation from common use.
Now in such as choice, there must be a separation of Elements from their
dishonor to honor: From baseness and vileness to glorious use: for what
comparison is there between earth and heaven, the common creature in daily
use, taken from the Bakers basket or the cellar; and the heavenly body and
blood of the Lord? What shall then reconcile these? Surely the divine power of
Christ: he must take off the common and base clothing of it: and as it is
said of Iehoshua (for the typifying of the more honorable ministry of Christ
above the legal) that his filthy rags should be taken off, and goodly pure
garments put upon him: so here, Zach. 3, 4^
the Lord takes off the cold coat of the creature, serving for all sorts, at
all times, for corruptible or corrupt uses, so that (for the time being which
it serves for) is is sacrilegious to conceive or use it for private uses: (as
its said, 1 Samuel 2, 13.
El^'s sons thrust their forke into Gods Caldron and pulld out holy meat for
themselves) but it is separate from men; its Gods bread and wine for his own
table and use.

Secondly, the Lord clothes them with honor: he brings them into his own
house, and ordeynes them to be vessels of use for himself. Not that this
separation takes any thing from the natures of the creatures: nor yet that it
puts any inherent holiness into them: No, but only takes them from common
use, and puts them to an honorable and holy. And yet this must not be
conceived in a general sense only; as if there were no more in it, than in
other creatures made pure to the beleeeer: For so each creature is pure to the
pure: Tit. 1.15.
purified from the usurpation and curse, and sanctified by the Word and Prayer,
to convey love from the giver, and to prepare the receiver for his service: But
this is a further holiness, such an one, as, though it be not inherent, yet
it is real and in relation to the use the Elements serve for; it is a
clothing of honor and holiness during the season of it, and that by virtue
of Christ, who has stamped it upon them by his own hand.

Secondly, the Lord Jesus by taking, has settled an abiding service upon these
Elements: 2. Settling.
such as no mortal man might dare to reverse or deface, adulterate or change.
For why? Who is able to amend the work of God, or to add to the work of
perfection it self? This separation being in a sort as the work of Creation:
which God seeing, approoved as good, and not to be bettered: and therefore to
last and abide for all ages. So that cursed be he who shall meddle with this
holy workmanship of Christ: His seals are in this as his word is, outlasting
and outliving the devises of men; through all generations, and abiding for
ever. Chosen they were by the hand of a dying Savior, yet immortal; and
therefore no hand shall ever be able to abolish them: If any shall add or
diminish from them, the Lord shall diminish their names from the book of life;
and add unto them all the plagues written in his book against all
sacrilegious thieves or usurpers in holy things. But more in the use.

Of the former branch.
when we behold what cost God has bestowed upon base creatures for our good:
when Naomi saw Ruth come home full of the bounty of Boaz, she asked her, Where
have thou bin my daughter? Ruth 3, 16.
One cause of her joy was, because she should fare the better for her daughters
change: So, there is no good soul which sees this cost bestowed by the Lord
upon these Elements, how he separates the vile, and puts on a precious garment
upon them; but he should rejoice therein for the good of his own soul, and
say, Lord I see this creature clothed with honor, that it might carry him who
so clothed it, into my soul, and put on the Lord Jesus upon me the more
easily, in all the riches of his attire, in all the fullness of his grace and
nourishment: I see no use the creature has of it, but that all the excellent
Nourishment which it resembles, might be laid as by an hand in my lap. The
Disciples who saw their master usually converse with them in his poverty and
baseness, no doubt were ravished, when they beheld him transfigured and
glorious: Matthew. 17.4. Heb 2.9. Ephe. 4.8.
Oh! they said, Its good being here, they were loath to depart: so may we say
with the Author to the Hebrews; Behold we see Christ who was base, now in
glory, leading captivity captive, giving gifts unto men: yea so glorious, that
he chooses rather to appear in the honoring of poor Elements, than he would
be wanting to us. Abroad we see these creatures not only subject to vanity in
their use, but also abused by sinful wretches to corrupt and base ends: but
when we come to the Sacrament, lo there we see them clothed with honor and
set apart to heavenly ends: such as no drunkard, Epicure, swearer, or carnal
minded person (though he prease to the Sacrament never so boldly) can atteyne
unto; There they only serve to reach out Christ the nourishment of his Church;
they cease there to be perishing, and begin to be meat and drink of eternal
life. How should we bless God for them? When Bezaleel and Aholiab were endued
with gifts from heaven, to carve and ingrave wood, brass and gold in a curious
manner; Exodus 31, 4, ^
who could have beheld a piece of rude wood or metal, a little before common
and mish apen, but now curiously set forth with pictures and delights, serving
for the Tabernacle and the honor of God directly; but he must needs adore the
wisdom of that Arch-workman, who by such mean men could put such honor upon
such poor creatures? Labor we to do likewise when we see what power the
Lord shows forth by his weak Ministers, and in his weak Elements, and draw
near to them with more delight.

viz. their Books, Bells, Candles, Relics, Cream, Oil, Salt, Spittle, and
stuff not of Christ's, but their own separation? So much of the former branch.

Use of latter branch.
Touching the latter, let it be a comfort to all Gods people to consider the
perpetuity of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, the nourishment
of his Church. So long as Christ Jesus shall have a Church, till he drink this
Passover in his heavenly kingdom with them, he will see these holy signs
(separated by himself to holy use) to abide therein: for he has settled them
upon it for ever. What persecutions what confusions of Popery, what malice of
enemies could ever prevail these 1600. years, to rob the Church hereof? As
Iachin and Boaz abode while the Temple stood: 1 King. 7, 21.
so these two Pillars of Gods Sacraments shall never cease, till the ordeyner
of them shull come to judgment! They may be eclipsed, the light, purity of
administration defiled, and for a time sundry corruptions of men may be
permitted by Gods providence to pester the Church: but none of all these
changings of the Sacrament into a Masse-sacrifice, none of their pollutions and
superstitions brought in and obtruded upon the Church, shall prevail. That
settled separation of our Lord Jesus, shall give life to the Sacrament; and as
the Church her self, Micah. 7.8. Micha. 7, 8.
says to those Babylonians, Rejoice not over me O mine enemy, for when I am
fallen I shall ris^: Then shall she who upbrayded me see it, and tremble, and
be trodden down as the mire of the streets: So may the Sacrament of Christ
triumph over all popish enemies who set up a sign of contradiction against
her, Mass and Altars and other defilements; Rejoice not over me, for I shall
see thy ruin: the life of Christ's ordinance shall give me a rising and
recovery, and I shall say, Where is now your mouth that scorned the Sacrament,
where is your God of bread become? Oh! one day the Lord Jesus shall consume
your trash with the breath of his mouth, Revel. 11,
and then his own Sacrament and all his holy ordinances shall be set up in
their purity, when all humane scurfe shall breathe his last, and say, Thou have
overcome Oh Lord! thy truth and ordinance have prevailed.

to take the materials himself at the entrance of separation, and thus to
separate them by virtue of the ordinance; not to leave it to his Sexton or
Clerk to fetch from the Tavern as he list, and power out at his pleasure;
Better is an overplus than a defect in this behalf. And for the first act,
thus much.

The second act of the Minister about the materials, 2. Act of the Minister,
blessing.
is blessing them: for so our Savior Luke 22.19. Luke 22, 19.
is said to do ere he brake them. Still I must put in this, that the Minister
of himself can do nothing: (oftentimes he is far from being blessed
himself) but the obedience to the institution does it. Now by blessing is
meant sanctifying: What it is? Sanctifying.
the word being taken from the ordinary manner of the Jews in their feasts and
meals, whose graces were called blessings, because the first word of them was,
1 Cor. 10, 10.
Blessed be God who causes bread to grow out of the earth, and who gives wine
out of the grape, etc. From hence our Savior is said to bless bread and wine
(though in another form, and to an higher end, yet in general) as in the use
of the creatures. And the truth is, whosoever they be that dare come near the
Table of the Lord, and the blessing of the Minister, being privy of ordinary
using the creatures without blessing, are fit to be quite excluded from this
Sacrament. Remember the phrase of this blessing issued from that.

Now besides this blessing, although it properly denote Thanks, yet it
includes prayer also: First by Prayer.
Both make up the blessing of the Sacrament. Our manner at this day is to say,
We give thanks: not as if we did nothing else, or as if prayer were inferior
to it; but so the use of speech has prevailed. First then our Savior prayed,
and secondly praised and gave thanks to his Father, and in both stood this
second act of blessing. He was in this his act subject (as mediator) to his
Father, and so acknowledged no less, viz. That look what he did, he did
deputedly from him as the chief Agent in the sanctifying of the Sacrament. And
even so is the Minister much more to do in his stead: not to arrogate to
himself Popishly this power, but to abase himself to the lowest earth, as a
worm creeping out of her hole, when he lifts up his heart in this kind to the
Lord, in the behalf of the Church, for a blessing upon the Sacrament. Its
far from him or his intention, to make or not to make the Sacrament, it
depends upon an higher power. For in this case without question, the greater is
blessed of the lesser, to wit, instrumentally.

For the former of these two, viz. our Saviors prayer: its not to be wondered
at, that its a part of this blessing. For why? Why?
It was put up to his Father, to the end that he would give his solemn consent
to it, and by his word establish it to be a Sacrament. Even our blessing the
creatures is by applying the strength of the Word; Matthew. 4.4.
for man lives not by bread, but by each word of God. So that our Savior here
craveth a word from his Father, 1 King. 8.22.
for the blessing of this Ordinance. Solomon when he consecrated the Temple:
what did he? Applied a word by Prayer unto it: Thou O Lord art so great, that
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee: yet thou have said, I will dwell in
this house, and make it a place of my residence: Oh! be it so? Verse. 27. Matthew.
12.42.
Now although a greater than Solomon be here, yet lo, as being now deputed by
his Father to this great work, he beggeth from him, to set his (Fiat) to this
his act of Institution. As if he should say, Father its not of my self, as
man: but from thee and thy command, I thy righteous servant have separated
these Elements: Esaias 42.1.
Oh Father then, as the chief ordayner, show that I have done nothing rashly
and without thee in this attempt!

Conteines 4. things.
But more fully to speak of this Prayer of Christ, it conteines these four
things in it. Ioh. 17.22.
so declare; that look what I upon earth have done, that thou have ratified in
heaven: let not thine elect make any question, but that its thy will as well as
mine, that these Elements be sanctified for such use. Solomon in that his
prayer begs, Oh Lord, since its thy will to dwell in this house which I have
built, 1 Kin. 8.28.
therefore I beseech thee show it by real effects: Whenever thy people shall
be hemmed in by their enemies, be afflicted with famine, pestilence, sword, or
whenever they shall pray for any good thing: Oh Lord! look down from
heaven, and let it be enough that thy people look toward this house: Oh then
meet them, and bless them! So our Savior here: Oh Father, I know thou hear
me always, and by name in thy consent to this separation of the Sacrament. But
Lord, show it both at this time to my disciples, and for ever to the end of the
world. Let them not look toward this ordinance in vain, but put the savor and
foyson of thy Sons grace, strength, and refreshing into them; that they may
actually confer upon all hungry believing souls, my righteousness of
satisfaction, and sanctification of merit in the one, 1 Cor. 1, 30. Exodus, 20.1.
and efficacy in the other, to sustain them and increase their comfort, both
in their reconciliation and holiness, as the need of each requires.

this first suit with his Father, to the uttermost, that he would apply the
power of his death and blood to his Word preached, and Sacraments ministered in
his Church; so that no opportunity is now wanting to second this blessing: do
not fear least God should have forgot this old prayer, for with him two
thousand years is as one day: ^ Pet. 3, 8.
But say it were not so; yet we have an Advocate daily to put him in mind of
each occasion. Ioh. 11, 42.
So that if the Lord Jesus be all-way heard, when he prays, its well for us,
though old suits might be forgotten which is impossible.

But alas alas! The cold comfort we feel by the Sacrament is the fruit of our
little denying our selves, cleaving to the Prayer and the Promise, This is my
welbeloved, etc. If Iohoshaphat could so confidently go to God, 1. Chro. 20, 9.
so long after Salomons blessing the Temple, pleading to be heard; how much
more thou in the prayer of the Lord Jesus? Did not Rebecca and Jacob laugh and
take courage (think we) when they heard Isaac tell Esau, Genesis 27, 33.
That Jacob was already blessed, and should be so? Why do thou not laugh then
to hear a greater and surer blessing from Christ? Why go thou out of this
Blessing and Promise, into thine own warm Sun, to compass thy self with thy
own sparkles? Esaias 50, 11.
Think thou it is with this great Master of Requests, as at the Court, that
many requests may be made, ere one granted? No, no, The Lord heard his Son in
his fears, much more his desires: bring thou faith and fear not to receive a
Sacrament under such a blessing* as the Prayer of Christ lies in pawn to
procure. Heb, 5, 7.
Let thy heart be never so hard, Lam. 3, 17.
empty, barren and far from prosperity: if thou come in faith, the blessing
is thine. Its noted by the Evangelist, That when Christ prayed, Ioh. 12, 28.
Glorify thy name, etc. answer was made, I have glorified it, and will
glorify it again. Our Savior tells his disciples, This was for their sakes.
If thou can by the ear of faith, hear this voice, it belongs to thee.

Genesis 18.27.
even as dust and ashes, when they come to ask the blessing of God upon this
or other Ordinances at the hands of God. If a man having many children,
especially his eldest Son and heir so obedient and loyal, that he never
asks any boon of his Father, but thee comes in great honor and reverence to
ask it; Will not this teach all the rest (except Impes and degenerate) to be
much more so? Behold here thy elder Brother, the Lord Jesus, Lord of all, yet
subject and begging every thing he needs, not for himself, but for his Church:
and shall it not smite into thee one of the basest of all the family of God,
much more humbleness in thy prayers?

Hezekiah, The good Lord accept me, Chro. 30, 18, 19.
though no way prepared according to the preparing of the Santuary. Isaac bids
Jacob, come near my son, that I may feel and know if thou be indeed my
son Esau; Gen, 27, 28.
and so coming in his linen and roughness, he took him to be so, and
blessed him. Do thou so and prosper.

no ears to hear such a voice, but are mere patients in the Sacrament. And
therefore we abhor that Popish turning of the Priest from the people to the
signs, as a base enchanting ceremony; fitter to work a blind and carnal
devotion in a superstitious heart, than a sensible reverence and holy
confidence of a believing soul. For the latter, observe that our Savior
begges for no inherent holiness to be put into the Signs, save only a
conveying isntrumental holiness, that the Lord would vouchsafe to use them to
the ends of a Sacrament: that is, to make dumb, seely creatures (incapable of
any real grace) to carry real holiness into the souls and spirits of
believers, only capable thereof? Much less then did he, either by these or
those five (as they misreckon) Transubstantiate them into his body. When God
blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it: Did he infuse holiness into the day?
Are days, garments, vessels, houses capable of inherent holiness? No, its
enough they attend holy things: and ought therefore decently to be kept:
otherwise neither are they holy inherently; nor yet actions and things
therefore holy, because there done; but because they are so in their nature and
institution.

I hasten to the latter branch of his thanks. Thanks Thanks.
is the second branch of Christ's blessing: And so of the Ministes act in the
consecration of the Sacrament. We have to note that thus it was in other
blessings. Why joined with Prayer.
When Solomon dedicated the Temple, one branch of it was solemn thanksgiving
to God that had ratified his word and promise, 1 King. 8, 24.
enabled Solomon to perfect the temple, and made good that which he had spoken.
The ascent of thanks is so great a glorifying of God, that commonly it becomes
a rich descent of blessing. And when prayer is offered to God without thanks,
its no sign that the soul fastens upon God for the granting of those things
which have bin desired. But our Savior here, having had a commission from his
Father to ordain the Sacrament, takes it for granted, that he was heard by
him in this his request for sanctifying thereof to his Church: and therefore,
together with the prayer does also here annex his thanks for answer. Prayers
and praises ought ever to attend each other, especially for things formerly
received, that by the experience of former answer from God, God, our hearts
might not be to seek of confidence and hope for the present, and for time to
come. For sure it is, our self-love does so sway us in seeking what we would
still get, that the acknowledgement of what we have already enjoyed from God,
is forgotten. Nay rather, even while they pray for blessing from God upon any
of his Ordinances, or otherwise, it is our duty even then to give thanks, so
far as ws feel our selves to have praid in faith, and in the name of Christ:
for faith in a manner presents the thing (which we do warrantably seek)
unto us: And although I grant such a blessing may actually be denied us, yet
our thanks shall return (in such a case) into our bosoms, and shall be
accepted of God.

But in this case of our Lord Jesus, and his thanks, Causes of his Thanks
Three. The first cause Ioh. 11, 41.
the case is altered: for he gave thanks in assurance of being heard, and
upon promise thereof from his Father, without fail: and therefore he might
with more confidence offer up thanks even with prayer. Sometimes it so fares
with his members, that even in the act of prayer, the Lord intimates their
spirit, that they have prevailed: as we read that some of the Martyrs had a
kind of prophetical spirit given the^, so that some things which God had
enabled them to ask in full assurance of faith, they received an answer from
God, that they were granted; and therefore their prayers commonly brake out
into praises, and themselves wrote and spoke of those blessings as present,
though there were some years still to come, ere performed. And no doubt such
cases fall out still in the experience of such as are nearly acquainted with
God, and strong in faith, that they have answer with Jacob, they have
prevailed, even in their wrestlings: and therefore what doubt is there, Genesis
32, 28.
but that then, Thanksgiving should be answerable?

his Father and from himself so to attend it, that it might never be absent
from it, in the matter of union Sacramental, and further in point of true
sanctification of it to all his members, to the end of the world, who should
come in faith and repentance to receive it. Its not under a desired blessing
only, but a granted one, acknowledged, and therefore assured. Oh! that any
should come with a drooping and sad heart, doubtful, and staggering to that
Ordinance, upon which at the first institution, so great a handsell of grace
was bestowed, and a promise of so great future blessing granted.

The second cause.
A second cause of his Thanks was, for that he foresaw, even now at his death
and departure shortly from the earth, that his Father would not suffer the
memory of his satisfaction and death to be razed out: but eternize it as a
lasting monument in his Church. He foresaw that infinite honor and glory
which he should receive as a perpetual tribute from his thankful Church,
and what praise the Father by him should obtain at the hands of the faithful,
for the continuing of so lively, powerful a memorial of his death, and
perfect Sacrifice offered to God for the sins of the Elect. The foresight
hereof, that his Death should be a lasting Monument of himself, and a mean of
perpetual honor to the Father, through him, was another Branch of his
blessing of the Sacrament. Oh! when he saw, God and himself had blessed it
with their presence for ever, and that no enemy shoud prevail against it; Esaias
55, 13. Esaias 66.23.
but that as Esaias 55. ult, it should be an everlasting Name not to be
forgotten, and as Esaias ult. it should be a daily Sacrifice from Sabbath to
Sabbath to the worlds end; that it should prevail against the gates of hell,
ignorance, and superstition, attend the Gospel for ever as a Seal of the
Promise: and finally survive all base Pillars and Monuments of profaneness and
Idolatry. Oh! these things caused him to raise up his heart to his Father in
thanks, and therewith to be rapt up to bless his Name, and to set his Seal to
the Sacrament. Be it so Oh Father; and be pleased to confirm this grant, and I
in thy Name do bless and hallow these Elements to be such memorials for ever.

Sacrament, but to look up to God in his blessing of the Lord Jesus, and to
beseech him that it may be so continued: and to purge out from his Church in
all kingdoms that detestable Idol of the Mass, that it may not stand up as a
sign of contradiction, against this faithful witness of God: that the Lord
would not so lay to his heart this our profanation of his Sacrament as to
remoove it from us, and bestow it upon a people which should honor him with
better fruit of it. Oh! how have we in England of a long time played the
Harlots, and after this 60. or 70. years of the Sacrament, waxen weary of it,
and when any occasion of a Mass has been offered, ran by troops unto it, as
glutted with this Manna from heaven; how have we lain heavy upon the stomach
of God by this our transcendent abomination, and excommunicate thing,
deserving that the floudgates of all Popish trash should be let in upon us; and
the Gospel, Ordinances, and communion of Saints quite defaced, and sent into
another world from us: That, I say, either the possession, or the power of them
should for ever be pulled from us. Let so many as are free from this contagion,
still keep their garments unspotted, Revel. 14.4.
and still beg of God that the blessing once obtained by Christ upon the
Sacrament may be still granted, that in spite of all Popish pollutions, Christ's
Supper may be kept pure in the Church for a Seal to his Covenant, and for the
glory of the Father through the Lord Jesus.

A third, and last cause was, The view of that unspeakable Grace which the
whole Militant Church should reap by it: The third cause.
That good which he foresaw the Sacrament should do, caused him to break out
into this blessing. And to set his Seal unto it to the same purpose: That as
his Father had granted it to such an end, so himself also blessed it; as if he
said, Go my blessed Ordinance, be the Legacy of my Church, and seeing the
Father has made thee an instrument of so endless comfort, and strength to the
weak souls of my people; take my blessing also with thee; Lo, I am now
offering up my body and life upon the Cross, and I convey by them all the
merit and power thereof to the hearts of my people, when, and where, and how
often soever they shall partake it. It is no question, but that our Lord Jesus
mourned in Spirit also, to behold the errors, and infinite abuses both of
doctrine and practice which should ensue in the Church, through Popish
corruption, and base customs and profane unreverence of men; yet all this
hinders not his Thanks for the blessed fruit of the Sacrament.

Debora, Judge. 5, 9.
Judge. 5. and say, I rejo^ce for the people of Gods welfare, and for those that
came in faith, and departed from the Congregation with comfort. Their good
should be our joy. This is the fellowship in graces which the Church of God
has one with another: to rejocye with them that rejoice, and to mourn with
them that mourn. Both are parts of Christian sympathy. What Christian soul,
what true Minister of God is there, who should not seek to thrust from this
holy banquet, Jude 1^.
all profane and brutish ones, spots of Assemblies, eyesores to the godly, and
the reproach of Gods Sacraments? And who is there, who seeing such intrude
themselves, should not mourn for their own, and the lot of the Church, who
must be pestred with such? Oh! what a quayling it is to our joy to behold what
coruptions and corrupt ones hang upon these Ordinances? And so much for the
second act of blessing.

The third Sacramental act of Christ and the Minister, The third act. Breaking.
is the breaking and pouring out the Bread and Wine. In the opening hereof,
mark two things: First, the order of it: Secondly, the Act it self. For the
first, Why did Christ first bless, then break and power out? Answer, That he
might resemble the order of his own satisfaction. For first he was anointed
or qualified in his person to satisfy, set apart and sanctified to it; and
then he was Sacrificed: to have separated or blessed them after the work of
the Cross performed, had been needless: and so, to have been first
crucified, ere blessed and called, had been Sacrilegious. Even so here in the
Elements; resembling his separation and death.

But for the act it self, consider two things: first, Two things in it. 1.
What it was?
What was it? Why was it? For answer to the first; The breaking of Christ was a
taking of the loaf, and a breaking thereof with his holy hands into gobbets
and morsels meet for his disciples; not minsing the bread, and cutting it with
a knife into small bits, nor yet into overgreat pieces, but I say into morsels
competent. I do not quarrel with the custom of cutting with the knife: for
(as I said before of sprinkling the water, so I say of this) I disanull not the
Ordinance thereby: yet still I say, I would rather choose to cleave to the
institution in so plain an act of our Savior, if it may conveniently be done,
than to balcke it. And the rather, because it may savor of some Popish
niceness: For as they wear white gloves when they meddle with the Elements,
and touch them not with their bare hands, pretending more reverence to be in a
beasts skin, than a man's naked hand; so some think it too homely perhaps to
break the bread with their hands, in comparison of cutting it with a knife. To
such I say, that they are too nice herein; and the institution of Christ much
more to be followed; the Minister himself breaking it, and no leaving it (as
sometimes is used) to the Clarke or Sexton to be done.

2. Why was it?
Secondly, why was it? I answer, for sundry causes: first, to parallel the
Sacrifice of the Passover, (a type of Christ's Supper,) which was to be slain,
and the blood of it sprinkled about: Ioh. 10, 18.
when as else none could have taken it from him: for when his apprehendors were
cast upon the earth, then did he yield himself to their hands: Zach. 13.1.
but now set open for the Church. This Reason I would have well noted. No other
way, but to be broken, could make him meat and drink indeed. The Butt of
wine in the Celler has wine of excellent quality in it self, but except it be
broached, none can be the better for it. Hence the Church in the Canticles
cries out, Cant. 1, 3.
Thou art as an ointment powered out; in the savor of thy ointments we will
follow thee. Ioh. 12, 2.
As that box of ointment, John 12.2. which was broken upon him, and powered out
upon him, so that all the house smelt of it. Hence the holy Ghost especially
dwells upon his pouring out of his soul unto death: his being broken for our
transgressions, Esaias 53, 12. Romans 3.25.
and other the like phrases there, Esa^ 53. And Saint Paul dwells upon his
bloodshed, Romans 3.25. ane in twenty other places; to show that nothing but
death could make us the better for him, either in pardon or Sanctification: No
incarnation of his, no Innocence, Miracles, no Compassion, Tears, Love,
Reproaches, Preaching, Prayers without his being broken, could make him useful
to us.



John 19, 36.
Not a bone of him should be broken? Answer:

an whole unbroken Element, made of a fine delicate wafer, round and whole: And
as for pouring out the wine to the people, they never power out, nor allow any
at all unto them, but keept it quite from them. Thirdly, they profess not to
act the part of the Father, reaching out the broken body of Christ to his
people: but their Priest sustaines rather the person of a false Church, and an
Idolater, to offer up to God a Sacrifice of Christ, for expiation: destroying
the power of Christ our only Oblation, offered by himself, never more needing
to be offered. And whereas we press this argument against them, they fly to a
shift which overthrowes their cause, saying, They offer an unbloudy sacrifice
in their Mass, not bloody as that of the Cross. In all three respects, being
the most woeful enemies of the Sacrament.

How Papists enemies to a broken Christ
For first, they act it as a thing of mirth, not as a broken Christ: secondly,
they neither break nor power out to the use of the Congregation: thirdly, they
profess to have so little need, that God should give them his broken Son,
that they bid him take him back to himself, for they care not for him; nay,
they give him back with a mocking of God, and say, they offer him an unbloudy
Christ and unbroken: whereas its sure, if the Lord Jesus had done so, he had
blasphemed and not satisfied. Heb. 9, 22.
Cursed be all new offering of a Christ, as a propitiatory Sacrifice to God; or
offering of a Christ without blood. Thou shall as soon satisfy wrath by thy
own, or by an Angels, or Saints Prayers, as by a Christ unbroken and unbloudy.
A Christ neither broken nor bloody, is an Idol, nothing in the world, neither
meet to satisfy, nor to nourish. So that, forasmuch as the Church of Romes
Sacrament is a Christ no Christ; no price, no pardon, no peace, reconciliation,
or eternal life, is to be found there: We beseech God for ever to deliver us
from her, and our selves depart from her as a fatal enemy and destroyer of the
Sacrament of the Supper.

For what communion can be between light and darkness, Christ and Belial? 2
Cor. 6.16.
The very Sacramental acts alone, require holiness of all that thus draw
near unto God, least he be revenged of their profaning his Ordinance: And how
careful should the Minister be himself to act this breaking, and pouring out,
not leaving it to another: since thereby the voluntary Act of the Lord Jesus
is obscured: he himself still freely giving himself by the only hand of his
deputed Minister?

Exhort. to diverse things.
and under such powerful signification. That whereas we come to the Supper for
our nourishment and growing in faith, and gracc in Christ: Lo, the Lord offers
these under the lively s^^nes of the Lord Jesus himself, and not only so, but
cruci^^d and broken and powered out for us, even meet nourishment, meet to be
apprehended by us in the act of his suffering, to secure us of our
justification by removing of wrath; in the act of his preparedness to nourish
us, by cutting himself out into morsels for us? Oh! what life and sap is
there in a Sacrament, so offered to a poor soul, as crucifying Christ before
our eyes, and giving him so, into our hands? What thanks should this draw from
us? If Esaias, Chap. 63.1. could in the meditation of this point, so many hundred
years before, Esaias 63, 1.
ravish his heart, how much more we? How should the instruments of our souls
peace with God, and welfare in him, cause us to cry out as he did, Who is he
that comes up from Bozrah in his red garments; be sprinkled with the wrath of
God upon soul and body, by agonies, desertions, outcries, and dolors
incomprehensible under that justice and wrath, the winepresse and fierceness
whereof he trod? And although he thereby was powered out to death, yet he so
trod out that wrath that it shall never seize after upon a believing soul; Oh!
not only to think of this (as Esaias did) a far off, but to behold the very
thing in the Sacrament, in a broken, powered out bloody Sacrifice, made ready to
our hand, both to forgive, refresh, and revive the assurance of both to our
souls, what thanks and joy should it breed in us? How should it magnify the
power of the death of our Lord Jesus in us? He himself was wholly taken up in
the joy of it (as bitter as it was) and shall not we? Ioh. 12, 24, 25.
Read Ioh. 12.24.32. when some Greek Proselites preassed to have a sight of
him two or three days ere his suffering, he pulls them to behold him dead, not
alive: Except the wheat corn fall and die, it abides alone: If I be lifted
up, I will draw all unto me; meaning by the word and Sacraments of this
Passion. And shall not these ravish us much more?

Zech. 12.10. Zach. 12, 10.
They shall see him whom they have pierced, and mourn, and be in bitterness,
as one, for his only Son. I exhort none to whip themselves for Christ, (for
woe be to such as mourn for him whom they should rejoice in.) No, no, weep for
your selves: Come eat this Passe-over with^^wre herbs, Exodus 12, 8.
and behold your selves in this Sacrament, who brake, rent, and powered out the
heart-bloud of the Lord Jesus to the earth. Truly, if thou be not sensible of
this thy sin, and broken for breaking the Lord Jesus, thou art a Cain to this
Abel, Genesis 4.10.
and his blood shall cry for vengeance against thee. Hearken to the voice of
Justice, crying out, Either rend this sinful cursed soul in pieces for her
hypocrisy, infidelity, profaneness; or tear the flesh of thy Son for him.
Ask, oh Lord! why should not I have been torn and broken rather for my own
sin? But thou have laid the iniquity of me upon him: Oh! how I am stung for
the cause? Therefore I mourn, not because thou did spare me, and lay my guilt
upon him, but because I was that spear, those nails that brake his holy hands
and sides, Oh! How few come into the Congregation thus abased? Behold thy own
just destiny in the broken body of Christ, and mourn. Oh, thus my pride,
hollownesse, worldliness had handled me, if the Lord Jesus had not stepped in!
Moderate that frothy lightness of spirit, which beholds Christ in the
Sacrament, as an object of all joy and mirth. Oh! Let it be thy sadness first,
and thy gladness after. If the sight of a Page being beaten for a Prince, will
cause the Prince to mourn, and see his error in the Pages strokes: what shall
the Page do then when he sees the Prince smitten for his prankes? Oh! such a
broken heart would make Christ sweet in the Sacrament, such a mourning would
bring joy. For why? As thou should have suffered unsatisfyingly, except
Christ had satisfied: So, he having freely broken himself for thee, has
prevented thy breaking, and caused thee to bless him, and say, Oh! because
thou have delivered me from this anguish, I will take up the cup of salvation
and praise thee, Thou stepst in, Oh Lord (when Angels durst not) between wrath
and my soul, Psalm. 116.13.
that the snare being broken, I might escape.

Two things. 1 Order.
that all true right to the Lord Jesus his nourishment to thy soul in renewed
grace, Spirit of prayer, of uprightness, watchfulness, bearing the Cross
well, issues from thy renewing of faith in his reconciliation and forgiveness.
If thou have lost thy peace by an ill conscience, beware thou come not first to
the Sacrament to fetch strength to return to thy former course of walking with
God, till first thy pardon and peace be renewed; that were to soder, not to
mend thy breach: yea, it were to dawbe with untempered mortar. Christ is first
broken as a satisfier of wrath; and then as a nourisher of a poor empty soul.

Touching the second, Learn to apply the Lord Jesus broken in the Sacrament
for thee, in a confident manner. 2 Act.
If he have been really thine, broken for thy renewed pardon, yea, the oftener
the better; lay thy soul in the clift of this Rock, Exodus 33, 32.
get thy self into his wounds, and lie in his sides, and thence shall thou
draw nourishment to sustain thee, whence thou drewest strengh to make thy
peace. This broken Christ, his blood, his pouring out, contains both thy peace
and thy grace; and by an inseparable union of the Spirit is given for both.
Less than the blood of Christ dead upon the Cross could not save thee; and
less, than it can not restore any grace of his Spirit decayed in thee, as the
Spirit of prayer, watching, soberness, heavenlinesse of heart. But if the
Sacrament have revived the one, fear not, the other will follow. There is a
knot of unions in Sacramental broken Christ, get one, and get both: faith will
teach thee how to get both; and does sweetly claspe with Christ for welfare in
both. Touching the substance of which, I speak less here, because I shall
handle it in the second general head of the grace offered in this Sacrament.

Esaias 61, 3.
and the sweet fruit of righteousness and patience, more sweet, than the
trouble was grievous. These the Sacrament does confirm and settle the soul in
daily, if Christ broken be wisely applied and put on by faith. To conclude
all, I say, if the Lord Jesus Sacramental, be a broken Christ, for all uses:

Christ had never dyed nor Sacrament ever been offered them. For they are
still the same, neither good day mends them, nor bad payres them, for any
pardon or grace that ever Christ broken could yet help them withal. But for
the third Act, thus much.

Now the fourth and last ministerial act of the Supper, The fourth Act. The
distributing.
is the distribution of it to the people, with a charging them to receive it as
from God. For its expressly added that our Savior having taken, blessed and
broken the Elements, did give them himself to his Disciples. He called them
not about him, and suffered them to serve themselves of them, but dealt out
both Bread and Cup to each of them, and susteyning a double person both of the
divider, and of the thing divided, charged them each and all to receive and
apply them, as the offer of God. And to say truth, to what end served the
former acts, save for this last? Touching the several distribution of Christ,
I do not think that he did severally give it to the person of each disciple
immediately; but that reaching out the several morsells, he gave personally to
them who were nearest, and so by them, he conveyed it to the remotest sitter,
till all were served. And this he did, not only in the bread but in the Cup
also, as Saint Luke does particularly mention, and so the other, 1 Cor. 11.21.
Luke 22.20.
and Paul 1 Cor. 11. expresses.

Now in this last act, I consider two things. Two things here.
First, personal. Secondly peculiar application of the Sacrament. For the
former, he would intimate thus much, 1. For personal application.
that the Minister in his reaching out the Elements to each receiver, is the
hand of the Father, applying the Christ of the whole Church, to such a man, and
such a woman in person. And as each communicant susteines a double person,
either of membership as he is belonging to the whole body, or of person, as he
is to answer for himsefe to God: so in the former respect he communicates no
other Christ than the Christ and head of the body: and so calls God our Father,
and Christ our Christ, seeing he has no right to any Christ, save in the
Communion of Saints: By virtue of which, he approves himself to be a true
member of the body, clayming no right to Christ otherwise than the Christ of
his whole militant Church. But in the second respect, as each person or
believing receiver, stands in his own place, and receaves special grace for
himself, so he calls God my Father, and Christ my Christ: and therefore comes
not to receive any implicit Christ, John 10.28.
or as the Church receives him; but comes to receive him for himself in
person, for his own pardon, assurance, peace, support: and so his own as no
man's else. Each Christian has Christ in a community, because a branch cut off
from the stock is but dead, John 15, 6.
and the Legacy of Christ Sacramental is not given to a member, but to the
body, that so it may aptly and fitly be derived out into portions. As of many
grains one loaf is framed, 1 Cor. 10.17.
and whole Christ is given to the whole body: so also of this loaf the Lord
cuts out here one morsel there another, for each members several use, which
perhaps is not another. The arm in the body has no nourishment save in the
body, that it might learn to abide in the body, Romans 11.18.
and to need it as a fellow feeling member. Howbeit, the nourishment of the
arm in special, is not the footes, nor the thighs, but it own.

2. Peculiar.
Secondly, in this distribution of the Sacrament, our Lord Jesus aims at
peculiarnesse: and teaches us, that when the Minister reaches out the Elements
to this person and to that, he does not only present a common Christ to
become my Christ; he does not only make him my Lord and my God, and lay him in
my lap, for my reconciliation and life: but also he does make him mine
peculiarly, for the granting of such graces, and supplying such wants as I in
particular find in my self: without which it should not avail me that he
supplies the wants of others. And thus Christ Sacramental, is no common
Christ, (though a Christ of Community) but a peculiar and special Christ, cut
out, divided and proportioned for each souls necessity: as many lines are
equally drawn from one center, to each part of the orb and wheel thereof.

To make this point clear, consider the ground of it: The ground of it.
The Lord Jesus who is the (Demensum) or portion of the Church, is also his
own steward to divide and deal out himself as the dole of the Church, and of
each of his household. Solomon Prove. 27.23. Prove. 27.23.
says to all Masters of families; Look diligently to the state of thy flocks
and herds: Provide hay and stover for them, that thou may thereby have
sustenance for thy children, and maidens. Does the Lord take care for cattle,
or for the bodies of men and their families? 1 Cor. 9.9.
How much more then is he careful for his own sons and daughters, that they
lack not? If he be worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.
who provides not for his family, what should the Lord be, if he should
neglect those of his household? Nay further, read Luke. 12.42. Luke 12.42.
speaking of his Ministers he says, Who is a wise and faithful steward, whom
the Lord may set over his house, that he may give them their due portion in
season? The answer is, that Christ is he: all Ministers are underofficers, but
he is above Moses, Peter, Paul: he is faithful as a son, 2 Cor. 6.1. Heb.
3.5, 6.
not a servant; who then but he should do it? who is all in all in the house
of God the great King, as David in Saul's, 1 Samuel 22.14. 1 Samuel 22.14.
It is he who provideth for the weak and sick ones, for the strong and
hail, for infants, for grown ones: if it be required of each steward, that he
be faithful, how much more of him? Heb. 3.2.5. 1 Cor. 4.2. Heb. 3.2.5. 1 Cor
4.2.
He can do what he will as his Fathers steward; officers are as they are,
must do as they can, but he as he list. Well may be be trusted for
faithfulness in all the house or Church of God: having stored up in himself
all gifts and treasures, and being the wisdom of the Father to divide them to
all and each as he needs it, knowing them by name, and their needs; and knowing
what, how much, and when will best fit them: and wanting no tenderness to attend
his wisdom. Far be it from him to give some all, some never a whit, for he
is just: or to give some the portion of others, for he is wise; or to give to
the strongest, and oversee the fatherless and weak, for he is tender and in
all three faithful, even Gods right hand to deal as God himself would do,
if present. As it was he who first did take off our yoke, and lay meat before
us: so it is he who maintains us at his cost, gives us our daily bread, in
word and Sacrament, till we need it no more, Hose. 11.12. Hos. 11.12.
Yea he himself is our food and ordinary, which no steward can be, as in the
next general shall appear.

and most base, unfaithful and foolish steward in the world, to pull away the
Cup from his people, and to defraud them of that full nourishment which both
his Father allows them, and himself was broken and shed his blood to
become. And whereas they cavil thus, that Christ gave only to Ministers, to
no lay men, and so they do: But as for the people (by whom there is peril of
spilling) they do it not, for honor of the Sacrament. Ye hypocrites who
streine at gnats and swallow Camells, how can he be secured that the wine will
not be spilt in a Ministers drinking it? Or who taught ye that the Church
serves for the Elements, and not they rather for the Church? Cares Christ for
dropps of wine more than the souls of his people? Is it more with him that
wine spill, or the soul perish? Again, where learn ye to expound the words
of Christ (Eat ye, drink ye all) exclusively? Does he not say, I am with
you to the worlds end? Do the Apostles live for ever? Says he, Do this as
often as ye do it, till I come? Tell me I pray, by the same reason why may any
save the Minister take the bread? is there any proviso for them? No, no, he
spoke here as elsewheere, in the persons of Ministers to all believers, as in
Ioh. 17. he expresses, I pray not for these only, but for all that believe.

people? That so Gods Spirit might not seem straightened; and for ease,
carelessness and form seem to eat up all power and spirit in men, causing
people to misapply truths, so deluding themselves.



John, Thomas, such a man or woman: for in a manner the Sacrament supplies the
defect of the word, both in personal and peculiar application. It tells thee
thy name is written in heaven: it gives thee a ticket in special from God, to
secure thee to be his: and as it offers whole Christ to the Communion of
Saints, so it severalls out thee, and tells thee that thou art not forgotten
among the rest, but to thee the Lord Jesus broken belongs. Thou see not the
parcel of bread and wine, more personally offered to thy hand, than Christ to
thy soul. So that as by virtue of general Christ thou deniest thy self and
prayest, Our Father, give us this day our daily bread, forgive us, lead not us
into tentation: that is, compst thy self to serve only for the use of the
body: so by virtue of Christ cut out and divided to thee, thou say, I believe
in God: I believe in Christ, I believe in the holy Ghost: I believe my self to
be the Lords, and fasten so upon Christ, not as every believers but mine own
in special, to pardon, to save me, as if I were the only person. And not
only thus, but after this Assumption, comes in a Conclusion, Therefore Christ's
benefits are thine, all his graces, his enablements for doing, for suffering,
supply of thy ignorance, relief of thy forgetfulness, wanderings,
earthlinesse, coldness, etc. I say Christ is peculiarly thine with all his
nourishment to eternal life. Learn to make this use of the Sacrament.



Reproof in three respect^.
first, their cavilling; themselves? Oh! if such or such were present, here
were for them, for they are thus and thus, tec^y, worldly! As Peter, Ioh. 22.
asked Christ, What shall this man do? But what have thou to do with the
portion of another? Look thou to thine own? Do not cavil I say, Oh such can
carry away such and such gifts as I cannot atteine! Why? has not the Lord for
thee as well as them? But thou seek another man's supply, not thy own. As
Absalon sought to govern, when he should have been subject: so, thou come
for the gifts of such and such, but no supply of thy own wants. What should
the hand do with the gift of the head? or the foot of the hand? Keep within
thy bounds, covet the special portion of thy soul: come to Christ divided to
thee, if that will not satisfy thee, thou art no member. Perhaps if thou had
another portion it would pride thee! cast away envy, and get faith, and Christ
has for thee as well as him.



the Lord Jesus in his peculiar distribution and supply of all his peoples
wants. Oh! if thou knewst the gift of God, how should these scales fall from
thine eyes, and how should thou behold the Supper of Christ? As Iehojakin
lifted up from prison to the daily portion of the king of Babells meat, so
should the hearesay of a Sacrament be to thee. Thou would abhor thy self
for thy blind, base and fulsome receivings, more than for thy swearing and
drunkenness. To these I should add the last use of exhortation to the Lord
people, to get selfedeniall, and the sense of their own wants: and therewith
to bring special faith to take out this portion to themselves. But I reserve
both these to their several rooms, if God will, hereafter. So much therefore
be spoken of this first general, viz. the acts of the Minister in the supper.
Now follows the two of the people, in receiving.

The Acts of the people in receiving are two, The two acts of people.
all suitable to the ministerial charge which the Lord Jesus himself at first,
and the Minister in his Name continually does lay upon them, the which are,
First, taking or receiving. Secondly, eating, enjoying and possessing the
comfort of these good things. Concerning the which, although in coherence to
the former, it were not amiss here to treat of them: yet, considering they
cannot be well understood, till the next general have been handled, to wit
the grace of Christ offered in the Supper, (for how should an act be understood
till the object about which it is occupied, be conceived?) First therefore of
that in the next Chapter, and then of these two after by way of use of the
doctrine, (if God will) shall more seasonably be spoken in the eighth Chapter
following.

CHAP. VII. Of the second part of the description, viz. The grace of the Supper.
WE come now to the second general in the description of the Supper, to wit
the grace of Christ offered therein to the believer: and that is whole Christ's
Body and Blood for spiritual nourishment of life once received. The distinct
understanding of which point in the branches, will prove one of the maine
points in this description, 3. Questions.
and give us light in the doctrine of the Supper. Here then let three
questions be opened. The first, how comes it to pass that Christ Jesus is our
spiritual support in grace, as well as our being and regeneration? First
Question. How is Christ the souls nourishment.
Secondly, how comes Christ to be propounded to us as our Sacramental Support
or food? Thirdly, wherein consists it?

of life at the first to them, affording himself to be seed, and begetting
unto them; then the same Lord Jesus must become also food of this life, to
cherish it, to repair it, to supply the wants of it, to redress the decays
of it, and to uphold the frame of it in them. If God thought it good not to
betrust them with this second life of grace, as he did Adam with that first of
creation: and therefore has put over the custody of that life and the supply
of nourishment tending thereunto, into the hands of the Lord Jesus, that so it
might never fail nor wanze away any more: Then surely it behooves that the
Lord Jesus be as well the keeper of this life, and the nourishment thereof, as
he was the first the breeder thereof. 1 Cor. 1.30.
sanctification and redemption: all good things necessary for the making of
such as are not his to become his: and such as are his to be more his, or his
in a more full and assured manner, to prosper, grow and thrive in him unto
perfection.

Esaias 57.17.
the gift of faith, to pull them to himself, to unite them to himself, and to
convey his own spiritual life by this union of faith unto them: causing his
blessed Spirit to concur so with the word, as to settle it upon them: and
having so done, to give them this privilege, that they shall as truly be
maintained at his cost, John 17.11.
be kept in his name, be upheld in grace, prosper in it, be defended against
all enemies within or without which might impeach this their welfare, growth,
fruitfulness and perseverance, as ever he bred life in them at the first.

The second question, viz. How Christ is so in the Supper?
But as yet here is nothing of Christ our Sacramental nourishmen. Understand
therefore the Sacrament to stand in relation to the word of promise, wherein
Christ is made the poor souls own, to feed her. As I noted in Baptism, so
here again observe, Christ in promise, and Christ in the Supper differ not,
save in the manner and degree of exhibiting him out nourishment: Look then
what the Spirit of the promise works for the soul, that it much more works
by the Sacrament. First, persents the promises.
Take some instances. First, it presents the soul of every one truly bred,
with those choice promises of Christ her nourishment, searching them out of
each corner. Tells her, Esaias 25. Esaias 25.7.
That the Lord makes her a feast upon the mountains, of fat things, of wines
refined and pure, and the dishes of the feast are, Christ in his graces,
plucking away the veil of darkness, remooving death and fear, bringing joy
and peace. Esaias 55.1.
Esaias 55.2. he offers him in all kinds of things useful and nourishing, wine,
honey, oil: bids her eat good things and delight her self in fatness. In
Pro. 7. Prove. 7.1.
he invites her to his feast and provision of all choice dainties, not for
necessity only, but for fullness, for delicacy, for variety and delight, for
safety, for durablenesse. In Psalm. 23. Psalm. 23.3.
he leads her as a shepherd into his pastures, streams, folds; guards her
against dangers and death, annoints her head with balm, Cant. 4.13.
and fills full her cup. In the Canticles, he makes himself her husband to
marry himself to her and bestow all at once upon her: his garments smell of
mirrhe, Cinnamon and Cassia. In Psalm. 84. Psalm. 84.11.
he denies her nothing that is good for her, either for light or defense: in
those Parables he makes her a feast, Luke 15.23.
brings out the Calfe. In John 6. John 6.55.
tells her, his flesh is not only life, but meat indeed, and his blood
drink indeed: And plainly says, They that live in him shall abide in him,
and out of their belly shall spring up waters of life: they that eat him shall
not dye, but live for ever. In Revel. 3. Revel. 3.18.
he offers himself to her in all respects; Attire for nakedness, Gold for
poverty, eye salve for blindness, himself a supply of all necessities.

How much more then does he lead her to this great Sacramental promise
mentioned in the Text, This is my body given for you: this is the Cup of the
New Testament in my blood? 2. Brings the fullness of Christ into the promise.
Again, the Spirit of the promise, brings the Lord Jesus and all his fullness
of nourishment into that promise: the spirit of nature does not so prepare the
nourishment of the infant, and seal it in the breast, for more easy fastening,
than the Spirit does settle all the fullness of Christ in a promise, so that it
offers it self to the hungry soul. Besides, 3. Puts the truth of the promiser
into it.
it put the faithfulness of the promiser into the promise, all the tenderness
and compassion of Christ to the wants of the Church, and the truth of his
meaning, not to fail her in any good thing he can help her with. Furthermore,
it strips her of all her own strength: 3. Strips the soul of her self.
tells her, that although she be borne of God, yet except he cleave to her as
a feeder, as a father, a nurse, a supply, she cannot subsist: she will go to
work else with her own tools, and compass her self with her own sparkles,
Esa. 50. ult.
and deceive her self with her own trash: she cannot do any duty, get out
of any temptation, bear any trouble of her self, without Christ she can do
nothing. Moreover, he shows her, 4. Leads her to the sufficiency of Christ.
all her sufficiency is from Christ: The work and life of grace requires his
daily, hourly acting power in her, to set it on work or else all she has in
her is in vain; the principle of life she has, will not work, will not
help, except it be jogged by the Spirit that gave it, (as the hand that
stirs the saw) to quicken the operations of life: no means, no diet can
nourish without this. 5. Takes measure of all her wants in special.
And so I might be endless: For this spirit does by a promise offer the Lord
Jesus to the soul as one that knows all her wants, takes measure of her
defects, as one should do of a body for apparel, to make it fit and suitable:
So does Christ provide all nourishment, apt nourishment, for every part,
against each corruption, temptation, affliction, for every duty, for marriage,
for liberty, for company, for Sabbaths, hearing and ordinances: yea (to draw to
an end) the Spirit by the promise, does stir up; first, sight of Christ her
nourishment; 6. Works application of the promise.
secondly, affections after him; thirdly, an hand to reach him, take him, put
him on, apply him: faith to digest, and draw from him whatsoever he offers her,
freely, cheerfully, confidently, sensibly; Faith carries her into the stream
of his welfare, the floods (as Job speaks) of his butter and honey: and
venturing upon his word, takes him as he offers himself, and not by a base and
treacherous heart, putting him off with his store and plenty, as if it were too
good for her to receive.

Conclusion.
Now then to end this point, if the Spirit can thus work the heart to embrace
Christ by a promise, how much more by the Sacrament of the Supper? in which I
may truly say the Lord Jesus is brought forth in his likeness, eminently,
even in the instruments and immediate manner of nourishing, all Christ, whole
in respect of his obedience and death, pardon and holiness, as a diamond not
to be broken: and yet broken also upon the Cross, divided into portions, as
the meet morsells of each poor receiver that needs his flesh and blood: True
bread to be her staff of life, and wine to be the cherisher of her spirits.
Oh! the bringing forth of these flagons, in so sensible a manner, to affect all
her soul, and to overthrow infidelity, must needs be a more effectual
instrument of the Spirit to persuade her, that Christ is all in all unto her,
for her support in grace and holiness, than either the word alone, or any
other ordinance. The Lord having in special set the Supper apart, neither to
be a breeder at all of grace, as the word preached is, nor to be a nourisher
in an ordinary manner, as other public or private means, in each of which
Christ conveyes himself and his communion to the soul: but an ordinance only
tending to nourish, serving for the nonce, and to no other purpose, and
therefore having no other scope, must needs be most effectual for the end it
serves for. Each thing is most prevalent in her own predominancy and Element.
If then the spirit so can work by the promise alone, how much more by the
Sacrament which represents that which it offers under the shadow of the
signs? and tells the soul, Ioh. 20, 27.
Behold the print of the nails, behold my side, behold my self, here is my
body, here is my blood given for thee, shed for thee: Verse 28.
Be not unfaithful, bue faithful. Sooner shall bread and wine cease to
nourish thy body, than my flesh and blood to nourish thy soul to eternal
life: The conclusion is, the Spirit does more eminently convince the soul by
the Supper, of her nourishment by Christ, than it can by the Word alone, for as
much as the Sacrament with the Word is above the Word.

The third and last question remains, 3. Quest. Wherein Sacramental Christ
for our nourishment stands? Answer twofold. The first. The object expressed
many ways.
wherein Sacramental nourishment consists? The meaning of which question is
double; The first concerns the parts of it: The second, the degrees of it. The
first looks at the object, how many ways Christ is the nourishment of his.
The second rather looks at the influence it self, of what kind or measure it
is. Touching the first, As I said before of Baptism, that it affords to the
soul, Christ to be her seed in all respects of true being and regeneration:
so now I say, the Supper offers him to the soul in each of those particulars
for welbeing. I have often thought of two Texts which will express the
difference. That of Paul, Ephe. 1.3. Ephe. 1.3.
Blessed be God who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things by Christ: does note unto us the grace of Baptism, as all the Chapter
following prooves, in which the distinct essence of those blessings consists:
There is another in 2 Pet. Chap. 1 Verse. 3. 2 Pet, 1.3.
His divine power ministering to us all things for life and godliness: he
means not the being of those things, but daily supply and increase, influence
from the Spirit of Christ, to uphold the soul in them, which has them: and
this denotes the grace of the Supper. Now if we mark we shall see the
Scriptures speak of this nourishing grace of Christ sundry ways: Psalm. 84.
Psalm. 84.11. Psalm. 37.4.
He shall deny them no good thing. Delight in the Lord, and he shall give thee
thy hearts desire. Do but think what it is which of all other thou would
have, find out thy want, and the Lord shall be thy supply; noting that how
infinite so ever the needs and decays of the soul are, God has supply enough
in Christ for them. This is most general. Sometime the holy Ghost shortly
knits up particulars, as in the same Psalm, The Lord shall afford light and
defense to his: By light including all such good things as we call positive
graces, as pardon, peace, ability to duties, etc. By defense, all privative
grace, as prevention of evil, strength against enemies, assaults of Satan,
world, flesh, streights and crosses. Sometimes he is more large, ^ Cor. 1.30.
saying, that Christ is made to us, wisdom to make us more and more
understanding in the truths of God, and direction to live accordingly:
righteousness, to know our selves justified by better and surer evidence:
Sanctification, to grow holier, and more mortified daily, abler to walk with
God in the course of our conversation: Redemption, to uphold us in all our
troubles, with more humbleness, patience, faith and experience, and to help
us against all enemies, till we be fully delivered from all.

Especially by applying it to the graces of Baptism.
But as I take it, the most convenient way to express the extent of this Grace,
will be to apply the Supper to all and each branch of the grace of Baptism.
Breefely then mark: welfare of the heart may either be greater or smaller, and
therefore they concern the grace of the Supper.





count them no strange thing, to wait for them, to be humbled, and broken, and
powered out by them; made by them, more sober, selfe-denying, more patient to
bear, and more wise to profit by purging out the causes; more growing in
graces, living by faith in streights, for an holy use, and good issue out of
them. And in a word, the Sacrament is Christ our Influence and Nourishment in
all respects, wherein the soul is capable of any want or complaint; serving to
this purpose, that we may be quickened up in our affections, and in steed of a
decaying, uncheerefull course (which Satan and corruption beset us with) we
may walk in and out with God, with peace and comfort, and it may go well with
us in all that we put our han^^ unto, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
both without and within, in life and death. It is a strengthner of us to duty,
a supply of needs, protection against evils, provision of good things. Its
enough that the Supper is as large as any wants can be: No man knows where
another man's shoe pincheth but his own, but wheresoever the pinch is, Christ
in the Supper is ease. All the difficulty is in the wise application, there is
none in the point. This for the extent or object of Christ our nourishment.

The degrees. Which are four.
The second Question will yet come closer to the point: viz. What this influence
of Christ is, in what kind or degrees it consists. The answer is; That it
stands in four several parts, and tends to as many ends. Prosperity of soul
being the adaequate end of the Supper, look wherein true prospering consists,
therein stands this influence: So that by this latter, the former will discover
it self. Christ our nourishment by Christ our influence, which is the efficacy
of it in the soul. The severals are, health, growth, stablenesse, and
fruitfulness in grace. The Lord Jesus Sacramental being all these in all such
as are truly begotten of him, in one measure or other.

1 Health of soul. 3 John 2.
Touching the first; Health of the soul is one step of spiritual prosperity.
Saint John Epist. 3.2. prays for Gajus (an holy, yet sickly man) That he
might be well, or in health, as his soul prospered; Pro. 3.8. What it is: viz.
Sustaining the soul in her welfare.
intimating that one (and the first) step of prospering, is healthinesse.
Solomon speaking of the fear of God, says, It shall he health to the navill,
and marrow to the bones: noting that the soul which truly prospers by Christ,
is, is healthy, even as a body is. Note then, even as when we see corn, hops,
or the like, hold their vigor and color, we say they will thrive: and as the
body when it holds it own, and keeps good color and countenance, the bones
running full of marrow, and the blood and spirits running well and aright in
the veins and vessels, then its called hayle and sound; so it is with the
soul of a Christian. His nourishment is then well aseene on him, when he holds
that which he has received once from Christ, when he bears his years well,
when the constitution and frame of his spirit abides sound, humble, believing,
upright, thankful, wise, wary, holy, righteous. We call health, the due
consistence of the constitution, and humors, without either excess or defect:
when the body keeps temper and vigor without any clogge or oppression of ill
humors or surfeit, befalling her. So is it here: when the soul is preserved
from the annoyance and distemper of the wonted bad qualities, pride, ease,
infidelity, unthankfulness, envy, world, self-love, unsavorines: when kept
from looseness and security, and hanging her grace upon the hedge, and running
out of course, to all occasions, companies, baits, profits, pleasures,
vanities: whereby the life of grace should be choked and oppressed: then she
bears mark of some health and prospering; then she seems to hold her own
in the life of faith, and the order of good conversation.

Now to this first end, the Lord Jesus our nourishment serves, Christ our
nourishment can do it Sacramentally. Psalm. 119; 57.
especially in the Sacrament; and to this end all true Receivers frequent it,
viz. That they may fare well, and prosper in soul. The Lord Jesus is able to
do this and more for them: David has a sweet speech, The Lord is my portion,
thou shall maintain my lot and my chance: Christ is able to uphold his own
work, and the portion which he has in his: As John 17. John 17, 11.
he prayed for it, Father keep them in thy Name: so he can do it, and of his
fullness, they receive grace for grace. John 1, 17. John 6, 55.
His flesh is meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed: its a seen upon
their faces, and runs in their veins, it puts sap and vigor of joy, peace,
and hope into them; and will not suffer them to look worse and worse: as its
said, Dan. 1. Dan. 1.15.
That the pulse they eat, by the blessing of God made them look as well and
fresh at seven days end, as if they had eaten the Kings fare. How much more
then shall the Kings diet do it? Gods servants need not forsake his house and
fare, for the diet of the world, joviall, bold, wanton libertines, and
timeservers; the Lord has better fare than so for them: He counts it a
dishonor to his housekeeping, to see any of his to look meager, or
evill-favoured. And therefore look what grace he has put into them, he
upholds it in them by his diet, by his flesh, by his blood; So that they have
the true Spirit of nourishment in them, they do not cool in their love,
through the abundance of iniquity: they are not pulled from their steadfastness
by the error of the wicked; they do not decline in their zeal, love,
affections, judgment, savor, by the malice of Satan, the corruption of their
own spirits, the examples of formal and temporizing ones; they leave them to
themselves, and look to what they once received, and to him they have once
betrusted themselves with; and from his nourishment they find themselves to be
enabled to keep the good things they have swet for, as a John 8. 2 John 8.
which in so bad and degenerate world as this, is no small portion.

The second degree. Growth in grace.
The 2. degree of Christ's Sacramental influence, is growth. And this still
argues more prosperity of soul, and that their nourishment does them good.
We see it in the creatures, and bodies of men; health will cause growth, by the
constant use of nourishment. And this is, when not only the soul holds even
terms with the Lord, What it is? Esaias 63.3, 4.
but outstrips her self, and as a tree of righteousness shouts forth her
branches: and as the willowes by the waters do every year grow in length,
thickness, and tallnesse; that they do not only not wanze and wither, but
get still and grow bigger and bigger. So it is with a true prospering soul:
Phil. 3, 13.
He looks not behind him what he has been, is not weary of health and
welfare, waxes not resty, lazy, careless, and standing at a stay, as who
say, I have held long enough, and abode the heat of the day. Let hypocrites who
stand upon their own bottom, and keep a measure of their own within them, do
so: These are in another stock, planted by the hand of the Lord Jesus into
himself, and therefore look what the seed is of which they were borne, Luke
2. ult.
the like is the pitch they aspire to; they look still forward to that which
is before, aiming at the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. In
whom, Ephe. 4.16. Ephesians. 4.
the whole body fitly joined, and compact, according to the effectual working
of Christ in each part, makes increase of it self; till (Verse 13.) it grow
to a perfect man, and the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. So
that, look what dimensions are in Christ, what his length, depth, and breadth
is, Ephesians. 3, 16.
that (in proportion) the soul united to him by his Spirit, does covet and
seek after by a kind of holy instinct; and never thinks her self to
prosper, and to be in good case, till she thrive and grow in grace: and
although she mourn for insensiblenesse in this kind, and that any outward
growth is more discerned than this, yet she rejoices that she has some secret
motions in her that way; Psalm. 101, 3.
that as she loathes to cleave to such as decline and wax dead, so she
abhorres also to stand still, luskishly, lazily, wearisomely in the way and
work of Christ. Therefore sweetly Peter, 2 Epist. last Chap. and the end,
joins these two, to hold our own, not to be pulled from our steadfastnesse:
with growing in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus.

And to the end she may do thus, The Lord Jesus can do these, and how? 1 By
himself.
she beholds him into whom she is ingraf^ed: from his stock she draws juice
and moisture continually. She does not only behold his flesh and humanity, how
that grew in stature; or at his example, how he by the assistance of his
godhead, grew in grace with God and favor with men, (although these be sweet
helps) but she beholds the Mediatorship and unction of the Lord Jesus, Heb. 1,
9.
how by the unction of his flesh with God, he was sanctified for his Church,
and her use; how all his obedience and growth in it, was not for himself, but
for his believing ones; that they might grow up in more meekness,
humbleness, brokennesse of heart, mercy, love, patience, holy example, more in
quality of graces, that they might be more purged from the uncleanenesse of
their own spirit, and be more pure, and savory; more in the quantity and
measure of them, that as a little did some good, and went a little way, so more
may do more, and go a far greater: give more light, seem more beautiful,
afford more savor, bear down an ungracious world more powerfully, and
witness more sweetly to their own heart, the truth of Regeneration, than ever.

By his Sacrament.
And to help themselves herein, they apply themselves to the Ordinances of
Christ, not only to the word that they might grow thereby: But to the
Sacrament of the Supper especially, being the especial help appointed to this
only end, to bring the Lord Jesus into the soul for her nourishment and
growing in grace. So that needs it must be, that this growing in grace, which a
poor soul seeks, is one of the most especial fruits of Christ in the
Supper: and Baptism does not more truly assure her of Regeneration, than the
body of the Lord Jesus, and his blood in the Sacrament, does assure her of her
groth in grace. Matthew. 13.8.
Such as the seed is, such is the crop: wheat brings forth twenty, thirty,
or sixty fold, it still of wheat: even so the food of Christ, which is
heavenly, and holy, (for the flesh profits nothing, nor the blood, although one
had drank it under the cross; John 6.63:
its the Spirit only which quickneth) and was given for the breeding and
nourishing the soul in grace, it breeds an heavenly groth, and a spiritual
increase in every true Receiver; especially being assisted with other helps,
inward, and outward, the mercies and blessings of God, which as Talents, are
put to advantage for Gods glory.

The third degree. Stablenesse in grace.
The third is stablenesse in grace. We see that men's bodies in time by
continuance of health and groth, come to a pitch, to a measure of groth. This
is a third prospering. It is not with the soul as with the body, which cease
to grow, when it is at her pitch, or declines rather when it is grown to her
full point. What it is?
But herein a pitch of bodily groth, resembles spiritual: that as the man
grown to his full period, enjoyes (as it were) himself and all his former
years which he has lived: becomes now (of a growing) a grown man, is come
now to his best, to his full strength, ability and sufficiency for service; so
is it with a Christian. He grows in Christ to the measure and fullness of him,
Ephe. 4.13. Ephesians. 4.13.
So that whereas before in his beginnings, and proceedings, he found much
ignorance in mind, much error in judgment, much infirmity in spirit, much to
seek of direction and wisdom in his course: Also much unsettled, wearisome,
off and on, up and down in holy practice, many combats and conflicts with his
bubbling, rebellious, inconstant, treacherous, withdrawing spirit; lo, now its
otherwise: now he is grown to some stay, settling, ripeness, and experience in
Gods matters, Heb. 5. Heb. 5. ult.
more exercised in his spiritual senses to put a difference between good and
evil, persons and things; not so blind as formerly, but light in the Lord,
judicious, observative, sober in affections, staide in mind and resolution,
Ephe. 5, 16. 1 John 2.13. Act. 11.27. 1 Cor. 7.35. Ephesians. 4.12.
having his heart at better bay and more awe, for teachable subjection to God,
more firm in purpose of heart to cleave to God without disstraction, 1 Cor.
7.35. not easily carried away by each Doctrine and dice-play of men, not
mistaking truths, not slighting them, not partially affecting them; but molded
in them, fashioned by them, and keeping his fashion as a man would do of his
apparel, against each noveltie, So also constant, settled, rooted and stable, 1
Cor. 15. last (read it) not ungrounded in the foundation, not to seek when
Satan buffets, but knowing his devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. 2 Cor. 2.11.
and also strong to resist, courageous in the use of the Armor, and so
persevering in his course.

This is that which Paul, Ephe. 3. calls Christ dwelling in the soul by faith;
as the Inhabitant who keeps in his own, Christ Sacramental does this. Epes.
3.17.
is not as a Stranger, or a Sojorner who comes and goes, but a Ledger, one that
holds his abode, and delights in his dwelling. Oh! this is a great degree of
Christ's infusion and influence into the soul, when he pitches there, settles
and dwells there, (for what else is the stablenesse of the soul in grace, save
Christ's dwelling in it by his grace?) and is no flittet thence. And this third
degr^e of nourishment the Lord works in all his, who have attained the former
two. They come to be as the Scholar riveted into his Rules, or the tradesman
in the myrie of his occupation, not to seek of it: It is the promise of Christ
to all his, that they shall grow up thus in the body; not by any virtue of
their own, but by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus their nourishment: And to this
end, especially they cleave to this Sacrament, and improve the promise of it,
This is my body; This is my blood, even to settle the soul by the frequent
receiving of it, upon the Lord Jesus, for stablenesse, strength, courage, that
they may enjoy the Lord Jesus in all the Sacraments they have received, and
retain the power of all the Ordinances they have used, all the graces they
have grown in, all the duties they have done, afflictions they have endured,
examples they have seen, works and government of God which they have marked:
I say, that from all these the Lord would bring such an holy experience of
heart, resolution of purpose, settling of spirit upon the Lord, his threats,
commands, and promises, as not doubting but they are firm and sure, Matthew. 7,
ult.
and therefore a rock and foundation sufficient to rely upon in all winds,
storms, and weathers whatsoever. This I say is that third degree of Christ our
nourishment, which each communicant looks for at the Supper.

The fourth degree. Fruitfulness in grace. 1 Cor. 15. ult. What it is?
The fourth and last, is fruitfulness in grace. See 1 Cor. 15, ult. where the
Apostle joins these two last branches: Be ye unmooveable and settled, always
abounding in the work of the Lord. We see it in plants and men: The plants
must be well spread and rooted in the earth before they can grow fruitful, at
least in plenty. A little root will not nourish large branches and boughs:
Sometime the root is so bare and fleet, that it will scarce furnish the tree
with leaves; but a large, deep root has many strings, and little suckers,
which work for the tree, and feed her with nourishment; so that the root
abiding deep aod fast in the earth, the fruit is plentiful. We know nature
is never more fruitful in the active principle of generation, than when the
strength of the body is well confirmed. So then, this is the last step of
spiritual prosperity, when this fourth is added to the three former, to wit,
fruitfulness in a good course. And it is the perfection of that influence and
communion which we here enjoy in the Lord Jesus our nourishment. That meat
indeed, and drink indeed, is this abundance and fruitfulness; When out of
the abundance of the heart, the tongue is fruitful in uttering, the hands in
working, the feet in walking, the members in service, the whole tree in
bringing forth fruits of righteousness. Esaias 61, 3. calls such accepted, and
beloved of the Lord; as we esteem exceedingly of bearing trees, especially if
yearly and plentifully. It is from the root of the Lord Jesus, that the soul
does grow thus fruitful. The indwelling of Christ, is the abundance of
influence: the less of Christ the soul has, the less sap and fruit; the
nearer the communion, the greater the influence. The greater the treasure is
from which a man draws, the richer the supply. We say, Its sweet to take from
a great heap. An heap will serve for all uses: a poor unstockt man is easily
perceived in his wares, the small store and choice thereof: he that has little
money to lay out, is bare in his household, attire, family, diet; scarce has
for necessity, but nothing for delight and plenty. So is it with a man that is
no prosperer in grace, has only from hand to mouth; he cannot verify our
Savior his specch, That out of the abundance of the heart, he brings good
things abundantly: but rather he is scant in good speech, scant in preaching
(no more than needs must) in hearing, prayer, meditation, barren and poor: so
in the graces of the Spirit; little love, small humility, compassion, so in
duties, so in means. Alas, the root is bare, and therefore the tree is
unfruitful.

So also the deeper the soul is rooted in Christ; Christ it this root of
fruitfulness. John 11, 3. and 12, 1.2.
the larger room he has in the heart, the more scope and entertainment he
finds, the greater graces he affords. If we compare Mary and Martha's house
with the houses which now and then Christ was bidden too, no doubt but we
shall find, that his fruits of preaching, love, converse, miracles, and good
doing, were more fall in the former than the latter. Why? There was no stop, he
might be sure to be welcome at all times: therefore he showed himself more
there, than elsewhere. Christ then the more he is rooted in the soul, the
fuller he is of influence, and so grows more fruitful. For, what is
fruitfullnesse? Surely when a Christian being ashamed to consider what a barren
heart he has had under full means; and how little and narrow the good is
which he has done for God, to himself and others; and beholding the cause
thereof, his want of true stock of knowledge and faith: mourns for this his
misery, and seeking for an heart fuller of Christ and his nourishment, does
from his treasure extend himself plentifully to the exercise of such graces,
means, and duties, as may be useful to himself, and in the communion of
Saints. If a poor shopkeeper almost banquerupt, be set up, and helped up
again with new stock, what will he do? Ply the matter, run to London,
furnish himself with the best of wares, and choice of them, bring them home,
fill his shop in every corner; and satisfy the turn of every buyer. Oh! what
a change is there?

So it is with a Christian recovering out of a fruitless course by the Lord
Jesus his raizing and setting him up again, stores himself with plenty of
graces, sets them on work, and fills each part of his life with duty; yea,
sets himself against his former unprofitablenesse: Adding to his knowledge,
faith, to his faith love, meekness, patience, experience, hope: that so he
may not be unfruitful in the Lord Jesus. 2 Pet. 1, 1, 5, 6.
If he have risen up well apaid in his morning awaking, he rests not there (as
before) but fetches from his treasure a cheerful heart to his calling: from
thence proceeds to family duties and government, from thence to do good, and
take good in company, thence to be well occupied alone, thence ready to visit
the sick, to admonish, to comfort, to advise others, and when all is done, 1
Cor. 15, ult.
to nourish in himself the life of faith one while, humbleness another while,
forbearance, long suffering in prouocations; thanks for blessings, patience if
crossed: sometime in one, sometimes in another duty; yet neither hurt by one
from another, nor glutted by succession of service, but fruitful and unwearied
in all, with one eye to his ground, another to his end. Even as a man of an
active spirit, if well apaid in diet, and refreshed in body, sticks not from
morning to night to be doing, loathes to be idle, and thinks himself to have
lost that day wherein he has not been full of emploiment. Now so is it here;
the Lord Jesus his nourishment, so enables the souls of his, that they seek
occasions to express goodness, as eagerly as a barren heart shunnes them:
that which strikes the one dumb, and as dead as a stone, yea is as bane to
him, that quickens and joys the other, because the fullness of grace makes the
work most sweet and welcome. Now wherein is the Lord Jesus so full a
nourishment as in his Supper, in which he brings forth all his store and
Magazine to fill the soul that is empty with good things, and so to send it
away from his Table, furnished (as the Apostle says) as a vessel of honor,
and prepared for every good work, so that none comes amiss? 2 Timothy 2.21.
Thus I have given to the Reader an Answer to this question, what the Lord
Jesus our nourishment is, both in his parts and degrees, one of the maine
things which I would wish him to mark in the whole Treatise, for the true
conceiving of the virtue of the Supper.

Now I come to the use, which is as weighty. Esau) this birthright? If with
Swine ye tread these Pearls, and this Manna in the dirt? Alas! Matthew. 7, 6.
it availes not you to have such a previledge as Christ to feed your souls,
if the whilst ye want your carnal appetite satisfied. If this food were but
as a mess of Pottage, Heb. 12.16.
as the wearing of your locks, ye would have had him ere now. But oh!
saplesse, barren, and unsavory wretches; to whom these dainties as are a dry
chip. Who come and go to the Sacraments, as to dumb Pageants; more fit for a
mass of tricks, and apish ceremonies, than the Solemn feast of Christ
Sacramental.

Woe be unto you, oh ye Dogs and Swine! your morrall sins are fearful,
your swearing, your lying, cosenage, drunkenness: But your chief misery is,
that you are carnal wretches, sold under your lusts, destitute of all union,
or communion with God: your hearts are not where your bodies are, when you come
to Christ and the Supper: But as the fools heart is on his left hand, Eccles.
10.2
so are yours with your lusts, which are your appointed, meat, drink, and
pastime unto you. Acts 8.21.
Therefore you have no fellowship in this business: your Sacraments are the
wofullest marks of wrath which ye can carry about you: Law, fashion, custom,
fear, formalitie, are your grounds of receiving; Christ ye come not for, and
your hearts tell ye, he belongs to no such. Therefore ye are as yet in the gall
of bitterness; Verse 23.
save only that lust has chained up your senses and hearts, that ye feel
nothing amiss, and ye do but abide under this chain, John 3, ult.
till the day of wrath, and vengeance; Oh that ere that woeful hour sweep you
to hell, the Lord would awake you either by his Word or Works, to see in what
a woeful condition ye stand! Seeing the Church does not excommunicate you, oh
that you would cut off your selves as Alians from this Communion! Oh that your
flesh might be destroyed, and your jollity subdued, that (if possible) your
souls might escape in the day of the Lord! 1 Cor. 5.6.


Reproof.
but leave it to God and themselves to try) to whom after all this long while
of Sacraments, the doctrine and mystery of the Supper is both unknown and
untasted! What juster complaint can we take up among many, than this, that
Christ the nourishment of his people is so little known! Look to it; if the
Gospel and the pearl hidden in it be yet hidden from you, 2 Cor. 4, 4.
the God of the world has blinded you with the ease and form of an empty
profession, that the glory of Christ should be still eclipsed from you. Beware
least there be not in you still a common heart a of the world, which causes
these spiritual things to be so harsh and unsavory.

With examination. The first, and that in five.
But to such as desire to be affected with their ignorance in this kind, I say
but this, Examine and try your selves about this weighty matter, I mean the
knowledge and use of Christ in the Supper; and let this make amends for your
ordinary egresse and regresse to this Ordinance without searching your selves.
I know right well, Sacraments were never so common, so monthly, so ordinary;
and here and there Sermons,or some kind of preparative are made before them:
but who is he almost that knows what Christ offers to be unto his truly bred
ones, the youth of his womb, in his Supper? Job 20.17.
which are in Christ for the soul that is starven and needs him? Oh if Christ
in the promises of nourishment were your delight! your need would make you
seek out, and search after the seal annexed to the Promise, that by it, your
bare faith, naked and barren souls of the power of Christ to purge and
sanctify you, might be doubly refreshed.

Ioh. 4.10*
to quicken and enlarge the graces of the Spirit; faith, love, courage,
thanks, uprightness, mercy, patience, and fitness for the Cross, (all which
you so infinitely want) how could it be, but that honest and good hearts would
press in for a child's portion, as often as God offers it? from some great house
of alms, as discourage you from the Supper! If there the Lord Jesus empty his
treasures of wisedone, and direction, for the order of your tongues, marriages,
families, companies, buyings, and sellings, and so to make your whole round of
conversation, sweet, reformed: 2 King. 7.8.
drink for thirst, apparel for nakedness, gold and pearls against
poverty, both for the present, and for time to come? But alas! ye know it not.

Secondly, trial in four particulars.
Again, if ye shall say, ye hope ye have got these in the Sacrament: I
answer, I know some do, but seeing I speak to the body of Christians who do
not; it cannot hurt any to try that also: I may truly say; thickness, depth,
and makes them increase in favor with God, in credit with his Church, to reach
further than formerly they did, and to be enlarged in holy abilities for God
and his Service; loathing to stand still, as much as to be quite dead.

Psalm. 119.57.
and to cleave to the Lord, as Barnabas says, Act. 13.27. Act. 13.27.
They shall wax more rooted, grounded both in truths (especially the maine) and
in the power of them; and that not in doing only, but in suffering also.
Christ will be a Bulwark unto them, to fence them with courage and armor
against assaults, enemies, Satan, and the errors of the wicked, that they may
not be pulled from their steadfastness. 2 Pet. 3. ult.
the Lord Jesus will nourish them so fully, and so root them in himself, and
set their pipes so in his wellspring, so dwell in them, that out of their
bellies shall flow rivers of waters, able to water all their practice, Ioh.
7.38.
and to make each part of their life fruitful. I say, he shall heal their
barrenness, extend their grace so, that it shall suffice them for many uses of
lif, as formerly for few. Conclusion of the use.
Briefly then try your selves by these marks. Sure it is, they catch many in
their snare, convincing them, either to be none of the Lords: or else to
dishonor his Diet, and to call the Lord a hard Master, who reapes where he
sowes not, and keeps a bare house: Mat. 25.25.
whereas the very hired servants of his house fare better, than the jolliest
and bravest that live out of it. Oh! if ye be these children that have their
daily portion from Christ's trencher (as Ierem. 52.54. it is said of poor
Iehojakin that prisoner) happy is it for you, these trials shall not hurt you;
Ier. 32, 54.
but if ye be not such, certes, to try may do you good, and prevent that
danger which all bad Receivers are liable unto. Which grace the Lord grant you.

Iehojakins of the Lord (be not offended at the name, seeing its probable, God
at last showed him mercy for his obedience) I mean, such as by this daily
portion of his Christ, farewell and prosper in goodness. In two Branches.
These I must diversely speak to: first the stronger sort, then the weaker. 1.
The strong.
To the 1. in a word, this I say, That if the Lord in mercy have granted you
this portion, and these blessed fruits of prosperity, whereby ye are eased and
cured of that Epidemiall disease of the age, a declining, hide-bound, unsettled
and barren course with God; I say unto you, bless God in secret, who has
given you morsells and draughts which the world knows not: count your portion
to be fallen into a good ground, Psalm. 16.6.
and desire not to change it for the husks of Swine, no nor the feasts of
Princes: To you I shall say more after, in the point of enjoying Christ.

2 The weak.
But unto you weak ones, let me speak otherwise, and take your sad words out
of your mouths: you cannot deny, but the Lord has both bred you, and fed you
by his Son, and by his Sacrament; yours they are, and as Christ is Gods, so
you are Christ's; but yet that nourishment of Christ which I have here described
in the parts and degrees of it, which dogs do catch at bouldly; perhaps you
dare not apply to your selves: you are afraid that this my discourse will
condemn you, Dub.
for you are far from the tyth thereof (you say) far from improoving the
Sacrament to all those ends, or in such degrees as the last use presses: your
faith (notwithstanding all your Sacraments) is weak, your comfort, peace,
freedom of heart, small: your grace little stirred up in you (to your
feelings) your inner bent of spirit still faint, and your stream weak; your
conversation full of disorder, and the staves of your wheel which should
support the race of it pitifully broken, your errors many in ruling your
tongues, families, liberties and selves aright: and you say, if this be the
fruit of the Sacrament to make Christians prospering in health, growth,
staidness, and fruitfulness: oh! what shall then become of you?

Sol.
I answer: Hold the Evidences of your Baptism and regeneration: prove your
calling to be sound: and keep that you have gotten: mourn that you have not
improved Christ in his food and welfare, since you knew your selves to be the
Lords: perhaps there has been a fault this way, that you have rested too much
in that, and too little stirred up the grace of Baptism by the Supper. Let
that humble you: and covenant for hereafter to make better use of the promises
and Sacrament of nourishment than you have done: and then for your comfort,
this I say, The Lord has taken away your sin, you shall not dye: the Supper
is the nourishment of the weak as well as of the strong: All measures are not
alike: By those which I have here noted, I do not desire to snare any, but to
show Gods bounty and what Christ's fullness can beteame, not what each receiver
carries away. Therefore be not discouraged: God is like a tender mother who
has both strong children and weak, she has meat for them all: But if any
one be poorer and weaker than another, that shall have the deintiest: not that
it may ever look to lie upon her hand: But that being cherisht by her
cordialls, it may grow stronger, and be free from such maladies. Therefore in
Gods fear, if there be truth, and a mourning heart for faylings, and hunger
after the best measures of grace which Christ has for thee: let not this view
of doctrine dismay thee. Encourage thy self to wait for pardon of old
defects, and the Lord shall by that I have said, rouse up thy spirit to an
earnest coveting and a true enjoying of such welfare in Christ as thy heart
longs after: Desist not thy diligent receivings, and holy, humble preparing
of thy self; for if thou leave Christ (as Peter said when those carnal
followers departed) whither shall thou go? He only has both words and food
of eternal life.

But here some may step in and say, yea, we should have hope of this if only
we had some defects and decays in grace and goodness: But its worse with us:
for we have harbored our corrupt qualities of sloth, ease, deadness, yea,
perhaps, a proud, unclean, covetous heart: yea rebellious against many known
truths of God: sinned against his mercy by much presumption, against his
threats by security, against his charges by contempt and disobedience: our
hearts accuse us of coldness, self-love, unthankfulness, forgetting of Gods
administrations, weariness of the yoke of a strict walking with God, and
counted it preciseness; taken the uttermost of our liberties: counting them
our enemies who have reprooved us: And now lo, the Lord arraigning us at the
Bar of justice, we are confounded in our selves, and almost driven to
despair: when our consciences do rise up against us, and the Lord seems to
leave us to our selves, we seem to be in hell: Is there any hope for such as
we? I answer, first I wish such to try their Baptism and the truth of their
first calling to be sound: (of which after in the trial of our estate) and if
they can prove that they have ever believed the promise, and found favor with
God, then I say, the grace of God within you shall stir up your souls to an
unfaigned humiliation, and brokennesse, and shall recover you to a sight of his
promise. The Spirit of God shall not suffer you to run from God with such
full bent of heart, but your checks, and cumbats, working with the experience
of mercy and former pardons shall revive the seed of God within you: So that
ye shall not wholly shake off the spirit of regeneration: The grace of your
Baptism shall be as a second board after shipwreck to recover you; and shall
send you to the Supper with hope of regayning that light and comfort which your
revolts have darkened and eclipsed: else should the Sacrament be of no power to
succor distressed consciences in their relapses; But this I add, such shall
find it hard to bind up their breaches, and wish they had never revolted.

Esaias 63.2.3. Esaias 63.2, 3.
And although Christ dran^e the dregs and trod the wine press threof to free
us from the guilt and curse of it: yet not from suffering for Christ: The
Sacrament is a badge of our con^ormity with Christ (or at least of our renewed
courage) in his afflictions, Phi. 3. Christ's cup was so bitter that he prayed
often; Father, take it away: So must thou look for the like, that if God should
compass thee about and hedge in thy way, Phil. 3, 12.
add sorrow to sorrow, and make thee a Marah of a Nahomi, remooving thee (on
the sudden) far from prosperity: Oh! Ruth. 1, 20.
thou may say, The Lord Jesus has drank of this cup unto me: The extreme
bitterness and anguish of it, he has taken off: if thou be his, thou may
say, Blessed be God, this Sacrament offers me a discharge from sin, curse,
Satan, hell and Death: I know the hardest, and have shot the gulf of these:
yet still there remains a relic of bitterness for thee to drink, to frame
thee to the love, self-denial, patience, and victory of thy Master, 2 Cor. 5,
ult. Esaias 53.12.
and much more to be content to bear as he did. He bare for no sin of his
own; but thine only: and he bare, that he might help thee to bear, and in
all thy afflictions be troubled; that he might take the sting and venom of
them away, and make them tolerable.

Do not then greet the Lord unkindly, and treacherously, when the cross comes,
as if the Lord had sent it in wrath, to cut thee off, to take away thy right,
Lam. 3. and to cast down thy soul out of her place: No, although the Cross
may seem dark, uncouth, Lam. 3, 35.
and to have such sad circumstances in it, as for the present, thou see not
how to wind out of: But, remember thou receivest the Sacrament no ofter, than
the Lord Jesus offers himself to thee in the heaviest, bitterest, and most
unspeakeable cross, that ever was borne: What gall was not mingled with his
drink. Mat. 36.46, 48.
Wherein was he afflicted save in that which was most precious, even the love
of his Father? and for what, save for sin, that was more irksome to him than
death? If the Lord then cross thee so, not in some petty filip of a finger,
but in a tedious sort, even in what is most precious: consider the Lord has
done it: that he might make thee partaker of his holiness, Heb. 12. conformed
to him in his meek yielding to his Fathers will, to the contempt of the world,
nay of thy vile and proud heart; to self-denial in all blessings, to
mortification of thy rank lusts: yea he does it, that thou might put thy
mouth in the dust, and be low, when he will have thee so: that rottenness
might enter into thy bones, and thou might have peace in the day of trouble.

Be then under it as he was, whose cup thou do drink of; and show what
strength thy often drinking of it, has put into thee: Be sensible of Gods stroke
in a moderation, neither too much, nor too litttle. Labor to suffer the will
of God: let it cleanse thy soul and purge that scurfe which it was sent for:
and trust God, and pray that he would deliver thee from that thou fear; Heb.
5.5.
wait for the good of it, the whilst; and for release of it in due time, not
consulting with flesh, how, or how far or when, but trusting him with it, who
has infinite ways above thy reach to effect it. If the Martyrs could endure
their bodies to be burnt to ashes, gladly, upon this ground; how much more
thou, who never enduredst the fiery trial, nor yet the anger of God in thy
smaller trouble? If he have removed that, by his agony, bloody sweat, and
desertion: what else save sweat conformity to thy head, remains for thee? Let
it then be instruction to thee, to draw more and more strength from the
Sacrament to enable and sustain thee in thy bearing of it! Alas! we come for
the staff of bread, and the wine of rejoicing, to fit us to obey: But not for
the helping us to eat the bread of affliction, and to bear the cup of
indignation aright, as Micah 7, 9. Mica. 7, 9.
Oh! what a stranger it is! But of this so much.

CHAP. VIII. Touching the Sacramental Acts of the People: and so the third
General of the Description, viz. The End of the Supper.
NOw, my promise made at the end of the 6 Chapter requires that I come to the
Sacramental Acts of the People: The which I will handle as the use of
Exhortation, from the doctrine of the former Chaper falling fitly in^o the
stream thereof.

Fifthly, then is Christ Sacramental our nourishment? Then let all his People
obey his charge: first to take this body and blood, of his to them: secondly to
eat and drink them. Touching the former, I mean this, receive and believe
that this flesh, and blood of his is given thee, for thy particular
nourishment. All the former uses presuppose this: obey in this, and all the
rest shall follow duly.

For the better conceaving of this Act of taking: note, 1 Take.
that it stands in relation to a gift offered in the Sacrament. And the gift is
Christ and his benefits. 2 Things in it.
Now to take them is to do these two things. First to concur with the giver
in the offer of this nourishment. Secondly, 1 Concurrence.
to apply and make it our gain for the purpose which it serves for. The former
of these has two branches, according to the nature of the offer made in the
Sacrament: the former is concurrence of consent, the latter of obedience: in
both stands faith. That this may be conceived, mark, that the Lord offers
this gift, either by promise: or by charge: The former is the ground of the
latter; and therefore the soul concurres with him in both duly: consents to
his promise without cavilling: obeyes his charge without rebelling, takes by
both. Partly in consent, in 6 partice.
Touching the former, first, let it appear how God offers and promises Christ
Sacramental: and then it will easily appear how freely faith consents. The
promise is conceived thus, This is my body, that is given for you: This is the
new Testament, and the cup of it, in my blood, shed for you: In this conceive
these six especialls (which in a short view to see, will both revive and
profit the Reader) breefely. 1. 1 The excellency of the offer.
The excellency of the gift. 2. The fullness. 3. The aptness, 4. The
propriety, 5. The graciousnesse. 6, The manner of exhibiting: and these will
show how faith consents. First the Lord says This is my body and blood; that
is, my nourishment, meat indeed, drink indeed, not earthly, fading, mortal,
but heavenly, eternal: he which eats it shall hunger no more, he who
drinks it, shall thirst no more: its the Lord Jesus from heaven, heavenly.
What says faith? I consent Lord, the reason is strong, I take thee. Secondly
the fullness. 2 The fullness of it.
This my food is no scant and half diet: its my flesh and my blood, that is,
my self in my Satisfaction and Efficacy, and my whole self, no part
excepted, the whole Diamond unbroken: and with my self, all that I can afford,
all my graces, to nourish the whole soul in each part, for each defect, for
full increase: not a particular gift to the mind, as knowledge, or to the
heart, as patience; but all Christ and all his grace for the perfecting of the
whole man in his measure. What says faith? She consents: its royal, Oh Lord,
I yield and take it.

3. The Aptness of it.
Thirdly the aptness. The Lord offers thee not meat and drink which thou art
incapable of: as if whole loaves or flagons should be offered thee, too heavy
and gross for thy receiving; But its apt, prepared for thee, meat laid unto
thee, in morsells, in a cup, a meet draught for thee, a body given and broken:
A cup of the new Testament in my blood. What says faith? I consent Lord, I do
take it as prepared for me. Fourthly propriety. 4. The propciety of it.
The Lord adds, Its given for you: shed for you; for you in person, and for
your wants and uses in especial: So broken and shed, as if no other, but you
were regarded in it: yea, though given for the sins of the world, yet,
specially for you, and your nourishment. What says faith? She consents, Lord I
leave not my portion for another to take, I take my own my self. Fifthly
graciousnesse. Lord its a Nourishment given, 5. The graciousnesse of it.
Offered to you; what is freer than gift? Its not urged, extorted by force on
your part (although if ye went from sea, to sea, to get it, it were cheap on
the price) but freely, and of mine own accord, given, when it could not be
expected; with a most plain, beteaming heart, meaning as I speak, not to
deceive, nor defraud. What does faith? Lord far be it from me to warpe from
thy meaning, I enquire no further, I consent and take it. Lastly, the manner of
exhibiting it. 6. The manner of exhibition.
I offer it thee under signs of bread and wine, the staff of life, and cheer
of the spirits: It is no other nourishment, than I offered thee in my Promise:
That offered me as thy pardon, peace, and strength; so does my Supper: The
manner of exhibiting is diverse, but my offer is one, and the nourishment is
the same; only here I offer it in a more familiar and apt manner, to releeve
thy infidelity; let not that which I offer thee for the better, in the more
effectual manner prove for the worser, and be weaker in efficacy. What says
faith? She answers, Thy way is best, I consent, I take it in the way thou
offerest it. Thus we see how faith concurs with the promise, and consents to
it.

Upon the Promise depends the charge. For mark, The 2. Act Obedience of faith.
the Lord adds, Take it therefore, eat and drink it. Why? because its so
qualified for thee, and so necessary, that thou can not take it, but thou
shall prosper and be happy; thou can not refuse it, but thou must needs pine
and perish; Therefore I who by promise have thus drawn thee, do also by my
Authority Command thee. I know many things (as excellent and weighty as they
are) yet are not esteemed, because they are unknown; Therefore I who know them
better than thou, do require and charge thee upon thy Allegiance, Take, eat
and drink this my body and blood, that thou may prosper and fare well. What
does faith? She obeyes the command, and says, I do so Lord, I take them as
thou command. I concur with thy command as with thy promise. Thus we see
the first work of faith, to concur with the offer of Christ her nourishment.
Thus much for that.

The use of it (ere we come to the second) is threefold, first, The Uses, 1.
of distinction or difference between a true Taker of the Sacrament, and a
false, a believing one, and an unbeleeving; Its worth our noting, because every
fool will be prating and say, he has taken the Sacrament to day; Oh its high
holiday with him! His garments are all white. But oh fool? what taking is
thine? Only of the Elements! only the work wrought! If this will commend
thee to God for a true taker, its well, else all is lost. But oh wretch! Thou
art a taker indeed; but a Thief, thou take that which is none of thine, by
sacrilege. Thou take not by concurrence with a promise; Thou neither
consentest to that, nor obeyest the charge: thou runnest not with God, but
out-runnest him, preventest him, and snatchest his nourishment from him as a
dog, which he has given only to children. And this I will prove. Thou
have neither a consenting eye of faith to see what the Lord gives thee: nor yet
a consenting heart to be affected with it: nor yet a consenting hand to receive
it: more than sense convinces thee of; thou take not, because thou
consentest to no promise, Thou have a traitors heart within thee. None of all
these six cords of this Sacramental Promise will draw thee: no, though the
cord were made of many more linkes, thou would still be the same, an
unwilling, unbeleeving wretch, and still warpe, withdraw from God and dissent
from his offer. Thou have no power to cleave, to consent and obey.

I may say of thy unbeleefe, as of Saul's hypocrisy, 1 Samuel 15. 1 Samuel 15.30.
Though Samuel did sundry ways convince him, and ferret him out of his hole,
yet so tainted an hypocrite he was that he would not be convinced: He was at
last as at first: he said, Honor me yet before the people: and so went away an
hypocrite. Such is unbeleefe: its like the Ethiopians color, Ierem. 13.
or the Leopards spots: if these may be changed, then may unbeleefe, not else.
Oh! the endless and bootlesse urging of promises upon unbeleefe! behold her
face in a glass and abhor her, and say, Into her counsel let not my soul
come! And as I say of her treachery, so I say of her Rebellion: She will be
awed with no charge, no more than won by a promise. Alas! she thinks as Eve
thought being deluded by Satan: Genesis 3, 5.
That God forbad her the tree of good and evil, for hatred and of evil will:
all that ever God had enricht her with, could not sway her rebellious heart, to
conceive a good thought of him, still he did it to cross her. So does
unbeleefe deal with Gods charges: when he tells us, He commands for our good,
and not his own: that it might go well with us: we answer, No, I cannot
think so, its harsh to my ease, and sloth, to yield: True, but if it were
possible that thy rebels heart could stoop, it would after seem pleasant,
and thou would not for the world but have obeyed. This by the way may serve
to point out the contrary natures of faith and unbeleefe.

the sight of the promise, wonder that any man should take Christ and his
Nourishment; who yet when they be baffled with carnal reason, are so far
off the hooks, that they wonder any should believe it! Beware of this lewd
counselor; if once he and thou have talked, he will corrupt the simplicity of
the promiser, and the nakedness of faith: and fill thee with so many
crotchets, that (as they in John) thou will cry out, How can this thing be? Can
he give us of his flesh? John 6, 3^.
What a riddle is this? This is an hard saying, who can believe it? Surely no
man that has not chased away carnal reason, and closed with the promise. I
do not bid thee put off sound reason: for then I might bid thee (with a
Papist) believe that bread is turned flesh, and wine blood: I bid thee not be
mad; but not distrustful. Be not faithless! ascribe not more to the Pilot
than Paul, as that carnal centurion did, because he saw no other than
likelinesse of shipwreck. An Angel of God (says Paul) stood by me too night
and secured me: Act. 27, 1^
I believe God therefore; I see as little hope as any of you, nay less; but
yet the promise of God, and his charge, that I fear not, prevails more with
me, than all outward reason! Oh! do so in the Sacrament in the Supper as I
urged before in Baptism. Look at the word and charge, Except baptized of
water and spirit, ye are damned; cannot enter; he that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved. Look at this; and say not, shall a man enter the
second time into his mothers womb and be borne again? But honor the
promise, as Noa, John 3, 4.
when he was in the Arc was saved by faith; and the waters which swallowed up
the world, bare up the Arc and saved him; Heb. 11, 7. 1 Pet. 3, 20.
God had said it and he believed. So Christ has said it, This is my body; This
is my body. Why? (says carnal reason) I see no more here than at home, what
consequence is this: here is bread and wine, therefore Christ nourishment? I
eat and drink, and take the on^; therefore I may take the other? What sense
is here? None at all; It must be faith and Religion, not sense must rule here,
not (as Popery says) against common sense and true reason to produce a thing
impossible) but to confute unbeleefe against false and carnal reason!

Oh! either cut the Throat of it, or it will cut thine! Lift up the Arc of
thy faith above the rocks and cragges of reason, or else it will Split: Beg
the spirit of the promise and of the command, to set thee upon the rock that
is above reason, Christ and the Sacrament, or else reason will destroy both! 2
King. 6, 18.
There are more with thee (as Elisha told his man) than against thee, if the
promise and command of Christ be for thee! Its an evidence from God, and
subsists in his faithfulness, power, and mercy, grounded upon the death of the
Lord Jesus: 2 Cor. 6, 1.
Receive not this grace in vain, as if thy ears were stopped, eyes blinded,
hands held and cheyned by thy fleshly sense! Rather let this promise of Christ
loosen this chain. Solomon says, A gift in the hand, prospers whither so ever
it go; Oh! here is a gift in the hand, Take and eat. This is my body given
for you, and now given to you: let this prosper against all the mutters of
carnal Reason: and say, Oh! be there never such unlikelihood (as Caleb said of
the Anakims) yet they shall be but meat for us: Number. 14, 7, 8.
If the Lord love us he will give it us! So say thou! If God have spoken,
standby sense, and be still: I know thou will be ready to put thy self forth
in and against each promise, but I will have no ear to hear thee, if God
speak. The charge of God has power to enable thee, as well to command thee;
it gives what it commands; as when the Lord Jesus bade the Palfie man rise, he
put life and motion into his limbs and joints and left not the work to the
criple; So I say, resist sense and corruption by a promise and a charge of
Christ, and it shall stoop unto them. The Lord has put an infinite power into
one against the other.

Esaias 1. The words are both used to signify faith, Esaias 1, 19.
for a matter not unlike: and (says he) ye shall eat the good things of the
land. So say I here, come with an open hand, and a simple heart, and a naked
faith; and thou shall eat this meat and drink this drink indeed never to
decay. True apprehension of the Promise first, will cause it. Say then thus,
Lord thou saydst, seek my face in the supper, thou saydst, come, take, eat:
What meanest thou but this, that I should concur with thee, and be of like
mind, consenting to thee, that thou dealest plainly, and speak as thou
meanest, without hook or crook! Oh Lord what should let me! I am convinced,
that if thou had not meant well, thy self and Christ might have spared
infinite labor; Therefore I consent. Thou say, take as freely as I offer; be
to me as I am to thee; play not the traitor; 2 Cor. 6, 11, 12.
Be enlarged to me, for I am enlarged. Oh Lord, so I am! I believe, I dare not
distrust, and descant, and play the slave with thee, but see cause, why thy
word should be esteemed as pure, true, faithful as thy self is: I am the
cause of my own sorrow; could I be to thee, as thou to my soul, my people, as
thy people, my thoughts, affections as thine; Oh how happy! I will strive for
it.

So, for obedience! say as Peter, Luke 5, 5.
At thy command I will let down, I will take thy Sacrament. Alas! what villainy
were it to think, thou should seek thy good in it, and not mine! should not
I creep and crouch for it, rather than urge thee to command me! Nay, should
not I fear that if I disobey thee in thy charge, thou will threaten me with
condemnation for not discerning thy meaning! Oh! I obey with all gladness!
Give power to do as thou bidst, and I will do what thou will! And to end this
point, deny thy self, and come in the sense of thy utter perishing to the Lord
for this grace of the Supper. Come to the Lord with that speech which the
Israelites were bid to come to the feast of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 26. verse 5. A
perishing Syrian was my Father: So come with a soul in love with his dainties,
and like to sterve for want of them. The drowning man has the most Taking hand
of all, the most catching fastening hand of all: 2 or 3 of his fingers will
take more hold, than an whole hand of one that is well enough: be it never
such a paulsey-hand, trembling and shaking, yet if a taking hand, it is the
hand which Christ calls to his body and blood.

The latter work of faith, 2 Branch. Application of faith.
is the application of the grace offered unto thy soul, for the gain thereof.
When thou have believed the promise once, do as he who has bought and paid
for his bargain: incorporate thy self into the benefit of it, and apply it to
thy self: Take the Lord Jesus thy nourishment so, as he may in truth really
nourish and do thee good in all thy whole soul, in all the powers of it, in
thy whole body and all the members, and in all thy whole course, of each part
and service thereof. See it be well with thee in all, that thou prosper in
all, and bless God for faith, when thou feel her carrying from this body
and blood of Christ, Laid out by a similitude in 4. Branches.
into every faculty and member of thee. Faith in relation to Christ, in the
supper, may be compared to the Nourishing soul and her natural faculties in
man, and that in four particulars.

1 Faith Sacramental resembles the stomach in the body. The stomach we know
so takes the nourishment, 1. By the stomach.
as that it unites it to it self and alters it in the property, that it may
become her own, and begin to loose it own form, that it may put on a new.
Till the stomach have thus held, closed and digested the meat, lo, it may be
voyded up again. This is the first work. Faith takes the Lord Jesus, and
closes, with him puts him into the stomach of the soul, digests him there,
unites him to it self, suffers him not to depart away from her as he came, but
holds him, makes him hers, and alters him in some degree for her own
Nourishment. When the hand takes Bread, flesh, drink to put it in the mouth,
lo its true meat in it self, but not the bodies as yet: but if the stomach
have once laid it in close, lo, it ceases to be bread and flesh, and begins
to be the stomachs, and to undergo a due change that it may afterward be
the bodies food. The Ivy does not so close with the tree, or the Misle to the
Appletree, for her own end, altering the juice for her own use, as faith
Sacramental, alters Christ's body, blood makes it another, turns it into
matter prepared for her self. Faith truly says, by virtue of the ordinance
and Spirit of the same, lo, This body is mine, my meat, I lay claim to it:
this blood is mine: All the grace of the Sacrament is mine, I clare not leave
it behind me, for its given for me, as meat for the body. And as the
stomach closes with meat as her own, so does faith with the Lord Jesus, for
why? By as due right this nourishment is hers.

Secondly, faith is like the natural Appetite in the body: 2 By Natural
Appetire.
we know such is the Nature of that faculty in the healthy and stirring, that
there is always a passage from the stomach to the veins; and so the appetite is
clear, the stomach kept clean and fit for continual Attraction of new
nourishment. So is faith in the soul, it holds the soul in such perpetual
holy motion: and passage of old nourishment; that it is always healthy, and
empty and open to receive in new. Perpetual expense of nourishment, prepares
her appetite to new refreshing. The soul that is desirous of meat by starts
and fitts, is clogged, and makes not away with the former: but when the use of
nature has conveyed one meal away, and spent the strength of one; lo the
veins grow very attractive and pinch the stomach to covet more, and to be in
perpetual appetite. Faith is the stirring workman, or hous-wife in the soul,
never surfited with humors, or clogged so with distempers; but that she
retains some sweet appetite after new refreshing. Otherwise Christ yesterday,
to day, and for ever, would grow fulsome and wearisome with her: but by this
means the appetite is in continual health, and temper; ever sending forth
supply for new duties, occasions of the heat and life, and therefore ever
capable of new nourishment with delight. Hence it is, that though the meat be
not much, which she takes, yet she thrives merveilously: and a little in an
hail stomach goes a great way? how much more then when hunger makes her feed
fully?

Thirdly faith is like the great carrying vein in the body, 3 By the carrying
vein,
from the liver the fountain of blood and nourishment: and to the small veins
in the extremities of the members. For as the one derives the blood into each
part by a propriety of nature secretly distributing the mass into several
parts, according to their variety of substance and need: so is it with faith,
she comes to the mass and full heap of blood and nourishment, she finds an
hoorde of fullness in Christ; and there fastens her pipes and vein of
conveyance; and thence she carries to the uses of the soul whether for
blessings, a sober thankful heart: or for crosses, an humble, meek,
believing, and confident upon the promise of Christ's protection: here she
lays in grace to rule her self well in marriage, then in family, in hearing,
in prayer: here she catches at grace to resolve her doubts, to bane her
corruptions, to better her conscience, to comfort her in forgiveness: none
comes amiss; as the need and measure of each part requires, so she draws and
derives, from Christ, her wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. And look how the distribution of nature, does by secret instinct
derive meet juice for each part, not that to one which is the others due: but
the tenderest to the most fleshly, and the viscous or course to the stiffer, as
muscles and joints: so is it here, the derivation of faith is wiser than of
nature.

And the veins of last concoction.
Secondly, having so done, the lesser veins nearest to each member to be
nourished, by the heat and concoction of it, does turn this proper
nourishment into the substance of the nourished, that both may be one; and this
is the eminent work of faith also; that turns the Lord JESUS, into the being
of the soul spiritually: it does not only carry meet juice to the part,
leaving it there unapplyed; but makes the meat and the member one. The Lord
Jesus by faith dwells in the soul, inhabites it, is one with it, bone of her
bone, and flesh of her flesh: and by his own strength prays, hears,
meditates in her: by his own strenght, patience, love, humility, puttes an
influence into her for the like; so that of his fullness the soul has grace
for grace: yea Esaias. 26, He does all her works for her, and in her: he is
afflicted and suffers with her, rejoices in her, and she says, Now live I,
yet not I, but Christ in me.

Lastly, faith is like the natural soul her self in her Operation: 4. By the
Natural soul.
for as we see men well fed, are fit for work; so is it here. Faith exercises
the grace of the soul, received from CHRIST Sacramental, in the several
passages of life, concerning each man's calling. Look how it is with ten men
that have bin well fed at one feast, although they have 10. several works to
do, yet they go cheerfully about them; the plowman to toil, the Merchant to
project, the Scholar to his study, the traveller to his journey; the works
are several, but the same feast affords strength and cheer of body and
spirit, to each of them, for the menaging of his task; even so, 1 Kings 19.8.
in the strength of this cake and water, this Lord Jesus his body and blood,
the refreshed soul goes about every lawful service which the Lord calls her
too: One hinders not another; But there is enough in Christ to fulfill all, and
to fit each for his task. So that, if he be put on well as the Apparel; lo,
in the warmth and comfort of it, the soul is ready to go from duty to duty,
from her rising, to her lying down; who of her self was good for nothing. And
thus she boasts, 1 Cor. 1.30.
boasts of the Lord; and sees that as her self cut off from him, is as the
branch that withers, so all her sufficiency is from God; and as the sea sends
forth al, l waters, and receives them, so does the Lord receive from faith the
honor of his al-sufficiency: These few things may serve for a draught of this
Truth, how faith Sacramental applies Christ to be her Nourishment, having
taken him in the Promise.

Admonition in many Caveats.
Beware least thy vain heart be seduced by Satan to forsake the Lord in the
plain way of his ordinance, as if because it is seely to fleshly show,
therefore thou stumbling at it, should be carried from that which should do
thee most good, to do thee most hurt. Help thy hand of faith, by the hand of
sense, assure the one by the other, but hurt it not. Resolve to get the Lord by
his own way. Miss not the gripe and hold of a Promise, for a shadow of thy
own conceit. Let not wanderings of thy mind, suspicions and jelousies against
God and thy self, the guilt of old receivings, the examples of the common sort
of Communicants, who make a custom of going as they come; the temptations by
thy own unworthiness, emptiness, and baseness, carry thee from the steady
believing of the promise. Tie not God to thy girdle: rather fasten thy Boat to
his Barge, to be carried by the motion of it: Nourish not an evil eye against
others, that they grow by their receivings, and prosper, but not hou. Turn
envy into faith, and the fullness of him who has blessed him, can also
satisfy thee. Let not an evil heart of unbeleefe possess thee, to think,
the Sacrament will prove no better to thee, than it has bin: rather think,
its the way whereby GOD has appointed to break through the pikes: therefore
the Lord will not suffer thee to live so barren as formerly.

2 Pet. 3, 8.
yet know, a thousand years with him, are as one day: he has a day of
salvation: an accepted time, and will one day pick out special Sacraments, and
by them special graces, for special needs: cure thee of all the deadness,
world, hollownesse, pride and self which is in thee, if thou mourn under thy
burden: say, Corruption shall down, and grace shall outlive it, and I shall
yet see better days, and best at last: though I feel little, seeing GOD has
said it, I believe it. Do not appoint GOD his measure, nor his time: but wait
and try thy patience: perhaps GOD looks for it: Light is sown for the
righteous, let them wait till it come up. Demensum which thy wise steward sees
best, is better for thee than a greater: Thou have no promise of such a measure
but of grace sufficient. If thou have any dram of it, know its precious, thou
art not worth the ground thou go upon, the breath thou drawest; and will thou carve for thy self in the degrees of grace?

Exhortation.
Secondly and lastly, come and bring thy faith to Christ thy nourishment, and
close with him for it. And remember, for as much as the Lord has only
appointed thi^ grace of faith to be that spiritually to thy soul, which the
mouth, stomach and veins are bodily to corporal nourishment: Therefore rest
not in any other instrument of application whatsoever, either in thy bodily,
and carnally touch, or in the carnal conceit of thy mind, thinking thou
come with a devout mind, or with that faith in the Sacrament, which the
Church do come with, infolded in a mystical darkness of devotion; for what
soever is brought hither in stead of faith, shall be thy bane one day, and is
abominable to God. Let it be thy appetite, thy stomach, thy veins, thy
soul, to draw, to unite, to distribute, to assimilate, and to convey Christ
into all parts of thy life. Lin not till his substance be thine. If thou had
a sundry friend to furnish thee with sundry boones, thy want would send thee to
them all: To the Lawyer for direction in thy suites and troubles; to the
Physician for thy diseases; to the rich to borrow moneys; and perhaps for
necessity, to a Divine, in trouble of mind: Count the Lord Jesus all. If a
poor man be asked why he makes such a trade of it, to frequent such an house:
He will say, Its a full house, its not dear, to trouble it often. To be sure,
here, to this store and wel-spring; the ofter thou come (to the Supper I mean)
the welcomer. If his fullness can make thee empty, know all thy emptiness
cannot rob him of fullness. Believe that thy need can not amount higher than
his fullness: and so long thy pipes are sure to be filled. But come in faith,
and bring a free heart, and an empty bucket, and be to him, as he is to thee:
Come to hm to cloathe nakedness, to pay debts, to rid thee of chains; and let
there be no fullness in him, whereof thou feel not need, and then as the
Sacrament is appointed to thee for special growth in godliness, so shall the
Lord Jesus become unto thee; and thou shall not be the first servant that shall
bring in a false report of Christ, for an hard master to thee, as hypocrites
do. And this be said of this maine point, chiefly aimed at in the first part
of this Treatise, to show the use of Christ our nourishment.

One point still remains: Namely, The second act Sacramental of the people.
Eat, Drink. The meaning of it. Enjoying the chief things of Christ in his
feast. Psalm. 128.2.
the second act of the people, to eat and drink Christ. Which I distinguish
from the other for just cause. When these two acts are divided in the Text, I
expound them for one thing, Take, that is, believe, and eat, that is, believe;
but when I find them joined, especially in so solemn a text as the
Institution of the Supper is, I avoid repetition, and do conceive two things
to be meant, by Taking (as I have said) Believing. By Eating, enjoying the
benefit, or delighting the soul in the fruit thereof, according to those
Texts. Of the fruit of thy labor thou shall eat. Psalm. 128,2. 1.19. Esaias 1,
19.
Thou shall eat the good things of the Land. In which places, Eating is not
taken, as in Ioh. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, Ioh. 6, 51.53.
ye have no life in you (where eating is taking for believing) but as here, for
enjoying. So then the eating of Christ Sacramental, is, That spiritual
enjoying of the Lord Jesus, and all his good things which we have received; to
bear our selves as well apaid ones at his feast, and such as are filled and
satisfied with himself, desire no better condition count our portion to be
fallen into a good ground; and so reflecting upon our souls what we have found
at his Table, rejoice therein as in spoils, and he have our selves as those
who have been keeping holiday in his house, and feasting in the Mount (not of
Sinai or Horeb, as Moses did) but the Gospel, Esaias 25, 8. Esaias 25.8.
and therefore we having that we came for, be as we would be; and possess our
souls with exceeding complacencie and contentment, and enlarge them to the
Lord with joy and thanks, rejoicing in him, as Mary says, our Savior, and God
all-sufficient.

The grounds four.
For why? Is there not good cause, or need we be ashamed, or pluck in our
heads as if confounded? No, the feast we have been at, and the dishes thereof
are things of perfect sweetness and contentment; and that in respect of these
four perfections: first, Safenesse, secondly, Pureness, thirdly Fullness, and
fourthly, Durablenesse. In all these, the dainties of Christ exceed all other,
and he in them all other objects. The world has her delights and feastings, 1
The safety thereof.
both wicked and indifferent liberties; but neither safe, both dangerous.
Thieves delight to steal money, and stolen waters are pleasant: True in the
taste, but as the Prophets. Book, Bitter in the belly. Know thou not that
there will be bitterness in the latter end? 2 Samuel 2, 26. 2 Samuel, 2, 26.
When prison, fears, gibbetcome, then all the honey is turned into the gall of
Aspes, as Job 20, 14. Job 20, 14.
Wickedness is dangerous in the issue: witness Gehazi's booty, Achans Garment
and Gold, the Fools ease in his plenty; the Harlots taking her fill in
pleasure, in her husbands absence; but her steps are not as her lips: these
drop honey, but they go down (with her guests) to hell. Nay even of the
indifferentest liberties I may say, there is no safety in them; for there is a
surfeit in them, either to body or soul: Wine is an mocker, and strong drink
is a deceiver; there is a hook and a snare underneath; in the issue they bite
as a Serpent. Too much honey is not safe; it surfeits, and kills: even as
feasts of great plenty breed diseases, and make work for the Physician. The
unsafenesse of the best thing, makes it imperfectly contenting; But the feast
of Gods corn, and oil, and milk, (as it costs nothing) Esaias 55, 1. Esaias 55,
1.
So a man may feed on them without fear; as in Verse 2. Eat good things, and
spare not: curb not, nor put a knife to thy appetite, the more the better; no
surfeit is in them. Let thy soul delight and satiate it self in this
fatness, there is no hurt in it. Not safe only in respect of Gods leave and
warrant: as Solomon says, Drink of thine own wells, thou art truly entitled
to them in him whom all things are thine by: But thou shall never hear of them
after, for any danger they can do thee. Read Ephesians. 5.18. Ephesians 5, 18.
In all other things is excess.

Secondly, these Dainties Sacramental are pure and mere, 2 Their Pureness.
uncompounded, and without the mixture of carnal delights. Sweet is that of
Solomon. The Lord gives the righteous a portion, and no sorrow with it. He
means, there is no check of an ill conscience in it; as commonly in worldly
contents there is, either by the person, or by the things; either the user is
none of Gods, or the things are ill come by, and impurely used. But here is
neither impurenesse of person or of things; each are pure to other, Tit. 1.15.
Tit. 1, 15.
whereas the conscience of the impure is defiled. Hence it is, that this
mixture marres the feast. As we see in Belshazzars jollity, there wanted no
mirth, Dan. 5.4, 5,
but the Lord caused such an horror to fall upon it, by that handwriting, that
all the joy vanished. As he in the Fable, who all the while he was feasting had
a naked sword (hanging by a bristle) with the point downwards, hanging over
him. As once one said (when he had showed a friend all his Treasures.) But what
if a man should go to hell with all these? When Haman had related all his
contents to Zeresh and his friends, he adds, Ester 5, 13.
Yet all these do me no good, when I see Mordecai sitting in the Kings gate.
The sweet meat of the wicked has sour sauce, but these dainties are pure,
meat and sauce are good, in themselves they are holy, so to them pure.

3 The compleatnesse.
The third perfection is their fullness. In all other contents there is a
scantnesse, in respect of the number, that men have not enough of them: If men
of poor become rich, then they want pleasures; if both, then they want honor
to make their content full. So they strive still for an earthly Paradise, which
is lost,; and when they have all yet their soul has not enough: But these
dainties have a fullness and comprehension in them, able to satisfy the
spirit; there is an equalness in them thereto, Genesis 45.25.
both are eternal. The heart has enough, as Jacob said when he saw the
Chariots; and although it longs after more for measure, yet it finds rest and
quiet, even in the kind of the things which are perfect in their nature. When
men take money in a market, or for their rents, still they like that they love,
but yet they want, and there is an hole unstopt: the barren heart cries as the
grave, Prove. 30.16.
give, give: and why? save, because they have not enough; yea, though they had
enough (for a mediocritie is enough for a sober mind) yet because there is not
a quality of content in them, their increase works no full satisfaction. A
man that has spending money enough, wants a stock, another has money to buy
him one suit, but he wants for change: or he has enough to buy one of cloth,
but not of velvet; or if he have that which will suffice for apparel, yet
considering that children, diet, suits of Law, and friends, call for more
expenses; that he has joys him not so much as that he wants: So are all the
fulnesses of this world, they have a scantnesse: not unlike to a coat made
scant, which comes not over the wrists or knees or bosom, but leaves them
bare. But this nourishment and fullness of Christ is as is described, in every
kind, and a full supply, as I noted before, and especially, out of Revela.
3.16. by an enumeration of all things for use and price. Revel. 3, 16.


The 4, Durablenesse.
The fourth and last is durablenesse, and continuance. When folks go to
Pageants, and enterludes, oh! how they are tickled? How they could spend days
in them? But when all is done, they are al a-mort. As I have heard of some
besotted Epicures, who were not able to subsist, when their games and drinkings
were over: and therefore so laid the matter, that the end of one should begin
the other; till at length with rotten bodies, and wasted consciences, and
empty purses, and tired spirits, they fell dead over their cups and games.
Alas, though this were a prodigious, yet not a perpetual lasting; and yet such
a one as made themselves last but a while. But lo, the things of this feast are
durable meat, drink, riches and honor. No wonder they issue from a
fountain, Ier. 2.13. Ier. 2, 13.
not a broken pit: A Fountain (we know) though it be but a fingers deep, yet
outlasts a lake that is up to the middle; the one payres with use, the other is
fed with a Fountain. Durablenesse in kind, and durablenesse in succession, is
great perfection. If a man could buy cloth which would last all his life
without wearing, and yet daily wear better and better, oh, what a market would
he think he had? when those fading and blasted crowns of Laurel and Wormwood
are withered; men's gains, feasts, brave clothes, games and companies: then the
garland of a Christian made of Semper-vivum, not the herb, but the grace of
the Sacrament, shall flourish and survive upon the heads of the believing
receivers; and when some of them blast at their death, yet they cease not till
another crown of immortality succeed for ever, and ever. Rejoice in the Lord;
Phil. 4, 4.
but how long? Not as in froth, and the cracking of thorns: but always, and
again (I say) rejoice.

Diana of the worldlings. But if Christ exceeds yours in all four, wonder not
if we come not in unto you: but tremble you for your sitting so long upon the
devils deaf eggs: throw eggs and nest upon the dunghill, and come in, and
join with us, cast your lot in with us, and let us have but one Portion. We
would not change with you although we might have this boot, to tell money all
day, and have it when we have done: although your lusts commonly strip you,
even of the outward also. Rest not in a short ruff, and running pull of joy,
and to say, Would there were neither Preacher, nor Puritan in England. Alas!
your time is short, and your sorrow will be endless: Let Husband and Wife
look back and say each to other, What fruit have we had of all under the
Sun? Surely, neither safe, pure, full, nor lasting: therefore let us forsake
it in time for a better, while there is season.

Exhort to enjoy it.
and to enjoy the portion with sound complacencie and content which the world
knows not, nor shall ever enter into. Tell me, why do men sow, purchase,
build, labor? Is it not for the fruit? Use all these in their kinds, but
enjoy these, and in so doing, ye have the perfection which nothing else can,
and these do afford to the soul. But here ye will say is the difficulty. I
answer, I will point briefly at two or three branches of direction and so
conclude.

Directions for it, three. The first delight in God. Psalm. 37.
The first is this, Delight in the Lord for this perfection of soule-content
which he offers in his Christ. The perfection of love is joy: let him have
perfect delight of thy heart, for his perfect nourishment. If David said well.
Delight in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire: how much more
then set thy heart upon him, when he has already done it, that he may do it
more? Use the Ordinances of Word, of Prayer, yea of this Sacramental Christ
our nourishment, as a stirrup to get up into this full, safe, pure, and durable
object of delight in the Lord, his Christ, and Spirit, who (when all these
poor helps which serve to proppe up a Pilgrims travel, as so many
baiting-places till he get home; shall fail:) yet shall be the eternal
delight of the soul in glory. Begin this complacence and well apaiednesse of
heart, here: and if it be hard, pray to God to give thee a judicious heart, to
understand the weight and worth of the things, and to delight groundedly in
those things which are best, and approved of God to deserve it. As if a Iueller
assure thee of the value of a pearl, he need say no more. And pray also that
all thy affections may follow, love, joy, (fear to forgo it) sorrow, (if
weakened) and all the rest, as in a Gentleman's house, let the Master welcome a
stranger, and all the servants will strive to do the like.

Beseech him that his Spirit of comfort by faith, may not only show thee the
good things he has given thee, 1 Cor. 2, 12. 1 Cor. 2, 12.
but shed a lively sweetness and joy in them into thee, so that as the Vine
said, Judge. 9, 11, 13.
Thou will not forsake this thy fatness and sweetness for any thing. Beseech
him to purge thy conscience from all creeping defilements of thy self, world,
Satan, or crosses, which might dampe it: and so raise up thy soul by them,
above all this earth, which might eclipse it: If it be an heaven upon earth,
now and then to believe a promise, to savor a Truth, to receive a Sacrament, to
be in good company, to resist a lust, to revive a grace; what should he be who
is all these, and whereby should the heart be sooner raised up to him, than by
that which makes all this good cheer, the Sacrament of the body and blood of
the Lord Jesus? Oh! maintain no melancholy distrust against this. But as
Hanna, 1 Samuel 1. 1 Samuel 1.1^.
when she had heard Eli, was quite another and wept no more, so be thou.
Peninna still was a chokepeare, (and so shall there never cease some thing or
other to correct thy content,) but yet Peninna now was no more thought of.
Remember if food and gladness always go together, (as Act. 14.17. Act. 14, 17.
How shall thou hold up thy face before the Lord of this feast, if thy sad
heart poison it?

Secondly, 2 Maintain communion with him.
add thi^^s maintain this Communion with God daily. As the influente of
Christ in the Sacrament is a special piece of our communion with God: so, when
we are gone it should make us fond to hold it, that we might be as it were
drunk with the wine of his cellars, and the pleasures of his house. That so we
may keep a communion with him daily from Sabbath to Sabbath: and be always
breaking bread, and receaving as those disciples at Jerusalem, who attended the
coming of the Holy Ghost. David was so ravished with that he felt in the house
of God, that he says, had I but one thing of God, this it should be. Psalm. 27.
That I might behold his face in the beauty of his Temple and holiness; and
yet he might never come into the Priests Sanctuary, much less the Holy of
Holies, to see the merciseat and the Arc under it, covered with glorious
Cherubins: which we may do daily. This is to spend our whole life in Gods
House, Psalm. 23. ult. Psalm. 23, 6.
Not to be never out of it, (which old Anna her self could not) but to retain
that savor of immortality and hope of eternal life, which the communion of
Saints in the world, and Sacraments does breed in the soul. Oh, the smell of
these spices in the garden, which the North-winde of the Spirit, does afford to
our nostriles, Cant. 4, 16. Cant. 4, 16.
should so perfume us, as all other fellowship should stink unto us: as no
douht Peter his nets did, and all the world when he was with Christ, and Moses,
and Elias upon the Mount, and would have built three Tabernacles, Math. 17, 4.
and said, It is good to be there.

As those brutish ones longed, When will the Sabbaths be gone, and the new
Moons be past? (meaning those feasts of continuance for weeks) so should
thou long for them. When will they come? And with David, Psalm. 84. Psalm. 84.3.
Oh my heart faints, and my feet long for to go to thy Temple! How rare are
such in these days, in which though our cups and vessels be of silver and
gold, yet our receivers are wood and stone (for the most part) and such as
savor not this bread of life, and food of Angels. How should we be afraid, lest
this Idol of form eat up all, as those lean Kine in Genesis 41, 18. Genesis
41.18.16, 20.
and lanke ears devoured the fat and full ones. Where is he who so comes to
the Sacrament, as loath to leave it, and to go into the air of the world
again? I ^^mmend not the excess of these old Monks, who forsook the course
of the world, for to live always in holy services: But this I say, few such
there are, who do so much as hold any savor of this communion of Christ
Sacramental, a few days after: Oh! then, such as have found this hoord of
grace in the Supper, keep it daily also, that it may attend ye forty days,
till the Mount of God.

Directions for it.
Therefore, let our daily course hold this communion. But how, may some say? I
will add one or two words of direction. also in all duties of both Tables) and
the fruits of this faith, I mean the graces of hope, love to the Saints (the
partners with us in this communion, Psalm. 16, 2. Psalm. 16, 2.
) and patience, humility, courage, thankfulness; and the rest, of which I
gave a touch before in the point of fruitfulness. Genesis 5.22.
and soberly, approving our selves to him in the way of our life: making his
Word our delight in both the promises, commands, and threats of it; and so
holding the Lord in our sight, as loath to forgo him. David, Act. 13.36. Acts
13, 36.
) as well as looking that it go well with our selves, (of which self-love our
spirit is full stuffed, except this grace scour it out.) Remember we, that the
gain we get by Christ in his Assemblies, should press upon us the bewailing
of the loss thereof, Zeph 3.18: Zeph. 3.18.
the beseeching God to establish the Lord Jesus, and to set up his King upon
his Zion, in the power of his Ordinances, to demolish the Throane of Satan and
Antichrist, that the Scepter of Christ may prevail every where against Popery,
Atheism, Ignorance, Blind devotion, profaneness, and form of godliness.
Phil. 3, 18. Phil. 3.18.
knocking us off from below, moderating our liberties for us, enlarging us to
desire his glorious presence, to have communion with him as he is; concluding,
that if these treaties with him at distance (as in the Supper) be so sweet;
then much more to eat and drink it in his kingdom, Luke 22, 16. Luke 22.16.
Oh! if our treasure be there, let our hearts be so also, and send we them
before us, in token we look to remove thither as our abiding place. Phil. 2,
1, 2. 2 Cor. 5.1. Phil 2, 1, 2. 2 Cor. 5.1.
Thus doing, we shall use the Supper for the end which it was given for, to
supply the absence of the Lord Jesus from us, Luke 22, 35, 16, 17. Luke 22.16.
till we may enjoy it.

Thirdly, let that good we have got out of the Sacrament, The third, imparting
our selves to others.
so plentifully abide in us, that we impart it to others. The nature of these
graces is such; not to feed on them alone. When those Leapers, 1 King. 7, 12.
1 King. 7, 12.
had filled themselves in the Aramites tents, with store of all things, their
hearts smote them, for staying there so long: and they resolved to hasten and
tell the King and people of it, that were sterven in the city. So should
thou: The Sacrament, is called a communion in this respect as well as the
former. Poor birds if they light upon scattered corn, call their fellows to
the heap. When Sampson had found honey, Jude 14, 9.
though he kept the riddle, yet he imparted his honey to his Father and
Mother. The benefits of Christ are not of a secret and private, but diffusive
nature: Let us be ashamed to consider that other things in the world are so
perfected by communion, that neither Trades, Arts, Customs and fashions, nor
any other thing, have cause to complain, but the matters of Christ are now at
the barest and lowest: Why? save that those that should excel in them,
conceal their skill and experience. The Communion day, should be our exceeding
day, and as in feasts, so in this, we should send (or carry) portions, and
acquaint others (wisely and seasonably) with our lot, and receive from them
like intelligence. And thus much for the second general head, viz. The grace
of the Supper. I conclude with the last.

And that is the particular end of the Sacrament, viz. The sealing unto a
believing soul, The third general. The end of it.
an assurance of that grace which it exhibiteth. I have spoke before of this
sealing power. I will add but a little for the applying of the gen^rall, to
this particular. Desiring the wise Reader, to look back, and make use of what
I have spoken of this sealing work in general, and to apply it here in
special to the sealing of the growth, as already I have spoken in Baptism of
the sealing of our Birth, or Regeneration.

A needful digression to show the order of the Spirits working.
And, that my Reader may retain the ordinary view of the two sealing works,
this briefly let me say, borne of God. That is to say, reconciled to him, and
renewed in him. Secondly, persuasion that she grows in the grace of the new
birth, and shall grow as a lively member of her head, till she receive the
fullness of that part. That God is the Author of both persuasions, appears by
the two maine heads of unbeleefe, which formerly I noted to reside in the
soul. First, that she dare not believe at all, that the promise of mercy
reaches to her. Secondly, that she dare not believe that she shall ever reach
to any further degree of sanctification than she presently feels. Both these
the Lord in his double persuasion confutes.

We do not limit God to his Sacraments, but (ordinarily) we say, he limits
himself in this kind. Lastly, I add, the most apt way to get the persuasion
of the Spirit in an higher measure, is to hold close to the lower measure. As
in the promise, the best way to get the persuasion of the Spirit of promise, is
to cleave to the bare naked word, and truth of the Promiser for himself. So,
the next way to compass the best measure of sealing persuasion in the
Sacraments, is to come unto them with faith in the persuasion of a promise: for
mark; the Spirit in multiplying persuasion, does never lose the former
measures, but holds them still as grounds unmovable. He that can now swim
without bladders, yet retains the skill he got first by them: and he that
makes true Latin of his experience and art, yet forgets not his Rule, by which
he first attained it: still the power of the bladders abides in the man who
swimmes alone: and still the power of the Rule is in him who of himself does
suddenly speak true Latin: Even so the promise still abides in the seal of
the Sacrament, and the persuasion of the sealing Spirit, although it be above a
promise, yet it is not without it, but holds the relation close. Even as the
seal and delivery, and seasin of a purchase, is above a Covenant, yet never
without it, but always relating to it, and adding a superior strength (which it
had not before) of persuasion and assurance.

Terror in two Branche^.
Now I finish with the Uses. First, if the Sacrament of the Supper has this
end, to seal the assured growth of the soul in grace; let it be terror for
two sorts. Covenant. As she that durst drink the water of jealozie, knowing
her self defiled, implied her craving the rotting of her womb: So I say to
all such: If they come not hither for the right end of God, they cannot choose
but come for the wrong: either for the better, or for the worse. A seal it
must needs be, no man can hinder it, yea to a covenant: if not to the Lords,
then to such a covenant as they belong too: that is, a league with hell, Esaias
28. a league with their lusts, adultery, pride, etc. As if the Lord should say,
Be thou yet more filthy still by rebuke of my Sacrament, more proud, more
profane; Add drunkenness to thirst. Fulfill thy measure. Its not my Sacrament
which causes thee to be so, but thy unclean dungill which dare offer it self
to the pure beams thereof. As Jeremy Lam. 3. Lam. 3.65.
So does this ordinance cry in Gods ears, Lord seal them to an hard heart
(which is thy curse) to an hard heart which cannot repent, mourn, believe;
because they have abused all thy calls in the word, all thy patience, and
means, and dare come hither in their sin, send them hence with thy black
mark upon them, for the scaring of others! Nay, the Spirit of this seal cries
after ye, ere ye be gone out of the presence of God, saying, how durst thou
sit here to catch the food of my People, with a dogs impudency? with that
heart which thou bring with thee from the alehouse or thy harlot, or oaths?
Go thy ways; never fruit grow more upon thee! No rain, no dew fall upon thy
hard heart! That which was a snare to Judas, John 13, 26,
even the Table and soppe of Christ, be a snare to thee, to fall, and rise no
more. If thou would avoid this, let this Doctrine of the seal pull thee to
the knowledge of the Covenant.

rather of formal presumption and security. What shall then this Sacrament
do, if there be so few whom it concerns? Shall it return in vain to him
that sent it? No, it belongs to those few, (for all are not alike) whom the
Lord loves, and will seal to the day of the full assurance and redemption.
The Spirit of sealing shall not be quite straightened for all the sin of
others. Mica 2, 7.


Admonition upon two grounds.
so that it should not effect that end which it serves for. To which purpose
remember these two items. Heb. 9, 16. Heb. 9.16. Ioh. 8.56.
If then those rejoiced in this sealing day, a far off ere it come, and saw
it as Abraham and others by faith: then what excuse shall thou pretend, who
see not this power and end of the Sacrament, being after the death of the
Lord Jesus, and being offered under the Signs of his death, thou mighst not
doubt of the effect of it. Grounds.
not only above other Ordinances of growth; but even the Word it self:
wherein, although there be a power also of Sealing, yet not under such
Evidences of the Lord Jesus crucified; nor under so great an authority and
commission to Seal.

Ahaz, deprive thee, either of the bounty of his promise or sign; least others
enjoy it, and thou be stripped even of that thou seemst to have. Go rather and
sum up those sweet promises of God, for thy growth. Behold them, John 10.9.
Ioh. 10.9. Ioh. 15, 4.
He that comes in by me, shall be saved, and go in and out, and find
pasture. Ioh, 15, 4. Those that abide in me, shall bring forth fruit in me: My
Father will purge them, that they bring forth more fruit. Such as are planted
in the house of my God, shall bring forth fruit in the Courts; shall in their
age bring it forth, and be fat and well liking. Read also those texts before,
Ephe. 3.16.17. and 4.15.16. Col. 1.11. and such like, to set thy teeth an edge.
Spread these promises before the Lord, beg his Spirit to seal them: Urge, 1
Ioh. 3.24 and 4.13. upon the Lord: And as a poor woman would cry to the Lord
Keeper for his Seal, so thou to this great Keeper of the Seal, to bring it
out to thee; Do not give him the lie, make him not a lier in his chief work,
wherein his honor most stands, and in due time he will hear him.

The end of the First Part.
An Alphabeticall Table, containing the chief points handled in the first Part.
A
ANtiquity of Sacraments. Page 3 Agreement of new Sacraments in two things.
Page 22, 23 Author of Sacraments is God, reasons of it. Page 29 Appropriation
of Elements, one part of their form. Page 38 What it is. ibid Application of
Elements by divine ordinance, what. Page 39 Assurance of Sacraments relates to
the Covenant, Page 54 What they do assure? Page 55 Acts Sacramental in
celebration why necessary? Page 64 Admission of the Infant into visible
communion, is the general use of baptism. Page 82 Aptness of the Elements in
the supper to resemble. Page 109 Acts of administering the Supper must follow
the institution. Page 112, 113 Christ is the nourishment of his, in point of
their Affliction. Page 107 Acts of the believing Communicant in the Supper,
two. Page 173
B.
Baptism, what? Page 70 Order of Baptism. Page 71 Matter of Baptism, water.
Page 72 It is united Sacramentally with Christ. ibid. Not to be despised. ibid.
Persons requisite to Baptism are four. Page 73 Grace of Baptism is partly
general, and partly special. Page 81 Baptism a great stay to fearful
minds. Page 83 Against prophaners of Baptism. ibid. Baptism requires many
things to make it our own in the power of it. 87. partly for grounds. 88.
partly for application. Page 89 End of Baptism what? Page 92 How attained.
Page 93. ib. Ignorance of Baptism and her use, great cause of mourning. Page
94 Want of true knowing Baptism, hinders assurance. Page 95 Use of Baptism
how to be tried. Page 98. ib. Grace of Baptism unlimited, not restrained to
the act of it. See preface. Bounty of God in clothing the Elements with honor
for us. Page 116 Blessing of Supper Elements, the second act of the Minister:
In how many things it stands. Page 119 Breaking of Sacrament, a third act of
the Minister, what, and whereto. Page 129 Broken Christ must provoke
compassion, and how. Page 134 Broken Christ cannot be applied but by faith.
Page 135. ib. Broken Christ, is nourishing Christ. Page 136 Christ is not
availing to us, except Broken. Page 130 How Brokennesse comprehends Christ,
both in merit and power. Page 131 Papists love an whole Christ in both Elements
unbroken, overthrowing him. Page 132
C.
CIrcumstances of Sacraments six. Page 1 Congregation requisite for
Sacramental persons. 69. their duty. ibid. Duty of Congregation in the act of
Baptism. Page 75 Carnal reason abhorred in use of Baptism. Page 90 Closing
with the Spirit necessary for the grace of Baptism. Page 91 Popish
Consecration confuted by the blessing of Christ. Page 123 A true Communicant
concurres with Christ in taking the Supper, Page 173 Carnal reason to be
abhorred in the taking of the Supper. Page 177 Maintaining of our Communion
with God in Christ, is one part of our enjoying him in the Supper. 191. and how
we may do it. Page 192 Communicating the good things of the Supper to our
fellow members, is a part of our enjoying and eating Christ in the Supper. Page
193 Communion with God how it may be nourished: the directions for it, four:
exercise of Graces: walking with God: service of our time: and knocking off
from hence. Page 192, 193.
D.
DIfference of old and new Sacraments in three things. Page 14 Difference of
the two Sacraments of the Gospel, in what. Page 23 In five things. ibid.
Dullness of most in conceiving the Sacraments, whence. Page 41 Discerning of
the Sealing power of the Sacrament necessary. Page 59 Dipping in Baptism most
agreeing to the institution. Page 77 Distribution of Supper Elements, the last
act of the Minister. 137. the ground of it. Page 138. ib. Drinking Christ in
Supper. vid. Eating. Delighting in God and Christ, one part of our enjoying
him. Page 190 Christ's Dainties, disgrace the Delicates of all worldings. Page
199
E.
EXcellency of Sacraments, See the whole preface, and page 27 Dumb Elements,
how they shall condemn unbeleevers. Page 52 End of Sacraments, what. Page 53
And how manifold. ibid. 55 Ends of Sacraments must be observed and not
separated. Page 62 Baseness of Elements must not blemish the Sacraments. See
preface. Exhibiting power of Sacraments whence it is. See pref. Eating and
drinking Christ, the second act of the people in the Supper. Page 185 What
Eating and drinking of Christ imports, viz. enjoying him, and how. Page 186,
187, 188. Grounds of Enjoying Christ, four: viz. his Safety, Pureness,
Completnesse, and Durablenesse. Page 187. 188. Enjoying of Christ in four
things. Page 190 End of the Supper is the sealing of Christ her Nourishment to
the Soul. Page 194
F.
Form and essence of a Sacrament, wherein it stands. Page 37 Faith mainly
required to discover Sacramental union. 50. and to apply it. Page 51 Form of
Baptism, viz. Grace of Baptism. Faith required for the getting of the grace
of Baptism. Page 89 Fullness of the Elements of the Supper. Page 112 Fruit of
Sacramsnts a great cause of our thanks even for others. Page 128 Fullness of
sails of Faith, a mark of the sealing Spirit. Page 103 Fruitfulness in
grace, the fourth step of soul prosperity by the food of the Supper. 160. and
how. Page 161 Recovering out of a Fruitless course, is one work of
Sacramental fruitfulness. Page 163 Faith obeying the offer of Christ in the
Supper takes him. Page 175 Application of the Supper resembled by four
natural acts of applying.
G.
SAcraments are Glasses to resemble Christ in. Page 56 Grown ones must look
back to their Baptism, Page 80. and 100 Grace of Baptism, what. 83. the
handling of it. Page 84. and 85 The Grace of the Supper, is, whole Christ for
spiritual nourishment of them that live in him. Page 146 Spiritual growth is
a second degree of soul prosperity, or nourishment by the Supper. 156. how
Christ does this. Page 157
H.
Holiness and hope of glory, fruits of the sealing Spirit. Page 103 Spiritual
Health of the soul the first part of prospering by the Supper. 115. what it
is. ib.
I.
INfants the object of Baptism. 78. yet not only they. ib. Baptism of
Infants proved. 78. ib. and reasons for it. 79. against Anabaptists. Infants
how capable of the grace of Baptism. 79, ibid. not by faith. ibid. Idolatry
prevented by the ordaining of Sacraments. Page 33 Imparting our selves. vid.
Communicating.
L.
LIberty from the Spirit of bondage one fruit of the sealing Spirit. Page 103
M.
MAtter of Sacraments must be sensible and corporal, and why. Page 32
Sacraments serve to be Memorials. Page 56 Matter of Sacraments adulterated by
Papists, or disanulled. Page 33, 34 Minister a necessary person for Sacraments.
65. His calling and person must be suitable. Page 65, 66. Ministerial acts
about Sacraments many. Page 68 Ministers duty in Baptism manifold, and what.
Page 76 Matter of the Supper Bread and Wine. 10. It is sensible. ib. Ministers
must be reverend and holy in Taking, Blessing, Breaking, Dividing, the
Sacrament, vid. Breaking, etc. The Minister honorable for his under
stewardship, dealing out the portion to Gods family. Page 143.
N.
NEcessity of teaching the doctrine of Sacraments threefold. Page 5 Number of
Sacra. small. Page 6 New Sacraments, clearer, fewer, and effectualler, than
old. from p. 13. to 19. Young Novices must make use of their Baptism. Page 99
Christ's Body and Blood for Nourishment of a Believer, is the grace of the
Sacrament. 146. and how, in six particulars. Page 147 Christ in the Supper
becomes Nourishment in all respects, as Baptism^ becomes seed. Page 152, 153
Christ our nourishment stands in four parts of spiritual prosperity. Page 154
Christ the Nourishment of the Believers, a fearful Terror to al unbeleevers.
Page 163 Trial of the soul about Christ her Nourishment in five things. Page
165, 167
O.
OLd Sacraments were curses to many through error. See prefa. Old Sacraments
dark: wherein and why. Page 15. 16 Old Sacraments more in way of resemblances
and why. Page 17 Old Sacraments weaker than new, and wherein. Page 18, 19
P.
PVblikenesse of Sacraments. Page 7 Popish colors for abasing the Sacraments
of the old Testament. 11, 12. their colors answered. Page 13 Papists see not
the distinct use of our two Sacraments, but confound them. Page 26 Propriety of
Elements twofold. Page 38 Papists ill judges of Sacramental union, and why.
Page 46, 47 Sacraments are pledges, and seals of Gods truth and covenant. The
point opened. 57. 58. Also of our fidelity to him. Page 61. ibid. Popery abuses
the Sacrament to profane ends. Page 63 Persons occupied about Sacramental
acts, who. Page 65 Person of a scandalous Minister weakens, but disanuls not
the Sacrament. Page 67 Parents duty in Baptism, what. Page 74 Popish darkness
in the signs of the Supper, and in the doctrine of it. Page 110 Popish bravery
of Sacraments confuted. Page 111 Perpetuity of the Supper. Page 118 Prayer the
first part of consecration of Supper elements. 119. and why, 120. ib. what it
contains. ibid. Personalnesse and Peculiarnesse, two causes of distribution of
Supper. Page 137 Popish denying the cup, wicked, Page 140 Peace and joy and
confidence, one mark of the sealing Spirit. Page 103 Spirit of Prayer another
mark. ibid. People must cling to the Supper for their own portion. Page 144
R.
RElapsers or revolters must make use of their former Baptism. Page 101
Receiving of the Supper, vid. Taking.
S.
NAme of Sacrament how used. Page 1 Season of Sacraments. Page 8 Sacraments to
be applied according to our necessities. Page 26 Substance of a Sacrament what,
The description of it. Page 28 Simplicity and meannesse of Sacraments for two
causes. 35. first for generality: then for safety. ibid. it should excite in us
spiritualnes. Page 36. ib. and 37 Gods security by Sacraments is best of all.
Page 60 Sealing power of Sacraments, vid. Pledges. The Spirit of Christ is the
inward Baptist: what it does. See preface. Self-denial, or stripping of our
selves, requisite for applying Baptism. Page 89 Spirit of Christ the true
steward to feed the hungry soul. See preface. Marks of the sealing Spirit of
Baptism. Page 102, 103, 104. What the Supper of the Lord is. Page 105 Order of
the Supper. Page 106. ib. The Sensiblenesse of bread and wine in the Supper.
vid. Matter of Supper. Simplicity of the Supper-elements. Page 11 Teaching
spirituallnesse. ead. Separation of the Elements, the first part of Taking.
114. Settling the Elements to their use, the second part of Taking. ead. Christ
our Steward to be magnified in the Supper for his provision. Page 141 The
Supper is to the promise, as the assumption to the proposition. Page 142 Christ
in the Supper exhibited as nourishment, more fully than in the promise only,
and that in 6. respects. Page 149 Stablenesse and setlednesse in grace is a
third degree of soul prosperity by the Supper, and how. Page 258, 159 A view
of that order which the Spirit uses in Sacramental sealing of the soul, in
four branches. Page 194, 195 Sealing power of the Sacraments, a terror to
unbeleevers. Page 197 Sealing power of the supper, to be mainly sought by the
good Receavers. Page 198
T.
TRansubstantiation confuted. Page 48 How it grew. Page 49, and Page 108 Taking
of the Bread and Wine, the first act of the Minister, Page 114. 117
Thanksgiving a second part of Christ's consecrating supper elements, Page 125
Why, Page 125. ib. 126, 127 Taking the supper aright, an act of the Receiver,
concurring with the offer of the supper in all the properties of it. Page 173,
174 All lets of Taking Christ by faith in the supper, to be abhorred. Page 184
V.
Union a maine part of Sacramental being. 42. the sorts of union. Page 43
Union Sacramental is not corporal, but real. 45, 46. and mystical. ibid:
Union Sacramental inferres no confusion of the signs with the grace. Page 47
Union is appointed for familiarising Christ with us. Page 49 The woefulness of
Unbelief, in not taking Christ in the supper. Page 176
W.
APplying our selves to the word, necessary for the grace of Baptism. Page 90
Wisdom of God in uniting all Christ in each Sacrament. Page 133 Weakness of
our nature the occasion of ordaining Sacraments. Page 33 Weak ones must not
deny Christ in his supper, to be their nourishment. Page 168 Little sense of
weakness in Receivers, hinders the work of the sealing spirit. Page 198
FINIS.
THE SECOND PART OF THE TREATISE OF THE SACRAMENTS.

Wherein the Doctrine of our due Preparation to the receiving of the Supper of
the Lord, is handled: together with our due behavior in and after the same.

An Appendix showing, First, how a Christian may find his Preparation to the
Supper sweet and easy: Secondly, the causes why the Sacrament is so
unworthily, or fruitlesly received by the worser or better sort, with the
Remedies.

By D. R. B. of Divin. Minister of the Gospel.

1 COR. 11.28. Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of
that bread, and drink of that cup.

Verse 29. For who so eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his
own damnation,

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes, for John Bellamie, dwelling at the three
Golden Lions in Corne-hill, 1633.

THE SECOND PART OF THE TREATISE OF THE SACRAMENTS.
CHAP. I. Concerning Sacramental Trial in general: the Description of of it;
and the duty it self propounded, reasoned and urged.
HAving treated hitherto of the Doctrine of the Sacraments (wherein the use of
Baptism was urged) it now remains that we come to the exercise of the
Supper of the Lord: Entrance.
Whereunto this second Treatise shall serve (if God will) and wherein,
(somewhat more largely) the Doctrine of our Preparation to this Sacrament shall
be propounded: The rather, seeing it was the chief scope of the Book it
self; and which occasioned at first, the former Discourse. That so the
religious Reader might in one view both understand what a Sacrament is, and how
to be received. Concerning which, I purpose to describe what this preparation
is; and then in special to descend to the branches whereof it consists, with
the use and application thereof: and so with some directions and caveats at the
end, to conclude the Treatise.

Sacramental Preparation and Trial, is a duty required by God, Description of
Sacramental preparation.
at the hands of all and every that desire to receive worthily; by the due
exercise whereof a man may discern whether or no he be qualified to receive;
and accordingly either proceed to Communicate with comfort, or else desist for
the present, till better prepared. I will briefly touch upon the severals of
this description, Six branches.
which are these six. First, what difference there is between Preparation and
Trial. Secondly, that Trial is a Divine command. Thirdly, the Persons who are
to try. Fourthly, what the due exercise of trying is. Fifthly, the different
sorts of religious search, and how this Sacramental search differs from them.
Sixthly and lastly, the end and scope hereof. The second and fourth of these I
reserve to the last place, as most essential to the duty. Touching the rest in
their order I shall first speak a little of them, and so of the two other.

In what respect preparation and trial differ.
And first, let none cavil at my differencing Preparation from Trial. I know
well that they agree in one, and that the former word usually is taken for the
whole Trial of a Communicant. My meaning by it is, to show what a man who
would try himself aright, is to do, ere he set himself about the work. That
is, Preparation is more general.
to bring himself within some such compass as may fit him the better to close
with a trial of himself. Not only to sequester himself from other business
and objects of the world and his calling, that he may do but one thing at once;
but also to call in, and to calm his thoughts and affections, so that he may
be himself, and gather up his loose garments, and gird the loins of his soul
to do this maine work well; that is, with a close, reverend, and intent
purpose of heart. Solomon has a sweet speech, Prove. 18.1.
For a man's desire he will separate himself: that is, lay aside for the time,
all other business, and thoughts of less consequence, that he may do the
maine thing to be desired, Mat. 13, 44:
in a more due manner. And when the Merchant had found the Pearl, he is said
to withdraw himself; that is, to go apart and to weigh well the worth of that
he had found. And in the story of Rehoboam, the holy Ghost uses this phrase of
preparing the heart to seek God; noting that to seek God either in the work
of Conversion, or in any service and ordinance, requires a separation of the
soul from the usual affairs of the world, which distract the mind from
weightier objects. As Solomon speaks of the fool, so it may be said of most
men, (who yet think themselves wise) Their eyes are in every corner of the
world; that is, so busied and hurried about a thousand vagaries and fancies
abroad, that they are no where less, than where they should chiefly be; in the
meditation of heavenly things: Hence that complaint of most, that meditation is
so difficult to them; others, their memories are so fickle, because they divide
and cut themselves (as Martha) into many pieces, Luke 10. ult.
who should rather unite themselves closely into one; and because they have
stuffed and fraught their minds and hearts with so manifold thoughts, and have
so many irons in fire at once, that one hurts another; as in the crowding of a
multitude at a small wicket, (at which one by one might enter easily) we set
its long ere any one can well get through.

1. Reproof,
condemning first that brutish profaneness of many, who (to bewray what
hearts they have) can hardly bite in their common talk and thoughts of base
carnal things, when they are to kneel down to prayer in their families, but
mix one so with another, till they breed irkesomnesse in others, and a
pollution of holy things to themselves. Perhaps all are not so gross, as once
one was in his saying Grace before meat, who brake off usually in the midst,
to bid his servant to set his dishes aright; but surely the sin of most men
is great in this kind: Except God will take them as he finds them, deep in
their business, and over head and ears in other matters, he must pardon them
for Trial at the Sacrament; for indeed they have used themselves to such a
course, that either they must defile Gods worship with their own vanities,
pleasures, profits; either they must serve God and Mammon at once, or not at
all: they never knew what an empty heart meant, unloaden of her usual thoughts
and affections, prepared for God, serious and withdrawn from it self; They
count it impossible to attain to it. To whom I say, As good never a whit, as
never the better:

Its a separation of the whole man for God; Instruction.
and that not in public only, (where our shops and trades and affairs must
be cast out) but in secret also. To have some few wandering thoughts after God,
to cast in a word by the way, of religion; to hear a chapter read in the
clutter of household business, is no worship; for that requires a separation.
There is more required also; but without this, nothing can be done. The hand
which will compass Gods Altar must be clean also: But first it must be empty;
if it be filled with nutshels and trash, it can hold nothing else. If we cannot
so much as hear a serious story, or indite a letter without privacy; if we can
do no choice work well, except we be solitary and serious: do we think it
easy to worship God in a Fair, a Marquet, an Alehouse, a Bargain, while we be
working, or playing, or prating, or dreaming? No, all our courage, all our
strength is too little; a broken, humble, believing heart is little enough for
it: Therefore at least an empty, a swept, and voyded heart is necessary.

Admonition.
we must ere we set to it, abhor that giddiness, lightness, and
fraughtnesse of our souls, (which the most think is no sin) as our bane,
and the destroyer of Preparation for the Sacrament. We must know, that as the
gold weights will not try gold till they stand still; so neither can the soul
try her self till she be well stayed and poysed. When we will power any
precious liquor into a vessel, or glass (especially if it have a narrow
neck) we will set it in a steady posture, for fear of spilling. No man can
see any thing in roared waters. As the Lord Jesus speaks of agreeing with our
adversary, that we must lay down our sacrifice by the Altar the whilst, Math.
5.25. 1 Pet. 2.2.
and do that chiefly; and as Peter bids those who will covet the milk of the
word, that they purge out of their stomachs all superfluity; so especially do
it in this Trial at the Sacrament. Its manifest by men's cavils against this
duty, (viz. that they have callings to attend, and business to look after,
and they cannot prepare themselves) that, I say, they account it as a venial
offense to be thus cloyed with other cares; but if it defile and destroy Trial
of thy self, how can it be small? Thou will say, thy thoughts and affections
are neither murtherous, unclean, oppressing, defrauding, lying, revenging,
profane, intemperate: What then? Is there no other disease mortal, save the
plague? Let it therefore be as odious unto thee, to carry a light, a gadding,
unsavory heart about thee, so full of other bables, that Gods liquor must
needs run over: I say, to be out of frame always to entertain the best
things, Let it be unto thee as odious as very profaneness it self. And before
thou venture upon trial, cleanse thy self of this fulsome glut: and do not
enterline or write Gods letters upon a blotted, but clean paper, even as thou
would wipe thy Table-booke, ere thou writest the Sermon. And whatsoever
vanity has pressed thy heart, or dares presume to come before God; serve it
with the same sauce that Abner is said to serve Asahel, that wild Roe, whom
(when he perceived to perke sawcily in his presence, and dare him to his face)
he watched him so closely, 2 Samuel 2, 19.
that he smote him with the hinder end of his Spear, and laid him on the
earth. Let thy care be, so to smite thy giddy heart, that it may no more annoy
thee, or interrupt thy spirit, being well occupied.

Exhortation
all thy powers and members, to come in, to forsake other objects for the time;
and close seriously, and sadly with the Lord, in this work of Sacramental
trial. As thou would feign have thy heart close at thy trial for the
Sacrament; nay at thy great trial of death, so keep it clean, empty,
unsnared, in thy whole course. Remember when thy heart would lash out, there is
a Sacrament, and a trial before it: If my thoughts then be past call, I shall
have an ill work of it, or else rush to the Sacrament with a surfeit upon it.
Surely look how thy heart is watched unto in thy course, so shall thou find
it, at a special season; and so shall thou bless God for the Sacrament, and
say, Else Lord I should have strayed endlessely; but this Ordinance has kept
me at a bay from wandering, not only from thy Commandments, but even from a
sober and serious attending to it self, in lawful liberties. So much for the
first.

Touching the second point, viz, The persons whom this trial concerns, it
has two branches, First, how many, Secondly, Who must try? For the former, it
may soon be answered: All must try and examine, Persons. 1. How many?
against the Sacrament. The charge is general, admitting no exception. As it
was to the Jews for the Passover, that all who eat it, must be liable to the
rules of observing it: Exodus 12.
so must it be in the Supper, none can be exempt from Trial, None exempt.
who will have a part in the Sacrament. Briefly (not to stay the Reader long)
He that has not a soul to save, to thrive, to prosper in grace, or to be
happy, or to desire it: He that neither cares for the loss of heaven, or woe
of hell; See Exodus 12.43.
he that abhorres the name of a child, and so the allowance of his fathers
house, and the portion of an heir; he that chooses rather to be without among
dogs and swine, he that has cut off himself and is become an Heathen and
Publicane, a scorner and pastgrace, let him exempt himself; else the Lord
exempts none at all. Pearls indeed must not be cast before swine, else it is
not the difference of any outward respect that can discharge from this duty.
All need the benefit of it, all are in danger to incur the loss by
neglecting it: all therefore are equally obliged to it. The people cannot
exempt themselves under color of inability, or not being book learned; they
must not put it off to the Minister as more sufficient for it. The Minister may
not exempt himself from it, as if he less needed it than the people:
Scholars are not free, because their calling is to study, or read the
Scriptures, for they may be far from the trial of themselves: Such as have
learned the doctrine of the Sacrament soundly, must not wash their hands of it,
because of their knowledge. The wife must not think her self to be tried in
her husbands careful trial, as if she were but his shadow, and has him to
answer for her; much less the husband may quit himself upon hers. The rich
must not plead liberty by his great business; nor the poor for lack of
leisure from his handy labor; nor the aged, because of their infirmities
growing upon them: not the more experienced, because they have often done it; nor
the novice, because he is green, and new to begin: not the travellor, because
in a journey: not servants, because they are under the government of others;
nor governors, because they have authority over them: No, there is no Time,
Age, Person, who can prescribe against the Lord of heaven; Prince and people,
learned and idiots, Jew, Barbarian, bond, free, great or small, are all alike
and under no difference with him; But all of all sexes, conditions, estates and
relations, (if men, if Christians, if of capable years and discretion) stand
bound to this Sacramental trial. He who will exempt himself, let him bring
forth his dispensation. Therefore let all covers of figleaves, drawn from the
variety and difference of outward respect, fall to the ground, as unable to
hold water, when God shall enquire who they are that dare take out their names
from this general rule; Gods laws are not as cobwebs, only to catch small
flies.

The second branch is, Who must try? To which I answer, Branch 2. Who must try?
Each one himself; for these are the express words of the Apostle, in which
were reason sufficient; But besides, there is cause for it. Each one himself.
are not errors and ignorances (properly) whereof the soul for lack of
knowledge can take no notice; but either good or evil, whereof we are privy or
guilty to our selves; and as for the rest, the Lord in mercy pardons them to
his own servants, who mourn for them, as those who would gladly know them,
and so shun all evil, and repent of their omissions and failings; therefore it
is conscience which must give the answer, and make the inquiry. others, is to
her well understood: And therefore from her must proceed this trial: she is
this him self, who must examine, and who must be examined. 1 Cor. 2, 11.
now that cannot be: for although some man may be in GODS stead to another
yet that is only in light and derection, not in search or trial. The things
that are in the soul, lie hid under so many locks, and with so many windings
and conveiances, that the soul it self cannot search them of it self, except
the Lord help her: Iere. 17.
much less can any other do it.

himself aright, may and must be such a law to himself upon due survey taken.

Admonition.
But it will more fitly fall upon the last branch. Here only I admonish such
as would try themselves well, to beware least they rest themselves upon either
the labors or opinions of others. How ordinary an abuse is it of the public
and private directions that are given to people for trial, that men think
themselves discharged from self trial? How great pity is it, that fair
weather should do such hurt? And that men should hang other men's trial of
them, as a Cover of darkness before their eye, that they might not come within
themselves? Some through unwillingnesse, ease, or a false heart, stop their
mouths with this, that having had such excellent helps, they cannot choose but
be well tried. Reasons why men try not.
Howbeit themselves can give no reason why? And others when they have offered
themselves to be tried, with some sense of their need; yet either by having
more knowledge of the Sacrament than was expected, or expressing some good
affections of desire and sorrow for the present, or because they have a gift to
make the best show, and to conceal the worst: I say, some way or other, bleare
the eye of their Minister or Parents: 1 Samuel 16, 7.
so that they thinking the Anointed of the Lord to stand before them, occasion
them to boldly adventure upon the Sacrament as if beyond exception. Alas poor
soul! Do thou not know that the trial rests in thy self? If thou be
neither truly broken, believing or Penitent, can other men's erroneous Charity
releeve thee? It may possibly be a great sin in another to think thee unfit
for the Sacrament (knowing no other) or to exclude thee: when as yet it is a
fearful, bold and uncharitable rashness against thy self (who know thy
self) to dare and presume thereto. Mat. 16, 29.
What shall it profit to win a world of good opinion from others, and loose
thy own soul? or to rejoice in other men's errors, Mat. 26, 22. See 2 Chronicles.
35, 6.
Objection. Is the trial of others needelesse?
to deceive thy self? What did it boot Judas to escape the judgment of all
his fellows in coming to the Passover? Let that pattern discourage all
selfeconceited and subtle hypocrites.

What then? may some say, is the helpful trial of others needles? No: But of
use. As we see the Levits to sanctify their brethren.

Only there is difference between the trial of others and our own. The
trial of others, serves as the materials toward a building: Answer. No.
our own trial, is, as the building of the workman himself. When all the
Timber, Brickes, and Lime is ready laid: the workman must finish the frame.
The Saw or Axe may be laid upon the stone, or upon the timber: but except the
lively hand of a man do acts those tools duly, there will be no sawing of
them in two. So is it here: The minister or governor must give light and
direction how to try, wherein it stands, and how the false heart should be
handled: he may teach, upon what terms search is to be made, and what not:
he may remove false scruples, error, and letts: But the verdict of trial must
be thy own in secret when all is done. As at the Assyses, there be two
Iuryes, the one of Inquest: the other of life and death: There is asingular use
of the former, and yet that meddles not with the final sentence. Only it
makes an easy way for the final, and remooves rubs, and gives light, what
bills are to be enquired upon: and so the other consults and gives verdict of
life or death, guilty or unguilty. So here let the use be, to admonish all
cavillers and profane persons, who would take advantage of the rule, to try
themselves: and all to exclude the help of others, whom they should shun,
least their sin and profaneness should be perceived. There are none who so
decline the help of others, but those who abhor to try themselves, and so at
once would rid their hands of all. But oh woeful wretch! Will thou neither try
thy self, nor take advice of others? If thou were under arrest for debt, and
some of thy friends would become surety for thee, would thou choose wilfully
to go and rot in rison, rather than to be beholding for their love? Then may
it be said, Thou art worthy to perish. Even so I say to thee, Revel. 12.11.
If thou will not try thy self, nor be tried, let him that is filthy, be
filthy still. Thus much for the second point.

3. General. The difference.
The third branch follows, which concerns the difference of this Trial from
others; and that from these words; (Whereby a man may discern himself to be
qualified to rereive.) I will digress as little as may be; but my aim is, to
dispatch somewhat in this point, which may give light to that which follows,
and to show what may help to the better trial of a Communicant when he comes
to the Sacrament; also how a Christian may without confusion apply himself to
each service of God, in the due manner and kind severally. First, Dister.
this Trial and preparation differs from the Trial we should premise to
other Ordinances, as hearing the word, reading, praying, fasting, family
duties, etc. All which require a preparing of the soul to seek the Lord: 1
From other Ordinances.
yet in there respects they differ: First, in that all other (for the most
part) although they do require an estate in grace, ere they can please God:
yet so far as they do confer toward the conversion of such an one as yet
wants grace, and must therefore be used upon pain of rebellion against God:
therefore they do not absolutely require that strict trial, which the
Sacraments do. True it is, those who hear, pray, fast, confer, being
destitute of faith, sin in the manner of doing: yet since the Lord has also
ordained them to be instruments of begetting faith it self: therefore its also
a sin to neglect them, although a man be unqualified to use them holily. But
the Sacrament is of another nature, being no ordinance appointed for the
breeding of grace, but of nourishing it only: so that he who dares to come to
the Sacrament being yet out of covenant, Double presence in Sacraments,
profaneth it both in matter and form. Therefore the closer Trial is required
unto it, above others. Again, in the Sacrament the Lord is not spiritually and
virtually present, but even visiblely and sensibly appears to his people in
the signs of the substance, matter and form of his covenant: both our
reconciliation, and sanctification. A good subject ought to present himself at
each Court and meeting of Justices, Sessions and Assyses, with due regard and
reverence, as one that dares not break the peace, nor be a bad subject.
Howbeit if the King do send for him personally in his own sight, to tender
and renew his oath of Allegiance, it behooves him to put on a more awful, and
reverend loyalty than before. So here, every ordinance is sacred and has the
Lord present in it: But the Sacrament exhibits him in a more real, near, and
familiar manner, even as if the Lord Jesus came corporally in presence, to eat
and drink with us, and to present us with his own flesh and blood to feast
us; Therefore in the approach thereto, our trial must be more cautelous and
solemn.

Differ. 2. 1. From legal
Again, the trial before the Sacrament differs from other sorts of Religious
trial. There is a Legal trial belonging to the unregenerate, by which by
soul laying it self in the balances of the law of God, feels her self
weighed down by sin to hell and destruction. There is a trial of the
Gospel, whereby a laden soul, finding that the Lord offers her ease and
pardon in Christ, upon the due preparations to faith, and actual believing the
promise, does try her self about the work of these, that she may partake the
benefit of Christ. There is a penitential trial, by which a believer having
fallen from God and broken covenant, 2. Penitential.
searches himself and casts up his gorge that he might by pardon of his
revolt, return to God, and recover himself to former grace and comfort. There
is also an ordinary and daily trial of a Christians course and walking with
God: 3. Ordinary walking with God.
by which he watches to himself and to the rule and living by faith, and
obeying God, viewing his practice daily, and keeping holy quarter with God, as
occasion moves him: These all differ, each from other, and all from
Sacramental trial; Not that they are excluded from it (for they are necessary
antecedents to it) but yet they fail in this special respect of a
Sacramental trial; which looks at this, how the soul may be qualified to
communicate.

So that in this trial, as these former trialls are helpefull, so yet a
further thing is looked at. This trial is a further thing.
viz.

The sum and scope of all is, thus much; Prove. 19, 2.
Without knowledge the heart is naught. If they who have practiced the 4.
Trials abovesayd, yet must not confound them with this, but revive this trial
at and for the Sacrament; what shall be said to such blind and ignorant tryers
as these without rule or reason? Lastly, it should inform every good
communicant in the nature of this true trial, not to desist and give it over,
by weariness, sloth, or difficulty, till in some measure he find how he is
qualified for the Sacrament, seeing till then he does but mistake the whole
scope of the Ordinance, and mock his own soul.

General. The issue of it.
The issue of this trial, viz. That accordingly a man may either proceed to
the Sacrament, or desist for the present. And this the nature it self of
trial requires, and otherwise it were needelesse to try except it were for the
issue. Which is plain by the end which the Lord has in trialls of another
kind. Why is the Lord said to try his people with false teachers, and lying
Prophets, Deuteronomy. 13, 3.
Is it not no know whether we will cleave to the truth, or believe lies? Is it
not that the faith of the elect might be discerned from the rottenness of
hypocrites? Why does the Lord try us with streights and crosses? Does he not
intend to try whether we will be content with our portion, or murmr and use
indirect shifts? So the Lord tried Gedeons souldies who were meet for war,
Judges. 7.5.
who not. Men also in their trialls (as at Assyses) what intend they, save
either to acquit, or condemn? My scope is to show, that Sacramental trial
has also her issue, either to encourage a man to receive with comfort, or to
desist for the time, till beter provided, with caution and wariness.

Instruction.
The issue is great, either the comfort of well receiving, and danger of
loosing a great blessing if we come not: Or else the peril of incurring of a
great mischief and judgment, if they presume to come. We say, the end of a
thing is last in execution, but first in intention. If this were so in the
purpose of such as try themselves; how wisely, jealously and religiously would
they go to work? If they knew and considered, that the scope of trial, is
either to come or to forbear; and that our desisting it self (if it be
ordinary) is a mocking of God, what color soever we pretend; how close and
wise would it make them in going between both extremities, either of rushing
to the Sacrament without trial, or desisting upon unsufficient trial? How
would it cause them both to tremble at contempt and refuzall: and yet also at
neglect of due trial ere they come? Which is indeed to make a virtue of a
necessity.

Reproof.
who (if they pulled out of the vile profaneness of such as abhor all
trial:) do presently think that God is so beholding to them for their trying
themselves, that let their trial be what it will, he owes them welcome to
the Sacrament for it. Alas poor wretch; Trial is appointed for an issue, not
for a fashion and formality, to stop the mouth of God and conscience. That
trial which has no issue, can have no due substance of matter or manner in
it, but rather is a confuzed doing of somewhat without rule, with opinion of
something in the deed it self, to commend a man to God. No. As well the tryer
of himself may see cause of not coming, as the not trier ought not to come.
Trial has still a respect to the issue: and must be used to avoid sin and
punishment, not to increase both.

Mark. 9.29.
and to expel such Devils as neither the Sacrament, nor any other Ordinance
can, especially the public Ministry being the setter of them on work, and
the first convincer of the conscience. Its a wise man's part to use every
Ordinance for the good of it;

Chap. 2. more is said. But, to rush upon the Scarament, upon Trial of this
dangerous Condition, is a double sin, an adding of drunkenness to thirst: as
also an abuzing of the Sacrament: causing it to seal up rather their guilt and
curse, than their pardon and peace. Remember still, the Sacrament convertes
none; but strenghtens the converted.

Beware therefore (all such) least by Sinister and unwise Counsel of any, they
blanch themselves over, and think that because they see all is not well,
therefore the Sacrament must be these Physician. No, The word of Law and
Promise must first convince them of sin, John. 16.9.
and then of Righteousness: whereof after they shall find both the Sacraments
to be a seal, through faith: Baptism of their Conversion, the Supper of their
confirmation. Only let this be added, That as they do for the present desist
from the Sacrament, so, yet they must ply this first conviction and trial of
themselves, by attendance upon other ordinances, till they come to see clearly
that the Sacrament belonges to them. For if they give over the work by
loosnesse and weariness, before the fruit be atteined: they may fear that
it had bin as good for them they had never seen cause by trial to desist, as
having so done, to leave their work unfinisht. Sacramental trial serves not
to dash men quite out of conceit with the ordinance, but to convince them for a
time, that they may be so abased for their cutting off themselves from it,
that they may return to it with more comfort, and abhor themselves in that
condition of desisting from it. And so doing, their Abstinence shall be for
their good: and although the Minister cannot suspend them, yet their own
suspending themselves shall prove more gainefull to their souls, than their
bold adventure. And so much for this fourth branch.

5 General: that it is Divine.
The 5. and 6. now follow: which (as I said) I have kept to this last place, as
depending upon one another, and most essential to the Doctrine. The 5. branch
then is, that this trial is a charge of God, not left arbitrary to us, but
necessary to the receyving worthily. To which ere I come, least any stumble at
this word (worthily) as if any could be worthy to receive: How a man may be
said to receive worthily.
I answer, its the phrase of the Holy Ghost himself in sundry places: And
look in what sense the wicked are said to be unworthy, in the contrary
thereto the godly are called worthy: first in respect of themselves, secondly,
of the Lord. Touching the former, see Act. 13.43. where Paul says, Seeing ye
think your selves unworthy of eternal life, etc. he means, that they
thought the tidings of it, unworthy of them; they thought themselves so worthy
and so good, that they thought Gods offer unworthy of them, and so they
despised the Counsel of God to save them. So here, the profane and hypocrites,
do think Sacramental Christ a mean thing, discern not what it is, or of
what worthiness, therefore they are unworthy. But the faithful receiver is
worthy: Matthew 22.6. 1 Cor. 11, 29.
Why? In respect of that worthy and precious esteem of the Sacrament, for
which they account no preparation sufficient. Secondly, in respect of God
himself. In which sense, Rev. 3, 4. the holy Ghost tells those few names in
Sardis, Revel. 3, 4.
that they should be clothed in white, for they were worthy; he does not mean
they were worthy to be so clothed; but being so clothed, they were worthy: that
is, the Lord having clothed them with the Robe of Christ's righteousness,
Revel. 19, 8.
(the linen of the Saints) they were worthy ones in his account: So
contrarily, the unregenerate are unworthy, because they are naked still, Revel.
3, 17.
and care not to be covered with this garment: And why? They know not (or will
not know) that they need it. Now then, as the good receiver is worthy, because
he is so accounted in Christ, and his preparation is accepted in him, and the
want thereof is not imputed: so the bad is unworthy, because his person is not
accepted, and therefore whether he prepare himself, or no, he is the same; for
out of the Lord Jesus he cannot be worthy. The Sum is, not the preparation
of a man (in it self) makes him worthy: But the imputing of preparedness by
faith: and this works an high esteem of the Sacrament, and a carfulness to
be a meet Communicant: neither whereof the ungodly can be partakers of. This by
way of Digression.

To return then: The duty of trial is commended by God. Proofs of it.
And this appears by Paul, 1 Cor 11, 28. as also by good Analogy of the
Passover, applied by the Apostle to us. For the former, Paul concludes the
direction for receiving well, and cutting off all abuses: Let a man therefore
examine himself, and so let him eat: He had told them before what Christ's
institution was: But as if knowledge alone of the pure ordinance were not
enough, he adds further, Let a man therefore examine: q. d. Although the mere
observing of the institution were enough to cut off the abuse of your love
feasts: yet, for the avoiding of all other corruption inward as well as outward,
I command from God, Let every man examine. He does not mean, let him if he
please, as leaving it to men's choice: but the word is imperative, let him, that
is, I enjoine him: As, let a man abide in the vocation wherein God has set
him: let a man so esteem us as the dispensers of grace etc. That is, I command
him so. Neither is this as one of those temporary counsels, of which Paul says
he had no warrant from God expressly: This says not the Lord, but I* But it
is one of those, of which he adds, This say not I, but the Lord. And the
connection of this 28 verse with the 20. evinceth: For I deliver unto you, that
which I received of the Lord, etc. And he subjoyneth, let a man therefore
examine, etc.

Further proof.
Nither does this rest only upon this text; but upon the Analogy of the
Passover, whereto this succeeds. Its manifest by the Scripture that there was
special Preparation of them that ate the Pascal Lamb. For not only the Lord
required the Lamb it self to be weaned off from the damme 4 days: to teach
the people in all that space to weane themselves from those sweet breasts of
their worldly delights, and lawful liberties; but he required them also to
keep another feast of unleavened bread seven days; wherein all leaven
whatsoever, was to be swept out from their houses, and Sacrifices to be offered
for expiation of sin, and uncleanenesse, that so they might not come polluted
to the Passover. And those two Passeovers of Hezekia and Iosijah prove it: 2
Chro. 20. 2 Chro. 23.
where special charge is given to the Levites and people to sanctify
themselves and each other: although for the speediness of receiving, there
could not be such legal clensing, as the Law required; and so also, the people
and the King first purged out Idols, and defaced their groves, and abandoned
all will worship ere they came to the Passover. What betokened this, save the
trial of their spirits, much more, purging out all Idols of the heart,
sweeping out the leaven of corruption from within; without which the other had
been bootlesse. Therefore Paul in that place does press the same, though not
Sacramentally, yet universally, saying, Let us therefore keep the feast, 1
Cor. 5.7, 8.
not with old leaven of malice and mickednesse; but with the unleavened bread
of sincerity and truth: Why? Because Christ is our Passover, who is
sacrificed for us: q.d. Let not us be behind hand in our feast and spiritual
Pascall Lamb, to those that ate the old Passover. If they might not eat it
with leaven, with any pollution of flesh, as of Leprosy, touching of the dead,
or the like ceremonial defilement; how much less we, with our real and
spiriturall leaven and uncleanenesse of soul?

Instruct.
That its well that we have an express charge from God for this trial. Else
the world is full of curious heads, and profane hearts, to outface and
outwrangle the Ordinance. Men have no joy to such a task as they feel to
pinch their spirits, and press upon them any power of practice; and therefore
(although they are ready to cast the cords, and break the bands of the most
convinced truths; yet the more mannerly way is to question the charge it self.
And hence are those usual interrogatories, How prove you that any man has to
do with me when I come to the Sacrament? Or, how prove you that Paul speaks
to us as well as the Corinthians, to try our selves? Or how can you prove that
I am bound to sanctify the seventh day from the Creation, for a Sabbath? Or
how know ye that God will have us preach and hear twice upon the Sabbath in
public? Or, that a man is bound to pray by himself, or twice a day in his
family? Or that it is against nature for a man to wear long hair? Or, for a
woman to be shorn? Profaneness of men's wits.
And to these might I add a thousand other scrutinies of a base and profane
heart, willing to overthrow all such strictness, as it self distasts; and
loath to believe, or inform it self of any thing which it is loath to do. The
truth is, never did Satan so obscure those maine truths of the Scripture, in
Popish dark times by turning all into curious queres of things less
pertinent; as now, he does in this light of the Gospel seek to alay, and
disanull the power of truths by profane cavillation. But I say still both to
the one, and to the other, Its well that God has so punctually declared
himself in his Word as he has. All that are not wickedly nice and curious,
will rather yield to those probable deductions from Scripture, which arise by
consequent, for the beating down of our own base spirits, and rejoice in so
doing, because they argue for God; than whet their leude and prejudicate wits
and spirits upon the devils whetstone to cavil against truths received:
nibling here at one, and there another, till they have defaced their beauty
and grace, and so exposed them to the utter contempt of themselves and others;
Stop your mouths therefore oh ye carpers at Gods precise rules, and play not
the Proctors for the devil against God, least he pay you your fees little to
your content: Stoop rather to the Lords Canon in all things. And you to whom
this yoke of trial at the Sacrament is so heavy, consider, the Lord will not
lessen or lighten it for your sake: labor ye to be eased of the devils yoke of
a profane carnal heart, and turn your swords into mattockes, deny your
selves, get the Lord to change your minds and wills, that so his yoke may
become sweet unto you. And as the Prophet tells those Cavillers, who asked him,
Why may not we go to good Witches about our cattle, Esaias 8.20.
or things lost, etc. Go (says he) to the Law and to the Testomony; let that
be your touchstone, that will abandon both all will worship on the right hand,
and all profaneness on the left. If these give ye no allowance, know there is
no wisdom in your witchcrafts, nor in your cavilling defenses: So here say I,
Go to the charge of God, that will convince both Popish trial, and tell you,
that there is no Religion either in fasting before the Sacrament (although I do
advise no man to eat) nor in not spitting at the Sacrament, that much more will
confute all profane contempt of trial of our selves: let God speak, and let
all men be liers, both left hand profaneness, and right hand superstition must
fall before the Ordinance. Oh! if men be so busy against the practice of
goodness, when there is a rule to controwle them, what companions would they
be, if we wanted it? Howbeit even by this they show that the duty is divine,
because else their cursed spirit would never so fight against it. Thus much of
the fifth point.

The sixth and last branch is, General 6. what it is?
what is that due trial which God requires of every true Communicant, and in
what things does it consist? I answer, Due and true Trial stands either in
the properties thereof to qualify it aright; or in the object thereof, that is,
the things to be be tried. Concerning which, first, I will lay down some
reasons why the Lord requires this trial in both respects. Then secondly I
will lay down the due properties or manner of trial. And so with the use of
the general doctrine I will finish this Chapter; and in those that follow, God
willing, I shall handle the several objects to be tried in their order, one
after another.

The Reasons are these three. The difficulty of this trial. 1 To discern
hypocrisy. from soundness.
is not a word which aims at some defect in the measure of our grace only, as
the trial of light gold may be dispatched by weights which any man may use:
but it especially signifies trial of substance, and soundness of metals,
such as only the Goldsmiths skill can find out: the Touchstone and the
Furnace only can try gold, or separate the silver from the dross. Even so,
its not a common skill nor easy work to discover the soundness or falsehood
of the heart in matter of grace, There is nothing more hard than this
discovery. 2 Cor. 11, 14.15.
Satan and Hypocrites can transform themselves into Angels of light; and make
men to think them so. And the hollownesse and depth of the heart, and the
self-love of it in easily believing our selves to be that we would be, and
yet are loath to be, is unspeakeable. Nothing more easy than to pray for such
things as indeed we would not have, if God would give, because then our hearts
and courses must be changed; and yet we think we pray aright. Nothing more
easy than to look upon our selves in our outside of duties and performances,
and reflect an opinion thereby, that we are true worshippers. No grace, but a
false heart will counterfeit: and the depth of the heart is such, that there is
no show of meekness, innocence, tenderness of spirit, thankfulness, love
of Gods people, but a bad person may accommodate himself unto, and act a part
therein. The soundness of the heart is very hard to discern.

2 To discern soundness where it is.
Secondly, although there be soundness in the heart, yet it is not always
discernable. As it is not easy to find a Pearl in the dunghill, nor a needle
lost in rushes; so, its hard to find out a little truth of heart and faith,
when they are so covered and mixed with abundance of dross. Besides, it is no
easy thing, (although a man find them) yet to walk constantly with God in
the practice thereof. 3 To discern our not improving of grace. Either in our
privacie. 2 John 8.
Its with us as with the fool, who not knowing the worth of gold, stoppes here
a piece in an hole, there another in the thatch, and forgets it: So do we
slight tha grace which should rule us in each part of life; lose the good
things which have cost us labor to come by. Its hard to improove the things
we have heard and learned, and to bring them forth in due season; they are to
seek with us, patience, when we are provoked: faith, when we see no
likelihood of Gods hearing or answering our prayers, and so of the rest; as it
is with tools seldom used, so there grows a rust upon the gifts of God in
us, for lack of watchful improovement. Sloth, and ease do fret into us as a
kanker, and creep so insensibly upon us, that they mar us ere we be aware.
The Talents of God which we have received, become unprofitable in us. The
greatest part of the duties we do, is not the least of them we omit: in the use
of means and Ordinances, formality, and commonnes, unreverence, unsavorines
defiles us: and the life of faith in crosses, blessings, duties, is very poor
and wanzing in us. It were endless to speak of all. Or in our outward course.
Now if it be so hard to try our grace, how much hard to try our whole
course, in which the wearisomnesse of our hearts does tire us so, that the
errors thereof in so manifold parts cannot be reckoned; as the sins of our
single estate, or married state, our callings, dealings, in the world, lawful
liberties, company, solitariness, with other innumerable occasions: wherein as
it is hard to survey our selves distinctly; so its as hard to watch to our rule
unweariedly. Much more is it hard to try our corruptions.


To conclude, if the trial of our grace be such, what is the trial of our
corruption? Who can perceive the danger whereto the best lie open, by the
unspeakable sweetness of their personal and beloved sins? How secretly does
Satan and lust creep in (as sleep to one warm in his bed) even to an honest
heart ere it be aware? By what fine slights is it at first entertained, either
because it is but one, or small, or soon shaken off? And having once entered,
how does it defile the conscience? When once the tenderness and sensiblenesse
of the soul, (which is the Sentinel) is gone: how soon does sin grow upon
it, and increase? That whereas at first it seemed a great thing to attempt, now
it seems little, to go through with it: and that which seemed little, now
becomes as nothing: till at length it foulds up the heart in self-love and
carelessenesse, and grown to a custom and falling sickness, that it is a
great difficulty for a man to pick out an end in this confusion of estate, or
to know where to begin or where to end. So then if trial be so hard a
task, how due and conscionable ought the practice of it to be; seeing the
Lord has set the Sacrament to be the awer, and holder in compass of our
course?

Romans 2.3.
to be smitten down suddenly with a thunderbolt, or to be plagued in our
bodies and children with sickness or death (as those Corinthians) we are
content the Lord should deal with us otherwise as he pleases. 1 Cor. 11.29.
But oh wretches! To be accursed with barrenness for ever, with an insensible,
dedolent heart, with a dead benumbed spirit; to be stripped of those gifts we
seemed to have, to be sent more empty away from God than we came, to be
pulled out with that guest that wanted his wedding garment, and cast into utter
darkness: Mat. 22.11.
these are curses ten times greater than the former. Thou eatest and drinkest
thy own condemnation as Judas did; the handsell whereof was this, that upon
the eating of the soppe, Ioh. 13.27.
Satan entered into him and filled his heart, ripened his treachery, and sealed
him up to a desperate resolution that he would finish it, though he went to
hell for it. They that judge not themselves, make work for the Lord to judge
them finally: 1 Cor. 11, 30.
and although it appear not to men, yet the wrath of God abides upon them, and
shall in time smoke out as upon Cain. The Sacrament is a spiritual mystery,
and cannot be violated, save by spiritual wickedness. And whereas the gain
should have been great, if thou had come prepared, even the enjoying of the
Lord Jesus wholly: now the judgment shall be as fearful, not only to go
without him, but to drink and eat hell and damnation. Of which more in the
use.



But here a willing heart would feign know the properties of this trial,
Properties of true trial.
and when he has duly tried himself. For answer to which, although in the
Chapters following, this will appear better in the objects of trial: yet
briefly I will note some works here generally concerning all the particulars,
and so come to the use.

First, then let thy search and trial be wise, 1. Wise.
and according to knowledge. Let the Law and Testimony be the Hammer, the
Furnace, and Touch, to try thee in all, both thy heart and life. This will
inform and in still such skill and discerning into thee, that nothing shall
lightly pass thee without, both notice and due verduict: Thou shall neither by
looseness of heart judge evil, good; nor through blindness, or misprision,
think good evil. This will let in light to thee to behold all things in their
lively colors as they are. The Goldsmith will not easily be gulled in the
trial of gold or silver. So if thou carry this light and torch into the dark
corners of thy heart, few either sins or graces shall escape thee. Else, thy
own false light, erroneous judgment, prejudice, precipice, security,
defilement, and the like, may soon deceive thee. And so thy trial may prove
like Ahimaaz his news, idle and confuzed.

Secondly, let it be ingenuous and filial: Filial.
Do not think that the Lord only enjoynes thee to search out the evil, and
let the good pass: The trial of Gods people is as well of their virtues and
graces, for their encouragement, as of their corruptions to their humiliation
And yet, let it also be impartial. So abhor a slavish heart of base fear
causing thee to harp upon the jarring strings of thy distempers: That yet thou
much more loathe self-love, to applaude thy self in any of thy corrupt and
vicious habits or actions: But rather be as willing thy errors and evils be
discovered, as thy graces. The true trial of a Christian is a middle between
both extremes. The most usual of the second, is the latter. Fewer offend in
the other; and yet their danger is as great, because the true root of trial,
is the witness of a good conscience, testifying that there is grace at the
heart, which a slavish trial denies to it self.

Thirdly, it must be very inquisitive and narrow; 3. Narrow and close.
not hoverly and superficial. It must not be like the mashes of a net made to
catch great fishes, and letting pass the small. For both the good things and
the evil are closely and deeply couched in the soul; Cursory trial will not
search them thoroughly. Graces are as coals raked up in the ashes, and appear
not easily; or as a little corn in a great Chafe heap. And corruption is as
the core of a disease lying in the intrals; and as Gehazi his booty thrown
into close corners. If the King should send a Commission to a true subject, to
search Jesuits, or Priests in a great house: they would take a narrow course
both by belaying, and ransacking the inner passages and rooms, for fear of
escape or lurking: Sacramental trial should be such. Not as the searching of
friends houses, whom we very sparily and generally look over, or give notice
before to remoove out of the way that which we are loath to epsy. But as a
man would search the house of his enemy: And as we read that the Papists were
wont to seerch for the Martyrs, in all places, likely or unlikely, yea, even
the heaps or reekes of corn, and the haymowes, with forkes, swords, spits,
and spears. So should we do our selves, as Searchers very glad and desirous
to find what they seek. And to this end, our trial should be punctual and
painful. By punctual, I mean particular and personal, Both in
punctualnesse.
either graces or corruptions; which most naturally and generally accompany
thee. And therefore Christian search best attends Christian Prayer and watch:
look what thou observest to pester thee most usually, either in thy spirit, or
in thy course, that take note of, and make a Calender of it. Forgetfulnesie and
confusion of memory do much hinder trial. Note therefore both what sins
run in the stream and frame of thy life; and what special evils bear sway,
and are most selfe-putting forth; and then the rest will follow alone; and yet
pass not by the lesser: seeing those which are but of a second degree do often
disguise us, while we are bent only to mark the most prevailing ones; and so
by ill custom are unsuspected. Few men there are in whom some masterly sins
do not bear rule, pride, self-love, worldliness, or the like, to poison
their course. Secondly, let it be painful: And painfulness.
The issues of good and evil are as a spring of seven heads. A laborious
searched will therefore open them all, and take himself tripping in all:
searching, the spirit within, the tongue and members without, and fetch in
matters of humiliation from the trial of marriage, single estate, Duties,
Ordinances, company, solitariness, liberties, callinges, behavior, and
actions of common life. So much of the third.

Fourthly, it must be faithful 4 Faithful.
and loyal, that so all the subtle startingholes, and cunning deceites of the
heart may be found out; for self-love and falsehood will else bleare the eye
of the wisest. Bribes corrupt the wise; but not the faithful: Sin is a
bribing mischief, it labors to overthrow search and inquest, that so it may
escape the jury. But as a good Justice, in taking the examination of a fellon,
or rioter: will not be gulled with each color or fair tale, but will search
to the quick, and drive him out of his tricks, and lay him open, because he
is for the King; so should our trial be faithful, because it is for the King
of heaven. Its for his honor; and yet also for our comfort to be true to the
Lord and our selves: Else we shall find as we bind, and the Lord will be
froward with the froward, Phil. 18, 25,
and subtle with the subtle. The Sacrament will not afford that peace to the
false, which it will to the faithful; with the true, honest, and plain, the
Lord will be good and plain. If sweet, gainefull, or natural corruptions
be so incorporate and beloved, that we are loath to search them out, and (like
Laban) search every where, Genesis 31, 34, 35
save where our Rachel sits upon her Idol; the Lord will leave us to our
defilement, and deprive us of the fruit of our trial. Now that our trial may
be honest; observe two things: First, nourish tenderness of conscience and
uprightness. Ofttimes many a secret evil of smaller consequence may annoy
some man, even a glance of the heart, or eye; when as a grosser evil will not
touch another. Its not easy for one that has his glove on his fingers to take
up a needle or a little pin, which the naked hand will easily do. The tender
eye will water and twinckle at a mote falling in it, as if some great hurt
befall it: and the weazand will streine at a gnat. Secondly, be willing to take
any help which may further thee in thy search. Sometimes a faithful friend who
observes thee; a stander by may sometimes see that which a Gamster spies not,
Sometimes it will not be amiss to see and read thy own trial in the book
of a Cross; for each Cross has her superscription, and will either tell us
what grace the Lord would try, or what sin he would correct; yet I say, the
best trier is our own conscience and experience.

5. Direct.
Lastly, let our trial be Direct; aim at the end of thy receiving the
Sacrament, and the reviving of thy faith, or thy repentance of evil. Search
out in thy self, either those spiritual graces which are most like to
further, or those evils which are in directest opposition to a comfortable
receiving the Sacrament. The Sacrament is a most spiritual communion with God;
spiritual evils will most choke it, as infidelity, hypocrisy, apostasy,
unthankfullnesse, falling to the creatures: let these and such like be most
pursued. Contrarily, the most spiritual graces, do most chearish it; as daily
faith in the Promise both of pardon and holiness, pureness of heart,
heavenlinesse of mind, self-denial, humbleness, thankfulness, and such
like; be sure to find out these; and so thy search will stand thee in best
stead, toward the end thou aimest at. And thus much for those properties of
Sacramental trial: according to which the particular object is to be framed,
as in the following discourse shall appear.

Terror.
as (for all this) dare rush upon this holy feast, with unwashen hands, and
with profanation or neglect, whether presumptuously or carelessely without
trial. Be it known unto you, ye take the Name of God in vain in an high
degree, and are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, as tramplers of it
under your feet, and crucifiers of him the second time; therefore he shall not
hold you guiltless. You boast much, that ye have received to day, and eaten
your maker (as the Papists say) but ye have eaten and drank your own bane and
poison. This Sacrament shall be as that cursed water was to the belly of her
who being defiled, durst come to drink of it, as if innocent. 2 King. 5.
And as Elisha said to Gehazi, Went not my spirit with thee when thou runst
after Naaman? So, Is not the Spirit of Christ privy to thy profane neglect and
bold adventuring, being in thy sin? Although the Lord come not really to
pluck thee from thy fellows in open vengeance, yet be sure, the Sacrament
shall be as Judas his sop to harden thee in thy sin, and seal thee up to
impenitencie and damnation. Once a Monk did villanously poison a Christian
Emperor with the wine of the Chalice; but thou poisonest thy self: How much
greater is thy villainy? Therefore, although I scare thee not from receiving
utterly (to which by nature thou art prone enough) yet for the present, I
admonish thee, abstain till tried and examined. But perhaps thou will object;
Benjamin: But yet the Lord smote forty thousand of them when they went. He
who approved the justice of his own will, that sin should be punished; yet
punished them ( Judge. 20.20.) even them who went about it, being themselves as
guilty. The question is not about the doing of the duty, but the right manner
of it. So I say to these, that Gods Sacrament be received, is necessary. But
who are they that are fit for it? God has no such need of Sacraments, that he
cares not how they be received: But most righteously he urges the duty, yet
punishes the ill doer. Thou will still cavil and say, thou have often done
thus, and are not yet stricken from heaven: I answer, the more is behind; the
Lord can smite with dumb strokes in a worse manner. But do thou so abuse his
patience, and heap up wrath to thy self? But thou will say, I will abstain
then, and so I hope to escape, for this charge concerns no other save
receivers. I answer, thou excusest a fault with a crime; thou can not thus
escape, for God shall judge thee for both not coming, and not preparing. But
thou pretendest, that its hard to try thy self, and thou art ignorant, have
no gifts: Well, yet be admonished, Wisdom is easy to him that will
understand; thy ignorance comes not from seelinesse, but wilfulness. Those
whom thou can mock as simple ones, can yet remember and repeat all these
directions: And have thou lost thy wisdom in this business? Oh! but thou
say, I am forgetful Why? Save that, thou have no heart; for thou can
remember any quarrel, or wrong, to revenge thy self. But thou want
leisure. Alas, the Trevant complains of an ill pen, ink, and paper; But the
fault is in his sloth, else all were well. For why? Thou can find a day in a
week spare to hunt, to game, to drink, to be in company, to sit in the
alchouse: if thou carry thy corn to market, thou do somewhat else besides
thy business: and so, if thy heart stood to this work, thou should find
leisure enough for it too. But thou say, Few do thus, and thou do but as
the multitude. Shall number and company qualify thy judgment in hell? If
thou would be loath to suffer with them, be loath to sin with them. And to
end this use, break off thy cavils, think not thy case desperate; Say not,
there is no hope for so saped a wretch as thou. Who can tell? Perhaps the Lord
may bring honey out of a carrion, and even out of thy long contempt, fetch
humiliation and repentance? I have known some touched more by the Sacrament
than by any terror beside: That the Lord has so long spared them in patience:
they have concluded, he has done it to break their hearts. Perhaps the Lord
will turn away his fierce anger, that thou perish not: Howsoever it fare, be
doing, humble thy soul, and choose (if thou must perish) to perish in thy
trial, rather than justly to run hazard, and rush into assured misery, by
not trying.

Exhortation.
to all sorts: Minister, and people, strong and weak, all who would behold the
Lord Jesus his face with joy in his Ordinances, to submit themselves to this
trial. 1 To Ministers. Jude verse 23.
The Minister first, knowing this terror of the Lord: let him with compassion,
pluck as many out of the fire as he can, by a careful instructing of the
people in this way of trial. Its not one of the least objections which are
made against it, that they have none to direct them. No bucket for this deep
Well: no man to thrust them into this poole. How shall thou answer the loss of
so much blood of souls, when God shall call thee to account? I know indeed
that where the Minister is most faithful, many people are contemners, but
their blood be upon their own heads: save thou thine own soul, and let them
not perish by thy sin. Secondly, let all godly Ministers do their uttermost
to debar all open despisers of this Ordinance, from partaking it: Though they
have but small power of the keys of censure in their hands, yet let them use
the key of Doctrine so much the rather, to stop as many as may be from
running upon the pikes of vengeance.

Likewise let all faithful receivers look to this duty, 2 To the people.
and upon no color, either of their knowledge, or former use of it, or other
occasions, neglect it, either for themselves or their families committed to
them. The Lord will accept a little endeavor, and judges us not according to
that we want, but that we have, if there be faithfulness. And let none
think that this duty is so urged, as if there were any merit in it from the
work wrought; No, thy searching it self stinkes, and thy very clothes may
defile thee, if thou look at thy self. But look at him that commands it, and
has promised a blessing to it: that is, So let him eat of this Bread, and
drink of this Cup: Let this welcome encourage thee. And because I have already
laid down some properties of trial for thy direction: I say no more, but
seek the Lord in prayer and denial of thy self, to help thee to put one
these cords and rags, to come out of thy ill custom. And to shut up all, let
me encourage all faithful endeavourers to try themselves: I know there is
cause; for many tender hearts foil themselves sore in this work, and make the
remedy worse than the disease. They say, These rules are so strickt, that they
shall never practice them: and therefore cannot be prepared: yea, they say,
the more they search themselves, the more dross and scurffe they meet
withal. To whom I answer, First, let no difficulty of selfe-triall, in the
point of the measure thereof dismay any: let sloth, contempt, and wilfulness,
be absent, and the Lord will both admit of their honest endeavor to try: and
also (the weaker they are) so much the more welcome them to the Sacrament,
which is more especially belonging to the weak than the strong. Secondly, I
say, Although by trial they meet with much corruption; yet better to be met
with than concealed: Neither do they meet with it to favor it, but loathe
it; and they so meet with more corruption than they dreamed of, that also they
find a Pearl in their Dunghill, and more grace than ever they looked for:
unless slavish fear and unthankefulnesse do blindfold them. Let them
thereby the more praise God who pardons these their transgressions, and say,
Who is a God like to our God? Mica 7. ult.
and then although they must add, who is so corrupt a wretch as I? yet mercy
shall drown their sin in the Sea, never to appear more. Therefore let them
be comforted; and look what has been said in the general, touching Trial,
let them wisely apply to the particulars following, to help themselves
forward in the practice thereof. This much for the Uses.

2 General. Object of trial threefold.
Having thus spoken of the properties of trial: I come to the Object. And that
is threefold: A Communicant is to try himself, either, Estate. first, about
his estate in grace. Wants. Or secondly, his wants, or else Graces. thirdly
about his Sacramental grace; concerning which, God willing, in the following
Treatise more shall be said in their order.

CHAP. II. Of the Trial of our estate toward God.
Trial of estate
COncerning which Trial, although I know there be such strange spirits stirring
in these our days, as take for granted, that all those that are baptized, and
live under the Gospel in a visible Church, are undoubtedly in good estate of
grace without any more a do; and therefore will reject this as needless to
try our estates by surer warrant: yet because I know none of indifferent
judgment, but abhor their conceit: I shall take liberty to confute them
with silence, and to proceed to show what better trial of a man's estate
toward God may be found. Objection against it.
Only one objection of greater moment I most first remove out of the way: to
wit, that the calling in question of our estate toward God, upon every such
occasion as the Sacrament, may seem to infer, that a Christians estate is a
very staggering condition, which may easily be doubted and suspected: as also
it may seem to turn Christian liberty, into a slavish and fearful bondage.
Ex. gr. If the Prince should graciously proclaim that he would renew the
Charter of some Corporations in such a County: No village, Towns or places
that never had any such privilege from the Crown, would be so idle as
repair to the King, for they are excluded. If the Parliament grant the King a
subsidy from his subjects, no man that knows himself to be no subsidy man
would prepare any such money for the King; for the business concerns him not.
So is it here. The Lord calls his free-denizons by spiritual baptism, to
renew the Assurance of their pardon, peace, and adoption, at his supper; and
promises there to all such, a further increase in the graces of his covenant:
should then any be so mad as claim a part in this Sacrament, who never have
been or baptized, called, and partakers of the Spirit of grace at all? Now
then how shall that be discerned? True it is, those that are free borne, and
true members, know it or may do, as Paul quickly could tell Lysias, he was a
Roman. But who shall stop the mouths of Aliants and strangers, such as are
of Ashdod and Cham, when they come to plead themselves Israelites? I mean when
hypocrites come to the Sacrament, pleading themselves to be Gods people:
doubtless there must be some Rules of Trial which will not deceive; they must
be urged to prove their Genealogy, or else be convinced to be counterfeits.

Gal. 5, 1.
but of unbeleefe especially: and to walk according to that they have
received: For peace shall be to all that walk according to rule, even the
Israel of God. Yea as its ridiculous for any such to seek new grounds to build
upon: so is it sinful to stagger about the old: because the covenant of God
is with us, as the Covenant of Noe, as the Covenant of the Sun and Moon:
Esaias, 54, 8.
yea everlasting after these shall have an end. Far other use are Gods people
to make of this trial at the Sacrament. First, many know not all such grounds
as their faith rests upon, although they believe unfeignedly: ignorance may
hinder them. Again, although they have had them in a readiness, yet by Satan's
deluding them with other diversions to worldly objects, or by forgetfulness,
or being dazeled by some secret love of evil, or by the error of others,
these things may be grown strange to them, dark and to seek. Besides,
although it be not so, yet may it be a sweet exercise for a believer to be
well skilled in his best Evidences, and it may joy him to have the things
revived in his spirit which he has known before, and especially at the
Sacrament, when they may most encourage him. Men do look upon their evidences
of lands for more ends, than fear of their Titles. And yet I will not deny,
but that (as the case may stand) the trial of a man's estate at than Sacrament
may and ought to be anxious and sollicitous: yea, and that so, that for the
time he were better desist than proceed: viz. when having snared himself with
some lust which he cannot easily be rid of, he questions his estate
thereupon: and, till God have eased the hardness and despair of his spirit,
through unbeleefe, perhaps he can neither perceive nor yet relish his
evidences as he has done. This may be one case in which this trial may be
used with some doubting and distemper: Howbeit neither is this so ordinary, but
to be sure not the only case. Therefore this objection is of no force.

To proceed then: 2 Sorts of trial of estate. 1 Our first calling.
This trial of our estate I would call to these two heads as breefly as I can.
First to a man's first calling home to God. Secondly, to some essential marks
either accompanying or following the same. Concerning the former of these, it
shall not be amiss to give the reader a short general view of calling, before
I mention any trial in special belonging thereto. In a man's calling
therefore, In calling 3. things, 1 from what?
consider first from what, secondly unto what, thirdly to what end God calls.
First the Lord calls a soul from an estate of woe and misery through sin
and curse (common to it with all the posterity of Adam wherein she lay
plundged, deadly; from a covenant (I say) with sin, death and hell, wherein
she was wrapped. This he does by the Ministry of the Law; which, Ephesians. 5, ^
crying a dismal and loud alarm in the ears of a drowsy and sleepie sinner,
awakens him from the dead. Being rouzed out of this sleep, it beholdes a deep
gulf set between the Lord and it self, so that it cannot come at him: By
this means the soul is broken off from all her rotten proppes either natural
through secure ignorance, or Religious through conceit of knowledge, or the old
covenant of works and performances. And (whether Publicane or Pharisee,
before) this Law putting no difference, condemns and kills a sinner in point
of all his former life and jollitie in sin, holding him under the Arrest of
Justice in an estate of bondage, till it be brought to utter despair in him
self (more or less) of any redress.

Secondly, the Lord calls the soul to an estate in grace through the Lord
Jesus. 2. To what?
And this he does by a most sweet voice of the Gospel spoken in the ears of
it while it lies in this Pit of self despair. The which does let in (by
degrees) a Spirit and Covenant of grace into it: first in susteyning it from
extremities by an hope of possible Deliverance: Secondly, by presenting the
soul with an increasing light and sight of the All-sufficient price of grace
and reconciliation in Christ the satisfyer of wrath, and procurer of peace;
Thirdly, by declaring himself fully appeased by this satisfaction, so that
former anger is turned into welpleasednesse: Fourthly, by expressing his
placable and pitiful heart to a sinner in an offer of a covenant with him;
adding moreover, that he would have him to be reconciled and receive his
promise as freely as he makes it: Lastly, by enlarging his promise in the
apprehension of the sinner both in respect of the infinite many good things
contained in the same: as also the most free, full, gracious, faithful heart
of the promiser (loving, strong, and sure, which cannot lie:) I say by all
these presentiments of grace in a most apt, sweet, and powerful manner: he
works in the soul such preparations of meditation, desire, esteem
inquisition, restlesnesse of heart and unweariednesse of means using: That at
last this seed breaks out into fruit: so that the soul weighing all duly in
the balance, to wit, the worth of grace offered, the mercy of the offerer
(beyond exception) and her unavoidable condemnation in refuzing it; does at
last cast her self upon the promise, resigning up her self to it so far, as
to believe it to be her own portion.

3. Why?
Thirdly, the Lord calls the soul from misery to mercy, to the end that it
might enter into a covenant of holiness; and become a Saint by calling, Rom,
1, 7.
called to sanctification and the image of him that called it. That as the
soul lives by grace, so grace might live in the soul; And this he does by
the voice of the Spirit of Regeneration and Baptism; The which by the
immortal seed of the word, sheddeth the love of God into the soul, to the
end his seed may beget the image of God in it; By which means the whole bent
and frame of it is changed, subdued and turned from sin to God; so that now
Gods Spirit is that, unto and in it, which old Adam before was, according to
the capacity of the soul. This Power the Spirit of Grace works in the
believer, because it is that Spirit of Christ which cannot be divided in her
parts of Reconciling and renewing, but carries the soul into Christ for both.
More plainly and breefely, this Spirit writes the purpose of the covenant in
the soul, to wit, Iere. 31.33.
that it may have the law engraven in it, it may be cleansed, as with pure
water, and may be caused as by an inward new Principle, to walk in the
Obedience of all Commandments of Law and Gospel, as compting them an easy
yoke and perfect freedom.

These three are wrought (according to the measure of mercy) in every calling
one: and are (not so much the marks, as) the parts of effectual calling: and
who so is thus called, is also in covenant with God, and by virtue thereof has
true right to the Sacrament of the supper, for the growing up in the grace of
the covenant. Howbeit because it is hard for a Camel to go through a needles
eye; 2. Trial of estate by marks of calling.
and every poor soul can not receive all this whole frame all at once to try
it self thereby; I will help it a little, by taking it so into pieces, that
each several trial may enter in at the narrow door the more easily; Let then
the soul that would try it self about her calling, proceed in this or the
like manner.

1 Make Preventing Grace
That when thou thoughst of nothing less than grace, yet God was found of one
that sought him not? Did the Lord so mightily over rule and so order thy
occasions, of education, company, acquaintance, calling, ministry, placing,
employments, that in all thou saw God spreading his net for thee, that thou
might not run thy course, but be taken in it, and be brought homewards?
Did the Lord, by this way of Providence, make thee of a dead, unsavory piece of
flesh, to begin to hearken after and savor the things of God? Its a good
sign.

shifts and excuses, Convince thee of sin and curses, and cause thee to
stink in thy own nosethrils? Its a good sign: especially when the 10.
Commandment did it.





In the 2 place, I ask, 2. Mark, Assisting grace.
thus: Did not the Lord leave thee thus, but ply thy heart with the word, and
nourish thy feeble hope with more and more light in his Promise? Can thou say
this light was no Moon light, dark and doubtful, but as the light of the
morning, dawning and increasing in thy soul? Its a good sign. Mat. 24.27.


Mat. 13, 44.
To ponder the truth and warrant of the promise, thou that might see how
able it was to bear thee? So that thou would not in so weighty a thing as
this, leave all at six or seven, and trust rather than try. Its a good sign.

Did this cause thee to discern self in the work, self pride, self
unworthiness, self fears, self hope, carnal reason, cavills, objections?
Felt'st thou Satan here to plye faster with buffetings and temptations, than
(presently) the word it self could stay thee? Did this conflict of self
against the light of the word, so affect thee as the struggling of the twins
in her womb, affected Rebecca, when she went to God for counsel? Did thou
enquire still for counsel, and by degrees labor to see the heavenly rest and
ease of a promise, the woeful restless, pudder of self within thee? Did this
still make thy soul more to loath self, and dive into the freedom and
fullness of Christ in the promise? Its a good sign.



Ephesians. 4.22.
or any lust which might defile the sweetness of Christ, and waken thy faith
in him? Are these marks in thee, true and soundly wrought? Then are they good,
though weak. Thirdly, art thou called? Try it by the perfecting and fulfilling
grace of God. Can thou then say, That the work of says is finished in thee
with Power and persuasion? Can thou say if thou have been deceived in
believing, God has deceived thee? If thou perish by believing, thou art
content? Can thou buy and sell upon Gods Word? And does the Spirit of the
Promise deliver thee into it? Do thou find that sealing of heart thereby,
which fills thee with peace and joy through believing? Then is thy spark
grown to a flame, and the Lord has brought forth thy judgment to victory.
Less measure than this may yet be a true sign: but this is a fuller sign.

2 Cor. 5, 14.
Does it constrain and hemme in thy heart, to love him again? To think no
duties too hard, no measure too much? Does it work life in graces, in Means
using, and works of piety and charity to God and man? Or is it a love coming
from a dead faith; I^^^. 2, 20.
which will suffer thee to be proud and selfe-loving, unmercifull, careless,
barren in fruits, worldly, coveteous? Thy faith is vain and thy love rotten.
But can thou say, The love of God is a fire in thy bones, to purge thy
dross, to kindle thy heart to all love, thanks, uprightness, humbleness,
innocence, and fruitfulness? Its a good sign.

Romans 1.17.
both of kind and measure? Try it then. For the former, thus, God has given
all his a double Portion: standing in a copy hold and a free hold; the one by
grace imputed, which the soul takes up by the Court Roll of the Promise,
holding upon another. The other by a grace inherent, which it takes by the
livery and seasin of the sanctifying Spirit. Try then: Can thou say thy faith
has both a hand to take the one and the other? To take both righteousness
from faith of justification, to faith of sanctification? Dare thou not sever
those things which God has joined? Its a good sign, of a faith precious for
kind, if by the same faith, thou can receive both kinds of righteousness,
though by a several conveiance.

Fourthly, try the measures of it. If God Righteousness be from faith lo
faith: it proceeds from, one step and degree to another: gettes to it self
more Promises, more evidences, yea stronger and greater. Can thou say, it is
so with thee? do thou grow from faith of salvation to faith of government? Is
thy chief religion, thy living by faith? Is thy faith thy bottom for law
obedience, and not thy Morality the bottom of thy faith? Is Christ reveald to
thee from faith in his Priesthood, to faith in his Prophecy and Kingdom, to
guide thee and rule thee? Does the peace of thy King so awe thee, that rather
than thou woldst forgo it, thou would for go all? And, does the Law of the
same Spirit of Christ which has freed thee from hell, act all thy whole man,
the powers and members of it, so that (in some measure) not thou live, but
the LORD Jesus in thee, to do all thy works for thee? Its a sweet sign.

Fifthly, Try thy self in the Bent and stream of thy Spirit: Though thy errors
and defects are many: yet if still thy spirit be upright, thy Course (taking
it generally) is sound: thy frailties are covered, the Lord looks not upon
thee and thy sins, but upon his grace in thee. Fear not: its a good sign.
And thus might I be large. But I content my self with a draught in steed of
many.

Now because this first trial of calling, Trial 3. Fruits of calling.
and of a good estate toward God, is more large and full than some weak ones
can reach: At least they may be dismayed by the weightinesse thereof: Besides
these, I will yet add a second sort of marks, that is, some several fruits
of grace as the soul may discover them more easily in it self to flow
evidently from faith of Gods elect: of this sort are these following in which I
observe no method, but name them as they offer themselves, let every man take
notice of himself by his own earmarke. Jacob. Pro. 24.16. Numb.
Whom God pardons one sin to, he will pardon all: No believer can fall
totally from God: GOD loves his when he afflicts them for their sin: In many
things we sin all: No man here can be perfect: but our perfection is the
sight of Imperfection: GOD compts our endeauours and wills for performances:
Faith is not the excellency of apprehending and feeling the good of the
object, but our cleaving to a word. All things, even sin turns to the good
of Gods elect. None come to Christ save such as are drawn by God. Our comfort
stands not in our repenting, but believing (especially:) and the like. Now the
trial is, If these be snares to us, causing us to fall to sloth and
soosnesse, its a sign we are dogs: but if they work kindly to provoke us to
jealozy and more awe, its a sign of children. For example, the sins of Gods
people God turns to their good, Romans 8.28.
and he loves them when yet he afflicts them for sin,! Oh then, how much more
gracious will he be to such as walk with him? Those that truly believe are
elected, Oh! how then will my soul strive for Faith, that I may prove my
election? Not be desperate, because if I be elect, I shall believe. In a word,
when such Truths are used for encouragment to the tender, not occasions to
presume, its a good sign.

As Ephesians. 5.17.
we argue then for so much the more closnesse in walking with GOD: and then
above all, think its a season for us to draw near to God. Psalm. 73. the end.



Se Genesis 39.10.
which the ignorance of it did nourish in us: its a sure sign, that the more
the Lord costs us, the more we love him: and would lose any thing for it.



2 Samuel 6.22.23.
its a sign that we love the truth for it own sake.





Act. 13.38.
But serve not our time and Generation in the peculiar duties thereof. Also if
being rich, learned, honorable, Ministers, Magistrates: we content our selves
with such Religion as any poor, idiots, mean ones and private ones may do:
but for the duties of the rich as are rich, to honor GOD with our wealth,
honor, parts we are far from it: This bewrayes us to be such as are nearer
to our selves than God. The contrary to this bad sign is a good one.

10. Mark.
Tenthly, if not only we hate that calling and company, and occasions which
admit us not to serve God: But also rather choose to forgo otherwise a lawful
calling, if to us necessarily encombred with conditions of an evil conscience,
choosing rather to endure any streights, and to trust God in a pinching cross,
its a good sign. Many marks might be added, whereof good books are full, and
the souls of such as are the Lords are convinced; as to love a Saint as a
Saint, even a poor one that is so, better than the tichest that is not: To be
fruitful in grace as well as gracious, to change no religion with the time; to
mourn for sin more than for sorrow, our own sin more than others; and yet
for both sins and sorrows of others as our own; to keep the Sabbath
closely, and with a thousand more: but these few I have chosen as perhaps
agreeing best with these times, and because many are not so convinced of them,
as were to be wished. And thus much for the trial of our estate to God,
necessary for such as come to the Lords Table.

Admonition in general. 1. The unregenerate.
Now I breefely end with the use of the doctrine. First to all sorts better or
worser, this I say, Try your estate. All unregenerate ones, do it more fully,
toze your consciences by the parts and marks of true calling and grace: And
the regenerate also do it, yet with more quietness, and less anxiety of
heart, as knowing these marks belong to them: The former sort laboring to get
some sense of sin, to rub their secure hearts to the quick, and get off
their deadness of spirit; awakening from the dead that Christ may give them
light. God is not the God of the dead, Matthew. 22.32.
but of the living. The Sacrament serves not to be put into the mouths of the
dead men, enemies of God and strangers from the life of grace: but into the
souls of the living, that they may prosper and grow. 3. Ioh. ver^^.
How should such dare to receive the seal of a covenant of grace, being in a
covenant with hell and death? Deceive not thy self. If thou be in covenant
with God, the fruit of the lips has done it, even the effectual Ministry of
the law and Gospel; else thou art still as thou were borne, in old Adams rotten
stock. There is no communion between lusts and Christ, 2 Cor. 6.15.
between a proud, adulterous, hypocritical worldly wretch, and grace. Trust
to it, if the Lord never called thee, thou art not in covenant, so as by an
actual faith: if God never stopped thee in thy lewd course, laid it as a load
upon thy shoulders, presented thee with better hopes even the hope of
immortality by the Gospel, digested in thy soul the value of this pearl till
thou bought it. Act. 15.
Except the Spirit of God have purified thy soul through believing: never
count thy soul spiritual in the covenant, and therefore presume not upon the
seal of it. Alas! poor creature: No seed of these is wrought in thee as yet:
no condition of them, no knowledge, no fear of the worst, no degree of desire,
endeavor.

If Gods dear ones, who have tasted his grace, yet find themselves so unfit
to receive when they have fasted, prayed, worshipped and walked with God all
the week long; where shall thou appear who never were so in covenant at all?
Renounce all thy false errors and counterfeit signs, color not with God, (who
will not be mocked) pretend not thy good meanings, civility, keeping of Church,
paying of debt, being in charity, giving of alms, shedding of tears: these
amount not to the marks of a calling: but say rather, Oh Lord, by all signs,
I see I want the faith of the covenant of God, and have run into a praemunire
with justice all my life long, and each Sacrament has sealed up my judgment:
God has long suffered me, I dare heap up wrath no longer, I will a while cut
off my self from the communion, that the whilst I may get the faith of the
covenant. Do so and prosper. Number. 12.14.
Remember Miriam and how she was served; when she abused Moses, and would have
yet abode in the Congregation: the Lord forbad her, saying, If her father had
spit in her face, should she not separate her self seven days? So do thou,
and make use of thy separation, to humble thy soul: And yet do not abuse the
Lords cutting thee off for a time, to lowre and quarrel with him, saying, This
trial has hurt me, I had been quiet and well, if I had been let alone, and
gone to the Sacrament; but this searching has snared me, and now I am further
off: No, this is nothing but Satan's delusion, who would for ever pull thee
from the Sacrament: whereas the Lord would hold thee off only for a time, and
shut thee up as a Leper for seven days, ^eri^. 1^.
till the Lord Jesus the high Priest have beheld thee, and cleansed thee by
believing. This sickness is not to death, but life: endure affliction in thy
spirit a while, pray God to bless this trial unto thee; Repent with Miriam,
and thou shall return with Miriam; and bless God with Onesimus, that thou
departedst for a time, that thou might return for ever. So much for the
first sort.

Exhortation to Gods people.
Perhaps such will say they have tried it often, and hold it by faith daily,
and therefore its needelesse so to do: But I answer, yet honor this ordinance
and renew your comfort, by reviving the memory and presence of it: The oftener
you do it, the easier is the work, and the gain. Ye will object, Christ
Jesus is the same, Heb. 13.8.
yesterday, to day, and for ever. True, but your unbeleefe is great, your
inconstancy admits infinite fears, wastings, doubts, and distempers. Revive
therefore the sense of former mercy, and apply it each Sacrament a new: Be not
weary of getting daily more sweetness in the promise, and prove your calling
and election more sure to your selves, as it is sure in God: ^ Pet. 1, 10.
Pray for more insight, savor and taste of this work: and enjoy the comfort
thereof at the Sacrament. The less rust ye have gathered, the less filing of
your soul may serve. Take either the three points of calling before said,
which are the surest, or sometime revive the other marks and fruits of
conversion: Do not divide them, but try thy self by them all together, if
thou can: if not, then choose out some few concluding marks, and apply them to
thy self: if it be hard, seek to God to teach thee to search them in thy
self; mourn for any decay of them, and humble thy heart for it, and give not
the Lord over, till both thou know that thou had them, and (in measure) they
appear to thy self presently: Recover thy loss, Heb. 12.7.
quicken that has wanzed, strengthen the feeble knees or hands: and so doing
bless God, that by the occasion of the Sacrament, thou have seen those graces
to abide in thee which thou thoughst thou wantedst; For the Lords ways tend
not to destroy, but to edify, and not to turn thee off from the Sacrament with
fear, but to send thee thither with stronger consolation and hope. So that
thou shall have small cause to repent thee, for obeying God: For lo, in this
thy strength, thou may go to the feast of the hills, Esaias 25.
to the Lords fat things, and fined wines: the which if the Master of the feast
bid thee to, neither have any other, nor thy self authority to forbid thee.



doubting, and carries the soul above all fears to the assurance and feeling
of mercy, and fills the heart with comfort and joy: these I want, therefore I
have no faith. Mat. 12.20.
than the Act of believing.

1 By concession,
One thing I must freely confess, That there was never more cause than now in
this forlorn Age full of formalitye and dissembling; (in which the Devil and
the error of the wicked would deceave the very elect, if possible) to press
upon the soul the necessity of faith with power. For, weak faith, hardly will
bear out the strong fiery darts of Satan, which now in this subtle world,
are on foot to try our effectualnesse of believing. Men hear preachers say,
Faith is as true in the least sparkle of it, as in the whole fire: and faith
may as much excel in infirmity to hold the promise upon former experience, as
in the greatest strength etc.

Now (as I said before) what use does Satan make hereof in hyopcrites, save
this? They need not be so earnest for faith, for the kind of it must save
them, not the measure, and the weakest may be saved as well as the strongest.
I could in this respect wish, that so often as Gods Ministers fall upon these
Arguments, they took as good pains to stave off the dogs, as to encourage
the faithfull-weak ones. For when error has once defiled a man in the root and
truth of faith: then he grows presumptuous to think that each wanzing motion
and Pang after faith, is as good as that which is attended with selfedenial,
and cleaving to the Promise. Whereas faith of the true stamp, although it come
short of some feelings, stirrings, and much more that overpowring of spirit
that quashes unbeleefe; yet the Spirit of grace, putts forth it self in combat
against their infidelity, setts it in the forefront of Gods battery, (as Vriah
was set by Ioab) maynteins no ease or sloth in them, but rather mourning for
their standing so at a stay, with continual care to prove themselves to be in
the faith, and their calling to it, to be effectual. And in this warfare they
look for no discharge, till God have answered them in some measure.

But to answer the objection, and so to conclude, 2 By Solution.
I affirm that not only the weak in faith, simply, but even the decayed in
faith, yea the fallen into sin, if recovered by faith, are not to be debarred
from the Sacrament, till they become partakers of overpowring grace of the
Spirit. It were exceeding absurd for a Physician to say to one tormented with a
burning ague, want of sleep; or like pain; That he must forbear Physic,
and lie under his disease, until he get more strength, and recovery. What
shall Physic avail him after, if he die before? Or what needs it, if he be
recovered? the Sacrament, I say still, is rather the portion of the weak
child, than of the strong man, so that a loose, dallying heart be abhorred;
and to such this ordinance serves. And (to say truth) such poor souls need
not be urged to more sorrow than they feel: for what sorrow is like theirs
who mourn under unbeleefe? and yet even such (as experience prooves) have
found the Sacrament effectual, to send them away much settled and confirmed.
And so for answer of these doubts, and also the trial of our estate in grace,
ere we come to the Supper, thus much be said.

CHAP. III. Of the Trial of our wants.
NExt to the trial of our estate, fittly offers it self to our view the
Trial of our wants. Trial 2. Of our wants.
The method whereof (God willing) shall be this. First to lay down the grounds
of this Trial. Secondly to show the Nature of a Christians wants, and what
sorts they are of. Lastly, in the use to teach us in what duties the Trial of
our wants stands.

2 thing. 1 The ground of this trial 2. Al have their wants.
The ground of this trial is manifold. First, the necessity of Sacramental
trying of our wants, appears in this, that as the Lord enjoynes all that
receave, to prove themselves to have grace: so he suppozes al such to have
many wants therein. So long as this body of death, and back-byas of Corruption
cleaues to the regenerate soul to retarde and weaken it, to defile, to
disable, to dismay, to quench it: a poor soul shall never want matter to cry
out, (even when gross evils are far off) Miserable man who shall deliver
me? Rom 7.24.
How shall I do to get out of this my dead, luskish, lazy and unsavory course?
Who shall supply my wants? Now then if these wants be unknown, how shall the
soul be thankful for the relief of them? How then should a Christian
search them out and mark them? In the duties of both Tables: in the use of the
ordinances, in graces of the Spirit, in the order of whole conversation! For
the





The 2. ground of this duty of Trial of wants, 2 Ground of this trial.
is the wisdom of God in providing for the souls of his people, a supply of
all their wants in the Sacrament of the Supper. A point which is yet as a
Riddle to many receavers: who although they look at the Supper of the LORD as
a service of high devotion, fit to hold men well occupied, and keep them from
base earthly thoughts, yet alas! far are they from once dreaming that it is
ordained for a supply of all their wants. It needs a good Perspective to show a
man the LORD JESUS Sacramental, ready to fill the soul with all good things,
much more to supply all our wants. Christ in the Supper is sealed by the Father
to give us all that his Promise conteines: Now if that offer provision against
all defects, ignorance, unbeleefe, earthlinesse: if that be able to releeve
the wants of the soul complaining, that she is unable to bear a cross, to
enjoy a blessing, to live well in marriage etc. What less can the Supper
conteyne, save the sealing up of that provision, and the unlocking of all GODS
storehouse? The LORD in the Supper has taken measure (as I have noted) of all
the infirmities and wants of his Children: and although it be not sensible to
the eye of flesh, save in a shadow of the Elements, (Bread to repair strength,
and wine to restore the Spirits) yet so it is, There is all the LORD JESUS, (as
one privy to and sensible of all the wants of his members) to fill up every
breach, to soder up every chinke and flaw of the soul, that can wait for him.
How should the soul then put on the LORD JESUS his apparel to cover her
except her nakedness in each part be understood? Or, how should those
Varieties of dishes of GODS feast be fed upon, except each receaver feel his
own wants? Feasts we know consist of many deinties, because there are sundry
appetites, and each guest has his special longings. So here the Lords love
in providing such supplies in CHRIST should teach each guest to enter into his
own wantes, except we should think the Lord either so unwise as to abound in
superfluous provision, or to fail in necessary?

The third ground.
The third ground is taken from that spiritual instinct and nature which is
ingrafted into all Gods people; and that is, to seek the welfare of it self.
Now that cannot be except it were sensible of her wants. We see it is natural
to each creature to procure the support of it self by all means. The least
maime in a tree or plant of herb, causes a kind of sense in the creature, for
it will fill up the wound and knit the breach again. The body of man being
wounded, or the flesh decayed, or the spirit, smite a feeling and compassion
into the natural soul, which lins not till by nourishment, cordials or
physic, the want be repaired. So much more is it in the New creature; it
cannot feel a want of grace in it self (except it be not it self, but fallen
into some spiritual lethargy) but it is sensible of it self, and cannot lin
till it out-grow it, and supply it by means, that so the welfare thereof may
be recovered: Now what means are so like to eike up and repair spiritual
losses, as the Supper of the Lord? and how can that help, save by the due
Trial of our wants?

But to come to the second general; some may ask, What, and of what sort are
these wants? 2. General. What and what sort of wants,
I answer, That wants are such things as presuppose true Grace, in the being of
it. Wants then may be called either defects of grace, or decays in grace. By
defects I mean commings short of that which ought to be: By decays I mean
failings and losses in that which has been. Defects are necessary as well as
willing: but decays wilful and voluntary. Defects arise from sundry causes:
Sometime from unavoydable, or else unusual inabilities and impotency of
understanding, memory, spirit and parts: Sometime want of due means and
helps, as of public Ministry, private ordinances, counsel, fellowship or
the like. But especially I speak of such, as are caused by either the souls
neglect of means by which she might supply her wants, or using them less
frequently or fervently than she ought: or else not wise and thrifty exercise
or improvement of graces, occasions, and experience already attained. In like
manner I speak of decays in what we have got, either for the kind or number,
or the measure of grace and forwardness.

Terror.
they are wholly made of privations; spots are not seen in stained clothes:
They cannot come to the Sacrament, because they cannot try their wants. They
have no wants to try; both because they have no stock of grace at all, and
because they are not sensible of the true Treasure. Their misery is, they have
but one want, that is, want of grace in general, no God, no hope, no
reconciliation, no faith. Oh! these are not as one who has drunk some gall
and wormwood, but are drowned in the gall of bitterness, (as Peter told Simon
Magus. Act. 8.23.
) They have no gaps or flawes, but lie to havocke and all is down, both the
hedge and ditch: they have no wants or breaches, for all their life is a wide
gulf of distance, between God and them. When they see the godly mourn for
some particular wants, as of memory, gifts to pray, to fast, or of humility and
the like, they do not smite upon the thigh and say, O LORD, do these (who yet
have some good stock in grace) thus complain for a few wants, and am I no
whit troubled that I want grace altogether? If the righteous so mourn because
here and there some want appears, shall I be thus merry being a mere beggar
and banquerupt? The one streines at a gnat, and is troubled to see any gift of
meekness, or of uprightness in others which they want: and the other swallow
a Cammell and stick not to say, They hope to do as well as the most precise
of them all. Tremble Oh ye woeful men! The LORD has a feast of all good
things, but you are incapable of them, yea bid him take them to himself, they
want none of his dishes. Psalm. 4.6, 7.
They ask, who shall show us any good? good bargains, marriages, fellowship
at the Alehouse, Psalm. 17.14.
gold and silver: or if they be full of GODS hidden treasure, it is from the
earth: they are full and want nothing, therefore all that GOD powers into them
runs over. Oh! does it not scare ye that ye are bereft of any right to the
Supper, and that whether ye come or come not, the LORD has sworn ye shall
not taste of his Supper? Luke 14.16.
That he will turn ye back (at death) and bid ye satiate your selves with
the things ye have gotten! Oh! be sensible and pray, or rather desire others
to pray for you, that if possible, the wickedness and cursed barrenness of
your heart may be forgiven!

Admonition.
that they beware of such evils in this kind, both on the right hand and
left, which might hinder them. On the right hand, let them be warned of two
things. happy! None, he puffes you up. Trial of wants stands not in these
only: Their wants may perish with them, if there be no more but fight and
complaint of them: and yet I say, also that many come not so far.

of Regeneration which is in thee, will act and provoke thee to improve the
grace of God, whether thou stir or sit still, sleep or wake. It is a
pestilent dotage. True it is, the Spirit of grace is an active principle in the
soul of the regenerate, it is a full, eternal, working Spirit of it self,
able to supply all wants, Phil. 4, 19.
as Paul speaks: Howbeit not whether we will or no: its a willing, not
necessary or compelling principle, and is given us not to let it lie by, but by
the daily use of means without and within, especially by the hand of faith, to
be continually jogged and set on work. The sharpest saw may lie upon the
timber long and near enough, but it will cut never the sooner, except the
lively hand of the workman stir and move it duly. How shall the Spirit of
grace work upon thee, outgrow and repel thy errors, amend and supply thy
wants, while thou suffer it to lie rusting and unprofitable in thee, both at
other times, and also at the Sacrament?

Comfort.


Object. But it is but a poor stock: a stock from the Lord, thou shall not
bear the blame of the smallness of it, so thou seek to increase and occupy
till thy Master come. All cannot have great stocks: It is in the spiritual
stock as in the temporal. A stock of twenty or forty pound for a poor man
is as good as hundreds to a greater man. So here, Those talents of knowledge
and faith, nay though it be but one, (so it be not buried in a napkin) which a
poor soul has, are sufficient for his estate. Perhaps such a poor
tradesman, may by sundry occasions, want, here twenty shillings, there forty,
and so borrow and supply his wants, till his trade grow better, and his custom
increase. Yet for all this we count not such an one a beggar. But say thus,
Alas poor man he had never any great matter to begin with, but ye see he
lives well, and brings up his charge, and keeps out of debt: and although he
has wants now and then, yet he has not spent upon the stock, nor trades
with other men's moneys: Therefore its good to help such an one in his wants,
to keep him from want. Thus is it with a poor Christian: he is not in want,
yet he has wants, but his stock abiding. will supply all thy wants, if thou
want not a stock. He that has, shall have more given him, till he have
abundance: But from him that has not, shall be taken away, even that he had.
The Lord is a bountiful Father, not like to the fathers of our flesh: If a
child be always complaining to his father, what answer shall he have but a
check? Thou art always complaining of wants, I put all into the bottomless
purse; But the Lord is a father of all abundance, and will give more than we
can ask or think; He upbraideth no man, and yet gives plentifully: Open thy
empty hand and the Lord shall fill it: and especially at the Sacrament. Come in
the true sense and Trial of thy wants in Christ and faith for supply, and thou
needst not doubt of supply. Only be content with thy portion: The Lord has
not superfluous grace, but he has convenient. Although thou have not the
richest apparel, costly plate to set forth thy Table nor fare deliciously
every day, which were to surfeit thee, and make thee forget thy self; yet if
thou have honest sufficiency to keep out of debt, pay every man his own, and
live competently of thy Trade, its a great portion: He is a rich Christian
who sits close and comely to the Lord, though he be not superfluous. A comely
Christian has cause to be thankful.

Exhortation.
that first they try their wants. 1. Beware of letts.
whereas perhaps our own are far greater, though deeper and more subtly
covered than theirs, who because they see not their errors, betray themselves
ere they are aware. Oh! we do but guess at others men's, but our own we know,
and what helps we have had to releeve them, though to small purpose. He who
dwells at home, shall have small list or leisure to look after others.

But to come nearer the point in hand, Sacramental trial of wants stands in
these three branches. Wherein trial of wants stands.
First in a close and impartial overlooking our selves in our whole course,
not only when others watch us narrowly, 1. In inquiry
but when we are by our selves: But more especially to mark the inward
passages of our spirits before God. And not only to do this in a g^od mood,
but to carry a wary eye constantly over our ways. Alas! perhaps many a man
being at a Sermon, or under a sudden Cross, or coming into some rare
company, or ordinance; hears and sees that which for the time smites him, and
makes him lift up his hands and say, I see I am not as I should be (God help)
but full of wants, too light, earthly, formal, etc. But when once they are
come into their old Elements, alas! they are as Saints James his fool, who
turning his back, forgets of what shape he was, or what spots he had.
Therefore its a needful charge, to heed every part of our life, to see where
our wants lie most: Judge. 16.16.
and as she sought where his chief strength lay, so we where our chief
weakness lies. Sometimes also (to prevent self-love) to get some trusty
friend who can tell us where he thinks the fence is lowest, inuring our
selves to be most patient and thankful when our chief follies are told us.
But our nature is rather to feed upon our praises. What poor man is so mad
as to deny a rich friend to see his bare walls, or tell him of his empty
purse, if he know him presently ready to supply him? Therefore let us search
our selves in every corner; in our worshipping of God see what wanderings,
deadness; in our communion what coldness and uncheerfulnesse; in our callings
what commonnes and earthinesse; in our companies what unprofitablenesse there
is; And it will be hard, but if we fetch from every part, we shall make our
wants an heap.

2. Judging our selves.
Secondly, after inquisition of our wants, we should judge our selves for our
wants; count them our eyesores, and matter of deep offense and sorrow to us.
Oh! that there should be such a falling sickness in me of anger and
techinesse, to blemish my grace. As Bethsheba takes up Solomon with
indignation, so should we our souls, What O the son of my womb, and of my
desires! should Kings drink wine, etc: So say thou, What oh my poor soul,
shall thou who fear God, be so waspish, so conceited, so cold, so loose in
duty, so carnal, so wandering! Oh! Should so many vows, prayers, experiences,
and reproaches by my infirmities, prevail so little! Oh! me thinks, if I had
strengh to hold my heart close to God one day together with delight and savor,
how joyful should I be at night? how many sad cheeks meet I in the day for
my unsavory, barren wandering, and weariness of good thoughts and affections!
How lie I open as a throughfare to Satan in base thoughts and desires, till I
am snared? What many opportunities have I of doing and taking good when I meet
with better and holier ones then my self, such as stand with their moulders
ready to catch any good speech! And for lack of wisdom, love and grace, I
vanish and am as saplesse as the white of an egg without salt! Oh! How
uncomely a thing is this and how it disguizeth me! Oh Lord thou art privy how
wearisome I am to my self by means hereof! As ground of an ill temper mends
not with cost, but upbraides the owner with barrenness, so does my heart cast
in my teeth all Gods cost. I am as one in chains by my wants, as if I of all
others were forestalled from grace and welfare: others I see with my eyes daily
out-grow their ignorance, their weak gifts in prayer and conference, their
impatience under crosses: Oh! how wise they grow, how skillful, how wary, how
fit to be examples to others, how above the world? so that it scarce appears
that ever they were of such weaknesses before. Oh! doubtless they have got the
start of me, for I fare as one once behind and ever behind, once techie,
foolish, and ever so: How shall Gods grace ever get honor by my thrift and
forwardness? Could I attain to fill up my wants and breaches with the graces
of such and such Christians, how might I beseem my calling and place? Thus
should our wants be as pricks in our eyes, and as thorns on our seat, to
cause us to sit uneasily wheresoever we become. This indignation at our wants,
upon our continual eying and observing them, would purge us of self-love and
conceit of our own worth and forwardness, and provoke us to an earnest
seeking out for supply by any means whatsoever.

And that is the third and last rule: That we have these our wants ready summed
up and at hand, when the Lord is making toward us with his Sacrament. 3. In a
present view of them at the Sacrament.
If Naaman presently upon conversion, had his hand upon his own sore, 2 King.
5.20.
viz. his likelinesse to correspond with idolatry which yet he loathed: how
should we have our wants always before us? How should we pray, Herein the Lord
be merciful to me, (not when I go to Rimmon) but when I go to his Temple and
Sacrament; John 1.17.
(where the Lord Jesus his fullness of grace for grace, and according to all
his members wants, is present) that as I feel my wants of grace to gag me, my
unfitness for marriage, for family duties, my abusing of liberties, etc. So
the Lord Jesus would there meet me with his special supplies. Oh! if it were
thus, how should our hearts be on wing at the Sacrament, and how should the
fullness of him who fills all in all, both shame us for our unsutablenesse to
such an head, ravish us with his grace and provision, and transform us from
wanting to abounding, through faith in his premise! Herein LORD be merciful to
me, in that I loath pride, but it will not away: Thou bidst me shine to
others in Holy Conversation, but for lack of pureness, I reflect my beams
upon my self: Thou bidst me converse in heaven, and lo, my base affections
are so glued to my gain, and my thoughts to the earth, that I seem to be as
a bird whose wings are broken. What shall I do then? Shall I cease to shine,
Shall I cease to be heavenly because of my wants! No LORD, but herein be
gracious that I may shine with humility, and be above the world: Thou have
promised that thou our God shall supply al our wants: and do for us above al we
can think or ask, Lord thy Sacrament is thy seal: Seals include al Promises
or covenants: I see thee not with mine ey, but in thy promises: Lord seal them
up to my weak faith: in this supply of my want above al other Lord shall thou
bind me to thee for ever. Let others that want knowledge, find a supply of
it, but I want lowliness, thankfulness, ruling of my tongue and Passions: oh!
let me have my supply, each member her own fulfilling; for every soul best
knows her own sorrow, and a stranger shall not enter into her joye. Thus come
to the Sacrament in the trial of wants, and there wayt and give not the Lord
over til he have answered thee, or given thee some handfel of supply, til more
come, and so shall this Direction make thee bless God for the fruit of this
Sacrament. More I might have added: but I consider I shall meet with a fuller
ground of enlarging my self when I come to the 5. Sacramental Grace of
desire: To which I refer the careful Reader: because the grounds of this and
that Chapter do well help to the understanding and practice of each other. And
thus much of the trial of our wants.

CHAP. IIII. Of Sacramental Graces: and first of Knowledge meet for the
Sacrament.
The 3. trial of Graces.
THe third thing requisite to be tried by every communicant ere he come to the
Table of the Lord, is, Whether he have al those Sacramental Graces of the
Spirit, meet for him that is invited to the Supper or no. Which Graces are
these Five. First. Knowledge. 2. Faith. 3. Repentance. 4. Love. 5. Desire or
hunger after the Sacrament. Which I mention, first that the Reader may
understand those Questions which follow about them in general. Which when I
have cleared, I shall come to the first Grace of Knowledge, and these 2. shall
confine this Chapter.

Some Q Q cleared The 1. Why graces tried.
The 1. Quest. Why must our Graces be also tried? Answ.

Why these five?
Why are these five culled out from among the rest? Are not all other
sanctifying graces of the spirit as essential as these? Quest 3. Are al these
of equal necessity.
Answ.
Answer. No, not in the Act of it: for faith is the most chief and immediate
Grace of all the rest for this work, because its the Appetite, Stomach, and
hand of receyving Christ to the soul.

Yet all the rest are also needful in their kind, partly as Graces antecedent,
partly as Attendant and Consequent: for neither can Faith stand without
Knowledge, nor be approoved without Repentance. The 2.
Again, in the Sacrament are more Relations than one:there is one from GOD to
us to give us his Son: another from us to him, to renew our covenant: a third
from each of us to another. That is, to increase in communion: No wonder then
that in so many respects, many graces are alike, (not equally) necessary: As in
the act of going to a feast there are many complements required for the better
doing of it as attire decent, comely carriage, love and courtesy, but appetite
is the principal: so here. Question 4. Are these graces thus called, as if
only serving for the Sacrament, and then out of date? I answer, Christ Jesus
and the promise, Heb. 13.8.
yesterday, to day, and for ever: But in special then: because there Christ is
sealed to the soul, though the soul is always to feed upon him as promised,
both for daily pardon and strength: He that will have his Armor to show at the
Training, or that will bring it into the field in the day of battle, must have
it lie by him all the year long: The odds is, At the time of use, he must put
it to scouring, and buckle on in closer manner and in good earnest, than at
other seasons.

These generals premised, I come to the first of these Graces, viz. Knowledge.
Touching which I would handle these three points. Three points to be handled.
First, why knowledge is to be had and tried for the Sacrament? 1 Why is
knowledge to be had?
Secondly, what knowledge for kind or measure is to be had? Thirdly, how
should a man cry himself about his knowledge? After which the use shall be
applied of all the three. Exodus 12.5.
Durst any Jew have brought a Pascall Lamb to GOD, maimed, halt, evil
favored, but especially blind? say but one eye had been out? especially if
both? How dare we then bring a service to God without the eye of knowledge? 1
Cor. 10.18.
how shall we praise God for that we know not: If we know not Christ, nor his
Sacrament, how shall we thank God, or remember his death? Mat. 6.23.
What a Sacrament is that, which requiring light in every part thereof, for the
receiving it well, yet has no knowledge at all brought unto it, to enlighten
the mystery of it, and to discover each corner clearly? if the putting out of
the right eye of the body, was such a reproach to all Israel, what then is the
spiritual putting out of both, to the communion of Saints? 1 Samuel 11.^.
Solomon tells us that without knowledge the heart is naught. Pro. 19.1.
Who dare go to the Sacrament with a naughty heart, when God calls there as
much as in any duty, My son give me thy heart? Pro. 23.26.
If we read the 1 Cor. 11.20. we shall see that when Paul went about to
reform the abuses of Corinth in their love feasts, he does it by the light of
the ordinance: 1 Cor. 11.20.
q. d. If ye can find any such corruption in the first institution, go on:
but if knowledge convince ye, leave off your corruption. Excellent is that of
Josiah, 2 King. 23.21. 2 King. 23.21.
Where he bid them keep the Passover according to all which is written in the
book of the covenant. If the pattern of the covenant must be before their eye
so often as they come to eat the Passover (and no doubt the Priests and Levits
dids then take occasion to read over and revive the book of the Law, and the
institution especially) how much more ought the knowledge of the will of God
and of the Supper by name, be planted in all that receive it? And if that of
the Apostle hold true in the smallest duties, how much more in this, Whatsoever
is not of faith is sin? Romans 14.23.
meaning of sound knowledge.

And there is good reason of it also: Other reasons.


Secondly, The second.
knowledge is the key of all other things needful for preparation. How shall
a man examine himself in general, try his estate by law or Gospel, or search
out his wants, save by knowledge of them? Not to insist in the graces that
follow: whereof faith consists, partly of a special convincement of the
understanding: and desire of the Sacrament presupposes a knowledge of some
thing amiable to the soul: (of unknown objects there is no desire.) So I
might say of the rest; knowledge therefore is essential to the Sacrament. When
Paul prays that the Ephesians might increase in faith: he begins with the
enlightening part of the soul: Chap. 1. Verse 17. Ephe. 1.17.18.
That ye being enlightened (says he) in your minds, may acknowledge him and
the hope of his calling, etc. So that true knowledge is the root of all true
savor of the grace or graces of God. If thou knew the gift of God, John. 4.
John 4.10.
thou would have done so or so: So, if a man knew the Sacrament how would he
love it? But not to know it includes a necessity of not believing, or well
receiving it.

The third.
Thirdly, the fearful penalty threatened in the word against bad receivers, is
by name annexed to the not discerning of the Lords body. 1 Cor. 11.29.
Now, though I grant there is more in that than mere ignorance, yet that is
one mother root of not discerning. For what is that which causes popish
profane ones, yea hypocrites to come to the Sacrament, as to common bread and
wine in the shop or cellar, save that all colors are alike in the dark, and
ignorance puts no difference between natural things and spiritual? If
knowledge then teach to discern the body of the Lord, and to quit the soul of
all this threat and vengeance, how needful is it?

The fourth.
Fourthly, the Lord has (no doubt) ordained, and the Church most wisely made
use of this second Sacrament of groth, that by occasion of it she might take
notice of the thrist of her Children in the doctrine of the foundation, and by
name of Baptism, and so consequently of such things as they have bin taught in
the ministry, Alas! The Preacher follows not (nor can) all such to their house
as have heard him catechize or preach, to demand an account of his labors, (as
were to be desired.) If then there were not some awe and bridle put upon men by
the Church (which yet alas! few make use of among our Ministers) how should the
Minister know the plight of his poor people from their baptism to their
grave? Though I grant, private visitation is needful: but what one of an 100.
look after it of themselves till their deathbed? Now the Sacrament is so holy
an act of worship that few are so basely vile as not to confess that there
ought to be some more than common scrutiny and search what knowledge they and
theirs have gotten. Which confession prooves knowledge to be most necessary.

But as the slothful are curious, so the ignorant are cavillers, and Judge.
16.21.
devotion is as Sampsons bestirring himself when his eyes were put out: he
was fit for nothing save to run the round and grind in the Mill. So do
devout ones, they are ever in motion, and never the nearer. Devotion of this
kind is fittest for Papists, who are under a strange language, and a worship
of man's brain, having no footing in the word: Ier. 4.12. Eccles. 5.1.
its best for them that know not what sacrifices they offer, but like fools
they know not that they do evil: Its fit for the Mass, and for such like
trash: But for the Sacrament its most unsavory. abase themselves to hell in
their cavills, Esaias 2.
so they may live still in their profaneness! I do not allow any who are
weary of their trades under pretense of hearing, or getting knowledge; but I
say, trades need not hinder from a diligent attendance upon the means, if the
heart be good. And as for the mysticalnesse of the Sacrament, it is so to such
as plow not with Gods heifer, Judge. 16.
nor submit their carnal reason to the revealing of the Spirit: Otherwise (God
be thanked) there is greater obscurity at this day, in matters less
essential, than the most weighty. So that were it not for the mere sloth and
profaneness of men, there need be no such conplaint of religious difficulty.
But the contempt of men to whom Christ is hidden, 2 Cor. 4.3.
might justly both deprive them of means, and streighten the spirit in the
means, that so they might complain for somewhat. But to end, one would
think, that these men should reason contrarily and say, If I be so seely, and
the Sacrament so dark, what an honor and praise were it for me a simple man
to have more skill and knowledge in it, than others above my rank? Surely in
other matters of hardness men dispute so: only in these they are content to
let all go beyond them, yet God be thanked, There want not even among the
seeliest Christians, many whom God has made wiser in his matters than their
ancients and betters in worldly wisdom: 1 Cor. 1.12. Psalm. 119, 99, 100.
that by these, the cavills of the other might be confuted.

is just with God to suffer ungodly men to defile each other: and them that
know to lay offenses in the way of the ignorant, 2 Timothy 3.13.
that both the offending and offended might fall and perish, because neither
love the truth. True it is, That knowledge is not sufficient: a man with it may
perish, but to be sure, he must perish without it. So much for these cavills:
And also of the first branch.

The second follows: What knowledge there is requisite? 2. General Question,
what knowledge.
I answer. First, the more knowledge a man brings (if conscience be thereafter)
the better; too exact knowledge cannot be had. And here I will crave leave of
my Reader, to digress a step or two, and mourn to consider that, which
(according to that little experience I have had in my Ministry of late years)
I cannot but say, (O that I were a liar in this! A digression and caveat to
ungrounded Christians.
) viz. That hundreds of poor people in our country there are (of whom I am
persuaded, they are the Lords and shall be saved) who yet by all the cost and
means which the Lord has for 20. or 30. years been at with them, never came
to see such sweet light, order and direction by the Catechism, that they can
give an account of their faith and sound knowledge therein. They rest, in here
a snatch and there a catch at a good point, in their good affections, innocent
lives and blameless carriages: But as for discerning of things, peisons,
doctrines that differ, holding that which they have spent many a weary step to
come by, grounding themselves upon the word for their estate and actions, and
seeing how they have their warrants not from a Preacher (whom they love and
like) but from the strength of truth which cannot lie; growing up in knowledge,
that so their hearts might wax better, and themselves more settled in
Christianity: Oh these things are as the sound of many waters unto them, far
above them. Shall I praise you in this (I speak to you of my own flock) No,
I praise you not. Especially, where there is a manifest defect of that which
might be: As for invincible weakness and want of reach, I am so far from
dismaying such, that I doubt not to say, The Lord will cloth their uncomely
parts with the more honor, and supply some want of judgment, with much
integrity and uprightness of heart! Alas poor souls, 1 Cor. 12.23.
if ye wanted this too, what should become of ye! And because I know not
whether I shall ever speak to you any more, let my words sink into you! Enjoy
your portion in truth and singleness of heart, as a jewel exceeding all the
skill and cunning of hypocrites. Vex not your selves too much for the want of
that, whereby God does so humble you: for who knows what ye would prove, if
your knowledge did equal some other graces and affections in ye! Exhortation
to others.
But to others this I add, Seek as much light to guide you in this deceitful
world, as possibly ye can! Let not all doctrines be alike with ye. Prize all,
but above all, those which teach ye your selves and Christ, and the well
ordering of your conversations: Psalm. 50. ult.
be wise as Serpents as well as doves in innocence: let not the cunning juggling
of Satan and diceplay of men, Ephe. 4.14. Ephesians. 4, 14.
so gull ye as to pick out here one truth, there another, while he has left
you barren, so that all is one with you whether ye live under an idle, empty,
fruitless ministry, or a grounded and fruitful: And the like caution I might
give ye in other respects: But I forbear; only let that hope and opinion
which God and his people have conceived of you, be upheld in you with honor,
least the Lord do cross you both with a staggering life, and a doubtful
death because of your dallyance.

And so I return again to the point and answer, Not exquisite but competent
knowledge required.
When I teach that knowledge is necessary, I speak not as if every one who
fails short of exact and clear and full knowledge, were to be rejected; God
forbid: for the grounds may be soundly held by many who yet fail in these. As
for example, if I should question with many a Christian, in what nature Christ
subsists, or how a person and a nature differ, or how Christ's humanity is not a
person, but a nature: perhaps I should gravel them, whereas yet they believe
firmly the Lord Jesus to be flesh, and truly God, and both made one Christ
for the working out their salvation. The like may be said of other points
which to the skillful are taken for granted, yet to them are not so clear. As,
how Christ should satisfy, and yet not taste of hellish torments, in what
special office the act of satisfying stands. To what part of the Catechism
each article of truth as the Sacrament belongs. So, I am persuaded, many a
poor soul conceives not of each mystery in the Sacramental union, although
he believe Christ to be there present in his word and Spirit to a faithful
soul. Therefore of such knowledge this I say, The more the better, but many
who want it may yet be good receivers. I know I cast bread to dogs in thus
saying, but weak ones must not want their due: let none abuse that to
slightness and ease, which only aims at relief of the weak.

But the question is, what knowledge is needful? What this competency is.
from his Son, offers most freely and faithfully the fruit of it to a
sinful wretch. Adam, and how that becomes settled upon us, how unavoidable it
is, and what a stain and guilt it has brought upon all flesh, none excepted.

Conclusion of the answer.
By this draught of the truth of God, its apparent upon what principles the
Sacrament and the knowledge of it depends, viz. immediately upon the knowledge of
the means of salvation, next upon the knowing of the state of regeneration:
next upon the knowing of the work of faith and a promise: next upon a
satisfaction, and the Lord Jesus the worker of it! next upon the work of the
Law convincing of the curse: next upon the knowledge of sin: next upon the
knowledge of creation. I go backward, that the simplest may understand the
coherence: so that by this cheine of doctrine (the last linkes whereof, that
is, creation and the fall, are the first in order and so downward) every one
may see that a mere receiver, is not only to know the nature and use of the
Supper: But of sin, of the Law, of pardon, Christ, and the new creature:
without which a Sacrament (severally considered) is a meare shred, an Idol, an
object of blind devotion. To apply what I have said both negatively and
affirmatively: Application of it.
This I said That although in all these seven som-what there is which every
receiver comprehends not fully, yet the substance of truth in general is to
be known by him, except he will come to he knows not what, nor why. For
example. Perhaps some poor soul distinguishes not the means of Salvation one
from another, Public, private, ordinary, extraordinary, in the name and
nature of each one: yet its necessary that he know the Supper to be a mean of
Gods ordeining, for his growing in grace. So again, perhaps every one cannot
distinguish between the habit of a New creature, and the operations of
holiness issuing thence: yet its necessary that he know all Gods people must
be holy. Say again, All cannot tell how many kinds of faith there are: By what
steps faith is wrought: What is contained in a promise: What Christ has in
special obeyed in, or suffered: what the several works of the Law are, how
many kinds of sin there be, and by what means Adams is derived to us: yet
necessary it is, that he be convinced of all these in their natures generally:
and find them wought in himself particularly. And surely if none may receive
at all, save he who is in the state of grace: needs it must follow that the
lesser must be where the greater must be: I mean, that knowledge there must
be of all these, where faith must be, to give a man his special portion in
them. Howbeit, because now we are about the trial of knowledge, apart from
the other: and doubtless many both ministers and people teach and hear this
point of knowledge as a thing sufficient to enable a Receiver: though I abhor
their opinion (as shall appear in the sequel) yet I would by this I have
said, stop the mouth of any such as dream of a knowledge which is not
competent to salvation. Sure it is, a knowledge incompetent for salvation,
cannot be competent for the Supper.

A demand. Some might here perhaps ask how they might be directed to know
these points soundly, to wit of the Supper and Sacraments, and all Those
doctrines which they depend upon. Catechism at large, and briefly touched in
the second Chapter of this second Treatise. And the doctrine of the Sacraments,
especially the Supper is handled at large in the former Treatise, the three
last Chapters; to which I send the Reader with this caution; That I handle
these things at large here and there, not to the end that my book should never
come into their hands, save when they come to the Sacrament, (for to what
purpose were that?) but that they duly exercise themselves in reading of the
whole: That noting those especial things which they most need in the matter
of knowledge and trial, they may be able to turn to them and make use of them
familiarly, when they come to the Supper.

I should now come to the third branch; how a man may try himself about this
knowledge: But I consider that this will better come in, in the use of
exhortation; I will refer it therefore to that place, and being the breefer
in other uses, insist somewhat more fully in that.

Exhortation, with confutation.
who not only in practice, but even in doctrine maintain ignorance to be the
mother of devotion, and so hatch in their bosoms all ignorant ones, as
principal members of their cursed Synagogue: And to say truth, their sacrifice
of the Mass being it self a mass of confusion, having no color of bottom
out of the word, who but the blind are meet for it? Who but the deceived as
willing to be led by blind guides, as they are to lead them, would endure a
Sacrament in an unknown language? Justly therefore both fall into the ditch of
perdition. What one of a whole assembly knows for what cause he is met? Or
what does he expressly believe about the Sacrament, either touching the
ordainer, the matter, the form, the end? And put case they all knew that which
Popish doctrine tells them concerning a Sacrament, yet how much better were it
for them to be ignorant of it, than to know it? So that both their knowledge,
and their ignorance are accursed. I cannot think of a Popish Assembly, but
that description of the Poet of the house of the Cyclops comes to my mind,
wherein all darkness and confusion dwells, so that no man can tell what
another says. And how can they choose, when no man in special knows what he
believes, but wraps up his blind faith in the faith of the Church, and yet has
no guess what his Church believes? Aad yet more woeful it is to think that
many of us who have lived in the light of the Church of God, do hasten to
nothing more than to such Popish scurfe and filth; being weary of the dazeling
of Sunshine.

Terror.
which (God knows) swarm through the congregations of this our kingdom. Not
to speak of the thousands that live under no means of light, who are rather
to be pitied, that they discern not the right hand from the left (whom God
in due time prevent with light, ere the besome of his wrath sweep away them
and the causers of their misery: Iona. 4 ult.
) what shall I say even of the tail and scurffe of those places, which have
long lived under clear knowledge of the word and Sacraments, and yet through
an incorrigible disease of ignorance, are yet as far to seek of knowledge,
as if they had lived among the wild Irish? Such a wretched fagge end of people
there is in the best places, whom no sun will tanne, no heat will warm;
Neither good means amend, nor bad pair; but as the windmill sails ever
moving, but never stirring out of their place: so are they, ever learning, but
never coming to knowledge. As for the doctrine of the Sacrament of the Supper,
it is as easy to catch an Hare with a Tabor as to make them conceive what
manner a thing it is: as if the Lord had branded them with his black-marke, If
the Gospel be yet hid, it is hid to none but such as are lost: Whose eyes the
god of this world has blinded that they should never see the light and be
saved. And yet (which is worse) who so bold, so merry, so quiet and so
conceited that all is well with them? Give them their red broth with Esau,
their belly full, their lusts and pleasures, and take the Sacrament who will.
If they once a year at Easter do receive with others, they think the
holiness of the time, and the crowd of Receivers shall shroud them: but as for
any sense of what they do, what they want, what judgment they rush upon for
their cursed profaning and trampling the blood of Christ under feet, and not
discerning the Lords body, its the furthest end of their thought! To whom (if
they could hear) I would say; In Gods fear look to your selves! With
Admonition.

Hos. 4.


This smooth stream of yours will carry ye to hell laughing, and ye are never
like to know your sin of ignorance till it have brought ye into utter
darkness and gnashing of teeth! If any sense or spark of God remain, and if
ye be not wholly forlorn and hopeless, consider this, that if thousands of
such as know the doctrine of the Sacrament, yet for lack of faith and love,
shall perish! What shall become of you that obstinately and wilfully refuse so
much as to know! your sweet idiots life here shall turn to the most bitter
sense of wrath in hell, and there ye shall fill your selves with that ye have
loved, even lie in darkness for ever: and yet your darkness shall be rather
want of comfort, than of conscience; for the light of that shall so gnaw ye for
your contempt of knowledge, that ye shall need no other hell, than that within
your own bosoms. Prevent it betimes therefore.

Admonition 1 To the ministers.
Parents, Governors and guardians of others, to consider the terror of the
Lord, and the sin of not discerning of the Lords body: That they tremble to
be Accessaries to the damnation of their souls. Say not, They are old enough,
let them answer for themselves: for if you inform them not, if ye who are set
over them know their ignorance, see them running into the gulf and stop them
not, Ezekiel. 3, 18. 1 Kings 20, 42.
your lives shall go for theirs, their blood shall be required at your hands.
Let not sloth, ease, love of your own pleasures, and spending the time in riot
and profanenes, or else in a vanishing course of worldly business and carnal
liberties, forestall your hearts and cut off occasions of teaching them the
truth of God. Catechize, preach, convince, and inform them of all truths, and
by name of the Sacrament; do not turn the wisdom of Church, to a snare. If
they reject your counsel, lo ye have saved your souls; they shall perish in
their sin: because their souls were precious to you, and neglected by
themselves.

And secondly, 2 Branch. To the people.
Herodias did not so hate John Baptist, as these lusts hate the light, least
they should be gastred: Mark 6.25. John 3.20.
They know the absence of means is the oil to their flame: when there is none
to control or reproove, they are alive and jolly: But the word coming in,
their feast is marred, they cannot be quiet and merry. Beware of sloth and
ease, lothnesse to stir, alleging the way is long, the weather bad,
business lying upon hand, when in truth heart is gone, and will is not at
home. Bethlem. Foster no secret love of the sweetness of ignorance: it kills
as the viper: Think not, that because this sin deprives you of sense (for
the time) of your danger, therefore ye shall avoid it. No: the ignorance of
the glass of mercury water (among other glasses of rose water) and the
drinking of it by error, will poison you and fret out your bowels, as well as
if wilfully taken. In a word, as ye love your souls, so hate the steps leading
to this hell of ignorance. Crescentius, that Cardinal did of the black dog,
which came into his chamber. Beat out the black dog, beat him out. This
ignorance is the true black dog, and the Devil himself. Know that its as
the surfeit and Drunkenness of the soul; for, as that surfeit, sometime makes
men mad, Woeful fruits of ignorance.
sometime merry, sometime sullen, sometimes fearful, sometimes bold and
ventrous, sometime quiet, but ever fools, so does this: sometimes it breaks
out into sottish stupor of heart, sometimes into madness and villainy,
sometimes into desperate presumption and scorn of all means, sometimes into
slinesse and subtilty, sometimes enmity and malice, sometimes superstition and
Popery, but always to mischief and misery. And in a word, it makes every Idiot
incapable of the Sacrament, eating and drinking his damnation, not discerning
the Lords body. This damnation sleeps not, because thou sleep: God shall
awaken thee one day with sad confusion.

Psalm 4.
Lastly, this is exhortation to all Gods people that they bring knowledge with
them to the Sacrament, Exhortation
and try themselves about the competency and savingnesse of it. If those whom
it concerns, forget their duty to us, yet that shall not excuse us; let every
one examine himself about his own knowledge. It will be asked how this trial
shall be made? Trialls.
I answer. By these rules following, or the like. First, The 1.
If our hearts tell us that we have so prized knowledge of Gods will and the
Sacrament in special, that we have sought it as pearls: have attended upon
the ordinances in season and out: have chosen rather to be at cost with God,
than to forgo the knowledge of his truths. No heat in Summer, cold, rain,
winds, snow in winter have hindered us: but as he that sows or reapeth,
takes his season, so have we; ordering wisely, yea undervaluing other affairs,
commodities, liberties, to make a purchase of truth, Phil. 3.
buying it whatsoever it cost us, not selling it whatsoever we may have for it,
wives, farms, Oxen; but returning to them with our second affections, when God
has had our chief courage and strength: this is a good sign.

The 2.
Secondly, if we go not to work by halfes, that is, to catch up knowledge in
what kinds we please, scumming off the fat and sweet of the easiest duties,
or that which will stand with our own wills or knowledge of some Promises or
privileges. But as for knowledge of our selves, our natures, our sins, we
are backward to them: If we rejoice that there is a word that crosses us in
our belovedst sins, that smites us under the fifth rib most mortally, compting
it as balm: Psalm. 141.5.
esteeming the words of the minister in that kind as sweet as any: refuzing no
information from God which concerns us, not kicking at it, but saying, The
word of the Lord is good, its a good sign. Esaias 39, 8.


Thirdly, The 3.
if as we have sitten at the feet of Christ attentively while we heard, so
afterward we ponder the things we have heard: digesting them, and chewing the
cud of them; Luke 2.51. Mat. 13, 43.
till they become nourishment unto us, and till that which is truth in the
understanding, becomes love in the soul, causing the word to dwell plentifully
in us, Col. 3, 16.
swaying us (as the scepter of Christ) to all obedience in our course, living
by fath, bearing our crosses and the like: its a good sign also.

Fourthly, The 4.
if we come and go, to and from the means of knowledge with appetite, savor,
delight and hunger. That is, if we come with a view of our special errors and
ignorances to be freed from them: and if when we have sucked out the sap of
one ordinance, we are unwearied and go to another, if by any means we may
attain to true knowledge: and that we take as well other occasions to enquire,
advise, pray, meditate, confer, and read the Scriptures, as at the
Sacrament, and use extraordinary helps as well as ordinary, by others as well as
our selves, yea the meanest; not disdaining to be disciples even to the Ant,
the Horse, the dumb creatures, Prove. 6.6.
so we might learn, its a good sign.

Fifthly, The 5.
if the knowledge we get, be sweet and harmonious, according to the analogy
of faith. That is, clear, evident, convincing, orderly, and agreeing with
other parts of the word, unto which (as the linkes of a chain) it belongs by
coherence, so that by knowing some one threat, command or promise, we conceive
of more, and be not still in darkness, and doubtfulnesse, about the truths of
God, its a good sign.

Sixthly, The 6.
if as our knowledge increases, so our humility does also grow withal. If it
awe us, tame us, mortify us, and teach us to deny our selves, as it did good
Judas, who said, John 14, 22.
Lord what is the cause why thou should reveal thy self to us and not to
the world, it is a good sign. Commonly men either are blocks under the
means, or if they thrive in knowledge, the Devil puffes them up in the
companies where they become, so that they must rule the roast, and be praised,
or else all is marred. But true knowledge serves especially to show us our
ignorance, and so to abase us more than when we were empty: ignorance is ever
most bold.

The 7.
Seaventhly, if our knowledge be a welspring to run out to others as well as
to teach our selves. If our lips be as a fountain of life, Prove. 15.4.
and never stands as a lake, putrefying and stinking, but always is dropping, as
those Olive branches Zach. 4. Zach. 4.3.
were into the Candelstickes to maintain their burning: So, if we be always
dropping as dew, Deuteronomy. 31.2.
and rain upon others that are dry and barren, wives, children, others, its a
good sign.

The 8.
Lastly, if we revive the knowledge of the Sacrament in our own spirits, and
linne not, till that we know of it, set our teeth on edge to the Sacrament, and
whet an appetite in us unto it, it is a good sign, that we rest not in the
lazy habit of that we know, but set it on work to the end it serves. These
and such like Trialls, may serve for this use, which if we shall sanctify to
our selves by prayer, they may stand us in some steed, for the trial of our
knowledge.

Comfort.
and rather hold off himself by them, than encourage himself to the
Sacrament. 2 Caveats.
Therefore these two things let me add. 1. Be not dismayed in thy self by thy
small measure of knowledge, so long as there is soundness of mind in thee,
which may be as well in a little as much. The Lord will require of thee
according to that thou have, and no more. Be faithful in a little, and thou
shall be ruler over much. Excellent is that of our Savior John 7.17. If any
man do the will of the Father, he shall know of the doctrine, more and more:
and if a man keep my word, I will come unto him, and acquaint with him. Look
to thy obeying heart, and that has a promise of knowing, yea and that
experimentally, which is better than all rules or conjectures. Again, if thy
knowledge be sound, though weak, yet let this be no let of receiving the
Supper: for that serves for the weak, both in knowledge and in all other
gifts. Christ Jesus is given of the Father, to be unto thee wisdom as well as
righteousness: come to his feast, and it is a good time to ask it; for him
has the Father sealed in the Sacrament to be thy Prophet, John 6.27.
and he will give thee of his fullness, even knowledge for knowledge, yea,
James 1.4.
richly, and without upbraiding. And for this grace of Sacramental knowledge,
thus much.

CHAP. V. Of Sacramental faith; and the trial of it.
I Take it for granted, that the wise Reader will remember that which was
before said, Entrance.
that faith is not required as all other graces are, that is, only for the
better receiving of the Sacrament. But that it is above all other the most
essential grace, and the immediate instrument of receiving that which the
Sacrament exhibits: By how much the more diligence ought to be used by a
Christian Communicant, that this grace be tried to be soundly wrought in him,
and revived at the Sacrament. This caution being premised, I come to the matter
it self.

For the better conceiving whereof, what this trial of faith in the Sacrament
imports, I think it meet, by some steps to ground this point in the Readers
mind, Grounds of this point named.
and to lay down these three things: 1. That the Lord offers the good things
which he bestows upon his faithful ones, only by and in the way of a
promise, which faith laying hold upon in special, takes the name from that
promise; as Sacramental faith is so called from a promise of a Sacrament.
Secondly, that each particular promise depends upon a former maine promise;
that is, the promises of Sanctification, upon the promise of Justification, and
the promises of more grace and growth upon the first promise of reconciliation,
and spiritual or lively being in grace: so that he who would try the latter,
viz. a promise to grow by a Sacrament, must first try his interest and part in
the maine promise. Thirdly, that who so has by sound evidence prooved his
right to the first; may and ought with hte more ease prove his right to the
latter, faith in the latter depending upon experience of the former.

The 1. ground Heb. 4.13.
(as Saint Iame says, Iam. 1.17.
Every good gift and giving comes from the Father, who of his own good will
begat us) we must know, God is infinite, immortal, and incomprehensible.
Needs then must it be that this infinite good convey himself to a finite
subject by such a mean and way, as the poor weak carnal creature can reach
it. For else what proportion is there between one and the other? How shall
flesh comprehend a Spirit? No more than a little child's short arm can reach a
thing far beyond it. Therefore the Lord conveyes himself to the poor soul,
by an ordinance: which is such a thing as consists of a spiritual, and yet
unexternall or sensible nature. An Ordinance is the subject to which God
communicates himself and his goodness, with a power of his Spirit to carry
them to the soul: as by preaching of the Word to the ear, through the sound
of a mortal voice: By prayer, consisting outwardly of sentences and order: By
the Sacrament also, standing of outward weak Elements: The Lord carries to the
soul by these, most inward and spiritual things.

do us good; we shall still be strangers to it, though our bodies and senses
be never so near it. For example, Prayer is an Ordinance, by which God imparts
himself deeply to the soul: yet except the soul cast anchor upward by faith
upon the flesh of our Advocate, giving strength and life to it; Prayer is but a
moral devotion, and a mere shadow in respect of uniting those good things to
the soul. Likewise the Word of God preached, if it want the flesh of Christ
our Prophet and Head: it will carry nothing, save by a bare sound into our
ears: The words he speaks are life and spirit, and must be carried by the
spirit of our flesh into us, Ioh. 6, 63.
or else not at all. And note this. The more of Christ's flesh an Ordinance
contains, the more it imparts Gods good things to the soul. And so the
Sacrament of the Supper, consisting of the very materials of Christ, flesh and
blood, must needs be very powerful means of grace to the soul: and must
needs carry the good things of Christ, born in point of satisfaction and of
sanctification, pardon, and holiness; into the soul in a more peculiar
manner, as being the instruments of both.



The conclusion then of this first ground, Conclus. of 1. ground.
is this, If God will give his graces to the soul, it must be by the mean of
an Ordinance, of Christ in an Ordinance, and of a promise. A promise is the
immediate way by which Christ in an Ordidinance is made ours. As the promise
is, so faith bears her name: faith in a promise of the Sacrament, is
Sacrmentall faith: and he that would try whether he gets by the Sacrament,
must try his Sacramental faith. This for the first ground.

Use of this ground.
Ere I proceed, let this point teach us to mourn for the common sort of
Christians, and Reveivers of the Sacrament, of whom I may say, as those in the
Acts, Act. 2.
said to Paul of the Spirit: They never heard whether there were a Spirit or
no. So, these worshippers of God, and hangers upon Christ and his Ordinances,
yet cannot tell us, whether there be any promise or no, any faith in a promise
or no. They will keep their Church, and come to the Ordinances, pray, and
receive, but the way of faith in the promise they have not known. To whom I
say, save for fashion sake: What differs a Popish corrupted ordinance from a
pure Ordinance of God (I say, in respect of good to thee) yea what d^ffers thy
absence from thy presence. in this regard? Oh tremble at this, all ye that
profess God, and yet know not a promise, nay, I say! profess to believe and
yet know not a promise. Was it ever heard that faith could subsist without a
promise? Oh therefore I say to all such, judge what case ye are in: ye are
without God in the world, and are still barren of all his good things, either
of Reconciliation, or of Regeneration: your Baptism, hearing and receiving are
empty, and never do him good: For you never got any thing by a Promise: A
promise never wrought upon you any life of God, or growth in that life: ye
never saw need of Gods good things, never emptied your selves of your selves
by self-denial; If ye had, these would have presently brought ye to a
promise to be sustained by, as the Woman of Samaria drew her neighbors to
Christ. I conclude therefore, the faith which such pretend is an Idol; a faith
hanging upon the bare story of a God, a Creator, a Christ, a Redeemer, not in
God; and such a faith is a mere hangby and formal notion of a thing a far
off: its a faith of the Church, a faith of contemplation, a faith not of
adherence to a promise, but of mere hearesay of things, which thou never,
either feltest any need of, or soughtst any part in. And therefore whosoever
thou art whose faith is no other, know that thou live a most woeful life,
without any of Gods gracious influence, and when thou die (except thou be
changed) thou shall die without comfort or hope. Therefore, to this thy
hearesay of God and his good things, add faith in a promise, and thou shall
enjoy God in an Ordinance, and by name in the Sacrament savingly, really, and
comfortably. Oh! let all thy wearisome and misspent former time, sting thee for
thy unprofitablenesse, and now in time look about thee.

I come to the second ground. The second ground of this point.
Every particular promise of good things from God, is planted in a general and
maine promise. So that he who would try him self whether this or that good
thing be his or no (as the gift of patience, right use of the cross, growing
by the Sacrament, etc.) must first try whether he be in the Covenant or no,
which is the well head of the rest. For this one Covenant, to be our God
reconciled, includes, yea, gives a being to all other promises, that God in
this or in that, will be our All Sufficiency. True it is, each poor soul sees
not this. The reason is, because they judge of the chief promise, according to
the limit of their present feeling; that is, because in the agony of their
laden spirits, they feel most need of Christ to ease their conscience of
guilt, and to settle peace, therefore they see it not to reach further than
their present need. Whereas, Christ being such a gift as either is wholly
denied, or wholly given, cannot be divided; 1 Cor. 1, 13:
but is by the soul (if she knew it, and were not too narrow to contemn it)
received as he is given, all at once. Only the soul retailes him in
particular, as she meets with her needs of him; and then by recoursing to
the maine promise, finds her right to all the rest. As the smaller boats tied
to the great ship, follow their motion; so is it here. At leisure the soul
comes to see her penny worths, which at the first appeared not: even as a
purchase of worth, does not all at once appear to the buyers sense, but at
leisure, as the commodities of it come to hand. Now when the soul comes to
behold them, then she sees all couched in a general gift of Christ made to be
her peace and pardon. Secondly, the reason of this is, because God is the God
of order. He first sets the soul out of the danger of Adams forfeiture of
grace, because the soul is not else capable of any good thing. Now in taking
away this guilt he assumes the soul again into union and fellowship with him
in all the good things which she enjoyed before. When the gulf is taken away
which separated the soul, then the way lies open to the soul to recover all
her privileges in time past. Thirdly, this is true in respect of congruitie of
providence: For having once granted a being to the creature of spiritual life,
he does therein bind himself to a supporting of that life; else he should
pluck down that which he has built, and undo his own work. Psalm. 119.94.
As David says, I am thine, Lord, save me. I mean not that believing one
promise should save us a labor in believing the rest: But become a good pledge
of performing the rest. 2 Cor. 1.20.
As all the promises of God in Christ, are yea, and Amen: so, all special ones
are yea and Amen in the general. He that has given his Son, Romans 8.32.
how shall he not with him give us all things?

Use of the second ground.
The use of which briefly is, to instruct and convince us of that horrible
treason to Gods Alsufficient promise, which every one is guilty of, who will
not cleave to God in his first and maine promise of mercy and redemption. Alas,
what man is there who often descries not to find God good to him in the
Sacrament, there to fill him with good things, seal up his pardon, purge out
his corruption, and the like. But because he seeks not to know God in his
Covenant, how should his Seal do him good? What is a Seal, save a relation
to a former bargain? If thou never strakest hand with God for his Christ thy
righteousness, how came thou in for his wisdom, sanctification, and
redemption? They belong not unto thee: either thou must have all Christ to set
thee out of fear, or thou have never a whit of his benefits. And to apply this
to the present point, how should thou come to God by special faith in the
Sacrament, when thou want him in the chief faith of the first promise? Oh!
then cuttest off thy self, thou know not from what liberties, and mercies,
when as thou art careless to be made sure of the maine. Thou should dispute
thus. The time will come, when I shall crouch to God for strength to bear the
Cross, to be afflicted in all my afflictions, to die willingly, etc. But then
why do not I the whilst make sure in the maine with the Lord, that he might
finish his own work and save me, because I am his? Doubtless if I dally with
this, or go upon false grounds, deceiving my self, the Lord will be
guiltless in not regarding me, because the time was when he cried out to my
soul, Believe, rob me not of my glory, distrust me not in my offer: But
because thou were deaf to my cry, Prove. 1.24.
so its just that I stop mine ears at thine; go therefore and seek relief
of thy idols of ease, self-love, and the world which thou preferredst before
me. It is with thee as it was with Israel, Judges, Chapter 1. verse 21. Judge.
1.21.
The Lord had given them one promise for all, to drive out the Cannanites; now
because they believed not the maine, therefore here one Cananitish city, there
another prevailed, and became goades and pricks to them. And so, hence it is,
that neither promise of Sacrament or of other Ordinances do prevail to purge
out their lusts, but they remain as thorns unto them, because they never
took pains to join issue with God in the truth of his Covenant to pardon
them, and make them his beloved. Thus much for the second ground, teaching,
that the trial of ones special faith, rests in the trial of the maine.

The third ground issues from this second, Ground 3.
viz. That the trial of our first believing, may, and must make the other
easy and familiar. Its our great sin if it be otherwise, For why? The Lord
gives us assurance of the one in the other; yea, teaches us to argue from one
to another without wavering, so far as our weakness will permit. Excellent is
that of Paul, Romans 5.10. Romans 5.10.
If when we were enemies, we were reconciled by his death, how much more being
friends, shall we be saved by his life? Mark his manner of speech, How much
more? If God made that easy to us, which seemed impossible, how much more
easy is that which is under a direct promise? if God had cast us quite off
being enemies, we had the mends In out own hands, and could not complain: But
having his word to make good our own desires, we have the Lord tied to us,
and at a kind of advantage, (be it spoken with reverence) so that we cannot
be defeated. Great is the odds between being an enemy formerly, and being now
reconciled. He that will release a stranger from prison, and pay an hundred
pound for him; will (in reason) lend a friend twenty shillings. Such an
argument is this here.

Use of the third ground.
The use of the point is, first, to condemn the practice of all such, as having
found the Lord above their expectation in the promise of reconciliation, 1.
Conviction.
yet dare not trust him for some shreds (in comparison) of blessings of lesser
nature, as to overcome their passions, revenge, worldliness, etc. Oh! Thou art
like Ahaz and his subjects, Esaias 7.12.
who would not tempt God in asking a sign, when as yet they believed not
without it. The Prophet tells them: Verse 13.
Is it not enough that ye weary men, but ye must weary my God also. Thou
tyrest the Lord, when he sees that none of his ways will prevail against thy
infidelity. But still thou art ever out and in with him (as Ioabs sword that
could not hold in his scabbard) and putst him to cry out, Oh! Ephraim, Hos.
6.4.
oh, Judah, What shall I do, or how shall I entreat thee? Is the work of
faith as far off now as when thou first beleevedst. Oh! weak (if not froward
wretch) how long shall I suffer thee? As they in the wilderness, whom no
miracles, no providence could persuade, but were as far to seek at the end
of forty years as the first day. Oh! the Lord loves when his Scholars are
apt to learn, (especially this lesson of faith by many warnings;) and when our
experience teaches us to buy and sell upon his word. 1 King. 20.23.
But to seem to trust God with the foiling the enemies of the hills, and yet to
distrust him with those in the valleys: to pretend that they doubt him not for
heaven, but distrust him for earthly blessings, surely it either justly calls
thy first believing into suspicion; or else argues a careless heart, not able
to improve thy Talent of reconciliation, to warrant thy faith for a poor
supply of this life.

do by many degrees, than to believe the promise of mercy at first? And does
the Lord with far greater ease (as I may say) beteame to the soul growing in
faith, than breeding of it? Why then do they who believe come to this trial
with so much ado, and bury the Talent of God unthankefully in the earth? As
those servants of Naaman told him, 2 King. 5, 14.
If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done
it? How much more then, when he only bids thee, Wash and be clean,? So say I,
put case the Lord required the greatest work of thee, would it not seem small
in respect of the good of the Sacrament? How much more when he says, Revive
thy faith, in the promise of the Sacrament? If thou were bidden to try what
alms thou have given since thy last receiving, or what prayers thou have made,
or what zeal thou have uttered against sin, etc. oh, how would thou plod,
and gather thy goodness together? Now when the Lord says, Revive the edge of
thy faith once received, often renewed, quicken it up in some Sacramental
promise or other, ere thou come to the Supper; lo, how hard a task it seems,
Why? save that those moral duties partly are from thy self, and are mixed with
self-love: But the other is a mere divine grace without thee freely given,
and relying barely upon the promise, and behold how tedious it is: whereas thou
should say, If I were found of God when I sought him not, Esaias 65.1.
how much more easy will it be when I seek him unfeignedly? If mercy were
free, when I had no promise, who should doubt of the more assuredness of it,
when God has tied himself: Surely the very ease of it should teach us to
dispute strongly for our selves, the Lord teaches us to argue for our selves:
In other matters that serve for our own ends we can argue fast enough; but in
this, either God must put us to it, and shame us, or else we will lose our
benefit for lack of pleading, and so, come to the Supper, with a dead or
unrevived faith. May not the Lord repent him of all his cost, when he sees so
small profit? The point it self.
And thus much of this third ground.

Now having premised these things thus, let us apply them to the point in hand.
The Question then will be, how a Christian may try his Sacramental faith? Two
ways of trying faith 1 First, believing.
I answer, by these two ways. 1. When he can prove by good evidences, that he
has believed the promise of reconciliation already. Secondly, when he can
revive his faith upon the promise of the Sacrament. Therefore of these two I
will speak a little, and so come to the use of the chapter.

How may first believing be tried.


1 Position. The mean conducing to faith.
Now for the first Position. The mean conducting unto faith, is, the distinct
understanding of the Doctrine of the satisfaction of Christ, both in life and
death. It was the foundation of Election, Ephe. 1.3. (not the cause) in which
the Lord answered his own Justice fully, to the end that here might set open a
door of mercy to poor Adams lost posterity. Now, that which was a mean
ordained by the Lord, for the declaring of his righteousness in saving, Romans
3.25.
must be the mean also to conduct the soul to fasten upon the offer of God.
For why? As nothing save a ransom could stop the course of Justice, or cause
him to be reconciled with a sinner: so, nothing can stop the fear of
conscience guilty of wrath, nor warrant her, that she may be reconciled to
God, save this propitiation. Till the soul come to know, Esaias 27, 4.
that anger is not in God: she cannot think she may dare come near him;
seeing she knows him to be a consuming fire. Therefore, 2 Cor. 5.20.21. Paul
grounds a fearful soul strongly upon this bottom. Be reconciled to God
(poor soul.) For why? 2 Cor. 5.22.
He has made him to be sin that knew none (both by obaying and suffering)
that we might be the righteousness of God in him. So says Elihu, Job 33.24.
Job 33, 24.
Deliver him, for I have received a ransom.

The trial then of faith by this Rule is this. Trial by this.
Can thou say truly that in the conflict of thy soul with Gods anger for thy
sins, (thy long lain in, deeply died sins, both of omission, commission,
morrall, spiritual, offenses and revolts) thou have beheld the mean of grace,
in the alsufficient merit of Christ? Has this stayed thy heart, that God has
cut off his plea against thee, in giving his Son to satisfy? Can thou say,
Heb. 10, 20.
that thine high Priest has brought thee to God, and caused thee to see his
face with joy? Have thou sent Satan to Christ, and told him, God cannot be
satisfied, and yet angry still? Heb. 6.18.
Have thou found strong consolation (in the pursuit of Satan) from this, that
thou beholdest this city of Refuge, the satisfaction of Christ as a sure
Sanctuary to rescue thee from the avenger of blood? Psalm. 100.7.
Have thou drank of this brook (or wellspring) and lifted up thine head in
hope of being accepted? Deny not thy self; if it has been thus with thee, it
is a good sign: I say, a good sign, if thou have any condition of faith, any
feeling of thy burden, wrought in thee, and sending thee to this mean. For
why? By virtue of this price, the righteousness of wrath is turned into a
righteousness of mercy; so that it is a meet and equal thing with God
(having thus received a ransom) to forgive: yea in Christ, God himself was
reconciling the world: and now he does declare his righteousness in justifying
a sinner through the faith of Jesus: yea, thou may say with David, Save me O
Lord, according to thy righteousns. See Romans 5.26. 2 Cor. 5.17.

Briefly for the 2. The object of faith, The second object.
which is the promise, which contains 2. things, either the good things
offered in the promise, or the hearty meaning and purpose of him that freely
marks the promise. The good thing offered in the promise, (pardon, peace, a
purged conscience, life of grace support in grace, the earnest penny of the
Spirit, and the like) serve to draw the affections (which carry the soul) unto
God, and to dash out of countenance all false objects of gain, ease, pleasure,
lusts, to draw the soul to God in desire esteem of mercy, and in hungring,
mourning, and endeavoring after Christ. Secondly, the manner of offering these
good things, being free, full, faithful, entire, and simple, (exceeding
desirous the soul should embrace them, Romans 5. ut supr.
sorry it should reject them, urging it to believe) serves to put it out of
question, that the Lord means as he speaks: else needed he not to have
prevented us at all. but seeing even when we were enemies, neither deserving,
nor desiring any favor, yet the Lord out of the mere graciousnesse of his
heart would needs bestow it upon us; Trial by this.
therefore he would have us conclude, he will not repent him of his freedom,
if we come in to lay claim and plead this promise.

Try thy faith then by the promise, thus; first, whence came those dispositions
of heart in thee, I mean those tears of thine, those desires, prayers,
fastings, and diligent searching after grace? Came they from self-love, or
from an heart of baseness, bringing thy money and cost to God to buy mercy? If
so, thou have little to boast of: but if the good things of the promise wrought
them in thee, if thou can say, that faith, and the preparations to faith
proceeded from the promise: The good things offered therein, drew thee to God,
as with cords. If thou can say, that thy good affections could never purchase
faith; rather that promise which bred faith, bred also those affections in thy
soul, because thou saw God willing to save thee, and pardon thee, therefore
thou mournest after him, prayest unto him, Jonas 3.9.
and (as Nineve) could not give him over: the rising of the Sun, caused
this dawning of heart in thee, and these making toward grace, it is a good
sign. Secondly, try thy self thus: If the freedom, fullness, and strength of
the promiser, have truly wrought upon thee, then thy base conceits of the
Majesty of God are vanished, I mean thy enmity and hateful spirit is gone.
And whereas thou once could not think a good thought of him, but all thy
thoughts framed him rather to be angry, envious, cruel, unbeteaming; now thou
stoppest, and (as one better settled) beginst to say; oh my poor soul, who
could never get out of thy slavery and slightness, think of the promise a
little better? What will thou say if by all this offering, urging,
expostulating, charging to be reconciled upon pain of hell, the Lord means
thee well? Perhaps he may. If while he seeks to save thee, thou devize how to
get out from him: will it not be bitter at last? Thus weak hope breaks the
ice, and sets the soul forward. Then the Spirit of grace creates in thee both
thoughts and affections of such strange goodness, bounty, long-suffering, free
grace and compassion, that thy heart breaks into wondering at him, and saying,
Who is a God like to our God, Mica 7. ult. 1 Samuel 24, 19.
forgiving and passing by the sins of his people? Who could find his enemy
at the vantage, and not destroy him? Therefore my soul is even carried into
the stream of his grace, and persuaded to believe. I see the good will and
meaning of his heart shining in his promise; and whereas it was wont to be a
barren sound and empty noise for me to hear a promise: now I see it as a
vessel standing full and running over, yea, a stream to carry me in, with
holy confidence, saying, If the strength of Israel can lie, if free grace, if
faithfulness it self can shrink back and deny it self, I am content to
perish. Thirdly, try it thus; If a promise have been thy Object, then thou
confessest that the power it self to believe is in a promise as well as the
motives to believe. The promise is the instrument of the Spirit to persuade:
And as when the Lord made a promise to the Jews that if they did come to the
Temple to worship, he would keep their dwellings and goods safe the whilst:
Lo, this promise had in it such a power as held off all Robbers and enemies
from attempting any pillage: they durst not, they could not; so much more in
the promise to a laden heart, there is always the strength of God to effect
that which he promises: and such a soul need not stand out strangerlike and
say, here is a sweet promise, if I could believe: But here is a promise strong
and able to cause me to believe it: If in any measure these trialls be in
thee, they are all good signs.

Trial 3. By the root of it.
Thirdly, try thy faith by the root of it, which root is selfedeniall. All
other graces seem to have some inherencie, and being of their own in the
soul: only faith is rooted in the overthrow of a man's self. This self is
nothing else save the spirit of old Adam, resisting the Spirit of grace, and as
we see in defenced cities some of their Bulwarks are out-workes and
retrenchments, others are maine sorts near the walls, wherein their chief
strength consists: So here, self has her out-workes, selfe-wealth,
selfe-ease, credit and esteem, learning, parts, experience. These are more
easily cast down, because Christ and they are of two several kinds. Others
are forts of greater consequence, in which the heart more trusts, as carnal
reason, and the wisdom of the flesh, which Paul in 2 Cor. 10.5, 2 Cor. 10.5.
calls high thoughts and strong imaginations of flesh, setting themselves up
against the obedience of faith; so also Religious duties and performances,
whether will-worships of Papists, or duties required, as Jewish righteousness
by the Law: and all the devotions of carnal Protestants. To these I may add
the secret counterminings of the heart, mixing it self with the preparation to
faith, and so destroying the work of God, as selfe-mournings, desires, and use
of means. Now of all these, the Scripture tells us, That if any will believe,
he must deny himself, and be content to be stripped of those, or else grace
will not dwell in him, Trust not in thy own wisdom, but trust in the Lord,
Prove. 3.5. Prove. 3, 5.
So Paul, That I may be found, not having my own righteousness of the Law,
Phil. 3.9.
but of faith. See how Paul opposes them. All the frame of Creation,
Redemption, yea, of the whole Word of God prooves it. Esaias 42, 6.
God will not give his glory to another. He that boasts, must boast of the
Lord. Two suites of apparel may as well agree with one body at once, as self
and Christ (in equal terms) to a soul. The red earth had never had the
breath of life put into it, if it had not been a mere dead patient, and at
Gods dispose to be as he would have it. The flesh of Christ had no subsisting
in it self, save in the Godhead: Romans 11.32.
and what is else that of Paul, God shutting up all in disobedience, that he
might have mercy upon all? Not of the willer or the runner, but God, etc. Romans
9.16.
The Doctrine of imputation, what does it import, save that righteousness
stands in counting that as ours, which is none of ours? What else is that of
the Apostle, Romans, Chapter, 11. verse 6. If of Works, not of Grace, Romans
11.6.
else Works were no Works: If of Grace, not of Works: else Grace were no
Grace.

Try thy self then by this Rule, Trial by this.
Do thou observe this backebyas of corruption in thy soul, always playing her
parts, and resisting grace? Is this spirit of original sin as irksome to
thy spirit, as the most odious sins of swearing or theeft? Is it so much the
more suspected, by how much the more fine spunne, and subtle, running in the
stream of thy best Religion? Do thou feel it in the Work of the Law, of
the Gospel, of Sanctification, still resisting Grace, and starting as much
from the Word as the Sacrifice from the Knife of the Priest? Do thou wholly
set thy self against it, both self on the right hand deceiving thee with
thine own hopes and deserts; and on the left scaring thee with fears of
unworthiness? Art thou as well afraid of a white Devil, as a black, yea,
more? Do thou tremble to think that self should share with God in thy
conversion? Do thou choose rather to be as base as dung and dogs meat?
yea, when thou have done all, do thou think thy self no nearer heaven
thereby, than if thou were a Publican? Do thou confess that there is no
blood, no merit, no congruity in self, to purchase any dram of grace? And
that it is just with God rather to seek himself glory by abasing all flesh
and carnal proppes, than to suffer self to perke above him, or mix with him?
Yea, can thou say, oh Lord! I choose to lie as the dust under thy footstool,
and to be at thy pleasure, as a fatherless Orphan, to do with me what thou will: yea, when thou art under the deepest abasement and selfe-desertings, and
without a subsisting in thy self; can thou say, Verily gladdly will I be
under this buffeting, 2 Cor. 12.9.
(though it be as a prick in the flesh) that Gods grace may be another self
and a new principle of comfort to stay my self upon? Yea, in this want of
carnal stay, I wait upon the promise to be my stay. If it be thus in any true
measure in thee, it is a sweet sign.

The fourth ground.
I come to the fourth ground of trying faith, to wit, by the act of it. The act
of faith.
And that in two things; First, in the naked and free consent of the whole
soul to the truth of God, which is, that he will ease the laden soul,
comfort the mourning, and satisfy them that hunger after righteousness. Math.
5, 4, 5, 6.
The Lord requires that the soul simply rely it self upon this bare Word of
his, because he will perform it, without descanting this way or that against
it. Esaias 1.16. Psalm 32, 1.
Secondly, in the relying upon the mere and free act of Gods not imputing
sin, or imputing righteousness to the soul; yea, a righteousness inhering
in another, and not in thy self. The Lords act of esteeming and reckoning to
the soul the righteousness of Christ, is as real an act, as if he had
infused a real habit of it into the soul to dwell personally in it, as it
dwelt in Christ.

Trial by this.
Try thy self then by this rule thus. First, can thou say truly, that in
the believing of Gods promise thou did directly go from a word, to a word
without adding or mixing the slime of thy own conceits to defile the pureness
of it? Did tho^ with Peter, emptied of himself, obey and say, At thy
Commandment Lord, I will let down, though else I should not? (Luke, Chapter
5, verse 5. Luke 5, 5.
) Can thou say, oh Lord, thou bidst a laden wretch come unto thee to take
ease: as if there were no more circumstance in it, than only so: Lord, I have
found my soul laden and pinched by thy Word, therefore I come to thee for ease;
believing that seeing thy self art the Author of both words, therefore thou,
who would so really lode me, can as truly ease me? Can thou say, Lord
in thy words, is neither hook nor crook, and therefore as I seek to add
nothing to it, so neither do I detract, nor dare I, (Revelation, Chapter 22.
verse 18. Rev. 22, 18. Ephesians. 4, 21.
) but take thy truth as it is in Jesus, even truth it self subject to no
exceptions or cavills of flesh? I enquire not why thou do it, or why for me,
and not for many hundred thousands, that lie in their blindness still: Secrets
are for thee: but revealed promises are for me: and therefore to thee I leave
the one, and claspe so much the more closely to the latter, by how much the
former is more above me. If thou can find in thy heart thus freely to
concur with free grace, saying: Luke 1, 38. Luke 7, 30.
Be it to thy servant as thou have spoken, I dare not despise thy Counsel for
my salvation, or gainesay and give thee the lie, but put my seal to thy word
that it is true: I say, again, John 3, 3^.
if in any true measure thou can do thus, it is a sure sign. And secondly,
if the Act of God in heaven justifying a poor wretch, by his bare accompting
him his righteousness, (when yet corruption abides in him exceedingly) yea his
perfect righteousness: can so far prevail with thee as to say, O Lord, thy
one witness and approbation of me, is to my conscience, as a thousand, though
I neither see thy face, nor can hear thy voice; yet O Lord I account my self
as thou esteemest me, even thy perfect righteousness in the midst of my
greatest sinfulness: and all because thy account is a done deed* and my faith
compts it done in earth, because it is done in heaven: I say, this act of thy
faith is a good sign.

The fifth ground is from the end of thy believing, The 5 ground. The end.
and that is, that God may have the glory of his rich grace in saving a lost
soul. The last and full end of God in thy pardon and savation, is not, that
thou might be happy, but that himself might be glorified. This the Lord so
looks at, that all other ends are but second hand ends unto him, although
real ends.

Try thy self also in this. The trial of this.
Have thou sought the name of God (as chief) to be shrined and set up in the
most inner man and secret of thy soul, above all thine own ends? Has the
wisdom of his way of saving his elect entered into thy soul with admiration?
Has it more affected thy poor humbled soul, that God one day shall be
admired in thee and them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.1.
because they obeyed the promise when they heard it: than that thou thy self
shall be admirable and glorious (for so thou shall be) in that glory of his?
Are all thy springs in him? All thy thoughts on him? thy delights, love, and
affections in his most rich, wise and glorious grace in Christ? Is thy Spirit
wholly drunk up in his wisdom, 1 King. 10, 5. Romans 9, 1.
as the Queen of Sheba's in Salomons? Could thou chuze rather to be cut off
from God (if possible, which yet is not) rather than to rob him of his glory?
And is it thy chief crown to know thy glory and thy life to be hid with him
in Christ? Col. 3, 2.3.
I confess this is to flesh and carnal reason, a riddle; therefore it is the
Lord who has revealed it for a special good mark unto thee of sound faith.

By the properties of faith.
Lastly, among many other Properties of faith in the Scriptures, as that if is
unfeigned, saving, etc. These two are most usual. First, Its called
effectual. 1 Effectual.
Secondly, Precious. Try thy self then about these. First, by the efficacy of
thy faith. 1 Thessalonians. 1, 3.
Faith is called effectual for this cause, That it overcomes the world. It
bears down before it those distempers which assaulted the soul under
temptations and doubtings. Not that the soul is quite free: but as far as it
believes, so far it drownes her distempers as in a Sea of forgetfulness.
What distempers faith overcomes.
These are of many sorts. formerly atteyned: 1 John 4.18.
and perfect love in God to banish these fears and enemies, so that as those
accusers of the woman, John 8. John. 8, 9.
one after another they vanish and yeeeld to the truth? Do thou feel thy
Temptations to Atheism, to deny the Scriptures, to destroy thy self, to cast
off hearing and use of means and to fall off as Peter's Cheines when the Angel
smote him on the side? And do thou with Hanna shake off sadness, by the
voice of Eli, the promise? 1 Samuel 1.18.
Do thou grow wiser, teachabler, more hopeful than before? It is a good
sign. For thus Abraham looked at the promise, Number. 14.9. Judge. 13, 21.
nor at Saras womb, nor the slaying of Isaac: So Caleb, so others.

Secondly, is thy faith a precious faith? 2 Petiousnesse in 4. 2 Pet. 1.2.
Then it is more unto thee than all other thy graces, as a Jewel is above any
other wealth: Faith having settled that upon thee which no other grace could,
do thou keep it as preciously as such a Jewel deserves? Do thou account
of other graces, as they borrow light from this? It is well. But especially try
it by this: precious things will go a great way. How far has thy faith gone
with thee? has it waited upon thee in thy course, and shall it so do, till it
leave thee at heaven gates? Have thou lived by it as upon thy stock, in
blessings, crosses, duties, liberties? Precious things will bear the trial,
as gold and the like. the power of Christ thy King into thee, to sway thine
heart, can thou say thou carriest Christ as coals in thy bosom? By these
effects and properties and such other, examine the truth and stamp of thy
faith, and if they appear in thee, come to the next point of Sacramental
trial with comfort. Thus much for the first trial of faith in the first
promise.

Second trial of faith by reviving it.
I come to the second trial of reviving thy faith at the Sacrament. Now this
faith differs not from the former in substance, but thus: it is a turning from
the general promise, to the particular promise of an ordinance, as the Supper.
For the better direction of the reader, I will lay down this duty by several
steps* distinctly, first propounding the ground, then adding the trial.



Trial by it.
Try thy self then thus by the first rule. Do thou revive thy faith by
turning the eye of thy mind carefully upon the ordinance of the Sacrament, as
the hand of God to settle the gift of Christ thy food and refreshing upon thee?
Do thou behold this ordinance! (so often as it is offered) as a renewed gift of
God to thy soul? as a mark of the wisdom of God, plying thee with the
Supper, as he knows thy daily spiritual ebbings and decays require? And
does the hearesay of each sacrament turn the spirit of thy mind toward it as
a solemn object, which may not be wanted? Does it possess thy thoughts and
memory more than common objects and passages of this life: Do thy thoughts so
mind it, heed it, does thy memory so retain it, as that it survives other
occasional matters, thy self longing while they be over, tha: this may
possess thy spirit? and does thy preparation unto it cause all other things to
lie by? It is a good sign of reviving.

Secondly, proceed to thy Affections. I noted in the former Treatise in the
chapter of the Supper, that the good things offered in the Supper are manifold.
Look back and read them. I spoke also there of those ends which the Lord
gives them for, viz. That the soul may be healthy, growing, settled and
fruitful.

Try thy self also by this ground. Trials by this.
Does thy heart by the considering of all those good things, revive and summon
up all thy affections of love, joy, thanks, zeal, desire after them? Does not
thy mind rest in a bare view of them, till all the affections are up in Arms
to covet them? And is it with thee as with a crazie diseased man, coming into
a Physicians closet, and there is showed a box wherein his medicine lies,
which being applied will heal him? Does not such a man fasten his eyes upon
that box? Will he look off? Is not that box precious to him for the
medicines sake? Does he not stand upon thorns till it be taken out and put
into his hand? Does he not think each minute an hour? and does he take
thought for the parting with his money to buy it? Even so here. Math. 13, 44,
Do thou digest the good things of the supper, till thou have caused thy
heart to conceive an heat of appetite and love of them? Do thou ponder them
so as to leap for joy to think that thou shall be healed there of pride,
self, wrath: and filled with meekness, an heavenly mind, and gifts for thy
place? It is a good sign, thou have revived thy faith for the Sacrament.



Try thy self then by this rule. Trial by it.
Do thou revive and quicken the blunt edge of thy weak faith by this
consideration? Do thou beat out deadness, benummednesse of faith, by this
ground? Feel thou as free and naked an assent of heart to this offer, Take,
eat, drink: as thou did to the first promise, Be eased. Luke 22, 19, 20.
Mat. 11, 29.
Take my yoke and my refreshing to thy soul. Do thou charge upon thy self
strongly to resist thy unbeleefe in the Sacrament hereby? Do thou urge it
thus my soul, except the Lord should mean as he speaks; he should doubly
falsify himself? His Sacrament is a double strength, there is both a covenant
and a seal in it: therefore it is a double confirmation, or else a double
deceit. Oh! dare thou think the Lord can lie in that wherein he seeks thy
double assistance? If thou dare not, Heb. 6.18.
then let faith here double her strength and edge. If the strength of man be
but weakness to Gods, then what must this weakness be? how should
weakness it self gather life and spirit from it? 1 Cor. 1.25.
If thou can thus revive thy dead faith at the Supper, its a good sign.

Mat. 17, 21.
thankesgiving etc. As that one of these shall cast out Devils, which else
will not go out. And that he who prayseth God, Psalm. 50. ult.
glorifies him: So the Supper has special promises. Take, eat, this is my
body, Drink, this is my blood of the new Testament. Both are given, and shed
for you. My flesh is meat indeed, Luke 22.18. John 6.55.
my blood drink indeed. He that eats my flesh has eternal life: shall not
dye: shall be satisfied: shall not hunger nor thirst any more, with many others.

Trial by it.
Try thy self (above all) by this ground. Does this promise really present the
truth of God in special to thy soul? There are thousands of receivers in the
Church of God. But does this promise speak in special to thee, as if there
were no more receivers save thy self? Is the promise of thy soul such a
security as a specialty is from an able debtor, for the paying of a great
debt? So that do thou but sue the bond, and the law will restore thy debt: Is
it so here? Thy name is not written in the Scripture, yet the promise assisted
by the Spirit of Christ, lays the grace of the Sacrament as it were in thy lap
(as Baez did the barley into the lap of Ruth:) so that the Lord speaks by it
in thy ear thus, Ruth 3, 15.
This flesh is meat indeed, and this blood is drink indeed for thee: Take it,
drink it. 2 Cor. 2, 5.
It is a sweet sign. Again does the power yea the omnipotency of God shine
in the promise to thee, so that whereas thou doubtest how Christ can be in
heaven bodily, and yet in the Supper Spiritually, thou wondrest how he should
be in thousands of communicants at once, and how poor alements should be one
with him, to convey him to thee: yet the power of a promise can effect this?
Do thou see that all the attributes of God attend his love, least thy soul
should be frustrate? It is a good sign. Again does the promise settle and
bear down the fear and bondage of thy heart, arising from thy present sense
of unworthiness, darkness, and deadness? Does it work thy spirit to a
holding fast of Christ, although unbeleefe would stave him off? And whereas
that would give God the lie ten times, during the space of one Sacrament, yet
does he promise, still hold thee close to him, till he answer thee: so that as
that poor dog, Math. 15. Mat. 15, 27.
rather than the Lord Jesus shall send thee away empty, scraps and crummes
shall serve thy turn? Can thou feel such succor from a promise
(notwithstanding thy formality and flatnes were great before) and thy
experience of fruit by former Sacraments be small? Do thou thus strive in
hope against hope, and fight for life against thy base Spirit? These are all
good signs of faith revived for the Supper.

Paul, Act. 23.1.
I have exercized my self in all good conscience continually.

Try thy self then by this rule, Trial by it.
thus. Can thou say (as often as thou art going to the Sacrament) Oh Lord, I
make a show of very solemn preparing my self and trying my faith, when I go
to thy table. But if it were only my practice now at this time, and at no
other, I should go and come from thee with a sad heart. No Lord, I bless thy
name, Gal. 2.20.
I do live by faith daily: I can say with Paul, The life I live is by faith in
the Son of God. I appeal to thee who know, that if I go to hear the
word, I mix it with faith; if I pray I look to my Advocate; if I have a
Cross, I live in faith in Christ for strength, Heb. 4, 2.
selfedeniall and patience to support me; if I prosper, I believe all is pure
to the pure, and given me in mercy; and in this faith thus trained and set on
work, I humbly come to the Sacrament, looking that as in other parts of life,
and of worship, the Lord has been with me, so he will not leave me to my
self in this. 1 Samuel 7, 12.
Tell me, can thou say thus in truth, be it never so poorly? It is a sweet
sign of a revived faith.



Trial by it.
Let thy trial from hence be this: Do thou daily quicken up thy self at each
Sacrament, in the memory and experience of former fruit received? especially,
when thou have found it sweetest unto thee at any season, when thou have felt
thy self most emptied in thee, faith most clear and sensible, thy soul
freest from earth and sensuality, and so of the rest: have thou kept this
experience by thee, as a child holds a sweet thing in the palate as loath to
forgo it? Do thou by this trial go to the Sacrament afterward with more
hope and expectation of the like? Or, if thou have found the contrary, that
thou have had but a dead Sacrament of it, what do thou? Poast it over and
forget it, hoping it will be better? or do thou record it often, and use it
as a spur of greater care and serious dealing with God next time, being
afraid to tempt him: and yet loath to forsake him although he should hold thee
off still? 2 Cor. 12, 8.
If thou can thus revive thy faith by thy experience, it is a good sign.

Genes. 18.27.
Then they pray for assistance in the ordinance; meditate and confer about
the right doing, Trial.
and the fruit of it. Try thy self then by this. When thou go to the
Supper, do thou swell in the conceit of thy former strong faith? Do thou
rush upon God without prayer, or meditation? Or rather do thou jogg^ the arm
of the Spirit (as the clapper shakes the corn into the millstone) that it may
let fall the benefits of Christ out of the Sacrament into thy soul? That thou
may come to receive with better savor and strength than thine own? Do
thou beg with the Apostles, Lord revive my faith? Luke 17.5.
Lord make make it a sweet exceeding day? Lord let not the meeting of profane
blind receivers defile me! Let the fellowship of thine Angels and my brethren
refresh me! give me that I come for Lord, and deceive me not? Dare thou not
through ease and sloth neglect the sanctifying of one ordinance, by another?
Do thou engrave the promise thus in thy heart, and blow up the poor sparkle
within thee? It is a good sign.

Heb. 13.8.
Christ Jesus yesterday, to day, and the same for ever? Its a sign of faith
quickened in thee. So come and prosper. So much for the latter trial.

I conclude the Chapter with some use. Conclusion.
And because the whole is one use of trial (which is the scope) the shorter
use shall serve. I will not trouble the Reader with former uses: as to mourn
for the woeful faith of ordinary receivers: or, reproof of Gods own for
counting this trial tedious, which God has made a sweet yoke to his: I will
partly warn, partly exhort, partly comfort the good receavers, and so end.
Admonition.
rest not in former faith, thinking the Lord tied to their girdles: Tempt him
not to alter his course by your sloth: but hold on still this trial of faith.
Remember, its the chief Sacramental grace of all the rest; All other without
this, are fruitless or counterfeit. This must give both being and luster to
all. Bring this and fear not. The Devil will fight against this as the King
of all: If he can wrest this away, he cares for no more, because upon this
hinge the door turns, I mean the joy of well, or sorrow of ill receiving
hangs upon it.

Exhortation.
Faith in the Supper answers the act of sprinkling the posts of the Israelites
doors, when they first ate the Passover. Exodus 12.21.22.


Consola.
The best will soonest complain. Oh! says one, Here be so many Rules, that
I am confounded to think of my self, or to try my faith by them! But I
answer. Prove but a drop or dram of faith unfeigned, precious and
effectual, and the Lord and thou shall not differ about measure. Be sure thou
have any, and then know the Supper is an ordinance to make weak ones strong,
Objections remooved.
not only (nor cheefely) to make strong ones stronger. Touching the objections
of the weak, I have spoken in the Chapter of the trial of our estate. To add
a word more, another objection is, I cannot find the promise so powerful as
to overpowre and persuade me to believe with full stream of heart. I answer,
First, by a Concession.
That faith is a sensible thing, and a conviction of heart: So its called Ioh.
16.9. Its called the rayning down of righteousness: The receiving of Christ:
The buying of the pearl: The running into the stream Esaias. 55.6. and the
like, as drawing near to God, Secondly, Solution.
coming to God: Howbeit we must know the spiritual sense of these phrases
imports not always a reflexe, sight and knowledge that we have it, and much
less ought we to stumble at such phrases as imply the measure of faith, as to
be carried with full sail: To rejoice with joy unspeakeable, etc. Heb. 1^.22.
Only let a poor soul beware of resting in any measure, till he have
atteyned faith with power and feeling: (which is a stranger in these days.)
But to hasten; this I add, Many talk of the overpowring of the heart, who
know not what it means: it is not the measure of full assurance, but the true
drawing of the soul from Idols to the believing God. Therefore poor soul
dismay not thy self: perhaps thou see not full light of believing, nor the
whole breadth and length of it as yet, nor yet what the Lord means to settle
upon thee: Thou art as one that dreameth: yet God was at work to deliver
Israel, when they were as they that dreamed. Psalm. 126.1. Exodus 6.^.
Long anguish caused them to hear of a Savior, as one that was far off: yet
he was near. Give not the Lord over, but even in thy darkest bondage, cleave
to the means, seek the Lord, and leave the success to him, be not beaten off
from hope by any fear within or without. Read Acts 12. Act. 12, 7, 8.
Peter in his sleep thought he saw but a vision of deliverance: yet the Lord
was at work even then. He came not at first clearly to consider the matter.
But what did he? Surely he did as he was bidden, even in his dream: he arose,
shook off his cheynes, Verse 8.9.
put on cloak and sandales, followed the Angel through iron doors and gates:
and at last, when he was past danger, the Angel departing, he understood all
the business. So perhaps the Lord will do by thee. When all Angels and
proppes are gone, and thou left to the bare promise, stripped of other helps,
thou shall be as glad to cling to the Lord in it, as ever thou were backward
to it? But in the mean time, be doing as thou art bidden, and obey, and thou
shall one day see light. Receive the Sacrament with weak faith (for so God
bids thee) and more shall be given thee. And so I shut up this weighty trial
of Sacramental faith.

CHAP. VI. Of the trial of repentance at the Sacrament.
Entry upon repentance.
I Must in the entry upon this point, advertise the Reader of some generals,
which may make for the better Caveat 1.
conceaving of the scope of the whole Chapter. First, let him remember that
which was before said, That in pressing the trial of repentance, I do not
mean that repentance concurrs to the act of receiving so properly as faith:
But in a second respect, as affording a sweet witness to the truth of faith
already shaped in the soul: as also to honor the pureness of the ordinance
with suitable pureness of conscience and course. The second thing I would have
noted is: The second.
That although in this trial of repentance, it is to be supposed that each
receiver of the seal, must first be in covenant, that is, have his heart
renewed: and in that respect that whole labor might be spared, how the
substance of repentance may be tried: yet, considering that it is not always
with receivers as it ought to be, but man still will come without it. Therefore
as I have done already in the point of faith, to show the true form and being
of it, ere I came to handle the renewing of it at the Supper: So here I will
do for the grace of repentance. The rather least any should allege his
ignorance what it is, or wherein it stands: yet I will be short, because I
have elsewhere handled it largely, viz. in the third part of my Catechism, in
the two first Articles. The third thing I note is, The third.
That our special and main enquiry shall be (in this trial) about daily
exercise and renewed practice of repentance at the Sacrament, and not only as
repentance is taken for some penitent affection occasioned: but as it is taken
for that walking with God which consists in the duties of mortifyed and
quickened obedience to God and men: and that either in an ordinary course of
innocence, or in the case of some special revolt.

Before I handle the trial of either the substance or the practice hereof,
Grounds of the point, first, Scripture.
I will ground the necessity of this trial both in Scripture and reasons. For
the former whereof: First, the Analogy of the old Passover will prove it:
wherein sundry charges were given which typifie repentance, and that in each
part of it. As we know the sorrow and yrking of heart, and mourning bitterly
for sin committed, was urged under the ceremony of sour herbs: Exodus 12.8.
not only to show what it cost the Lord Jesus ere he could satisfy: But to
show what they are who come to this Sacrament, even such as peirced him by
their sins, Zach. 12.10.
and therefore ought to come in bitterness to the signs of his body and
blood, and eat this sweet meat with sour sauce. So also the Lord required a
separation from the filthiness of the heathen, when they came to eat the
Pascall Lamb, Ezra 6.21: Ezra 6.21.
yea from all legal pollution, Numb 9.6. Number. 9.6.
which as it concerned the Jews always in any offering or worship, so
especially at the Passover. And the Apostle. 1 Cor. 5.7. 1 Cor. 5.7.
urges one other solemn ceremony of casting out leaven. He that kept in his
house any leaven at that time, more or less, was to be cut off. Now least we
should think this to have lost his force under the Gospel, he says, Purge out
therefore all sour leaven (meaning their Communion with that incestuous man,
which sowred their holy assemblyes) that ye may be a clean lump, even as ye
are unleavened. And why? For Christ is our Passover sacrificed for us:
therefore let us eat him with sincerity and repentance. And the weaning and
abstinence of the poor Lamb from the damme four days before, Exodus 12.^.
typified no less than separation of such as worship God thus, from the love
of their sweet lusts and liberties, that they might be free for the Lord: And
when the Apostle urges the Corinthians to examine themselves: 1 Cor. 11.28.
what entends he save that having defiled themselves by their love feasts,
they would search and cast out that sin, ere they came to the Sacrament.

Secondly, from Reasons.
Now for Reasons. Tit. 1.15. To the pure, all things (not only meats) are
pure: But to the impure, all things (both blessings, crosses, and ordinances)
are defiled. The sin of man can put no defilement into the things themselves,
but it makes them so to the sinners that use them. It is a rule concerning both
Minister and people, Esaias 52.11. Psalm. 26, 6. Prove. 28, 9. 1 Timothy 2, 8.
Be ye holy, that bear the vessels of the Lord. And, I will compass the
Altar with washen hands. And, the prayers of them that turn their ears from
the Word, are abominable. S. Paul requires us to lift up pure hands, 1 Pet. 2,
1.
without wrath and doubting. And S. Peter bids them that would hear to grow
thereby, to cleanse all superfluities away. Epist. 1. Cap. 2.1.2. Act. 3.26.
Act. 15.15. But true repentance argues faith, because it only purifies the
heart. True faith works by love, 1 Timothy 1, 5.
and the end of the commandment is love: from whence? from a pure heart, and
whence is that? from faith unfaigned. Levit. 10, 3.
See Gal. 5.6. Act, 24.16. 2 Cor. 5.17. Heb. 12, 14. 1 Pet. 1, 16.
therefore none should behold him in his beauty of holiness, or in his
ordinances without it. Be ye holy, because I am holy. These few may serve.

Trials of repentance.
But I hasten to the trial of it. And first (very breefely) of the substance of
it wrought in the soul. 1 By the substance. Tit. 3.5.
This may be tried by the root of it. No repentance can subsist without an
inward principle: That is, the spirit of renovation wrought by the word and
Baptism, putting into the soul a seed of God, and the image of God as far
as in these suburbs of heaven, I mean in the militant Church, may be
obtained. Now for the opening of this to the Reader, let him in a few points
conceave and try himself about it.

First in the mother and nurse of it: In sundry particulers. 1. The mother of
it.
That is, faith, shedding the love of God, Romans 5.5. into the soul, being of
it self destitute of all such list, ability, life or savor. The Lord in
reconciliation, by faith becomes our sanctification. God having freed us from
our old yoke, will put upon us a new most willingly, which eases our heavy
hearts, and pacifies the conscience, sets the mind in frame, and shows us
Christ in his true and lively colors; not a Christ of looseness, but as the
truth is in Jesus. Ephe. 3, 18. 2 Cor. 5.9.
That having the root of his love set in our hearts, we may contain his
sweetness, and it may let us on work, yea constreine us to do the like to
him. Oh! How should this try us? What is our repentance? Is it a cutting off
some shreds of evil, or a pang of go^d devotion now and then in tempest,
thunder and lightning, in our passion of fear, or when God pleases us? Or is
it an inward workman at the root of our hearts, and does it engraft and
inoculate us into his stock? Pro. 6, 27.
Does it as a corner stone hold in and encompasse us, that we can more forbid
fire in our bosom to burn us, than the love of God to compel us to love him
and turn our heart to him? It is a good sign.

Secondly, try it in tne material of repentance. 2. By the matter. Act. 26.18.
Its a conversion or turning home to God from our Idols: a setting of our face
backward from evil, and our backs forward to goodness: and that in a
contrariety. As if a fool going on pilgrimage to Rome, and her Idols should
there be smitten, and turned home (with Naaman) to the true worship of the
living God. This trial will search also, for the repentance of most is no such
turn. Men have rectified thoughts (sometime) of a good course, and their
sins yrke them, and tire them, and cause them to ease themse^ves by
complaints, and turn aside from them in their accusing mood: But it is with
them as it is with Seamen, who can hold their course as well when they coast
about, as when the wind is on their backs. So do these: their lusts keep
still in their spirit, though they keep them out of sight as David did
Absolon, 2 Samuel 14.24.
forbidding him his presence, when yet his heart was with him. But these lusts
will come again as Absolon, and that with more violence and sway, afterward,
because the heart is not turned from them, and set in a contrariety. Hatred is
not become love, nor love hatred, outside is not inside, and inside outside.
Still old love abides, and the falling out of old friendly lusts, prooves a
renewing of love. A bad sign.

3. By the form.
Thirdly, try it by the inward form and nature of renovation, which is the
work of the Spirit infusing the habit of Gods holiness into the soul; and
letting in the efficacy of his power into the same, to form it to a new
creature in righteousness and according to the Image of the Creator. Ephe.
4.22.
Its the second breathing of the Lord the breath of life, not to be a living
soul, 1 Cor. 15.45.
but a quickened spirit. Try thy self hereby: if repentance be in thee, then
the Lord Christ is in thee, and stampes thee for his own, sets his
superscription upon thee as upon his coin: Ier. 31.33.
causes thee to be like himself, and endues thee with his own savor and
qualities, purges thy old caske, and sweetens thee with new liquor: Now
pureness, innocence, faithfulness, thankfulness, soberness and contempt of
the world, with denial of thy self, are powered into thee. If then thou find
no presence or operation of new savor, instinct, appetite and affections to be
wrought, but old Adam still as he was wont, as sensual, carnal, proud,
selfeloving, thou have no repentance.

4. By the parts.
Fourthly try it by the parts of renewing, quickening, and killing. By quickening,
1. Quickening.
I mean, that power of Christ his righteousness and resurrection, not only
in a dead habit, but in a revived power: Romans 6, 8, 9, 10. Rom 8.11.
whereby thy dead spirit to the matters of God is stirred and changed to a
lively life of grace. We do not say, that a man is alive to his trade and
business, when he lies on his deathbed: though he live, yet he is not lively,
unwearyed, active and cheerful to it. Again, by killing, 2. Killing. Romans
6.6, 7. Romans 8.10.
I mean, that other part of the Spirit of Christ's cross and grave, which
destroys that old life and vigor of sin, that rankenesse, jollity and crown
of pride which was in corruption: For, though sin be called but a privation;
yet by the law it conceaves a kind of being, and becomes living, turbulent,
rebellious, and venomous in the soul, till the power of the Law of Christ do
suppress this strong man and spoil him, and tumbles him into the grave of
Christ, that he may lie and putrify there. This is an excellent trial, when a
man can say, I was once dead to goodness without the Gospel: but now I am lively
to it: Romans 7, 9.
and I was alive to sin, and where I would be, but now dead to it, as a woman
to a dead husband, as Abigail to dead Nabal. A living death, and a dying life
is in my soul, and a stirring spirit in both; 1 Samuel 2^. en^
My own dead and living spirit is gone, and Christ's both dead and living
spirit is come in place, and in both my heart is stirring and on wing, neither
flat in mortifying evil, nor unoccupied in good, but to both set at liberty. I
say this is good.

Fifthly, try it by the extent both in parts and degrees. 5. By the Extent.
If it be sound renewing, it will be both universal, and increasing. In the
first respect it is like Leaven, which being hid in three peckes of meal,
leavens all, and sowers all: Mat. 13, 33.
So does this Leaven of renewing, it seasons and sweetens all the parts; the
understanding, judgment and memory: The will and choice thereof, the passions,
the spirit and conscience* the appetite of nature, the senses, and the members.
Though it be weak in all, yet it is entire and through all, body, soul and
spirit. And it is increasing in all, for life is growing as life is decaying:
Try thy self by this also. For it is with most of us as with one that is in
debt, who perhaps would sell off some pieces of his land lying out of the way
and less looked at. But as for his fair lands of inheritance, which lie close
and about his Manor, he will not deface them, nor sell them for any price. So
it is with most men: Their renewing stands in some outsides, they can tip their
tongues, or color their brains, and command their senses, but when Gods
Image must be in the inner man also, they will none of that: Romans 12, 2.
Their spirit must still run it own stream, to dye for it. And so for their
growth: many have some violent offers of goodness, as mercy, zeal and
religion: but alas! All they do, adds no one cubite to their former stature,
they keep not the good they had, much less put it to advantage, 2 John 8.
growing to to more sweetness and ease by experience, or cleaving to God with
fuller purpose of heart, Act. 11.23.
when they see the most to warpe. This is a bad: but the contrary a good mark.

6. By the combat. 1 Cor. 13. end.
Sixthly, by the combat of the Spirit within it self. For because we live here
to be conformed to our head Christ, therefore we cannot be wholly spiritual
and mortified, but we abide in part renewed, in part old: (not because Christ
cannot make us better, but because we are not capable of perfection till we
live by sense.) Therefore Grace will work a perpetual sense of strife in our
souls against the law of sin in our members. Not only a desire to be with
our head in fullness of glory. Psalm. 137.2. Romans 8.23. 2 Cor. 5.2.
But the whiles to groan and sigh under our burden, till every drop of blood
thereof be spent: especially to war against our strong, personal, beloved
lusts which fight in us; till we recover strength and get victory: till the
house of Saul be down, and the house of David be up. We shall feel this
combat in us, Genesis 25.22.
as Rebecca felt in her womb by her twins: Till the Lord answer us, The elder
shall serve the younger. Try then thy self herein: if this strife be held up
in thee by the spirit, not in thy judgment only against thy ill will and
lusts: But in the very same part of thee, in which corruption fights: judgment
against judgment, will against will, affections against affections, conscience
against conscience, grace against sin, it is a good sign. But if sin rule,
and there be not scepter against scepter, if there be much foyling, many falls,
few or no resistances, but rather willing slavery and bondage both by sin,
and to it, it is a poor sign. And this is all I will say of a man's trying the
root of renovation, in himself: Perhaps the view of these may do some good
to comfort an heart that can find them, or admonish such as are decayed: or
scare such from the Sscrament as never had them. But I hasten to that which
more nearely concerns Sacramental repentance, which is the practice of
repentance.

2. By the practice of it. In two thing. 1. Ordinary course.
Concerning which, I will devide my self into these two maine heads. First, The
practice of it in an usual course of Christianity. Secondly, in our revolts.
And my method shall be this. First, to lay down the will of God about them
both, and in what particulars they stand. Secondly, in the use of the doctrine,
to press the trial of them at the Sacrament with a revived affection. For the
former then, the usual practice of repentance, may be thus divided, either to
the first understanding part; secondly, the willing or affecting part; thirdly,
the acting part in the life. The Judicial part stands in the inquiry and
search of those special errors, abuses, and corruptions of heart, tongue or
life, which have passed us from Sacrament to Sacrament or before: Either in the
understanding. Lam. 3.40.
beginning (as he Genesis 44. Verse 12.) at the eldest, and ending at the
youngest: Both spiritual, as hardness, deadness and defilednesse of heart: of
the tongue, rash, idle, uncharitable, false, vain offensive or superfluous
words; morrall of the heart and life: hollownesse, earthlinesse,
unprofitablenesse, self-love, pride, rancor and bitterness of stomach,
passions of rage, As search.
base fears, hopes, joys, sorrows: unrighteous, unmercifull, censorious
deeds and passages, or the like. These although (like Saul, and Gehazi's
booty) they lie hidden, must be watched as they utter themselves and break
out, notice being taken and a Register of them kept by us, that they may ever
be before us when we come to the Lord. And if the conscience play booty in
concealing, or excusing them, the soul must go to the candle of the Lord
which searches the bowels of man, and beg light to discern, Prove. 20.27.
and strength to convince it self of them, and the curse due to them, till the
soul be even caused to stop her own mouth, and give up her weapons of
defense, standing as mute and guilty before God, of them. Concerning which
work of search, because I spoke of it in general in the first Chapter of this
Treatise, I remit the Reader to that place. Here only this: It were good for
us to make use both of our best friends and worst enemies, if we would know our
selves: and not wholly be our own judges. Helps to search.
which his friends could not.

Our Soul part.
The next is the soul part, or the affecting. And here in the first place is
required a broken mourning heart for sin being thus searched out, 1. Brokennes
and that with uprightness and tenderness, as Zachary describes it: Zach.
12, 10.11.
They shall see him whom they have peirced, and mourn as one mourns for his
son and heir: yea, they shall be in bitterness (note the phrase) that is,
godly sorrow shall soke and sape them, they shall be in the power of it, so
that it shall overruled them, they shall not easily shake it off; yea it shall
be exceeding sorrow, as that of Hadrimmon for the sad loss of Iosia: and
further it shall be fervent and sincere, both signified by the secrecy of it,
husband apart, wife apart, and family apart; as we say, He mournes truly that
mournes without witness. Such a sorrow, such tears, hearty and unfaigned, not
in a mood, coming from a full heart, impotent and pouring it self out before
God plentifully, because it has greeved the Spirit of so good a God, so
patient and longsuffering; I say such a one is the true badge of repentance:
which issues from faith. Wherein either tears are abundant, as at Bochim or
Mizpeh when the people drew buckets before the Lord: Judge 2.4.
or else in the want thereof, the heart sheds tears of blood, 1 Samuel 7, 6.
and the soul sighs under a burden which she cannot well utter. This sorrow
usually bears the name of repentance as being a maine companion inseparable
from it: and that true eating of sour herbs required of him that ate the
Passover: which herbs grow no where, save in the garden of grace. Only the
love of that God whom the soul has dishonored even in the midst of mercy,
and when she peirced the Lord of life, then was that Lord willingly peirced to
death by her, that she might live, Act. 2.37. I say, this love only can melt
a heart of stone, and break it in pieces, so that it cannot but repent,
whereas before by the hardness of heart, Romans 2.4.
despising the patience of God, it could not repent. True search of heart will
work true brokennesse, and cause the belly to tremble, Habac. 3.16.
and rottenness to enter into the bones, that it may find peace in the day of
trouble. Yea as the Lord turned the captivity of Job, Job 42.10.
when he prayed for his friends: So, in this through mourning of heart, tne
Lord turns the captivity of the soul and converts it to himself. No terrors
of conscience can soften an hard heart; but rather they will harden it and bind
it up to greater hardness: As we see, an hammer may break a bell to gobbets
fit to be melted: but the fire only can melt them, that so they may be molded
a new. So the love of God can only effect this mourning after God, and broken
heart, a most welcome sacrifice to God: till which the soul cannot beteame the
Lord herself to be offered up unto him, Romans 12.2. Romans 12, 2.


Secondly, the heart thus broken breaks out into confession; 2. Confession.
and (as Hosea says) takes words unto herself to express her sorrow: Hos.
14.2.
for confession is the true vent of godly sorrow. This confession is an
uttering and pouring of the heart out to God, when once sorrow has filled it
to the brimme: and therefore in all those texts almost where we have examples
of sorrow, confession follows immediately. Confession (without this open, full,
and affected heart) is as saplesse and barren a thing and as unsavory a
formality as can be: Only this broken heart will break out into open and
ingenuous confession, which else keeps the impostume within her self, and
hides it. Thus David sweetly Psalm. 32, Psalm. 32.5, 6.
says, While I hid my sin, and nourisht an hard heart, my bones were
consumed, and the fire burnt within me: But when my heart thawed, then I
acknowledged my sin, that is, powered out my soul in confession, and thou
forgavest me the iniquity of my sin. This confession is sampled by the matter
which is searched out and according to the sorrow which the heart conceives:
and by both becomes a most humble, plain, tender and hearty expressing of
sin to the Lord, not only in the substance, but the circumstances of
aggravation. Its no mincer or lesner of it, but to the uttermost enlarges it
against her self: according to either the greatness, the extension and
effects, the heinousness of it by the person committing it, the person against
whom, the heart wherewith, the time when, place where, and all to make up an
ingenuous confession against it self. Oh! that one under such means of mercy,
even in cool blood, with the heart of a Traitor should with so high an hand,
with such spiritual wickedness offend the Lord (say it be by uncleanenesse,
by living in a course of unprofitable hearing, hypocrisy, formality, vain
glory, pride, earthlinesse, especially unbeleefe, or as the case requires) yea
that I should sin against such mercies and longsuffering of God leading me to
repentance, and that to the horrible scandal of Religion, and hardening of many
in the like sins! Oh woeful wretch, how shall I look thee in the face! Thus
confession turns up the bottom of the heart, with shame and detestation, yea
treading it self under Gods feet as unworthy to breathe in his air, or look
up to heaven: and makes it self vile and odious, comparing it self in her
filthiness, with the pure eyes of God. See the confessions of the holy men in
Scripture, Dan 9.8. Ezra 10.1. Ezra 9.6. Psalm. 51.3. Job 42.2. 1 Timothy 1 10.
( Ezra, David, Job, Paul and others) confounded in themselves for their sins.

Thirdly, the soul having thus arraigned and indicted her self before God,
does receive sentence against her self pronouncing her self by her guilt,
Thirdly, sentencing herself.
to lie justly under the vengeance of God for her sin: and does justify God
in all his sayings, that he may be righteous (whatsoever become of her;) Y^a
she brings her self even to the suburbs of hell, as she deserves: Psalm.
51.4. 2 Samuel 24.17.
looking at Gods glory above her own redress. This exceeds any repentance of
an hypocrite: whose terrors and confessions are but to vomit up the morsells
which load the heart for the present, but after are welcome; This I say, is
the third step: So to condemn her self as to applaud and justify Gods
sentence: If he say, she is a Traitor, she grants it; if he say she is cut
off, and accursed, she confesses it righteous: in all the Lords accusings and
judgings she prevents him and judges her self, saying, True Lord, thy
judgments are just: If thou should make all my days miserable, it were but
just, if all at once wrath should seize upon body, name, mind, conscience,
goods, wife and children, all were just, yea whatsoever is not hell, is mercy:
hell it self being but just: and under this confuzion and heap of guilt and
wrath she lies, as one held down with it; as one that lies under the ruin of
some piece of building, fallen upon and oppressing of his body. As we see
odds between a face made white with colors, and appalled with a disease:
between a vizard and a countenance consumed and worn with lying bedred: which
(though no man speaks) utters it own weakness. And this spiritual
subjection of a penitent heart lying under her sin and shame, the holy Ghost
much expresses true repentance by: saying of Ephraim, Ier. 31.18.
I was as an heifer that knew no yoke, but after I was corrected I turned: yea
I smote upon my thigh, yea I was ashamed and confounded because I bare the
reproach of my youth. This holds the pearking proud heart of man, under the
hand of God wholesomly: and sometimes the anguish and confusion of the soul
works upon the body: so David and Job tells us, Psalm. 32.4. Job 33.20.21.
Psalm. 6.6.7.
that the wrath of God turned his moisture into the drought of Summer: That his
flesh was as a bottle in the smoke: that it was consumed, loathed deynty
meat, and was brought to the grave. By which we must not conceive pangs of
despair, but the wounds of the conscience under the guilt of sin as sin,
and wrath as wrath, so much the more bitter by how much more sustained by God
in the hope of pardon: for all true Repentance, yea each seed of it,
presupposes some seed of true faith in pardon.

The fourth and last in this kind is Indignation and holy revenge of a man's
self as his own greatest enemy for his sin: The fourth, Indignation.
Which follows upon the other, because the soul that loves God, hates
whatsoever resists his righteousness: and as it does has sin in others, so
especially in her self, because it knows it self best: which zeal and anger
against sin does not only stand in a meare pang of passion and distaste, but
even in a revenge of it self upon both it self and sin and all instruments
thereof, in token of utter detestation. And why? because it means no more to
meddle with it; for if it did, it could not attain to this degree. First it
conceaves a true enmity against the sin simply as sin, and opposite to the
Image of God, be it greater or smaller, and the deeplyer, as it dishonours God
most deeply. This is a work of the Spirit putting a contrary Principle into a
man, to hate that which he loved, and love that which he hated: a thing which
to flesh, is impossible, for no man ever hated his own flesh. As it was with
David, that nothing could cause him to hate Absolon: neither the murder of
Amnon, nor deflouring of his Concubines, nor treason against his own person:
so it is with a natural man, nothing can set odds between him and his lusts,
the amity with them is so rooted. When therefore true enmity is set between
sin and the soul, that it can say, Lord I hate it, yea as my rankest enemy,
its a work of the Spirit: for before it counted him her enemy, who sought to
sow the least dissension between sin and her self. Then secondly, she has
indignation against her self for sin: We know how our nature is given to
miscall our enemy; So does a repenter miscall himself. 2 Cor. 7.11.
Thus the Corinthians are said to revenge themselves for that bolstering up the
incestuous person in his sin: and David called himself (not in a pang but
cordialy) a wretch, Psalm. 73.22.
a fool, Romans 7.24.
a beast for his distrust of the promise. Paul also, O miserable man! And this
revenge reaches to the very instruments of sin, that they may never provoke
the soul to the like any more. As we may see in those, Act. 19.19. Act. 19.19.
who destroyed their curious books of witchcraft, amounting to a great value.
Yea lastly, the soul of a penitent revenges it self by intercepting all
provision of old lusts, and denying it self the lawfullest liberty (if tending
to occasion the sin) as Job would vow that he would not feed his eye with
so much as looking at a maid, to cut off lust: so far would he be from
fulfilling it. And Solomon bids the young man to balke the way, Prove. 5, 8.
and not so much as to come near the strange woman. This is to bear the
voluntary marks of Christ, even to cut off the right hand, and pull out the
eye that offends. Mat. 18, 8.
And this for the fourth point of affection.

The third and last is the life part, The 3. The life.
or the part of practice. And therein a repenter does 2, things. 1. Renounces
his sin, 2. Returns to the Lord. Read Esaias 55, 7. Esaias 55.7.
For the first, What were the other two, but mere equivocation, without this?
This is called a departing from iniquity: Either in renouncing sin.
a forsaking of our evil way and works: and is used by the holy Ghost as a
description of repentance. When the soul so falls out with sin, as that it
sues a divorce, and abhors a Reconciliation. Saying with David, Remove far
from me all the ways of deceit. Psalm. 119, 29.
This is the souls utter resigning up all her right and possession of sin:
so that as she who has given up her right to her land, never looks to be a
penny the better for it, nor to receive one penny maintenance by it, so here.
And this is very material. For sin is like an old harlot which will plead
welcome after long intermission, by old familiarity and sweetness. As that
harlot which Austine answered: when she meet her lover and told him it is I. He
answered, but I am not I. When old unlawful gains in shops and trades, old
base company, and unlawful gains: when old stolen pleasures and waters offer
themselves in a golden cup, saying, How can thou want us? Then for the soul
to answer by woeful experience, how dare I buy repentance so dear? how dare I
return to that I have abhorred? Romans 6, 21.
What fruit have I had of those things, whereof I am ashamed? Do I hasten to
woe, that I repent me of my repentance? When Achish saw David to go against
Saul and bear arms against him: He told him: Now he had made himself
stink in Saul's nosthrils, he shall return no more. 2 Samuel 27, 1^.
How odious were it then for thee to return to that sin, which the Lord has
caused to stink in thy nosthrils? An hypocrite would feign be a repenter, but
he would keep that which cuts the throat of repentance: As David would feign
be King of Israel and keep his crown, but his first question is, Is the
young man Absalon alive and safe? 2 Samuel 18, 19.
What absurdity was here? or how could these two stand together? But
repentance answers as Cushi did, Would all the enemies of the Lord were as he
is! verse 32.
He is thrust through and dispatched, never to trouble thee with his treason
more. So here, renouncing of evil stands at the elboe of repentance, and when
the old remnants of lust suggest to the soul how sweet it is, to keep under
hand some sweet partnership with sin, as uncleanenesse, again she prompts
it thus, How shall those that are dead to sin, Romans 6, 2. 2 Kings 9.32.
live any more therein? Cst down this painted Iezabell, Cast out this Idol to
the batts and moles. Take no more thought for her, renounce her not only in
her self, but in all her colors, shifts and occasions. Play not the fool, to
follow thy harlot, but keep closely thy heart to a final divorce, and so
prosper. Say thus, In my unrenued part I feel strong motives to return to
folly: Romans 7, 25.
But my dear friend repentance will not suffer me! I feel an hundred fold
gain for this forfeicture of my lust: Luke 18.30. Psalm. 85.8.
I do not forbear sin as a slave, but I have boot in beam within me, the
Lord Jesus has spoken peace to me, that I may not return to it.

The latter part of the practice, is, returning to the Lord. Or returning to
God.
For repenting is no staggering between two: its no dark carririage, rather
standing in the absence of some vices, than the practice of virtues. But, an
apparent turning from the one that it might return to the other: not to one or
two duties, but to the Lord; universally, entirely, equally and faithfully,
uprightly, and constantly, according to the measure of mercy received, And, by
this phrase the holy Ghost usually urges repentance. For why? returning to God
is such a clozing with God in the promise of reconciliation and mercy: as
proceeds to a cleaving close to him in all his revealed will and ways with
comeliness, 1 Cor. 7, 35.
without separation; drawing daily strength from the love of God tasted and
renewed, to hold the soul to God with fuller purpose of heart, without
revoltings, As the loadstone pulles the iron to it self by a secret instinct,
and so holds it close; so does the love of God attract the soul to God, Romans
7.22.
and fasten it to him with delight, counting his yoke easy and his burden
light. It sides with God, stands for God, the desires of her soul are to him,
his ways and ends; Esaias 26, 12.
yea the remembrance of his name. It seeks God, balkes no knowledge or
information of his will, wherein he will be worshipped, even in all commands
and ordinances, Luke 1, 6.
both in the immediate service of the two first, as in the mediate of the
third. Renewing covenant duly with him, where any breach has been, and
looking more narrowly to her paths, by occasion of slippes. Not fleeting off
the fat and sweet, leaving the rest: But taking Gods work as it lies, the
hardest duties of selfedeniall and bearing the cross; as well as the easiest;
diligent in all those means using, which serve either to purge out corruption,
or to nourish goodness; observing and savoring all occasions offered, to draw
nearer to God in the fellowship of his graces, and in the increase of
holiness. And to this course she endeavors (as infirmity will admit) to bend
the aim and stream of her spirit, her thoughts and affections, without
wearines walking with God, till he come unto her, watching to it, girding to
it, Luke 12, 35.
and standing with her loins girt and lamp burning, that at the coming of
the Lord she may be found faithful and well occupied. And thus much for a
view of a christian ordinary practice of repentance, so far as I think meet
for this place; least any pretending willingness to try themselves, should
allege they know not how.

The second follows, that is, the practice of repentance by occasion of
revolting from God. The 2. In revolts.
For we have hitherto spoken of repentance, rather as it is Gods way, than as
many find it to be, or practice it. They have many starting holes, and go in
and out of order as horses out of their traces; yea many make the way of God
nothing else save a falling sickness, ever a falling and a rising, as those in
Judges did; which the Lord abhorres. Sometime by their secret and inward
declinings of heart and spiritual wickednesses and infidelity, hypocrisy,
formality, and timeserving security, pride, etc. Judge. 4, and 6, and 7, 8, etc.
Sometime by morrall open falls into wordlinesse, uncharitabl^nesse, strong
Passions and lusts, neglect of the means. In this case, the Lord has provided
a repentance of recovery, and redress of such falls; for, shall a man fall and
not arise? Shall he lie still in the slough as an ass under his burden? No,
but repent of his Backslidings, Ier. 8, 4. Ier. 3.14.
and make up his breaches, and make peace again. But how? (may some say) is
this to be done? I will give a short draught of this also, and so draw to
applycation of the whole, by way of trial.

And that. 1. Branch.
Know then, that for substance this repentance is no other, than the former:
only it differs in circumstance. And for the better conceiving of it, observe
these particular acts of it. First, as the Lord susteynes his people so, even
by that seed of his in them, that they shall not totally shake out the Spirit,
nor yet pour out themselves so far into sin as to sin with a full bent
and stream of soul, but with a check and control of grace: so, when
conscience is awaked by any word or work of God upon them, they are kept from
extremity of uttter depaire. Corruption through the malice of Satan, is
always ready to suggest utter deserting of God, and that they are cast out of
his sight. As we see in those pangs of the best of Gods children in Scripture,
Esaias 38, 11. Psalm. 51.11. Jonah 2, 4. Lam. 3, 18.
Hezekia, David, Jonah and others, yea in the Church of God, forsaken for a
time in captivity: all which were by temptation, brought to the graves brinke,
and to think themselves cut off from the land of the living: Ier. 2, 25.
and to say, No, no. There is no hope. Here then the first work of returning
to God, is, To stay and stop themselves in this headlong ruin; and by some
glimpse of God a far off to be kept from utter dashing in pieces. Thus we
see in all those examples (if we look into the texts) that the Lord wrought a
stop of despair: Iona in the Whales belly, Iona 2, 5.
and in his horrors, yet stays up himself by an hope: Yet (says he) I will
look back to thine holy Temple: Lam. 3, 19.
and the Church in the Lamentations, considered and felt the gall and the
wormwood, (that is, that God smote her not to cast her off, but to draw her to
repent) and so she had hope. It cannot be thus with the reprobate: who as
they fall totally, so they want an eye to see God in their horrors, but
apprehend as dismal and final desertion of God as Saul, 1 Samuel 23, 6. Man 27,
5.
Judas, and others: so that they are sent away packing from the presence of God
without pity, and left to what ends themselves chuze, even often to lay violent
hands upon themselves, the Lord that caring what becomes of them. It is not so
here: But some light is given to them that see Gods meaning in the afflicting
of their souls with wrath, not that he might give them a taste of hell a
coming: but that he might pinch them to return home, and turn them from the
pit.

Secondly, 2 Branch.
the Lord adds a more clear sight of himself to his fallen servants; and
causes them more fully to call to mind his mercies of old, and thereby to be
more sensibly upholden. This is caused by a reviving of his seed in them,
which cannot dye: So David, Psalm. 119, 52.
even in his agonies when (to his feeling) the Lord had forgotten him: yet
remembering times past, was comforted. [An hypocrite I knew will catch at these
things to bane himself, but children must not be starved therefore.] They
seriously weigh this, That neither their goodness did first work their
pardon, nor yet that sin (truly repented of) can cut off their estate in
grace: for why? The gifts of God are without repentance: and his Covenant is
eternal. Esaias 54.8, 9. Romans 11, 29. 2 Cor. 5.21.
Even as the covenant with Noe (as the Prophet speaks.) The Lord Jesus being
made sin, all sin, for the elect, sin of offense and sin of revolt,
they dare not abridge his merit, and therefore conceave the covenant (by this
means established) to be suitable. This then is the 2, step of the return
of the godly: The experience of former free m^rcy, when they had no title:
therefore now having a title which sin cannot cut off the elect from) they much
more are stayed by it. By which means she sees that even the sins of deep
hardness of heart yielding to temptation and the violence of lust, secure
lying still for a time in sin; or other sins, as falling to embrace the
world, cleaving to base fellowship in evil, are yet curable revolts with God,
and there is balm in Gilead for them, to heal them: not to encourage the
soul to tempt God further, but in the sense of bottomless mercy to return
home for ever, as Onesimus by occasion of his running away, became better to
Philemon, Philem. 15.
than ever.

The third step is, The 3. Branch.
that grace in the children of God fallen does clear up the understanding from
that confuzion which sin else would cause in them, and deter them from God
and from any heart to return. Thus it is with the hypocrite: his mind does so
present the multitude of sin, in so intricate a manner, that it confounds the
spirit, and causes him to think, Genes. 4.13.
that his sin is above pardon. The slavery of his defiled mind is so great
when he weighes the woeful course which he has run, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Rom, 2,
3, 4.
adding drunkenness to thirst, and heaping up wrath against the day of wrath,
that he is as one who has run out above his ability to pay, and therefore his
book of accounts is yrkesome to cast over: it is death to him to think of it.
Thus it was with Cain: each hundred of years that he lived, the debt of his
murder was so increased by other sins and the penalties thereof, that at
last it became inextricable. But repentance in the true children of God causes
the view of sin and the chain thereof to be presented with some hope of
forgiveness: because although perhaps the conscience is amazed, yet its not
privy to that treachery which the wicked were carried by in sinning. Psalm. 51,
4. Mark. 14, 72.
And therefore their sin is said to be ever before them: they are said to
come to themselves; Peter is said to weigh his sin, ere he went out; which
argues that the weight of it oppressed him not. Thy reviving of the mind from
the horror and oppression of it, is a great mercy in the midst of such misery.
Iona was infolded as in a labyrinth of Sea, Jonah 2, 6.
Whale, and conscience; yet in this gulf he was not swallowed up, but
conceaved in his mind a possiblenesse for God to bring order out of his
confuzion. So that the first occasions of revolt, the circumstances attending,
the degrees following, and the danger incurred: rather serve to magnify mercy
in keeping the soul from utter Apostasy from the living God, than to beat off
the soul from hope.

The 4. Branch.
The fourth (and one of the many) is the recovering of a sensible and broken
heart, after long hardness by the deceitfulness and sweet baits of sin.
Heb. 3, 12.
A most sweet fruit of the spirit of election. For it was not possible for the
hard heart of Saul or Judas to relent, upon the check of conscience: there was
no drop of the seed of repentance in them. It would seem impossible that
Peter and David after so long a lying in so hideous sins, Mark. 14, 72. 1 Samuel 12, 3, 4.
should at the first conviction of Nathan, relent, and breaking through all the
bars of his sin, say, I have sinned. It was not in the words speaking, 1 Samuel 15, 24. Mat. 27, 3, 4,
(for Saul and Judas spoke the same) but in the broken heart which uttered
them. But the cause was, That grace and mercy, which lay at the root. Oh! that
they should after such mercy once felt, and vows so often renewed, so basely
handle the Lord, and hazard (as much as in them lay) their title to heaven, and
sell their birthright! And yet should the Lord renew a second charter, or
rather the first a second time! Oh! it pierces them to the quick! This chases
away the clouds of dedolence and impenitency, and cleeres the coast again.

The fifth is, The 5. Branch.
That yet they do not so easily shake off their fears: the Lord so orders it;
that either by his word or works, they feel his wrath for their revolt, so
seazing upon their conscience, that it does work out and purge their
corruption (through mercy) so that they vomit up their sweet morsells; And as
one under the Physician his hand, lying in an hot bath, sweates out the venom
of his disease, so is it with a penitent soul. Gpd mixes gall and wormwood
for them to drink: He causes them to possess the sins of their youth with
sorrow, though long since committed: Lam. 3, 19. Psalm. 6, 5.
he pays them for old and new at once, makes their bed a bath of tears: till
he have caused all that sin which they drank in with such greediness, to
return back with as much loathsomnes! Then, being under this rack, he makes
them feel in their own spirits, how their sin lies upon his shoulders: and
by their own pinching he makes them confess: Now I see what my pride, ill
company, stolen liberties come to, and must cost, ere I be rid of them! As I
like such sauce, so let me return to the meat again! I thought I had but
dallied, I cast arrows and darts into the flesh of the Lord Jesus, in sport!
But now they gugg me! Now I see ihe Lord will not bear all, I must bear
somewhat, and if I provoke him, it must be to the confusion of my face. As I
troubled and greeved the Spirit of God, so the Lord troubles mine this day!
Josh. 7, 25
The shame, the ill report, the sorrow and sting, outward and inward, which I
sustain, sin is no trifle.

The 6. Branch.
Sixthly, the Lord now in season proceeds to offer himself in a promise to this
revolting penitent. And that in two kinds. First. That their revolt has not
extinguished mercy. Esaias. 57.17, 18. Ier. 3, 1, 2.
See Esaias 57, 17. I will heal their covetuousnesse Ier. 3, 1, 2. If a man's
wife play the harlot, will thou return to her? Will thou not write her a Bill
of divorcement? Yet return to me, and I will receive thee after all thy
whoredoms! And again, I will heal all their backeslidings, etc. So, Ier.
3.12. Rev. 2, 5. and 3.19.
Revelations chap. 3, verse 19. Be zealous and amend. Yea the spirit of grace
in that fullness of Satisfaction by Christ, does fix and settle such promises
upon the soul, so that it hears them not as the sound of many waters, but
dwells upon and digests them as concerning her: So that they leave not a
wanzing conceit (as in presumptuous hypocrites, who sin that grace may
abound) But they so fasten upon the promise as a real comfort to cure them of
their falling sickness. Rom, 6, 1.
Secondly, the Lord reveals the promise to them as the due order of their
recovery. For whereas the ungodly do return to their trade, See Iona 3, 21.^1.
upon the suppozall that their doggish vomit shall serve the turn: Lo, the
Lord always comes between the revolting and repenting of his own, with a
savory application of the promise: Teaching them that if there were no more but
their mourning to make up their repentance; Alas! It would vanish and come to
naught. Therefore he will have them lay hold upon the promise of free grace,
which may quiet and cleanse their conscience, Psalm. 51.10.12.
and restore them to that former influence which they had from grace: And
although their pipes are still set in the welhead, yet because they are
stopped, the Lord by faith cleeres the passage of grace for them, that they may
partake that strength and encouragement from their head, which may cause their
repentance to be sound, and put new hope of holding out into them.

Lastly, by this means, They keep themselves well while they are so, The 7.
branch.
and dare not (by that experience they have gotten of smarty sin) adventure
upon it any more. They abhor to tempt God, or greeve his Spirit again, Romans
6.6.13. Psalm. 51.13.
but learn wisdom for ever. If thou will cleanse this blot, oh Lord! I shall
show forth thy mercy and convert others, but my self shall be far from
falling at that stone any more. 1 King. 22, 41. with 2 King. 3.7.
And the truth is: We rarely read of any, who after their recovery offended
in like sort the second time. They so hearken to the promise, and what the Lord
will say to his people, that is, his speaking peace unto them, Psalm. 85, 8.
that they dare no more return to folly, but pass the rest of their dwelling
in fear, and get that speech by heart, Blessed is he that fears always.
Prove. 28.14.
To the stopping of the foul mouths of all Cavillers, who abuse this Doctrine
with the nicke name of licenciousnesse; being in very truth the Doctrine of the
most precise strictness to the flesh to all that believe it; and the contrary,
a Doctrine of desperate looseness, teaching them that are over shoes to rush
over head and ears. And this also may serve for a view to the Reader, of
Repentance upon Revolts.

Terror. 1 Sort.
who dare rush upon this Sacrament without this grace: Alas! they know not
wherein this preparation stands. They make of Repentance no other than the
speaking of three words at their death: By the which reason they might as well
put off the Sacrament till they die. As for the search of their sins: Alas,
look how they have walked, so they walk still, the works of the flesh are
manifest. No man need light a torch to search out those sins which they
proclaine, as Sodom, Esaias 3, 9.
drunkenness, swearing, Sabbath-profaning, uncleanness, lying, covetousness,
and all other abominations; and yet when the Sacrament comes, to it they will
go. Their sin is written in their forehead, and lies cluttered in their
souls, and unserch'd from seven years to seven. If any seek to convince
them, (Preacher or friend) they are so high and stately, so jolly and alive,
that they are ready to fly in the faces of their reproovers. Luke 18.1.2.
And as they reverence not man whom they see, so much less God whom they see
not. Nay, most of them shun the light, Romans 2.3.
least their sins should be seen. As for any breaking of heart or mourning,
alas! they cannot repent by the hardness of their hearts, which are become as
flints and Adamants; and therefore their trade is, to justify, excuse, to
palliate, and blanch their villainies: they are seered with an hot iron, and
have consciences past feeling. 1 Timothy 4.2.
And as their course is void of renouncing any sin (for no sin comes
amiss) or returning with the Prodigal) so, Luke 15.18.
in stead of making up their revolts, their whole life is nothing else but one
falling sickness: if their course were but survei'd one day, how from morning
to evening they cut out the day, spending it in the pursuit of one lust under
another, from drinking to lust, from that to gaming, pleasures, eating,
company, sloth and sensuality: it were easy to esteem what their whole life
amounts unto.

2 Sort.
Secondly, to these I may join another sort of common and carnal or civil
Protestants and Hypocrites, who think themselves the best receivers: but alas!
if repentance be as I have said, rooted in renovation of the Spirit, planted in
a course of walking with God, and redress of their falls: then are these
Pharisees as far off as the other Publicans; for they were never rolled upon
their leez, Jer. 48.11.
and therefore their taste and filth abides in them. They are closer than the
former, but no chaster; their leaven is not purged out, still in the midst of
all their hearings, Pro. 30.12.
Prayers and Sacraments, as false, unbeleeving, unrenew'd, and unmortified in
heart, tongue, affections as ever: their sin has seen no light this many
years, but is kept within as the mizers hoard: If they can with much ado
keep out of gross evils, simper before the honester sort, and get up their
names once, let them alone to maintain their opinion with slinesse and
temporising subtlety; when yet in all these ways of theirs, seeming good in
their own eyes, they were never renewed by repentance: not to speak of a
worse kind of some of them, who have so long dallyed with God and men, till
they have deceived themselves, and grow open revolters and returners with the
dog to their vomits again. And yet in these sins, either the heat of
open, or the guilt of secret wickedness, who but they dare venture upon the
Sacrament?

Oh! ye wilful reproaches, and spots of Assemblies, (more worthy of Church
censure, than private terror of a pen) how dare ye rush your selves upon this
rock of the Sacrament, and split your selves in pieces! But perhaps some of
you are not so far gone, but you will say, Its a good thing to come to the
Sacrament with repentance, and hereafter you hope to repent, but as yet ye
find it too hard a task; hereafter you hope to turn a new leaf, (they go
far that never turn) and fall to keep your Church better, and hear, pray,
and read good books: but oh poor wretch! What will thou do the whilst? The
Sacrament is present, and calls each month or quarter upon thee; Repent,
repent, and come; else come not: and thy repentance is to come, thou have none
for the present; what? Looks thou to be welcome in hope of after repenting?
What if thou be taken away (as thousands have been, who have hoped for more)
before another Sacrament come? Oh fool! Rather bless God for these warning
peales of the Sacrament, and that it will not let thee lie sleeping in thy
sin, but awakens thee to repent: Oh! ply the work in season, Acts 8.
if it be possible, that the wickedness of thy course may be forgiven thee;
then shall thou rejoice (as many have done) for the watchword of a Sacrament,
if it shall send thee to the Law, and to the covenant for an humbling and
convincing of thy sinful soul, and a hunger after righteousness; then shall
the seal be sweet unto thee. But as for this dallying with God for hereafter,
alas! it is not, because thou meanest to bring it at last, but to spin out
time, and spare thy self a labor of repenting at all. For why? Is it not as
easy for thee to allege it next Sacrament as this? When shall there be an end?

And say thou had a lease of thy life (as Cain had to no purpose) what use
would thou make of it, Admonition.
save to abuse the patience of God leading thee to repentance, and according to
thine hard heart which cannot repent, heap up wrath against the day of it.
Thou promisest repentance hereafter, and lo, Romans 2.4.
God is hardening thee for time past; How shall the clay that lies in the Sun
be softer? Oh break off thy dallyings? Those many peales which both Word and
Sacrament have rung in thine ears, have made them deaf, and shall thou repent
with a deaf ear, who could not with an open? If God will give each penitent
soul forgiveness, will he therefore give each sinful dallier, repentance?
How will thou answer him for thy not renewing thy Covenant with him at each
Sacrament? Whereas thou rather have renewed and sealed up to thy soul thy
covenant with thy lusts, and made each new Sacrament as a brazen bolt to lock
thee out of the room of repentance, Deuteronomy. 29, 18.19.
and to make thee worse, adding drunkenness to thirst. Come not at the
Sacrament while thy false heart is in thee: eat not thine own bane and
condemnation; excommunicate thy self (if the Church do not, or the Minister
cannot) till thou repent, and the Lord bless this counsel to thee.

Reproof.
Secondly, here is sharp reproof to Gods own people, for living in any such
base distemper, as might blemish their repentance, and make their Sacrament
uncomfortable. I know the world is ready to cast false aspersions upon the
best. But as for such, their innocence is their brestplate; and they may take
such accusations, Job 31.36.
and wear them openly without fear, as Job speaks. No, I ohly speak of such
as truly and deservedly are cast upon professors of piety (either sound, or
thinking themselves so) as this, who are so zealous as they in the first Table,
in hearing Sermons (three or four on a Sabbath) and receive Sacraments duly
and often; but where be their fruits? Where is their repenting, or their good
works? How many leave their places where the Gospel is to be supported, and
the poor releeved, and lie in private houses in the city, pranking up
themselves in fashions, raking up portions for their children, taking their
ease and jollitie, neglecting calling and charity, and living upon their
Revenewes without either good doing, or giving example; making it their life to
hearken after news, or to improove their wits and brains in all abilities,
and under color of much hearing, and Religion in public, open the mouths of
Papists against Protestants, as Solifidians, and fruitless in good works. So
others have God much in their mouth, but break their promises as fast as they
make them, they will bite and pinch in their dealings, are hard and sore in
their buyings and bargains: Others not to be trusted, but time-servers, and
affecting the company of the sensual and carnal, more than the godly; very
intemperate in their pleasures, loving them more than God, and their wills,
better than heaven: passionate and soon stirred to rage, but hardly appeased;
if displeased, fierce: living in the married estate very offensively, bringing
up their children dissolutely, and the like. Oh! consider in the fear of God,
what dishonor you do to the Sacrament, and what bad preparation you make for
comfort there? If any of you be such for want of soundness, look to your
selves, and set Saint James his Trumpet to your ears; oh vain man, Iam.
2.2.20.
know thou not that faith without works, and repentance is dead, dry, and
saplesse? See thou not how thou passest thy time away in an empty, proud,
and idle Religion, as unsavory to God and men, as pleasing to thy self? But if
there be soundness in thee, seem not worse than thou art; honor thy faith
with fruits, and lay up such a Treasure for thy self against thy receiving, as
may meet thee there with joy, and give thee more sweet peace, than all thy
ease, fashions, and seeking thy will can give thee. Remoove that (Butt) which
enemies to profession shout at, zealous, but covetous, religious, but proud,
hateful, etc. And give Religion the entire honor of thy heart, as well as thy
shows, and then shall one Sacrament be more truly sweet to thee, than many,
and Religion shall truly honor thee, as well as thou have honored it.

Instruction.
it should instruct us what necessity of mourning there is for the woeful
impenitencie and profaneness of many, and hypocrisy of others, who make the
Sacraments their ordinary diet. And yet who shall gainesay them? How had we
need to pray for the ancient discipline of the Church, for the purging of
such? And the whiles to turn our feast into a fast of sorrow, for the boldness
of such spots; and the offense caused by such, to them that desire the
pureness of the Ordinannances? When Xerxes beheld hundred thousands of
soldiers on an heap, he wept to think in how short a time so many men should
be swept from the earth. How should then a Christian heart (which has
prevented that danger to it self) lay to his soul the sad spectacle of so
many thousands, as, either for lack of means, or else under the contempt of
means, daily rush themselves into hell, and eat and drink their own
judgment for want of repentance?

Exhortation.
Fourthly, let it be exhortation to such as would receive worthily, to bring
repentance with them to the Supper. Let even the approach of the Sacrament
smite your tender hearts to think how poorly ye have profited in repentance,
since your last receiving. Yea, what a cursory ceremony their vile hearts would
make of the Sacrament, if the Lord did not ring this Alarm bell in their
ears. 1 Samuel 12, 19.
Even as they, 1 Samuel 12.19. mourned (in the time of thunder and lightning) for
all their lewdness, but especially their asking of a King: So at the season of
the Supper should each Christian revive his repentance, and mourn as for all,
so especially the sin of bad receiving. As Pharao's Butler could say, Genesis
41.9.
This day my sin comes to my rememhrance; So should every good man say sadly
upon the day of the Sacrament; Oh Lord, how poorly prepared went I to it? When
God revived me a little, soon forgot I it: Even as the fool that has seen
his face in a glass! Alas, the old savor has returned instantly, I see Gods
Sacrament seasons me not with fear any long time together; an hundred toys
have worn off the edge of it from me; and I am over head and ears, if not in
lusts, yet in calling, business, liberties, vanities, retaining no thought of
my Covenant there made? Oh! revive your repentance yet more lively and cordialy
than before: There is a way of getting and gaining more by the Sacrament than
ye are aware. If ye would deny your selves, mourn for your slightness, and
bring faith to seal up better care and covenant with God, there is no time
past, but the Sacrament should arm ye stronglier than ever against Satan and
your lusts: frame and mould you more to obedience with delight in the inner
man, prevent falls, restore ye being fallen, and cause ye to grow in grace more
than ever. Which if you had once tasted, who should drive ye from the
Sacrament? Or should ye come to Church, meaning to receive, and to yet depart
without it? or (which is worse) give advantage to the devil and the world to
set upon you the more fiercely by occasion of this defiling your selves. No
surely, but be confirmed in coming, the oftener, the welcomer.

Examination.
a rule of trial to us, about our Sacramental repentance. I have laid down
3. grounds in this Chapter, which might serve for this use, to a careful
heart. Likewise in the trial of our estate, Chapt. 2. at the end, I have said
somewhat which sorteth well with this Point. Yet least I should leave the
Reader unsatisfied, let me here help somewhat toward setting this trial on
work. I will cull out some few, leaving the Reader to apply the rest;

Zach. 12.10.
Now it was prophesied by Zachary, that repentant souls should see him whom
they have pierced and mourn. How is it then with thee? Do thou mourn to see
the Lord Jesus pierced at the Sacrament? Do thou as well take thought for him
as for thy self? Is thy heart broken to think how thy pride, hollownesse, and
self-love have shed his precious blood and been the spear to pierce him? I
mean not that thou should whip thy self for the cruelty of the Priests and
Scribes, (as Papists do, themselves being as bad) but that the cost of thy
redemption does abase thee, and thy sin humble thee even to hells brinke in
thy own sense. And does it deeply affect thee, that thy sin caused the Lord
to lay such load upon his Son? Does it make thy sin truly irksome to
thee? And dare thou not the second time crucify Christ to thy self? But
rather carriest all thy beloved darlings to his Cross, that they may there
lose their life and heart blood, sacrificing them in an holy recompense unto
him. Romans 12.^.
It is a good sign.

Ephe, 4.30.
Is that Ministry most welcome to thee, which carries in the spirit to search
the depth of thy heart? When thou can overtake thy subtle heart, and find
out the turnings and tricks of it, the far fetched devices of it to keep
thee in such a course as maintains self and fleshly ease; destroying
self-denial and sincerity, can thou rejoice as one that finds spoils? Is
it thy secret prayer, that the Lord would set the righteous to smite thee?
Psalm. 141.5.
And countest thou him a dear friend that will reprove thee? Yea, when thou
might carry a sin slily, and none the wiser, have thou one within thee
that will give thee no peace, till it be cast out? And is secret sin as base
as open unto thee? A blessed sign.

1 Cor. 4.3.
that they might as well pray as praise God for thee, as being privy that the
greatest part of thy virtues are not the least part of thy corruptions? Do
thou still see an excellency in the members of Christ above thine own? And
some such base stuff in thy self as often causes thy best graces to be in less
account, Romans 7.24.
mourning that thou can not reach that measure in tenderness, jealozie of
heart, plainness and truth, which thou see in others? Its a good sign.



it resembles, and the other loathsome, 2 Thessalonians. 5.22.
because it is opposite to it? It is a good sign.

Peter vowed to stick to his Master when there was nothing to try him, but
when there was, Mat. 26, 23.56
then to stick to him was too hard and heavy to him. If it be thus, thou
know not thine own spirit. Take an ensample; Thou professest that thou
dare not be unrighteous; but it falls out, that thou art convinced of some
bad dealing: now thou art willed to renounce it, that is, to make such a
satisfaction as thou have damnified, not being thine own judge, but as they
who are wise, think best? If thou be as free in renouncing, when either shame
by open confession, or loss by restitution lies upon it, it is a good sign;
else thine heart play^s booty.

Psalm. 119.136
as thy own? And can thou drown both other joys and sorrows of thine own in
these? And accordingly to thy affections, so are thy prayers, endeavors,
procurements, for the peace of the Church, and against her miseries, and those
that cause it? And can thou forget thy self and thy business for this
purpose? It is well.

2 Cor. 7, 9.
or a good use which has been the instrument of fulfilling thy lust? It is a
good sign.

which thou should find more comfort than in that truth thou art called to
suffer for: on the other side, thou can not deny the lesser truth to be a
truth; in such a case, to be willing to suffer for any truth, commending thy
self to God, and craving that thou may not be afraid to suffer for greater
if called to it: yea, to count the price of any truth to exceed thy best
contentments, its a good sign.



Consolation.
Lastly, this Doctrine affords us use of Consolation, which belongs to all the
poor servants of God, that cannot (as they would) comfort thmselves in their
trial of repentance. Oh! say they, our life is a continual revolting from
God, but rare repenting: If (say they) repentance be such a thing as stands in
the renewing of the soul, the ordinary practice of the life, and recovery out
of our falls, we cannot say much for our repentance. Well, but I demand of
thee, Are these wrought in thee, for the kind? Is there a sound heart in all,
though much weakness? Then thy weakness shall not sunder thee and the Lord
at the Sacrament. But why then (will you say) do you press repentance so
strictly? I answer, Not to urge repentance in perfection here, for that is for
heaven; but to provoke all believers to the greatest measure that they can here
attain unto. And let such be comforted, that the Sacrament belongs to them for
their further increase. It is as if a poor Lazer should have said, He was not
worthy to step into the poole, when the Angel had roared the water. Oh! But if
the poole served to heal such an one, it had been a wrong to have deprived
himself of the poole, by that argument which rather served to encourage him.
God sees not the unavoidable defects of his own, nor imputes them: he looks
at that which is good and his own in them, and passes by the bad which is
theirs. In this case thy faith must fulfill the righteousness of the Law, Romans
10.4,
when thine own is too weak: That must be thy chief Robe to cover thee,
though thine under-garment be worn and thin. Oh! but they cannot mourn
(they say) their hearts are dead and senseless; no sooner do they resolve
upon a forsaking of sin, but it salutes them again presently. They keep no
Covenant almost which they renew at the Sacrament. Well, I praise you not for
this: yet I hope you mourn, that you are so mournelesse, and you are not dead
so far forth as you feel it. Strengthen the feeble hands, Heb. 12.12,
and make straight that which is crooked: Revive the edge, and furbish the
blade of your repentance. But to refuse the means of your growth and increase,
because you are weak, were to conclude; That because you are but poor,
therefore you must starve your selves. Nay rather, you have the more need of
strength; Go to the Sacrament that your complaints may be fewer, abstain not,
because you feel cause of complaining. For so you may add oil to the flame,
and the devil will rejoice, but to be sure your selves shall be the greatest
lozers. And touching the trial of repentance so much.

CHAP. VII. Of Sacramental Love, and the trial thereof.
The 4. grace Love.
I Come now to the fourth grace required of all true partakers of the Lords
Table, which is love. A most maine grace for the Sacrament, and of special
familiarity with it. Entry. Three things.
And for the better conceiving hereof, I purpose (God willing) to handle these
three things. First, I will show what this love is: secondly, I will prove the
truth of the Point by Scripture and Reasons; thirdly, I will make use of the
Doctrine, and therein I will propound the trials of this grace. Premising still
this caution, that as needful a grace as this is, yet I make it not of that
essential nature for the very act of receiving, as faith, though otherwise
most necessary for the Supper, because its that grace which improves and
beautifies the whole Commumunion of Saints, and much more the Communion (for so
we call it) of the Supper.

1 What it is.
For the 1. of these three: Sacramental love (differing no otherwise from the
grace of love, than as reviving of it differs from the thing it self) is a
grace of the Spirit in the soul of man, and the daughter of faith, renewed by
occasion of the Sacrament in all true receivers; whereby they are so united
unto all that are their fellow members, that they enlarge themselves to all
occasions of their good, for the ends of Communion. Six things in the descript.
In this description are six distinct things: 1. The author of it. 2. The
begetting cause. 3. The circumstance of reviving. 4. The form or being of it.
5. The act of it. 6. The end it propounds. For the first, I call it a
sanctifying grace of the holy Ghost in the soul. 1 A grace of the Spirit.
Usually we plant love in the affections and concupiscible part: But here I
plant it in the will of the soul, ascribing to it an higher seat, than an
appetite or passion, as being grounded in the choice and purpose of the soul,
and planted by a far stronger agent than affections are, and to an higher end.
But of this I say the less. That the spirit is the workman of it, appears by
direct Scripture. Gal. 5, 22.
Paul gives it the birthright of all fruits of the Spirit, The fruits of the
Spirit are love, joy, peace, etc. And the like he says in sundry places. Romans
5, 5.
For the Spirit shedding the love of God into the barren and hateful heart of
man, causes it to conceive like love to them who are begotten, as that was in
him that begat. Hence that of our Savior. Thou evil servant, Math. 28.32.
Did not I forgive thee all the debt, even of many Talents? How then ought
thou to forgive him the debt of pence? Till (then) the soul be seasoned with
the love of God in pardon and holiness, both to save and sanctify: it cannot
possibly love his brother spiritually. Can a rush grow without mire? Job 8, 11,
Or can love be in us, till a principle of the Spirit infuse it. It is
commended by the Lord Jesus himself, A new Commandment give I unto you, that
ye love each other. Ioh. 13.34. Romans 13, 9. and 10.
All the Law is fulfilled in it. Its infinitely magnified in all the
Scriptures, in 1 Cor. 13. Its described by abundance of both negative and
positive properties, all which show the Original to be divine. But especially
in the first Epistle of Saint John, 1 Ioh. 3.11. and 3.10 and 4, 7, 8. and 5,
2, etc.
where it is made first the charge of God. Secondly, the offspring and birth of
God, Thirdly, A mark of the Elect and saved. Fourthly, That which especially
is occupied about brethren, such as are borne of God, members of the militant
Church: All these argue of what kind and seeede it is; not of flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God.

Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49, 5.
brethren in evil: yea, this is almost as strong and deep as hell. Thieves
have their league, and drunkards their love, union and fellowship, yea, sworn
brotherhood. The spirit of error and heresy is strong to link the heart in
love: yea, Jesuits are so knit to their Catholic league, that death can not
dissolve it. And yet Paul imployes that this may want true love. 1 Cor. 13, 1.
Men have a garish humor of love and pangs of affection, so that in a mood,
they pretend the greatest love, but on the sudden they either stabbe each
others, or else hate each other, more than ever they loved. As the bands are
which tie men, so is their love. Carnal lusts, gain, sweetness of manners,
politic respects to make use of each other, natural regards, likeness of
manners, or professions, or disposition of soothablenesse and courtesy derived
from Parent to child, or a civil love standing in an intercourse of mutual
offices, (love me, and I will love thee) or such like; all of them are a sort
of love which Religion does not disanull, but season and subordinate in the
elect, to this fruit of the Spirit, even as the powers of the natural and
sensible soul are subject to reason. A Christian has other love, yet from a
better principle of spiritual love.

2 The Parent.
The second thing is the begetting cause of it, and that is faith effectual and
unfeigned. Hence Paul, 1 Timothy 1.5: says, Love proceeds from a pure heart, and
faith unfeigned: and as a workman both makes a tool of his trade, and works
by it also: 1 Faith breeds it.
so faith begets this love, and works by it. Now faith in thus work does two
things. 1. It breeds it, 2. Purges it; first it breeds it, and that two
ways. 1, By an infusing quality. 2. By a persuading. The infusion of it is
this; Faith having possessed the soul with the love of God in reconciliation;
Romans 5, 5.
diffuseth this love into the faculty of the will, planting it there, and
causing the sweet thereof to dwell in it. Christ comes not into the heart
without the Spirit of Christ. Now the Lord Jesus his manhood was filled with
this grace of love: the Spirit of the Godhead shedding it without measure into
him: Ioh. 1.17.
That from his fullness we might receive grace for grace. Look then what a
loving heart, tender, merciful, See Act. 2.22. and Mat. 11.19. and Luke 7.13.
and 23.34. etc. Act. 2.36.
forbearing, forgiving, doing good to body, to soul; look what amiablenesse,
gentleness, sociablenesse, usefullnesse, was in his heart, that is sh^d into
the believer. Now what that was, his whole life showed: he loved and prayed for
his rankest enemies, died for those that crucified the Lord of life, converting
three thousand of them at once: he loved Mary and her sister Martha, and
Lazarus, and John his disciple most dearly. Ioh. 11.5. and 36.
See Acts 2.22. How he went about, doing good even to all, healing diseases,
preaching, converting. This Spirit then of the head is derived to us, to be a
privy mark unto us, whether we are his or no: for he that loves not, is not
of God; for God is love, 1 Ioh. 4, 8. and 16.
and he who loves, dwells in God. Secondly, by persuasion. For this see 2
Cor. 5.14. 2 Cor. 5, 14.
The love of Christ constraines us, for we thus judge, etc. Mark. There is a
secret persuasive in this love, to cause us to love one another; and that by
judgment and good reason. This is that which Paul presses to the Ephesians,
Ephesians. 5, 2.
Walk in love as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, as
an offering of a sweet savor. So again, Col. 3, 13.
Put on as the Elect of God, the bowels of mercies, kindness, forbearing, etc.
Why? Even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. This is a strong dispute from
relation of head to members, reaching to all holiness, but especially to this
branch. For what a disproportion were it for us to join the body of a Lion,
fierce and cruel, to the head of a lamb, loving and meek? What villainy were
it for a man, dealt mercifully withal by his Master, to take his fellow by the
throat? Ephe. 2, 13.
If Christ has destroyed enmity, broake down the wall of separation, and
made peace for me, when I was past hope, how should I love and live with my
brother? Christ ought me nothing; but I owe him him my self. Should I after
such love, ever know any enemy? Or if I should, Philem. 19.
should not such love as this quash it for ever? If I should live in
heartburning, jealosie, bitterness, and hatred, should I not look that the
sweet morsel of mercy should come out at my nostrils? 1 Ioh. 4, 10, 11
Hence it is that Saint John so presses this point: Herein is love, not that
we loved him, but be us: Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one
another.

Secondly, faith does purge love from manifold corruption: By name from these
eyesores. First, from all partiality. Secondly, faith purges it. 1 From
partiality.
We restrain and limit our love to such persons as we our selves affect for
some parts and indowments: others are not so precious in our eyes; we cannot
affect them, because we see closeness, harshnesse, techines, pride and self,
to abound in them. But love is unpartiall, as well reaching to the undeserving,
provoking, as to the amiable (in point of soundness, I mean, though extent
may differ) and over-comming evil with good: for the root of it is an higher
thing, than self-love, and drownes all distastes in him, that forgot all our
injuries and died for us. 2 From inconstancy.
Secondly, from all inconstancy. Every fool loves in his mood, while the pang
lasts. But as the torrent is soon up and soon down: so it is with many
lovers; they are either as high as the skies, or as low as hell, either men are
the best with them, or worst living. Whence is this? from their fickle heart,
which wants a bottom. Love causes the soul to be firm, constant, equal; and
if occasions be offered of any breach, Gal 4.18. 3 Folly.
yet soders it up betimes, that they grow not deep and incurable. So thirdly,
from all so injudiciousnesse, and error. Love is wise, imparting it self, as it
sees the Object require: it is not alike to all. There is a false and
counterfeit love in some men, who out of either a weakness, or formality of
courtesy, will impart themselves to such as they meet with very gently: and a
man would think this came from a deep habit of love: But if ye observe them,
it comes from a slightness and emptiness, for they will impart themselves
to all alike: The best Divine in a country, and the veriest Ruffian shall
share equally in their affections, no difference. They will be liberal to good
causes, but so they will to bad and base ends also. What a fulsome love is
this? What amiablenesse discern these in the object of their love, who can
love the hateful and to be abhorred, as well as the best? 4 From weakness.
Fourthly, from all weakness and suspiciousnesse. There is in some tempers a
mavelous jealousnesse, which makes us so conceited, that the least toy, or
wry countenance, puts them into a new frame; when as yet the occasion
conceived, is mere nothing in all the world. Melancholy may afford some seed
to this ill humor, but pride is the fomenter of it, and self-love the nurse.
It is enough that these men think themselves slighted, or wronged: it skills
not whether they be or no: conceit affords realnesse sufficient. But this love
is too rough hewne to couch close in the building of communion, 1 Cor. 3, 16.
Candor and ingenuousnesse of spirit, loath to think ill of that which is so,
(more than needs must) but abhorring it, 5 From straightness.
when no cause is, and rather striving to interpret all at the best, is a more
meet stone, to lie in this frame. Fifthly, all straightness and (as I may call
it) hide-boundnesse of spirit: many Christians are of so dry a temper, so
narrow-brested, that their love lies only in a course of slight trifles: they
think it a superfluity to love in any other measure, than that they may feel
no virtue to go out from them to others. They cannot beteame any, the
enlargement of their bowels: they think it waste, to break a box of ointment
upon thee feet of the Saints: John 12, 3.
But if any shredds will serve, such shreddes as they can part with, and feel
no loss, ye shall have from them. This causes them to be uncomely members
in the Communion of Saints, and their love to be odious and unsavory: for love
is as her object requires, where an ounce is needed, a dram shall not serve
the turn: (within her power) a pound is as ready as a shilling, or a shilling,
as a penny. O ye Corinthians (says Paul) I am enlarged unto you: because I
love you, I can beteame you any thing, even my own soul; so, 1 Cor. 13, 4. 6.
From self.
love is bountiful and not shrunk up as a bottle in the smoke. Sixthly, all
self and self-love, the very bane of communion. When men will always see some
such addition to the grace of a man, that although he seem to love for grace;
yet except there be some other by and squint aim, of sweetness and
courtesy, of Pleasure, gain, reputation, or that which some way satisfies it
self, alas, their love is cold, and falls off. Such shall be marks in their
eye, as will praise their gifts, or lend them as their needs are, or do them
good offices so as they may serve their turns. But for others, they are not
very forward to seek them. Whereas true love is selfe-denying and clean
handed: Psalm. 16, 2.
Sets heart where God sets his, and although (as the case may stand) offices of
love are due and owed, yet for those respects, a good man abhorres to love; and
loves for that excellency of grace which he beholds. That sparkle of divine
nature which she can discern to shine out of a soul, in any kind, as
Humility, uprightness, faith, mercy, innocence or the like, are the Loadestone
which knits them and draws them together. Seventhly, pride and vaineglory. 7.
From pride.
For many there are, who think themselves so complete as if the body held not
them, Romans 11, 18.
but they it. They are too proud to have intercourse with others, of all
ranks: They must be very choice and peculiar Divines of great fame and worth
whom their love must honor: But if of a meaner sort, they have no edge to
them. Their love is as proud as his, in Saint James, who said to the gold ring
and Pearls, sit thou here, as deserving my love: But to the meaner man, sit
thou at my foote-stoole! Iam. 2, 1, 3.
Oh! Says the Apostle, is not this to have the love of our Lord Jesus in the
acceptance of persons? 1 Timothy 1, 4.
Others out of singularity affect new opinions by themselves, weary of the old
grounds of truth, as too mean for their curious and fine wits, and thus bring
in scisme and faction in steed of peace and consent in the Church. Others are
sick of a Praesident and stiff selfewillednesse, Romans 12, 16.
so that look whatsoever they have once vented and broached, be it never so
unsound, John. 19, 22. Gal. 5, ult.
yet they will stand out in it, and what they have written they have written:
whatsoever confusion they cause thereby. So also, others are so vaineglorious,
that either they must sway and rule the roast, in what companyes so ever they
become: if they be not attended only, their gifts and parts admired, and all
cry Grace, grace, to their opinions, (though they disdain the gifts of others
better than themselves) all is marred; 1 Cor. 13.
Whereas love is humble, Romans 12, 10, and 16.
thinks better of others than it self; in giving honor, goes before others,
and is equally minded to those of lower degree, moderate in her tenets, willing
to submit to any that show better reason. 8. From censoriousnesse.
Eighthly, censoriousnes, For then if they see any go in any other way than
themselves, they never enquire into their reasons, much less forbear and
sympathise them in their (supposed) weakness, but condemn them presently,
unheard, and unknown: Whereas love is supporting and tender, Gal. 6, 1. 1 Cor.
8, 10.
choosing rather never to eat flesh, than to offend the weak: But some if
their conceit be crossed, (though never so mildly and with reason given) yet
with a prejudicate heart, forestall their intentions, suspect and shun their
persons, and judge them instantly for refractary and opinionate. Not remembering
that so it has ever been, and will be in the Church, that in some
particulars which some allow, others will streine and scruple: and therefore
such should be forborne and tendered so far as may stand with the common peace.

Lastly, and especially dissimulation. 9. Dissimulation. Romans 12, 9. 1 John
3.18.
Other vices seem to tear the coat, but this to stabbe the heart of
communion: Therefore Paul charge that love be without dissimulation: let
there be no false brother, who under color of love, should undermine his
brother.

Paul also says, All have not faith: he means there, fidelity to be
trusted: sound to God and his brother. 2 These. 3, 2.
Such as can say to their brethren, I am as thou art, and my horses as thy
horses: I am weak in my love, but sure and true; 2 King. 3, 4.
Whereas it is with many as it was with Ioabs sword. Its sometime in and
sometime out. They are not true and constant in their love, yea many, their
tongues are ready to jangle, and their feet to carry tales against those whom
they will seem to love and honor; belike hypocrites, they speak fair words,
and their words are as smooth as oil, but their tongues are as swords and
coals of Juniper: yea themselves as Ioab taking Abner and Amasa by the beard
in great love and with the other hand, shed their bowels to the earth. 2 Samuel
20, 10,
These are some few of those many distempers which faith purges love from, or
rather them who profess to love: By the which judge of the rest.

The third point is, 3. Point reviving of love at Sacrament.
that this love is to be revived at the Sacrament. Hence its called
Sacramental. No wind of an Ordinance, but blows good to love: for all are
(more or less) sanctified to this purpose. Sweetly said the Psalmist. Oh,
Psalm. 133, 1.
how good and comely a thing it is for brethren to dwell together! Meaning,
that as cohabitation is a great improover of civil love: so the house of God
in which Gods weatherbeaten servants in this world do meet together, is a
singular band and provoker of love. When they consider one God, Christ, Spirit,
truth, Ephesians. 4, 5, 6.
one baptism, one Supper, one hope, one faith: (all which the Ordinances of
word, prayer and Sacraments do exhibit) oh! how do they conceive heat of
love, before these rods? But above all, the Sacrament of the Supper is ordained
for love. So faith Paul, The bread which we break, 1 Cor. 10.16.17.
and the wine which we drink, are not they our Communion with the body and
blood of Christ? And what of this? Mark how he inferres. For we being many
are one bread, and one body: for we are all partakers of one bread. Many wheat
Corns and grapes do not more partake of one loaf and cup of wine, than the
Receivers do of one Christ. So that next our partaking of him, we partake of
each other, and that under the most real Symboles of Communion. The Papists
may in this teach us, who when they have any villainy which they would most
combine and secret themselves in, come to the Sacrament. In this (I grant)
basely, that they stretch it to strengthen hellish communion. But well, if by
it, they did provoke themselves more to serve in love, to be faithful and
painful for each other. Psalm. 122.5.
Therefore the Psalmist speaking of the union of the Church, adds, There are
the thrones of discipline: and assemblies of Religion; as if they were the
sinews of it. And who is he (that is not utterly debaucht) whose heart has
not this instinct, that the Supper is for love? Use having prevailed to call
it, The Communion. Witness the Conscience of the worst, (though rotten) who
then count it a main thing to be at amity; though it be but while the day
lasts.

The 4. The form. Psalm. 122, 4.
The fourth point is the form and essence of love. That is, Union. Jerusalem is
as a City compacted; that is, dwelling close; noting that love takes all
joints and compacts them together. Not only them whom other bands of nature,
civilnesse, or family has linked, but, such as are otherwise strangers and
far off. Hence the Prophet says, that under the Gospel, Esaias. 11, 6.
the lamb and the Lion should seed together: (that is, put off their
contrariety) and the little child shall then put his finger into the hole of
the Cockatrice. So Paul, He has reduced (or contracted) all into one by his
death, Ephesians. 2.15.
making peace, and destroying enmity; All both in heaven, earth, and under it,
being brought to a league, either to love; or not to fear each other. Either
so finds or makes one. As the soul makes the body one by the band of the
spirits: so does love make the members of this spiritual body, one. One soul,
one mind, Act. 2.46*
one heart, one fellowshippe was in the Primitive Church, yea even one wealth,
as then occasion required. Note this then, The being of love is union: be there
never such disproportion of particulars, for years, gifts, birth, wealth,
place or m^nners; yet this grace makes all unequalls, equal and one. There
could not else be such a sensiblenesse between the members, such sympathy,
likeness of mind, of heart, of course, if this were not. One spirit causes
them (though so far off as England and America) to be one. We know a member
cut off, feels no more the welfare or pain of the body. But union causes each
toe to be afflicted with the affliction of the leg, thigh, back or head. All
are knit by the mediation of fit joints, sinews and bands into one, Ephe.
4.16.
and therefore greeve or joy in each others grief, or welfare; yea, do but
cut off these Pipes of union and sensiblenesse, and what becomes of that
instinct which sends every member about the others business? The foot to go,
and the hand to work for the good of the whole?

The fifth point, is the Act or exercise of love. The fifth. The Act. Col. 3.8.
This stands partly in the negation of all opposite vicious dispositions, as,
wrath, crying, bitterness, sullenness, envy, rejoicing in the evil of
others, heartburning, contention, quarrels, jealosies, uncharitableness,
unmercifulness and the like, of which I spoke in the act of faith purging: and
partly in negative acts as occasion is offered. For instance; 1. Negative. Iam.
5. ult.
hiding of a multitude of sins when they may be hidden: passing by offenses
both in word and deed, concerning our name, or goods, so far as may be: if
necessity require that we (by law) seek defense of both, then that still the
heart look at her own honest clearing, rather than at any personal revenge:
not interpreting things lefthandedly, (an heathenish quality) but as fairly as
possibly they may be construed: So also forbearing the seelinesse, weakness,
and lesser measures of other men's graces: their techines, errors and follies.
Waiting to see the end of a thing: not so rejudging persons, Eccles. 7.10.
Ephe. 4.32.
intents, events, rashly: Forgiving such as have offended us, whether in their
heat, or cool blood, especially if we find them ready to seek it by making
amends, abhorring implacablenesse, yea and this often, not to seven times but
seaventy times seven: Matthew. 18.22. Matthew. 6. Matthew. 18.35.
even as we our selves would be heard in the like from God: So also,
moderating of justice in case of strife, vantage of Law: Extreme right may
prove extreme wrong. When a poor man then is fallen into our hand, we may
not deal in the hardest manner; cause all creditors to come about his ears
and to undo him: or take for pledges, his Bible, his garment, bed, milstones,
bread, etc. Add to these others of like nature. ^. Position.
Secondly, love extends her self to all such Acts of communion, as she is
occasioned unto: and that first, both in maintaining of those inward graces of
the spirit which should put forth the soul unto them, Col. 3.12.
as tenderness, painefulnes, Col. 3.12.
long-suffering, amiablenes, mildnes, courtesy, thankfulness, kindness in
mutual offices, plainness, largeness, humblenes, and whatsoever of such
quality. 2. As also practice and exercise of loving actions, 1. Either to all,
as to hold peace with them so as is possible (with good conscience:) and to
help, pity and releeve their bodies or souls, though they deserve the
contrary: for there is an holy overflow of love in the godly, even extended to
such as are without, that their hearts may be broken: Ephe. 6.10.
of this sort are these; Usefulness in common life, (for a righteous man and a
good man should go together) readiness to assist, Job 5.7.
advise and protect the shiftlesse and wronged against their encroachers: Job
31.16.
as Job was the poor man's sanctuary: especially of Orfans and widows, whose
low hedge is soon trod down: And that by free counsel, riding, writing in
their defense, if need be. So, neighborly offices. 2. Or else, (and that
especially) to that household of faith, our fellow brethren: and those either
near hand or remote; For the love of the faithful bends it self to God
himself: But as David speaks Psalm. 16, 2. because it extends not to him,
therefore it returns upon those whom he has made his Attorneys to receive
it. First, for Particulars we must know, nothing can act beyond it own
sphere, and so the love of the Saints shines most beautifully within her own
praecinct: I mean to them whom she is nearest unto in place and also in
compass.

1. To the person of Gods Minister, his name, estate, To the Minister.
and welfare; to maintain, countenance and assist to their uttermost,
especially in streights, sickness, and other necessities, and to express our
selves toward him, See Heb. 13, 1
as under the greatest prosperity.

2. To the persons of such faithful ones as offer themselves unto us, by
occasion of travel or business; 2. 2 People. Heb. 13, 2. Romans 12, 13. Judges
19.15*
that we be harberours unto them, and make much of such, esteeming their
fellowship far above our welcome. But it is now grown to this, that (as that
Levite at Gibea) so a goodman if he lie not at an Alehouse, may lie in the
streets. An ill sign.

3. 3 To Christian near dwellers.
To those Christians among our selves who are decayed not by their sin, but
the hand of God, as fire, sickness, or the like losses (best known to such as
are nearest:) and therefore more concerning such than strangers, who may easily
be deluded. And this to be done in season before the breach be too far gone;
at which time a shilling may do as much good as ten, after.

4. 4 To the bodies of Saints. John 12, 8.
To the bodies in general of all poor Saints whom we must always have among
us in steed of Christ himself, to discover what spirit of love is in us,
Toward whom we must show love, frankely and freely, beteamingly and
cheerfully, Romans 12, 8.
in all simplicity, with bowels, that is, abundance of compassion to six and
seven, dispersing not grudgingly, upbraidingly, Romans 12, 13.
or niggardly. To these true poor not only rates for collection are due, (as
to all) by the Law, but several and privy mercy. Now here, as the bodily
distress lies in special, so does mercy draw lines from the Center of Gods
Commandment, Heb. 13, 16. Eccles, 11, 1.
(To do good and to distribute and forget not. Cast thy bread upon their
waters, etc.) to each necessity: one love extending it self to many
operations, according to judgment. If she beholds the tattered or naked, she
earnes to cloathe them: if the hungry, to feed them: if penylesse, Mat. 25,
33, 34.
to money them; if sick, to visit them, if imprisoned, to comfort and releeve
them: or howsoever their sorrows are, in their credit, state, posterity or
the like, 5 To the souls.
to succor and stand by them. So again (and most of all) to the souls of the
faithful; to extend our charity according to their needs. Not each one
tending himself and looking to his own private welfare of soul; but to see
that the commonwealth of Souls prosper. And here love is full of eyes,
toward the weak in knowledge, Act. 18, 26. Gal. 2, ^^.
to enlighten them as Aquila did Apollos: Toward the offensive to resist and
reproove them sharply, as Paul did Peter: Tit. 11, 13.
toward the fallen either by weakness, to restore them and joint them, Gal.
6, 1. or by revolt, to gaster and recover them: Jude 23. 1 These. 5.14.
to comfort the sad, to warn the unruly, and to exhort and quicken the weak
and staggering. Generally by good example to walk so unblameably toward all, 1
Pet. 2.12.
that the bad may be daunted, and the good hartened, built up and furthered in
their most holy course.

^. General.
Secondly, as a fountain narrow at the spring, diffuseth it self in her
passages; Diffusion of love.
So love: she always begins at home; yet enlarges her self to them that are a
far off: even the whole Church in the corner, in the country, in the
kingdom, in which she lives: yea further, even to other lands and the
Churches thereof. 2 These. 3. 3 John 2.
One spirit possesses the whole body for each members good, and each member
for the good of the whole, and that both for outward and spiritual good. For
outward, that all promises of prosperity belong to the Church: So if it seem
good to providence, she may enjoy them. Thus David Psalm. 144.12. Psalm. 122.6.7.
prays for this, That our sons may be as plants, our daughters as polished
stones: That our garners be full, our sheep plentiful, our Oxen strong: and
no beggars in our streets. But especially love looks at the inward prospering
of the Church; that it may go well with it, that the kingdom of Christ may be
set up throughout it, far and wide. Dan. 9.7.
And therefore first she mournes for the spiritull sins of the whole body,
Ezra. 9, 6.
especially those that threaten her ruin; dallyance with the word, contempt
and profanation of Ministry, Sabboaths and ordinances, declining from the
power of godliness; choosing to serve God for form, secretly looking toward
Popish trash, as being weary of sound doctrine. Secondly, rejoicing to consider
that the Lord has yet reserved to himself many, whose hearts are upright with
God, holding their first love entire, and their zeal unspotted with the filth
and dregs of the age and time; serving their generations, as David did, Act.
13.38. Thirdly, sorrowing to see the distresses of the Church abroad, Esaias
63.15. Zeph. 3.18. Micah 2, 7.
to hear of the sad disasters that are; the dark ways of providence, the
disappointing of our hopes, the mourning of Assemblies, the unfruitfulnesse of
ordinances, the streightning of the Spirit, the dissipation of sheep into the
remote corners of the world. Lastly by faith, holding the promises, that
concern the Churches victory, as, that she shall possess the gates of her
enemies: The gates of Hell shall not prevail against her: Matthew. 18. Micha
7.8, ^.
she shall arise even in her falling, and shall see light in darkness:
until at last the Lord plead her cause, execute vengeance against her enemies,
head and tail, branch and rush, and bring forth her light as the morning. This
for the fifth point.

The sixth and last is the end why love does thus act it self: The 6. The end.
All these passages of love, although they convey in them some good to the body
and members: yet look at a further thing that is, the edifying it self in
love; and the final welbeeing thereof in this vale of misery. Concerning
which, and the increase of grace in the body and members, the Reader may look
into my Catechism in the Article of Communion, and there help himhelfe. And
this be said of these six grounds, by which this grace may be the better
understood: and according thereto, try himself, if he be wise. Which work,
though I might have spared: yet knowing that weak ones as well as strong may
meet with my Book: I will (after I have grounded the point) come to
application, and among other uses to examination.

Fow the point then, this it is, 2. General the proofs. Exodus 12.3. Number. 9.12.
Love thus described is a necessary grace for the Sacrament. And it appears
first by proofs thus. The Analogy of the Passover, which the Lord commanded
to be eaten in one house: Not only least the Lamb should be broken and
divided, but rather to typifie this Sacramental love and union between those
that received it. Again, whence was that, Exodus 12.8, 3.
That no bone of it should be broken? Surely not only to typifie the Lord
Christ, that he that enjoys him, enjoys him whole: But to show also, That
those who will be bone of his bone, and make him their nourishment, must be
whole, unbroken, and unshattered in their Communion: as we know his seamelesse
coat was another type of this want of rupture and division, Psalm. 133.1.
in the Church. In Psalm. 133. David is ravished with love and amity of the
Church in the use of the ordinances, of which this was one. And what says he?
Oh how comely and good a thing it is for brethren to dwell even together? Even
to come together as one man! And he resembles it to the fragrant oil of
Aarons consecration, and the fruitful dew upon Hermon and Zion. Yea, even
those love feasts as badly as they were used, yet intimate that Ancient
Churches desire to nourish Sacramental love. And that text of Paul 1 Cor. 10,
18. Who by this Sacrament, and the elements thereof, presses Christian love
(as in Ephesians. 4, 5. he urges it by the Oneship of God, Christ, baptism, and
faith) does clearly prove it. The bread we break, made of many grains, the
wine we drink consisting of many grapes: what is it but our love and
fellowship in the body? John 12, and 13, and 14. Where Christ exhorted his
Disciples about sundry things, immediately before the Supper: This is one of
the many and oftest urged, that they would obey his new commandment and love
one another. Have peace in your selves and each with other. Five or six of
such passages there. And the Evangelist does not so express that consent and
love of the Church in this Sacrament of breaking bread: But he infers
strongly thereby, that it was a peculiar grace to be brought thither.





viz. his body and blood, who should dare to defile it with enimity? Even
Heathens themselves loathed ceremonies in their worship, repugning to their
institution: As to admit of dwarfes to Hercules his sacrifice: To suffer such
to come to Bacchus his feasts as were too sad; to Venus, who affected
virginity; to Saturnes, who were not sad and solemn. What comelines then shall
the Lord look for at his Sacrament? That all who come to a Sacrifice grounded
in love, should not dare to come in bitterness, and so defile it?

Tim. 2.8. 1 Timothy 2.8.
Lifting up pure hands, without wrath. And 1 Pet. 2. 1.2. Where all such as
covet the Word, are bidden to cast of all superfluity of malice and wrath, and
envies, etc. Now if this be so necessary for all, how much more for this?

1 Ioh. 3.14. 1 Ioh. 4.7.
that we are passed from death to life, with an 100. more. Now he who has
evidence of all these within himself, how sweetly may he sit at the Sacrament,
not only with Saints, rejoicing in their mutual welfare, but even with
Angels? So much for Reasons.

3. General. The Uses.
Now I conclude with the uses of the Doctrine. Branch 1. Of Terror.
And (to terrefie them by degrees) they come in the fore-ranke that cloak their
treachery and villainy both in their own hearts, and against others, under this
ordinance. Jesuits establish their trayterousnesse against Princes, States and
Common-w^alths, by this means; and dig deep to hide their counsels from
God and man. As Jacobs sons used the pretent of circumcision, Genesis 34.19. 1
King ^1 9. Matthew. 26.26.
and Judas covered his treason by the Pass^over. Iezabel hers with fasting,
with impudent faces, being yet full of murder and Treason: but in stead of
secrecy, he exposed himself to a desperate conscience, that could not repent;
that so he might go to his work without check or feeling: and so his eating
the sop was costly. So shall the Sacrament be to all such as under their
receiving it, do hide their griping, usury, unmercifulness; For who (think
they) will judge us such in the second Table, seeing us to be so devout in the
Sacrament? Do ye not see (say they) how folk balke the Sacrament, when they
are come to it? But alas! we go through stitch with it. It is true, so ye
do, if that were the worst if ye were as ready to be purged of your rancor
and malice; Then I would say ye had put on a breastplate indeed of proof;
But now ye are armed with a paper defense, which conscience and the wrath of
God will shoot through one day. ^am. 4.8.
Cleanse your hearts ye sinners, and purge your hands ye hollowly minded. Lay
away your colors and pluck off these mufflers of uncharitableness; Psalm.
26.6.
and so ye are allowed to compass the Altar of God with washen hands and in
innocence of love. Agree with your Adversary not only man but the Lord
quickly, soder not nor equivocate, but deal sincerely. Empty out all filth and
turn the bottom upward, that ye may be the children of him who as an
innocent Lamb shed his blood for enemies, that you might not know any save
his. This feast of the Lamb will be a costly feast to you, that want, nay
cast off this lap of the wedding garment from you.

is the Sacrament over, but ye return to your vomit, to your former jarres
and quarells, and so wear your sin as a mark upon your faces for all to
see, and for the Lord in wrath to curse you, saying, Never grow love from such
roots or trees of bitterness any more, such as proclaim their sin as
Sodom.

James, they dare dally with love, Iam. 2, 16.
and say to the needy, Be warmed, clothed, and fed, yet themselves give them
nothing. Others there are of a currish and Naballish disposition, that their
oil of love is not sufficient for their own Lamps, but most chorlishly
deprive even such of their due who are of their own flesh, as drunkards, etc.
Oh monsters! how dare ye lift up your head before the master of this feast?
and crucify again him that dyed for such traitors as your selves? How
dwells Sacramental love in such? Oh be scared from thus adventuring any
further! Come no more O ye fearful spotts of assemblies, Jude 12,
into the holy place, in which Ch^ists body and blood are offered: least as
dogs ye catch at them, and bane your selves! Act. 8.22.
Pray (if possible) that these wickednesses may be forgiven you.

Bacchus, and spend five or six hours of the Sabbath in junketting, Chambering
and wantonness, tossing of pots, eating of deinty belly cheer, playing at
stooleball, barley break, dancing and such base behaviors. If ye ask them
why? Oh say they, we have received too day, this is a merry day with us! But if
a Turk saw ye in this your holy day work, what manner of God would they
think ye serve? And this is a more woeful blindness, because sometime both
Minister and chief of their parish (not to speak of their governors)
encourage them to it, and have no sense of any sin: but think it a very fine
way to make youth love well together! Oh ye profane creatures? Do ye despise
Gods holy bands, to bring in your own rotten packthred? and do ye turn his
sacred ordinances into such scurfe? If ignorance and base custom be the cause,
Gal. 6.7.
be informed: if profaneness, be also terrified; God will not be mocked. To
conclude the whole use, seek the remedy of all this: There is hope if ye be
not hardened; seek to know your enmity with the Lord himself, and get his love
to be shed into your souls, which may constreyne you to love his people, and
so come to the Supper and welcome. Despise not this my counsel.

Reproof.
Secondly, let it be reproof even to Gods own Servants, and likewise
admonition to search their hearts and lives for all this sour leaven of false
love, and venom, which many of them dare suffer to clogge them from Sacrament
to Sacrament: Though perhaps they keep the sore sweet, and so that it
festereth not, yet they are very careless in casting out that bitter root,
which daily springs up and defiles them, through their pronenesse to fall to
it, Oh! true love is a jewel indeed, not every Merchants portion nor easily
preserved when it is gotten! Loath I grant we are to be noted for so unsociable
and lovelesse ones, that none can live by us, unfit for a Church or a
Commonwealth; yet the Lord only knows what secret roots and rindes there
abide still. Oh! we should not top out the chief of the sheafe only, but
thresh clean, and fan our selves thoroughly of this scurfe! Having escaped a
gulf we should be afraid of a shallow! Oh how should we break our hearts to
think what pettishnesse and waspishnesse we walk with in our family, among
wife, children and servants? What pride, vaineglory, unkindnesse, unforbearance
do we utter therein? What crossenesse and heartburning among neighbors, if
it be but for their fences and cattle? What buying and selling of each other
for trifles? Oh Lord, if others of thy people did not more good than I, in
releeving poor Christians, and upholding good causes, all must needs go to
ruin! I feel what a weak proppe I am! I live as if at my death I should dye
undesired! A clod of the earth, and bundle of self-love, borne for my own
use! Wit I have enough to bite in all fruits of love, but none to utter them
with bounty and beteaming! And some of us are so gross as to think that good
works are but boastings of our goodness; as for us we will renounce them, and
be saved by faith! God keep me from thy salvation! Learn poor wretch, That
faith alone justifies, but is not alone in her fruits. Others of us if we be
of any use at all by our love, yet are puffed up in conceit of our worth and
service, and how much other hang upon us, and how little we upon them; whereas
we should serve them in love, and feel no virtue to have come from us! How
many of us are far from ripping up the seames of our souls, from distasting
of such as cannot brook us? How soon are we weary, and by one act of love,
think our selves exempted from many? how many partial have we? how rare and
odd ones are they whom we can affect and humor! Oh cast up these morsells,
dear friends, and let all our receivings be with the unleavened bread of
sincerity,

Exhortation, and examination.
go over those six branches before, and by Prayer, importune the Lord to
bless the meditation of them for the breeding of love unfeigned in thee.
Think not the Sacrament to be a breeder of it: That only by faith is there
improoved and nourished. And secondly, revive it at thy coming to the Supper,
as thou would come from it with cheerfulness. Some few rules I have here
set down for thy trial herein.

Matthew. 6.3.
that thou had rather do many kind offices of love, though none should know
of it, than neglect one of them when thou see God calls thee to it.

Nehemiah and Vriah. Nehem. 2.3.


in the midst and sweetest thereof, break off and say, Now do I neglect the
service of my time, and so return unto it. As Joseph full of affections to
Benjamin, sought occasion, and cried, Genesis 45.1.
Have every man from me, and so fell upon his neck.

Phil. 4 7.
thy heart is so loathed, that thy froward, sullen qualities, and those darts
of hateful thoughts are even quenched in this blood of thy satisfier. Also
when thou find thy enemies so displeased, that thou can not reach or win
them by all thy love, yet even then thou art so far from weariness in
weldoing, that thou desire to hook them in by thy prayers, begging their
conversion rather for their own good, than to be quit of their injuries.







Gal. 4.14.
when they are disabled by age or other infirmities from their former abilities
and employments, as when they improved themselves to the uttermost, and we
rejoiced in their light.

Act. 20.35.
9. That we count it a far greater mercy that we give, than if we receive.
Being a kin to that excellent Church of Macedonia, whose grace was this, 2 Cor.
8.1.
to esteem the Lord far kinder in lending them an heart to give to
Jerusalem, than Jerusalem it self had cause to be thankful for her relief.





Consolation.
and make it their path and way. Many a good Christian will say, I cannot boast
of many evidences, but this I thank God, I can say, that my heart goes with the
cause of God, to his religion, covenant, Ordinances, I love the Saints, etc. My
affections and endeavors go that way yea, when I cannot go, yet I can creep
and methinkes the dog of a good man is welcome for his masters sake. I
abhor that selfe-seeking, and self-love, which reigns in the world, I
practice compassion and love to all, both mean and great, known, and
unknown, near and far off: and my prayers are cast in as a lot among the
prayers and petitions of the Church. I desire no welfare save in hers, and as
she fares, so do I desire to do. Oh! rich soul be comforted. The Lord has
set his mark upon thee, and called thee Hephziba, Esaias 62.4.
one in whom his soul delights, his Love, his Dove, his Undefiled one. Thy
name is as a precious ointment, therefore the daughters follow and love thee.
By thine example many have lost their brutish and savage qualities, and been
taught to feed with Lambs. They say of the Panther, that she has so sweet a
breath, that she allures all the beasts to her thereby: So that hereby she has
her name. So is it with thee, the savor of thy amiablenesse, shall honor thee
wheresoever thou becommest till at thy death thy works shall follow thee.
Mark 14.9. Act 9.9.36. and 10.2.
Though the Scripture be witten, yet as the name of Mary that anointed Christ,
and Dorcas, and Cornelius are in the word, so shall thine be in the Church. Oh!
enjoy thy self and come to the Sacrament with comfort, for the Lord Jesus
stands there ready with open breast to welcome thee.

James 3.13.
does so hardly fasten upon thee? Do thou combat within thy self against all
naughtiness in this kind, and nourish the motions of that spirit which is
pure, peaceable, gentle, and full of goodness, and bear down the other as
much as is possible? Deceive not thy self, and I dare not bar thee from the
Lords Table: Although thou had poor fruits to boast of, yet since our Lord
Jesus has not forgotten a promise of reward to a cup of cold water to a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, Math. 10.42.
I cannot exclude thee from the benefit of the Supper. Only take heed least
thou catch at such an encouragement to any evil end, that still thou may
keep thy conscience defiled, with the like pangs, and yet venture to receive:
But let the Sacrament bring a special reviving of love unto thee; the very
sight of thy brethren at the house of God, let it renew that poor sparckle
that is in thee: Heb. 12.25.
Think that thou art come to the souls of merifull and holy men, and art as
in a corner of heaven, while thou may sit among them: And if this
encouragement belong to thee, it shall work kindly, and not by contraries.
And for this use and the whole trial of love thus much.

CHAP. VIII. Of the desire after the Sacrament, and the trial theof.
We are now come to the last, The 5. grace Desire. Entry.
but not to the least of those five graces preparing for the Sacrament, which
is desire or longing after those good things contained in it. Concerning the
handling whereof I shall not hold the Reader long in the grounds of this grace,
as I have done in the former: Because those points which serve to the opening
of desire, either concerning Christ himself our alsufficient nourishment; or
else the trial of our own wants: (of both which I have both in the former and
in this latter Treatise spoken) shall not here need any repeated discourse.
Only my method shall be this. 1 I will briefly speak a word of the object of
this desire. 2. I will prove the Doctrine. 3. I will make use of it sundry
ways, and therein, if any thing may be added, either for the procuring of, or
the trial of the soundness of this desire, I shall mention it, and so
conclude.

Affections are strong and vehement things in their pursuit, and not stirred
up or provoked in us save by objects of great allurement and persuasion,
especially spiritual affections require eminent objects to raise up and to
improve them. Natural affections of joy, love, hope, sorrow, fear, or desire,
must have suitable objects to quicken them up: otherwise they lie flat upon the
earth. How much more must it needs be so here in holy and divine affections,
whereunto our nature is less inclined, and the flame (for lack of daily
supply of oil and matter to nourish them) does easily decay and vanish.
Sacramental desire and longing therefore must needs presuppose some more than
ordinary object, to excite and maintain it; else neither would a carnal heart
easily rise to it, nor it a good heart hold appetite and desire to it long
together.

The object of desire is Christ
Sundry ways therefore it pleases the holy Ghost in Scripture to express this
object to the eye of the soul. The thing it self being in substance one, the
Lord Jesus the nourishment of the living soul in grace and goodness; yet the
eloquence of the Spirit appears in no argument so great as in this one, to
wit, the due laying him out in his colors, that the dead spirit of man might
behold and esteem him as an object well deserving her best affections. Hence
it is that in the Song of Solomon so many allusions taken from carnal objects
of desire, Much described in Scripture. Cant. 6.5.
are used to provoke the soul to the like spiritualnesse of desire. As when he
is brought in like an amorous bridegroom of choice, personage, beauty, and
proportion, and that from head to foot: as if some curious Absolon were to be
seen, in whom from top to toe, there was no blemish. His head, locks, eyes,
lips, body, and all his liniments are painted out to us, that it may appear he
is the chief of ten thousand. The like course takes our Savior himself,
Math. 13. ver. 44, 45.
in the Sermons and Parables which passed from him; wherein his chief drift is
to magnify grace under the name of the kingdom of heaven, meaning nothing
else save the power and efficacy of the Gospel offering to the soul his
satisfaction and sanctification, for pardon, and life eternal. And sometimes
he compares himself to a pearl of great price, which he who found, sold all to
buy it. Also to a Treasure hidden in a field, which so affected him that saw
it, that he bought the field it self to purchase it. Hence also it is that
both in old and new Testament the Lord expresses the grace of Christ by the
similitudes of all kinds of creatures, which either by their preciousnesse or
by their usefulness, do draw men's affections. Rev. 3.18. Psalm. 45. Luke 15.
Esaias 55.12
Of the first rank are, gold, silver, precious stones wrought gold, robes,
apparel, and white linen, treasure, ointments: of the latter sort, are,
bread, corn, wine, oil, milk, honey, waters, etc. Not as if these were as
good as grace: but that hereby the carnal soul of man, (of it self easily
snared with the love of such things* (yea meaner) might understand, that look
what excellency is in all these together for the content of our outward
appetite, that infinitely much more is in this for satisfying of the soul: since
all these are used but as shadows to discover this.

And to say the truth, let us mark well, Illustration of it.
and we shall perceive one principal scope of Paul, (that chief of Apostles)
in all his Epistles, is this, to set forth the privilege of Believers to be
such as does not consist in some shreeds, but in admirable glory. He would have
us to know, Christianity is not, making a shift to rub through, or some
covering of our infirmities, supply of some wants, or clensing out the stain
of some odious sins. But, an estate of excellency, choice, welfare, and
curious contentation to the soul, such as Adam at his best never enjoyed.
Read these Texts, Col. 1.9, 10, 11.12. Col. 1.9.
where he speaks of a believer thus, as, That he may be filled with all
spiritual understanding; That he may walk worthy of the Lord unto all
welpleasing; That he may be fruitful and increasing in the knowledge of God;
That he may be strengthened with all might, unto all long-suffering and
joyfulnes. So Ephesians. 1.17.18. Ephe: 1.17.
he desires that, They might know the hope of their calling, the rich
inheritance of the Saints, and the glorious power of Christ, mortifying them,
and quickening them by the power whereby he raised himself, So Ephesians. 3.17. Ephe.
17.
That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith: that being rooted in love, ye
may comprehend the breadth and depth, etc. and know the love of Christ which
passes all knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.
See also Philip. 3.3.10. Phil. 3.10.
I count all things but dung in respect of the excellency of Christ. The power
of his resurrection, the fellowship of his sufferings, and conformity to his
death. Nay, in one place he says, Col. 2.9, 10. Col. 2.9. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
That in him we are complete. Saint ^eter also witnesses that Christ is no
bare gift, but that, The Divine power has given us all things pertaining to
life and godliness through him. To what end do I heap up these? Surely, that
the Lord Jesus his excellency rests not in himself, but is derived to all his
members, and that to the end, that he may be all in all with them, and win
the honor and love of their affections.

Sacramental desire must have her object.
To come a little nearer then to our matter in hand, it must be some eminent
object in the Sacrament, which must draw the soul to it in this Sacramental
desire. It must be more than the eye can see, for that's no object of any
affection at all, scarce so much as a natural appetite. But what is that?
Surely that spiritually which the Elements resemble naturally, I mean full and
complete nourishment. If the soul can see this, it will draw desire without
question. Now we know that Bread and Wine united, contain in them perfect
food, and cheerishing to the whole man, that is, to the body and spirits of
nature. Even so Christ our nourishment in the Sacrament, is comepleately so to
the soul, both for renewed peace and holiness. And to open this, we may see
when the holy Ghost lights upon Christ Sacramental, he forgets his ordinary
style, and rises into an unusual one; Pro. 7.1.2.
for then, it makes the Father an extraordinary great housekeeper, brings him
in as a man that builds himself a sumptuous house upon seven hewne Pillars,
prepares his fatlings and dainties, Esaias 25.
his wines and spices. Nay, then it tells us, that in those days the Lord will
make a feast in the mountains, Luke. 14.
a feast of all choice delicate things, fat meats and wines thoroughly stale and
refined. Nay then, it brings him in as a King who is disposed to magnify
himself in the making a feast to his Subjects at the marriage of his Son. So
that look what is in a feast either for quantity, fullness of dishes, variety
of choice, dainties, or for quality, as rareness, pretiousnesse, exquisite
dressing, music, company, safety of things eaten, without fear, either that
they make surfeit the guest, or breed ill blood. All that is to be applied to
the feast of the Lord Jesus our nourishment, which God the Father makes to his
Church at the Sacrament of the Supper. And yet that is not all; for whereas
that may be easily thought to come frow the magnificence of the master of it;
but as for poor wretches, and hunger sterven souls, how should they come
near it? The answer is, That only for such it is prepared, even for beggars,
and such as are found among the hedges, and by the highway sides, for lost and
forlorn ones; It is the office of Gods hand-maides and Ministers to invite, to
bring in, yea, by all arguments of persuasion to force even such (not the fat,
lusty and fed ones) to this feast of the King. Now if it be thus, who doubts
but a feast of the mountains, a feast of all delicacies, a Kings feast,
offered with so solemn an invitation, yea, threat of contempt, yea, to the
most unworthy, yea, with such a welcome at the feast as this. Esaias 55.2.
Eat good things, and let your souls delight themselves in fatness; I say,
who can deny, but here is an object of the best and most earnest desire and
longing? These things I have thus in a shadow premised (to spare repetition of
the substance contained under them) least the Reader might conceive me to rush
upon the point without some ground of preparation.

I come now to the point it self, and the proof thereof. The point it self.
That is this. Christ Jesus our nourishment in the Supper, must be received
with special longing and desire. For proof of it, take first the Analogy of
the Passover. Proofs.
In that there were sundry ceremonies noting out this desire. For first, what
did that typifie, that the Lamb should be separated from the teate of the
damme, four days ere it was slain? Exodus 12.6.
Surely not only to teach mortifiednesse of lusts and liberties, but
especially the desire which the soul should feel in her self; as we know the
poor Lamb made many a mournful bleate after the damme in that time. Verse
12*
Again what signified those first guises of eating the Passover, save desire
in a special degree? I mean, their eating, with their shoes on, and standing?
Their staves ready in their hands, and their hasting to be gone? Doubtless it
argued earnest desire. And therefore, Luke 22. verse 15. Luke. 22.15:
it is said expressly of Christ that he exceedingly longed to eat the
Passover with his Disciples. If he so desired it, what ought they to do? Also
those sour herbs (or sauce made of them as some write) what do they show
but the sharpening of appetite?

For the reasons also, these few may serve. as the desire after Christ our
life, is requisite for a convert. But we know that hunger after Christ our
life, is one of the conditions and marks of faith. Therefore is this also a
mark and condition of a true receiver. Especially if we consider that the
Sacrament is a fuller and more festival exhibiting of Christ than the word
alone. ohn 6.35.
Objection. Pet. 2.2. 1 Pet. 2.2.
If ye will covet the sincere milk, etc. Great appetite (even as great as an
infants after the breast) is due to hearing of each Sermon, to each fast: how
much more to each Sacrament?

Means of attaining it.
Ere I come to the use, methinkes I here some asking, How may this grace be
attained? I answer, by sundry steps wrought in the soul, by name these: will
work hope of being satisfied: Meditation therefore and pondering hereof with
prayer, will cause the soul to hunger without horror or despair; other
hungers there may be after a thing denied, yea impossible: But the desire of
the faithful is sweetened, and strengthened by the fullness of the supply,
joined with the promise of him that inviteth, and welcometh, freely, and
bountifully.

Now the third part of the Chapter remains, Terror.
viz. the use of the Doctrine. And that is manifold. 2 Cor. 4.4.
he is so to none but those that shall perish, whom Satan has more power over
to darken, than the Lord to enlighten. Oh Lord! but to consider how great a
part of our Christian Church consists of such, would gaster a good man. They
savor nothing save back, and belly, and trade, Phil. 3.18.
and pleasures, and drink, and gold: if ye would preach of such things, ye
were for them. But Alas! As for desire of the savor of Christ in the Sacrament
of nourishment, a Dog savors a chip as much. Why? Of a thing unknown there
can be no desire; Why then come such? upon unsavory, saplesse, and senseless
terms? Perhaps one has been sick, or upon a journey, and his wife was loath
to receive, till they might go together? I do not mislike the joining of
couples: but if God by disease have hindered thy husband, or by absence, must
his wife needs hold off; what scurffe is this, for sinister ends to balcke the
Sacrament? Oh! the qualmes of cold undesirous Communicants, should justly
stir the faithful to loathe it in themselves. Such as come not with desire,
either may come or not come upon any base pretext, as, because they see others
come, or because it is Easter, or because they think it is a better thing (at so
holy a time) to be among devout folk, than to sit in the chimney corner at
home alone. So, alas! Many come, because they came not last time, and they are
loath to be noted to absent themselves too often; or because some of their
neighbors receive to day. Oh fulsome beast! Avaunt from the presence of that
God who will be followed in the savor of his ointments; Mark 9.50.
who will receive no sacrifice from any, but such as have salt in them, and
season it therewith? Who abhorres a dead beast with the throat cut, and not
raised up and burning upon his Altar: If the least drop of relish were in thee,
could these be the motives to bring thee to Gods table? God give thee an heart
to tremble at thy sottish profanenes, and if mere ignorance have hitherto
caused it, add no more drunkenness to thirst, least the Lord by some
fearful hand rend thee from thy companions with horror at thy death, or else
leave thee a most saped and senseless conscience in thy presumption. Tremble
to think how many thousand of affections of Gods Ministers, both by Sermons
and Sacraments, must finally be lost upon such stones and stocks! If ye lay
sick upon your beds, and your stomachs were lost, what an outcry would your
wives make in the ears of the Physician, saying, Help for Gods cause, my
husband is a dead man, he takes nothing. But Oh thou beast! Thou take neither
drop nor crumme of the flesh or blood of Jesus Sacramental, and yet feel
no aile. Beware least sense be reserved for thee in hell, except thou repent.

a reproof
Math. 11.10.
Secondly, here is also reproof even of Gods own for coming to the Sacrament
without renewed appetite. It is with many unsavory receivers, as it was with
John Baptist hearers; at the first they rejoiced in his light, but shortly they
became so fulsome, that their savor was gone. So that our Savior upbraides
them saying, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? a reed shaken with
the wind? Or a man wearing soft raiment? Their zealous devotion was turned into
form and custom. So it is with these. Those sacred lays of first Love which
shined in you at your first receivings, then, when the Sacrament was as honey
to their taste; lo, now they are damped and cooled: Plenty makes no dainty now
with you; but except God rouse ye up to meditate of the object which first drew
your affections to burn within you, while he preached, and reached out the
Sacrament unto you, so that the same fullness makes as great dainty as ever,
and the oftener the greater, God shall not hold ye guiltless of this forfeit: I
tell thee, the very besotted Papists shall rise up against this saplesse age,
and condemn it: for they (as Esaias says) inflame themselves under every green
tree with their Idols. They burn in their adulterous desire after their Wafer
and their saplesse god, their Agnus Deis, and Crucifixes, Images of the Virgin,
and the Saints. But as for us, the Lord Jesus preached and offered in the feast
of a Supper, leaves us as barren, empty and saporlesse as a chip. Oh,
brethren, be zealous and amend. What cold or surfeit has taken us, that the
things of God should wax as dry Manna to the Israelites! Number. 11.4.
Could the Lord endure their brutishness? Did he not swear they should not
enter into his rest? Heb. 12.11.
If there be but a dram of old appetite and spark of old fire left upon the
Altar, take Gods bellows of indignation and blow it up that it die not.
Strengthen the feeble knees and hands, Heb. 3.12, 12.
that they faint not. Has the day been wherein the morning watches of a
Sabbath have been more precious than all the days of the week? And yet every
hour in the day appointed for Gods honor, more sweet than the hours of
eating and working: and is now meat, drink, gaming and pleasure so full of
taste, that Christ and his Supper can afford no appetite! The Lord recover it
in thee (if thou be his, he will) by some smarty Cross* or sting of
conscience, rather than suffer thy affections to lie buried in the earth. Do
as those do who must carry home logges or timber which are sunk and buried in
some dirty ditch, or quagmire: first, they must raise it by their skill, and
unsettle it; and then being loose, they may carry it, and carry it home. So do
thou: if there were ever true desire in thee, lo, its sunk into some dirtie
pit of the world, lewd company, sloth, and ease: raise it first out of it, and
after thou shall the better carry it home with thee to Gods house. Oh! I touch
a sin, now more frequent than I know any in the Church; viz. of sleepy dead
Sacraments without affection. If thou see that the Lord will not take of this
cover off darkness, Esaias 25.^7.
and dampe of undesirousnesse from the body (because of their long desperate
carelesn^sse) yet step in for thy own soul that it perish not in this
common, yea, Epidemiall lathergie.

Admonition.
to all that know what this point means, to be weary of all those enemies of
desire. which haunt the soul in an insensiblenesse and indifferency of
appetite toward the Sacrament. They are these; first, 1. Against resting upon
former affections.
a resting upon former affections in receiving, and supposing they are still
the same, when as yet they are oppressed and surfeited with such scurffe as
has choked them, and therefore are not now at hand as they have been, to
cheer us at the Sacrament; whereas affection had need be revived daily, in
secret above all things. What should be a Christians daily exercise, but this,
to try how those promises of the Sacrament can affect us? as this, Christ is my
feast of full nourishment, his flesh is meat indeed, etc. These would have
affected me in time past, but now they will not stir me. As that Courtier
told Alexander, that he would appeal from him drunk, to himself sober; so
had we need to do when we feel neither judgment nor affections, tender
and open to the Sacrament, (nor perhaps to any thing else, either word, or
works, of God) shake thy self before God, and say, It is not with me as it
has been, I have hung zeal and esteem of Christ, upon the hedge, other
matters, have defeated them, of their birthright. Secondly, 2. Unbelief.
be warned against unbeleefe. This takes off the soul from all her right to
Christ, to Christ, and therefore marres her plea: If I be the Lords, I have
right to his nourishment, and cannot choose but plead it, as the infant pleads
with the mother for the breast. But if Satan do get in so far as to dazzle the
soul with unbeleefe; lo, all the ground of gracious appetite is gone; and
then, what succeeds but fulsomnesse and staggering? Unbelief is the death of
the soul: Does the dead child miss the breast? No, no: above all things
abhor this woeful enemy of infidelity, and nourish faith to the conservation
of the soul, Heb. 10. ult. Heb. 10.38.
If the soul be upheld in her life and being, life must have nourishment, and
want of it, will prove hunger. But if the soul have once withdrawn it self
from the body, what is it but a carrion? Thirdly, Thirdly, surfeit of lusts.
cast all superfluity out of the soul, which has secretly soked at unawares
into it. The womb that will conceive, must be clean from all former
conception: it will not conceive upon conception. If then a proud heart, loving
it self, if a techy revenging spirit, if the love of gold and silver, if
gallantnesse, jollitie, and pride of life, scorning to take it as we have done;
if uncharitableness, slighting, and neglect of means defile us (as alas, what
is easier, if a man be let loose to walk after the guise of the world) how can
appetite last? 1 Pet. 3.1.2.
If ye will covet the word, purge out all your superfluities, for they oppress
the seat of appetite, and while they lie there, small appetite will appear.
Fourthly, Fourthly, excess of liberties. Pro. 23.2.
cast out the tickling excess of all lawful liberties, eating, drinking,
feasting, recreations, pleasures, and vanities of all sorts. To go beyond our
bounds in these, under pretense of warrantablenesse: does as much jarre with
the spirit of a Christian, as open offenses: for, by these colors Satan
withdrawes the Spirit from a close cleaving to God, self-denial and faith;
poisons it with liberty, bewitches it with ease, and corrups it with a
declining of heart from that diligence, sinceerenesse, power, and delight,
wherewith it formerly walked. Add to these, such as thou have felt to dampe
affection in thee, perhaps ill marriage, a bitter root of infinite branches,
jealosies, suspicions and ill affectednesse to each other: Never look that the
appetite after grace can hold, while such scurffe is nourished. I tremble to
see by woeful experience, how far some dare venture in this kind. So also
crossings in our estates, and health, and business which draws the heart off,
(for the most part) from God: as also too much business and padling in the
world: many irons being in the fire at once to distaste affection, and to craze
the sweet temper of it for Christ and his Sacrament.

Exhortation.
to all Gods people in these dangerous days, (wherein scarce one of an hundred,
quits himself without some crack and flaw) to look to spirit, fervencie of
desire and affection to all the will and ways of God constantly (as far as
our weakness will permit) to file off our rust and scrape off the barren
moss that will overgrow a tree of righteousness; Use all helps and motives.
to cast our Snakes skin, and Eagles bill; and to scour our selves upon the
salt marshes (as sheep do) that health and appetite may be preserved. I mean
afflictions wisely used. Be wary of thy company, keep the watch of God,
preserve tenderness and jealousy, double the use of best means, set God above
them, and renew thy Covenant daily. This will easily work Sacramental
appetite in thee: Come with it to the Supper, empty thy stomach; bring not
thy brown bread and cheese in thy pocket, to feed on at Gods feast: (the
fowlest contempt which thou can offer him) Remember, desire after Christ's
fullness, is the most proper and peculiar work of a guest, if he would have
his inviter think well of his presence. Marriage feasts pour out men into
affection: and without it such occasions are odious; but to God much more. If a
Judge oppress, being in the place of Justice, it is horrible. So for a
communicant to come with a dead heart, and no stomach to Gods feast, is most
woeful. Say to Christ, as once he said to his Apostles, Lord, with desire I
have desired (note the phrase, Luke 22.15. Luke 22.15.
) to eat this Passover with thee. Lord nourish it in my soul, I desire, Lord,
pardon my indifferency. Thou see that commonly look what thou seek
earnestly, thou gettest: eagar pursuit of money, of will, or lust, co^passeth
them: so, desire of the Sacrament shall attain her end. Esau with tears
sought a blessing, not a spiritual, Heb. 12.17.
but a temporal: if he had an heart to have craved a better, he had it. Take
heed least the Lord thus lode thee one day, for thy fulsome receivings: and
let all this be some quickening of thy soul to receive aright.

Trial of it.
this is one maine one: Luke 5.8.
If the sight of that fullness of grace that is in this feast of Christ, do
empty our souls to the bottom of all selfe-sufficiencie of our own.
Contraries applied to each other do greatly enlarge one another: ignorance
with knowledge, pureness with corruption, the modesty of a Matron, with the
impudence of a Harlot. Try then, has the Lord Jesus his fullness emptied thee
of all thy base counterfeit shows, and left thee confounded in thy self for
thy seeming virtues, thy barrenness of grace, thy fullness of corruption? Thou
see what Christ is, does thy own spirit begin to smite in thee to consider
what thou art compared with him? Alas! if there were no more to lay thee open
to thy self, than now and then, to meet with here a shred and there another
of sin: thou would be oppressed with self-love, and wax a dunghill of
dross. Only Christ can truly perfect the discovery of natural poison. If
then all that is said of Christ, leave thee as it found thee, its a sign of a
wretch. But if confounded and empty, a good sign.

Rachel (when she so longed for children) Be quiet, Genesis 30.1.
for thou have a loving husband dearer to thee than ten Sons; would she
not have been more fierce? So when thy soul is pinched within thee for some
odious lust which thy hard heart will not be rid of; and then the divill
comes in with his contents, and tells thee what gifts, what opinion thou have
in the Church, how God blesses thee with wealth, etc. How does it affect thee?
Is it as a dagger to thy heart? can thou say. Nay, rid me out of this my
woeful chain, and I will be cheerful, but else the more I have, the more is
against me, that one so blessed by God, should carry an heart about him so
hardened with pride and ease, or the sensuality of the flesh. Nothing can still
an hungry appetite, but meat, or a thirsty, but drink. If then this pinching
of thy soul be wrought in thee, which counts every babble dross, till thou
get that which thou want, it is well.

Naomi going out of her dwelling for famine, being in Moab, yet could not be
quiet with that diet, Ruth. 1.6: Pro. 18.2:
but still listened, till at the last she heard the Lord had visited his people
with bread. So is it here, if thou be thoroughly pinched, all thy whole
thoughts, inquiries, will be after this bread of life. Thou will be scarce an
hour together in this pinching want, but thy prayers will be earnest with God
to satisfy thee with Christ's fullness. Thou will give him no rest, nor thy
eyeliddes any sleep, till the Lord have spoken peace to thee, and rid thee out
of thy thraldom.

Ephesians. 5.18.
But he that would fill his spirit with thy favor, and be satisfied with
thine image, and get Communion with thy Spirit, Psalm. 23.6.
let him come to thy house and feast. Oh! I do not grudge them their portion,
but in secret I bless thee that mine own is fallen into so good a ground. Oh!
let me live thus in thy Cellars and drink of thy flagons, Cant. 2.3.4.5
and I shall never envy them their corn and wine: but enjoy mine own portion
with sweet savor, and full contentment, and spend all my life in thy Temple.
Psalm. 27.4.
One thing I have desired of the Lord, and will not cease; that I may dwell in
the House of the Lord all my days, to behold his beauty:

Aram, 2 King. 7.9.
had (beyond hope) filled themselves: they began to check themselves, that
they had not done well, in that they had so long concealed. So does every soul
which has met with the treasure of Christ in the Sacrament, he thinks thus,
Lord this is a blessing not belonging to one or two, but to the whole body of
the Church! Oh that I could tell how to impart that little which I have got to
as many as need it? Especially to such as are near me, husband, wife,
children, kindred and near neighbors! I can but wonder how a thing of such
excellency as this is, should so little moove me, to improove it! Try then thy
self by this: Whether when God has satisfied thee in his house, thou hoardest
all up to thy self, never dreaming of another wants? or whether with Sampson,
Judge. 14.9.
having found honey in the dead Lion (the Lord Jesus) thou go away feeding
thy self, and giving to father and mother, yea and (more than he would)
telling them the true meaning of thy Riddle.



thereby. We say, many bad meals make the last a glutton. If this be a true
sign, doubtless there be many of us who might have a merveilous stomach.
Try then, is the Lord more fulsome or more sweet by absence? Is the deferring
of thy desire the very fainting of the soul? Psalm. 84.3, 4.
does thy intermission renew thy love; thy longing, thy joy; thy fondness thy
fainting of heart after the Sacrament? It is well. These few to an honest heart
may help more forward.

Comfort.
I have small joy to comfort either false desirers, or revolters to their old
carnal desires. I send such to the use of admonition, and upon search to cease
venturing to profane the ordinance till their glut be vomited up. But I know
also many a poor soul whose desire is constant, yet cannot be satisfied. For
say they, it would have long ago broken out into believing. But I wanze still
in a bare desire. Is it even so, do ye account true desire so bate a thing?
No, The Lord shall not break thy bruised Reed, nor quench thy smoking flax,
till judgment do break out into victory. Be it known, desire is no bare
thing, but precious and fruitful, and shall end in fullness. Therefore be not
dismayed: come to the Supper, be sure it is no surfeit, but a faint desire, and
the Master of the guests, when he spies thee, will pick out the best deinty of
all his feast, and lay it unto thee. And this also shall serve for this fifth
and last grace of desire, and the trial of it, and so in general, concerning
the whole doctrine of Sacramental preparation. Which the Lord so bless, that
all his servants to whose hands this poor treatise may come, may meet with
some morsells, which may cause them not to repent them of their Travail.

CHAP. IX. Of the due behavior of a communicant in the act of receiving.
NOw according to our order prefined, we proceed to add somewhat concerning
the work it self of receiving: Of the carriage at the Sacrament.
The communicant then having taken due pains for the making himself fit for
the Supper, is not there to rest, but to go to the Sacrament to eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup, as Paul speaks. Now to give the Reader a taste
beforehand of the subject matter of this Chapter, let him know it is twofold.
The one concerns the coming unto, the other the due receiving of the
Sacrament. For the former, I will by this occasion speak a little of the
necessity of coming to the Sacrament, both in general as it concerns all
that are worshippers, and in special, those that are prepared for it. For the
latter I shall handle it either in that due carriage of the receiver toward
the whole ordinance, or toward some passages thereof. For the whole ordinance
it self, the receiver owes a double carriage, Entry and division.
either of commemoration, or of perpetuation: The former being a thankful
raising of heart to God the father, 1. Point. Necessity of coming.
in praise for the Lord Jesus. The latter being a preservation of the integrity
of this ordinance (by the incorrupt use thereof) from all corruption of humane
devises. The carriage of the receiver concerning some occasional passages in
the Sacrament, is a spiritual accommodation of the soul, attending so to the
outward Sacramental acts there performed, that he find himself much
quickened in the grace he brought with him, and edified in respect of that fruit
which he looks to carry away.

For the first of these. The words of the Apostle are plain, So let him come,
and eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. Proofs. 1 Cor. 11.28.
Which words are not permissive (let him if he will) but imperative; let him,
See Treatise 1. Cap. 1.
I command him upon pain of my wrath and displeasure. But many reasons there
are to prove it also. First, who can deny but the Church and ordinances under
the Gospel are more excellent than those under the Law? Read these Texts, Heb.
9.11.23. Heb. 5.1.2. etc. Heb. 3.5.6. with many more. Now in the old Testament
we see how sollemne a penalty is threatened against him that in cool blood
(having no plea by sickness, or jorney, and business to allege) should
forbear to keep the passover; Numbers 9. Verse 13.
even such a one (says the Lord) shall be cut off from his people. Nay it
seems that although legal pollutions might hinder ordinary services and
sacrifices, yet the necessi y of the Passover, Verse 7.
took away the bar of such pollutions: so that the touching a dead man, or
being in a jorney, and about common business might not infringe it. The Lord
by this mean providing for the honor and necessity of the Sacrament. How much
more necessary then are the Sacraments of the Gospel to frequent? And how
severe a censure of excommunication lies upon the violaters of them?

1 Cor. 11.29.
how much more will he plague a non-receiving dispiser? If a Prince send for
some of his Subjects to appear before him: whereof some appear, but bow not
the knee to do homage, others refuze to wait upon him at all, whether of
these two think we incur greatest dispeasure?



Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you, Ioh. 6.53. What case are such miscreants in then for sole life,
as abhor Sacraments?

2 Cron. 30.3.21.
both in their commissions sent about, their munificence in providing lambs
for such as wanted, and their charge given personally to the people, to keep
the same to the Lord; 2 Cron. 35.7.18.
do sufficiently argue that these holy Princes were fools, if the thing they
undertook were a needelesse trifle? How much less then is the use of the
Passover of the Gospel a needelesse thing?

Fifthly, if the Lord press oftennesse of coming to the Supper as a necessary
duty, how much more is a coming and tendering of our persons to God, needful?
If scanty coming be a sin, what a fearful praemunire then run they into,
that refuze at all to come?

Luke 22.21.
what a sin is that which cuts off both the general end of the worship, and
the peculiar scope of this? But I dwell no longer upon a point so clear: To
brutish swine reason is lost. And to the good it is needelesse.

1 Terror. First, terror to all profane Esau's, who being out of love with
the Sacrament through loathing of examination of their woeful profane lives
(which indeed are so intricate and overwhelmed in sin, that they admit none)
make it their constant practice to abandon all Sacraments. And when they are
cut off by men's censures for this their contempt, they are content so to live
and are no whit troubled: a man knows not whether the disease or the remedy
do worse with them. I might compare them to Caine, save that I should wrong
him by so unjust a comparison. Caine because he had villanously and
sacrilegiously defiled the ordinances which Abel and he joined in, was debarred
of them and for ever cast out of Gods presence: But as cursed as he was, he
could lay it to heart, Genesis 4.13.
and say it was too great for me to bear. But these Atheists and swine are so
far from that, that they willingly content themselves to be cast out, and think
it is a good bar to keep them from that which they are glad to be rid of. If
ye ask why they do thus, they say, they have business to do, and cannot
skill of this new doctrine of Trial, or cannot be reconciled with their
enemies. But Oh monsters in the shape of men! does the Lord appoint ye one
ordinance to fit ye for another, as the Sabbath to exempt ye from your work;
and the doctrine of trial, that ye might come better prepared, and do ye
pick a quarrel with the one to balke the other? Do ye turn Gods helps to
lets? Surely ye shall pay double for your contempt, both of the means and the
duty it self. If a man bid his servant go to work in his field from morning
to night, and he run to the Alehouse and neglect his labor: when his master
comes to reckon him, will it be an excuse for him to say, Truly I was taken up
so between your house and your work that I neglected it? No, his master will
answer, Oh thou base wretch, when I commanded thee my work, did I not forbid
thee whatsoever might turn thee from it? I will pay thee double: both for thy
Alehouse haunting, and thy forbearing of my work also. Oh! Answer, 1 Cor.
11.29. Luke 14.
viz. They eat and drink their own condemnation by coming, or take him, and
bind him, cast him into utter darkness, where there is wayling, weeping and
gnashing of teeth, for not coming? If there be any odds, much good do them
with it: But their deep logique cannot help them to any.

Oh! That those into whose hands the keeping of both Tables is committed, would
another while turn their eyes to hunt out these beasts! and the edge of their
authority betimes to cut off such from the City of God! Oh that they would
turn the back thereof unto all godly and upright hearted ones, whose joy is
to partake the ordinances in their beauty and pureness! My soul within me
faints to think how unanswerable a sacrilege and horrible a plague they are
guilty of, who having the coercive power committed unto them, suffer our
Sacraments to be made execrable, either by the profaneness of receivers, or
the Atheism and popery of absenters and recusants! Oh! compel them in Gods
fear to come! not by thrusting any particular man upon the Supper, being
unmeete: but by providing that whosoever may be prepared and will not come, may
pay for both contempts. Thus did those Magistrates whom before I named. I end
this point thus: first, let the Magistrate know, that as the Minister of God
represents Christ in his prophetical office, teaching every soul to be
prepared to come ere he come, and then joins the kingly office, to debar him
thence till prepared: So the Magistrate only exercises their kingly office, to
force all to come. Secondly, all ye wicked refusers, cease your quarrelling
with God, and turn edge against your selves and say, Woeful wretch, as the
case stands with thee, whether thou come or come not, thou art both ways
snared and accursed. There is no way for thee but to humble thy self, first
prepare, and then come.

Reproof.
and perhaps some may be religious) who though they come, yet scant God as much
as they can in the number of his Sacraments, and come as seldom as possibly
any honest men can come. What a shame is this? Perhaps a wise observer may note
at some one Sacrament twenty to absent themselves, whom no cause mooves, save
that they received last time! Why? are ye afraid least mercy should compass
ye as a shield, and follow ye from Sacrament to Sacrament? Does not this
convince ye that ye turn your backs upon God, because his yoke is
burdensome? Consider it in Gods fear ( I speak especially to mine own) and
remember that Paul calls for often doing of it. 1 Cor. 11.26. Act. 2. end.
And the primitive Church having lately lost Christ's body, did daily behold his
spiritual presence in the Supper. Truly, to such as do sow sparily, Gal. 6.7.
shall be a reaping sparily: and he that will do no more for God than needs
must, shall have no more of him than needs must. No, no, the Lord must be
served fruitfully: with all our strength and courage: Delight in the Lord,
Psalm. 37.4.
and he will give thee thy hearts desire. The ordinances must be thoroughly
plied and waited upon, yea, made the uttermost of, by all such as look to
thrive upon them: Dallyers, and timeservers, and scanters of God shall never
drink of the brooks of butter and honey which flows from these fountains.
And O lazy receiver who take turns with God, what do thou know whether the
turn be the right one or the wrong? and whether God will follow thee or no,
when thou come at thy pleasure, or forsake thee for thy forsaking him! One
should think, that an assembly of such as have been taught the way of this
worship, should not (after 20. or 30. 40. years) balke the Lord every each
Sacrament for lack of list or leisure to prepare themselves: but ^ather count
it their great gain (next to Gods honor) to come often. I know not how
general this ill custom is: But I have observed it so much where I least wish
it, that I must complain and call for redress. Surely none streighten God in
his Sacrament, save those that take the uttermost of their own liberties in
profits and pleasures, and vanities: It is commonly seen, that they think all
spiritual service too much: think also all liberty to the flesh too little.
Be ashamed of this your course: you would soon tell God of it, if he should
bless you by halfes, as you serve him. 2 Samuel 24.24.
Oh! serve not the Lord with shreds which cost ye nothing. Count ye his
service perfect freedom and his burden light, if ye be the children of the
free and not the bondwomen.

Admonition.
and caveat even to some such as have prepared themselves duly, to beware least
Satan wind in with them when they have done, and (coming between cup and
lip) dissuade them from eating that bread and drinking of that cup. I tell you
he is a subtle sophister, and has so bewitched some novices that they have
made themselves away under this pretext least they should live longer and sin:
And he can suggest unto some fearful ones, That seeing they have done to the
uttermost to prepare themselves, it is no great matter for the act of receiving
it: seeing the endeavor with God is as the deed it self. And so it is (I
grant) where more cannot be atteyned: but not where it may: for he says,
Phil. 2.13.
It is God by whom ye have both the will, and also the power to do. Put the
case an husbandman should plough and sow and fence, and wait the whole year
for his Crop, and when it is ripe, he should keep his bed and say, I have
prepared for harvest to the uttermost, therefore now I will let my wheat shale
in the ear for lack of reaping. Would not all chronicle this man for a fool!
yet such folly there may be in the professors of religion. For why? many who
both in their own judgment, and other men's have approved th^mselves to be the
Lords, and abhor to foster any sin in them which might disable them from
comfort: yet, pretending their unsufficiencie, or from an unthankefull heart,
or melancholicke fears, or sowrenesse and sullenness: suddenly kick down
all their building, and refuze to come to the Table of the Lord. But oh poor
deluded creatures! What is this, save to confound Gods issues and ends? What is
it but in a sort to condemn the righteous, and to justify the wicked? What is
it, but to cross with God, and to make that ordinance which serves for
edifying, not only to serve to no such use, but rather to a worse use, than if
no such ordinance at all had been? For why? Does it not as equally contradict
the rule of Trial, that a prepared soul should not come, as, that an
unprepared one should come? Let them know, that they offend as much in not
coming, as if they having not tried themselves, durst come. And the Sacrament
especially serving for the supply of our wants: these bereave themselves not
only of the end of trial, but of the end of the Supper it self. I warn them
therefore to be wise and advised. Do not bestow much time in trimming and
preparing to meet the bridegroom; and when the marriage day and feast is come,
then look sowrely, and make question whether thou should meet him or not.
This were to make a May game for the devil, to escape the gulf and make
shipwreck in the haven. Rather lay hold upon the Lord Jesus in the day and
season of his grace, and say, Lord, the means I have used, preparing to the
end: let me not (like a fool) take my labor for my pains, but attain the
end of my labor in coming to thy Sacrament, that both my soul and body may
honor thee together, and both carry away comfort of thy Promise: remembering
how fearful a sin it is, to separate the things which thou have put
together. Thus much for the first head.

Having thus brought on the Communicant from his Praeparation, A Communicants
General carriage.
to the Table of the Lord: Now I come more nearly to direct him about his due
carriage there. And first for such general carriage both of body and mind as
concerns every ordinance, I will be short, as hastening to the more pertinent
carriage at the Table. For the external carriage first, 1. Of body.
it must not be unreverend, gazing, idle, offensive, light, wandering,
wearisome; nor yet Popish, formal, resting in some outward gesture without any
reverence of spirit: But sober, composed, attending the duty and beseeming it.
Unto which, singing of Psalms of praise may be added, so far as may not
confound the action. Math. 26, 30.
And Alms also at the end of the Action in token of true Thankesgiving: that
seeing we cannot reach the Lord, Psalm. 16.2.
our love may fall upon his poor Saints. As touching the behavior of our
spirits, they are to be present with God: 2. Next of the soul.
All the Liturgies of the old and new Church have that solemn clause in them,
Lift up your hearts: We lift them up to the Lord: And most excellently (rather
like a Preacher than a Prophet) Iosia charges the people thus, 2 King. 23.21. 2
King. 23.21.
Keep the passover to the Lord your God. A strange phrase. If he had said,
Pray to the Lord, or, give thanks to the Lord: we should have conceived it: but
he says, keep the Passover to the Lord: meaning; raise up holy, heavenly,
hearts, and affections toward the Lord, who is present to see your dispositions
and thereafter to requite you. This for the general. More in the particulars
will be occasioned.

Particular carriage. To the whole Sacrament.
But more specially the Lord requires of al his, peculiar behavior at his
Sacram. The first of those duties that concern them, is commemoration, 1.
Commemoration.
or thanks giving for the Lord Jesus: The Father presents him at the Supper in
his fullness, that we may make it as a Monument of his death and of all his
benefits. This is that he says, Do this in remembrance of me. As we see in
Colleges and houses founded by the bounty of great men, that they have
sollemne days of commemoration, to rehearse the names and bounties of their
benefactors: so the Churches day and season of thanks for Christ and his
benefits, Matter gotten
is, the Sacrament of his Supper. Hence is it called the Eucharist or
Thankesgiving. Patterns of thankesgiving for Christ.
Now to this end it were not amiss for us to set before us those patterns of
th^nkes which we read of in Scripture, for the benefits of Christ. If we
read the 63 of Esaias Esaias 63.1.
the first six verses, we shall see how the Prophet breaks out into a
gratulation for Christ: Who (says he) is he that comes up from Bozrae, with
red garments, glorious in his apparel, mighty to save? Wherefore art thou
red, and thine apparel as he that treads in the winefatt? I have trodden
the wine press alone, etc. I will mention the loving kindness of the Lord
according to all the goodness, etc. So also that of Saint John, Revelation I,
verse 5. Revel. 1.5.
Who is the faithful witness and first begotten of the dead, and the Prince
of the Kings of the earth: who has loved us, and washed us from our sins in
his own blood, and has made us Kings and Princes unto God and his Father; To
him be dominion and glory for ever. See the like 1 Timothy 1, 17. 1 Timothy 1.17.
Now unto the King immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and
Glory, for ever and ever, Amen. So Paul 1 Cor. 15. 1 Cor. 15.57.
Oh hell where is thy victory? oh grave where is thy sting? The sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be to God who
gives us victory through our Lord Jesus. See also Romans 7, 24. Romans 7.24.
Who shall deliver me from this body of death? I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. We see the Saints of old could make Songs of the Lamb and his
deliverance: Moses and Miriam gave not greater praises for deliverance from
Pharao, Exodus 15.3.
than they could make Songs for Christ: But how should we do so? Surely if we
would take the like course with our base hearts at the Sacrament, which they
could do without it; we should do as they did. They filled their souls to the
brimme with the meditation of his benefits. So should we do at the Sacrament.
The Lord gives us a feast of him in all his dishes, we may choose which our
appetite most longs after (all summed up in the seals of his body and
blood:) Meditate of that love which made him forget glory, and become shame, a
worm of the earth: continue with long-suffering and baseness, 30 years upon
earth, that he might be called and anointed to suffer and dye. Consider his
misery, reproaches, and indignities, from the vassalls of Satan: his being
tempted by the Devil: spending days and nights in fasting and Prayer:
willingness to be taken by his enemies, and to endure his Fathers wrath to the
uttermost, and crying out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Cull out
what parcel thou can from the cratch to the cross, such as affords the
deepest, the divinest grounds of meditation, able to conquer and ravish the
soul, and to blow up that sparkle of love and thanks which is kindled in
thee. Thou can turn thee no way, but matter will offer it self to thee to
raise affections to the Sacrament.

2. Heart raised thereby.
Matter being thus raised, set thine heart on work therewith: Let admiration at
this love of Christ so set upon thee, a traitor, a rebel, when thou were (not
the most unprofitable or unworthy but) most treacherous of a thousand others;
let it cause thee to cry out: John 14, 22. To Admiration of God and Christ.
Phil. 2, 4.5.
Why should thou thus reveal thy self to me and pass by so many? What
should move thee to empty thy self to the bottom of all thy excellent
contents, that thou should obey even to the death of the cross, and that
for such a wretch as I. Oh! how my soul is linked to thee! How do I love
thee? What parts, wealth, esteem, hopes, welfare yea life it self, should not
be dung to me in respect of thee! Whom have I in heaven but thee, Psalm.
73.24.25.
or whom in earth to be compared to thee! Yea this abundance of thanks to
Christ should carry thy heart through him to God the Father, Col. 3, 17.
as Paul, Col. 3, 27. speaks. O Father, how could thou spy out such a
sinner as I, out of a thousand, to choose and call me home? how could thou
forgo thine only Son, and suffer him to be made the of-scouring of the
earth, Michael 7, and.
rather than I should perish! Oh! who is a God like unto our God, forgetting
and pardoning the transgressions of the remn^nt of thine heritage! Oh! my soul
magnifieth the Lord, and my flesh rejoices in God my Savior! Of the Holy
Ghost.
From both the Father and the Son, let thy thanks proceed to the holy
Ghost: Oh blessed Spirit, who blowest where thou listest, what moved thee to
make this Sacrament, such a sweet seal of pardon and heaven to such a
staggering distrustful creature as I am? Why have thou assured my soul by
these sweet pledges of security, that I shall not perish, nor for ever be
separated from thee! My soul shall never forget such a blessed Spirit, as has
conveyed his best assurance into my soul, so barren and empty thereof before.

I say, thine heart should fasten upon God the Father, Son and Spirit, with
all admiration and thanks, and from this thanks should issue into thy soul,
all peace, joy, complacence and delight in the Lord. All thy thoughts, desires,
affections, 2. To complacence, delight and joy.
purposes, endeavors and abilities should pitch themselves in his founteyne:
wholly resign up themselves to be at his command, mourning that the fruit
should be come to the birth, Luke 1, 47. Esaias. 37.5.
and no strength to bring forth. Yea besides this joy, thy soul being thus
warmed and inflamed with the bounty of the Lord, should shake off deadness,
weariness, inconstancy, and renew her covenant with God for time to come,
saying thus; oh Lord, thus have thou magnified mercy above justice toward me a
sinner? But what can thy servant do to thee? 3. To thankful expressions.
Psalm. 116, 9, 10.
What shall I recompense thee with for all thy love? Oh! I will take up the cup
of Salvation and praise thee! I will not approach to thee, with flocks of
Lambs, or with rivers of oil, but with an humble, meek, and righteous
walking with my God! Oh! that there were such an heart in me of faith, love
and uprightness, as to walk in and out with thee in all thy Commandments,
that it might go well with me for ever! Oh that there were not rather, Deuteronomy.
5.29. Psalm 19. ult.
such a base heart of sloth, ease, self, world and sensuality to withdraw me!
Oh! Let the thoughts of mine heart, 4. Indignation at out baseness.
and the covenants of my soul and tongue be ever accepted and ratifyed with
thee, O Lord my God! Then should I go 40 days to Horeb, even from Sacrament
to Sacrament, in the strength of this thy feast! 1 King 19, 8.
Yea this congregation wherein I stand (which is partaker with me of the like
mercy) should be a witness of my faithfulness, and in the midst of thy
courts, and Temple should I perform the vows which I have made! yea and that
grace which I have found at thy Sacrament should go with me, Psalm. 116. ult.
and follow me through my life, to season and sanctify all my course, my
prayers, my worship, my marriage, my company, my blessings, my crosses, my
whole conversation! This may serve for a brief view of Sacramental
Thankesgiving, or remembering the death of the Lord Jesus.

The second duty, is perpetuation. 2. Duty. Perpetuation. Luke 22, 20.21.
Intimated in that clause of our Savior. For so doing, ye show forth the Lords
death till he come. I will touch it but breefely. First know, it is not with
the Sacrament of the Supper, as it was with that daily Sacrifice which the
Jews offered to God morning and evening. That was destroyed when the Temple of
Jerusalem was ruined by Titus Vespasian. But the Supper of the Lord Jesus,
typified (in part) thereby, Esaias. 66.23. The Sacrament eternal in the Church.
is to last, till the worlds end in one part of the Church or other. Popery by
their cursed Mass, and other heretics by their devices, for many hundred
years together (through Satan's enmity) interrupted shrewdly the Purity of
Christ Sacramental. They brought in a Sacrifice for a Sacrament, and defiled
this ordinance so far, that they quite defaced it. The Jews (as histories
relate) in derision of the Supper and of the Lord Jesus, were wont every
Easter, to steal a Christian child or stripling, and to crucify him upon a
cross: all, (as much as in them lay) to destroy the true doctrine and
Memorial of Christ Sacramental. Truth is odious to the factors of
superstition: and at this day, what do Papists reproach with so base terms as
the Supper of Protestants, calling the Table of the Lord by the name of an
Oyster Board, and the Sacrament by the name of the heretic ordinary?
alleging that their Altar and Transubstantiation are the only true means to
honor Christ's Sacrifice, which they offer to God for the sins of quick and
dead, but not receive from God as a pledge of forgiveness and holiness. Now
mark, the Lord in all ages has still upheld the glorious beauty of his entire
Sacrament, against all such corruption and profanation. How upheld.
And that especially by susteining his poor servants to shed their blood, in
the defense of this cause. We know how many hundreds in King Henry the 5. 6. 7.
and 8. days, but more openly in Queen Mary's, suffered in our own nation for
the defense of this cause of God: besides the thousands of Martyrs slain in
other Countries by the Inquisition and tyranny of Popish Bishops. Neither are
we to look that in any age (till the Kingdom of Christ come) this holy
ordinance shall ever want enemies: who either openly or secretly, in part or
wholly, will seek either to undermine and obscure the Purity and honor, or
overthrow the substance of this Sacrament. But all in vain: for this shall
stand as a brazen Pillar in the midst of the flood, and shall survive all
corrupters and enemies: and shall be perpetuated in her honor and integrity,
till the coming of the Lord Jesus to judgment, when all heresy shall perish
with the breath of his mouth: and Satan himself be driven from earth, and
confined for ever to hell.

But how shall this great work be effected and continued in the Church so
long, and so daily? Illustration of the means of upholding it*
Surely by those his people who are members of the militant Church, who (like
Champians of Christ) shall stand out for this precious Jewel committed to
their trust and safeguard. Both Ministers by their diligent teaching the
doctrine of the Sacrament, and vindicating thereof from the cavills and
corruptions of Popery: 1. Ministers teaching.
And the whole Church both Ministers and people, by their receiving this
Sacrament according to the pure institution of the Lord Jesus without leaven of
man's mixture: Both these I say, are appointed to perpetuate the honor and
dignity thereof, in spite of all enemies. Indeed I grant, 2. People in
conf^ssing.
that perhaps each poor soul in receiving, do not punctually attend this:
but the Lord attends it in them, and effects it by them, while he sustaines
them by faith and good conscience, to come and partake this ordinance,
incorruptly and sincerely. We see then what a maine charge lies upon every
sound Christian. Though he be no Martyr, yet he is a confessor to the truth of
the Sacrament, so soft as he receives it, according to the ordinance. He holds
out with an hand openly to all that can see, the death of Christ, till he come:
and by his cleaving close to the will of the ordeyner, becomes a witness to
Christ Sacramental: bearing down as with a stream, all popish,
superstitious, Jewish, will worshipping enemies of this holy Sacrament.

Only such as by faith cleave to the institution of Christ, the doctrine of a
Sacrament and Sacramental relation, the promise of the Lord Jesus to be
present till the end of the world with all such: I say, only those that
abandoning a Sacrament of form and deed done, rest upon the power of a
promise for making good the fruit of their receiving to their souls in the
Spiritual nourishment of the Lord Jesus, do bear witness to the Sacrament
against all Usurpers, The great duty of a receiver urged.
who else by their tricks and devices would rob the Church of this Monument.
Therefore it concerns every true Christian, not only to take upon trust from
others, the doctrine of the Sacrament, but to understand it themselves warily
in their receiving, that they cleave to the rule of Christ, and stop their
ears to all Popish chapmen in this kind, who if they might be hearkened unto,
in their consecrated stones, Adoration and other cursed ceremonies, soon would
the honor of the Sacrament lie in the dust. The duty lies not only upon the
Doctor of the chair, or the Preacher in the Pulpit, but upon each member of
the militant Church, That he show forth the death of the Lord till he come.
Keep the trust which is repozed in thee, poor as well as rich, unlearned as
well as skillfull, base as well as honorable. In this thou sharest with the
best (for kind though not degree) that in thy receiving corruptly or purely,
the truth and glory of the Sacrament is either preserved, or betrayed to the
enemies of the death of Christ. If a man should betrust thee at his death with
the dispensing of his wealth, and menaging of his Orphans, as truly, as if he
were a live to behold: tell me, durst thou be false to a man? And shall thou
dare to be false to God, who have betrusted thee with the Church treasure, I
mean the Preservation of his Sacrament in her pureness? Look well to thy
self therefore: Thou art now a Guardian of Christ's Orphan, not a man's: and he
will not hold him guiltless who shall forfeit this trust. And this be said of
the second behavior of each communic^nt in the act of receiving.

Duty to the Sacrament in her Acts and Passages.
The third follows, which I call, holy accommodation of the senses and Spirit
of a receiver, to those Sacramental Acts both of Ministers and people,
occasioned at, and during the time of the Supper. In the former treatise I have
handled them at large with their use: Here I only touch upon them breefely,
in point of Actual behavior. The sum is, that the Sacrament has enough in
it to busy and take up the whole man of him that receives it: and it is no
dead object, but lively and fruitful, to exercise him who delights in it: So
that he shall not need to borrow devotion from the marking how this man and
that woman carries themselves, or by reading of chapters, and such like helps.
But the Lord will have him bend his senses to mark what acts are there passi^g
between God and his peoplc: for he knows, that the behaviors fetched from
the Sacrament are ever safest and best at the Sacrament. And that by marking
these acts, the soul of a believer will gather one wholesome oocasion or other
to edify it self. The first,
As for example. When he beholds the Minister of God standing in Gods stead,
and separating the Elements: he gathers, that God the Father has given the
Lord Jesus to the Church: and thereby comforts himself in the free gift of God.

Secondly, The second.
when he sees him to bless and break the Elements: he remembers that
himself peirced and brake his body and sides by his sin, and provoked the
justice of the Father against him, which causes him to eat this Lamb, and to
mix sweet meat with the herbs of mourning and contrition.

Thirdly, The third.
when he hears the Minister offer the Elements to himself in particular: he
hears in him the voice of the Father exhorting him to apply the Lord Jesus to
himself for his peculiar strengthening against Satan, the world, and
corruption.

Fourthly, beholding himself to thrust forth his hand to take, The fourth.
eat and drink the Elements: he rejoices to think that God has united them
to Christ inseparably, that by the power of the ordinance, the one might carry
the other into the soul, and the soul might fasten with faith and hunger upon
both as the true Nourishment of grace, peace, joy, unto eternal life: so that
no enemy shall be ever able to frustrate the fruit of this Sacrament. The fifth.
Also when he sees the Church partake with him in these mysteries: he
perceives an inward tender love and communion, quickened in his heart, and
drawing him to rejoice in his own welfare (as a member) in, and under the
welfare of the Church, through which (as the body) each member receaves her
own special influence from the head.

Yea the Psalms and Alms of the Congregation, sung, The sixth,
and given from a cheerful and charitable heart, both to God and his poor
brethren: does provoke him to do likewise, to sing with a grace in his heart
to the Lord, and to distribute with a loving spirit to the necessities of the
Saints. All which being pertinent relations to the Acts administered, do
further and ripen the soul in the grace of the Sacrament, so that it shall not
need to repent her of her labor, but with the end of the Sacrament reap also
the fruit and carry away the blessing, and returning God the Glory. And thus
much of the behavior of the communicant at the Sacrament. Which if it were well
weighed, what difference should we soon see? a maine difference between the
baseness of man, and the Provision of God? Conclusion.
Alas, this would banish all earthly, wearisome, sensual, wandering carriage of
communicants: who either for lack of sound knowledge, or else want of savor of
heart, are faint to fi^l up the time of long Sacraments, with most tedious
thoughts and affections: and so defile themselves in an yrkesome receiving of
that, whereto they made so solemn a preparation. Whereas we know that, as it
is a greater commendation to a subject to demean himself duly in the presence
of his sovereigne, than only to spend thoughts before hand, how he may do it:
so it is no small comfort to a poor soul that has painefully prepared it
self, when also it can converse with God in the ordinance, so, as it may lay
no offense in the Lords and her own way, from a plentiful dispensing of mercy
upon her self, while the season of dispensing lasts. And thus much for this
chapter.

CHAP. X. Touching the due carriage of a receiver after the Sacrament ended.
The third and last general carriage after.
TO conclude the whole treatise, let me also add a word or two, concerning
this last, but not least duty of a communicant, after the Supper. A piece of
work very little regarded by the most. But let us know that as some part of
the Sacrament was entered upon in preparation, so, some part of it is to be done
after the public action ended. I confess it is counted a ridiculous thing by
the most to be so precise, as never to have done: but to go from Church to
chamber, and there finish the work. But to such as make conscience of other
ordinances in private, this will be more welcome: and no pains will be
thought too great for the attaining of so great commodity.

Breefely then, the Supper being ended, 1. In special duties.
a Christian receiver should in private set himself in the presence of God,
and perform these two duties: The first of faith. The other, due survey of his
receiving. Touching the first. 1. Faith.
A Christian must close up the whole action with the Amen, and so be it of
faith, lotting upon the word of God, that it shall be to him in the fruit of
his travel, Esaias 53. end.
according to that which God has caused him to look for. It comes in my mind
what is recorded, Acts 12. of the Church assembled together in Mary's house.
They had been earnest to God for Peter, Act. 12.15.
in their prayers. It pleased God to hear them and break chains and prisons
by them: And to send Peter miraculously among them, as they desired. Now when
the Damsel came in and told them it was Peter, they told her she was mad: It
was an Angel. Whence came this, that they should so hardly believe that which
they had so earnestly prayed for? Surely, because faith is such a stranger to
our spirit, even when it is at the best, that it seems to be a grace above
us. Carnal reason, fear, and distrust are always upon the latch ready to
break in when we have been most spiritually occupied, (how much more then
ordinarily) and to buzze into our ears thus: Thus now thou have been busied,
and as thou think thou have discerned that which few have done at the
Sacrament: But what if all this thy labor should be lost? What if God should
do neither good nor evil? What if for all this, thou shall be no better than
if absent? Oh! Here then let thy faith still be as attentive to guard thy
soul as Satan is, with his fiery darts to dismay thee: be able to quench them
by faith: think it no strange thing that unbeleefe has never done assaulting
thee: but ply thy self with this shield and Armor till thou have frayed away
Satan from thee, and recovered thy former part in the promise. Say thus, Lord
was thy word strong at my going to the Sacrament, and is it weak at my
return? Do not thou always speak the same thing? Is there any shadow of
turning in thee? Shall I in the general, say with Martha, oh. 11.22.39.
I know thou can do all things, but when it comes to the push, then start
back and say, He stinketh? Far be it from me Lord thus to be at a sudden
loss, as if thy promise were no bottom sufficient to cleave to? This is the
first thing which the Lord looks for, that thy faith should be as real as the
promise: and that thereby thy heart should be fenced from the fears and
distempers of carnal sense and distrust, which else will break in upon thy
wanzing heart, and weaken thy confidence: Alas! we see nothing, nor hear any
voice from heaven: we behold the boldness and presumption of Hypocrites, who
after their receiving, are as merry as the best: and this troubles a poor
soul when he finds staggering, in stead thereof. But, discourage not thy
self: better is some fear where there is a treasure to lose, than all mirth,
when thy heart is empty. Only let this be thy practice. Lot thou upon the
truth of God to bear down all thy doubts and distempers, as fast as Distrust
and Satan ply thee with them.

Faith lots upon the promise. 2 Chro. 20.9. Examples of this act of faith.
Dispute for God as Iehosaphat did for victory. Did not thou say O Lord, that
when our enemies assaulted us on every side, if we looked toward thy Temple,
thou would hear from heaven and deliver? Mark: very little appeared for
him, all rather was against him; but he shook all off with this casting
himself and lotting upon the word of promise. Said I not to my Lord, deceave
me not (says that Shunamite to Elisha: 2 King. 4.16.28. 1 King 1.17.
) she had lotted upon his word, so that when the child was dead, she was
cheerful, and went to the Prophet to plead the promise. When Adonija was got
to be king, poor Bathsheba, and Nathan agree to go to David, and encounter
him thus; Did not my Lord the King say always in our hearing, Solomon shall
reign: how then is it that Adonija reigns? Can these stand together? So
should thou say, Lord is not thy flesh meat indeed, and thy blood drink
indeed? Saydst not thou, that he that eats the one and drinks the other,
has eternal life in him? Ioh. 6.52.
Have not thou promised that thy Sacrament shall chase away my fears, my
distrust, my old lusts of covetousness, and uncharitableness, impatience and
the like? Whence is it then that still they dare assault me? The Lord tells
thee, this is to try whether thou will rest in the work wrought, or rely by
faith upon the word, that it may be a done deed, as it was a spoken word. Give
not the Lord over then, cast not away the confidence, but lot upon the word and
say, I believe it must be so Lord, because thou have said it: and if any
should come and tell me, methinkes you are better, since the last Sacrament, I
should not think it strange, but answer, you say the truth, indeed, I
believe I am so, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it: therefore if I
should be but as I was before, I should make the Lord a Liar, and do
unspeakeable wrong to him by my unbeleefe. Thus much for the first duty.

The second duty follweth. 2. Duty, survey of our receiving, in 3 Acts. 1. In
case of disapointment.
That a Christian after his receiceiving, must survey the work and the fruit
of it, how he has gained by his receiving, or what he has lost, and
accordingly apply himself. And that in these three passages following. First,
if he find himself joynted of that fruit which he looked for, that God has
not assisted him in his attempt, if he feel, that still his heart is dead and
dark, and the spirit hardened from reeiving such grace as God offers; then is
he not to shake off all at 6 and 7, but to look well about him. He is to
consider, that such a watch word from God is not for naught, the Lord is not
wanting usually to his ordinance altogether. If in steed of a melting and
broken heart, more cheerful by the promise, more penitent and more watchful
upon the Sacrament he feels the contrary evils to appear; sullennes,
loosenes, deadnes, unmercifulnes; then has he need to consult and give
sentence. And whereas hypocrites and time-serves look at nothing, save how
they may dispatch the work, and then make account that God is tied to their
girdles, although still their corruption fester and ranker in them so much the
more; the people of God are impatient of such shuffling and confusion.

And they conclude there is a pad in the straw still: What to do in that ease.
there is some excommunicate thing hidden in their tent, which they would not
cast out. And therefore, howsoever conscience was content that they should take
some pains to prepare themselves, yet the chief work was neglected, and
therefore either their person is still unaccepted of God (being in his
uncleanness) or else some beloved lust lies glowing at the heart, unseene or
else unpurged out. Thus was it with those Israelites Deuteronomy. 5, 29. and Joshua
the last, Deuteronomy. 5, 29. Josh. ult. Judge. 20.22.23.
and Judges the 20. all who thought well of themselves, vowed themselves to the
Lord: prepared themselves very strongly to fight in a good cause against
villainous trespassers. But God was not with them, but slew 42000. of them, even
by those men of Gibea, worse th^n themselves. The reason was, that although the
cause was good, yet they were unfit to handle it at that time, their conscience
being crazed with Idols. But when they saw the root of the malady, they durst
no longer kick against the pricks: but fell sadly to search out their sin
by fasting and prayer, to break their hearts before the Lord, to weep,
repent, and renew covenant. And upon this the Lord altered his course also, and
at the third on set, gave them the victory. Even so must it be with these. They
must not give the Lord over in this Sacramental discovery: they must bless
him unfeignedly that has rather by frowning upon them, and by turning a day of
feasting into a day of sorrow, showed them their corrupt condition, than to
leave them still hardened in their sin! Oh! If thou belong to the Lord, thou
can not endure so bitter a countenance of his to be cast upon thee; but
recover his favor by a thorough purging out that venom which defiled thee: yea
if ordinary means will not serve, extraordinary shall; of the practice
whereof, I have spoken in the chapter of repentance, and the trial thereof.

The 2 Act in ease of want of feeling.
Secondly, if thou find it to be otherwise upon due survey of thy receiving: to
wit, that thou have been faithful to God and thine own soul in the work:
so that thy conscience does not accuse thee, nor the Lord frown upon thee: And
yet for all that, thou still want that feeling and savor of the Sacrament
which thou desire to walk with: Then, thou art to apply thy self otherwise.
What to do in this.
That is, thou art to conceive that as yet thou art not fitted to receive such
measure of grace, nor to use it well: but rather would be puffed up with it,
and not be able to honor God with it. The Lord therefore goes about to try thy
desire, how long it will last, and how long it will thirst after the grace of
the Sacrament, and against the next time, grow more earnest by this thy
forbearing: The Lord would empty thee more of thy self and convince thee how
unworthy a vessel thou art to have it powered into thee, 2 Cor. 12.^.
and he had need buffet thee and bring thee low before he dare trust thee with
it: and, seeing all this is not from hatred, but in love, set thine heart at
rest, make no haste, nor limit the Lord, but patiently wait and be well doing,
and in time the Lord shall break the pride of thine heart, and let in his
promise by faith sweetly into thee, so that thou shall not repent thee that
thou were for a time deferred, that thou might be after rewarded with more
comfort, and learn to boast of the Lord.

Thirdly and lastly: The 3 Act in case of satisfaction.
If thou find that the Lord has sweetly satisfied thee with that fruit of
the Sacrament which thou wentest for to his feast of the Lord Jesus; so that
now thou art as one set at liberty, cheerful in heart, meet for thy calling,
and purposely bent to obey: Then thou art to apply thy self a third way. And
thou art to do somewhat for the present, and somewhat for time to come. For
the present, What to do ^ 1. For present.
to renew again thy thankful heart to God, who at last has heard thy desire
and quitt thee of thine adversary which always upbrayded thee with thy
unfruitful Sacraments: and now with poor Hanna to receive this comfort, as
one that means no more to look with a sad heart, but to honor the Lord in the
strength of his own gracious faithfulness: and to knit thine heart to him by the
band of so undeserved mercy. Secondly, for the present also thou must ground
thy self in experience of Gods love, that it may be a pledge in thy bosom of
like, yea (if thy sin let not) of greater mercy, 2. For time to come.
that thou may not be to seek of it. For the time to come, thou art to
practice two things. 1. To use some means. 2. To exercise some Graces. For the
first, 1. Exercise some means.
thou art to set thy self on work to pray and seek the Lord to nourish this
fruit of the Sacrament in thee, and by all means to blow it up as with
bellows, yea to hatch this mercy in thee, that it perish not. As Paul bids
Timothy, to preserve that Trust committed unto him, 1 Timothy 4.14.
by the laying on of hands: And so should thou take heed least thou loose,
3 John verse 8. the good things thou have labored for, till thou get a full
reward.

2. Some Graces.
Likewise there are two graces of the Spirit which all such have cause to
practice. The first is fear, The second is care, By fear I mean as Heb. 2.1.
Taking heed least these good things leake out, through the secret chinkes and
crackes of our false hearts. 1. Fear.
Iealosie of loosing grace, is like the tender eye-lidde, which keeps any
offense from the eye. And watches narrowly to all occasions against all
temptations of the world and Satan, whereby this pearl might be endangered
and imbezzeld. The mother whose the living child was, would not give any way
to the cutting it in sunder: But the false mother would; 1 King. 2, 28.
and by that Solomon bewrayed her. So is it here. An hypocrite who wants this
Treasure (as the proverb says) will sing before the thief, having nothing to
loose, although he go in the midst of a thousand dangers, he is not troubled.
But the traveller who carries a round charge about him or behind him, cannot
be so merry. He comes not to a place of robbing or hazard, but he will be,
sure to have his company here him, and to have his hand upon his hilts. Oh! he
is sensible of his money! So is a true Christian: The grace which he receives
from Gods hand, brings with it a jealous heart, least by some means or other
he forgo it. Psalm. 128.
Blessed is he who thus fears always, and stands upon his watch.

2. Care.
Secondly care. That is, he is very studious and painful to improove that
Talent which he has received from the bounty of the Sacrament. Math. 25, 16,
17,
If he find that faith and her fruits he planted truly, he plays the
occupier of these Talents. We know a bare man, having gotten a stock together,
and borrowing upon use daily, had need to look to himself, as knowing all
his hope is in his credit, that he can hold quarter, and keep days of
payment. So ought it to be with a Christian; he goes every Sacrament deeper and
deeper into Gods books. That faith, peace, and grace which he meets with at
the Sacrament, is as a new borrowed sum of the Usurer. If he come not to the
Sacrament for the better, he knows he comes for the worse. 1 Cor. 11, 17.
Therefore all his care is, how he may improove this treasure, and be daily
able by his occupying, to keep credit with God, and to find favor with him
for new receipts, as his needs require. The grace of the Sacrament is costly
and requires good improovement: And except a man walk in the exercise thereof
more faithfully and fruitfully, the Lord will withdraw his gifts, and come upon
his as a hard master, who will exact the uttermost penny of increase. And we
know that commonly if the Usurer fall sore upon a debtor, he breaks his back
To avoid this misery, learn this. The more God betrusts thee with, Matthew. 25.27
the more care do thou nourish in thy self that thou grow: That so the Lord
may receive his own with increase. And by this means of reviving thy self
after the Sacrament thou shall find the fruit of it to abide in thee
constantly: and to be a mean of thriving in a good course. Which grace the
Lord grant! And for this third duty after the Sacrament, and so of the whole
doctrine of the preparation; and this second Treatise, thus much be said.

An Appendix, added to this second Treatise, consisting of two Chapters.
CHAP. XI. Showing some directions how a communicant may find his preparation
to the Supper, sweet and familiar.
How to make our preparation sweet.
IT is the will of God that all his people do find his yoke easy, and his
burden light: both in those duties which ought ever and at each instant to be
done, as to believe, repent, to live well and to be ready to dye: as also those
which are for ever due, but not at every instant to do: But at such seasons as
are meet and appointed for them, as, to preach, hear, pray, receive the
Sacraments. To insist in the Supper only in this place: Gods will is, it
should be so
The Lo^d loves not that it should be a toil to his people, either to try
themselves before, or to communicate at the Table, or to survey their work
after. Yet impossible it is, but so it must be and will be to such as please
themselves in nothing, save in their ease and formality of serving God: Matthew.
11.28.
But to such as know that God will have his yoke put on, and has promised to
make it sweet, it will become so, if they will yield necks to it, and
believe. Let none mistake me herein. I know that no man must diminish or take
away the least dram of weight from any service of God: Revel. 22.18.
it were cursed presumption and sacrilege to do it: and cursed be he that
does the work of God negligently. Ier. 48.10.
Yet neither ought any to add any weight of his own to the Lords work, and
to make it heavier than himself has made it. But take it as God has framed
it, most light and cheerful to an heart applied thereto. Now to apply what I
have said, to this Sacrament: Yet to the most it is tedious, and why?
What one work of God (among the outward) is so shrugged at, and wearisome to
the most, as this of Trial and receiving the Supper? On the one side men feel
a great difficulty in the dispatch, and on the other side, the Kings command is
straight, a necessity is laid upon them, and woe to them that do it not: and
what comes of this? Surely they break through it with head and shoulders, and
do it as they can; their own ease and sloth they will not shake off, and the
Lords yoke they are loath to take on. Rules against it, 6.
To prevent this eyesore, I have set down these few directions, which I
commend to the teachable: as for the fool (set in his frame) I know though one
should bray him in a mortar, yet would not his folly depart from him.

To the pure all things are pure; Tit. 1.15.
and nothing be it never so pure is savory to an unclean heart, whose mind
and spirit is defiled: Let therefore this be the first rule, That the heart and
conscience be pure, and so preserved daily: Romans 7.24.
for so the inner man will delight in the law of God, and the bent and stream
of the soul will go that way, although we be not continually bufied in the
outward performance thereof, as in receiving the Sacrament, or hearing, etc.
Whereas they, who still abide in their uncleanenesse, and their hearts are
corrupt within them, are at no time fit for any duty, whether present or
absent; for why, they delight only in that which follows their own
principle, yea in any thing, save that which tends to the honor of God, and
their own profit and comfort. So then, first I say, let us get a believing
heart, and a pure mind thereby, nourishing it daily, and then the inward man
will bend it self to walk with God, in such duties as it meets with, be they
liberties or crosses, be they hearing, prayer or Sacrament, nothing shall
(through mercy) come amiss to a prepared heart: But as the playing of all
lessons is equally seasonable to a well tuned instrument, so here.

Heb. 13.8. yea as well every day as at the Sacrament, to become our meat
indeed and drink indeed: what (save unbeleefe) should hinder, why we should
not take him every day as well as any day, him (I say) with all the benefits,
as pardon, peace, and direction, both for doing and suffering, living and dying
wel^? Christ is not for a Pageant or Procession, to gaze on once a year, but
for use, and to live upon daily, as Paul says, Now live I, Gal. 2.15.
yet not I but Christ in me: and the life I live is by faith in the Son of
God. To this end consider further, that we receive the same Christ in the
Sacrament, and in the promise: If then we be upholden by faith in the promise
daily, that Christ will be our patience, strength, hope, and will do all our
works in us: Esaias 26.16.
Then by the same faith the Sacrament will be welcome to us, although it were
as daily as in the primitive Church, Act. 2. end.
Act. 2. because still we receive the same Christ, though in a differing
conveyance. Deceive not thy self about thy life of faith, and then thou shall
not be easily unprepared for the Sacrament. The Soldier that lies always in
garrison is fitter to encounter the enemy in the field, than one that comes
from the shop or plough, untrained for the battle.

Ephesians. 6.18.
and so, between us and his ordinances; setting a gulf between us and them,
so that we cannot come at them easily, as the Sacrament by name: And
contrariwise, we must maintain our daily fellowship with God daily, in faith,
patience, meekness, diligent use of means, meditating of the word,
absteyning from techinesse, worldliness, pride, inconstancy, unthankefulnesse,
remissness of spirit, busying our selves about other, or more things than we
are called to, etc. Iam. 4.2. Heb. 3.14.
Which although at the time of committing them, they seem nothing: (we not
thinking of after-reckonings, or what hurt they will do us) yet in the mean
time, we are corrupted and hardened therewith ere we are aware. Little
dreaming what an ill handsell they make us toward the Sacrament. And moreover,
when we would find them out and confess them at the Sacrament, we cannot so
easily bring it to pass, our hearts being a far off to seek through their
distemper. Psalm. 32.3.
So then (in a word) keep we our hearts undefiled, and shun occasions as we
may: and we shall find our Sacrament work mightily set forward thereby: so
that the sollemnenesse and hardness of the task will be well over: and we
shall come to it not as a Bear to the stake, but as to our appointed food; for
why? Is not this our fellowship with grace much furthered thereby? Mark but
this: When we have newly bin at the Sacrament, we seem pretty well affected:
And what hinders us from being so continually, if such scurfe brake not out to
defile us? but we imagine (basely) that fellowship with sin and Christ, light
and darkness, may be held together, which cannot be. 1 Cor. 6, 19.


Lam. 3.40.
(by which we must get pardon, and new strength to obey) and abhor all
sodering up of our falls by our own devices. All men will confess that sin
must be repented of, or else it will hurt us; but we make question of the time
when it must be; but we make question of the time when it must be; and so
Satan bids it, put it off till after when more leisure is, or till the
Sacrament come: for then it must be done, and then as good make but one work
of it, as many, and spare our selves a labor; and repent of all together. But
he that is wise, finding out his errors and sins daily, will repent daily,
and not put it off so long till he have forgot it, and so the work will prove
the more tedious. Besides, daily repentance keeps the heart fast and tender,
and preserves us wary of offending afterward. Even as when the water is much
frozen by an hard and deep frost, either it must be broken and kept thin every
day, that so the cattle may drink easily; or else it will renew her hardness,
so that it will be hard to pierce it: Even so if we suffer our hearts to go on
in sin, till we come to the Sacrament, we shall not have them soft at our
command, but shall be much cumbred with them.

as well as a paile; but if out of it, then presently dreines out: Contrariwise
we ought, when we come from the Sacrament (as I have said) seriously to ponder
what good we have gotten there, or what we have failed in: if we have failed,
we should covenant to humble our selves, till we have cast out that failing,
as unbeleefe, sloth, uncharitableness, which deprives us of the fruit we
looked for, as peace, joy, growth in grace. But if at the Supper we have felt
these to revive in us, then ought we to retain their work and power in us,
from day to day, till we receive again, When Elija had eaten bread and drank
water, 1 King. 19, 8.
he went on forty days in the strength of it. So should we who have fed upon
other dainties, and so should we not be always new to begin, but keep our old
grace, and increase new, which is indeed to grow by the Sacrament. But of this,
before.



CHAP. XII. Why the Sacraments are so unworthily partaken by some, and so
unfruitfully by others.
TO that which I have said of the unpreparednesse of men to the Sacrament in
the former chapter: Most receive unprofitably.
I may add somewhat of the unprofitablenesse and unfruitfulnesse of them, in
this last period of my book. No man need wonder that he who is awcke and
unwilling to a work, commonly finds it to thrive with himself accordingly,
that is, to prove barren and fruitless. Therefore the former chapter might be
a reason sufficient of this. Howbeit because the sore is deep, I will dive a
little further into the causes hereof, both in the worser sort, as also in the
better, touching upon the remedies breefely. 1. The worser sort. Causes. 1.
Inward. 1. Ignorance.


In the worser sort (for I would have none think that I confound the diseases
of all sorts) I have observed some causes to proceed from inward, some from
outward respects. Touching the inward: first one cause is the general
ignorance of people. True it is, Popish blindness and error is removed,
touching the merit, necessity and work wrought: and generally people are free
from Bread worship: yea they think there is some excellent thing in the
Sacrament; but if ye come to the up shot of the matter, namely to demand what a
Sacrament is, to what end ordained, what fruit it affords, and how to be
received; ye may go (even in Towns duly and well catechized) and pick out
scores yea hundreds of people, who can give no common sensible account of this
ordinance: But are as blind, about the doctrine of it, as the mole in the
earth. What then shall be said of such as live in utter darkness? Remedy.
Hos. 4.6.
The cure of it is, that these understand, that as Hosea says, they perish for
lack of knowledge, yea ignorance rotteth the heart and makes it naught, and
therefore that they cast out this bitter root, and get some measure of light:
and pluck off the cover of darkness. Esaias 25. 2. Cause. Superstitions.


A second cause, is superstition; causing a solemn yea Popish over reckoning
of the Sacrament, viz. That it is so holy a thing that all must not meddle
with, fit to be shrined up under a Canopy, than brought forth into over
ordinary use: Alas! few men are worthy to come to such mysteries; It is well
for them they have devout hearts, and love them: But as for that wisdom,
faith and charity which is necessary to partake them, they come short, and so
(they doubt) do many who make themselves skilfuller than they: Therefore they
find enough of it to come at Easter, and sometimes neglect it then also. Oh!
blind idiots! The devil has cast upon you the oil of superstition to burn
you up, as he has cast the water of contempt upon the former. Remedy.
But for remedy know. That the Lord loves not extremities: he will neither
admit the despising scorner, nor the superstitious esteemer, but count them
both guilty. If God allow the Sacrament to his faithful people in ordinary,
thy superstitious mannerlinesse is out of season: let reverence bring thee to
God, but cursed be that superstition which beats thee off.

3. Cause. Profaneness. 2 Cor. 6.16.
A third cause is brutish profaneness of life. What communion is there with
Christ and Belial! Many do so debauch their lives with odious drunkenness,
cosenage, lying, swearing, Sabbath breach, with other abominations,
proclayming their sin as Sodom, Ioh. 3.20.
abhorring the light, and maintaining their lusts and pleasures against it:
that their hearts are powered out as water: and there is no heart left in them
to look after the Sacrament: They tell themselves in secret, That such holy
things are not for dogs: Swine more become the trough than the Table: Matthew.
7.6.
The Devil also takes on and torments them (if they dare look toward the
Sacrament,) and tells them, They have another trade to thrive upon, their
whoring, their riot, their roaring, and emptying themselves into their lusts
without all control, and stabbing all that give them a cross word, must be
their joy and delight, and in stead of all Word and Sacrament. And thus they
desperately go on saying, There is no hope, Remedy.
Jeremy Chap. 2. Verse. 25. The remedy is, That they submit to Gods terrors,
and stop their ungodly courses, and try if the terrors of God can came them,
and bring them into some general compass.

A fourth cause is, conceit of men's civilitie, Fourth Cause. Conceit of
civility being out of Covenant.
innocence and good life among men: but voidnes of grace, and being quite
estranged from the life of Religion. Now, how can such find any relish in the
Seal of that Covenant which they regard not? Its enough for them that they
keep their Church, shun the Alehouse and drunkenness, be no open profane
offenders: but they keep quarter with their own Idol, and set up that in
stead of God, his Word and Sacrament, their harmelesnesse and courtesy, must
go for pay with men, though they be never so fulsome in Gods account. I
condemn not civilitie, nay I praise it: yet the resting in a principle of our
own, sterves the heart of Gods grace, when a man resolves there to pitch. Let
these men learn to be out of all savor with themselves, Remedy.
knowing that their excellency stands in a thing which is quite underline of
grace, and so seek to season their souls with true understanding of their
enmity with God, and care to keep covenant with him, which only can make the
seals savorie.

Some outward causes there are also of this: First, the want of the Ministry,
2 External causes. 1 Want of means.
and means of knowledge of Gods Ordinances, and the Supper by name. How should
Ministers preach of the Seals that understand not the doctrine of Christ
himself? Nay I mourn to speak it; diverse Ministers neither unlearned, nor
unpainefull (in their kind) nor ungodly; yet in point of the Sacrament, do
little acquaint either themselves or the people with it, almost through the
year, except in a passage a far off. Remedy.
I dare not boast my self, I know well mine own wants: but if I might draw
any to emulation, I durst say, That whereas my poor labors for twelve years,
were more upon this, than any other one point; I am not ashamed to say, I found
the argument more fruitful at the end, than all the while. And doubtless many
good people there are who mourn for the barrenness of their Ministers in this
kind, as much as their own deprivall of the benefit.

Secondly, base example. Sin, 2 Base example. 1 Pet. 1.18.
1 Pet. 1.18. goes strong in the stream of tradition. When as in a town you
shall have twenty families into which the knowledge and savor of the
Sacraments never entered: how should it descend into their children? 2 King. 17.
ult
No, But as 2 King. 17. ult. that worship which those Samaritans had learned,
was continued many hundred years after, even till Christ's time, John 4. So
here, look what unsavorinesse of Sacraments was in the grandfather and father
or mother, it descends as an inheritance to their posterity, Remedy.
running in the blood as a disease. The remedy is, that young ones do withdraw
themselves from such cursed customs of profaneness, and suffer the word to
season their hearts more deeply with grace and the love of holy things more
deeply, than lewd custom has leavened them with the contrary.

3 Scandal.
Thirdly Scandal. When the bad stumble at the actions and lives of such as are
frequent receivers (who may be hypocrites) and when they see that such dare
cogge and cozen men of their estates, undo men by breaking and running away:
and sometimes be as joviall and merry companions as themselves, as to lie,
traduce others, break promises, play the worldlings and the like; Oh! they
conclude, There is no great matter in receiving the Sacraments, and if this be
the religion of such, let us abide still drinkers, etc. Oh fearful scandal!
Thou should bind thy self by receaving to an inoffensive course of meeknes
and love, that thou might win honor to the Sacraments. But for redress
hereof, Remedy.
let such consider the woe to all that offend others, and all that are offended
at others. Its just with God to set one against the other, that such may perish
who love not the truth: One shall not need to mock the other. This for the
first.

2. Better sort. Causes. 1. No pondering the spitualnesse and worth of
Sacraments.
Now for the better sort, even with them also it is not well. They debar
themselves of the sweet fruit they might enjoy. And why? Surely because the
entire value and honor of the Sacrament is not nourished in their hearts, the
true gain of them continues not in their souls. They ponder not the
spiri^uall nature of them, they believe not that God can bless them as he
has promised, they hold no strength from them any time, but forget it by their
vanity and giddiness. They cannot see how the Spirit of Christ gives efficacy
to the Sacrament to purge them from the wrath, revenge, lightness, abuse of
liberties: and the less they gain by them (through their own sin) the less
they love them. Much less do they consider the sealing power of Sacraments to
give the soul assurance of that which other Ordinances alone cannot. The
remedy whereof, Remedy.
being that which often has been pressed, I need not urge it. Only I aim at
this, that I may give the Reader a view together of these diseases for his
better recovery.

Secondly, even the better sort are much given (often times) to hide their own
follies, 2 Cause. Hiding of their sin.
and to bear with themselves too much, even in those errors which break out
openly enough to the eyes of the wise observers. Now if the sight of our wants
is not all that God requires of his people, what shall be said to such as in
self-love applaud themselves, and look so much at their few commendations,
that they are loathe to acknowledge their blemishes. And sure it is, he that
walks with sense of few wants, m^kes God superfluous in his Sacraments. For
remedy hereof, go to the Chapter wherein this point is purposely handled.

Thirdly, many of these are deeply tainted with worldliness and have no
measure in their earthly business: 3 Deep Worldliness.
whereby neither their preparation to the Sacrament, nor their survey of it,
either before or after can find room with them. All is too little, for work,
work. Oh! thou shall have thy belly full of it one day (with aching and sorrow)
when conscience shall present thee with thy sin, and show thee how many
Sacraments, and the fruit of them, this gulf of the world has devoured
without recovery: And what a narrow entrance into heaven, it has caused to
thee, who (if thou had been enlarged to Gods opportunities, as they to thee)
might have found a large door opened unto thee. Then shall thou be weary of
those cauils which thy covetous heart has cast upon the Sacrament, as these;
Where find ye that so much cost is required to the Sacrament, that men must
lay aside their business, and look after that? Nay, where find thou that
the matters of so divine a Nature must stoop to thy base trash? And so
ingrosse thy hurt, that when holy things are in hard, thy soul is no where
less than where thy body is? So that that had as good do never a whit, as
never the better? The Remedy is, Resign up thy self and ends to God: make him
the Moderator, Remedy.
and he will not defraude thee of thy worldly due, if thou will be ruled: But
if thy self be judge, the Lord must needs prove the loozer. More causes added.
To these I might add more. As that men make a dead work of the Sacrament;
they live not by faith in it, they walk not humbly and tenderly, but suffer
smaller evils to lurk in them and defile them; till they feel conscience
crazed, they make not up their breaches by speedy repenting, but soder and
crust them over; they ply not Sacraments with other private and personal
helps meet to preserve the grace thereof; but in the midst of their
slightness, vanities, and pleasures which they mix with holy things, they
look to fare as well as those that watch closely to those succors; wherein as
they are foulely deceived, so let them know, that the Lord is righteous, and
will not conceal the labor of love in his better servants to equal the
slight and careless with them in blessing. Remedy.
For remedy whereof, let them look back to the Chapter of Repentance.
Conclusion of the whole.
And thus at last I have also finished these few advices, added to the Doctrine
of preparation: Conclusion of the whole.
Craving therefore of him, who is Alpha and Omega (and has now brought us to
an end of our purpose) that be would set home this doctrine of the Sacrament to
the hearts of the Readers: I finish the whole Book.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table containing the chief points handled in the second Part.
A.
ASsisting grace of God one mark of our effectual calling. Page. 38 And how.
ibid. The Act of faith one special trial of our faith. 96, and wherein it
stands. ib. The stirring of the Affections up by the good things of Christ
Sacramental, a special mean of reviving faith. Page. 101 Application of the
promise of the Sacrament. ib. Act of love is negative or positive. 179. 180. In
what particulars both consist. Abandoners of Sacraments terrified. Page. 213
Admiration of God, Christ, and the Spirit, necessary to raising the heart in
the Sacrament. Page. 218 Several Acts and Passages of the Sacraments, require
due carriage, called Accommodation of the soul. Page. 222 In six particulars.
Page. 223 Affections cannot be sacred, except they have a due object. Page. 193
Trusting to former Affections, an ill quality in Receivers, an enemy to desire.
Page. 202
B.
BRokennesse of heart and mourning, is one sign of hearty repenting. Page. 116
God recovers the souls of his, being fallen to new Brokennesse and mourning.
Page. 126 Behavior of a Communicant at the Sacrament, must be holy. Page. 209
Behavior there must be suitable in body and soul. Page. 215 Behavior of
Communicants must be due, both in respect of the whole Sacramont, and the
particular passages thereof. Page. 216 Better sort very unfruitful in
Receiving, with the causes. Page. 242
C.
COnfusednesse and indiscretion in the worship of God sinful. Page. 3
Cavilling about Gods Commands under colors an ill mark. Page. 19 God may
justly punish those who obey his Commands in an andue manner, as well as the
disobeyers. ib. Marks of effectual Calling necessary for our trial of
estate. Page. 37 The fruits of Calliog, a special mark of our estate in
grace, and what they are. Page. 41, 42, 33 Curiosity in prying into other men's
wants, makes men blind in seeing their own. Page. 54 Excess of Care and
sorrow overloding Gods people for their wants, sinful. Page. 55 Carelessness
of our wants, comes from gross sin, and is dangerous. ib. Each ordinance
includes Christ in it as their sap. Page. 82 Cleaving to the promise against
bondage and Carnal reason, a mark of faith renewed. Page. 103 Testimony of
good Conscience at the Sacrament, a sign of faith renewed. ib. The Christian
Combat, one sound mark of repentance. Page. 114 Confession, a great trial of
hearty repentance. Page. 117 Carnal and hypocritical receivers of the
Sacrament, are in a dangerous case. Page. 130 Crossing of our selfs in our
sweet lusts a trial of repentance. Page. 137 Censoriousnesse purged from love
by faith. Page. 148 Coming to Sacrament necessary and commanded, proofs,
reasons of it. Page. 209, 210, 211 Commemoration of Christ's benefits necessary
behavior in receiving. Page. 216 Due Carriage of a Receiver after the
Sacrament necessary. Page. 224 Contentation and well apaiednesse in God, ought
to be practiced by such as have been satisfied at the Sacrament. Page. 229
Care a special grace to be practiced after our Receiving. Page. 230 A pure
Conscience daily preserved so, a sweet mean to make preparation to Sacraments
sweet. Page. 235 Conceit of a civil condition, without being in Covenant, a
mean of bad Receiving, with the Remedy. Page. 241 Sundry Causes together, of
the ill Receiving of the better sort, with their Remedies. Page. 244
D.
NOt to discern the body of Christ in the Sacrament, dangerous. Page. 60
Dalliers with God in point of future repentance, dangerous. Page. 131 Little
hope of Delayed repentance to prove sound. Page. 132 Dissimulation purged from
love by faith. Page. 147 Diffusivenesse of love. Page. 182 Dissemblers of love
at the Sacrament, are bad Receivers. Page. 186 Desire of the Sacrament, a
necessary grace for a Receiver, Page. 193. 197. 198 Object of Desire, is Christ
Sacram^ntall; described. Page. 194 How Desire of the Sacrament may be
attained. Page. 198 Such as come without Desire to the Sacrament, terrified.
Page. 199 Want of renewing of Desire, a great sin in Gods people at the Sacra.
Page. 220 Ab helps and motives to be used, to stir up Desire Sacramental.
Page. 204 The trial of true Desire. Page. 205
E.
Trial of our Estate in grace the first Object of Sacramental trial. What it
is, and the branches thereof. 32. Objection answered. ib. How far a Christian
may be doubtful and solicitous about his Estate. Page. 43 Our Estate in grace
is to be tried by our calling, and how. 35. In three things. ib. Effectualnesse
of faith one property to try faith by. Page. 98 Effectual faith prevails
against all distempers and doubtings of the soul, and what they are. ib.
Experience of the fruit of the Sacraments a sign of faith renewed. Page. 104
Extent of repentance, is one trial of the soundness of it. Page. 113 Mean
Esteem of our selves, and higher prizing of others, a sign of repentance.
Page. 136 Edifying of the body, the end of love. Page. 183 Sacraments to last
Eternally in the Church. 220. How, and by whom. ib. Exp^rience of our former
Receivings, a great mean to make preparation sweet. Page. 237 Bad Example, an
enemy to good Receiving, with the remedy. Page. 242
F.
FAith consists not in the overpowring of the soul, but in resting on the
promise. Page. 43 Great need of pressing faith effectual. ib. Sacramental
Faith above all graces to be tried at the Sacrament. Page. 81 Faith being well
grounded upon the maine promise, is easily tried in the particular. Page. 87
How Faith in the maine promise is to be tried. Page. 90 How Faith is to be
tried in the reviving of it. See reviving of it. Exhortation to renew and to
bring renewed faith, to the Sacrament. Page. 106 The Form of repentance, is
one trial of the so undnesse thereof* Page. 112 Folly of love purged by Faith.
Page. 144 Fullness of Christ emptying the soul of her self, one trial of
desire. Page. 205 Feeding savorily, a good trial of true desire after the
Sacrament. Page. 206 Faith and the exercise thereof, one special part of our
carriage after our Receiving. Page. 2^5 Faith lottes upon the promise. Page.
226 Fear a special grace to be exercised after our Receiving. Page. 230
G.
SVch as can find no substance of grace, must cut off themselves from
Sacraments. Page. 44 Such good persons as seek not to be Grounded, reproved,
and yet comforted. Page. 69 The end of believing which is the Glorifying of
grace, a mark of faith. Page. 97 Graces Sacramental. Page. 5 And why they
only. Page. 63 Why Graces Sacramental must be tried. Page. 63 Why these five
especially? and whether equally. ib. Graces of Sacraments are not to be only
for Sacraments, but perpetually. Page. 64 God not tied to our girdles at the
Sacrament. Page. 105 Graces to be practiced after our receiving the Sacrament.
Page. 230
H.
HVmiliation of soul with self-denial and prayer, a special mean to renew
faith at the Sacrament. Page. 105 Holding out with God in the trial of
Sacrament, a sign of renewed faith at the Sacrament. Page. 105 Harkening after
food, a sure trial of hungring after the Sacrament. Page. 206 Hiding of sin, a
great enemy of good Receiving in the best. Page. 243 With the Remedy. ib.
I.
POpish Ignorance, pretended to be the mother of devotion, confuted. Page. 74
Ignorant Communicants, reproved, and admonished. Page. 75 The seeds and
fomenters of Ignorance to be abhorred. 77. what they be. ib. Ignorance may
damn, as well as knowledge abused. Page. 77 Woeful fruits of Ignorance
discovered. Page. 78 God has given an Instinct to his people to seek supply
of their wants. Page. 52 Judging our selves for our wants necessary. Page. 62
To rest in Gods Imputation, as a real thing, a sign of faith. Page. 97
Impenitent receivers of the Sacrament in a woeful case. Page. 129 Inconstancy
purged from love by faith. Page. 144 Ignorance a common cause of ill Receiving,
with the Remedy. Page. 239
K.
KNowledge one of the Sacramental graces to be tried. Page. 64 With reasons of
it. Page. 64, 65 Knowledge the key of other graces. ib. a principal help to
discern Christ's body. ib. Objections against Knowledge answered. Page. 67, 68
What Knowledge is necessary for the Sacrament. Page. 69 And the particulars at
large opened. Page. 71, 72, 73 Trials of Sacramental Knowledge. Page. 78, 79,
80
L.
LOve of lusts, and secret evils, the seed of ignorance. Page. 77 The Life part
of repentance in a Christian course, a sign of sound repentance. Page. 120 God
sustaines the Light of his Spirit in the Elect, to keep them in their falls
from confusion. Page. 121 Love of grace as grace, and hatred of sin as sin,
though small, a trial of repentance. Page. 136 Sacramental Love necessary to
true receiving, and how far. Page. 140, 183. What Sacramental Love is. Page.
140 Love a sanctifying grace of the Spirit. Page. 140 To be discerned from
carnal. Page. 141 True Love bred by faith. 142, and purged. Page. 143 Love to
be revived at Sacrament. Page. 145 Those that dare receive without Love,
woeful, and what colors they have. Page. 186, 187 Dishonouring God on
Sacrament days under pretense of Love, odious. Page. 187 Gods own people
reprooved for coming to the Sacrament with little Love. Page. 188 Love at the
Sacrament, to be renewed and tried. Page. 189 Sundry trials of Sacramental
Love. 189, 190, 191. Note and peruse them well in special. Such as can prove
their Love to be sound may be comforted. Page. 191 Surfeit of Lusts, an enemy
to Sacramental desire. Page. 203 Excess of lawful Liberties also is so.
Page. 203 Life of faith daily, an excellent help to make preparation to
Sacrament s^e^t. Page. 235
M.
(...) ^^^ster of God must be careful (...) ^^y the Communicants. Page. 30
(...) them with knowledge, yet not alone. Page. 78 Faith in the maine promise,
looks at the Mean of believing, viz. Satisfaction. Page. 90 The Meditation of
Gods meaning, freely to offer Christ, fully, and beteamingly at the Sacrament,
is a mean to revive faith. Page. 101 The Matter of repentance is one trial of
the soundness of it. 111. in a turning to God. ib. God supports his relapsing
servants by the Memory of old Mercies. Page. 121 Good Matter must be gotten,
ere the soul can remember Christ. Page. 217 Means to be used after our
Receiving for the preserving of grace. Page. 230 Constant aiming at the
Sacrament, in the use of all Means, a mean to make our preparation to the
Sacrament sweet. Page. 238 Want of Means, an enemy to good Receiving. 241. The
Remedy. ib.
O.
ORdinances are familiar ways to convey all Gods good things to us. Page. 82
Faith in the maine promise looks at the Object, and how. Page. 93 Each
Ordinance has a peculiar exhibiting of Christ by special promise. Page. 110
Turning the eye of faith upon the Ordinance of the Supper, is a mean to revive
faith at the Sacrament. Page. 100 The meditation of Christ's omnipotency in the
Sacrament, a special help to renew faith. Page. 102 Each Ordinance requires
repentance ere it can be well partaken. Page. 110 Cleaving to God, when the
Occasion of (...) evil presents it self, a trial of repentance. Page. 137
Object of love manifold. Page. 181 Both Ministers, people, soul, bodies. Page.
182 Object of Sacramental desire, is Christ the souls full nourishment. Page.
196
P.
PRreparation for the Sacrament, more general then Trial. What it is? Page. 2
Trial of our estate by Preventing grace is one mark of our calling. 37 and
how? Page. 38 Trial of our selves by the Perfitting grace of the Spirit, one
part of our calling, and how? Page. 40 Prejudice against the ordinances and
Ministers, a great mean of ignorance. Page. 77 God offers all his good things
by and through a promise. Page. 82 Few men seek a promise to conveigh Gods
good things unto them. Page. 84 All particular promises are planted in the
general promise, and how. Page. 85 Warping from the first Promise most deadly
and dangerous. Page. 86 Trial of faith, by her properties, a good sign of
faith. 98 Pretiousnesse of faith is one. 99. how to try that. ead. When Props
of faith fail, often time faith is at best. Page. 107, and 108 The Parts of
Rep^ntance are a mark of trial whether it be sound. Page. 112 Practice of
Repentance is a special mark of the soundnes of it. 114. And that both in the
understanding, will, and life. Page. 115 The Lord affords his promise to his
revolted servants, to restore them. Page. 128 The Lord preserves his own in a
good estate, when once recovered out of their revolts. Page. 128 Partiality of
love purged by faith. Page. 143 Pride purged by faith from love. Page. 145 Such
as have prepared for the Sacrament must also come, and not be let by any
occasion whatsoever. Page. 215 Patterns of holy receivers. Page. 217
Perpetual memory of Christ how to be continued at the Sacrament. Page. 219
Preparation to the Sacrament may become sweet and familiar to a Communicant,
232. and how. Page. 233 Profaneness, a cause of ill receiving. Page. 140 No
Pondering of the worth of Christ, a lot of good receiving. Page. 243
R.
FAith in the chief promse must be tried by the Root of it selfedeniall. vid
selfedeniall. Reviving of faith at the Sacrament how to be performed. Page.
100, 101, 102 Repentance in what d^gree necessary for the Sacrament. Page. 108
Trial of Repentance at the Sacrament necessary. Reasons why? 109. And proofs.
ib. Repentance a mark of faith. 110. and welcome to God. Ibid. Substance of
Repentance a good Trial of the soundness of it. 100. That is the spirit of
regeneration, ibid. Repentance is tried by the mother of it, which is faith.
Page. 111 Revenge a mark of hearty repentance. Page. 119 Renouncing of sin,
a sign of true lively Repentance. Page. 121 Returning to Gad another sign of
it. Page. 122 Repentance upon our Revolts, necessary for Sacraments. Page. 123
Gods own people to be blamed for their venturing to receive without renewed
Repentane. 133. Especially for foul falls. Page. 133 Exhortation to bring
renewed repentance to Sacraments. Page. 134 Raising up of heart to God in all
thanks must attend Meditation at the Lords Table. Page. 119 Restlessnesse of
the soul till it be satisfied, a good Trial of Desire. Page. 205 Renewing of
Repentance daily, a special help of preparation sweetly. Page. 237 Causes of
bad Receiving, inward and outward. Page. 239
S.
Steadiness of spirit a meet posture of the Soul for worship of God,
contrary to giddiness. Page. 4 The Supper is Christ in a mystery Page. 65 The
Supper is the Churches mark to judge of her Childrens growth. Page. 66
Sacramental Christ a Provision for all wants of his body. Page. 51 Spirit of
God not always tied to act his grace in us while we sleep. Page. 56 Search of
our wants, as well as our praises, necessary. Page. 50. and 59. Sensiblenesse of
the shame of our wants needful. Page. 62. To trust God for Salvation and for
Christ, and distrust him for particulars, is sinful. Page. 88 Faith in the
maine promise must be t^yed by our selfedeniall. Page. 94 True search of our
selves, a sign of judicieus Repentance; and how? Page. 115 Helps of true
Search of it. Ibid. The Soul part of Repentance in the will and affections, a
good Trial of the Practice of Repentance. Page. 116 Sentencing of our selves,
a mark of hearty repentance. Page. 118 Spirit of God and seed of God cannot
be shaken wholly out of the elect. Page. 120 Laying to heart the sins and
sorrows of the time, of others as our own, a Trial of repentance. Page. 237
Straightness of love purged by faith. Page. 144 Self love purged by faith.
Ibid. Seldom comers to the Supper reprooved. Page. 213 Survey of our
receiving, a special part of carriage after the Sacrament. Page. 227 Survey of
our selves in case of our disappointment upon receiving, how to be perfomed.
Ibid. Page. 228 Survey in point of want of feeling after receiving, how
performed, Page. 228 Survey in case of satisfaction upon the Sacrament, what it
is? Page. 229 Upon Satisfaction at the Sacrament we must do somewhat
presently, somewhat after. Page. 229 Superstition a cause of bad receiving with
the Remedy. Page. 239 Scandal a great means of bad receiving, with the
Remedy. Page. 242
T.
Sacramental Trial necessary for a Communicant, what it is. Page. 1. and 2
Trial and preparation differ, vid. preparation. Trial at the Sacrament is a
duty required of all sorts. Page. 6 Each communicant is to Try himself. Page.
16 Trial of others not excluded. 7. The Reasons. 8. Yet not to be trusted. 9.
The odds between them. Page. 10 Sacramental Trial wherein it differs from
other religious Trials legal, penitential, or morrall. Page. 11, 12
Sacramental Trial has her issue either to encourage or discourage the soul
from receiving. Page. 13 What course both the good and the bad must take, after
due Trial had: Sundry counsels and Caveats about it. Page. 14, 15, 16
Sacramental Trial not arbitrary, but needful, and divine. Page. 16, 17, 18
Reasons of Sacramental Trial. Page. 21. 22 Its difficult to Try aright and
why? ib. Properties of Trial are five, 1. wise, ingenuous, close, faithful,
direct. Page. 25, 26 Exhortation to Try our selves. Page. 31
V.
Union the form or essential cause of love. Page. 148 Vnsavorinesse and
inappetency of desire has nothing to do with the Sacrament. Page. 199
Unbelief a maine enemy of Sacramental appetite. Page. 202 Most receive
unprofitably and why. Page. 239
W.
Worship of God must be set, purposed, and a separation of the person from
other services for the time. Page. 4 Objections of the weak in the matter of
their estate, answered. Page. 48 Weak in knowledge, comforted and admonished.
Page. 80 Trial of our wants the second preparation to the Sacrament. Page. 49
All Gods people have their Wants, and in how many kinds, viz. in the grounds
manner, measure and ends of their actions, in duties, graces, ordinances. Page.
50 Wants of Gods people, are either Defects in grace, or decays. Page. 53
Wicked men have no wants, only they have one maine one. Page. 54 Christians
may be comforted in their Wants, because they have a stock of Grace. Page. 57.
58 One want hinders all sense of many wants, and how. Page. 57 God upbayds not
his people for their Wants, but supplies them. Page. 58 Lets of Trial of our
wants to be avoided. Page. 59 Wherein trial of wants consists. Page. 59 We
must have our wants summed up in a readiness for the Sacrament. Page. 63 To
rest upon a bare Word, and from one word to go to another, a sure sign of
faith. Page. 96, and 97 Comfort to Weak believers in the poor reviving of
their faith at the Sacrament. Page. 106 Objections of the Weak against their
revived and strong faith, answered. Page. 107 God causes the sense of Wrath
and his judgments to seize upon the consciences of his people being revolted,
to recover them. Page. 127 Willingness to be informed of sin, and reprooved,
a good sign of repentancc. Page. 135 Weak penitents comforted. Page. 139
Weakness of love purged by faith. Page. 144 Comfort to all Weak^ in love, if
hearts be sound. Page. 192 Watching daily against the enemies of a good course,
a special help to make the preparation to the Sacrament sweet. Page. 236
Worldliness a shrewd enemy of a good man's well receiving. Page. 243 With the
Remedy. Ibid
FINIS.

