OBSERVATIONS DIVINE AND MORAL.

FOR THE FURTHERING of knowledge, and virtue.

By John Robbinson.

Prove. 9. 9. Give Instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a
just man, and he will increase in learning.

Printed in the year M. DC. XXV.

THE PREFACE.
IN framing these mine OBSERVATIONS, Christian Reader, I have had as is meet,
first and most regard to the holy Scriptures; in which respect I call them
DIVINE: next to the memorable Sayings of wise and learned men, which I have
read, or heard, and carefully stored up as a precious treasure, for mine own,
and others benefit; and lastly, to the great volume of men's manners, which I
have diligently observed, and from them gathered no small part thereof; having
also had, in the days of my pilgrimage, special opportunity of conversing
with persons of diverse nations, estates, and dispositions, in great variety.
The names of the authors, specially known, out of whom I gathered any thing, I
have, for the most part, expressed: partly to give them their due; and partly,
that the authority of their persons might procure freer passage for their
worthy, and wise sayings, with others: and make the deeper impression of them,
in the readers heart. In the method I have been neither curious, nor altogether
negligent* as the reader may observe. Now as this kind of study, and meditation
has been unto me full sweet, and delightful; and that wherein I have often
refreshed my soul, and spirit, amids many sad, and sorrowful thoughts, unto
which God has called me: so if it may find answerable acceptance with the
christian Reader, and a blessing from the Lord; it is that which I humbly
crave, specially at his hands, who both ministers seed to the sower, and fruit
to the reaper.

Amen.
JOHN ROBBINSON.

CAP. I. Of Man's knowledge of God.
THe Lord gives wisdom; and out of his mouth Prove. 2.
comes knowledge, and understanding, says Solomon: and therein warns us, to
lay our ear close to the mouth of God, and when he speaks once, we may hear
twice, and Ps. 62.
having our closed hearts opened, by his Spirit, may attend to the words of
grace, and wisdom, which proceed from him; and are able to make us wise to
salvation.

As all our wisdom to happiness consists summarily in the knowledge of God, and
of our selves; so is it not easy to Calvin.
determine, whether of the two goes before the other. But, as neither can be
without other, in any competent, or profitable measure, or manner; and as in
vain the ey of Bernard.
the mind is lifted up to see God, which is not fit to see it self; so seem the
reasons of most weight, which prefer the knowledge of God to the first place.
For, first, God in his Word, and Works is the rule and measure of man's
goodness; and man, at his best, but formed, and reformed after Gods Image. As
in Nature, the rule is before that which is to be ruled by it; so must it be in
our knowledge. Secondly, such is our inbred pride, and hypocrisy, as that,
whilst we look only upon our selus, and upon other Creatures here below, we
think we are somebody for goodness* and virtue: but are then brought to that
confusion in our selus, which is requisite for our humiliation, when we come to
take some knowledge of the super-excellencie of God: even as our bodily ey
forthwith dazeleth being cast upon the bright Sun; how quick, and
strong-sighted soever it seem, whilst it is set only upon earthly objects.
Thirdly, so absolutely necessary is the knowledge of God, as that we can
ascribe nothing, as is meet, unto him, of whom, and for whom we, and all things
are, till we first know him in his Word, and Works: but even in our best
devotions, with the superstitious Athenians shall build our Altars to the
unknown God; and with the blind Acts 17. John 4.
Samaritans, worship we know not what. To conclude; He that pretends the
service of God, and yet knows him not in his Word, and Works of Creation, and
Redemption also, wherein his face is seen; is like him that counterfeits
himself to be the household Servant of some great Lord, whose face he never saw,
nor once came within his Court* gates.

Some ambitious, and curious wits, but not able (and no marvail) to raise up,
and advance their notions to God his infiniteness, for the comprehending of
it; have labored to depresse, and pull him down to their dwarfish conceptions
of him: and have indeed rather made him some great, and giant* like man, or
Angel; then (as he is in truth) an infinite God: allowing him an essence,
power, and wisdom hugely great; but not properly infinite, and immence: as
though God could not be that, which they cannot conceive of him.

The essence of God is known only to himself; but is undiscernable to all men,
and Angels: partly by reason of its infinitenes, which therefore no finite
understanding can comprehend; and partly, for that, no voice, sign, or form
can sufficiently express it either to sense or reason. And if God have placed
such light, and glory in some created bodies, as that we cannot intentively
fix our bodily ey upon them, without dazeling; what marvail is it, though the
ey of the understanding of all men, and Angels dazzle, in the too curious, and
intentive contemplation of his infinite, and infinitely glorious Majesty it
self? So as, if the most wise, and learned Christians should with the heathen
Philosopher Thales.
undertake to descry Gods being; they would be compelled, as he was, after one
days respite, to crave two; and after two, four; and so still to double the
time, with acknowledgment, that the more they searched into it, the more
unsearchable it appeared.

Albeit the understanding of man though glorified cannot possibly comprehend
Gods infinite being yet shall we, (coming to enjoy the blessed uision of God,
where of the Angels, and Spirits of just men perfited are made partakers) know
in a far both greater measure, and more excellent, and immediate manner, then
now we do. We now walk by faith; 2 Cor. 5. 1 Cor. 1^
and not by sight, as we then shall do: We now see through a glass darkly; but
then face to face: knowing him even as we are known of him. And for the
present, we are by the means of revelation vouchsafed us his Word, and Works,
partly within, and partly without us) to be led in our prayers, praises, and
meditations of God, to such a being for the object thereof, as in which, first,
there is nothing which has the least affinity with Dionisius.
the imperfection found in any creature; for the expressing whereof those
attributes serve, which we call negative; as immortal, invisible, a spirit,
that is, no body, and the like; showing what God is not, though not what he is:
2, Which is that eminently, infinitely, and essentially, which we, in the
creature, call power, wisdom, goodness, and whatsoever else imports any
perfection: and thirdly, which is that first fountain, and original of all
goodness in all creatures. And by these three stayers does our understanding
raise up it self from created things to the knowledge of God. This knowledge we
must seek with all earnest diligence, and store it up carefully in the
treasury of our hearts* that knowing God we may love him, and trust to him,
and fear him, and honor him; that as the Daughters of Jerusalem Cant. 5.
though before marvailing what ailed the Spouse of Christ to be so affectioned
toward her beloved, and so earnestly to seek after him, as she did; when they
once came to take knowledge of his perfect beauty, would then seek him with her:
So we knowing God, specially in the face of Christ Jesus, may so be ravished
with love of his Majesty, as to have our whole heart set to seek, and find
him, in whose presence is satietie of joys evermore.

CAP. II. Of Gods love.
GOd loves himself first, and most, as the chiefest good: and all other good
things, as he communicates with them less, or more, the effects of his own
goodness. And from this infinite love of his own infinite goodness is it, that
he so severely punishes some Creatures, though the Work of his own Hands,
which he always loves. For, first, The Creature by sin violating Gods
Holiness, and despising his authority in his righteous Commandments, and so
going on in impenitencie, and unbelief; and withal, it being impossible, that
Gods love of his own Holiness, and Justice, and the honor of the same; and
the love of the Creatures happiness (so obstinatly dishonouring him) should
stand together: it cannot be, but that the latter must give way to the former,
and greater; and the Creature (so sinning) become miserable; rather then God
forgetful of his own honor and glory.

God reveals his glorious Majesty in the highest Heavens; his fearful
Justice in the Hell of the Damned: His wise, and powerful Providence is
manifest through-out the whole World; but his gracious love and mercy in, and
unto his Church here upon Earth; which he therefore has chosen, and taken near
unto himself, that in it might be seen the riches of his glorious grace. And
albeit all things in God are infinite, and one; yet are the effects of his love
more wonderful, and excellent, then of any other his Attributes; as appears
in that his greatest, and strangest work of giving his only begotten Son to the
cursed death of the Cross, for his Enemies, out of his love and mercy. This
the Scriptures (and worthily) call a great mystery, 1 Timothy 3.
and which, for the rareness of it, was not only hidden from the Sons of Men,
but also from the very Angels in their Ephesians. 3. 1 Pet. 1.
perfection of created knowledge. Which manifold grace, and wisdom of God they
therefore desire to look into, and learn by the Church.

Love in the Creature ever presupposes some good, true, or apparent in the
thing loved; by which that affection of union is drawn, as the Iron by the
Lodestone: But the love of God on the contrary, causes all good Scaliger.
wrought, or to be wrought in the Creature. He first lives us in the free
purpose of his will, and thence works good for, and in us; and then loves us
actually for his own good work, for, and in us: and so still more, and more,
for his own further work. And hence arises the unchangablenesse of Gods love
toward us, because it is founded in himself, and in the stablenesse of the
good pleasure of his own will. And although the arguments of comfort be great,
which we draw from the certain knowledge of our love to him; yet are those
infinitely greater, which are taken from the consideration of his love to us;
as being not only the ground of the other; but in him also infinite, and
unchangeable. And hereupon it was, that the Sisters of Lazarus seeking help for
their sick John 11.
Brother sent Christ word; not that he, who loved him (though that were not
nothing) but that he whom he loved, was sick.

As by the hand of a friend reached unto us we are made partakers of the
strength of his whole body, to hold, or help us up: so by the hand of the love
of God reached down from Heaven, in the Gospel, we become interessed in the
most comfortable apprehension, and happy use of all other his attributes
whatsoever. The more wise, powerful, holy, glorious, eternal, and infinite
God is, the more happy are we by means of his love, and mercy in Christ; which
moves him to use, and improve them all for our good, and to communicate them
with us, as his friends, in their Phil^.
effects, so far as serves for our happiness. He whom God loves though he know
it not, is an happy man: He that knows it, knows himself to be happy. Which
caused the Apostle to make in his own name, and in the names of all the beloved
of God, that glorious insultation over all the Romans 8.
enemies of his, and their happiness, that they could not separate him, or them
(not from the power, or wisdom, or holiness; but not) from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus. From this love of God, as from a Spring head, issues
all good both for grace, and glory. Yea by it (which is more) all evil by all
Creatures intended, or done against us, is turned to good to us. By it our
afflictions work together with our election, redemption, vocation, etc. for our
good. By reason of it the stones of the Field are at league with us, and the
Job 5.
beasts of the Field at peace with us: yea even the very Sword that kills us,
the Fire that burns us, and the Water that drowneth us, is a kind of
Spiritual, and invisible league with us, to do us good. Upon the knowledge of
this love of God shed abroad into* our hearts by the Holy Ghost, is laid the
foundation, and groundwork of whatsoever good thing we return again unto God,
with acceptance at his hands. Upon this we do build our Faith, and confidence
in him: By this our cold and frozen hearts are not only thawed, but inflamed
also with love again to him, and to men for him: As the Earth being heated by
the beams of the Sun beating upon it, reflecteth heat again toward the
Heavens, and upon all the bodies between it, and them. Lastly, from hence arise
all the pleasing services, wherewith we present his Majesty. For howsoever we
ow our selves, and whatsoever we are, or can do, unto him, as our gracious, and
powerful Creator, and absolute Lord; yet can we do nothing heartily, and as
we ought, but from the Faith, and feeling of his love in Christ, and by the
motion of the Spirit of a sound mind given unto us. But being once 2 Cor. 3.
drawn sweetly by the coards of Gods goodness, and love, we readily, and
pleasingly follow after him; as being debtors, and Austin.
constrained, not by necessity, but (which binds more strongly) by love

The tokens of this love of God in Christ are not only by us highly to be
prized, but carefully to be discerned; lest we bring our selves into a fools
paradise, and grow presumptuously secure; which is the forerunner of sudden,
and certain destruction. We must therefore in this scrutiny neither trust our
selves, nor any other creature, but God alone in the testimony of his Word, and
Spirit, which 1 Cor. 2.
knows, and makes known the mind of God; and by which we may unerringly learn;
First, what the tokens of his love are; and secondly, who they are which
partake of them; and thirdly, that we our selves are of that blessed number.
Now, amongst them all, there is none so certain, and infallible (though those
of feeling be more joifull) as the gracious work of true repentance in the
mortifying of the Romans 8. Gal. 5.
old man in his sinful affections; and in the quickening power of Christ's
Spirit to willing (though weak) obedience to all Ps 119.
Gods Commandments. As we may certainly know, that the Sun shines, by the
beams, and heat thereof below, though we climb not into Heaven to see: so may
we have certain knowledge of Gods gracious love toward us, without searching
further then our own hearts, and ways; and by finding them truly, and
effectually turned from sin to God.

As God may so far hate some evil in a person (for example, the Adultrie of
David, and other sins accompanying it) as to punish the same severely in this
World; and yet not hate the person himself: so may he, on the other side, love
some good in a man, so far, as to reward it highly in this life: and
nevertheless, not love, but hate, the person-in whom it is found; as may be
seen in the zeal of Iehu for the Lord against wicked Ahab, and 2 King. 9. and
10.
his House. And if our narrow, and partial hearts can, upon occasion, hold and
preserve this difference between persons, and things; how much more may, and
does the same right well stand, with the distribution of rewards, and
punishments made by the most holy, and wise God? As then, when the Lord
manifests some signs of his anger at us, and hatred against the evils in us;
we must take heed we conclude not presently, that therefore we in our persons
are hated of him, and cast-awaies; except the evils reign in us without
repentance: so must we, on the other side, take more care (considering how by
selflove we are commonly in more danger thereof) that we c^oclude not of the
love of God toward our persons, from every effect of some kind of love, and
likeing of some particular good things in us; and not except those good things
be such, as make us good also; as Faith and holiness do; trans-forming us, as it
were, into their Nature, and kind: as in the Parable of the Wheat, and Tares,
the good Math. 13.
Seed is expounded the Children of the Kingdom because they grow of the good
Seed of the Gospel; and by their regeneration, as it were, turn very Word and
Spirit.

CAP. III. Of Gods promises.
THe promises of God are a kind of middle thing between his purpose, and
performance of good unto them, whom he loves. And as wicked Iezabel could not
1 King. 1^
satisfy her hatred of Elyas the Prophet, in intending evil to him, and
executing it upon him, in time, as she could; unless with all she thundered out
against him terrible threatenings, in the mean while: So, much less can the
love of our good God satisfy it self in a gracious purpose of good toward us,
in his heart; and actual performance of it accordingly, in due time; except
with all he make it known unto us before hand; both for our present comfort in
the knowledge thereof, and for the ground of our hope and expectation of the
good things promised, and accordingly to be received at his hands, in their
time: He having by his promise bound over unto us both his love, and truth,
and other Attributes for performance. And herein the Lord provides very
graciously for his poor Servants; who are oft-times brought into that
distressed state both outward, and inward, as they have very little else, save
the promises of God, wherewith to comfort themselves. Which yet are sufficient,
if we improve them, as we ought; considering, first, his love (moveing him to
promise) and the unchangeablenesse of it: secondly, his wisdom, directing him
to promise nothing unfit; thirdly, his power enabling him, and fourthly, his
truth bindeing him to all performance: In regard whereof, God has made himself
a Austin.
debtor, though not by receaving from us, yet by promising unto us: promise
being, as we say, due debt.

God ever performs what, and as he promises, and not one good thing for
another, as some think: no not Heavenly for Earthly, nor a greater good for a
less. For howsoever so to do, might stand with his bounty, and goodness; yet
his truth binds him to his Word, which is Truth. Spiritual good things
necessarily accompanying John 17.
Salvation he promises absolutely unto his; other good things (ordinarily)
upon condition. Which (considering, that through our abuse of them, they may
prove prejudicial to our Spiritual man) if so be the Lord should promise
absolutely, as the former; it were, many times, indeed, not to promise a
benefit, but to threaten a hurt rather. And truly we may observe in the
dangerous falls, and miscariages of the wise Solomon, unto whom temporal good
things were absolutely promised, in the fullest measure, and accordingly
performed; how graciously our wise, and good God provides for our slipperie
state, in scantling his promise of good things of that kind to our Spiritual
skill, and care of useing them, for the advantage of our true, and eternal
happiness. We are therefore first, to beware, that we expect not absolutely
temporal prosperity: lest by so doing we both wrong the Lords truth, and our
own Faith in the things promised indeed, by doubting of them, because we have
failed of obtaining of other things by us presumed of, but not promised by the
Lord. Secondly, We must as firmly believe, and expect the performance of
temporal promises (as the Lord has made them) as of eternal. For, albeit his
love do not manifest it self in like degree in promiseing both; yet his truth
is alike bound to exhibit both being once promised. Neither is that person in
earnest with God, who pretending Faith for eternal good things, yet dare not
trust his Word, for temporal. Such as despise Heavenly things, and love
earthly, usually pretend their trusting of God for the former (of which they
are indeed profanely secure): but will trust themselves, and their own fingers
for Earthly, which in truth they set by. I must therefore thus conclude with my
self touching those matters. Seeing God has promised all good things to them
Ps. 34.
that love him. If this, or that bodily good thing (good in it self) be indeed
for my good, I shall receave it from him, in due time: And if I receave it not,
it is a real testimony from him, that indeed it is not good for me, how much
soever I desire it.

As Gods goodness shines most clearly in his promises; so man's perverseness
abuses, and misapplieth them above all other parts of his Word. A great many
divide Gods promises from the other parts of his revealed will: and making
small, or none account, that either the rules of the Word appertain unto them
for direction, or the precepts for obedience, or the threatenings for restraint;
yet do lay their sacrilegious hands boldly upon the promises, as their true,
and undoubted right. And the reason is, because the promises contain in them
things good, and pleasing to man's nature; which because we would gladly have
true, we readily believe, and apply. But such separate what God has joined
together, and in effect, take Revel. 22.
away from the Words of the Book of God; and God will take away their part out
of the Book of Life. Others again trans-form commandments into promises, with
great, and dangerous* error. For example; where it is said, The Priests lips
should Mal. 2.
preserv knowledge, the Romish Priests chaleng an immunity from erring, whence
they should take warning, that they er not. So, from Christ's teaching, that a
city set upon an hill, cannot be hid, they will wring a promise of perpetual
visibility of Church and Ministry, from him, where he intends only an
exhortation to his Disciples (after to become Apostls) unto answerablenesse
both in life, and doctrine, to the eminency of their places. Some again make
conditional promises absolute: as that, Whose sins ye bind upon earth, Math.
18
they are bound in Heaven: forgetting that it must be the Church gathered
together in Christ's name, that is, both furnished with lawful authority, and
useing it lawfully. Likewise, that Christ will preserv the Ministry, and
Ministers, and be with them to the end of the World: leaving out the Math. 28
condition going before, which is, that they do their duty in their places, in
making Discipls, and baptizeing them, and teaching them to observe, whatsoever
he had commanded them. Lastly, How many, because God promises forgiveness to
sinners whenever they repent, promise unto themselves repentance upon an
hours warning, before their death, though they go on in sin all their life
long? But the saying of the Ancient is memorable in this case; He that
promises forgiveness to him that repents, does not promise repentance to him
that sins. But, on the contrary; as he that makes a bridge of his own shadow,
cannot but fall in the Water; so neither can he escape the Pit of Hell, who
lays his own presumption, this way, in the place of Gods promise.

CAP. IIII. Of the works of God, and his power, wisdom, will, goodness, etc.
shining in them.
IT is a received truth in Divinity, that whatsoever is in God, is God. So the
will of God considered as the foundation of that which he wills, and as
inherent in him, is nothing else, but God willing: his justice nothing else, but
God just: his mercy but God merciful, and so for the rest of the Divine
Attributes. And as every work of God is founded in some of those Attributes:
and that by name, in his understanding, as judging the thing to be good; in his
holy will agreeing thereunto; and in his power effecting all things: So this
foundation and first cause of them all being immanent, and inherent in God, is
God essentially, of what nature soever (always good) the work be without him,
which his will and power effects. Neither is this will of God to work by his
power, wrought in him by any thing without himself; for then he should receav
addition of perfection from the creature, moveing him thereunto: though yet it
be most certain, that there are many things, which God neither in his wisdom
judges fit to be done by him, nor wills the doing of them, nor would work or
do them by his power, but upon the creatures work going before. For example:
God wills, and works the condemnation of some sinners, because he judges fit,
wills, and will work therein the manifestation of the glory of his justice;
but this condemnation (which otherwise he would not lay upon any) he both
wills, and works by, and for the Creatures sin, according to his eternal, and
unchangeable purpose of will in himself.

When the Scriptures speak, and we according unto them, of any thing done by
God, in respect of the Creature, before the World was made; it must be
understood as meant only of his foreknowledg, and decree of will, and purpose
of doing. For things could be done no otherwise, then they could be; nor could
be otherwise, then in God, who alone was; nor could be in God otherwise, then
in his foreknowledg, and will: according to which he works them actually, in
time, by his power.

These three Attributes (as before I intimated) his power, will, and wisdom do
concur to the produceing of all, and every one of his works. His power works
and effects all things: his will sets his power a working: his wisdom directs
both the one, and other; his will in willing; and his power in working.
Touching his power: The right Ps* 118.
hand of the Lord (which in men is the instrument of strength) is exalted, and
by it he can do what he will; and much more then he will. And whereas God
cannot ly, or deny himself, or the like, it is (immediately) because he will
not: and that not of impotencie in him, but of potencie, and Tertullian.
perfection of excellency: as, on the contrary, it is the power of man's
weakness that he can do amiss. So for things importing contradiction; as that
the same thing should be, and not be at once, or not be that which it is, or
the like; it is Religiously said by some, rather that such things cannot be
done by God, then that God cannot do them: seeing the reason of this
impossibility of their so being is not in Gods Nature, but in theirs.

The will of God is one, as God is one. But as there is one Spirit, but
diversity of manifestations; so this one internal 1 Cor. 12.
will of God does exercise, and extend it self diversely to, and upon diverse
objects. This extention and exercise of this one will of God is of us to be
considered in diverse degrees. The weakest and most remiss degree is to will
Scalig^r. Iunius.
the suffering of evil. For though God (to speak properly) wills not sin, yet
he willingly suffers it: not as ignorant of it, nor as neglecting it, nor as
unable to prevent it: but as willingly, wittingly, and of purpose suffering
that evil to be done, which he could easily hinder, if he would oppose his
omnipotent power. The next degree of Gods willing stands in commanding good,
and approveing of it, where it is found: And thus God wills and commands that
all men should repent: thus he wills, that all should come to Acts 17. 1 Timothy
2. Ezech. 33
the knowledge of the truth, and be saved: and thus, lastly, he would have the
wicked turn from his wickedness; and live, and not die. And these things and
the like he seriously wills, to wit, by way of commanding and requireing them,
and of approveing them, wheresoever they are found. The highest, and most
intent degree of willing in God, is, when he so wills a thing, as withal he
imploys his omnipotent power for the effecting of it: and by this he does Ps.
115.
whatsoever he pleases in the Heavens, and in the Earth. The former will which
stands in commanding, promiseing, and the like, may be, and is too often
resisted, and made ineffectuall by men: this latter never possibly; except men
be stronger then God. By it his power avails to make things to be, which were
not; to continue them that are; to work all good; and to order all evil unto
good.

And as the works of Gods power according to his will are manifold, so has he
wrought them all in wisdom. For Ps. 104.
notwithstanding both the absoluteness of his will, and infiniteness of his
power: in regard whereof one says, It is more becoming God to ascribe any
power to him, then to Tertullian.
make him impotent; yet is he neither wilful in willing, nor unwealdy in
working. By his wisdom he not only eternally, and infallibly knows himself,
and all Creatures that are, or can be, and what either he, or they, or both
together will do, or can do, and that upon supposition of whatsoever can be
supposed; but both wills, and does in time himself, what he wills; and does
it also for good cause, and to good purpose: and accordingly, either, on the
one side, hinders; or, on the other, sustains, effects, and orders every
motion of every Creature.

By exerciseing these Attributes God works all his works whether immediate by
himself alone, or mediate by the creatures; which he uses of all kinds, and
every one according to his kind; whether good or evil; reasonable or without
reason. By Gods works I mean all things whatsoever are in the World, or have
any being, and existence In nature. For, He has made the whole World, Ps. 146.
Acts 17. Romans 11.
and all things therein. In him we live, and move, and have our being: He
gives all to all things. And, of him, and through him, and for him are all
things. As he gives being unto all things that are, by communicateing the
effects of his being with them; so is there nothing either so casual, in
regard of men, as that he directs it not; or so voluntary, as that he
determines it not; Nothing so firm, but he sustains it; nor so small, but he
regards it; nor so great, but he rules it; nor so evil, but he overrules it.

Neither can any of the works of God possibly be other then very good, and
righteous; seeing they are all wrought by the exerciseing of his holy will,
divine power and godly wisdom. And if a simple man ow the honor to him that is
of greater wisdom, and understanding then himself, to think, upon occasion,
that the other has reason for that which he speaks, or does, though he in his
shallownes cannot reach unto it: how much more do all men and Angels ow this
honor unto God, to beleev always, that whatsoever he says is true, and
whatsoever he does, Austin.
good, and righteous, though they discern not the reason of it.

Some of the works of God are such, as we can rather admire at them, then
discern of them: Some again are such, as at which proud flesh is ready to
repine, and murmur. Amongst the works of Gods most wise, and powerful
providence upon bodily things, it is most admirable, that the Heavenly bodies,
the Sun, Moon, and Stars should by their influence, and operation, have such
power, and effects upon the bodies here below, as to change, order, and dispose
the Air, Earth, and Water, with all things framed, and compounded of them as
they appear to do, by Scripture, sense, and experience. Yet, if we consider
(besides the two greatest lights and most powerful Genesis 49. Job 38. Hosh. 2.
agents, the Sun and Moon) the numberless number of the Stars, their huge
greatness, the variety, and excellency of virtues, wherewith they are
furnished far above the most precious Pearls, or any earthly quintessence; and
with all these, the infinite power and wisdom of him that made, and constituted
them; it will not seem incredible unto us, that the least, and suddainest
natural change in the Air, Water, or other Elementarie bodies, should be
wrought by the position, and disposition of the Stars, and Celestial bodies.
Neither does this at all diminish, or detract from the honor of the Lord in
governing the World, but rather amplifieth it; as it ads to the honor of the
skillful Artificer, so at the first to frame his Clock, or other work of like
curious devise, as that the several parts should constantly move, and order
each other in infinite variety, he, as the Maker, and first Mover moveing, and
ordering all. Where yet this difference must always be minded, that the
Artisan leaves his work being once framed to it self; but God by continual
influx preservs, and orders both the being, and motions of all Creatures. Here
also we except both unnatural accidents; and specially, supernatural, and
miraculous events; which are, as it were, so many particular creations, by the
immediate hand of God.

In them that are made partakers of the grace of God, the remainders of corrupt
reason is readiest to rise up at the work of Gods providence in the prosperity
of the way of Ier. 12. Ps. 37.
the wicked, and workers of iniquity: especially, if they themselves be pressed
with any singular afflictions: as we may see in David, Jeremy, and other. But
the same men of God, who were in their persons, present exampls of humain
frailty, do in their writeings, by the Holy Ghost, affoard us matter
sufficient for Divine comfort, and direction. As first that, before we come to
plead with God, how his works are righteous, we know, and acknowledge them Ier.
12.
all to be righteous; that so we may learn how and wherein their righteousness
consists. Secondly, that God is both as good to those whom he loves in their
afflictions, as in their prosperity; and as wroth with his enemies, in their
momentarie prosperity, as if his rod were already upon their backs. Thirdly,
that he has appointed a day, in which he will right whatsoever seems crooked
in the mean while; and will fully, and for ever, recompense both the good and
evil: In the expectation of which day, and of the work of the Lord in it, we
should satisfy our selves, for the present, and suspend our thoughts till the
manifestation of his righteous Judgment therein.

In them that desire to establish man's righteousness rather then Gods either
righteousness, or power; fleshly reason is most apt to quarrel partly that
work of Gods mercy, by which he freely justifies a sinner; and partly those
his just dispensations, upon which follows the Creatures sin, and misery for
sin. But for the former: It stands not with the riches of Gods mercy, and
grace, whereof he would make full manifestation in the justifying of sinners,
to borrow any thing of man's merit; but well becomes his bounty, freely to
bestow both the gift, and hand to receav it. For the latter; It must be
considered, that Gods work (so far as it is his) is good, as well in the
sinful doings, or miserable sufferings of men; as in their most holy, and
happy estate. The person that sins, with all his parts, and powers of soul,
and body, is Gods work: so is the preservation, and sustentation of both
person, and personal abilities; so is the natural motion it self, whether
within, or without the person (in which the sin is like the halting in the
Horses going); and lastly, so is, not only the voluntary permission of the
sin, which he could easily hinder by his omnipotent power, if he would oppose
it; but also the ordering both of sin and sinner to his own supernatural ends.
For example; The act of Judah and Thamar, morally considered, was sinful, and
impure: but naturally; good, and blessed of God with a Son, of whom Christ came
according to the flesh. So the abominable sins of Absalom were ordered of God
unto most just punishments of the sins of his Father David.

There is a twofold use of the world, and works of God in Bodin.
it: the one natural; the other supernatural. The former is common to men
with beasts; who are alike cherished with the heat and influence of the Sun;
alike nourished by the Fruits of the Earth. The other is peculiar to men with
the holy Angels, by which they behold the face of the Creators power, wisdom,
goodness, etc. as in a most Romans 1. Ps. 19.
clear Looking-glass; and are provoked accordingly to praise, and glorify him
in his wonderful works: even as by beholding some curious piece of workmanship
(much more Perkins.
if therewith we have singular use of it) of a skillful Artificer, we are led
in the view of the work to the commendation of the workman. And look how much
the Soul excels the body, yea the Spiritual man the natural; so much is
this use of Gods creatures more excellent then the former. And so the opinion
of the Philosopher, who Anaxagoras.
thought, he was born to look upon the Sun, and Heavens, was not wide, but
short; nor absurd, but defective; For he should have pierced further, even
through the Heavens, unto him, that made, and governs them, whose glorious
power, and goodness shines in them; that so he might have glorified him as
God, in his works. For though by that glimpse of light in the Creatures, we
cannot attain to the knowledge of God, as our Father in Christ; yet are we both
to honor him according to it, and to be provoked by it to further search, and
inquiry after him, in such means of revelation, as by which he further
manifests himself; which are his Word and Gospel of Salvation: Even as he, that
lying in a dark Dungeon spies some small glimpse of light, will groap toward it
by the wall, hoping Acts 17.
to find some door, or window, by which it comes in. For neglect of this, the
very wisest of the Heathens were left inexcusable; and not glorifying God,
whom they knew in Romans 1.
his works of creation of the World, but vanishing in their own imaginations
and serving the Creature rather then the Creator, who is blessed for ever, were
given over of God to a mind void of judgment, to do the things, which are
inconvenient. Now, of how much sorer punishment shall we be guilty; if
together with this lesser glimpse of Divine light by the creatures, we despise
also the more glorious light of the Gospel, not honoring God aright either as
our powerful Creator, or merciful Redeemer by Christ Jesus? But if we so
honor him, and make him great in our own hearts, and before men (what we can)
as he has manifested, and made known himself in his Word, and Works; he will
honor us with himself for ever, in glory.

CAP. V. Of created goodness.
Every thing that is, and has being is, in that Romans 11, Ps. 146. Acts 14.
and 17.
regard good, and of God. The natural parts, and powers of body, and Soul of
most wicked men remain in themselves (notwithstanding all infection of evil in
them) Gods good Creatures: so do the natural acts and motions of those parts,
and powers, in themselves considered, notwithstanding any moral accessorie of
evil in them, ariseing either from the evil affection wherewith, or unlawful
object, upon which they are performed. There can be no evil in the Work, which
is not first in the Worker, as the cause. And so (a wicked person being worse
then a wicked action) if the sin prevail not so far, as to make the part or
faculty of the person in which it is, to cease to be a part, or power created
of God; neither does it so far prevail in the action, or work, as to make it
cease to be, in it self, a created motion, and therein a natural good thing.

God is, and so by all is to be acknowledged for the giver of every good gift,
that is, of every thing save sin: James 1.
which sin is nothing that has being in nature, but an absence of, and
crosnesse to that which should be; as darkness is of, and unto light. And so
the good Father would not say, that his Mother gave him Milk, but God by her.
And Austin.
though the good which we enjoy, come unto us by never so ready, and ample
means; yet must we always religiously mind, that both the means are of Gods
raising, and ordering; and the blessing upon them, for our good. And if Job saw
by Faith, that all the evils, and harms that Job 1.
came unto him, and his, though by the Devils, and wicked men's means, were from
the Lord, as supreme orderer of all things: how much more should we look upon
God, as the Author, and worker of all the good that befalls us?

Notwithstanding, if God so far honor any persons, as to make them hands, and
instruments (specially voluntary) for the reaching of any blessing unto us
from himself; we also (and that even therefore) are to love and honor them: as
David not only blessed the Lord as the Author; but Abigail also as the
Minister of the good counsel which she gave him, for the not avenging of
himself 1 Samuel 25
upon Nabal.

Actions, besides their natural entitie, or being, are by Lumbard.
one distinguished, and that aptly, according to a fourfold goodness. First,
An action is sometimes good in it self, and to them to whom it is done, but not
to the doer; as works of mercy done, but not for God: Secondly, Good in it
self, and in the doer, but not to him, to whom it is done; as the Preaching of
the Word to them that despise it: Thirdly, Good in it self, and the doers, and
to them to whom it is done; as the same Preaching to him that receivs it:
Fourthly, Though neither good in it self, nor in the doer, nor for him to whom
it is done; as an evil, or injury: yet good, as it is ordered by God to an
end supernaturally Austin.
good. Who, as says another, would not suffer evil, but as knowing how to
work good out of it. In actions of the third kind only, goodness is entire
in all it parts, and relations.

A man should never glory in that good, how great soever, which is common to a
beast with him: nor a wise man in that, which is common to a fool with him: no
nor a good man in that, which is common to a wicked man with him: seeing,
notwithstanding it, the person may be out of Gods favor, and accursed. And
therefore Luke 10.
Christ our Lord would not have his Disciples rejoice, or glory, that the
Devils were subject unto them (which was though much, yet common to the workers
of iniquity Math. 7.
with them) but that their names were written in Heaven.

Many so measure the good which they affoard others, by the list of their own
will, as they deceav themselves in the whole piece of their goodness, by the
bad list that goes about it. They will do what good they list, and when they
list, and where they list, and as they list; as though their goodness were not
due debt; though not immediately to men, yet to God, and so to men, for, and
according unto God: for whom, even they ow love to all men, who ow Romans 12
nothing else to any; and the same upon Bill, and therefore to be paid, in Law,
whenever, and by whomsoever the Lord will call for it; and not when, and as
pleases them. These conditions are requisite, that we may do well in doing
good: First, we must do things in obedience to Gods Commandments, and in honor
of his Name, and Gospel; and must ever have that end in our ey, as Archers have
their Mark. Secondly, That we do it at all times, as we have opportunity;
sowing our Seed in the Eccl. 11.
Morning, and in the Evening not holding our hand. We must beware of that
agueish goodness, which comes by fits only, and when men are pleased: for so,
they say, the Devil is good.

Thirdly, We must do good readily, and whilst we have Gal. 6. Prove. 3.
opportunity; not saying to our neighbor, go, and come again to morrow, and
we will do it, if it be in our power to day. For who knows what a day will
bring forth, and whether the opportunity of doing good, will continue till to
morrow, or no? He that gives (or does other good) readily, Seneca.
gives twice: He scarce once, or at all, that does it slackly: He rather, in
truth, suffers a good turn, to be drawn from him, then does it. Living springs
send out streams of water: Dead pits must have all that they affoard, drawn out
with buckets. We should therefore have the mind* though we want the ability,
of Theodosius the Emperor, Eusebius.
who did much good upon request; but more of his own accord, and unasked: and
so meet, as one says, a just request in the teeth, and grant it before it be
made; as God many times Esaias 65. Seneca.
does ours. He that defers a good turn, loses two things: the time; and
manifestation of a loving affection. Both which are precious. And without which
loving affection all the kindnesses, which we show to any, are but so many
false witnesses to the unbeleeving, and unkind heart.

Fourthly, According to our ability; knowing that as our receavings are from
God greater or less, so must our accounts be, for good doing. It is true, that
God looks to the heart of the doer, and measures the work by the will, 2 Cor.
8.
as men measure the will by the work: but this according to that which a man
has. Else, albeit poor men may love as Bernard.
much as the richer, though they have not so much money to do good withal: yet
is not the will good, except they do the good they are able. And this our
ability we must not measure according to our wantonness, and unbelief: but
according to the truth of the thing, and equity of the case: which is, that
our superfluities give way to our brethrens conveniences: our conveniences to
their necessities: yea even our (though great) necessities to their
extreamities, 2 Cor. 8.
for the supplying of them.

Fifthly, We must have respect to men's present wants; and not only consider,
what we can best spare, but withal, what they stand most need of: as having
learnt of our Lord, and Master, in his Gospel, that our duty is to feed Math.
25
the hungry, cloth the naked, visit the sick, etc. as their need is: whereby
we may do a great good turn in a small matter: even one loaf (yea a shive) to
him that is hungry: Seneca.
and the showing of a spring of water to him that is thirsty, being a benefit.

Sixthly, We must do good to all, knowing, that wheresoever Gal 6. Seneca.
a man is, there is place for a good turn: but more specially to some,
according to the singular bond, Natural, Civil, or Religious, wherewith God
has tied us together. To good men we must do good because they do deserv it;
to Math. 10
strangers, because they may deserv it, and do stand in need of it; to all men
because God deserves it at our hands for Luk 10.
them; to our friends, because we ow it them: and to our Math. 5. Romans 12
enemies to heap coals of fire upon their heads: the coals of charity to thaw,
and soften their hardness, if it may be, and at which we must aim: or else the
coals of anger from God for their unplacablenesse toward us.

Lastly, A good man (how gracious soever, and ready to Ps. 11*
do good) guides his affairs with discretion; not sowing his seed in barren
ground, by bestowing favors without difference; for that is rather to throw
away, then to bestow a benefit. And Seneca.
it is not the least difference between man's good nature, and Gods good grace;
that whereas the former makes men much-what alike kind to all, the latter
(though also to all) yet with great difference put between person, and person;
as men sow their seed diversely in soils that differ.

Although this good nature, and the grace of God be as different as Heaven, and
Earth: the one being of our selves (that is) of nature created: and the other
the gift of God by supernatural grace: and that a man be neither the nearer
God for his good nature, where the grace of God is wanting; nor the further of
for his ill, where it pleases God to use his alsufficient work of grace: yet
the sweet and kind natural disposition in some much advantageth the
manifestation of their smaller measure: which an ill nature, as we speak, so
much obscures, as it can scarce be seen of other men: though the Lords ey
pierce through all such humain prejudices.

It is the main order, which God has set both in grace, and nature, that the
superior should do good to the inferior. So God does good to all, and receavs
good from Ps. 16. Ps. 136.
none: Our goodness reaches not to him: The Sun and Stars give their light,
and influence to the Earth, but receav no thing back from it: Parents lay up
for their Children, not 2 Cor. 12.
Children for their Parents. And for this end God bestows good things, both
inward, and outward, upon some above others, in ample measure; that their
abundance might supply the others want. It were good for other men, that the
Mighty of the Earth duly considered this; but better for themselves; as it is
better to do good to others, then to receav good from them. But this most wise,
and equal order of God is perverted every where, by man's iniquity; and they
who are less able, must still be adding Terence.
to the greaters heap: so as, if accounts were diligently kept, it would be
found in most places of the World, that the meaner sort bestow more on the
better able, then these of them.

When I consider, what good the rich and mighty otherwise, in the World might
easily do, if they had hearts answerable; and how little they do, for the most
part; it seems horrible unthankfulness, and iniquity in them, and matter of
indignation against them: But then, on the other side, when I consider, how
little good I my self do, in my meannesse (and others my likes) to that which I
should, and might do, if I did my utmost; I find reason to be most angry at my
self, and mine own unprofitablenesse; and to be glad, and thankful, that so
much good is done by the other, as is.

In benefits and good turns done, and received, it is the best, and right
order, that he who does them should forget, Seneca.
and conceal them; and he remember, and speak of them, that receavs them. And
therefore the first of the three Graces is so ordered, as ever to look forward
for the doing of more good, and never backward, to upbraid with good done:
which, where it is used, takes away the grace of the kindness; and is as
unpleasing, as the after-upbraiding of meat in the stomach, eaten with delight.
The other two ever look toward the first, to signify, in how continual
remembrance benefits received should be born. Which accordingly to acknowledge
with thankfulness, is a ready way to procure further good: as from God, who
specially delights in a thankful heart, and would Ferus.
have a reflux of his blessings to keep them sweet, as waters are by flowing
to, and fro; so likewise from such men, as either are, or would seem to be like
unto God, in goodness, and bounty.

To use to speak much of men's unthankfulness (even where their has been great
fault that way) for benefits received, both argues a mind not so free in
well-doing, as is meet; and that looks too much for thanks from men, and too
little, for reward from God: and is, withal, a course for a man to quench his
own charity, and forwardness, in other men's unthankfulness.

It is a more blessed, that is, both a more comfortable Acts 20.
thing, and that wherein a good work is more properly performed, to give, then
to take; to do, then to receav good: and so all good men should strive both to
be able, and willing, so to do. Yet should a good, and wise man, as God sends
occasion, be indifferent to either. Neither can he, in truth, do kindness, as
he ought, that is not willing to receav kindness, as he needs. It comes partly
from a suspicious, but specially, from a vainglorious heart, that some, who
are forward in affoarding kindness, can yet scarce, though there be just
occasion, have the like fastened upon them. Such desire to be too like unto
God, who does good to all, but receavs none back again from any: But the very
greatest must remember that he is not God, but man; and so stands need of other
men. The head cannot 1 Cor. 12 Plutarch
say to the foot, I have no need of thee. Besides, to refuse a kindness
offered is to shame it, as a ball ill sent, and let fall to the ground. Neither
has a true Christian any cause to be ashamed of his condition in receaving
good from others: seeing that, as in doing good he is in Gods place; so in
Math. 25.
receaving it, in Christ's stead.

CAP. VI. Of Equabilitie, and perseverance in well-doing.
WHatsoever is done for God, says one, is done equally: and the Apostle more
fully: The Tit. 2.
grace of God teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts; and to live
soberly in our selves, justly toward others, and holily toward God. True
goodness is comely, and well proportioned in all the parts; whereas the
counterfeit is still at jar in it self, and like the patches of a beggars
cloak. A wise man should be a wise man at all times, and in all things; and so
should a good man be a good man. Otherwise when a good thing is done (specially
if it be not ordinary) the goodness seems rather to arise from some other
motive from without, then from within the person doing it. Besides, what
strange thing is it to see a Stone fall downward, or a Spark fly upward? So nor
to see a fool do foolishly, or a lewd person like himself. But for a wise man
to do foolishly, or a good man wickedly, is not only hateful, but monstrous.

He that has not in him all Christian graces, in their measure, has none; and
he that has any one truly, has all. For as in the first birth, the whole
person is born, and not some parts; so is it in the work of regeneration: the
whole person is born again, though not wholly. There is but one Spirit both of
Faith, and Hope, and Ephesians. 4. Gal. 5. Romans 8.
Love, and Humility, and Patience; which all have that are Christ's; and If any
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. This Spirit though God but
drop, as it were, into some; and pour into others with a full hand; so as one
Christian far exceeds another in degree of graces: yet are the habits of all
graces, and that as I conceav, equally one with another (though not equal to
those in other men) infused at once into the same men's hearts, by that Spirit:
but so as in time by diverse occasions and means, both the habits, or graces
themselves, and the exercise of them, inward, and outward, have their different
increase in the same persons: till each have attained to the degree of grace
allotted to him, and serving for the preparing of him for the glory prepared
for him of God.

Perseverance in good is not any particular grace, or Barnard.
virtue; but the consummation, and storehouse of all virtue and goodness.
Evil men stand need of all graces; the good Tertullian.
only of this of perseverance, without changing, to the end, that they loose
not the things which they have done, or suffered; but that they may receav a
full reward; and in due season 2 John. Gal. 6.
reap, if they faint not.

Where I speak of the necessity of not changing, I mean that changing, which
is either to the contrary reigning evil; or to a total want of true
goodness. Otherwise, even Nature, which works most necessarily, may have its
most natural work interrupted, and changed, for a time, and yet not be
destroyed: witness the fire in Nabuchadnezars furnace, which though it
retained in it Dan. 3.
both the nature, and heat of fire, yet did not burn the three Confessors
which were cast into it. How often do men, though remaining, in nature,
reasonable Creatures, perform acts plainly unreasonable and brutish, thorough
ignorance, or appetite? How much more is it possible, that a man though not
wholly destitute of Gods grace, may through the remainders of his corruption,
advantaged by occasion of temptation, practice some particular, and the same
gross evils? Out of which, in time, he recovers himself by repentance. Who not
foolish himself will say that David was (simply) a fool, even when (by occasion
of special temptation of Satan) he 2 Samuel 2^
did a very foolish act, in numbering the people? We are not therefore to
measure a persons state by some one, or few acts, done, as it were, by the way,
and upon instance of some strong temptation; but according to the tenor, and
course of his life. Else, what wise man should not be a fool also? Or what fool
should not be a wise man? What Nabal should not be liberal, yea bounteous,
when he makes a feast like a King? A Rebel lurking in a Kingdom, may, by some
advantage watched, and taken, prevail against the lawful King, in a conflict,
or two; and yet for all that, not reign in the Kingdom: so may the treacherous
flesh, lurking in a Spiritual man, get the masterie in some combat; and yet
not therefore drive the Lord quite out of his Kingdom there. Yea the same flesh
ever lusting against the Spirit even in them which are Gal. 5. Romans 7.
led of the Spirit, and leading them into captivity to the law of sin, does
often so far prevail in them, as to captive them in some particular bypath both
of judgment, and practice (not so easily discerned) all their life long. For
Ps. 19.
who can understand his errors? And for these particular enormities, whether
actions or courses, of godly persons; howbeit, considering them in themselves,
and in their external acts, there appear in them no difference, from those of
the same kind, practiced by men utterly godless; yet is there a great
difference in Gods ey, not only in the person of the doer, in Gods account;
but also in his own heart, and affection, even in the very doing of them: In
which the Lord sees the inward struglings of grace (though, alas, too weak, by
the persons default) tending and bending the clean contrary way; and therein
plainly differencing the doer from the profane contemners of God, doing the
same things: in whom there is either altogether peace without any strife, and
resistance, whilst the strong man keeps the house; or that resistance which is
merely of natural conscience: terrifying with fear of punishment only,
without the hatred of sin, which is (though too weak and feeble) in the other.

Although it be a greater work of grace to become of vicious and evil; good
and virtuous; then so to continue, or to grow therein: yet considering the
mighty, and many enemies of our salvation, and the great stumbling stones in
our way, and with these, the heavy clog of our own corruption, which we draw
after us: it will be and is found a matter of no small difficulty, not to be
Gal. 6.
weary of well doing; nor to faint, before we come to reap in due time, that,
which we have formerly sown to the Spirit. And this the experience of all ages
confirms; in which there are few, which do the first works, and leav not
their Rev. 2. Ps. 92. Math. 20.
first love: fewer that bring forth more fruit in old age, and are fat and
green. And yet we know, that albeit of the laborers in the Vineyard, who
received each his penny, some entered sooner, and some later, and some not till
the very last hour of the day; yet all continued their labor till the
evening: So for our selves we must make account, that at what time soever any
begins, only he that continues to Mark. 13.
the end, shall be saved.

And indeed, it is a great honor to God, when a good man, notwithstanding all
discouragements either from within, or from without, persevers in the course of
goodness Gregory.
begun; and gives not over till he come at the Goal; how tirering soever his
way be. Such a one shows, that the Lord Ps. 92.
is faithful, and that there is no unrighteousness with him. To which purpose
the saying of Polycarpus is very remakable; who, being provoked by the
Proconsul to blaspheme Eusebius.
Christ, answered; that he had served him now eighty and six years, and had
never had hurt by him in any thing, why then should he speak evil of him? On
the contrary, he that departs from the Lord in the course of godliness
formerly held, greatly dishonours him; as the Servant does his Master, in
leaving him before his time be out. Such a one makes show, as if out of
judgment, and experience he disliked goodness; and therein really accuses
God, as if he had found some evil in him: or at least, not that good, which he
promised, and the other expected. And to that purpose, the Lord, in great
indignation, expostulates with the Jews, and asks, What iniquity they or their
Ierem. 3.
Fathers had found in him, that they were gone from him after their vanities.

It is dangerous in course of Religion and godliness to fall forward by
errors, preposterous zeal, or other misguidance; yet not so much, as to fall
backward by an unfaithful heart. The former may break his face thereby, and
loose his comfort in a great measure both with God, and men: but the latter is
in danger, utterly to break the neck of his conscience; as old Ely brake his
neck bodily, by falling backward from his seat, and dyed. Are there not many
Elyes in all Ages? And as the least declension from God is dangerous; so is
total desperate: neither will God ever forgive that sin, or give repentance to
any so sinning; but has utterly excluded every such a one out of the
(otherwise infinite) bounds of his mercy in Christ.

The Preaching of the Word of God is the means to beget Faith, and grace; but
for the nourishing, and increasing thereof, we must therewith join the
observation in our places of whatsoever Christ has appointed his Apostles
Math. 28.
to teach: in the use whereof, as the sanctified means for the obtaining of
that end, we shall keep our selves in the fear 2 Pet. 3.
of God, and not fall from our steadfastness; and withal, grow in grace, and
in the acknowledgment of the Lord Jesus; if not in bulk, yet in firmness; as
when the body leaves growing in bigness, it knits better then before. Neither
indeed can we be safe from being drawn away from God otherwise, then by
continual drawing nearer unto him. For, our way to Heaven is up a hill, and we
drag a Cart load of our corruptions after us; which, except we keep going, will
pull us backward, ere we be aware.

The Holy Ghost in those vehement exhortations of the faithful to
perseverance, enforced with so many promises, and threatenings, both shows
therein man's pronenesse, and danger, in himself, to fall away; and also
affoards the means, by which God will preserv his sanctified ones from
Apostacy; using the same as Evangelicall Austin.
conducts of grace for his working of that perseverance in them, which he
requires of them: and that rather by our being apprehended of Christ, as the
Apostle speaks, then by Philip. 3.
our apprehending him: As the Father leading his weak Child in a flipperie way
bids him hold him fast by his hand, lest he fall; which he also puts forth unto
him, yea wherewith he takes hold of the Child, that so by communicating his
strength with him, he may stand, and not fall. The Lord that says unto his,
Seek ye my face, and Ps 27.
gives them a heart to answer, Thy face, Lord, do we seek: gives each of them
also, when he warns them to stand fast, and not to fall away and the like, to
answer effectually, Lord, by these thy Commandments thy Servant is warned to
stand Ps. 19.
fast and to beware, lest I fall away, as hypocrites do. And whenever God
either promises unto men, or purposes in himself absolutely an event touching
any his good work in or by them; he withal both purposes, and promises, and
accordingly affords them both means convenient, and skill, and will to use
them; and therewith an answerable blessing upon them, for infallible success.

In regard of this grace of perseverance, the truly godly have an advantage
above Adam in innocence. He received to himself, at the first, his portion of
grace, and goodness from God (being made after his Image) and full freedom,
and power both to use, and increase it. But instead thereof, he soon misspent,
and lost all, by transgression. God therefore, as a gracious, and wise Father,
has provided better against our misgouernment; and made Christ Jesus our Head,
and Feoffer of trust for our state of grace, that he, in whom dwells all the
fullness Coloss. 2.
of the Godhead bodily might still furnish, and supply us, as we have need;
lest we having all put into our own hands, as Adam had, should mispend, and
cast away all, as he did. And so the same Christ our Lord, and Head, partly, by
his mediation and intercession with the Father; partly, by the continual
supply of his Spirit assisting us in our weaknesses, and recovering us in our
falls; and partly, by his Divine power restraining the enemies of our
Salvation; most faithfully preservs us in the grace of God; not suffering the
living members of his body to be plucked from it; nor the habitation of his
holy Spirit wholly, and for ever to be possessed by his, and his elects enemy,
Satan.

The Scriptures speak of men's falling from the grace of God as they do of their
receiving it. When the Apostles Romans 1. 1 Cor. 1. Phil. 1. Hebr. 3.
entitle particular Churches, or persons Saints, sanctified in Christ,
partakers of the heavenly calling, and such as in whom God will perfect the good
work begun in them until the day of Christ, as it is meet to speak and judge of
them all; they do not so judge and speak in respect of the inward truth of the
things, as certainly being in their hearts, which they neither did, nor could
ordinarily know: (for God only* 1 King. 8 1 Cor. 2.
knows the hearts of all the children of men: the things of a man no man
knows, save the Spirit of a man which is in him) but according to the outward
appearance, and profession made, in word, and deed: So when they speak of the
falling away of particular Churches, or persons, from God; they are to be
understood, as they mean; and mean, as they know: that is, according to the
outward appearance, and profession which men formerly have made, and then do
make; leaving to God, and men's selves (which only know them) the inward, and
hidden things of the heart: which too many causlesly make show of; sometimes
deceaving themselves, and sometimes others, and sometimes both, till the time of
revelation of hidden things come. And whereas weak Christians might unhappily*
stumble at the revolt from Faith, and holiness formerly professed by many; as
if there were not that stablenesse, satisfaction, and comfort in the Gospel,
and grace thereof, which it promises; the Lord, in great wisdom, and mercy,
removes this stone of offense out of their way, by intimating plainly, that
those Apostates were never truly and thoroughly made partakers of the Gospels
grace; from the former profession whereof they had unfaithfully* declined. Thus
the Holy Ghost teaches, that the ground Math. 13
(what show soever it made) in which the seed sown was either withered by
persecution; or choked by worldly cares, or pleasures; and which brought not
forth fruit to the harvest; was never good: but either stony, or thornie
ground: that they whose Faith was overthrown, were not vessels to 2 Timothy 2.
honor, but to dishonor: nor truly built upon the steadie foundation of God:
nor of them who had the seal of his Spirit; nor were of his known ones: that
those who Hebr. 6.
fell away, and crucified to themselves the Son of God afresh, were but formerly
as the earth which drinks in the rain, which comes often upon it, and yet brings
not forth herbs, but 2 Pet. 2. Jude.
thorns and briers: that they, who bring in damnable errors, and they who
follow their pernicious ways, both the one, and other departing from the holy
Commandment delivered unto them, and turning the grace of God into wantonness,
were (at their best) but as dogs, though having for a time cast up their
stomach, and vomited; and as Swine washed from their mire; and as Jude says,
ungodly men of old ordained to that condemnation, and crept in, to wit into 1
John 2.
the Churches, unawares: and, to conclude, that they, which went out from the
Apostles and Churches, by heresies, and profaneness; were not, to wit, truly,
and indeed of them before. Thus Gods wisdom, and mercy provides a shield of
Faith against the fiery darts of men's hypocrisy, and perfidiousnesse;
wherewith otherwise the tender hearts of weak Christians might be deeply
wounded by Satan.

CAP. VII. Of Religion, and the differences and disputations thereabout.
Only men of all Earthly Creatures are capable of Religion: which is also so
natural unto all men, how barbarous soever, Calvin. Acts 17. John 4.
that rather then any Country, City, or Family would want whereon to bestow
their devotions; they would worship they know not Cicero. Lactantius
what: yea which is more, that which they do know not only to be base and
vile, as stocks, and stones; but also hurtful, and evil. As then Religion, in
the general, is natural; and false Religion of corrupt nature: so is true,
and Christian Religion by supernatural revelation. For how can that worship of
God please him, which is not according to his will? And who knows Gods will
but 1 Cor. 2.
by revelation of his Spirit? But vain men are ready to deem God like
themselves, imagining, that the things which please them, please him as well.
Hereupon the Heathens have devised to themselves Gods, and Goddesses of Theft,
Murder, and all manner of filthiness: And even Christians (in name, at least)
because the Kings, and Lords of the Earth account themselves honored by their
Subjects, when they entertain them with pompous shows, and pageants of witty
devise; are ready fondly to imagine, that their witty, specially stately
devises and fancies please the Lord himself, as they do them: and therein deny
unto him his two properties; of simplicity in Tertullian.
the things; and power in appointing them: But if we will give God his due in
Religion, we hust have him both for the Object, and Appointer of our worship.
The 2 Chr. 1^ Revel. 9.
Apostate Israelites of old, and Antichristians since are said to have
worshipped Devils; not for that they did (at least, ordinarily) direct their
worship unto Devils; but for that (at least, more commonly) they followed their
suggestions, in the devised manner of worshipping though even the true God. As
in directing our worship unto him alone, we honor, and acknowledge his Majesty
and Fatherhood, as being our Father in heaven; so in receaving Math. 6.
it from him as the only Institutor, we honor, and acknowledge both his love
in providing, and his wisdom in contriving, and his authority in commanding
the manner of his service, and means of our salvation thereby.

This Religion is the means of Gods worship, and withal, Morneus
of man's happiness: which two main ends God in great wisdom, and mercy has
joined together inseperably; that the desire of the latter might provoke to
conscience of the former; and the exercise of the former effectually promote,
and further the obtaining of the latter. And this* being the only way to
happiness, ought to be common Ficinus.
to all men, rude and skillful,; base and honorable; high and Gal. 3. John 17.
low. And so all Chistians are one in Christ and Christ one in, and unto them.
For though the terrene, and worldly state of the persons, who are Christians,
be very different; yet is their Spiritual estate of Christianity all one.
There is one Lord Christ, through whom; and one Faith, by which they are
justified, and that equally; one Spirit by which they are sanctified, though in
different degrees; One calling of God begun, and perfited by the same Gospel,
and Ordinances thereof. No man's highness of worldly estate can set him above
the lowest part of it, or them: nor anyes mean-nesse keep him down from flying
as high a pitch of Christianity, as any other. An afflicted outward state
stands in need of Religion to sustain it: a prosperous, to perfect it in
eternal happiness; besides the moderating of it in the mean while. And seeing
our Religion is to God alone; and only the manifestation of it to men; we
ought to be alike grounded in it, and resolved of it, and zealous for it;
whether we enjoy the favor of the times, or the contrary.

All things requisite for the performance of Religious exercises are not parts
of Religion; but some are of natural necessity; others for civil order, and
comeliness. The former need neither be taught, nor commanded, being imposed by
absolute necessity; which is the strongest Law, and most pressing Master, that
may be. Thales.
The other are such, as without which all exercises of Religion would be
confused, and unorderly; and like the Chaos which God made in the beginning,
void and Genesis 1.
without form, and whose face darkness covered. For these, the general rules
of the Word, with common sense, and discretion, are sufficient.
Notwithstanding, though things be not therefore comely, and orderly* because
they are done of custom, or commanded by authority; but are therefore both
used and commanded (lawfully) because they are comely, and orderly: yet if
either custom commend, or authority command things that are such indeed; wise,
godly, and peaceable men should hold themselves even therefore the more bound
unto them.

Religion is the best thing; and the corruption of it the worst: neither has
greater mischief, and villainy ever been found amongst men, Jews, Gentiles, or
Christians, then that, which has marched under the Flag of Religion, either
intended by the seduced, or pretended by Hypocrites. The Jews in zeal of God
(such as it was) persecuted Christ himself to the death: and Saul in a kind of
zeal of the Law, was no less then a blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1. Tertullian.
persecuter, and oppressor. Pompey the Roman having erected that arcem omnium
turpitudinum, would not call it the stage, or stews (as it was); but the Temple
of Venus. And what shall we think of the Spaniards Romish zeal? who, by their
Glass of Spanish cruelty.
own Bishops relation in his first instance of Spanish cruelty, hanged upon one
Gallows thirteen innocent Indian women, in honor of Christ and of his twelve
Apostles. But God is not pleased with good intentions exercised in evil
actions; much less either pleased, or deceaved with the vizzards of impiety,
and inhumanitie: But as he will repay unto the wicked according to their evil
works of all kinds; so will he render double vengeance unto them, who under the
liverie of Religion seek countenance for impiety and wickedness.

A man has, in truth, so much Religion, as he has between the Lord, and
himself, in secret, and no more; what shows soever he makes before men: and
makes sound proof of his Religion both before God, and men, so far, as he is
forward, and ready to every good work, especially to the works of mercy
toward them that need. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God the Father is
this, to James 1*
visit the fatherless, and widows in their affliction, and to keep a man's self
unspotted from the World. There are many civil Hypocrites, who, if they
converse honestly, and kindly with men, presume of great acceptance from God,
though they have little care to know his will in his Word, and less to observe
his Precepts, and Ordinances of Worship. There are also Religious Hypocrites
not a few, who because of a certain zeal which they have for and in the duties
of the first Table, repute themselves highly in Gods favor, though they be far
from that innocence toward men, specially from that goodness, and love
indeed, which the Lord has inseperably joined with a truly-Religious
disposition. Such persons vainly imagine God to be like unto the most great
men; who if their followers be obsequious to them, in their persons; and
zealous for them in the things, which more immediately concern their honors,
and profits; do highly esteem of them; though their dealings with others,
specially meaner men, be far from honest, or good. But God is not partial, as
men are: nor regards that Church, and Chamber Religion toward him, which is
not accompanied in the House, and Streets, with loving kindness, and mercy,
and all goodness toward men. Such are also stuffed with selflove in their
very service of God, and do but flatter him for their own advantage: For if
they ^ John 4.
love not (and that in truth and deed) their brother whom they see, how can
they love God whom they see not? Besides, they sacrilegiously divide the two
Tables of the Law one from another, making the two great Commandments, which
Christ says, are like one to another, to be unlike in effect. In these,
Pharisaism lives, and Faith is dead: who as they shame Christianity, and
Christ in it, what in them lies; so shall their recompense from him be
answerable at that day, when every man shall receav honor or shame, according
to the works, specially of mercy, and goodness that way, which he has done,
or not done in the flesh.

The common saying, As good never a whit, as never the better, is verified in
the works of Religion: which not being performed, as they ought, for substance,
are accounted, as not done, in regard of Gods acceptance, and the doers present
benefit. So the new Inhabitants of 2 King. 17
Samaria served not the Lord; and yet they served the Lord. So he is not a Jew,
who is one outwardly, neither that circumcision, Romans 2.
which is outward (to wit only) in the flesh. So the carnal Corinthians in
eating the Lord Supper, did not that 1 Cor. 11
which was to eat the Lord Supper, to wit, with acceptance from God, and profit
to themselves, for the present. I say, for the present: for by after repentance
those very Corinthians might come to have and obtain the right use and end of
the Lords Ordinance formerly abused by them, and unusefull to them: and so
might Simon Magus, by repentance, of the baptism profanely, on his part,
received at the first. The reason of this is, because the effect of the Word,
and Sacraments, and other Ordinances of Religion is neither natural, as of
meat, and drink, which must either nourish presently, or not at all: nor
depends upon the worthiness of the Minister, as the Donatists imagined; no nor
upon the present fitness of the Receaver simply (though both Minister and
Receaver ought to be worthy, and fit): but upon Gods blessing of that which is
his own, in his time (it may be many years after the receaving) unto his elect;
and in mercy covering what was formerly amiss both in Giver and Receaver.

Besides them, who put on forms of godliness, and Religion 2 Timothy 3.
only, as men put on their Clothes (because to be naked of all Religion would
be both shameful, and in many places dangerous) and them, who for love of
lucre Lactantius
and riches feign and dissemble in Religion; many of those who seriously mind
it, make their choice amiss: as either lead by custom of times, and places, in
which they live; or by affection and admiration to and of some special
persons; or traduced by some vehement passion of anger, fear, envy, or the
like: or mislead by some guilfull appearance, without due examination. And
having so done, they commonly set themselves earnestly to advance that faction
into which they have once entered, and to depresse all others, though often
without competent knowledge of one, or other. Wherein yet they miss,
whichsoever is good, or bad; since either may be either, for ought they know.
Notwithstanding, we ow this honor to the particular courses of Religion which
we have once embraced, or wherein we have been brought up, and received any
good, that we leav it not lightly; nor further in any particular, then we needs
must; nor at all, in the things, which God, in it (in true, and distinct
consideration) has blessed to our Spiritual good. To be lightly moved in
Religion, is childish weakness: but to be stiff without reason, manly
obstinacy: and better to be a child in weakness, then a man in perverse
obstinatenesse. The former thinks too well of others, by whom he is too easily
moved: the latter thinks too well of himself; despising other men, and Gods
gifts, and graces in them; as if the 1 Cor. 14.
Word of God came either from him, or to him alone. And this fault of the two,
is both the worse, and more dangerous: The former may in time be more easily
confirmed in the truth; as a child, in time, becomes a man: the other is
seldom and hardly reclaimed, by reason of his hardness and obstinacy.

Disputations in Religion are sometimes necessary, but always dangerous;
drawing the best spirits into the head from the heart; and leaving it either
empty of all; or too full of fleshly zeal and passion if extraordinary care
be not taken still to supply, and fill it a new with pious affections toward
God, and loving toward men. And this the more, considering how the
controversies in Religion are generally carried with more heat, then of any
other subject: For that, besides reason, art, credit, and persuasion of truth,
and right; which warm men in other differences; they are in this inflamed, as
it were, with zeal for God, and his service: for whom, and which, not to be
fervent, seems to be derogatorie to his, and its honor. We are therefore
carefully to beware, and earnestly to pray, that we may in controversies of
Religion strive for God, and according unto God: seeing in them we both may
easily, and do dangerously er, if we miss at all: And therewith, that we
neither make our adversaries cause worse then it is; nor conceiv a sinister
opinion of his affections in it, without reason. In both which men seek
unhonest and unconscionable advantages: and are sorry in effect, that they
whom they oppose, are not worse then they are.

He that strives for error, strives for Satan against God: He that strives for
victory, strives for himself against other men: But he that strives for truth
against error helps the Lord against Gods, and his own enemy Satan, The
Father of Lies; and this specially, if withal he handle Gods cause according
unto God. A man shows most knowledge and understanding in the matter of truth:
but most grace in the manner of handling of it, with reverence, holiness, and
modesty.

No Faculty has so many unskilful ones to meddle in it; as that of disputing
in matter of Religion. Which comes to pass, either because men think it a
shame for them not to have both knowledge in, and zeal for that subject: or
because they make account in truth, that they venture nothing but words in the
voyage, and so can have no great loss: or else (which, is common with
ignorants) because they still presume they gain, with whom, or about whatsoever
they meddle: whereas, if they had modesty to call things into consideration,
and wisdom to discern of them aright; they would find themselves plain loosers,
where they think their gain greatest.

Diverse men are affected diversely with the oppositions, and arguments this way
brought against their tenants. Some through feebleness of heart are afflicted
with them, as with a troup of enemies invading their possessions: others are
lightly turned about, like weather-cocks, with every puff of new Doctrine.
The complaint is just, and great of the vanity, and wantonness of men, and
women, in finding, and following new fashions of apparel: but it were well, if
this vanity and newfanglednesse, were to be seen only on peoples backs, and
that the complaint were not as just, and more grievous of the profane
wantonness of many in taking up new forms of Faith, and Religion, specially in
places of Liberty, and where men may profess any Religion, or none, if they
will, without bodily danger. I have known diverse, that have more lightly, and
licentiously changed their Religion, and that in no small points, then a sober
man would do the fashion of his Coat: and who (in my conscience) if it might
but have gained, or saved them twelve pence, would have held their former
Religion still. Others by oppositions are drawn into further search, and
examination of things: Acts 17.
and this is commendable, where the matter is such, as we either understand not
thoroughly, or may er in. Some again, though of weak understanding, no sooner
hear an objection against any thing, which they hold, but forth with they fall
upon it with an answer. And this they do often out of a conceit that it is a
point of wit in them, and credit to them, to say something to every thing,
though little to purpose to any thing: in whom the Proverb is verified, to the
contrary, He that answers Prove. 18.
a matter before he know it, it is folly, and shame unto him. Others there are
again, who trust most to the Scorpions sting, their venomous tongue, in
disgracing, in stead of refuting, both cause, and person of their opposites, by
all possible means: and these are for the most part such, as presume that the
times (which they serve) and their credits with them, will countenance, and
authorize against their underling-adversaries the slanders, and calumnies
which they either maliciously invent, or lightly receav, or uncharitably
conceiv against them: which therefore they spit freely abroad with black
tongues as Serpents do their poison, to blast, and corrupt whatsoever they
light upon: These hot reproachers are often as cold disputers. There Scaliger.
want not also, who affect differences in Religion with others, either in
wantonness, and for ostentation of wit; or in affectation of singularity; or
in envy at Superiors; or in contempt of Inferiors; or to gratify the
Mighty, by: opposing such (specially of mean condition) as the other hate, and
despise. But we should affect strife with none; but study, as far as can be,
to accord with all; accounting it a benefit, when we can so do with any; and
the contrary, a cross; and the same the greater, by how much their gifts, or
graces, or places are greater, or the bond nearer between them, and us; whether
Natural, or Civil, or Religious. Lastly, there are to be found too many, who
make either proud contempt, or bold obstinacy a buckler to ward all blows of
arguments, that are, or can be brought against their preconceaved opinions. We
ought to be firmly persuaded in our hearts of the truth, and goodness of the
Religion, which we embrace in all things; yet as knowing our selves to be men,
whose property it is to er and to be deceived in many things; and accordingly
both to converse with men in that modesty of mind, as always to desire to
learn something better, or further, by them, if it may be: as also to beg at
Gods hands the pardon of our errors, and aberrations, Ps. 19.
which may be, and are secret in us, and we not aware thereof.

Whosoever offers the Word of God, and holy Scriptures for justification of his
Religion, deserves to be heard, and to have his cause examined for the very
Words sake, whose testimony he offers to produce: as in civil course, he who
offers to bring for his cause witnesses honorable, and worthy of credit, will
be admitted to plead it for his witnesses sake, though not for his own.

No difference, or alienation in Religion how great soever, either dissolvs any
natural, or civil bond of society; or abolisheth any the least, duty
thereof. A King, Husband, Father, etc. though an Heathen, Idolater, Atheist, or
Excommunicate, is as well, and as much a King, Husband, or Father, as if he
were the best Christian living: and so both owes, and has owing unto him
reciprocally the duties, and offices of that state, in which he is set, by an
inviolable right: which they that deny, are monsters amongst men, and enemies
to humain societies.

Divisions amongst a few, though not in the greatest matters, are most
observed, because First, It is expected that weak parties should be firmly
united for their better defense. Secondly, A few, and their doings are
remarkable for their fewness, as a handful of Forreighnours in a strange
Country. Thirdly, their differences are often more vehement, partly for the
greater zeal (spiritual, or carnal) of the persons; and partly because their
opposition is more immediate; whereas amongst many Bodin.
it will be hard, but some mediators will be found, to moderate things. And
this is the reason, why the danger of civil tumults is greatest in such
Countries, as in which two Religions only are in use. Lastly, All will be bold
with them, and ready to proclaim their miscariages to the full, and above
truth.

The most count it the best and safest way in differences of Religion without
further question, to take the strongest part: that doing as the most do, they
may have the fewest find fault with them. Such forget God who is strongest of
all. But the best and safest way indeed, is to get true, and sound conscience
of things certain, and without controversy. Such a person God will direct in
his ways, so far, and certainly, as not to miss of the main end, Life
eternal; and therewith in mercy will pardon all other his humain
abberrations. With Ps. 119.
mine whole heart have I sought thee: Oh let me not wander from thy
Commandments.

Men are for the most part minded for, or against Toleration of diversity of
Religions, according to the conformity, which they themselves hold, or hold not
with the Country, or Kingdom, where they live. Protestants living in the
Countries of Papists commonly plead for Toleration of Religion: so do Papists
that live where Protestants bear swey: though few of either, specially of the
Clergy, as they are called, would have the other tolerated, where the world
goes on their side. The very same is to be observed in the ancient Fathers, in
their times: of whom, such as lived in the first three hundred years after
Christ, and suffered with the Churches, under Heathen Persecuters, pleaded
against all violence for Religion, true or false: affirming that it is of
humain right and natural liberty, for every man Tertullian.
to worship what he thinks God: and that it is no property of Religion to
compel to Religion, which ought to be taken up freely: that No man is forced
by the Christians against his will, Lactantius
seeing he that wants faith, and devotion, is unserviceable to God: and that
God not being contentious, would not be worshipped of the unwilling: Whereas, on
the contrary, the latter, having the Emperors Christian, and on their side,
incited, and pressed them to violent courses. But considering, that to tolerate
is not to approve; and that the Magistrates are Kings, and Lords over men
properly, and directly, as they are their Subjects, and not as they are
Christ's; but that by accident, and as the same persons who are civilly their
Subjects, are Spiritually Christ's and Christians; and lastly, considering, that
neither God is pleased with unwilling worshipers, nor Christian societies
bettered, nor the persons themselves neither, but the plain contrary in all
three; the saying of the wise King of Poland seems approveable, King Steven.
that it is one of the three things which God has kept in his own hands, to
urge the conscience this way, and to cause a man to profess a Religion, by
working it first in his heart.

If the order in Israel be objected; it may be answered, First that the Land
was holy, as no Land now is; that one Nation separated from all other Nations
to be the Lords peculiar people, as no Nation now is; the Kings types and
figures of Christ, as no Kings now are: and Secondly, That none were, in truth,
compelled to the Israelitish Church and Religion; but being of it, whether
Israelites, or Proselites, were to be cut off from the Lords people, and Number.
15. Ps. 101.
destroyed out of Land for presumptuous sins; or working iniquity; or for not
serving God with all their heart and 2 Chr. 15
might. Kings by this course would come short of the number of Subjects, in
whose multitude their honor stands: and unto Churches, few or none could
possibly be added.

If it be further objected, that men may be by the Magistrate constrained to
the outward acts of justice, honesty, and the like, though destitute
altogether of the inward virtues; It may be answered, that these serve properly,
and immediately to preserv civil societies, of which Magistrates are properly
Kings, and Lords, and so do obtain their proper ends, if the very outward
things be done, though never so unwillingly: But of Religious actions the
proper end is not civil society, nor is attainable but by Faith, and devotion
in the heart of the doers.

Lastly, To that of the Father, that many who at first serve Austin.
God by compulsion come after to serve him freely, and willingly. I answer, that
neither good intents, nor events, which are casual, can justify unreasonable
violence: and withal, that by this course of compulsion many become Atheists,
Hypocrites, and Familists: and being at first constrained to practice against
conscience, loose all conscience afterward. Bags, and vessels overstrained
break, and will never after hold any thing. Yet do I not deny all compulsion
to the hearing of Gods Word, as the means to work Religion, and common to all
of all sorts, good, and bad; much less excuse civil disobedience palliated
with Religious shows, and pretenses; or condemn convenient restraint of
public Idolatry; so as this rule of reason holds its place, viz. that the bond
between Magistrate, and Subject is essentially civil: Keckerm*
but Religious accidentally only, though eminently. For conclusion of this
matter, Let the godly Magistrate consider, that as there is no Church State,
and profession so truly Christian, and good, in which too many may not be found
carried in their persons with a Spirit plainly Antichristian: so there is
hardly any Sect so Antichristian or evil otherwise, in Church profession, in
which there are not diverse truly, though weakly led with the Spirit of Christ
in their persons, and so true members of his mystical body. With whom to deal
rigorously for some few aberrations of ignorance, or infirmity, were more to
please Christ's enemy in the oppressing of the person; then Christ, in so
repressing his failing in some particulars, specially if they be not
fundamental.

As then the Christian Magistrate has his power of Magistracy from God, which
his Christianity servs to sanctify, and direct: so, undoubtedly, he is to use
it for God, and his honor, and that in his true worship, in which he is
specially honored; and against the contrary; yet with these two cautions.
First, That as the greater sins of other kinds, do not so violate and dissolv
the marriagebond, as adultery does, by reason of its direct opposition
thereagainst: so neither do Idolatry, or Heresy (how great sins soever in
themselves) so outlaw a Subject civily, as do Seditions, Murders, Adulteries,
and the like directly violating, and disturbing civil societies. The second
is, That no authority of man may bring into, or uphold in the Church either
Doctrine, or Ordinance of Religion, or person (which last is not lightly to be
regarded, seeing the other two serve for it) unto which the Lord in his Word
has not first given testimony of approbation for that use: seeing Magistrates
are not Governers against, nor besides, but under God, in their Dominions.

CAP. VIII. Of the holy Scriptures.
THe Holy Scriptures are that Divine Instrument, and means, by which we are
taught to beleev what we ought, touching God, and our selves, and all creatures;
and how to please God in all things, unto eternal Life. I speak of believing
things, seeing Faith comes by hearing: for else, we know things touching God by
that which we see, feel, and discern in, and by his works. We are led to the
knowledge of God in his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, and Mercy, by his
Works both without, and within us; And whenever God either does, or suffers a
thing to be done (though not so much as insinuated formerly in his Word) we
then know it to be his will, that such a thing should be, as certainly, as if
he had expressly revealed it before in the Scriptures. I speak of pleasing God
in all things; First, because entire obedience (so far as humain frailty will
permit) is the immediate end, and use of the Word of God; and the way, and
means to Salvation: Secondly, to meet with that dangerous presumption of doing
that, which is necessary to Salvation (as many use to speak) though with
affected ignorance of, and apparent disobedience to many of Gods Commandments.
Who knows with how little God can, and does save many, being faithful in
learning what they can, and in observing what they know? Though much more be
necessary to such, as have means to know more. And thirdly, because it is no
childe-like, but a bastardly disposition, to take care for serving God no
further (though, alas, all be little enough for that) then to be sure of the
Fathers inheritance. The heart of a man is then assured before God, and has a
warrant from Heaven against eternal confusion, when he can say, with good
conscience, that he has Psalm. 119.
respect to all Gods Commandments.

God would have his will written, that is, his Word to become Scripture, partly
for more certainty of truth to men, and to preserv it the better from being
corrupted; as all make account, that things set down in black, and white (as
they speak) are most firm: partly, for accord, and unity of Churches, and
Christians in the same truth: who, if they differ so much, notwithstanding they
use the same rule; what would they do, if their rules were different, or
uncertain? and partly, for more community; seeing Books, and Writings may
easily both be dispersed whither the voice of Teachers cannot come, and also be
read in private by Christians, when they are apart from their Teachers.

Neither all things which the Prophets of God wrote, were Iunius.
written by Divine inspiration (but some of them humainly, as their humain
affairs, common to them with other men, required): Neither was all wherein
they were divinely inspired, brought into the public treasury of the Church,
or made part of the Canonical Scriptures, which we call the Bible; no more
then all which they spoke, was spoken by the Spirit; or all which they spoke by
the Spirit, written: John 20. and 21.
but only so much, as the Lord in wisdom, and mercy, thought requisite to
guide the Church in Faith, and obedience, to the worlds end: so as the
Scriptures should neither be defective through brevitie; nor burthensom by too
great largeness, and prolixitie. And thus to judge is more answerable both to
Gods providence in preserving the Scriptures from miscarrying; and to the
Churches care, and faithfulness in keeping safe this heavenly treasure
committed to her custody; then to say with some, that any of the Books, or
parts of the Canonical Scriptures are lost.

It no more detracts from the authentic authority, or general use of some
parts of the Holy Scriptures, that they were penned upon some special
occasions, then of the Sermons of Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, that some
of them were* preached upon special occasions: And surely, it seems a strange
conceit, that the authority of the writing should be the less, because the
thing written was suggested by the Holy Ghost, and so penned, upon special
occasion offered: as such Scriptures were.

The Scriptures are not only authentic in themselves, as having the Spirit of
God for the Author both of matter, 2 Pet. 3.
and manner, and writing; but do also (as they say) carry their authority in
their mouths, binding both to credence, and obedience, all whomsoever, unto
whom they come, by what means soever. And if God left not himself without Acts
14.
witness in his works of creation, and providence; how much less in his
written Word? Wherein, without comparison, he reveals himself much more
clearly, then the other way: which is therefore discernable by its self, as is
the Sun by its own beams, and light: and which (as one Tertullian.
says) he that studies to understand, shall be compelled to beleev. Their
assertion, therefore, who hold, and teach, that we are to receav the Scriptures
for the Churches testimony, because usually (as others more truly, and
religiously speak) we receav them by its testimony, is in effect none other,
then Whittakers
that we are to beleev God for men's cause: whereas, on the contrary, if a man
should find the Book of Holy Scriptures in the highway, or hidden under a
stone; yet he were bound to learn, receav, beleev, and obey them, and every
part of them, in his place, though without, yea against the likeing, and
approbation of all the men in the World: except God must not be God without
men's likeing. Tertullian.
And if the Word preached by Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, in their time,
whether to Jews, or Gentiles, were absolutely to be believed, and obeyed, by
every one that heard it, without other, or further testimony: why not as
well, and much, now, by all that read it written? He that receavs the
testimony of Christ John 3.
for it self (whether exhibited in speech, or writing) sets to his seal that
God is true: He that receavs it for the testimony of the Church, sets to his
seal, that men Morneus
are true. But the Child of God knows his Fathers voice.

The profit and power of the Scriptures, both for stay of Faith, and rule of
life, and comfort in all manner of afflictions, no tongue, or pen is able so
fully to express, as every true Christian finds, and feels, in his own
experience. There is but one true happiness, life eternal; one giver of it,
God; one Mediator, Jesus Christ; and so but one means of imparting it, the
Word of God: by which, he that is both Author, and finisher of all, both
begins, and perfits all. Blessed is the man, that Psalm. 1.
has his delight therein, and meditates in the same, day, and night: that so
he may learn the things upon Earth, the knowledge Ierom.
whereof will fit him for Heaven.

When we avow the Scriptures perfection, we exclude not from men common sense,
and the light of nature, by which we are both subjects capable of understanding
them, and directed in sundry manners of doing the things commanded in them: yea
besides other humain helps, we both acknowledge, and beg of God as most needful
for their fruitful understanding, the light of his holy Spirit: only we
account, and avow them as a most perfect rule neither crooked any way, nor
short in any thing requisite. This their sufficiency and perfection is not to
be restrained to matters simply necessary to Salvation: For who can say, how
many, or few, and no more, nor less, they are? But to matters necessary to
obedience, that we may please God in all things, great, or small; expressed, or
1 Thessalonians. 4.
intended, and to be gathered by proportion, and just consequence. Without
Faith we cannot please God; and Hebr. 11. Romans 10. Prove. 3. Math. 12.
Faith comes only by the Word of God: which we must therefore make our guide
in all our ways. And if we be to give an account for every idle word, and so
for every vain thought, or work, there is then a Law of God for these smallest
matters: for where no Law is, there is no transgression; and where there is no
transgression, or fault, there is no account to be given. But as Philosophers
say, that the least natural things are not sensible, by reason of their
smalnesse; so may, and does it too easily fall out, that we fail through want
of skill, or care in applying our rule of direction, both in smaller matters,
and others of greater moment also. But this is not because the Scriptures are
defective in directing; but we either blind in discerning, or negligent in
searching, or both. And if the Holy Scriptures direction reach unto the whole
course of our life, how much more of our Religion, or worship of God? In which
nothing is to be practiced, but that which is to be believed; nothing to be
believed, but that which is to be taught; nothing to be taught, but according
to the Scriptures: This being Tertullian.
the first thing that we are to beleev, that we must beleev nothing, Whittakers
but according to them. All things else are humain; and humain it is to er, and
be deceaved. The custom of the Church is but the custom of men: the sentence of
the Fathers but the opinion of men: the determination of Councels but the
judgments of men. To conclude, One only place of Holy Scriptures rightly
understood, and fitly applied, will have more power, and fasten deeper upon a
truly good, and godly heart; then all the consenting authorities of men, and
Angels, though uttered with the tongue of men, and Angels.

As the title set over the head of Christ crucified, was the same in Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin; so are the Scriptures the same, whether in the Original; or
other Language, into which they are faithfully translated. Yet, as the waters
are most pure, and sweet in the Fountain; so are all writings (Divine and
humain) in their Original Tongues; it being impossible, but some either
change, or defect, or redoundancie will be found in the translation, either by
default of the Translatour, or of the Tongue, into which it is made.

In a Translatour is required specially skill in words, and Tongues; in an
Expositour, judgment in things. That Translation is most exact, which agrees
best with the Original, word, for word, so far as the idiom, or propriety of
the Language will bear: so as for words, or phrases (in the Original) proper,
or common; simple, or figurative; perspicuous, or doubtful; words, and phrases
of the same sort, proper or common, and so of the rest, be put, and retained in
the version: lest the Interpreter bring his own Commentary for the Scriptures
Text. On the contrary, the Commentary is best, which shows most clearly the
sense, scope, and meaning of the Text, in what words soever.

As the Lawmakers best knows the meaning of the Law, and how it is to be
expounded; so for the exposition of the Holy Scriptures, the Spirit of God, as
the Author thereof, is first and most to be consulted with, by faithful, and
earnest prayer, from a good conscience; that God may fulfill his promise made
of giving his holy Spirit to them Luke 11. Psalm. 25.
that ask it; and of revealing his secrets to them that fear him. And so some
special Instruments of renewing the Gospels light in the former Age, have
professed, that they learned Luther.
more this way by prayer, then by much study otherwise.

There is in a Scripture but one proper, and immediate sense; others are rather
collections from it, relations unto it, or illustrations of it, then immediate
senses. The literal sense is to be followed (as being most natural) what may
be; and not to be refused, if it may stand without Ireneus
danger, without blasphemy, and according to other Scriptures. And here it
must be noted, that Christ, and his Apostles in expounding Moses and the
Prophets, did not only infallibly express their conceptions, and meanings,
but the meaning of the Spirit speaking in them; and that (by reason of their
more plentiful measure of the same Spirit and experience withal) in some
particulars (as I conceav) further then the Prophets themselves understood:
albeit they always knew the immediate drift of the Spirit and meaning of the
things, which they spoke: and were not as the Pythonists, or other the like
Instruments of the Devil, uttering Oracles which they themselves understood not.

The Lawyers have a rule (and the same competent to the matter whereof they
treat) that Laws of favor are to be extended, as largely, as may be: but
odious Laws (as they speak) as much straightened, and confined within the
narrowest bounds of interpretation. But all Gods Laws, and Instructions must,
in honor of the Lawgiver, be expounded in the largest sense, that they can
bear: that so they may reach as far, and bind as fast, as may be. This the
infiniteness of his wisdom challenges, in directing us; of his authority, in
commanding us; of his mercy, in promiseing; and justice, in threatening: Which
by so interpreting, and applying his word, we acknowledge, and honor, as is
meet. And as they are blameworthy, who out of a scrupulous fear, lest they
should ad to the Scriptures, allow them no further meaning, then the words
express: so is their sin greater, and full of presumption, who shorten, and
straiten the Scriptures instruction to that which is expressed in so many
words, that they may make room thereby, for their own devises. A Scripture
commands, promises, or threatens whatsoever is contained in it, though not
expressed: And that is contained in it, which can truly, and justly be gathered
from it, though by never so many consequences, or inferences; though the fewer
the less dangerous, by reason of our weakness of discourse.

Particular words and phrases more obscure are to be interpreted according to
the scope and mind of the speaker Celsus.
(the Holy Ghost) in the place: which is, both in time, and excellency, before
the thing spoken; and that for which the Spirit speaks as it does in the
place: neither is the Chrysostom
Scripture profitable, except the scope be first found. And to hang upon a
word, phrase, or sentence in a Text, without looking to the main drift, is, if
any other, the character of an heretical disposition. With this that other
most necessary rule has affinity; namely, that the words Melancton
are to be understood according to the subject matter: the words of Law, and
Gospel according to the different nature of Law, and Gospel; the words of an
History Historically; of a Sacrament Sacramentally and mystically; and
accordingly notes of universalitie according to the extent of the matter, or
person spoken of.

As we often find out, and learn men's meaning by some of their company, and of
such as are about them; which we could not learn of themselves; so may we gather
the meaning of a Scripture (otherwise hard to be understood) by marking the
things which accompany it, and which are above and below, as the Jews use to
speak, and Christians Tertullian.
with them.

Like as the Lamps in the Golden Candlestick did one help another light; so
does one place of Holy Scripture another. And though a thing found in one
place (if in one indeed) be as true, and bind as strongly, as if it were a
thousand times written; yet so to insist upon any one place, in a difference,
as to neglect others, is the highway to error, and to loose the right sense,
by breaking the Scriptures golden chain, Chrysostom
whose links are all fastened together. And as one place must be expounded by
another; so must the more brief and obscure by the more plain, and larg: and
not the contrary, and cross way: for that were not to lighten the darkness
of a Text, but to darken its light: according to that of the Father: The fewer
must be understood according to the Tertullian.
more; and one saying must rather be taken according to all, then against all.

Touching precepts affirmative, and negative, First, They are usually either
kept, or broken together. He who does not what he should do, commonly does what
he should not do; If a man be drawn away from God, he James 1.
is easily ensnared by his own lust: On the contrary, he that does his duty
faithfully, has as it were, a Supersedeas from the Lord, against the
temptations of sin, and Satan. The way not to fulfill the lusts of the flesh is
to walk Gal. 5.
in the Spirit. Secondly, The received rule, that affirmative precepts bind
always, but not to always, as negatives do, is true, being rightly
understood. We are to take no time for doing evil, and but some time for the
doing of the best good, to wit, as we have opportunity, and ability. Thirdly,
Gal. 6.
In the prohibition of an evil we must ever understand the command of the
opposite virtue; and so on the contrary. He that says expressly Thou shall not
kill, means also, as well, Thou shall preserv thy neighbors life. Lastly,
There is both more virtue, and more vice practiced in affirmatives, then in
negatives. It is more good to do good, then not to do evil: and more evil to
do evil, then not to do good; though both the tree that brings forth evil
fruit, and that brings forth no fruit, shall be cut down, and cast into the
fire.

The oppositions intended in Scriptures are diligently to be observed: upon
mistaking whereof error follows; upon neglect, maimed obedience. For
example: The Apostle in teaching that there is but one God the Father, and one
1 Cor. 8.
Lord Jesus Christ, does not oppose the Father to the Son; nor the Son to the
Father for either is God, either Lord): but both to all whether Creatures, or
Idols. So where Christ bids his Apostles baptize them that beleev, he does
Math. 25. Mark. 14.
not exclude their infants; but such as beleev not the Gospel being preached
unto them. Likewise, where Paul says of the incestuous man, that he was
rebuked of many; he opposes 2 Cor. 2.
not many to all (as some conceav) but to one, viz. himself.

Lastly, He that will expound the Scriptures, ought in honor of the graces of
God bestowed upon other men, and in conscience of his own infirmity, with the
holy use of other means, to join the reading and searching of the commentaries
and expositions of such special Instruments, as God in mercy has raised up
for the opening of them, and edifying of the Church thereby: remembering
always, that the Word of God neither came from him, nor to him alone. 1 Cor. 14
He that depends too much upon other men's judgment, makes as if the Word of God
came not to himself at all: He that neglects it, as if it came to him only. Of
which two evils the latter is so much the worse, as arrogancy in a man's self
is more odious both to God, and men, then either slacknesse in examining, or
dullness in discerning, or excessive fear of departing from the opinion
(specially received) of others.

It is strange, and lamentable, that in the great profession of the Scriptures
made in our days, so many should be ignorant of the difference between the
Law, and the Gospel; of which two heads the Scriptures consist: making the
Gospel nothing else, but a more favorable, and easy Law: and thereby
transforming grace into nature; a promise to be received, into a commandment to
be fulfilled: and the offering of new life (even the life of Christ) into the
exacting Gal. 2.
of old, and due debt only. God as an absolute Lord, gives his holy Law,
saying, Do this and live: and therein properly exacts obedience, as a natural
debt, of the reasonable creature, thereunto enabled by creation: But as a
gracious Father publishes the Gospel, in it offering help to the miserable,
and helpless creature, and working withal (according to the election of
grace) power, and will to receav the help, and hand offered. This if many
considered, as they ought, they would not, as they do, plead the power of man's
freewill in Spiritual things, against the free grace of God; nor exclude, as
some of them do, the infants of believers from the covenant, and baptism of the
Church: as though God could not show grace, because they cannot show free will
to receav it.

The utmost ordinary means of revelation of Gods will for man's salvation, and
happiness, is the Gospel. When the Law written in man's heart by creation was
almost worn out, God gave it written in tables of stone. But life, and freedom
from sin, and death, being impossible Romans 8.
to the Law in that it was weak, through the flesh, and all men by it (whether
considered as written in tables of stone, or of the heart, by creation) coming
short of the Romans 3.
glory of God; it has pleased the same God by the Gospel of his son Christ to
provide a gracious remedy; that the sick to death, by the justice of the Law
might be cured; yea the dead revived, by the grace of the Gospel, and mercy of
God therein. And other remedy besides, and beyond this, for the obteyning of
salvation, God has not revealed. He that fulfils not the righteousness of the
Law, violates Gods justice: but remaining obstinate against the grace of the
Gospel also, he despises, with Gods justice, his mercy; and his authority in
both. And what remains for such, but a fearful expectation of the work of his
terrible power; of the Romans 1.
revelation of his wrath from Heaven against all (specially such) ungodliness
of men? For if the word (of the Law) spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression, and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: How shall
Hebr. 2.
we escape, if we neglect so great salvation (of the Gospel) which at first
began to be preached by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard
him.

CAP. IX. Of Authority, and Reason.
AVthoritie leads us to the Author of a thing, and bids us rest in his word,
whether for credence to his relation, or obedience to his commandment. Reason
wills us to look to the thing it self, and to the arguments for, or against it,
taken either from common sense; or natural principles, and conclusions; or
other undoubted grounds of truth, or goodness of matter. The ground in
Authority is, in a sort personal: in Reason, real. It is a kind of
impeachment of Authority, to examine the Reasons of things: so is it a
prejudice to Reasons work to call Authority to counsel; save only when God
speaks; for then the Authority justifies the Reason; and Reason bids, receav
the Authority, Philip. 2.
and do all things commanded without reasonings.

The Authority and credit of him that relates a matter, whether man, or Angel,
yea or God himself, makes it not the truer in it self, but the more readily to
be believed by them that hear it. The testimony of God in his Word, that in
the beginning he made the World of nothing; and will judge men and Angels at
that day by Jesus Christ, is only therefore true in it self, because God
indeed has done the one, and will do the other; but is therefore by us to be
believed as true, because he so testifies in his Word.

Divine Authority is to sway with us above all Reason: yea Reason teaches,
that God is both to be believed, and obeyed in the things, for which man can
see no Reason. And hence it is that the Lord has so severely punished men's
transgressing his Laws of Ceremonies, and Divine Institutions, called by the
Schoolmen voluntary precepts; for that in commanding of them Gods absolute
Authority most clearly appears, and man's pure obedience in observing them.
Humain Authority has more or less weight, according to the worth of the
person, or other circumstances: But as the moneys of all men high, and low;
good, and bad; are alike; so are the Reasons. The meanest man's Reason
(specially in 1 Samuel 6. 2 Samuel 6. 2 Chr. 26
matter of Faith, and obedience to God) is to be preferred before all
Authority of all men. I say, specially of Faith; yet not excluding other
subjects. For though I will and ought to do some things, simply because I am
commanded; yet I will not therefore simply beleev that any thing is good in it
self. And albeit I am bound to obey humain Authority in sundry things, for the
commanding of which I know no Reason, yea know there is no Reason: yet know I
Reason for mine obedience, even the honor of Authority, and preservation of
peace. The thing commanded may be unjust, and evil in him that commands, and
yet good in me obeying his Authority in it. For example. A matter of outward
wrong to me commanded by the Magistrate; in the doing whereof I sustain
damage, but sin not.

God who made two great lights for the bodily ey, has also made two lights for
the ey of the mind: The one the Scriptures, for her supernatural light; and
the other Reason, for her natural light. And indeed only those two are a man's
own: and so is not the Authority of other men. The Scriptures are as well
mine, as any other man's; and so is Reason as far as I can attain to it: But the
Authority of others is not mine, but theirs: which when I use, I borrow, and
lay to pawn unto them, whom I cannot satisfy, or secure by the other means,
which are mine own. Who would, borrow of others that has enough of his own to
satisfy as well.

God, who, though he be absolute Lord, so often annexeth Reasons to his Precepts,
teaches even the most powerful and mighty upon the Earth, in their
governments, to prefer Reason before Authority. And the man that would not
rather rule men by Reason (yea beasts, if they were capable thereof) then by
violent Authority, is himself inhumain, and beast-like.

The Authority of Gods Word, and testimony is always the same, as being
grounded upon his unchangeable verity: But the credit of men's judgments is
less, or more according to variety of circumstances. Men deserv most credit
in the faculty wherein they have been most exercised: for none can judge so
well of the craft, Anacharsis
as the crafts-man. So more likely it is, that a man wise, learned, and
studious in the Scriptures, specially, if withal, he be such a one, as unto
whom God has promised, in ordinary course, as unto one that fears him, to
reveal his secrets, should find the truth, then one sleightie, illiterate, and
of more shallow meditations. In former ages the Devil has so far prevailed,
as that men in superstitious reverence, have, as it were, pinned their Faith
and Religion upon the sleeves of the Churches Authority, and Clergies
learning: putting out, or winking with their own eyes, that their guides might
lead them: and this blinde-fold devotion is yet affected by too many. But
withal, there want not, specially in places of liberty, whose minds Satan
has so far possessed with the contrary delusion, as they think it half
Popery so much as to seek counsel, and direction at men of Learning, and
knowledge; lest, for sooth, they should be deceaved by them. This suspicion has
been, and is, too much occasioned, by the abuse of Learning to covetousness,
and ambition in the Learned: but is taken and held up by the other; partly, by
unbelief, whilst they more fear the Devils subtletie in deceaving them by
Learned men (specially being in any measure conscionable) then they trust to
the blessing of God upon his own gifts in them for their information; partly,
from conceiptednesse in themselves, as if they were indeed very Popes, and
exempted from danger of erring; and partly, through partial affection to their
preconceaved opinions: of which they are as loath to hear any ill, as fond
Parents are to hear ill of their Children, though there be never so much cause;
lest thereby they should be brought out of love with them. But as we are more
to desire, and endeavor, that we our selves may walk in the ways of God, then
others: so should we rather desire, and more endeavor, as we have occasion, to
converse with men of knowledge, and such, as may inform us; then with them that
know less then our selves, and do depend upon us for information. And, to
conclude; as Learning makes the good better, and Comineus.
the bad worse: so is it more likely, that a man should be bettered by it, then
not; and that knowing what concerns him, he will be the more ashamed of the
contrary.

It is also more probable, that many, specially wise, and godly, should find
the truth, then one; as many eyes see more then one: whereupon it was, that the
very Apostles in some cases of practice sought or took the advice Acts 21.
of others; which help our dullness makes much more necessary for us.

Into this account we must also bring the advantage of Ages, and times in which
men live: and so more credit in matters controverted between Rome and Us, is to
be given to the Churches, and Fathers of that first Age after Christ, then of
the latter, when the Mystery of Iniquity (rising by degrees) had gotten too
great both height, and breadth.

Besides, the occasions offered have their weight in these Balances. Austin is
observed, by occasion of the error of Pelagius, to have examined more
diligently, and more exactly discerned, and in preffer terms to have propounded
the truth, in the points of Predestination, and Free Will; then others his
Ancients. Many are ignorant, yea mistake, specially in smaller matters; not
properly because they want either skill, or will to find out the truth in
them, but occasion only pressing them to examine things received by tradition,
or done of custom without ground of reason.

With these also we must ioin the consideration of such advantages, as the
latter times have of the former, whose helpful labors they enjoy: by which
those which follow them (though in themselves meaner then they) are enabled to
discern of many things better then the other that went before them; as a dwarf
set upon the shoulders of a giant can see further then he.

Lastly, It is more likely, that of two, in any measure alike otherwise, he who
suffers affliction for conscience of God, should have the truth; then he that
gets worldly benefit by his course in Religion; specially if he have not in a
great measure learned to deny himself, and this world: it being their guize to
dissemble herein, who love ^ucre, and riches: as Lactantius
too many do.

The credit commending a testimony to others cannot be greater then is the
Authority in it self of him that gives it; nor his Authority greater then his
person. The person then being but a man, the Authority can be but humain; and
so the faith but humain, which it can challeng. The custom of the Church is but
the custom of men: the sentence Whittakers
of the Fathers but the opinion of men: the determination of Councels but the
judgments of men, what men soever. And so, if all the men in the World (not
immediately directed, as were extraordinary Prophets, and Apostles, in whom
the Spirit spoke, and testified by them) should consent in one; as they,
notwithstanding their multitude, were but men, though many; so were their
testimony but humain, though of many men; neither could it challeng other then
humain assent unto it: and not that neither absolutely either in matters of
discourse of reason, wherein it is possible that men should deceav themselves;
or of relation from others, by whom they may be deceaved. We are therefore to
beware, that we neither wrong our selves by credulity; nor others by unjust
suspicion. To receav without examination men's sayings, is to make of P. Martyr
men, God: to reject them lightly, is to make of men Devils; or fools, at the
best. The latter has pride, and uncharitableness for the ground: the former
either argues men to be simple, which cannot; or idle, which will not; or
presumptuous, which think they need not; or superstitious, which dare not judge;
or (which is worst of all the rest) desirous in a kind of humble hypocrisy to
shelter an evil conscience before God under the shadow of great men's
Authority.

To press immoderately men's Authority in Divine things, is to wrong Gods:
which alone is authentic; and whose will, and it alone, and all it (so far as
is fit for us to know it) we know more certainly to be contained, and
preserved, without corruption, in the Scriptures; then any Fathers opinion, in
the Books, which go under his name. This also wrongs men's Faith, and reason,
captivating them by prejudice; and rather offering a hand to lead the blind;
then a light for the help of him that has eyes to see with. I have known some,
who, if they light upon a peremptory Author, and bold asserter of things,
were ready to be still of the same opinion with the Book which they last read:
their weaker judgment being overborn rather by the strength of other men's
asseverations, then reasons. Lastly, this ingenders endless contentions: as is
to be seen in some Learned men's writings; in which there is more ado about the
meaning of such, or such a place in a Father, then were enough to determine the
whole controversy by the Scriptures, and good Reason.

These things notwithstanding, there is both a lawful, and convenient use of
humain testimony even in Divine things; as first, for the convincing of such
thereby, as regard it too much, and Gods Word too little Thus Paul amongst
Heathens, even in his very Sermons, alleged Heathenish Poets, and
Philosophers; and we in our writings rightly alledg Fathers, and Councels
against Papists, and others, who more regard the saying of an ancient Father,
or Canon of a Council, then the written Word of the Ancient of Days. They are
twice overcome, who are beaten with their own weapons, in which they trust.
Secondly, It induces a moral probability, though no absolute necessity of
truth: and though we see not the truth by other men's eyes, but by our own; yet
may we be something held up in the arms of their testimony to see it the
better, and so be helped, as Zacheus was, by the Tree, into which he clymbed,
to see Christ. So the Apostles in penning some parts of Holy Scripture, upon
occasion of differences in the Churches, and opposition to their Apostolical
Authority, took in, for the better passage with men of Gods undoubted truth,
the concurring testimony even of ordinary Christians: though both the
Decrees, and Epistles Act. 15. 23. 29. Gal. 1. 2.
were penned by infallible, and immediate direction of the Holy Ghost, as well,
and as much, as any other parts of Canonical Scriptures. Thirdly, Citation of
humain Authority helps to wipe away the aspersion of Schism, and singularity,
when we can show that our assertions, and practices have agreement with such as
are in account in the Churches. Lastly, It commends both a man's modesty and
diligence, when he enquires after, and withal, his cause, in the eyes of men,
when he appears to know the judgments of others in the things he handles: as it
is, on the other side, an imputation to him that knows them not; and that even
where it is otherwise, no benefit, to know them.

The Authority of him that prescribes, or commands (within his limits) is
the same, whether the matter be great, or small. God is God, in the smallest
things, which he requires; and man but man, in his deepest charges. The
Prophets, and Apostles in their writings are extraordinary; and Pastors and
Teachers, ordinary Ministers; and neither are either more, or less in any
part of their Ministry, for the instruction of the Churches. So likewise all
true Reasons are of the same force in themselves, to confirm that for which they
are brought: neither is any one stronger then other, but only more evident.
The best but proves of itself the things to be so; and the meanest (if sound)
does as much.

CAP. X. Of Faith Hope, and Love. Of Faith Reason, and Sense.

FAith in general is a firm assent upon knowledge Vrsinus.
to an affirmation, for the credit, or authority of him that affirms a
thing; whether God, or Angel, or man. To some things we assent by Sense, and
natural light: to some, for certain proof of Reason: but the assent of Faith
rests upon the fidelity of the speaker, and not upon the Sense, or Reason of
the thing, how agreeable to either soever it be. Yet so as the more reasonable
the thing related is, the more readily we beleev it to be true. The thing
believed Faith apprehends primarily, as a matter of truth, and therein has its
seat in the understanding. Divine Faith assents to the revealed will of God,
for the authority, and truth of God, which cannot deceav. That Faith, or act
of Faith by which we are justified is a due assent to, and application of the
promises of the Gospel, as made, and appertaining to us in particular: the
general promise upon condition of application duly, and rightly made, being as
much for certainty, as either extraordinary revelation, or particular
nomination of person. This application of Gods promises in Christ has evermore
affiance necessarily, and immediately joined with it. For being by the Spirit
of God, and Word of the Gospel, persuaded of Gods love in Christ; we cannot but
trust unto him, rest, and repose our selves upon him, and expect accordingly
from him, all good. But as we must lay hold of the stay or prop before we can
rest upon it; So must Faith go before affiance in order of causes: and we lay
hold of Gods love before we can repose our selves upon it.

Hope is the expectation of the good things promised, having Scaliger. Hebr. 11.
Faith for its foundation. These two, Faith and Hope have many the same
objects; yet neither all; nor any in the same respect. We beleev things past,
present, and to come: but hope for things to come only. We beleev both
promises, and threatenings; both rewards, and punishments, in the order set by
God: but hope only for things desirable. And for the very same things in
themselves believed, and hoped for; as for example, the resurrection of the
body, and life everlasting; we beleev them as present in Gods promises, which
Faith applies unto us; but hope for them as absent, and to come in performance,
unto which Hope carries us.

Faith begets Hope; for by believing the forgiveness Romans 5.
of our sins, and Gods promises, for the present; we are encouraged to expect,
and hope for all future good. And Hope again, as a good Child, helps to reliev
its Father Faith, in time of need: whereupon the Apostle says of the
Faithful, that if they had hope only in this life, 1 Cor. 15
they were of all men the most miserable. For what avails it a man in misery
to beleev eternal life, if he had not hope in time to obtain it, and therewith
freedom, and redemption from distress? But we have therefore comfort in
believing, because we have hope of enjoying in due time.

Love is the affection of union in regard of the loving; Scaliger.
and of well-wishing, in regard of the Creature loved. And Divine love is the
affection of union with God, in his grace, and glory (in which man's happiness
consists); and with the Creature, according unto God. Faith is the root; and
Love the sap spreading forth it self, for the fruits of good works, throughout
all the branches of our lives: Faith the beginning, and love the end of
Ignatius. Gal. 2.
our conversation. By faith we live the life of the Son of God, and receav all
good from him: by Love we are moved, and persuaded, to use what we have to the
good of men, and praise of God. And whereas Faith makes a Cyril.
man some great thing, richer then the richest, and Lord of the whole World:
Love makes him a Servant unto all men, in Luther. 1 Cor. 9.
humbling, and applying himself unto them, in all lawful things, for their
good. Now albeit Love have these two prerogatives; First, that it persuades
most effectually, and immediately, to the use, and employment of all the good
things which we have received from God, to the benefit of others; and secondly,
that, whereas Faith, and Hope are determined formally in this life; and ended
in sight, in the life to come; Love abides there 1 Cor. 12. and 13.
also; and that, in these two respects the Apostle ascribes an excellency, and
chiefnesse to Love above the other: Yet herein Faith has his singular
pre-eminence, that whereas by Love we, and what we are, become Gods; and men's,
for God: by Faith, not only all other things, but even God himself becomes
ours for all-sufficient Genesis 17.
good unto us: as he says, I am thy God all sufficient. By it, the will, and
Word of God is ours for our instruction, and direction; his righteousness
ours, for our justification; his Spirit for our sanctification; his power for
our protection; and his glory for our happiness, in the fruition thereof.

This Faith in Christ is a gift supernatural, not only in Perkins*
regard of nature corrupted, but even created: which therefore is not so
properly repaired in men by grace, as are some other virtues; but, after a
sort, new built from the ground; as directing to that attribute in God
primarily for its object, whereof Adam in innocence had no need; which is,
mercy through Christ, against the misery of sin, and punishment. Unto this
Faith most precious promises are made; and most excellent things affirmed of
it: And that not only for the excellency of the grace in it self; which yet
is great, and greatly honors God; in his truth, which it believes; in his
power, as able; and love as willing to bestow all good things upon us: but
specially for an attractive, and applying faculty which it has above other
virtues, to make God ours, and all Creatures with him, according unto God, as
is aforesaid. To beleev in John 1. Hebr. 11. and 12.
Christ is to receav him, and the promises touching him. And hereupon it is
said of that cloud of witnesses, that by faith they quenched the violence of
fire, stopped the mouths of Lions, put to flight the armies of alients, etc.
The reason whereof seems to be, for that, as by justifying Faith they applied
the righteousness of God, to salvation; so by the Faith of miracles, they
apprehended, and applied the infinite power of God, to the producing of those
supernatural effects.

The strength of true Christian Faith the Devil knows to his cost; as that, by
which he the Prince, with his whole Ephesians. 2. 1 John 5.
Army the World, has been so often foiled, and overcome: For being by Faith
persuaded, that in doing* or suffering according to the will of God, we please
him, and are under his protection, and blessing, we steadfastly persevere in
well-doing, and patiently endure all things for his names sake: whereupon he,
specially in the day of their distress, assaults the Faith of the godly, that
that might fail; as Luke 22.
knowing that if the root of Faith be shaken loose, the fruit of good works
will wither. Faith therefore must as a welcome passenger be well carried, and
conveied through the Sea of temptations in the Vessel of a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.
that it suffers not shipwreck by the leaks of an evil; directed by the chart
of Gods Word, and promises rightly understood, that it run not a wrong course;
and having ever in a readiness the sure, and steadfast Anchour of Hope against
a stresse; and continually gathering into the outspread sails of a heart
enlarged by prayer, and meditation, the sweet, and prosperous gusts of Gods
holy Spirit, to drive it to the desired Haven.

This Faith, if it be not grounded upon Gods Word, is fancy: if it receav not
the same Word in every part, but where it lists, it is sawsinesse: if it work
not as well (yea more) in an afflicted state, as in a prosperous, it is nothing
but fleshly presumption: if it be not fruitful in all good works, as we have
opportunity, and are able, it is dead; and will in the end, like the Faith of
the Devils, affoard James 2. Bernard.
only matter of trembling. Lastly, it must be firm, and not ambiguous, or
going by peradventures; else it is not faith, but opinion.

Yet are we not here to imagine an Idea of faith, free in this Chemnitius
infirmity of our flesh, from doubting. The tree may stand, and grow also,
though shaken, and bended with the wind: so may Faith hold its both standing,
and life, notwithstanding such doubtings, as the flesh (ever lusting against
the Spirit) mingleth with it. Against which weakness, and imperfection of our
Faith we have this firm comfort, that we are not saved for, no nor by the
perfection of the instrument, which Faith is; but of the object, Christ, which
Perkins.
it apprehends: and so may with a true, though palsy hand of faith receav,
and keep both Christ, and all his benefits. This weakness, and disease of
Faith we must not commend, as Papists do; nor nourish like secure persons; but
cure, with all diligence, by the holy, and diligent use of the Ministrations
sanctified of God, and given by Christ, for the perfiting of the Saints, and
edifying Ephesians. 4.
of the body, till we attain in the unity of faith, and acknowledgment of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, according to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. Also, we must nourish Faith by frequent meditations of Gods
love, and promises in Christ, and of the gracious effects of them; and must, as
the Prophet, and Apostle teach Habak. 2. Hebr. 10.
us, live by it: both doing in faith and assurance of acceptance at Gods hands,
what we do, not only in the works of his worship, but in those also of our
conversation with men; and putting our selves in all our ways, under his
protection, and that specially in the time of distress; or danger: that as the
bodily hand gets, and gathers strength by being diligently used in works
competent; so may also the Spiritual hand do; which Faith is.

Now, as, for our succesfull wrestling against the Rulers of the darkness of
this World, and spiritual wickednesses in high places, we must put on, amongst
other parcels of the Ephesians. 6.
Armor of God, the Shield of Faith; so must we not forget the Helmet of
Salvation, Hope; whose strength is great to bear off all blows of temptation,
and that with cheerfulness. For what burdens of afflictions, and temptations
will not he cherfully undergo, that expects undoubtedly their speedy ending in
endless happiness? Alexander the Great meaning to invade Asia, and giving
Curtius.
away his riches aforehand, being asked, what he would reserv for himself,
answered, Hope. But what is the shadow to the substance? He hoped for the
Kingdom of Persia, we of Heaven. And what if his hope stretched it self to the
Monarchy of the whole World? It was but to this World, wherein also it was
frustrated, and perished with him. But the Anchour of our hope is cast within
the Hebr. 6.
veil, and extends to the World to come; being also firm, and steadfast, and
which cannot be disappointed; nor shall have other end then in being perfited
in the end of all, the full fruition, and eternal possession of happiness
with God. Were it not for hope, the heart would break: but we having this hope
faint not, but hold fast Hebr. 10* Romans 5.
the profession thereof without wavering; yea even glory in afflictions under
the hope of the glory of God.

Lastly, Touching Love; as it is the affection of union so it makes, after a
sort, the loving, and loved one: such being the force thereof, as that he that
loves suffers a kind of conversion into that which he loves, and by
Scaliger.
frequent meditation of it, uniteth it with his understanding, and affection.
Thus, to love God is to become godly, and to have the mind, after a sort,
deified, being made 1 Pet. 1.
partakers of the Divine nature in its effects: to love the World is to become
a worldling; and so of the rest. Thus, in the Parable of the Tares, the
Children of the Kingdom Mark. 13.
are called good Seed, and Wheat, as growing, and becoming Wheat of the Wheat,
or Seed sown in them; as the Wheat ear grows of the Wheat corn: As on the
contrary, ungodly men are said to have eyes full of 2 Pet. 2.
Adultery, and the like; and not only to be sinful, but sin,
unrighteousness, darkness, and beliall; as being even 2 Cor. 6.
metamorphized and transformed into the evils which they love, and delight in.
Oh, how happy is that man, who by the sweet feeling of the love of God shed
abroad Romans 5.
into his heart by the Holy Ghost, which is given him, is thereby, as by the
most strong coards of Heaven, drawn effectually, and with all the heart, to
love God again, who has loved him first; and so becomes one with him, and
rests upon him, for all good, and happiness.

For this our love to God, there is required not only the positive affection
of the heart aspiring unto union Zanchy
with God, upon knowledge of him, as the chiefest good, both in himself, and to
us in Christ; and a contentation in him so known, and obtained: but withal,
that we exercise, prove, and approve that our love to him, in our love to such
good persons, and things, as unto which he has imparted some sparks of his
goodness; especially to his good Children, and good Word, and Ordinances. He
cannot love him that begets, says the Apostle, 1 John 5. and 4.
who loves not him (and that in deed and truth) who is begotten: in truth of
affection; and in deed of action, for his comfort: and this with greater bent
of both, as the graces of God are more eminent in him. Neither loves he God,
that loves not his Word, and that both in Ps. 119. John 14.
affection of heart, and effect of ready obedience to all his Commandments. We
must take heed of a shadowish love of goodness, and piety only in the
abstract: and must love it in the concrete, where both the person, and good in
him, is visible; in whom Hypocrites, for the most part, hate, and persecute it.
He but pretends to others, the love of goodness, or imagines it in himself,
that loves not good men for it. Lastly, He that 1 John 4.
loves not his brother whom he sees, how can he love God whom he sees not. Not
but that there is matter of love infinitely more then in any, or all men; but
because for the loving of God, we want the advantage of sense, and motive of
compassion, by which our love to our distressed brethren, is helped.

This love is the fulfilling of the Law: the love of God Romans 13.
being the greatest Commandment; and the love of our neighbor like unto it. It
is also that to which the Gospel in the end leads us: by which Gospel, or new
Covenant, God writes Hebr. 8.
his Laws in the mind, and heart of his: and so perfits the one in the other.
And so natural to Christians is this brotherly love, as that the Apostle makes
account he needs 1 Thessalonians. 4.
not write to the Churches, to teach them that which God taught them so many
ways. By this we know our selves to be 1 John 3. John 13. Tertullian.
raised from death to life; by it all others know us to be Christ's Disciples,
if we love one another. See, said the Heathens (pointing at the Christians) how
they love one another: and see, said the Christians of them; how they hate
another. Oh that Heathens could not now say of Christians, as they sometimes
said of them.

If we were perfect in this Love we needed no other Law to rule us, either in
the duties toward God, or our neighbors, no more then do the Angels in
Heaven, and Souls of the Faithful men departed: who by the Law of Love alone,
do live both most perfect, and most happy lives. And indeed to love as we
ought, is a very happy thing, wherein we resemble God, and the Angels: as by
the contrary, we complice with the Devil, and wicked men; who live in malice,
and envy, hateful, and hating one another. Titus 3.
And howsoever naturally we desire rather to be beloved, then to love; yet is
it incomparably a more both excellent, and blessed thing to love, then to be
beloved; as it is to give, Acts 20
rather then to receav.

Besides, Love is the Loadstone of Love: And the most ready, and compendious
way to be beloved of others is to love them first. They taking knowledge
thereof, will be effectually drawn to answerable good will, if they be not
harder then Iron, and such as have cast off the chains, and bonds of common
humanity: for even Publicans, and Math. 5.
sinners love those that love them. Yea, admit thy love of them never come to
their knowledge; yet will God by the invisible hand of his providence, bend
their hearts, by mutual affection unto thee, at least, so far as is good for
thee: and wherein they are inflexible, and defective, he will make supply out
of the abundance of his love, and goodness; that so it may be verified which
is written; With the same Luke 6.
measure that ye meet with all, it shall be measured to you again. To conclude
this point: Let the grace of God herein specially triumph over our corruption:
that whereas by nature, we would be loved of them, whom we hate; by grace, we
may love them, Which hate us. And this is a great Math. 5.
work of grace in deed; and yet most necessary for all Christ's Disciples. We
must not be like the Pharisees who in stead of enlarging their own affections,
straightened the Law of loving their neighbors, unto such, as loved them, or
dwelt within a certain compass of them: but we must account all our neighbors
that need pity or help from us: and our Christian neighbors, and brethren
also, if the Lord have received them, though they be neither minded in all
things as we are; nor toward us, as we are toward them.

Lastly, as Faith is to rule Love, that it prove not lust; Luke 10.
and Hope, that it prove not presumption: so also must it Reason, and Sense in
all their operations: which it no way abolisheth, but orders, and sanctifies.
And as in Nature, the denomination is from the predominant quality; so is it
in our course of life. To live by Reason is to live the life of a man; To live
by Sense is to live the life of a beast: But to live by Faith is to live the
life of the Son of God, and to Gal. 2. 1. Pet. 1.
be (in its effects) partaker of the Divine nature; and that not only in the
reasonable, but in the sensitive faculties also. For these three, Faith,
Reason, and Sense, being all Gods works in a man, cannot be contrary, in their
right use, one to another: neither can any thing be true in one, which is false
in another: neither does, or can any one of them destroy another; but use,
order, and perfect it: Reason, Sense; and Faith, both Sense, and Reason. For
Faith comes by hearing, at the first, and is nourished, Romans 10.
and increased both by hearing, and seeing, and by the benefit of all other
Senses afterward. Neither can it possibly either be begot, or nourished, or
increased, but by the discourse of Reason ordered, and sanctified by the Spirit
of God. Which Spirits work is so effectual, as it makes even the meanest
powers of nature created in a man to serve effectually for the furthering of the
highest works of supernatural grace. Sweet is the harmony of all the powers,
and parts both of the Soul and body of a sanctified person.

Reason is that wherein man goes before all other earthly Seneca.
creatures; and comes after God only, and the Angels in Heaven. For whereas
God and Nature has furnished other Creatures, some with horns, some with
hoovs, others with other Instruments, and weapons both defensive, and
offensive: man is left naked, and destitute of Plutarch
all those, but may comfort himself in that one endowment of Reason, and
providence, whereby he is enabled to govern them all. Now, who would not strive
to excel other men in that, wherein men excel all other Creatures? How much
more, in that, to which few men attain: true faith, and the life thereof.

CAP. XI. Of Atheism and Idolatry.
SOme are Atheists in opinion; others in affection; but many more in
conversation of life. There are but few of the first coat, and which can so
wholly blot out the remainders of Gods Image written by Creation in their
hearts, as to leav them altogether empty, and devoyd of the knowledge,
conscience, and reverence of a Divine Majesty; and which come to conclude
roundly in their hearts, that there is no God. Yet, some, without doubt, in
time, and by degrees, proceed from Atheism in conversation, to Atheism in
affection; and from Atheism in affection, to Atheism in opinion, and judgment.
Men civilly honest, seldom, or never become Atheists in persuasion; but lewd,
and flagitious persons do; who being pursued by the fury of an accusing
conscience for heinous evils, wish (and no marvail) that there were no Judge in
Heaven to condemn them: and so come at last to be persuaded in themselves of
that, which they gladly would have true; and are justly left of God to such
horrible delusion: that so sinning without fear, they may perish without
remedy. And this is the reason, why there are more Atheists in opinion, in our
days, then of old; even because so many are more bent upon mischief: and
liveing Morneus
wickedly in this world, bear themselves in hand (and so get to beleev) that
there is no justice in the world to come. Another reason is the proportion of
wit to which our Age is come, above the former. In regard hereof it is, that
Atheism (though dissembled, and concealed by the same ungracious wit, which
begets it) is a thousand times more to be feared in the Land, then Papism. Men
have too much wit to become Papists, in any generallitie: and just enough to
fit them for Atheists, if Gods powerful hand restrain them not. The very
simple dare not become Atheists; but are more in danger to prove superstitious,
and to beleev Prove. 14
every thing: the very understanding hardly can: but have by sound reason,
and sad thoughts (will they, nill they) some acknowledgment of a Divine
Majesty forced upon them: But persons of froathy wit, and vicious life, are
fitly tempered for the impression of Atheism for the Devil.

Atheism is incomparably worse, and more odious, then Idolatry: as it is more
intolerable in a State, or Kingdom, to enterprise the overthrow of all Kingly
Power, and Soveraigntie, then to detract how much soever, from the lawful
Kings, or Magistrates due honor, and to give it to a Stranger. Besides,
whereas Idolaters, and superstitious persons, having in them some reverence of
a Divine Power, are thereby both restrained from many mischiefs, and provoked
to many good actions: the Atheist wanting both this Divine restraint, and
motive; both runs riot in wickedness, and villainy; and is barren of all good
things: neither doing good, nor forbearing evil, further then for mere fear,
or shame of men.

Atheists use to be very confident in their assertions, as the Orator observes
in Vellejus: partly lest they should seem Cicero.
unto others to doubt, or fear, that there is a God, who will punish heir
impieties: and partly to encourage themselves in Ps. 64.
their wickedness; as fearing lest they should be drawn into some conscience,
and aw of Gods Majesty. It is often true in this case amongst others, that the
most cowards are the greatest boasters.

Idolatry either makes that to be God, which is not; Romans 1. Acts 17 Exodus 32.
2 Chr. 33.
or God to be that, which he is not. It is exercised either in intending Divine
worship (so known to be) to that which is not God: or in intending a devised
worship to the true God; wherein men make a will of God, which is not, and so a
God willing, which is not: or else in an act of worship in it self, though
neither professed nor judged such by him that performs it* Such men's actions
reprove both their intention in heart, and profession in word: and can not be
excused by either from Idolatrous.

This sin in Gods people is usually compared by the Holy Ghost to the whoredom
of a Wife; and Gods anger at it to the Husbands jealousy, in that case. And as
Adultery most directly impeacheth the marriage bond (and so procures the Bill
of Divorce): so does Idolatry the Churches Covenant with the Lord, and provokes
to sequestration from him. Yet herein two rules must be held. The former, that
not only special Idolatry* but even all, or any other wickedness with
profane obstinacy adjoined, separates from God. Secondly, that all sin
whatsoever is founded upon a kind of Idolatry. In sins of omission, we
acknowledge not God, for our God, as we ought, in doing what he commands: In
sins of commission we make some other thing our God; as our riches, if we trust
to them, as to God; or our belly if Coloss. 3. Philip. 3.
for it we do what God forbids the doing of.

CAP. XII. Of Heresy, and Schism,
IT is an ancient, and received saying, that Heresy arises from want of
Faith, and Schism from want of Love: which also has its truth, being rightly
understood. Yet if we mark, we shall find the Scriptures to speak something
otherwise of both the one, and other, then men commonly understand. We usually
call obstinate Error in the foundation Heresy: but the Scriptures 1 Cor. 11
Gal. 5. Titus 3.
many times seem rather to place it in the perverseness of the will, and
affections, whether the matter be great, or small; then in the error of the
judgment: the word also (...) signifying any election, or choice of will which
a man makes; or Sect which he follows, whether good, or bad; whether in
matters of greater, or smaller moment. Besides, men are oftens accounted
Heretics, with greater sin, through want of charity, in the Judges; then in
the judged, through defect of Faith. Of old, some have been branded for
Heretics, for holding Antipodes; others for holding the original of the Soul
by traduction; others for thinking that Marie the Mother of Christ had other
Children by her Husband Joseph: the first being a certain truth; and the second
a Philosophical doubt; and the third, though an error, yet neither against
foundation, nor post of the Scriptures building. As there are certain Elements
Hebr. 6.
and foundations of the Oracles of God, and of Christian Faith, which must
first be laid, and upon which other truths are to be built: so must not the
foundation be confounded, with the walls, or roof; nor errors lightly be made
fundamental, or unavoidably damnable. Yea who can say with how little, and
unperfit Faith in Christ both for degree, and parts, God both can, and does
save the sincere in heart? Whose Salvation depends not upon the perfection of
the Instrument, Faith; but of the Object, Christ. As, on the contrary, there
are some vulgar, and common errors (though less severely censured) which are
apparently damnable; as by name, for a man to beleev, and expect mercy from
God, and salvation by Christ, though going on in affected ignorance of, or
profane disobedience to Gods Commandments.

And for Schism; The Scriptures note it as sometimes made from the Church; but
most commonly in it. From it by the ten Trybes sequestring themselves from
Judah, and ^ King. 12
Jerusalem, the only place where the Lord had promised to dwell by his solemn
Church presence: and after Christ, by certain of the Hebrews forsaking the
assemblies of the Christians. Hebr. 10.
The former was from the only true instituted, and ministerial Church in the
World; which was then one individual, and not many, as now; and that by
Idolatry. The latter, from all Christian Churches, and persons by total
defection from Christ himself. The other Schisms mentioned were made in the
Church, either through the carnal lusts (bearing two great sway) of envy,
strife, and 1 Cor. 3. and 12.
uncharitableness; whilst the stronger despised the weaker, and the weaker
judged the stronger; or by Heresy, and profaneness Jude 19 2 Pet. 2. 1 John
2.
of manners: of which the Apostles Peter, Jude, and John speak.

That which is commonly called Schism, arises (if it be affected) from the
conceit of Faith, and want of Love: but may fall out, upon simple error of
judgment, or scrupulositie of conscience: By occasion whereof a person may
seqester himself, either in (or from) some particular Church in some inferior
courses of religion, from them, toward whom he yet bears much more true, and
hearty Christian affection, then the most of them do, who unite with them
therein.

And if only an uncharitable heart make an uncharitable person before God, and
a proud heart a proud person, then he, who upon due examination, and certain
knowledge of his heart, finds, and feels the same truly disposed to union with
all Christians, so far as possibly he can see it lawful; though through
error, or frailty, he may step aside into some by-path, that way: yet has
that person a Supersedeas from the Lord in his bosom, securing him from being
attached for a schismatic person, and so found in the Court of Heaven; what
blame soever he may bear from men upon Earth, or correction from God, for his
failing, upon infirmity, therein.

No man can endure to be withdrawn from, nor easily dissented from, by another,
in his way of Religion; in which, above all other things, he makes account,
that he himself draws nearest unto God. Therefore to do this causlesly (for not
the separation but the cause makes the Tertullian.
Schismatic) though out of error, or scrupulositie, is evil; more, to do it
out of wantonness of mind, or lust to contend, or affectation of singularity;
most of all, to do it out of proud contempt, or cruel revenge against others.

CAP. XIII. Of Truth, and Falsehood.
TRuth is either natural, or moral. Natural Truth stands first in the
conveniencie, and Scaliger.
agreement of the notions of the mind with the thing conceaved; and secondly,
of the means of manifesting it (especially speech) with the thing to be
manifested. Moral Truth stands in the conveniencie, and agreement of a person
with himself: namely of his heart with his tongue, and speech. The same
consideration is to be had of Truths contrary, in its kind; which is Falsehood.
Whereupon also it comes, that a man may sin, and speak falsely not only in
speaking that which he knows, or may know to be false, for what end soever he
speak it, yea though it be, that he may not deceav: but also in Austin.
speaking that which is true, in it self (if he know it not) that he might, or
so as he may deceav by it.

All truth, by whomsoever spoken, is of God, and of his Ambrose. John 15.
Holy Spirit, the Spirit of truth, in some its manner and degree of working.
Whereupon it follows, that nothing true in right reason, and sound
Philosophy, is, or can be false in Divinity. The truth in the inferior
faculty is subordinate to that in the superior, in all things; and comes
short of it in many things; but can in nothing be contrary unto it; seeing
God, and his Spirits work, cannot be contrary to himself* I ad, though the
truth be uttered by the Devil himself, yet is it originally of God. When he
speaks a ly, he speaks of John 8.
himself; but when he speaks the truth, he speaks of God; who so far uses, or
rather abuses him, as to utter, and profess that which he hates.

We ought to reverence excellent men, but the truth more, as Eusebius.
Aristotle.
Dionisius said of Nepos; and Aristotle of Plato, and Socrates. And good
reason, seeing a main cause of our reverencing of men is their knowledge, and
profession of the truth. No prescription (say the Lawyers) lies against the
Tertullian.
King: say we, with the Father, against the truth: which, by the Verdict of a
great King himself, and his Nobles with him, is greater then the King; no space
of time, no patronage Ezra 3.
of person; no privilege of place, from which blind, or simple custom commonly
getting footing, and growing into use by succession, is brought to coap with
truth it self: and that the most violently, where the persons are the most
brutish, and godless. But our Lord Christ called himself Truth, not Custom:
neither is Falsehood, Error, or Heresy convinced by Noveltie, but by Truth.
This Truth is always the same whilst The God of Truth is in Heaven; what
entertainment soever Cicero.
it find with men, upon Earth: It is always praiseworthy, though no man
praise it; and has no reason, or just cause to be ashamed, though it often go
with a scratcht face. They that fight against it are like the Floods beating
upon the strong Rocks, which are so much the more miserably dashed in pieces,
by how much they are the more violently carried. Though Fire and Sword assault
it, yet will it not be killed, or die: and though by violence it be buried
quick, yet will it rise again; and if not before, yet when all Flesh shall rise
again; and when Truth, which was first, and before Falsehood, and Error, shall
be last, and abide for ever.

We must love, and attain to the knowledge of the Truth in our selves, First;
Lest we be Clouds without rain promising that to others, which we our selves
want: and must in our places, afterward make manifestation, and profession of
it: and not be like the grave, insatiable in receaving in, and barren in
returning any thing back: but must be always ready, as we see hope of doing
good, to propagate it: like the Philosopher, who being found fault with for
disputing with all that he met with, wished that the bruit beasts also could
understand him, that he might impart something even to them: yea in our kind,
like God himself, that gives wisdom to all that asks it of him; and James 1.
John 1.
to Christ the Lord that Word of God, and true Light) which inlightens every
one that comes into the World: and sometimes, even, when we see no hope of
doing good, if duty bind us, though hope fail us; that so the non-proficients
Austin.
may have cause rather to complain of themselves, for not learning; then of us,
for not manifesting the truth unto them. And albeit all truth is not to be
spoken at all times: ( A Prove. 29
fool utters all his mind; but a wise man keeps it in for afterward) yet
nothing not true at any time, or for any cause. He that has but a right
Philosophical spirit, and is but morally honest, would rather suffer many
deaths, then call a Pin a Point, or speak the least thing against his
understanding* or persuasion.

A man in pleading for the Truth may show his judgment, and understanding best
in the matter: but his grace, and godliness in the manner; when he handles a
good cause well, and the Lords cause after the Lords manner. Sometimes men
pretend Gods Truth, and zeal for it, when indeed they make their pleas for
Truth serve only for hackneys, for their lusts to ride on, whither they would
have them: Sometimes men seriously intend Truth, and yet mingle both with their
good intention, and (it may be) true assertion also, such their personal
corruptions, and distempers, as Christ loses more by their inordinatenesse
that way, then he gains both by their sound knowledge, and fervent zeal of, and
for his Truth.

The most account a ly more shameful, then sinful: and therefore make it a
matter of great disgrace, to take the ly, specially in the hearing of others;
and yet make it no matter of conscience to make the ly before God, and his
Angels. Ah foollish People, thus to honor your selves, and other vile men (your
likes) more then God himself, and the Angels with him: and with all, base in
your Pride; who will rather bear the ly at your own mouth then at an others.
When a man speaks against his knowledge, his own heart tells his tongue it
lies: which to put up quietly, argues both a graceless, and an abject spirit.
Whereas both grace, and true courage also may be shown in bearing the ly at an
others mouth, by overcoming such indignation, and anger ryseing thereat, as is
harder to conquer then a City.

The Devil is the father of lies: which whilst they, in the John* 8.
womb of whose heart he begets them, impute to other, and better causes
mooveing them thereunto; they are but like harlots, who for their credits sake,
father their bastards upon honest men. Many things even good, may occasion
lying (as all good, may do all evil) but no thing can bring it forth, and
cause it, save the womb of our own corrupt heart imprignated by the devil. Now
if both by the Law of God, and light of nature, it be an abominable confusion,
for a woman to lie down before a beast; what is it for man or woman to
prostitute Levit. 18.
themselves to Satan for the gendring of so misshapen a monster, as a ly is?
And very rightly is a ly called monstrous, considering both the devils kinds,
of which it comes, and also the disproportion in it, often between the speech,
and the thing spoken; and always between the tongue, and heart of the speaker.
Neither does the goodness of the meaning, though never so good, excuse the evil
of the doing, when as a ly is told. He that tells a ly for God, is an accepter
of persons, and God will surely reprove Job. 13. 1 John. 3 Romans 3.
him, says Job. And no marvayl. Since his own heart condemns him, God which
is greater then his heart, and knows all things, will condemn him much more.
And if a ly told, that through it the truth of God may more abound to his
glory, procure just condemnation; what may they expect that use to ly for
meaner, though good ends? He that tells a ly for a good end, puts the Devil
into Gods service* which neither his truth needs, nor his holiness will endure,
but he that tells a ly for an evil purpose (as the most do to cover preceding
evils, which they are more ashamed to confess, then to practice) helps therein
the Devil in his own business. But whosoever loves, and makes a ly has no
right to the tree of life, nor shall enter Revel. 22
the gates into the holy City, but shall remayn without, with dogs, and
sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, we see with whom the
Lord ranks liars, what reckning soever the world makes of them, or they of
themselves.

He that tells one ly is not only the more prone to tell another, and so a
third (which is common to all evil doers) but (for the most part) necessitated
so to do for the covering of the former; as beggars cover one patch with
another; and that a lesser with a greater, and often a simple ly with a false
oath, as was Peter's case. Besides, he that is once taken in a manifest ly will
hardly escape suspicion when he speaks the truth, that I may not say with one
that he deserves not to be trusted, no not in that wherein he desires you would
not trust him. Neither does he wrong himself alone for after time, but others
also, Plautus.
who speak the truth. By somes lying, others when they speak Bernard.
truly, are not credited: specially such as have any conformity with them in
other things, that is often seen in effect, which is said of the Host, that being
once deceaved by one that held his hat before his eyes, when he gave thanks, at
meat, would never trust any afterward that used that fashion.

CAP. XIIII. Of knowledge, and Ignorance.
THe first line of the repaired Image of God in Coloss. 3.
man, and that by which he is first united to God is sound knowledge: the second
is the sincere love of the heart: which draw with them in the Zanchy
third place, the other affections, and senses of soul, and body. As the wagon
is guided by the waggonner, Math. 6.
and he by his ey: so is the body by the soul, and it by the ey of
understanding, and knowledge. If the ey be single, the whole body will be full of
light. Tertullian.


To beleev a thing futher then we know it, is indeed impossible; to love it,
lightness; to hate it injustice; seeing it may deserv the contrary, for ought we
know.

He that knows not in his measure, what he ought to know (specially in the
matters of God) is but a beast amongst men: He that knows what is simply
needful, and no more; is a man amongst men: But he who knows (according to the
helps vouchsafed him of God) what may well be known; and so far, as to direct
himself and others aright; is as a God amongst men. And to this purpose the
Lord tells Moses, that he should be to his brother Aaron, Exodus 4.
in stead of God. Such bear the lively Image of Gods wisdom.

The knowledge even of things evil is good, and the greater the better, so as
it be neither experimental, nor with approbation, nor have other infectious
accessorie joined with it. The Apostle knew Satan's devises better 2 Cor. 2.
then the Corinthians did: And God (only wise, and good) only knows all the
both good and evil of men, and Angels. And so pleasing a thing is knowledge to
Prove. 15.
reasonable Creatures, not unmeasureably degenerated (as the light is pleasant
to him that has eyes to behold Eccles. 11
it) that not only they who strive to attain unto it by likely means; but even
many, who hold a course tending to all ignorance, and error, do desire it, as
a natural good: and if not much the thing it self, yet the opinion of it;
hating the imputation of ignorance, as a matter vile, and reproachful. By how
much the more monstrous are many, and grown out of kind; who make reckning,
that it concerns not them to get, or have any more knowledge, then is simply
necessary for the maintaining of a poor, barren, and half-bruitish life?

How many, specially of the meaner sort (to let pass men's secure, yea affected
ignorance, in Divine things) would think it half curiosity in themselves, or
others of their rank, to know the East from the West; or what the reason is of
the Suns setting, and rising again every day; though they see the thing
continually before their eyes? The punishment of Nabuchednezzar is upon such
people, who had an Oxes heart in Daniel 4.
a man's body.

Of them that seriously desire, and carefully use means to obtain knowledge, the
ends are very different. Some desire to know that they might know; which is
curtositie: Bernard.
Some that they might be known; and that is vanity: Some only to make profit
of their knowledge; and that is covetousness: Some, on the other side, to
edify, and better themselves; and this is true wisdom: And some withal, to do
good to others; which is godly charity.

The means to get knowledge, specially Divine; are, First to love it: If thou
cryest after knowledge, and liftest Prove. 3.
up thy voice for understanding: If thou seek her, as silver, and searchest
for her, as for hid treasures; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord,
and find the knowledge of God. The second is the knowledge of our ignorance: It
being an effect of Christ's coming, that John 9.
they, which see not (to wit, in the conscience of their own blindness) might
see; and that they which see, might be made blind. To which join that of the
Philosopher, Seneca.
that many more would attain to knowledge, and wisdom, if so many did not think,
that they had already attained to it. A third is the fear of God, to which Ps.
25.
he has made the promise of revelation of his secrets; and to teach such the
way which they shall choose: who will also set themselves the most carefully to
learn it. A fourth is prayer, by which this wisdom and knowledge, James 1.
as with a strong hand, is fetched from Heaven. A fifth is the reading and
meditating upon (specially) the Divine Scriptures, and withal, other approved
Authors. For, as the affections are most moved by hearing, so the judgment is
best informed by reading. The last means is the company, and society of wise,
and understanding men: whereupon it was, that the Queen of Sheba pronounced the
Servants of Solomon happy, which continually stood before him to hear his
wisdom. They who profit not in knowledge, and wisdom by conversing with wise
men, are unworthy of their company; and worthy to keep or keep with Oxen, and
Asses.

Besides the forementioned means of getting knowledge; there is a mediocritie,
and mean-nesse of outward estate not a little advantageable to this purpose:
which if it be too low, and depressed, keeps down the disposition ingenuous,
and apt to great things; as his Emblem imports, who holds a wing in Alciat.
the one hand; but has the other clogged with a great stone. On the other
side, a state great, and prosperous usually lifts up men above the love of
knowledge, and learning; making them arrogant in themselves, and fastidious of
the labor, and industry requisite for the getting of understanding; and oftens
indangers the very quenching of that spark of natural desire, to become wise
(which God has kindled Genes. 3.
in all men's breasts) in bodily, and beastly sensualities. Hereupon it was,
that Plato judged the Cyrenians Plutarch
by reason of their prosperous estate, incapable of any good information, and
constitution of a Commonwealth by good Laws. Man is in honor, Psalm. 49.
and understands not; he is like the beasts that perish: and not
understanding, he perishes like the beasts, and worse. Few of great state in
the world, are humainly; fewer Divinely wise.

The knowing to do good, and the not doing it, is sin: not because ^ames 4.
Bernard.
it is known, but because it is not practiced: as meat undigested hurts the
body, not because it is taken into the stomach, but because it is not by
concoction turned into good nourishment.

Papists call ignorance the mother of devotion; and so make reckning, that, if
they (the multitude especially) be ignorant enough, they are devout enough. But
the Philosopher, though a Heathen, who thought all sin Socrates.
to come of ignorance, shot nearer the mark then those left handed Christians.
And in truth, where the reasonable faculties of understanding and will come to
work; the will therefore wills, or nills a thing, because it is judged good or
bad in the particular, by the practical understanding: whose office it is to
direct the will in its choice. For example. Peter though knowing, and judging
it in thesi, and in the general, better to confess Christ, then to deny him;
yet, being in the Highpriests Hall, and in the midst of his enemies, thought
it, in that particular place, and case, and state of things, better to deny his
Master, then to confess him: better I mean, not in regard of that good, which
we call honest, and virtuous; but profitable, and commodious, for his present
peace. He neither would nor could have chosen the denying of him, but as a good
apparent, and in show.

Ignorance is not always blameworthy, but then only, when we are ignorant of
that which we should know. Yea, not only some ignorance, but (which is more)
even some error is, in a sort, commendable: as when we judge of men, whose
hearts we know not, by the outward appearances, which they make, though they be
inwardly, and in truth, nothing less. So Philip charitably, and Christianly
judged Simon Magus a true believer, and Acts 8.
accordingly baptized him; though in truth, he then were, and soon after
appeared to be in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. In some other
cases, ignorance, though it justify not wholly, yet excuses a failing in part;
and that more, or less, as the thing whereof we are ignorant, either is more,
or less necessary to be known of us; or can be known more, or less easily:
and thus the Servant that knows Luke 12.
not his Masters will, and commits things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten
with fewer. On the contrary, there is an ignorance, which both shows, and
makes the ignorant culpable of greater judgment. And that is either affected,
or inflicted. Affected, when a man either of purpose shuts his eyes, lest he
should take knowledge Zanchy
of the sin, which he loves, and is loath to forsake* or purposely neglects the
use of the means of attaining to knowledge; or does the things, upon which
ignorance cannot but follow; as in making himself drunken: or fills the eyes of
the mind with the dust of wilful prejudice, and partiality. Inflicted, when
God to recompense Romans 1.
former disobedience, gives men up to a mind void of judgment, in the things
discernable by the very light of Nature. Thus not to know, nor do the will of
our Master, deserves double stripes.

CAP. XV. Of Simplicity, and Craftiness.
SImple persons are prone to suspect, that all wise men are crafty: and
crafty mates to despise all honest men, as simple, and silly. The simpleness
of the former makes them suspicious: and the naughtiness of the latter causes
them to measure other men's shoes by their own last; and to conceit, that none
are honest, but for want of wit to deceav. But both experience, and reason
teach, that craftiness, and deceit argue men to be Seneca. Bodin.
conscious of their own imbecillitie, and weakness, one way, or other; which
makes them (Hare-like) to trust to the double, and turn, rather then to the
right on course. And so, many of shallow wits, improving thoroughly, their skill
to deceav, prove their crafts-masters that way: showing that craft and
fraudulencie stand more in the wills, then wits of men. I ad, that as David by
seeming besides himself, deceaved 1 Samuel 2^
Achish: so many make advantage of their simpleness, to deceav the more
easily. For, appearing simple, they are unsuspected: and though they be taken
something tardi; yet if the matter be not very foul; men are ready, in
compassion of their weakness, rather to ascribe it to their want of wit, then
of honesty.

And as this of simple appearance is one; so are their other singular engines
of deceit; specially if they fall into the hands of such, as know how to use
them. The first is the show, and appearance of honesty, especially of
Religion: and therefore the preamble of the whorish woman Prove. 7.
for the inveighling of the simple youth, was, that she had her peace-offrings
upon her, and had paid her vows. And indeed, what good heart would suspect him
of unfaithfulness with men, that seems entire with God, and to walk under the
conscience of his presence, and judgment? A second is flattery, by which even
wise men are made fools, and led as it were, by the lip. By this the Devil
brought ou^ first Parents in Paradise into a fools Paradise, by beating them in
hand, that in following his counsel, they were in a way to become as Gods. A
third is the mingling of some Genes. 3. Ireneus
truth with falsehood, and matter of deceit (as hucksters do their wares good
with bad) that so impostures may not be discerned by being viewed alone. The
last is to keep touch in smaller things, that thereby men may take their
opportunity with more both ease, and advantage to deceav in greater; as Livius.
is said of Fabius Maximus.

The safest way not to be deceaved by others, specially to our Spiritual
prejudice, is not to deceav our selves: which till we do, no other can deceav
us. Hence is it, that God in his Word so oftens warns us, that we be not
deceaved, and that we deceav not our selves, and our own Souls. But and if we
either put out our own eyes with our finger, through passion, or prejudice, or
willingly wink at dangers, which we might foresee; who will pity us, if we
fall into the ditch of deceit which others dig for us?

Whilst crafty men deceav others, they themselves (though they little consider
it) are most deceaved by Satan, whose instruments they are, fitted for his
hand, and purposes. And what avails it the ravenous bird to devour that, which
belongs not to her, if therewith, she her self be taken by the leg, in the
Fowlers snare? Besides, even in respect of men howsoever such wi^y-beguili^s
may for a time (if they carry close) amongst other advantages, get the opinion
of prudent, and politic persons, and be accounted the more Petrarch
wise, by how much they have the more skill to deceav; yet if their craftiness
come to be found out, and appear; they become oftens a prey to all, and always
a scorn to the most simple; like the wily fox who being once catched, has his
skin Lord Willoughby.
plucked over his ears, wherewith every fool will have his cap furred, as a
worthy Lord was wont to say. Such are heirs apparent to Achitophels comfort,
and reward. 2 Samuel 17


His rule was peremptory that said, A wise man will not Seneca.
deceav, nor cannot be deceaved: So was his profession both of wisdom and
honesty loud, who chose this Motto, F^llere vel falli res odiosa mihi: And
though usually it be worse to deceav, then to be deceaved (though Austin (and
Austin*
who not) met with many that would deceav, but never with any that would be
deceaved) as a sin is worse then a cross: yet whereas to be deceaved is
always either a cross, or a sin, or both; a man may, in some case, and manner
deceav, without either; as did Athanasius the President Lucius, who Eusebius*
pursuing him, and approaching near the boat, wherein he was, asked for
Athanasius, and was answered by him (whom he knew by name, but not by face)
that Athanasius was hard before him, and that if he made have, he might
presently overtake him: who thus escaped, deceaving his Arian persecuter, by
speaking nothing but the truth, and that both wisely, and with good conscience.

CAP. XVI. Of Wisdom, and Folly.
SOme have been found not only contented with, but glorying in the name of
irreligious, and unhonest: but hardly ever any were willing to bear the note of
foolish, or unwise. And even of them, in whom is found some true love of virtue
and goodness, how few are there, that either indeed do, or would be thought to
do any thing, in favor thereof, which might, in the least degree, impeach the
credit of their wisdom, in the eyes of the partial world? So fain would all be
counted, though few, in truth, be wise. The main reason of this seems to be,
that whereas the want of wisdom imports impotencie, and inabilitie; Irreligion,
and dishonestie are by election, and free choice. The pride of men, if Gods
grace correct it not, makes them more impatient of a want either inward, or
outward, arguing them to be weak, and impotent; then of a grosser vice in
either, upon their own free election, and choice of will. And hence it is, that
many boast of things done by them for some particular advantage, which they
know to be evil, and unlawful.

It is the first, and a great point of wisdom to know wherein true wisdom
stands: specially, seeing that the thing, which God calls wisdom, and which the
world calls wisdom, are as different, as Heaven, and Earth; yea as Heaven, and
Hell. That cannot but be best, which God so valueth. It is known from the
Worlds wisdom, by first, its object: Secondly, the properties which attend it:
Thirdly, the School where it is learnt: Fourthly, the end to which it tends.
The object is Christ primarily who of God is made unto us wisdom; and in whom
are hidden all 1 Gor. 1. Coloss. 2.
the treasures thereof, which the Gospel the wisdom of God opens unto us. He
that knows Christ aright in the Gospel, knows both God, and man, and the most
gracious, and glorious effects of both united in one. Secondly, The James 3.
wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without jangling, and without
hypocrisy: The other is clean contrarily qualified: thick, and muddie with
lusts, and monstrously compounded, arrogant, self-willing, and selfloving,
inexorable, quarrelsom, crafty, and cruel. Thirdly, The wisdom of God is
learnt in the School of Christ, and upon the Book of Holy Scriptures: the other
has so many Masters, as there are corrupt either lusts within a man, or
customs in the World. Lastly, The wisdom of God teaches to provide surely for
the Spiritual, and Eternal state, though with prejudice to the bodily, and
temporal: The other bids, make sure work for the flesh, and pinch not it,
though the Spiritual man speed hardly by it. He that will be wise to God, must
be a fool to the World: which yet makes him not a fool in worldly affairs, but
skillful how to order them aright, both for the Spiritual life, and natural
also, as far as it is subordinate unto it.

The highway to wisdom Divine or humain is to observe and consider the reasons,
and causes of things. He that believes a thing because God affirms it, shows
faith; he that does it because God commands it, obedience: but he that joins
with these the reasons of the Doctrine, or exhortation in the Word gets into
his heart the props of wisdom against the storms of temptation both of
unbelief, and disobedience. So in humain affairs, he that minds, or remembers
things to be thus, or thus, gets skill in the things: but he that observes, and
learns the reasons, and causes why they come so to pass, or are so done, he
takes the right course to become wise in the matter, of what kind soever.

A wise man is the same, though his outward state be changeable, yea changed
from a prosperous to an afflicted, or the contrary way: else he but hits right
at aventure, when he does well in either of both. His condition is rather
happily fitted to him (as the hour once a day comes to the hand of the Clock
that stands always still) then he to it, by true wisdom. A wise man will wish
the Plutarch
more prosperous state, but fear the more afflicted, and use that which falls,
and his wisdom, in it. The Sayler, which wants skill, may miss his course, or
drown his Ship in a fair wind; but he needs most skill in a tempest: So is the
wisdom of a man most seen in the right guiding of himself, and his affairs in a
stresse of trouble, and affliction* I have seen it in experience, that many,
specially women, and women like men, who have showed forth much goodness in a
quiet, and prosperous state of things, if any great storm of trial have
happened to have overtaken them; have, through the want of wisdoms chart, and
compass, lost all, and not only been altogether uncomfortable, but above
measure, burthensom both to others, and themselves. The Apostle by the work of
the wisdom of God knew both how to be abused, and how to abound. Philip. 4.


He that is not wise for himself first, cannot be wise for another, either in
bodily, or spiritual things; though he may do him good in both. But that is
rather by occasion, or in humor; then upon ground of true wisdom. God, and
nature, which teach every man to love himself most; and his neighbor (truly
and heartily) as himself; teach him withal, to use his best wit, and skill,
for the promoting of his own welfare. By love of himself I do not mean that
ravenous self-love, which ea^s up all love of God, 2 Timothy 3.
and of other men, save for a man's self: but that affection of created nature,
enclyning every man to procure his own true welfare, to his power, every way.
The former is rather hatred of a man's self in effect; whatsoever the Prove. 29.
positive affection be: But now, the question is, what this himself means.
Himself is not his worldly riches, nor honor, nor any the like appurtenance;
but his Soul, and body in a convenient state, and constitution, to perform good
duties, and to obtain true happiness. He that is wise for this himself, is
wise to God, and for other men's true good. But for that other common, and
commonly called self love, in which men foolishly mistake, by taking that for
themselves, which is not: The best that can be wished to such, is, that they
have little wit, and less authority: and that specially considering the
deepest wisdom of such vermin is, not to care, how much and in how great things
they harm others, so they may benefit themselves never so little, in comparison;
like the thief, that to get the Gold-ring, would eat off the finger upon which
it stuck close.

If the wealthiest life were the best, wisdom were not so much to be desired;
considering how many mere Naba^s, and rich fools the World has. And if the
merryest life were the best, it were better to be a fool, then wise. The Fagle
continually gnaws the heart of Prometheus: And in much wisdom, is much grief;
so as he that increases knowledge, Eccl. 1*
increases sorrow, says the wise man, out of his own experience: Whereas, on
the contrary, natural fools (and many artificial fools also) almost always
laugh, and are merry; as having neither grace to mourn for sin, not wit to be
much troubled with crosses. But for all that, Chapt. 2.
wisdom excels folly, as far as light excels darkness: yea for that, if
there were nothing else: Seeing by the sadness of the countenance the heart is
made better; whereas Chapt. 7.
the laughter of fools is like the crackling of thorns under a pot.

There is in truth no greater recreation in the world, then to converse with
wise men. Yet many cannot make themselves merry, without a fool: though Solomon
Cartwright
amongst all the vain delights, which he could devise, or procure, got not a
fool to make him merry with. Such companions of fools might for the most part
save that charg, and say that in earnest, which a wise man said for fashion:
When at any time I would be merry with a fool, I Senoca.
laugh at my self.

Solomon in his Proverbs uses to call good, and godly men, wise; and wicked
persons, fools: partly because there is folly, and madness too, in all
wickedness; partly because the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, as both
making men careful to learn their duties, and having a promise of direction in
the way that they shall Psalm. 25.
choose: and partly to free true piety, and goodness from the reproach of
folly, and simpleness cast upon Acts 17. Romans 1.
them by worldly-wise men: who, as the Heathen-wise counted the Doctrine of the
Gospel foolishness, so do these worldly-wise judge all true conscience of it,
and obedience unto it to arise from want of wit, and superstitious simplicity.
But say men what they will; the Gospel is the wisdom of God; and the obedience
of it, the wisdom Deuteronomy. 4.
of Gods people, in his sight, and in all theirs, that judge aright: which to
neglect, and true happiness in it, is the madness of folly.

We say of some, that they have good wits, if wise men had them in keeping. But
as wooden daggers are fitter for some, then those of Iron, and Steel; so a
blunt wit is indeed fittest for him, who wants discretion, and wisdom how to
use it: without which the sharp is as dangerous, as is the sharp Knife in a
Childs hand, or Dagger at a Fools back. And as sharp wits without wisdom are
dangerous, so are they pernicious without grace: serving to make men, both more
incorrigible, and more inexcusable, and fitter Instruments of the Devil, for
mischief: even as the fat soil unordered brings forth greatest plenty of
thorns, and weeds. The Serpent was more subtle then any beast of the Field:
Genes. 3.
and of him before the rest the Devil made choice to deceav by: who accordingly
so well fitted his turn at the first, as ever since he has well liked, and
much used such subtle, and Serpent-like Instruments for mischievous purposes.
But the Serpent, who was more subtle then other beasts, was also cursed by the
Lord above all other beasts: and so are those Serpent-like men: for whom how
much better were it, if they had been born Idiots, and natural Fools; then to
abuse Gods good gifts of natural wit, to the dishonor of the giver, as they
do?

CAP. XVII. Of Discretion.
DIscretion is a skill enabling a man to improve himself in all his affairs,
and whatsoever he is, or has, to best advantage, according to variable
circumstances, and occasions. Sapience, or wisdom stands in bare contemplation
of things excellent gathered from principles, and conclusions: Prudence, and
discretion are for practice: which if we will distinguish; the latter,
discretion, is to be restrained to things fit, or unfit. This discretion is
neither wit, nor wisdom, nor learning, nor any Art liberal, or illiberall; but
that which shows how to govern them all conveniently, Plutarch
and every other thing with them: like Iphicrates, who was neither legionarie
Soldier, nor Archer, nor Targeter, but one that could rule, and use all these.

And of such use is this discretion, in the whole course of our life in regard
of the infinite variety of circumstances, according to which particulars are
performed conveniently, or inconveniently; as that we may daily observe men, of
lesser means for the World as riches, trading, and skill in faculties, and yet
doing well in it, yea better by discreet manageing their little; then others,
wanting this discretion, with far greater helps, and measure of means
otherwise. Yea, even in Divine matters some of less knowledge, zeal, diligence,
and other general graces, by the benefit of this particular virtue, are found
more serviceable to God, and profitable to men, then others wanting it, though
far exceeding them in the former. Discretion is to be preferred before wit, or
art, or learning; and only comes after goodness in worth.

As the Serpent-like generation (specially where truth and honesty goes with a
scratcht face, and is in disgrace of the times) esteems men square and upright
in their courses, for witless and silly: so must the more shallow-headed take
heed, that they sensure not discreet carriage, and handling of things, for
crafty, and unhonest: considering that other men may do that in good, and
honest discretion, which they, by defect thereof, could not do but in evil
conscience. The same honesty, and sincerity may continue in a man, though in
discretion applying himself diversely, to diverse occasions: as the hand remains
the same, whether closed into a fist, or extended Seneca*
abroad, or bended this, or that way, as occasion servs.

Of all enemies this virtue has none greater, then pride; which deprives men
(able otherwise) of much, and fools of all use of discretion: as making them
either rash, by which they do not; or so presumptuous in themselves, as they will
not restrain, and humble their understanding to due consideration of
circumstances of conveniencie; in the ordering whereof discretion stands. And
hence it is, that proud persons above others, fall into many things uncomely,
and inconvenient. On the contrary, God guides the humble in Ps. 25.
this way of discretion, amongst others. Lastly, as the discerning 1 Cor. 12.
of Spirits is one of the gifts of Gods Spirit; so are we by prayer to beg at
his hands this grace, that we may be enabled Phil. 1.
to discern both of persons, and things which differ, so far as concerns us in
our places: without which we go but by peradventures, and may do more harm then
good, even when we both mean well, and do the thing which is good in it self,
if unseasonably.

CAP. XVIII. Of Experience.
Only God is not taught by experience, to whose knowledge all things are
present at all times, and before all times. But there is no Creature so perfect
in wisdom, and knowledge, but may learn something for time present, and to come,
by times past. The day following (says one) is Shcoller to that which went
Seneca. Politian.
before. And the virtue (says another) which Nature denies, experience brings
to wise men. So as, though it be the Mistress of fools, who will learn no
wisdom, but that which is beaten into them with rods, through a torn skin: yet
are the wisest taught many things by it, and so become of commendable
admirable: as Antigonus Plutarch
being asked, who was the best Captain in his time, answered, Pirrhus, if he
grew old. And even experience teaches, that there are many particulars, and
those tending both to our natural, and spiritual state, which neither our own
wit, art, study, or conscience, nor the information, counsel, or example of
others can teach us; which yet we learn by this dull Mistress Experience.

This, if it be ripe, and but joined with any indifferent capacity, and
diligence, to compare together events past, and present occurrances; will
affoard better help for direction, in doubtful cases, then any other ordinary
rules: as a man can better in the dark find the way, to which he has been
used, then another that never went it can do, by the best instructions, and
directions that can be given him. And it seems to have been one end why God
gave our great grandfathers in the first Age of the Josephus.
World, so long life, that by experience, and observation they might learn the
skill, and art of sundry courses, specially of the Stars: the knowledge
whereof otherwise (without miracle) would hardly, if at all, have been attained
to. I conclude upon the premises that men of experience (with which wit, and
sometimes authority without wit, is still at jar) are not lightly to be
gainsaid, or neglected in their faculty: seeing experience is gotten by sense,
which easily ers not in its proper object: whereas the discourse of reason is
very subject to swarv in inferring and concluding of things. Yet has this
plodding guide experience this danger in it, that it leads men on in the beaten
way to which it has been used, without due consideration of such variable
circumstances, as fall in, and make cases past, and present, though alike in
general nature, yet in particular applycation, and consideration very unlike:
of which differences wit, and art make men more able to discern.

Though all knowledge be good in it self, as tending Austin.
to perfect the understanding: yet the getting of it is not always good; as
when it is gotten by experience of punishment, specially of sin: as our first
Parents got the knowledge of evil both ways, to their, and our cost, in eating
the forbidden fruit. A man may buy Gold; so may he experimental knowledge too
dear. Solomon seeking by experience to try the delights of all things Eccl. 1.
and 2.
under Heaven, and being too bold in wading in that stream, that he might know
the depth of it, fell in, and without Gods special helping hand, had been
drowned therein for ever. Woeful then is the experience, which is gotten by
sin, and misery, our own, or other men's either: like that of Hexophilus the
Physician, that butchered six hundred Tertullian.
men, that he might search into man's bodily nature: destroying man, that he
might know him.

The Servants of God are sometimes so pressed with the sense of present
temptations, as that their special comfort arises from the recourse they have
to the experience of Ps. 77.
the days of old, and years of antiquity: considering that God casts not off
for ever, nor forgets to be favorable to his any more. So some in age, and
under temptations, have received more comfort from their former experience,
though of a weaker measure, of grace, in their Childhood, then they could of a
greater, in their riper years.

CAP. XIX. Of Examples.
THe rules in some Sciences, especially speculative, and for truth only, are
grounded upon examples, and gathered by wise observation, and induction of
particulars: but so are not Divine, and Moral rules. Neither is any thing to
be reputed good, and just in it self, and so exemplarie to us, because such,
and such men have done it: but they have done it (if doing their duty therein)
because it is good, just, and lawful: and so are unto us examples of Faith,
patience, mercy, and the like; as they in their particular courses expressed
these, and the like virtues; and not otherwise. Only he, that can do nothing
but good, is our absolute example in things which concern us.

Particular facts commended in Holy Scripture are general examples, and bind
to imitation, when either Greenh(...)*
the same thing is els-where commanded in general; or where either the ground,
or drift, or equitte, of the thing in general. And thus the very both
myraculous, and meritorious works of Christ (though in their particular nature,
causes, and ends inimitable) are so far forth our examples, and to be followed
by us, as the Holy virtues of Faith, patience, and obedience toward God, and
of love, and compassion toward men shine forth in them.

Moral examples serve first for confirmation, and commendation unto others of
the truth, and goodness contained in precepts; and are therefore called by
some the pledges of rules. Secondly, for direction in particulars Plato.
agreeable unto precepts, but not expressed in them. Thirdly, to till men on in
obedience active, or passive: for even lazy travelers will hold out with good
company, which beat the path before them. And this help examples specially
affoard, by taking away the excuse of frailty, that we are ready to make,
against the obedience, Calvin.
which yet we confess, and are convinced that we ow. Now the presidents, and
examples of godly men, as of Abraham the Father of the Faithful in believing
under hope Romans 4.
against hope; and of Job in keeping patience in extreamitie of trials, and the
like, are as a Cloud of witnesses James 5. Hebr. 12.
going before us, as did the Pillar of Cloud before the Israelites in the
Wilderness to show them the way: and do testify against our withdrawing
hearts, that other frayl men, as we are, by the power of the same grace of God,
whereof we are made partakers, have performed due obedience unto God, in such,
and greater trials, then ours are: So that as in precepts we have the Word of
God, and his will in it to direct us; so in those patterns of godliness we
have his work, and, as it were his visible hand reached down from Heaven to
lead us in the way, which by his Word we are appointed to walk in. By which if
we profit not we take the Name of our God in vain both in his Word, and Works;
in which he makes himself known for our good.

He who makes another his ensample, really acknowledges both the want, and the
desire of that perfection in himself, which he imitates in the other. And so
Parmeno in his (how artificial soever) imitating of the Plutarch
gruntling of a Sow, aimed but at a swinish perfection: The like is to be said
of childrens playing of Bulls, and Bears, and Horses. To which purpose tended
the saying Lord Willoughby.
of a great Lord, that Women's imitation of men (as their perfection) in
apparel, gesture, and the like, might better be born; then men's effeminate,
and degenerate imitation of Women. Which also the practice of Lycurgus
confirmed Plutarch
in trayning up maids in manly exercises, and making them thereby, after a
sort, masculine; whereas usually by riot, and wantonness, men are transformed
into women, and made feminine.

Many think themselves good enough, if there be any worse then they: But we
should not strive with the worst, but with the best rather; making apace, and
as fast as we can, after them, though we come never so far behind them, in
wisdom, and goodness: as the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians to be followers
of him, as he was 1 Cor. 11
of Christ. Yea, further, as Eupompus would imitate Nature, Plutarch
and no workman in Painting: So neither should we stint our endeavors, and
desires absolutely at the degree of goodness, to which any mere man is come
before us: but should aim at the very perfection, which the Law of God
requires. Men in shooting aim at the White, though sometime they miss the But.
Only the Law of Psalm. 19.
God which only is perfect, must be made by us the absolute rule of our life,
and ways.

As Landmarks are set up by the Seashore not only to teach men which way to
take, but sometimes also which to leav: So are sundry examples even of good men
propounded in Holy Scripture not for imitation, but for warning. And a very
preposterous course it is to follow good men, wherein they do evil: which they
that use, are like unto Apes, and Dotterels, that are aptest to imitate men in
their mops, and mows, and unseemly gestures. And if it were folly in the
Persians to Plutarch.
esteem such men the fairest, as had hooked noses, because Cyrus their King had
such a one: It is mere madness in Christians to deem vices virtues, and
errors truths, or either the one or other to be embraced, through
superstitious admiration of some men's persons, in which they are found. But as
the Egyptians following the Israelites with the Exodus 14.
dark part of the Cloud toward them, were drowned in the Sea, which the other
passed through safely: so they who follow good men in their faylings, and not in
their virtues, shall surely be punished, when the other escape.
Notwithstanding, although examples of others great, and ancient cannot make
sins to be no sins: yet does it something Beza.
lessen their blame who are mis^^d by such guides; as it was in the Polygamy of
the Patriarcks; and both has been, and is in other the like traditionall evils.

Some pretend the examples of good men in their faylings, for the excuse of the
evils, which they themselves have a mind to do, and would do, though none ever
had done them before them, or should do them after them: Others are indeed
misled by their aberrations. In both the Devil shows himself his crafts-master.
And hardly can he more improve evil, then when he so works, that a good, or
great man's virtues (which he cannot abolish) should countenance, and commend
his vices to others. By how much therefore the more any person excels in
knowledge, wisdom, virtue, or authority; by so much the carefuller must he be,
that he furnish not from thence the enemy of Gods glory, and man's salvation,
with weapons of advantage for evil, from whence the special means of his
overthrow therein, are to be taken; as, by Gods appointment, they are, from
great, and good men. And if any thing possibly could, surely this would make
the very Saints in Heaven sorrowful for their faylings upon Earth; that
others having by their example, o^ other provocations, been drawn to evil
(whereof they never repenting, as the principals did) do for the same suffer
the eternal wrath of God, which they by true repentance have escaped.

Examples of Superiors are strong coards to draw on others, either to good, or
evil: in which regard, it is rightly said, that great men have no small either
virtues, or vices: with which that of Austin consorts; The joy for the Austin.
great, is great, if they be good, because it is not for them alone. So on the
contrary, when Peter dissembled for fear of Call. 2.
them of the Circumcision; not only the other Jews dissembled likewise with
him, but Barnabas also was carried away with that their dissimulation. How good
were it for inferiors, that Superiors minded this, ^s they ought? How much
better for themselves? That they might be warned to take heed, that they
increase not the guilt, and extent of their personal sins by making them
exemplarie. He that having many standing under him, falls from aloft, may
easily bruise others besides himself, with his fall. And if the blind do lead
the blind, though both fall into Math. 1^.
the ditch, yet the guide falls under; and so is pressed, besides his own, with
the others burden, that falls after, and upon him. As, on the contrary, he
that furthers others by his holy ensample, in virtue, and godliness has his
part in their goodness also both in the eyes of God, and men.

CAP. XX. Of Counsel.
Counsel, by which we consider wisely, whither, Keckerm*
what, and how things are to be done, for profitable ends, is a sacret thing;
and withal so Menand^r
necessary to be taken not only with God, and a man's self, but with others
also; as that Solomon, though peerlesse in 1 King. 12* Prove. 11. and 12.
wisdom, yet had his Counselors about him. Without counsel people perish, and
purposes are disapointed; but in the multitude of Conncellors there is both
safety, and stabilitie, It is Gods peculiar to be all sufficient in himself
whether for wisdom, or otherwise. No one man but stands need of another; and if
for little else, yet for counsel.

He that gives counsel to another, therein stands in the place of God, who is
the Councellor, and whose Esaias 9.
Mine, Counsel is, and sound wisdom. This, he that gives advice, Prove. 8.
must well weigh, that he neither dishonor the wisdom, and goodness of God,
whose place for the dispencing of these attributes, he sustains therein; nor
wrong him, by whom he is so far honored, as to be sought to, as Gods mouth.
And so must he also that takes counsel; that he may neither seek it at Fools,
which none but Fools will do; nor at godless persons (specially in matter of
conscience) which he that does, desires to deceav himself, and to mock with
God. Now of all Counselors, in whom any wisdom, and goodness is to be found,
the peremptory, and bold are most dangerous: whose custom is to put men upon
extreamities, happily fitting their own ventersom disposition, but oftens above
the strain, and strength of their friends, or reach of reason either. Whereas
Counselors, specially in more difficult, and dangerous cases, should both
very sensibly apprehend the difficulty, and danger of the thing in
deliberation; and withal be careful, that they spur not on their friends whom
they advise, above their pace, lest they tire them by preposterous
inforcements, and put them upon such difficulties, as they are not fit to
struggle with. Wariness is best in advice; and boldness in execution.

Dead men (to wit, in their Books) were accounted by Panormi^.
King Alphonsus, for the best Counselors. And indeed so are they in regard of
one of the best properties of a good Councellor, which is sincerity, and
unpartialnesse. A virtue rare, specially in inferiors, who too often look
asquint in their counsel: as either casting how to advantage themselves in
councelling others; or in following the direction of Achabs messengers to
Michajah, by speaking that which is 1 King. 22
good to, rather then for the ^ing. Which latter calamity befalls great men not
only by base perfidiousnesse of flatterrers, but oftens by a just judgment of
God punishing them with their own desires, and so ordering that they that seek
shall find such as may rather deceav them by flattery, then trouble them with
the truth. Yet in these dead Counselors (Books) there is wanting a lively, and
likely discerning of such particular circumstances, as must be observed, and
gathered by present discourse, that men counsel not at adventure; which no
Books can sufficiently provide for. In Books we best learn general grounds of
direction; but that skill is unperfect, and must have joined with it a large,
and piercing discourse of the Counselors mind, who by comparing together
things past, and present, with due respect to singular circumstances incident,
is able probably to gather things to come; in which the life of counsel
consists.

Some will eloquently propound, and earnestly persuade to good and profitable
courses in general; but in the mean while, give no direction, how or by what
particular means to prosecute them, for the attaining to the desired end. Such
Counselors are like him that is earnest in persuading with a travellor to hold
the right way to the place, where he would be; but shows him not which it is,
and what are the marks of it: Or to him, who trims the Plutarch.
Lamp diligently, and fits it to burn, but poures no Oil into it. As we
understand even most necessary things in vain, except Erasmus.
we love them: So blind love (which alone in effect, the bellows of loud, but
windy persuasion kindles in the breasts of many) avails nothing, where knowledge
guides us not in our way.

The fewest of them that ask good counsel, do mean indeed to follow it. Some
ask counsel only in good manners, and to make show of respect to friends:
Others for a Ierem. 42 Ezech. 14*
color, that they did nothing, but having first heard, what such and such (it
may be, wise and godly) could say about it: And not a few, though they pretend
to ask, yet indeed intend rather to give counsel; that is, to have the courses
allowed by others, which they themselves affect. A man may have diverse ends, in
requiring the adviee of others, and all of them honest, and lawful; provided
he always keep his heart free to receav either information, or confirmation,
or reformation from others, upon good ground.

Three sorts of men though standing most in need of counsel, are many of them
most incapable of it. First, They in great prosperity; Secondly, They in
extreme affliction; And thirdly, Such as are weak, and simple. They of the
first sort are, for the most part, high minded, and lifted up in themselves (
Nabal-like) above the good 1 Samuel 25
counsel of other men, presuming, that they are able enough to direct
themselves. The second are commonly either obdurate, or melted in their misery;
like Wax, either too hard to receav; or too soft to retain any impression, as
the Israelites for anguish of Spirit, harkned not unto Moses the Exodus 6.
messenger of their deliverance. The third are partly incapable of advice,
through simpleness; and partly suspicious, either lest they should be
circumvented by their friends close-minding their own ends; or else thought
weak, and too simple to govern, and manage their own affairs: by which
prejudice it comes to pass, many times, that they become wilful, and headie;
because they would not be thought simple, and unable to direct themselves.

It is a rule, wherein many wise men have agreed, that it is more available for
the Commonwealth to have an evil Prince, and good Counselors, then a Prince
good, and virtuous, with corrupt Counselors about him; for that, it is more
like, that one should be bettered by many, then many be corrupted by one. But
the mischief is, that such as are naught themselves will make choice usually of
such Counselors as themselves are, rather to flatter, then better them: as
contrariwise, the good commonly, will choose such, as may further them in
goodness.

When a thing very inconvenient, and absurd is propounded to us, it is not
best always to manifest any great dislike; though we both have it in our
selves, and our reasons for it, never so present: except either urgent
necessity press a sudden, and violent stop of the matter; or that we have to
do with him, whom we know we can oversway, by our reasons, and authority: lest
by that course our friend take occasion to withdraw himself, and to conceal his
affairs from us, and so to steal misery closely, and, it may be, suddenly
also, if he be bent upon his course; for fear that our importunity should
bring hindrance to his purpose. But it is best, at first, to put off the thing,
and to provoke to further consideration, and so to gain time, with some small
manifestation of dislike for the present; thereby, as it were, pointing, and
making way for our after more vehement disswasions. By which course we shall
have our friends both ear, and heart more open to receav advice from us; as
conceiving, that we neither are forward to cross his design, nor carried
against him, or it, in passion, contempt, or unadvisednesse.

CAP. XXI. Of Thoughts.
MEn say, Thoughts are free, and pay no tribute: and this is true being
understood of men's Custom-houses, where they cannot be searched, but as they
bewray themselves by some outward sign, either word, or work. But so much the
more watchful we had need to be in our selves, over those close commodities,
lest we willingly feed a filthy, though secret sinck within us; which in time
will shame us before men, as it stinks in the mean while, where it is, in the
Nostrils of God; and men for it. Besides, if we do evil in word, or deed, men
may help us, either by contrary examples, or friendly reproofs, or hateful
upbraydings, or just punishments: but against sinful, and unsanctified
thoughts we have no help but from God alone, and our selves, by his grace; to
whom alone they are known.

Every thought of evil is not an evil thought, but only such as to which we
adjoyn either consent of will, or, at least, delight of affection. For besides
the thoughts of, or about evil, which are either in pure speculation, or
natural consideration of the thing, or with averseness of affection from the
matter thought on; there are thoughts merely by suggection from Satan; who
being a Spirit, and having such affinity of nature with our Spirits, and
Souls, can unite, himself, in his suggestions, with our imagination, after a
manner by us unconceavable; and offer unto us thoughts of great evil: which
yet we may by grace so resist, as that they are to be accounted his sin, and
our cross only, who are constrained to bear such temptations; as we are
compelled oftentimes to hear, and bear the ill counsel of wicked men his
Instruments, with sin in them, and grief in our selves; but without our sin, if
we no way hearken unto them: yea with commendation, both in the one, and other,
in the victory of Faith which we obtain over them. Indeed we are too ready to
receav such suggestions; as tinder is to take fire; specially being subtilely
fitted by Satan to our special inclinations, and occasions: and so must be
more careful either to prevent them by nourishing in our selves an abhorring of
them; or to quench them if they arise, by the stream of Holy meditations
running in our hearts.

They whose words, and deeds are faulty, and evil, and yet plead their good
hearts toward God, are like malefactors, who being convinced of theft, or the
like naughtiness, by plain evidence, to their faces; do appeal to the
testimony of such persons for their purgation, as they know cannot be found.
If the hearts of such men could be seen of others, as their works, and words
are, they would appear worse then they; as they do to God who sees them. There
is no evil in the mouth, or hand, which was not in the heart first, as the
stream in the Math. 15 Ambrose.
Fountain: Neither can the flesh be corrupted, except the mind be corrupt first.

Men judge of our thoughts by our words, and actions: but God of our words, and
works by our thoughts; accounting the thing whether good, or evil, as done in
his sight, if once it be resolved on in the purpose of the heart; Thus Abraham
offered up Isaac by Faith; and Judas did that Hebr. 11. John 21.
which he meant to do. And as God judges of us, and of our doings; so ought we
to do our selves. The thoughts of Prove. 12. Cartwright
the righteous are righteous. And by these, good and evil men are best and
trulyest differenced one from another: Whereas all outward works ly common; and
are many of them often exercised equally by good, and bad. No outward works are
so good, but Hypocrites have done them, at times: And few, or none so evil,
but some godly have at some times (by temptation) fallen into them. But how alike
soever the outward faces of such sinful actions be; the difference is great in
the heart of the doer, and is so seen of God to be at the very time of the
doing; and by after and better fruits in their time, so manifested unto men
afterward, to have been at that time, when in the outward evil act no such
difference could appear. But our only comfortable course, and that by which
our hearts are assured before the Lord, is, to provide, that in them may run
constantly so strong a stream of holy purposes, and settled thoughts, as may
both overbear the contrary current of our flesh, and lusts; and also carry
with it our outward man to all good, and godly practices.

CAP. XXII. Of Speech, and Silence.
MAn is endowed above beasts, especially with reason, and with speech to uttet
it: without which, his reason, how deep, and profound soever, were little more
profitable unto others (nor many times to himself neither) then a Spring hidden
in the ground. Hence the tongue is called the Index of the mind: and as by the
Index we know what is in the Book; so do we by the speech what is conceaved in
the heart. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And Math. 12.
so ready is the passage from the heart to the tongue, as that what is
conceaved in the one is usually brought forth by the other: neither does any
outward thing so soon bewray a man, as his words. Though Jacob brought Genes.
28.
his Brother Esaus hands, and neck, and meat, and sauce, and smell, to his
Father Isaak; yet could he not bring his tongue and voice: And though a man put
upon his hands the Gloves of dissimulation, and the Shoes upon his feet, and
mask his face never so cunningly; yet can he hardly so tip his tongue, but, in
a short time, a wise man will discover him, and discern whether he be good, or
bad; specially whether he be wise, or simple. Great is the affinity between
the heart, and mouth: And so the Second Person in Trinity is not called the
Work, John 1. Revel. 19.
but The Word of God.

Solomon in his Proverbs compares the speech of a wise, and righteous man to a
Tree of Life, and to a Fountain of Life, and to many other pleasant, and
profitable things. Which must teach both them that speak to preserv pure that
Cartwright
Fountain, and to prune, dig about, and manure, with all diligence, that Tree;
that it may bring forth fruit to the hearers: And so must it teach them that
hear, not to neglect that benefit, but to admit, and receav the words of truth,
and wisdom, as seed, by which they also Plutarch
may conceav, and bring forth good fruit.

A word spoken in due season is like Aples of Gold in pictures Prove. 15.
of Silver: And so a wise man must provide, that his words be not only Gold
for their worth, but also framed to silver-like opportunity: There being a
time when nothing, a time when something, but no time when all Hug^.
things are to be spoken.

That which is generally spoken of a blessed man, that Psalm. 1.
he is like a Tree that brings forth his fruit in due season, may specially be
applied to the aples of the tongue, and fruit of the lips. For the bringing
forth of which, he that can observe and take a due season, shall as effectually
promote his purpose, as he that takes his pull at the Bell-rising. A fool will
utter all his mind, and is ready to Prove. 29
burst, if he speak not whatsoever he thinks: But a wise man will keep a word
for afterward: and will neither run Seneca.
before, nor neglect; but follow opportunity. Want of wisdom makes men
commonly too forward in speaking, and overmuch wisdom too backward. As the
Bird oftens flies away, whilst the Fowler still seeks to get nearer, and nearer
her: so does golden opportunity many times, whilst we wait too long for
better, and fitter passage for our speech. It is better then to take a
reasonable good opportunity presenting it self, then to adventure the loss of
all by waiting still for a better.

He that takes up the time (specially wise, and godly men being in the
company) with unprofitable (how much more, with ungodly) speech, besides the
account which he must give to God for every vain word, that is, for Math. 12.
evere word not some way or other, profitable; greatly wrongs the whole
company, in hindering the speaking, and hearing of better things by his
vanities; which are like ill humors filling the stomach, and taking from it
both appetite of, and benefit by better meat. Let not Seneca.
thy speech, says one, be vain, but such as servs either to counsel, or to
persuade, or to comfort, or to direct: And the Apostle more Divinely, Let no
corrupt communication come out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use
of edifying, that Ephesians. 5.
it may minister grace unto the hearers. He that does this, is Gods Minister,
in his place; and has his part in the honorable praises of that wise King,
into whose lips grace Psalm. 45.
was poured.

He that can rule his tongue (considering how unruly an Iam. 3.
evil that little member is) is able also to bridle the whole body, and is a
perfect, and entire man, and he to whom no Christian duty is impossible. This
he that cannot do, though he James 1.
seem religious, both to himself, and others, deceavs both; and his Religion is
in vain. If this rule were well minded, and rightly applied; either more would
bridle their tongues, or fewer seem religious to themselves, and others then do.

Many affect speaking in an imperious and commanding accent. Some out of
familiar boldness with friends: But such may easily be more bold then welcome,
if they have not both good knowledge of, and interest in their so commanded
friends. Men write to friends, Yours to command, and offer their service: But
they that will take all, either in substance, or ceremony, which their friends
offer, will weary them in time. Some fools also affect masterfulnesse in
speech, specially with underlings. And of them I have known some so swollen in
the mouth, as they have thought, that if they gave their Servant a better name,
then Sir, or Boy, they lost of their authority. There are also which love to
snarl, and use surly, and currish speech, especially toward inferiors, or
equals either. It is pity such are not over some great men's Dogs, to order,
and govern them. Such become unsociable, and burthensom, and abuse the singular
benefit of God, and Nature (the tongue, and speech) bestowed on men for the
mutual intercourse of their reasonable conceptions, and preservation of humain
society. On the contrary, besides other benefits, there is nothing, by which
men may at so cheap a rate purchase good will, especially at their hands, who
are of a lower rank then themselves, as by kind, and respective language: which
made Titus Vespasian say (as he Sueton.
also proved the good of it by experience, gayning the opinion, and name of The
darling of mankind) that A Prince should never send away any petitioner
discontented. And, albeit, as the saying is, Fair words make fools glad; yet so
do they wise men also. Good language joined with real performance, is as a
pleasant sause to wholesome meat. Without performance, where ability is
wanting, it ought to be as acceptable (though it stand us not in so good stead)
as if the thing we desire, were done for us: and in that case we should account
of good words, as Diogenes did of his wortles, which were for sause to other
meat; and for meat, when he had no other. And even where men fayl us in that,
which both they are able to perform, and we have reason to look they should;
better we receav from them good words, then otherwise: seeing they carry with
them some appearance of respect to him, to whom they are used; whereas the
contrary cast withal contempt upon his person; which is more grievous to most
men, then a moderate disappointment in their suit.

Words are like Clothes, used first for necessity, after for convenient
ornament, and lastly for wantonness. Neither do harlots more strive to
inveagle fools by wanton tricking, and trimming themselves; then do fawning
Orators, and word-wise men, to allure vain hearers, and readers (who, as one
says, had rather be strewed with flowers, then fed with fruits) by curious,
and affected forms of speech. Such deserv (though they often Plutarch
get a better) the reward of the Harper, whom Dionysius pleased with hope
whilst he pleased him with singing: and there an end of both. And truly I know
few things by which men are either more puffed up in themselves, as Theodoret
Theodoret
taxes Chrysostom, or purchase from others with less desert, greater opinion
of excellency, then by curious and affected eloquence, whether in pompous, or
plausible speech, without weight of matter. This is vanity in all subjects,
and in Divine matters, profaneness: And so the truly learned Apostle
professes, that his Preaching 1 Cor. ^
was not with perswasible words of man's wisdom, but in demonstation of the
Spirit, and power; that the Churches faith should not stand in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God. He that (without sound information of judgment
going before) is either by eloquence, or earnestness persuaded to the liking
of any course; will, if he meet with an opposite Orator more eloquent, and
vehement, then the former, be as lightly dissuaded from it, and persuaded to
the contrary. As a woman overcuriously trimmed, is to be suspected; so is a
speech. And indeed he that goes about by eloquence, without firm ground of
reason, to persuade, goes about to deceav; and he that suffers himself so to be
persuaded, is willing to be deceaved. I may, and will do some thing for
importunity of speech, but if I like any thing the better, I follow passion,
and not reason.

He is rightly eloquent, who observing decorum, and tempering Cicero.
his style according to his person, can speak fitly, fully, and eloquently of
all things; temperatly of mean things, and Morneus.
weightily of matters of importance: and not he that can magnify his mouth
above measure, and the weight of the matter; and draw Hercules his hose upon a
childs leg; Agesilaus.
which the wise King counted no matter of commendation. And besides
affectation, in which men strain the strings of their eloquence, to make
persons, or things as good, or bad; or as great, or small, not as they are, but
as the speaker can; I have known some by an abused benefit of nature, and art,
so impotently eloquent, as that they could hardly speak in praise or disprayse
of person, or thing, without doubling, and trebling upon them superlative
synonomies of honor, or disg^^^e. Such Orators would make notable
market-folk, in crying up their own wares, which they meant to sell; and in
making other men's, which they would buy, Prove. 20.
double naught.

Both length, and shortness of speech may be used commendably, in their time;
as Mariners sometimes sail with larger-spread, and sometimes with
narrowergathered Sayls. But as some are large in speech out of abundance of
matter, and upon due consideration: so the most multiply words, either from
weakness, or vanity. Wise men suspect, and examine their words ere they
suffer them to pass from them; and so speak the more sparingly: But fools pour
out theirs by talents, without fear, or wit. Besides, wise men speak to
purpose, and so have but some thing to say: The other speak every thing of
every thing, and thereupon take liberty to use long wanderings. Lastly, they
think to make up that in number, or repetition of words, which is wanting in
weight. But above all other motives, some better, some worse, too many love to
hear themselves speak; and imagining vainly, that they please others, because
they please themselves, make long Orations, when a little were too much. Some
excuse their tediousness, saying, that they cannot speak shorter: wherein they
both say untruly, and shame themselves also: For it is all one, as if they said,
that they have unbrydled tongues, and inordinate passions setting them a work.
I have been many times drawn so dry, that I could not well speak any longer,
for want of matter: but I ever could speak as short, as I would.

Some have said, that hurt never comes by silence: but they Numb. 30
may as well say, that good never comes by speech: for where it is good to
speak, it is ill to be silent. Besides, he that holds his tongue in a matter
that concerns him, is accounted, as consenting. Indeed less hurt comes by
silence, then by speech; and so does less good. Some are silent in weakness,
and want either of wit to conceav what to speak; or of courage to utter what
they conceav; or of utterance, where the other defects are not. They of the
first sort are not desperately foolish, seeing they are sensible of their own
want; which is half the way to mending it: there being more hope of such a
fool, then of a man wise in Prove. 27.
his own conceit, that is thinking himself wiser then he is. Besides, such
have the wit to cover their folly; and a fool Chap. 17.
whilst he holds his tongue, is accounted wise: whereas a bab^ing fool
proclaims his foolishness. For the second, though it be Chap. 1^
a misery for a man to be compelled to keep silence, when he Seneca.
would speak: and that the prison be strait, where the very tongue is tied,
yet he wants not all wit, who can for fear of danger hold his tongue, and not
make his lips the snare of his Prove. 18.
Soul. Some again are silent in strength of wisdom, and others of passion. As
deep streams are most still; so are many, of deepest judgment; through vehement
intention of mind, upon weighty, or doubtful matters; whereas the shallower
are louder, and more forth-putting. And here the testimony which Spintharus
gave of Epaminondus Plutarch
has place, that he met with no man in his days, that knew more, and spoke
less. Again, in some, vehemency of passion, and affection dams up the passage
of speech. The grief Seneca.
is moderate which utters it self; that which is extreme is silent. So Absalom
hating his Brother Amnon to the death, spoke neither 2 Samuel 13
good, nor evil to him. Lastly, there are who can bridle their tongue in
discretion; and know, not only how to take the time to speak, but also the
time to keep silence: which Eccl. 3.
surely is no small commendation in a wise, and able person. And this the
Philosopher knew well, who, when all the rest of his fellows (being each to
present the King with some notable sentence, or other) were forward to utter
every one his ware, desired of the Kings messenger, that it might be certified
in his name, that he had skill to hold his peace, when others were forward to
speak.

CAP. XXIII. Of Books, and Writings.
WRiting is the speech of the absent: and even he that gives a writing into the
hand of another, to be read by him; thereby, after a sort sequesters his person
from him, and desires to speak with him being absent; and that to his
advantage, if his personal presence and speech may endanger either contempt,
or offense.

The Lord God in providing, that the Books of Holy Scriptures should be
written, effectually commended the writing, and reading of other Books touching
all subjects, and sciences lawful, and lawfully handled. For though the
difference be ever to be held between Divine, and humain writings, so as the
former may worthily challeng absolute credence, and obedience, as breathing out
only truth, and godliness; whereas the other are not only to be learned, but
judged also: yet even in humain writings, the truth in its kind, is taught
commonly both more fully, and more simply, and more piously, then by speech.
For howsoever the lively voice more pierce the heart, and be apter to move
affection, and that to the receaving of truth, and goodness not only by love,
and liking, but by Faith also, and assent (for Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God): yet men seldom take either the pains, or Romans 1^.
time to lay down things in speech, which they do for public writings: neither
can any possibly either have the obportunitie to hear the tithe of that which
he may read for information, or take the time for the full understanding of
things remarkable spoken, which in private reading he may do. Besides, men are
commonly in their writings both freer from passion in themselves, and from
partial respect of others, then in their speeches. And hence it comes to be
said of dead men, that they are the best counselors; to wit, in their Books,
wherein they are freest from affection one way, or other. Lastly, though the
Father found some in his time, who because Christ had said, Thou shall not
swear, thought they might do that in writing, which they might not do in
speech; Tertul.
and confirm Idolatry with their hand, so they professed it not with their
tongue: yet it is usually found otherwise; and that men are, or would seem to
be more religious in writing, then in speech. Who ever shall find a
black-mouthed blasphemer cursing, and swearing in his Books? though in daily
speech he scarce utter ten words without oath, or execration. Yea are there not
many, who by the gloss of piety cunningly set upon their writings published
to the World, steal the opinion of piety, and virtue from strangers, and those
that know them not; whose ordinary conversation in word, and deed to them that
are acquainted therewith, proclaims them no better then very Atheists, and
Epicures? I ad, even touching conferences, and disputations of purpose
appointed, and used, for light of truth; that though they may be, and are
singularly profitable for that purpose, to a modest, and tractable disposition,
which will as well hear, as speak; and be as ready to learn truth of others,
as to teach it them: yet to men of more unquiet, and stiff spirits, the
reading of Books is a course far more convenient for information: For that
therein will not be the provocation to inordinate anger, and passion, which in
speech oftens falls in. Besides, he who comes to dispute, comes specially to
show the truth to others: but he that comes to read an Author, comes specially
to learn something from him, for the most part.

Great care is to be taken, and circumspection used in writing of Books; not
only (though specially) for conscience of God; but also because the Author
therein exposes himself to the censure of all men, and those not only then
living, but also to be born, when he is dead, and rotten. And under their
censure he comes, whether he be wise, or foolish; learned, or ignorant; of
sound, or of corrupt judgment: and in part therewith, whether of virtuous, or
vicious disposition. He Seneca.
that commits any thing to writing gives men a Bill of his manners: which
every one that reads may put in suit against him, if there be cause, in the
Court of his own heart, and neighbors ear.

Some through extreme diligence are devourers of Books, and of infinite
reading: in whom if there be found any answerablenesse in memory to retain,
judgment to dispose, and wit accordingly to improve things read; such persons
prove singular. But this is rare by reason of the different temper of the brain
requisite for such furniture. Some are of great reading, but of so slipperie
memory, as they are like Water-conduits, which what they continually receav in
at one end, they let out as fast at the other. Some again are mere Ind^xes,
serving for nothing but to show, where, and in what Authors, things are to be
found; by benefit of their strong memory. There are also of those great
Book-men, that know better the most other men's judgments, then their own, in
matters of controversy, through injudiciousnesse, or irresolution; and if they
come to settle upon any rather opinion, then persuasion, it is commonly
according to the last Bool which they read. It is best for ordinary capacities
to travel in some few Books (though by occasion they may step into many) and
the same picked by good advice, of unpartiall, and experienced men; and those
thoroughly to digest, and discourse upon; as it is best for weak stomachs to eat
of few, and wholesome dishes: Which may also be done for further use, extention,
and applycation, then the Author himself conceaved, or at least, expressed.
And though Lucilius wished, that his Books might be read neither of men very
learned, nor altogether unlearned; lest the one should understand nothing, and
the other more then he intended: Yet indeed he reads a Book ill, that
understands not something more either in, or, at least, by it, then the Author
himself did in penning it.

As the maladies of the minds of many have been cured by reading of Books; so
have the diseases of the bodies of some, and those such as wanted no other
Medicines; if we may beleev Histories: As of Alphonsus King of Spain, by
reading of Livy; and of Ferdinand King of Sicily, by reading of Quintus
Curtius. The cure is both more common, and more excellent, which the reading of
the Holy Scriptures affoard.

CAP. XXIIII. Of good intentions.
A Good meaning no more suffices to make a good action, then a fair mark does
to make a good shot, by an unskilful Archer. This has been fully verified in
the Jews, who out of no less good end, then the zeal of God, and desire (such
as it was) to do him pleasing service, persequuted Christ, and his disciples to
the death. What intention could be better, or action worse? We must not
therefore take the sanctuary of fools by good meanings, without knowledge: but
first setting our faces toward heaven by meaning well, must further so far
honor God, and humble our selves unto him, as to resign our whole man also into
his hands, to be guided by him in the way thither: joining our prayers with
his, who had less need to fear stepping aside that way, then we, and yet
said, With mine whole heart have I sought thee; o let Psalm. 119.
me not wander from thy commandments.

And yet albeit a good end alone suffice not; yet there is nothing either good,
or tolerable without it, no not though Austin.
it have never so good success. Although the good meaning excuse not wholly yet
the evil wholly condems. This good intention Bernard.
and end is the first, and last in every lawful action. It is the first, and
that which sets the agent awork to do what he does, whether working reasonably,
or naturally. It is the last, (and so the best) and that at which he ayms, as
the perfection of his work.

And this, where it is found God so much regards, as he sometimes prevents an
evil action in him, in whom he sees a good intention; as is to be seen in
Abimele^k Genesis 20.
king of Gerar, whom God kept from sinning against him, and suffered not to
touch Sarah Abraham's wife, because he had taken her into his house, in the
integrity of his heart. Sometimes also God rewards the good purpose, yea though
he refuse the work intended, as incompetent, for some special cause; as in
David, when he would have built the Lord an 2 Samuel 7.
house. Always, he that means well, yea though the work be evil, which he
does, makes the devil (after a sort) serve God in it. He that does that which
is good in it self for an evil end, makes God serve Satan: He that does that
which is evil for a good end, makes Satan therein (though not warrantably)
serve God; as the means serve the end. And considering how little truly-good-doing
there is amongst men, in comparison; it were well there were more good meaning,
yea though it were without knowledge. By which both fewer mischeifs would be
done, and they that are done would therein be less heinous. We measure things
(says Bodin.
one, and it is true, in a respect) by the ends of goodness; and so better
miss, and we shall miss less, in the means, then in the end. He who has the
mark in his ey, and aims at it, will hardly miss so much, as he that takes a
wrong mark to shoot at. And for true goodness; He who gets this general grace,
to have his heart indeed, and seriously bent upon the course of piety toward
God, and innocence toward men, the Lord will not so far suffer to err in his
way, as to miss of heaven in the end, notwithstanding his particular
aberrations of humayn frailty; which God will cover under the veyl of his rich
mercy, by the persons sincere faith, and general repentance.

CHAP. XXV. Of Means.
MEans are so called of the middle place which they hold, between the
efficient and final causes; serving the one for the furthering, and atcheiving
of the other. And so all creatures, whether persons, or things, come under this
account, in respect of him, from whom, and for whom all things are.

God is able without means to do whatsoever work of power he does, or can do
by them: and the reason is plain, for that he both creates, and provides the
means; and also gives the blessing upon them, by which they are avayleable.
Neither (if we mind it) has the Lord ever done greater works then those,
which the hand of his power has wrought either immediately; or by means very
weak, and feeble; which being improved by Gods omnipotency have produced
wonderful effects. Thus God and froggs could plague Exodus 8.
Pharaoh and all Egypt: So can the H. Ghost and simple preaching make men wise
unto salvation. 1 Cor. 1.


God often uses means very weak and base, not because he wants better; but
partly for his own glory: as first for the glory of his goodness, that being
so mighty, and excellent in majesty, he will vouchsafe to employ them: and
secondly of his greatness, in bringing to pass what he will by them, as he
told Gedeon, Judge. 7.
the people were too many for him to save Israel by. when men make wars they
ge^t the powerfullest helps they can, therein Philo Iud.
bewraying their own weakness: whereas God, on the contrary wanting no man's
help, often times makes choice of weak means, as needing none: Partly, the Lord
does this for the means themselves, that they which God so far honors,
specially for good to men, should not be despised: and partly for others; that
none should be overmuch affected with, or to them.

To trust to means is Idolatry: to abuse them, want of wisdom, or of
conscience, or both: to neglect them, either desperatenes, when a man is
without hope of good by them; or presumptuous tempting of God, when he expects
good without them; or sloth, when he will not trouble himself with them. With
all which, unthankfulnes to the Lord is joined, who provides them as helps
against our infirmities: and therewith profane sawcines also, if with the
contempt of the means which we have, we long after such as we have not; as did
the Israelites in the wilderness, in loathing Number. 11.
manna, and lusting after flesh; and the Jews in despiseing Christ's miracles
upon earth, and desiring to see a sign from Matt. 16.
heaven of him. We must then (as one says) mingle our own sweat with faith
to make a sweet odor withal to God. For though his power be not bound to
means, yet his will binds us to such, as he in mercy affoardeth; partly as
helps of our faith, which need such glasses wherein to see Gods helping hand;
and partly to exercise our obedience; and partly to stir up our diligence. And
this we must do the rayther, for that when God purposes good to, or by a man
either, he commonly provides him means accordingly: which, when opportunity
servs, he expects he should use, in good conscience, for atteyning to the
good unto which they, as it were, lead him; which to neglect, is to disobey a
kind of real calling from God. In the careful use of natural means we show
most wisdom, and that we are not like beasts without understanding: and of
supernatural means, prayer, and the like, the most grace: and that we are not
as men which know not God.

A man must be sure in his most careful use of means always to bear in mind
the end for which he uses them; that he be not like the messenger, who so
minds his way, as he forgets his errand; To sever the means, and end to which
they lead ordinately, is vanity, in all courses: in divine matters, mere
madness. He that sinning without repentance, looks to escape hell, separates the
end from the means: He that without faith, and obedience looks for heaven,
separates the means from the end, which he aims at. Both would pervert Gods
word, and work of providence.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Labor, and Idleness.
GOD, who would have our first father, Genesis 2. and 3.
even in innocence, and being Lord of the whole world, to labor (though
without pain or wearisomnes) in dressing the Garden; and when he had sinned,
to eat his bread with the sweat of his brows, would have none of his sinful
posterity lead their life in Idleness; no nor without exerciseing themselves
diligently in some lawful calling, or other. I say diligently: For as poor
men play for recreation, now and then: so do rich men work. But that suffices
not. For God who has in the natural body appointed unto every member its
office, and function, which it is constantly to exercise; would have no member
in any society, or body of men ordinarily unimployed. Neither does that man
(how great, or rich soever) keep a good conscience before God, who makes labor
but an accessorie, and not a principal, and that which takes up his ordinary
time. Man is borne Job. 5.
to sore labor, in body, or mind, as the spark to fly upward. In heaven is
only rest without labor: in hell, restles pain and torment: and as sin makes
the earth (which is between both) liker to hell, then heaven; so God for sin
has given to the sons of man soar travail to afflict them upon Ecles. 1.
earth. And that in most wise, and gracious providence, considering the
mischiefs that come by idleness: as, The weakening of the endowments of nature;
whereas labor Plutarch
brings strength to the body, and vigor to the mind: yea the consumption of
grace, as rust consumes the iron for want Ringelb.
of using: yea, whereas idleness brings bodily poverty like an Prove.
armed man: it brings not only spiritual poverty in graces with it, but
withal, a legion of vices, like so many armed devils; puffing up the flesh
with pride, and making the heart Satan's anvile, (who is commonly least idle,
when men are most) whereon to forge a thousand vanities, and sinful lusts, as
having a fit opportunity to persuade Jerome.
men to do evil, when he finds them doing nothing; that so they, who will
not sweat in earth, either with the H. Smith.
labor of the hand, or heart, (though king Alphonsus said that God, and nature
had given kings hands as well as other men) might sweat in hell: and that if
they will not bear their Bernard.
part in the payns of men, they might partake in the payns of the Seneca.
Divils. Whereas, on the contrary, if we do that which is good, and well done,
though with labor, and paynefulnes; Musonius.
the labor is soon over, and gone, whereas the goodness and reward thereof
remayns behind.

Proud folk despise labor, and them that use it: And so it would be thought by
many, far meaner then Joseph's brethren) Genes. 4^
a disgraceful question to be asked, as they were by Pharaoh; Of what
occupation they were? And this difference I have observed, for the matter in
hand, that whereas in plentiful countries, such as our own, it is half a shame
to labor: in such others, as wherein art and industry must supply natures
defects, as in the country where I have last lived, it is a shame for a man not
to work, and exercise himself in some one or other lawful vocation. And, in
truth, there is more comfort to a good man in that which he gets, or saves by
his labor, and providence, and Gods blessing thereupon; then in that which
comes to him any other way. For he considers it not only as a fruit of Gods
love, but withal, as a reward of his obedience unto Gods commandment of
labor and travayl to be undergone in this world of the children of men. It is
a blessing upon every Psalm. 128.
one that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways, that he shall eat the
labor of his hands. And, he that without his own labor either of body or
mind, eats the labor of other men's hands only, and lives by their sweat, is
but like unto lice, and such other vermin. Let every godly Christian, in his
place, say with Christ, I must work the John 9.
works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night comes when no man can
work. Longa quiescendi tempora fata dabunt.

It is a great blessing, when God gives a man grace, and wisdom to take payns
about things first lawful, and secondly profitable. The diligent in evil are
but like the divill, who compasses the earth, and that like a roaring lion,
Job 1. 1 Pet. 5.
seeking whom he may devour. Such do best, when they do least. The life of
others is i^ quieta inertia, Seneca.
buesying, and often times troubling both themselves, and others, with things
altogether unprofitable; like the kings of Egypt in building their Pyramides,
to the mispending of their own money, and peoples labor. I have known diverse,
that with the tithe of the study, and payns taken by them, had it been rightly
improved, and to profitable uses, might have benefited both themselves, and
others far more, then they have done, with all their diligence, and that with
good meaning also.

Labor spent upon things eternal must not be counted lost, or too much:
seeing temporal things of any worth are not usually obtained without it. And
surely, if heaven, and happiness could be had with so little payns and trouble,
as the world reckons; it were strange, if they were worth the having. And yet
how many might obteyn the pearl of Christ promised with less payns, then they
take for Ierom.
earthly and transitory things, which yet often times they are disappointed of?
yea, I add, then many take for hell, which their wickedness brings upon them
unavoydably? Labor not for the meat which perishes: John 6.
but for that meat, which endures unto eternal life, says Christ our Lord.

CAP. XXVII. Of Callings.
THE effectual calling of a Christian is that by which the Lord first
differenceth actually, and in the person himself, the elect from the reprobate:
and by which the called approaches, and draws nigh unto God that calls
him: and that takes away his sin, which separated between the Lord, and him;
both by justifying, and sanctifying him.

This general calling of a Christian is incomparably more excellent, and
honorable, then any particular calling, and state whatsoever. By it we are
blessed with all Ephesians. 1.
spiritual blessings in heavenly things both for grace, and glory. It alone is
properly an holy calling, hallowing all other 1 Cor. 7.
callings: which also are so far lawful, and lawfully used, as they further
it; and not otherwise. If the excellency of it were well weighed, and rightly
prized, no man honored therewith should be thought worthy to be despised for
any other meannesse; nor without, it to be envyed for any other excellency how
glorious soever in the worlds ey.

These two mayn priveledges of Gods providence the elect before their
effectual calling are made partakers of, above others. The former that into
what other, or howsoever otherwise grievous sins they fall, yet they are kept
by the power of the Lord, from sinning against the Holy Ghost, of which there
is no forgivenes: And this the Apostle insinuates, where he testifyes of
himself, that before his calling by grace, he was a blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.
and pers quuter; but doing it of ignorance, in unbeleif, he obtained mercy:
which if he had done of malicious knowledge, he could not possibly have done.
The second priveledg is, that though such a man may fall into great dangers, so
as there is often but a step between him and death; yet still God will rescue,
and keep him alive, till he be effectually called to the participation of his
grace in Christ: witness the Iaylour in Philippi. God calls a Act. 16.
man actually in time, as he has chosen him in his eternal decree; that is,
as he has purposed to call, and save him in due time. And if there be a
particular, and effectual calling of some above others, then was there
undoubtedly a particular election, or purpose from eternity in God so to do:
except we will say, that God does that in time, which he did not from eternity
purpose to do. And if the Lord work no otherwise in calling of any to the
grace of Christ, then by outward means, and motives, so leaving them, as some
say, to the freedom of their will to determine it self by choosing, or refuseing
the grace offered in the gospel; then are many wicked men, so liveing and
dying, more bound to the Lord for his work of grace toward them, then are
diverse his holy, and faithful servants. The reason is, because many of the
former have been made partakers of the outward means, and motives of grace, in
preaching of the gospel, godly examples, and education, in far greater
measure, and more ample, and excellent; then many of the latter have been:
Neither are the true servants of God, by this doctrine, to go so far in humble
thankfulness to God, as did the proud Pharisee in the Gospel; who thanked God,
that he was not like the Publican, and other sinners. For whatsoever Luke 18.
else they have cause to thank God for; by these men's gospel, they have cause
to thank themselves, and not God, that they are not like other men, who have
been made partakers of as great, and ample outward means, and provokations of
grace, as they have been.

A lawful calling is necessary for every lawful work: the general calling
of a Christian, before we can perform any Christian work aright: and so a
particular calling to this, or that state of life, before we perform the works
thereof. The inward calling is requisite in regard of God, who knows the
inwards of the man, and with what heart, and affection he undertakes any state,
or action: so is the outward also, because God is the God of order. Also, when
a man knows himself to be orderly called to a condition of life, he both sets
himself more cheerfully, and roundly to the works thereof, wherein he is
assured he servs Gods providence by his order, and appointment: and with faith
expects a blessing from God upon his endeavors in that course of life, in
which his hand has set him; and with all, bears with comfort the crosses
befalling him therein: as we see in David; whose shield of comfort against all
darts of danger was, that God had selected him Psalm. ^. and 3.
unto himself, and anointed him his king upon Sion the mountayn of his holiness.

Little account is made by many of a lawful outward calling: whereas indeed it
is that alone, by which all states (save those that are natural, and so are
subject neither to election nor change) are both constituted, and continued.
For what makes him, who yesterday was none, to day to be a magistrate in the
common wealth; minister in the Church; steward in the family, or any other
officer, or member in any orderly society, but an orderly outward calling by
them, who have lawful authority to confer that state upon him? This being
neglected opens a gap to all confusion in all states. The gifts of a man enable
him to his office; his grace sanctifyes both the gifts, and office to the
person; his inward calling persuades his heart to undertake the outward in
desire to glorify God, and in love to Calvin.
men; his exequution of it in the works thereof presuppose it; and testify his
faythfulnes in it: but only the outward orderly calling confers the outward
state, and condition of life.

Ability for a man's calling is greatly to be desired for many reasons. For,
first, it is a thing well-pleasing in Gods sight, specially in the most
serviceable courses of life, as we may see in Solomon, who being called to the
state of 1 King. 3.
a King, desired above all other things, kingly endowments, and therein pleased
God greatly. Secondly, He whom God calls to a place, or sets over a business, he
enables accordingly; as he did the same Solomon, being set over a people many
in number, as the sand by the sea shore, with Chap. 4.
wisdom, and largenes of heart, as the sand by the seashore. Thirdly, It is
great case to a man, when he is master of his place, and course, and able to
play with it: otherwise, if he be compelled to strive continually with it; it
will both make his life burdensome; and force him at some time, or other, to
let fall the works thereof, as unable to weild it. Yet if such a one be
willing, and able to bear it out, it is a good way for him to grow to great
perfection, by daily improveing his ability to the full: as Milo by using to
bear a calf every day, proved able to bear him, when he was grown an ox.
Fourthly, It is an honor to a man to be excellent in his faculty, yea though
it be mean in it self. And so men excelling in mean trades, or callings are
more regarded, then those who are mean in more excellent faculties. One says
truly, that even plowmen and sheep-heards being excellent are applauded.
Lastly, Pindarus.
the unskilfulnes of the artisan dishonours the art it self how excellent
soever, in the eyes of many: although in reason it should not so be; seeing
that the more excellent Erasmus*
any profession is, it finds the fewer, whose worth can answer its excellency.

Although callings most useful, and necessary, are most despised by proud
folks; both because they are ordinary and common; and followed by mean, and
ordinary persons: yet it stands with a good conscience to provide, that our
course of life be such, as in which we benefit humayne societyes. And an
uncomfortable thing it is to him, that has any either fear of God, or love to
men, to spend his days, and labor in such a course, as by which more hurt
then good comes to the world.

It is a good and godly course for a person diligently to read, and seriously
to meditate upon such places of holy Scripture, as concern his, or her special
calling: as, for the magistrate diligently to read Deuteronomy. 1. 16. etc. the
minister 1 Timothy 3. and so for husband, and wife; father, and child; master
and servant; and the rest: that by so doing we may both more fully learn, and
better remember, and conscionably practice the particular duetyes, in which God
would have us exercise our general christian graces.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the use, and abuse of things.
WE are said to enjoy God alone, and to use the Austin.
creatures: because we are not to rest in them; but in God only, to whom we
are to be helped by them. And of the things which we use, some of them we must
use, as though we used them not: others, as though ^ Cor. 7.
we used them. The World, and all things serving for this life, we ought to use
with a kind of indifferency, and without setting the affections of our hearts
upon it, or them, how busy soever our hands be about them: spiritual good
things, on the contrary, and which concern our eternal happiness, we ought to
use, as using them indeed, with all earnest bent of affection upon them; and as
not suffering our selves, at any hand, to be disappoynted of the fruit of them.

God (says the wise man) has made every thing beautiful Eccles. 3.
in his time: and indeed, every thing is good for something: (I mean every
thing that God has made; for there are many vayn and leaud devises of men,
which are truly good for nothing) as, on the other side, nothing is good for
every thing. And hereupon Prometheus told the Satyr, when he would have kissed
the fire, upon his first seeing Plutarch.
it, that if he did so, it would burn his lips, as not being for that use, but
to minister heat, and light. Some things always bear, as it were, their use on
their backs, and cause also the right use of other things, where they are
found; as the sanctifying graces of Gods spirit, which yet some use more fully,
and faithfully then others; and this is also a grace of God: whereas all other
things have their good in their useing, and not in their owning. And a great
point of wisdom, and advantage for good it is to apply things to their right
use, and end, whether great, or small. He that can do this spiritually, is
happy, though he have received but one pound for others five, or ten. As on the
other side, how many were, (though not happy, yet) less miserable, if they
altogether wanted the wit, learning, riches, and authority; which they want
grace to use, according to the will of the giver?

A man has that most, and best, whereof he has the (lawful) use. And
hereupon a follower of a great Lord was wont to say, that he had, in effect, as
much, as his Lord; though he were owner of little, or nothing: considering how
he had the use of his gardens, and galleryes, to walk in; heard his music,
with as many ears, as he did; hunted with him in his parkes; and ate, and drank
of the same, that he did, though a little after him; and so for the most other
delights, which his Lord enjoyed. And, in truth, what great difference is
there, save in the proud, and covetous mind of a man, whether he himself, or
another be owner of the good things; whereof he with him, has the lawful use,
and benefit?

Distinction must be put between the things themselves, and Chemnit.
their casual, and personal abuses: otherwise the natures of the things can
neither be rightly conceaved of, nor expressed. Neither does the abuse of good
things so take away, or make forfeyture of the use, as that the counsayl of
Lycurgus Plutarch
is to be followed, who would have the vines cut down, because men were
sometimes drunken with the grapes. Yet may the abuse of a thing be so common,
and notorious; and the use so small, or needless; as better want the small
use, then be in continual danger of the great abuse of it.

The best things abused become the worst, both naturally, and morally, by
reason of a greater force in them then in other things. which we must not
therefore superstitiously disavow, or cease to account the best, as they are;
but we must thereby be warned to use them the more warily, that we may enjoy
their full goodness; and not prejudice them by abuse: Otherwise, we shall be
liable to the curse of a greater then A istippus, who La^rtius.
wished a plague upon those wantons, who by their abuseing it, had defamed a
sweet ointment, wherein he took delight.

All evil stands in the abuse of good. And good things Tertull.
are abused commonly, either when they are unmeasurably used; as it is said of
wine, that the first cupp quenches thirst, the second procures chearfulnes, the
third drunkenness, and the fourth madness: or by applying them unaptly, or to
wrong ends, or persons; as when one Cyprian.
offers light to the blind, or speech to him that is deaf, or wisdom to a
brutish man; or as when cowards fight with their tongues, and swash-bucklers
dispute with their swords: or in regard of their supernatural use, when we
refer not all to the glory of God, and our own, and others eternal good, and
welfare: which are the utmost ends of all things.

CAP. XXIX. Of Riches, and Poverty.
IT is the first degree of riches to have what is Seneca.
necessary; the next to have what is enough. And indeed, he is a rich man, who
wants no outward means, wherewith to mainteyne himself, and his, plentifully,
in that state of life, in which God has set him, whether high, or low: and he
poor, on the contrary, to whom that proportion is wanting. And hence it comes
to pass, that there are poor kings, and rich cobblers; poor landlords, and
rich tenants: as there are warm days in winter, and cold in summer; respecting
the season of the year.

Besides, if a person have the possession, and not the use of riches, and be
sick of that disease, which Solomon saw, and experience of all ages confirms to
be common among men; namely of a man, to whom God has given riches, Eccles. 6.
wealth, and honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul of all that he
desires: and yet God gives him not power to eat thereof; I would not call
him, but rayther his chests and storchouses rich; seeing, he as well wants that
which Ierom.
he has (in regard of its use, and end) as that which he has not.

A friend of mine in the university was wont to tell me merrily, and wittily,
that surely there was something in this money, more, and better, then he, and I
saw: seeing such a great wise, and learned man (whom he would name) loved it so
well; and such another, as wise and learned as he, as well as he; and so a
third, and a fourth. He knew well enough, it was not any good in it, which we
saw not; but lust, and filthy coveteousnes in them, whose learning, and wisdom
should have taught them to despise, and have such basemyndednes. And in truth,
if in any other thing, baseness of mind is seen in the love of money, and so
they are justly contemned in the eyes of others, that are enamoured of it. Some
do make their Phil. 4.
belly their God; and those are men of an abject spirit: others their riches,
(for covetousnes is idolatry) and that in a special work of devotion, by
trusting to them, which no man Ephesians. 5.
does to his belly: yet is the covetous, of the two, the more vile, and servs
the baser God: for the life, and belly (for which food is) are better then
food; and yet food for the belly is the best part of riches; and that of which
alone Adam in innocence stood need. If men were not above measure infatuated
with sensuallitie, they, who know inward good things, would not affect outward
inordinately. That fools, and idiots, that know no better things, should love
money, is not strange: For oxen love grass; and swyne draffe; and every
creature naturally the best thing which it knows: But that wise, and learned
men, and they who know the good things of the mind, specially the good things
of God in his word, should so dote upon it, is most vile, and monstrous. Some
love money for it self, and for the bare possession of it, and because they
delight to tell their pence: but that is the case of few of learning, or
wisdom. But as mouls by digging in the earth raise up hills: so do they hope to
clyme up by this baseness; as being set a work, this way, by ambition, for the
most part; which too often breeds in the breasts of men rarely endowed; as the
cancker does in sweet flowers. For such men esteeming themselves worthy of
account in the world for their excellency: and perceaving riches the readyest
way to procure it, or make way for it; they lay hold thereof with both hands:
and being seduced with the love of money for that end, do for the getting, 1 Timothy 6.
and keeping of it, pierce themselves through with many sorrows.

The blessing of the Lord makes rich. If wealth come Prove. 10.
by inheritance; it is Gods blessing that a man is borne of rich friends, and
not of beggars: If by men's free gift; it is his blessing, that has made them
able, and willing to do us good: If goods be gotten by industry, providence,
and skill; it is Gods blessing that both gives the faculty, and the use of it,
and the success unto it. And as riches are in themselves Gods blessings, so are
we to desire them of him, and to use lawful diligence to get them: for the
comfortable course of our natural, and civil state: For though we are to be
able to bear poverty, if God send it: Seneca.
yet should we rayther desire riches; as a man, though he can go afoot, yet
will rayther choose to ride. Secondly, to free us from such temptations unto
sin, as poverty Prove. 30.
puts many upon. Thirdly, that they may minister unto us, and ours, more
plentiful matter of exerciseing virtue, and Seneca.
goodness, specially of mercy toward the poor, and them in need. God could, if
he would, either have made men's states more equal, or have given every one
sufficient of his own: But he has rayther chosen to make some rich, Deuteronomy. 15.
and some poor, that one might stand in need of another, and help another;
that so he might try the mercy, and goodness of them that are able, in supplying
the wants of the rest. And the richer sort that make not this account, know not
wherefore God has given them their goods; and are as poor in grace, as rich
in the world.

Both poverty and riches, if they be in any extremity, Prove. 30.
have their temptations, and those not small: In which regard Agur prays God
to give him neither of both; but to feed him with food convenient for him. And,
in truth, the middle state is freest from the greatest danger either of sin, or
misery, in the world: as Icarus his father told him, that the middle way was
safest for his waxen wings, neither to be moystned with the water, nor molten
with the heat of the sun. And of the two states, the wise man insinuates in
that his prayer to the Lord, that the temptations of riches are the more
dangerous. Poverty may drive a man to steal, or deal unjustly with others;
and after to lie, or, it may be, and, as the Holy Ghost insinuates, by swearing
to take the name of God in vain, to cover it: But if a man be rich, and full,
he is in danger to deny God, and to say in pride, and contempt of him in
effect, as Pharaoh did, who is the Lord? For hardly does any thing cause the
mind to swell more with pride, then riches; both by reason of the ease, and
plenty of worldly good things, which they bring with them: as also of the
credit, which rich men, or their purses, have in the world; and both those
specially, if they have gotten their wealth by their own art, or industry. He
that is proud in a poor estate, would in a rich be intolerable before men, as
he is in the mean while abominable in Gods sight: He that is humble in a
prosperous, is a good scholar of Christ, and has taken out a hard lesson,
which the Apostle would have Timothy to charge the rich withal; 1 Timothy 6.
which is, that they should not be high minded, nor trust in uncertayn riches
From rich men's pride in themselves arises commonly contempt of others,
specially of the poor. I have known Nabals, who, in my conscience, have,
thought, that all that were not rich, were fools; notwithstanding any eminency
in them of gifts, or graces. But thus to mock, or despise the poor, is to
reproach God Prove. 17.
that made him so: and besides, if the person be wise, and godly, as he may
well be; for any bar that his poverty Ecles. 9.
puts against him; it is withal, to despise the image of Gods wisdom, and
goodness in him. But for us; considering how the truly wise, by the spirit of
God, pronounces, that the poor who walks in his uprightnes, Prove. 28.
is better then he that is perverse in his way though rich; as also, that a
poor, and wise child is better then Eccles. 4.
an old, and foolish king; we should have that strength of faith against sense,
and carnal reason; as, in all resolvednes, to prefer an honest, or wise poor
man before a rich Naball. Besides, though still the rich man be, and will be
wise in his own eyes; yet the poor that has Prove. 28.
understanding searches him out: and by searching oftens finds, that little
wit (being employed wholly thereabout) and less grace, servs to get wealth
with. A poor, and plain person seeing a Dives ruffle in silcks, and glitter in
gold, and silver, is half ready to worship him, as a petty God, many times:
But after finds by his speech, and other caryage, by which a fool* and wise
man are differenced, that if he had so done, he had but worshipped a golden
calf.

God sends poverty upon men to humble them, both in the want of bodily
comforts, and specially in regard Martial.
of the contempt, which it ever casts upon men in the worlds ey. And blessed
indeed are they, who by poverty, and other worldly crosses are humbled so, as
to Math. 5.
become poor in spirit: not being of those, of whom the complaynt is, that
they are humiliati, not humiles. As Cassander
if a rich man be humble, he is not of the rich of the world: so, if a poor
man be proud, he is not of the Lords poor, and blessed Bernard.
ones. Some are of opinion, that none but rich folks can be proud. But the
pride of many (as was said of Diegenes) may be seen through their rags. And who
ever saw any prouder, then some such worms, as in whom no others could discern
any thing outward or inward, (saving the devil) that should make them so? God
in his good, and wise providence many times sends poverty, and other calamities
upon such, to restreyn them; whose overswellings of pride, if they enjoyed a
prosperous state, would make them both odious, and troublesome to all societies.

There be some, who out of a kind of natural diligence, patience, parsimony,
and contentment with mean things, seem so fitted for a poor, and mean state,
as that if they were ever pressed with want, they would ever be good, and
virtuous; but being rich, and wealthy, are either base minded, or arrogant, in
the eyes of all men: There are also, who by their kind, and courteous
disposition seem so fitted for prosperity, and plenty, that if they ever
enjoyed it, they would be no meanly good people; and yet falling into a poor,
and needy condition, they appear not only impatient, but unconscionable also.
But the truth is, that howsoever some be fitter for the one estate then the
other, and so carry it better to the world; yet he that is not, in his measure,
fit for either, is indeed fit for neither. The Apostle had learned, and so
must all good Christians with him, both to be full, and to be hungry; Phil. 4.
both to abound, and to suffer need. He that is not faithful in a little, would
not be faithful in a great deal; and so, Luke 16.
for the contrary. He that is impatient, or unhonest in poverty, would be and
is wanton, or arrogant, or otherwise faulty, though more closely, in
abundance: neither Austin.
is any broken with an afflicted state, save he, who is too much inveigled with
a prosperous. He again, whose course is either to high, or too low, in plenty,
would never keep a mean in want.

The over-valuation of riches drives diverse men to diverse, yea contrary
appearances: some to make themselves Prove. 13.
rich, though they have nothing: and others, to make show of poverty, though
they have all abundance. The former so much esteem of riches, and think them
so much esteemed of by others, as that, if they seem not to the world to have
them, their life is a death unto them: and therefore they will be sure to make
a fair outside, and appear rich, though they be nothing less. The other
esteeming themselves happy in having, and keeping them; conceal, and spare that
their treasure what they can; least by having it known, they should be
occasioned, one way, or other, to diminish it. Both are injurious to God, to
other men, Cartwr.
and to themselves. To God, in belying him; the former, as if he had given them
that which he has not: the latter, as not having given them that which he
has. To others; the former, in getting into their hands the riches, which they
cannot satisfy for; or credit, which they deserv not: the latter by
withholding both from God and men their due. To themselves; the former, in
frustrateing the occasion of Iam. 1.
humiliation, unto which the Lord by poverty calls them: the latter, by
preventing, or quenching the provocations unto thankfulness to God for his
plenty bestowed upon them, besides other comfortable effects thereof.

The Apostle points at some Christians (so called) that 1 Timothy 6.
will be rich, even, whether God will, or no; and say he what he will, and
almost do he what he can, to hinder it. They will be rich (if it may be)
keeping faith, and good conscience in outward profession; If that will not be,
they will be rich without them; and rayther loose Math. 16.
their own souls then not gayn the world. But woe be unto them; for they run
greedily after the error of Balaam; and Jude 11.
will have God also run with them, otherwise he is not for their company.

CHAP. XXX. Of Sobriety.
THE grace of God (in Christ, and his gospel) Titus 2.
which has appeared, teaches us as well to live soberly, as justly, and
godlily in the world. And he that is not sober in himself, useing, and
desireing moderately, the good things of this natural life, as meat, drink,
apparel, sleep, pastime, credit, and the rest; will neither converse
righteously with men, nor piously with God. He that takes more to himself, then
is due to him; cannot give either God, or men their due.

Nature is content with few, and small things: for though Boethius.
the belly will be craveing, yet it is no exacting creditour; but will be
satisfied with a small proportion: which to press with Seneca.
superfluityes, makes things either unpleasant, or hurtful. It is reasonable
to deal with, if we give it but what we owe, Patricius.
and not what we can. In reproof of glut^ony, and excess, one says, that the
throat has killed more then the sword. And I think it may be truly said, that
how hard soever it have gone with many in the world, at times; that more have
received hurt by eating too much, then too little. And though many be of mind,
that by devouring a great deal, they shall make their bodies the stronger, and
lives the longer: yet is there reason to think, that were not men provoked by
company, and sensual objects; or misled by inordinate appetite; or miswonted
by custom; even half the meat and drink which the most use, would affoard as
long, and strong a state of body, and bodily health, as they do enjoy. Moderate
diet (says one) is good Ierom.
both for the soul, and body: and so is it for the estate also* and the
contrary pernicious; God both saying, and ordering, that he that loves wine,
and oil shall not be rich. He, especially Prove. 21.
if he be a poor man, and of small means, that will this worlds goods win,
must at his belly begin.

It is a base, and beastly thing, for a man to give himself Seneca.
to eating, and drinking, or to either of them: neither are such to be reckoned
(says one) among men but beasts. But for a man to be so inordinate, as to hurt
either his body, or mind by excess (as a riotous youth delivers over to old
Cicero.
age a feeble body, and more feeble mind, and destitute, for the most part,
both of wisdom, and grace) is to follow the basest of beasts, and to become
swynish: Few other beasts save Swyne will over-eat themselves. Neither is it any
sufficient excuse for him that has plenty to be excessive; more then for the
cook that had made the meat oversalt, to say, that he had store of salt by him.
Neither yet excuses it, that by custom some are able (as they say) to bear
their drink, and not be overcome by it. For, albeit drunckennes in this be very
odious; that whereas other sins deprive persons of Gods image, it deprives them
of man's; leaving them the use neither of reason, nor speech, in which two
things man differs specially from beasts; no nor of sense, and motion
accordingly, wherein beasts excel stocks and stones; but so blockifyes them,
for the present, that neither Terence.
hand, nor foot, can do their office: yet the Lord by the prophet denounces a
woe not only against them that are Esaias 5.
overcome by drink, (which may befall some by a very little, through natural
weakness of brayn) but against them, who can overcome it, being mighty to drink
wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink.

Considering that meat, (and so for other bodily 1 Cor. 8.
good things) makes us not the more acceptable before God; and that God will
destroy both the belly (in that use) Chap. 7.
and meat: it should teach us, in the mean while, moderately to use all things
for the belly, and natural life. But if, besides these considerations, we
weigh with our selves, how unworthy our sins make us of the least comfort by any
of Gods creatures; specially, if with these things concerning our selves, we
weigh how many in the world, and those of the Lords faithful servants, stand
in need of meat, drink, etc. for their natural necessity; If there be in us
either fear of God, or love of men, it will work in us a great conscience not
to mispend any thing vaynly, or riotously, wherewith we might comfort the
hearts of them that need it. And they who in this case will not be warned by
Moses, and the Prophets; nor by Christ and the Apostles neither; shall Luke 16.
with the glutton feel the torment of the flame of hell, for their excess in
themselves, and unmercifulnes toward others.

The special use of wine, and strong drink is, that the heavy of heart, and
ready to perish might drink, and Prove. 31.
forget his poverty, and misery. But the abuse is more common then the use;
by which the strong, and stout take the greatest part therein; drinking many
times, till they forget both God, and them selves; whilst the other languish in
want, and sorrow.

Christ, and his Apostles oftens join in their exhortations Math. 24. Luke 12.
1 These. 5.
sobriety, and watchfulnes together. For drunckennes, and gluttony make men
fitter for sleeping, then watching. And so does all excess in bodily things
draw with it carnal security; and security destruction. We are therefore to
be sober in the desire, and use of all earthly things, that we may watch: and
to watch, that we may escape the danger of spiritual enemies, which watch for
our destruction.

When thou sit to eat with a ruler (says the wise Prove. 23.
man) consider diligently, what is before thee, and put thy knife to thy
throat, if thou be a man given to thine appetite. They that eat with rulers, or
where there is variety of delicates, are apt enough to consider diligently
what is before them; but it is for the most part, not to restreyn their
appetite, as it should be; but rayther to provoke it. But a wise man will
consider of his temptations, to escape the danger of them: a fool to provoke
himself to swallow them the more greedily, as the fish does the bayt with the
hook under it.

He only is not overtaken with unlawful things, who Gregory.
inureth himself, at times, to absteyn from many things lawful. He that will
go as near the ditch, as he can, will at some time, or other, fall in: So he
who will Austin.
take all the liberty, that possibly he may lawfully, cannot but fall into
many unlawful things. Thereupon, Austins mother would not allow the young
mayds committed to her government, to drink as much water as they would: least
afterward, becoming wives, and having plenty, they should use excess in
wine.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Liberality, and its contraries.
Liberality teaches us to bestow our worldly Arist.
goods, when, upon whom, and as we ought, in obedience unto God, and for men's
good. This is to be done without hope of requital Lactant.
from them; as not being a mercinary virtue, Cicero.
but that wherein a man looks to his duty to others, and not to profit from
them. Else it is not liberality rightly performed, but a bargayn well made.
Neither Ambrose.
is that to be accounted liberality, which is done for vayn glory; seeing the
work is named from the affection: Least of all that, when men give to some,
that they may take from Cicero.
others. This is rayther theeverie upon condition. Many account themselves, and
are by others accounted not only liberal, but even bounteous, because they
give great gifts: whereas, if we consider the persons on whom, and the ends for
which they so pour out themselves, and their money (and other men's also, often
times;) we shall see that in truth they deserv no more the name of liberal,
then those prodigals do, who bestow their goods upon harlots, for the
satisfying of their lusts. For as that is not a benefit which wants the best
part of it, namely, to be given in judgment: Seneca.
so neither is that liberality, which wants that part; but the casting away of
a man's goods.

This virtue exercised in great states, and gifts, is called bounty, and a
hingly virtue: But may preserv the due respect of liberality in the smallest
matters, and by the poorest persons, if it be constant: which rayther teaches
to give a little to many, then much to few. This was verifyed in Seneca.
the churches of Macedonia, toward the poor Saints in Ierusaelem; 2 Cor. 8.
whose deep poverty abounded unto their rich liberality. The same is
confirmed, by our Saviors testimony of the poor widows contribution of two
mites, that she gave therein Mark. 12.
more then all the rich men. None can give more, and Ambros.
therein be more liberal, then he that leaves himself little, or nothing. On the
contrary; None can spare more, and therein be more covetous, then he, that will
not do the little which he can do, and his neighbor stands in need of. It is
the dangerous error of poor men, that only the rich are covetous, or
liberal. They may be, and often are, as very mizers, and odiously covetous in
their penny; as the other in their pound. So may they be as liberal.

Every one, says Solomon, is a friend to a man of gifts: Prove. 19.
which have in them, says another, a kind of secret force to Cartwr.
draw the minds of men, as the loadstone draws iron: and that not only of
them that desire to use the liberality of others; but of such also, as neither
need, nor would use the same* Look what liberality loses a man in his purse,
it gets him in a better place; not only in heaven, but in earth also, and the
best place there, the hearts of men, and their loving affection. On the
contrary, covetous men are contemned, and hated, not only of them, whom they
wrong by unjust getting, or keeping; but by all others that know them, though
all dare not so manifest. Their credit with others, and comfort in themselves is
only in their purses.

It is a question amongst learned men, whether of the two extremes of
liberality; prodigality in the excess, or covetousnes in the defect, is
worse: but something the less needful to be determined, considering how often
they meet together in the same person, and beget either the other. Many lust,
and desire to have (and sometimes James 4.
obteyn) that they may consume upon their pleasures: like unto kites, and
gleads, and other ravenous birds, who are ever watching, and catching for prey,
and yet remain ever caryon-lean, converting the greatest part of their
nourishment into long feathers. As some desire riches that they may have them:
so a great part of the covetousnes reigning in the world, is to maintayn
prodigal expenses: that look what covetousnes has gathered together, riot may
lash out and consume. For men, as well as women, Gregory.
being with child of riot, and excess in diet, apparel, and other worldly
vanities; long ^or riches, and great gettings, to nourish, and maintain their
lusts: without which they are in danger to cast their calf. On the other side,
they who escape best with prodigality, are driven to repair their too great
lavishnes in one thing, by too great nigardlines in another. But as it was said
of Cataline, that he was Salust.
prodigal of his own, and covetous of other men's; so the greatest mispenders,
for the most part, are constreyned to be as great misgetters, to feed one vice
by another. Hence some borrow without means, or meaning, to pay again;
circumvent others, if they have more cunning then they; oppress them, if they
have more power; and some are driven to plain theeverie, violent, or secret.
Yet if we will compare together these two naughts, we shall find covetousnes
the worse of the twayn. For, first, it is the root 1 Timothy 6.
of all evil: for that there is no evil fruit but will grow of it. Judas
sold Christ for it: And many thousand daily sell their bodies and souls to
sin, and hell for it; and would sell Christ, if he were in their hands: whereas
wise men, and lawyers count the prodigal raither vayn, or at the worst, but
half mad, and not capable of governing his own goods; then mischeivous.
Secondly, Covetousnes is ^^ the Apostle called Idolatry, not in the common
condition of all sins, in which men either in affection, or effect, esteem of
transitory vanities above God; and despise him, in comparison of them; but
especially for that they put more confidence in their riches, for their
safety, and welfare, then they do in Gods providence; and by them promise
themselves all abundance of happiness. This madness befalls not the but half-mad
prodigals. Thirdly, The covetous does good to none, nor to himself neither;
Seneca.
many times; wanting as well the things he has, as the things he has not; God
not giving him power to eat of, Eccles. 4.
and use his riches. Whereas the prodigal does good to many, though not well.
Fourthly, Covetousnes is a base, and beggarlike vice: Prodigality a
worshipful, honorable, and kingly sin. Fifthly, Poverty, and want (the fruits
of prodigallitie) prove, often times* good scool-masters to the ding-thrift, for
his bettering; as we see it fell out with the prodigal son: But the effects of
Covetousnes Luke 15.
(which are usually riches, and plenty) harden the houldfast; causing him to
bless himself the more, in his wicked way. The riot of the prodigal draws
him dry; but the gettings of the other serve to feed his disease, which causes
him, dropsie-like, the more he has, to desire the Polybius.
more. Ad we unto all these, that whereas age is some remedy Ierom.
against other vices, (specially against prodigality) which grows old, and
decays with the person, in whom it is;) Covetousnes then grows young: so as
they who are but thriftie in youth, are usually covetous in age. And though it
seem, and indeed be unreasonable, that the less Cicero.
way men have to go, they should be careful for the more viandour, and
provision, for their journey; yet are there diverse colorable occasions, though
no just causes of this malady. As first, age being impotent, and unable to
susteyn it self, is occasioned the more carefully to seek, and g^t riches, as a
staff to lean on. But for this, we shall never see any more greedy, then such
as have more then enough for many ages: their abundance no more quenching
their Gregory.
lust, then fuel does the flame. Secondly, the aged are often charged with
families, and friends, for whom they are to provide; from which burden youth is
free: for children are not to lay up for the parents, but parents for the
children. 2 Cor. 12.
But for this also; we see, that a man, though he be alone, and have no second,
neither child, nor brother, Eccles. 4.
puts no end of labor to get, nor is ever satisfied with riches. I have not in
my life observed any more given to covetousnes, then such as have not, nor are
like to have children to leave their goods to. Thirdly, the other lusts of
prodigal youth languishing in age, the heart (not being set upon God, and true
goodness, which alone could fill, and satisfy it) finds only the lust of
coveting riches a fit guest to harbor in it; wherewith the flesh mainteyns it
self, that it fall not wholly into decay. So Symonides, being accused Plutarch
of covetousnes, answered, that whereas the delight of all other pleasures was
gone, he nourished his age with that alone profitable pleasure. And lastly,
which is worst of all, though God have set religion, and covetousnes at such
variance, that they can not possibly reign in one person: None can serve God,
and mammon: And again, He that loves this world, the love of God dwells not
in him: yet we see it, that religion working in persons a loathing of excess
in worldly vanities, their flesh so works with it, as it disposes very many
to such a warines, as between which, and plain covetousnes there is too near
affinity. Yea how many have I known, who having passed the danger of the
highway ground, and understood the word of God preached, Math. 13.
and professed the same: and of the stony ground too, in undergoing some
troubles, and persequutions for the same: yet nourishing in themsevs too much
love, and care of worldly riches, have had all their goodness choked before the
harvest, by those dangerous thorns? Against this so dangerous, deceitful, and
close-cleaving evil, we are, first, to get into our hearts faith in Gods
providence, as well, and as much, for the good things of the life present, 1 Timothy 4.
so far forth, as they are good indeed, as of that to come. He that dares not
in the use of good means, trust God for this life, does not indeed trust him
for life everlasting, how often soever he say over his creed. Such a man mocks
with God, in making a show of trusting him with that, which in truth he
profanely despises: whereas, for worldly good things which he desires in
earnest, he will trust God no further then he sees him. Though the Lords love
show forth it self more in heavenly, then in earthly things; yet his truth
binds him alike to performance, as he has promised: upon which, he that dares
not rest for the lesser, makes but a show of resting for the greater. Secondly,
we must get contentation with that which we have, seeing Hebr. 13.
God has said to us, I will* never leav thee, nor forsake thee: esteeming, and
saying with our selves, that this which we enjoy with a good conscience, and by
means lawful, diligently used, is our alotment from God, by the sanctified use
whereof, he will provide competently for our temporal state, and further our
eternal. Thirdly, considering, how uncerteyn means of our good, even for this
life, all earthly things are; and how, many times they become the very snare
thereof, as in the case of Naboth; and how 1 King. 2^
always the coveting of them deprives of the hope of a better: Ephesians. 5.
(for the covetous is an idolater, and has no inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ, and of God) it is both sin, and folly, inordinately to affect the
getting, or keeping of them. Luke 16.
But, as the Pharisees being covetous, mocked at Christ, when they heard him
speak against their joining the serving the mammon of unrighteousnes, with the
serving of God: so men, in all ages, becomeing rich by covetousnes, and proud
by riches; are ready to mock at whatsoever God, or man can say against their
gaynfull wickedness.

Considering how many poor people want, and of those not a few, the living
members of Christ Jesus; we ought to make great conscience either of spending
prodigally, or sparing covetously any thing less, or more, wherewith we might
comfort them, and show them mercy: how much more, of that whereby we should
deal justly with them in giving them their due? which should first be done.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Health, and Physic.
HEalth is the greatest bodily blessing, which God bestows upon any in this
life: yet is it one of the least regarded: partly by reason of its commonnes to
al sorts of people, poor and rich, fools and wise, the vilest and most
excellent otherwise: partly, for that it is a natural good thing, which we
bring, for the most part, into the world with us, and so oftens preserv,
without any sensible change: And accordingly, we see, that no man is the more
honored for his health; which can scarce be said of any other good thing
whatsoever. The benefit of this most sweet sause of al other goods is scarsly
Plutarch.
discerned by them that enjoy it, till sickness come: for then not only Orpheus
his song, but much more our own experience teaches us, that nothing is
avaylable to men without health: neither riches, nor honor, nor the greatest
delights for belly, or back, which the earth can affoard. This blessing
therefore, where it is, may be set alone against many other wants: and God
acknowledged to deal graciously with us in bestowing it, though with the want
of many other outward good things: which though others enjoy, yet without it,
they want the comfortable use of them; and have less joy of their lives by
far, then we by it, without them.

The best rule in physic is to preserv health by the use of things wholesome,
and eschewing what is noxious, and hurtful, either in matter, or manner, or
measure: and that betimes, and before distempers have taken too deep root, or
that the strength of nature be too much impaired by the inordinate appetites,
and licentiousnes of unadvised youth. We say in the proverb, At forty years
every man is either a fool, or a physician. But because most are fools so long
before, and that in their best years, it is too late for them to become
physicians at this age; and the after years are constreyned to bear the
manifold infirmities, and diseases which are owing to inordinat youth. And a
happy thing it were, considering how few young folks will regard, or beleev
these things, till they be taught them by miserable experience, that wise
parents, and governers would so show their care over their children, pupils,
and servants; that where they cannot dissuade the affection, they might yet
prevent the using of those unwholesom, and hurtful youth-banes, unto which
inordinate appetite carries young folk headlong.

I have marvailed often at the aversnes of many, specially of the meaner sort,
from physic, in time of sickness: but more at their unreasonable choice of
physicians, when they use it. How ordinary a thing is it with a number, that
if but their horse, or cow be sick, or but in danger; they will let them blood,
or get them a mash; or run to a leach for them? who yet for themselves, or their
nearest friends will neither seek, nor willingly be persuaded to use the
counsel, or help of a physician. The reasons hereof I conceav to be, either,
for that men are prone, and ready to persuade themselves, and to be persuaded by
their friends, that they shall do well enough without such helps, and that many
times out of a superstitious presumption of Gods special help, where man's is
neglected: or, on the contrary, when they are heartlesse, and despair of good
thereby. But yet more strange is the choice which many make, when they use
means. For though in all other courses, men seek for such, as are most
skillful; yet in this they are not only more ready to beleev any that
professes himself a physician, then of any other faculty; Pliny.
but also choose rayther to trust their bodies, and lives in the hands of
ignorant Empericks, men or women, then of the most expert, and learned
physicians that are. Which I speak not, as esteeming the counsayl, or help of
the meanest to be neglected, specially where either the more skillful cannot
well be come by, or that the danger is not great: But for that all things are to
be done reasonably, and for the best advantaging and likelihood of good, that
may be. The causes of this are on the Empericks part; that they are more
officious about their patients; the other being many times supercilious, and
neglective of meaner persons: Secondly, that they are more bold boasters of
their own doings then the other, whose learning makes them modest: Thirdly,
their affoarding their counsel, and pains at a cheaper rate then the other do;
who very likelily, and as experience teaches in other countries) if they
would descend to that rule of equity in other cases, ( A pennyworth for a
penny) would find, that lighter gayns coming thicker, would make heavier
purses. Fourthly, their administering of medicines usually less offensive, and
loathsome unto nature: which, it may be, the others skill, and care (if custom
made not men less compassionate then they should be,) might much correct:
though it can not be denied, that by Gods providence, and for man's sin, the
most wholesome things either naturally, or morally, are bitter, and unpleasing.
On the patients part this aryseth commonly, 1. from a suspicion, least they
being mean, and plain persons should either be overreached, or neglected by the
learned. 2. From envy, which the learneds arrogance also oftens occasioneth. 3.
From an ambitious desire in them, to advance those of their own order; as of
old, the citizens of Rome would have the chief officers, even the Consuls, and
Dictatours created, Livy.
and chosen out of their rank. And lastly, for that, if any cure be, or seem to
be wrought by them, which want art, men are therein ready to conceav of a
special divine assistance, and helping hand of God.

One special use of a skillful artist is to discern aright of the variety of
circumstances that fall in. Simple men and women have many times the same
medicines, or simples, at least, with the most skilful doctors: But wanting
art, and skill to temper, and apply them, according to the diversity of the
estates of patients, and variety of accidents within, and without the sick,
they either profit not; or hurt one way, what they profit an other. To which
purpose it was wittily answered of the physician, who having prescribed a
medicine to his patient, and thereby cured him; and being asked by him
afterward, why the same medicine, which the same person, falling into the same
disease again, took himself, did not avayl him, as before; that the reason was,
because he (the physician) gave it him not. Neither is the use greater of the
skillful in this consideration, then of the experienced.

Physicians (says one, and truly) have this advantage Antoninus
above them of other professions; that the sun beholds their cures, and the
earth covers their faylings. They that die under their hands, or by their
default, are past complaining of them: they that recover and survive, though,
sometimes, by the benefit of nature alone, under Gods providence, will repute,
and report them the means of their recovery. Which consideration makes not the
honest, and conscionable the more secure; but the more careful of their
account to be given unto God, from whose eyes nothing is covered.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Afflictions.
AL afflictions are for sin, as the deserving Lamen. 3.
cause: for living man mourns for the punishment of his sin. Whereupon the
prophet tells the Jews, that their own wickedness should Jeremy 2.
correct them. Neither does God punish, but where man sins, says one. Now to
set these two together orderly, is the property of a wise man: Jeremy 9.
and accordingly in our afflictions, to mourn for our sins, which we then
rightly do, when out of the clear sight of their odiousnes in Gods account, we
more vehemently desire the pardon of them, then the removing of the bodily
punishment: as who having understanding in him, would not raither have the
bodily soar healed, then the plaster (though biting) taken from it? And
withal, when we acknowledge, that our afflictions are infinitely less, then
our sins. Which they that do not, neither know Gods justice, nor their own
demerits, as they ought. Neither yet is it sufficient, that in such cases, we
confess Levit. 26.
our sins, and how we have walked contrary unto God; but we must withal
confess our misery, and that God has walked contrary unto us, and brought
our present afflictions upon us. In Confessing our sins we shame our selves, and
declare our naughtines: but in ackowledging our selves Joshua 7.
justly punished for them; we honor God, as a wise, powerful, and just Judge.

Notwithstanding there be always the desert of sin procuring punishment: yet
God does not always principally aim at that: but sometimes that his power may
be seen, John 9.
as in the man born blind: sometimes for the honor of his holy name, having
been blasphemed of his enemies by the 2 Samuel 12.
sins of his servants, as it was by David's adultery, and other mischeifs
following thereupon: sometimes for man's salvation, as we see in the sufferings
of Christ: sometimes for the confirmation of others, by testimony given to the
Melanct*
truth, as in the case of Steven, whose sufferings *says one) Ignatius.
exhort to the confession thereof: sometimes for the trial of our faith,
seeing without afflictions neither others knew us, James 1.
nor we our selves, and for the shameing of the devil therein, Seneca.
as in the case of Job: sometimes to draw men nearer to himself by humiliation,
and repentance, which is a general end: sometimes to wean us from the love of
the world, unto which we are too much addicted, notwithstanding all the
sorrows, which we do find in it, and like foolish travaylers, love our way,
though troublesome, in stead Gregory*
of our country: sometimes, to prevent some sin ready to break out in us; as
physicians let blood to prevent sickness: Lastly, to make the glory which shall
be showed, and whereof our afflictions are not worthy, the more glorious; as
the sun is, 2 Cor. 12.
when the clouds are driven away, wherewith, for a time, it Naziam.
has been darkened. Now, as it were to be wished, that we could always
certainly know the Lords particular ends in afflicting us; (as we may gather
much ordinarily, by the knowledge of his word, observation of his dealing
toward our selves, and others, and due examination of our estate, and ways in
his sight) so is it most necessary for all his people, ever to hold this
general conclusion; that in all their afflictions the justice, and mercy of
God meet together: and that he begins in justice, and will end in mercy, with
them.

God has in a peculiar manner entayled afflictions to the sincere profession
of the gospel, above that of the law before Christ. The law was given by
Moses, whose ministry began with killing the Egiptian, that oppressed the
Israelite; and was prosequuted with leading the people out of Egypt, through
the sea, and wilderness, with great might, and a strong hand; and lastly, was
finished with bloody victory over Sihon, and Og the kings of Canaan. But
Christ's dispensation was all of an other kind: his birth mean; his life
sorrowful; and his death shameful. And albeit the love of God toward his
people be always the same in it self, yet is the manifestation thereof very
diverse. Before Christ's coming in the flesh, in whom the grace of God appeared,
God showed his love more fully in earthly blessings, and peace; and more
sparingly in spiritual, and heavenly: But now, on the other side, he deals
forth temporal blessings more sparingly; and spiritual with a fuller hand. It
is not unprobably gathered, that, after the destruction of the dragon, and
beast, and recalling of the Jews after their long divorse from the Lord; the
blessings of both kinds shall meet together, and the Church enjoy, for a time,
a very graceful state upon earth both in regard of spiritual, and bodily
good things.

In the mean while, many would fayn have their worldly advantage, and the
obedience of the gospel to agree together, further then they will. And when
they cannot frame the world and their worldly conveniencie to the gospel; they
will fashion the gospel to the world, and to their carnal courses in it. Pity
it is, that such men were not of the Lords council, when he first contrived,
and preached his gospel; that they might have helped him in some such discreet,
and middle course, as might have served the turn both for Heaven, and earth.
But let the world, in its foolish wisdom, say and do what it will, or can; the
way is narrow, which leads unto life: and considering Math. 7.
man's naughtines, it is neither fit, nor hardly possible, that it should be
broader.

All the afflictions which Christians suffer are not afflictions of Christ: nor
all the crosses which they take up, the crosses of Christ. The afflictions of
Christ may be set in three ranks. The first, (and those most properly so
called) are when men for Christ's cause, hate, revile, and persequute us. The
second, when we suffer evils, which we might be free from, and escape, if we
durst deny in word, or deed any part of Christ's truth. The third, and last sort
are, such as befall us in the course of godliness, though humayn, and as they do
all other men; as bodily sickness, death of friends, crosses, and losses by sea,
and land, and the like. If we be members of Christ our such afflictions are the
afflictions of Christ; else the mercy showed, and good done to such were not
done to Christ. But now, if he that in his person is a true Christian, suffer
for evil doing, he takes not up the cross of Christ, but of the devil therein;
and if he put himself upon needless danger, and difficulties, he takes not up
Christ's cross, but his own herein: and so has his amends in his own hands.
Yet may even afflictions so coming by our true repentance be sanctified unto
us; and we please God in their use, though not in their cause.

Both good conscience and wisdom must be used in applying such scriptures, as
speak of the afflictions of Christians for well doing: neither is all that can
be said out of every text thereabout, to be applied to all times. For
howsoever hardly at any time, or in any place, things go so well, especially in
our days (which even they, who are none of the best themselves, will confess,
yea complayn to be extremely evil) but that truth goes with a scratcht face,
less, or more; yet the differences of times and state of things must be
observed, and put, this way. Yea further, though the times in the general
should be very evil; yet for a person, who himself is well furnished with
earthly good things, well fed, and glad, and in outward peace, to dwell much upon
the afflictions of Christians, specially with application to the present state
of things, is not to hold decorum, but has an appearance more orator, then
preacher-like.

We are never simply to desire crosses, because they are natural evils: nor to
abhor from them, because we know they work together with our election, calling,
justification, Romans 8.
and sanctification, for our good: Not as causes thereof, as the forenamed are;
for the effects of sin cannot be the causes of righteousness, or happiness: nor
yet as means properly; as are the word, sacraments, prayer, and examples of
good men: but only as occasions capable of sanctification to our use, which
sins properly are not, as having no good in them, as such; whereas afflictions
have a moral good in them, as they are of God, and by him inflicted. Though to
speak of crosses most properly, God sanctifies us to them, in giving us grace
to make a right use of them. And considering, how it is both good for us to be
afflicted, and that God has promised, that no good thing shall be lacking to
them Psalm. 119. and 34.
that fear him; we are thus to make account; that God afflicts us, as he does,
not only in justice for sin, but in faythfulnes also; that is, both in mercy,
and in truth of promise: and must accordingly confess with the man of God; I
know, O Lord, that thy judgments are righteous; Psalm. 119.
and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me: and so must learn to take our
several crosses at Gods hands, not only patiently, but thankfully. We have
cause to thank our selves, and our sins, that wholesome things both for body and
soul are for the most part bitter and grievous to our nature: and to thank God,
that makes afflictions bitter-sweets, by turning deserved curses into fatherly
corrections to us.

It is commonly received for truth, that in all adversity Boethius.
the greatest misery is, sometimes to have been happy. But we must here use a
distinction. If we only respect the time Keckerns*
in which we are in misery apart from the former time, we are both more
sensible of our present misery, by remembering our former happiness; and also
more tender, and delicate, and so less able to bear it: But if we consider our
whole life together; then the less time we are afflicted, the less our
afflictions are, in that respect, and so must be minded of us. It is not
nothing, that God has given us to pass over some part of our days in peace,
and with comfort: neither must we be so unthankful, as to account it no
benefit, because it is past: but we must, contrariwise, something quiet
ourselvs in our present affliction with the remembrance of Gods goodness in our
former peace; as did our example James 5.
of patience, who in the extreamitie of his present distress said, shall we
receav good at the hand of God, and shall we Job 2.
not receav evil? Reason teaches this (except in a case, when God lifts up a
man on high, that he may the more violently through him down) how much more,
faith; which persuades the godly man's heart, that the Lord loves him as well,
and as much, in his after afflicted estate* as he did before in his prosperous;
as the goldsmiths esteems his gold as much, though melting in the furnace; as
glittering in the shop: and that the same God will both give patience, and
strength of faith, according to the trial; and increase of strength, if he
increase the affliction; as also full deliverance in due time. He Psalm. 25.
will redeem Israel from all his trouble.

As even good men perform their whole duty to God, with some corruption
mingled among: so God promises (and performs accordingly) the good things of
this life, with exception of the cross, and tribulation. If we could amend the
one, God would leav Mark 10.
out the other.

The Lord who tried Abraham in his son Isaak, whom he loved; and the rich young
man in his riches which he loved, knows well in what veyn to strike a man, that
the blood may follow. The more we love any earthly thing, we are the more in
danger to be crossed in, or about it. Not that God envyes our delights, as one
man often envyes another: but either because we do, or lest we should surfeit
in affections toward it.

Most men are moved too much with their own miseryes in this world, melting in
them, as wax in the sun, so as they are unapt to hold any impression either of
faith, or reason: but are too little moved with other men's calamities, not
affoarding them so much as a compassionate affection. Yet may, and does the
contrary extreme of over pitying others also, prevayl with some. Against both
which it is good to consider, that either we, and they reap spiritual benefit
by our afflictions, or no. If the former; that may, and ought to moderate the
grief: If not; there is cause of greater grief for after greater afflictions to
come upon us, and them.

A man may much increase, or lessen a cross by the course, which he suffers
his mind to run, in it; seeing all crosses have some conveniences joined with
them; as all commodities have some discommodities. If a man set his thoughts a
work upon the inconveniences, and discommodityes alone, which are in it, he
shall heap sorrow upon sorrow. But if, on the contrary, he draw into
consideration such conveniencyes, as usually fall in with their contraryes; he
shall always find some matter of ease: and sometimes, Judge. 14*
that meat comes out of the eater, and that which at first seemed a cross, is
rayther a benefit. It is a most dangerous thing for any to deem his afflictions
extraordinary; least by so doing, he prejudice himself against ordinary
comforts; which we should with readynes, and thankfulness embrace; and not look
for angels from heaven to comfort us, or for manna from heaven to feed us.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of Injuries.
AN Injury (say the Lawyers) is whatsoever is Pacius.
not done justly. In one, and the same act may be found both sin against God,
and injury against man. And therefore in cases of wrong done either by
violence, or deceit, the offender, under the law, was bound both to make
restitution to the wronged, and also to bring his Levit. 6.
trespass offering to the priest, to make an atonement for him before the Lord.
Sometimes the sin is taken away, and the injury remayns; as when the person
which has wronged another, truly repents; but is not able to make
satisfaction: Sometimes, on the other side, the injury is taken away, and the
sin remayns; viz. when the offender makes satisfaction by compulsion, or for
shame; but repents not before God: Sometimes both are taken away, and sometimes
neither; as both or neither satisfaction to men, and repentance toward God is
performed.

Between the injurying, and offending of a man there is this difference; that
we may injury him that is altogether ignorant of it; but can offend only him
that takes knowledge of some evil in truth, or appearance, done by us, whether
with injury, or not.

The more power any has to do hurt, without worldly prejudice to himself
therein, the more careful had he need be, that he take not to himself any
lawless liberty that way; remembering always that he has also a master in
Coloss. 4. Eccles. 5
heaven; and that he who is higher then the highest regards: who also may
with more right, and reason destroy him for ever, then he (how great soever) do
the least hurt to the sillyest worm, that crawls upon the face of the earth.

They who use injurious dealings themselves hate them in Seneca.
others, and them that offer them; as do they also who take knowledge of them.
For whom men fear, they hate: Now there is cause for all to fear him (to his
power) that hurts any; seeing in wronging one, he threatens all that he has
power to hurt. Yet if we will look upon things a little spiritually, such
persons are more to be pitied, then either hated, or feared; as being, (though
cruel to others, yet) more to themselves: hurting others in their bodies, and
bodily Austin.
states; themselves in their hearts, and consciences before the Lord, which is
far the greatest damage. And upon this ground it was, that the ancient father
desired Scapula, Tertul.
that he would pity himself, if he would not pity the Christians, whom he
cruelly persequuted, seeing the most hurt came to himself thereby. When
therefore we thus suffer any heinous injuries of any kind by any, we must pray
the Lord both to deliver us out of their hands, and them out of the devils,
whose instruments they are, in so doing.

For any one man whosoever to offer injury to any other whomsoever, is
unnatural, and inhumayn: but especially odious in these four sorts of persons:
The first is Magistrates, and men in authority, whom God has therefore
furnished therewith, that they might prevent, and redress injuries by others;
and exequute wrath upon Romans 13.
evil doers. Which if they become themselves, they transform the image of the
Lords power, and justice, which they susteyn, into the image of Gods enemy,
Satan, whom therein they resemble; and become, after a sort, wickednesses in
high places, as the devils are. The second are friends, whose office it is by
help, counsayl, riches, or Terence.
otherwise, to succor their wronged friends; and if no other way, at least, by
condoling with them, and comforting them. A man that has friends should show
himself friendly Prove. 18.
(says the wise man) and for such a one to show himself enemie-like, is very
grievous; as we may see in Jobs, and David's case. Now, if it be here demanded,
whether the injuries offered by friends, or by others, be less tolerable?
Answer must be made with distinction; that some injuries are such, and so
notorious, as cannot stand with a true freindly heart, but do plainly discover
an evil, and enimious affection: and of these by false friends David (and
worthily) complayns, as more grievous then by strangers. Psalm. 55.
Some again, are such, as may escape him that truly loves, through negligence,
rashness, or other infirmity. Such the heat of love should digest. And they,
who, in this kind will bear more at the hands of others, then of friends, are
unworthy of them. A third sort are men religious, whose professed piety
toward God promises honest dealing with men: as on the contrary, Abraham
looked for all Genesis 20.
injurious dealing in that place, where the fear of God was not. The fourth,
and last are men themselves oppressed by others, specially lying under the
injuries of the times. When one poor man oppresses another, it is like a
sweeping Prove. 28.
rayn, which leaves no food. Yet is it found by certain experience, that it
often rayns from this coast; and that the poor by oppressing one another, teach
the rich to oppress both: and this not only in bodily things, but in
spiritual also: none being found more injurious, and unmercifull, then are
some (out of the favors of the times themselves) to others, that are a little
more in their disgrace, then they. None of the heathens were so cruelly bent
against the christians, as the Jews, though themselves but scattered amongst the
Heathens, to be tolerated by them. Such should think of the brethren of Joseph,
who being themselves in danger to be violently oppressed, remembered, and
bewailed the violence, and wrong, which they had formerly Genesis 42.
offered to their brother Joseph.

There are two things causing inordinate stirring, and indignation at injuries
offered: the one natural; the other moral. The natural is the abundance of
hot choler boiling in the veyns, by which the blood, and spirits are
attenuated, and so apt to be inordinately stirred, and inflamed, upon
apprehension of a wrong done. This cause may something be helped by natural
means, and medicines; and the effect by true wisdom, and government, which
represseth all inordinate motions in the mind. The moral cause is pride, and
self-love: for men having themselves in high estimation, make account* that if
they be a little wronged, some great, and heinous offense is committed, and that
at which there is just cause of high indignation. The injury to such seems
great, because they seem great to themselves: whereas to him that is little, and
lowly in his own eyes, injuryes and wrongs seem less: specially if he set this
low price, and valuation upon himself, in conscience of his sins against God:
as it was with 2 Samuel* 16.
David. What strange thing is it, if an earthen pot get a crack? or if a silly
worm be trodden upon? or that he, who is little, be little set by?

It is wisdom, in cases, not to seem to take knowledge of an injury: as
either, when it is small, and scarce worthy the myndeing; and such the stately
gravitie of some persons make many to be, which to others seem intolerable;
witness Cato, who being asked pardon of him that Seneca.
had given him a bob on the mouth, answered, that there was no injury done,
and so no pardon needful: or when the greatness, (and malice withal) of the
injurious is such, as that to expostulate a wrong is to provoke to the doubling
of it: to which purpose his answer fitted well, that said, he had grown old in
a tyrants court, by thanking men, when he had received an injury from them.
Sometimes, again, it is wisdom to let persons know, that we account our selves
ill used by them, and that chiefly, when our expostulation is like to prove
their warning; by working either fear, or shame in them.

If the commendation given of Caesar had not been by Cicero.
him, who was too good a courtjer, that he was wont to forget nothing but
injuries; he though a pagan, might therein have been a mirror to all
Christians; considering the mischeivousnes of our corrupt nature this way,
which is apter to remember a wrong done, then any thing else, specially then a
benefit; because, as one says, we account Tacitus.
thanks a burden, and revenge an ease. In regard whereof it was not without
cause, that Christ our Lord in our directorie of prayer, which we must daily
use, reinforceth Math. 6.
nothing but the condition of the fifth petition: as we forgive them that
trespass against us; the petition being, Forgive us our trespasses; adding
therein, that if we forgive not* them that trespass against us, neither will
our heavenly father forgive us. And this exhortation, says one, if we be
Calvin.
not more hard, then iron, and steel, cannot but soften us, and make us
appeasable, and ready to remit offenses; considering how many, and great our
offenses are against the Lord; for which he both so justly might, and so easily
could take revengment upon us. And since vengeance is the Lords, and Romans 12.
that he will repay, we must beware we take it not further into our hands, then
God gives it us: lest meddling with edged-tools, in Gods shop, we surely cut our
selves deep, howsoever they escape, against whom we use them. And, besides the
conscience of offending God by revenge, in wish, word, or deed, we may take
instances of inducement to forgivenes, from circumstances of all the persons
that injury us. If it be a meaner person then our selves, that wrongs us; let
us forgive him, in pity of his weakness: If our superior, let us pity, and
forgive our selves: the former Seneca.
in charity; the latter in wisdom. Is he a malicious, and unmerited enemy? why
should we marvayl, if he do his kind? Have we hurt him before? he but gives us
our due, and why should we not take it at his hands? Is he a good man? let us
be ready to forgive him, whom God forgives. Is he wicked? Alas, we may well
forgive him, considering how fearful vengeance (if he repent not) God will
take on him for that, and other his sins.

Many who think it divelish (as indeed it is) to offer an injury, think it but
manly to requite it. But it is, (says Lactant.
one, evil as well to requite, as to offer; since God forbids both. And there
is, says another, only this difference between Tertul.
them; that he who offers the injury, is before in mischief; and he that
requites it, comes after therein, as fast as he can. With which two join a
third witness saying, that to render evil Calvin.
for evil, is to make two devils for one.

Not to be revenged for an injury done is not always to forgive it. For this
may be through want of power, or of courage, or in a kind of haughtines of
mind, when a man esteems himself above the wrong done, or scorns to fyle his
fingers with his adversary. Neither yet is it sufficient (though it be a great
thing) that we wish him no hurt who has wronged us; but we ought further also
so to keep our hearts, that they rejoice not at his fall, or slumbling, by any
other means; least the Lord see, and it displease Prove. 24*
him, and he turn his wrath from him upon us. All the other ways we may be
accessory before; this way, after the fact. Notwithstanding, we may, and have
cause to be glad, if the injurious, and oppressors be restreyned by some work
of Gods overruling providence; that the fox being chayned up may no more worry
the lambs: But this is not to rejoice for his hurt; but for his good. Lastly,
as God forgives injuries against him (which all sins are) if for the same he
hate not the person so sinning, though he both be angry at him, and correct
him; and therein provide for the repayring of the honor of his majesty
impeached by him: so may men forgive injuries done against them, in ^ Sam. 12.
spiritual sense, and holy manner; if therefore they hate not, nor wish hurt
to the person, that has wronged them; though, in cases, they provide for his
due correction, and also for the repayring of the damage sustained by him in
their body, goods, or good name, by lawful means.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Patience.
IT is our sinful condition that makes us subject to crosses: our humayn, that
makes us sensible of them: without which sense of them we were no more patient
in bearing them, then the stone is patient, upon which the weight of the wall
lies. But in the bearing of such evils as are brought upon us, or befall us,
Lactant.
with equanimitie, and moderation, true patience is seen. The grace it self
must be in us, even without crosses, and we by it in heart martyrs, without
fire, or sword: but so can Gregory.
not the use of it be; no more then there is use of a salve, where there is no
soar. And thereupon the Apostle says, that affliction works patience, that
is, occasions the exercise, Romans 5.
and increase of it. And hence it is, that men are most deceaved in the measure
of this grace, and esteem their inches e^ns; till by trial of evils, they
find the contrary. But patience tried by afflictions, and found firm, and
good, gives, above other graces, experimental assurance of Gods love.
Whereupon the Apostle, in the place forenamed, gives it alone the honor of
working experience: And no marvayl; seeing by it God gives a poor, and feeble
creature such experience of his powerful grace, and goodness, for the bearing,
and bearing out of those crosses, and miseries, both inward, and outward;
which, without this staf of supportance, were intolerable. Neither is the work
of Gods goodness lost in them, to whom he imparts this grace; seeing by it, if
by any other, they show forth the virtues of God; and honor him in so many of
his attributes, in the exercising of it. As first, of his will both commanding,
and approving it: as Christ tells the church and Angel Rev. 2.
at Ephesus: I know thy works, and labor, and patience. Secondly, of his
justice, as acknowledging really, that all the afflictions, which they suffer,
are less, without comparison, then their sins deserv. Thirdly, of his power,
and that both over them, with which they struggle not, but Chrysostom.
making a virtue of necessity, quietly bear what he lays upon them: and also
in them, in susteyning them, that they faint not under their burden. Fourthly
of his wisdom, in effectual acknowledgment, that he has his good, and holy
ends of his so dealing with them, though often times not so particularly known to
them. Lastly, of his goodness, in dealing with them in their chastisements, as
with sons, for their Hebr. 12*
profit, and that they might be partakers of his holiness: without which last,
all the rest how honorable soever to God, are uncomfortable unto man. Upon
this goodness of God, we do in our afflictions specially exercise the two mayn
graces of Faith, and Hope. Faith, persuading our hearts, that God loves us as
well in our greatest afflictions, as out of them, and will do us nothing but
good by them, is as the foundation for this bulwork of patience. Hope assures
us of happy issue out of them all; which if we wanted, what would it avayl us
though we had the strength of men, and angels to bear miseries?

Some Christians have said, that Patience is a miserable remedy. But how much
better said the Heathen Byas, that he only is miserable that wants patience,
for the bearing of his Laertius.
misfortunes. As indeed, he is in a miserable case; considering unto how many
calamities all mortal men are subject: against which they can neither promise
themselves before hand, nor find in time, other sufficient remedy, then this of
patience; which is a salv for all soars: and the Seneca.
same also so approved, that though it make not miseries cease to be miseries;
yet it keeps the person that has it, and suffers them, from being miserable.
Yea, as deadly poisons may be, and are so mixed, and tempered, as they become,
in cases, more wholesome, then meat; so do calamities, deadly in themselves,
tempered with patience become better then their contrary delights. Sickness
with this is better then health without it; and poverty so tempered, then
riches otherwise: and so all the works of Gods justice, unto which the
faithful are liable, are better to them, then any work of his mercy to others.
Lastly, so absolutely necessary is this grace, and the use of it, for all
Christians, as that the Apostle tells the believing Hebrews, and other believers
in them, that they had need of patience, Hebr. 10.
that having done the will of God, they might receav the promise: With which
accords an others exhortation, that patience may have its perfect work in the
Saints, that they may be James 1.
perfect, and entire, lacking nothing. A man would think in reason, that he who
has done the will of God, and been careful in all things to keep a good
conscience toward God, and men, should have nothing lacking, for the receaving
of the promised reward. But the wisdom of God tells us, that we must first do
our duty in all things; and then afterward, suffer evil with patience,
before we receav the reward promised. In which our patient suffering for, or in
the way of righteousness, we please God more (if it may be) then in our former
weldoing; as Christ our Lord performed the greatest work of his obedience unto
his father, and of our redemption therein, by his innocent, and patient
suffering of death.

Of all manner of crosses none are so hard to bear by Gods servants, without
despayr, as those, wherein the Lord seems, to their sense, and reason, to be
their enemy, by Job 19.
reason of some strange, and unusual working against them; as we have Job for
an example: Nor any so hardly born by them, without inordinate stirring, and
spurning again, as those, in which a man must be a mere patient, using, as they
call it, that passive patience; and may, or can say, or do nothing in defending
himself, or offending an adversary. A blow, or wound received in fight, or
action, is scarce perceaved: But if a man must sit still, and suffer himself to
be bobbed on the mouth; or, as the Prophet says, must give his back to the
smyters, and his Esaias 50.
cheeks to them that pluck of the hayr, or must be coupt up alone in a dungeon,
or prison, where none may come at him, this goes near him, and tryes his
patience, and how he has hearkened to the Lord God, the holy one of Israel,
saying, Esaias 30.
In returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness, and in confidence shall
be your strength. Where men's injuries are joined, and concur with Gods
providence in a cross, there the flesh and fleshly passions take more
liberty. I have known some, who have atteyned to a good measure of patient
bearing calamities and crosses by other ordinary hand of Gods providence; and
yet have been most impatient of any prejudice, or damage by men's injurious
dealing. And this may seem not to want reason. To be stirred against God for a
cross, is divelish; against unreasonable creatures, brutish; but has a show
of manlines, for a man to be stirred against a man that injuries him. But be
the show what it will, the truth of the ground, for the most part, is; that
pride causes this swelling of the heart against him, who is deemed to injury
us, specially if we conceav it to be out of contempt; whereof all men are
impatient. Against the pang of impatiencie this way, it is best we labor, not
to overvalue our selves; nor easily to think that others despise us; and, as we
have Job for a pattern of patience, so to follow his steps; who, looking
through the violence, and wrongs of men (the Sabeans, and Chaldeans,) beheld,
by the eye of faith, which sees a far of, Gods providence, as the soul of the
worlds body, and ruling all things in it; and thence took instruction for
quiet, and patient submission unto the Lord: seeing, and saying in all the
outrageous practices against him by the devil, and wicked men; that God who
had given, had taken away. Job 1.


CHAP. XXXVI. Of Peace.
THE Hebrews by comprehending under the name of peace, all both safety, and
prosperity, whether bodily, or spiritual, do show therein how both pleasant,
and profitable a thing peace is, for all persons, and societies. And though to
strive, contend, yea and wage war also, be in cases, and at times, not only
lawful, but also necessary; yet are they never so much as tolerable for
themselves, but only for peace, as the launching of the wound is for the
cureing of it.

From peace with God through the forgivenes of sins by faith, Romans 5.
and a good conscience, aryseth peace with a man's self; with the angels; with
all men, after a sort, yea with all creatures in the world. Such a one is in
league with the stones of the field, and at peace with the beasts of the field,
Job 5.
says Eliphaz. Yea his very enemies (says the wise man) Prove. 16.
are at peace with him. I add, that though he be burnt in the fire, drowned in
the water, or otherwise killed* yet that fire, water, and other instrument of
his bodily destruction; and therewith, all other creatures, are in a kind of
secret league with him, and do even in killing Romans 8.
him bodily, work for his spiritual, and eternal good. And if they which are
at peace with a king have his subjects at peace with them; how much more shall
Gods servants, and people, have all the creatures in heaven, and earth at peace
with them, for their true good, by the favor of him their absolute king, and
Lord.

God to show how peaceable man should be, has denied him such instruments of
offense, and natural weapons, as many other creatures are furnished withal;
of which some have horns, some hoofs, some paws, some tushes, some talents:
But, alas, how has sin armed man with hatred, and malice; and they with
weapons of violence, and destruction? so as more men are destroyed by men, then
by all other creatures.

When the Lord would show himself to Elijah, he did it not in the great, and
strong wind, nor in the earthquake, 1 Kin. 19.
nor in the fire; but in the small still voice, which came after them. And when
he would have a temple built to dwell in, he would not have David build it,
because his hands were full of bood, though of Gods enemies: but Solomon 2 Samuel
7.
the king of peace. In the building of which there was neither hammer, nor ax,
nor tool of iron heard in the house. 1 Kin. 6.
As the spirit of a man does not quicken any member of the body, but as it is
united to it; so neither does the spirit of Austin.
God any member of the Church, but being united in the bond of peace.

God would have Christians, if it be possible, and as Romans 12.
much as in them lies, to have peace with all men. But in some cases, and
specially, where this cannot be done without sin, on their part; it lies not
in them to have peace, but in the other, which would put upon them the
necessity of sinning. And in such a case, they must rayther want peace with
men, which is a cross; then with God, which is a greater cross, and a sin
also. The Apostle that bids follow peace with all men, adds in the Hebr. 12.
same place, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Such may be
the case, as a man may see God without peace with men; because it may be their
fault, and not his: so can he not possibly without holiness, of which no man
fayls but by his own fault, and sin. The Nazianz.
contention which makes us nearer God, is better then the peace that separates
us from him.

They are not most unpeaceable always, who dissent most from others, whether
in opinion, or practice: but they who either affect differences, or carry them
turbulently, whether small, or great, when they fall in. A feirce horse may be
so whistled, or yoaked, as he may draw in the same wagon quietly with others,
either gentle, or headstrong; so may a violent, and turbulent person go on in
the same course quietly a long time, because it pleases him, or because he is
strongly yoaked, though without all true love of, or earnest pursuit after
peace. But the Lord would have us not only to be held in peace by others, and
to hold peace Psalm. 33. Calvin.
with others, when we have it, and to embrace it when it is offered; but to
pursue and follow after it, even when it seems to fly from us. Many can cry
aloud for peace, and against peace-breakers: and can speak very glorious things
in commendation of so profitable, and pleasant a good, whereby to persuade
others to it. But what is this peace, unto which not a few of those good
orators so earnestly, and eloquently persuade? Surely too often nothings else
but either a cursed consent in evil, or servile subjection to their, or their
masters wills, and lusts, without regard either of equity, or reason. They
would willingly have peace; that is, they would do what they list, and have
others do the same their lists also, how unreasonable soever. But this (says
Hugo.
one) is not to follow peace, but to command it. The devil himself would have
such peace, and has with his; (when the strong man armed keeps his house, all
things that he has Luke 11.
are in peace) and upon condition that he might rule in, and over them after
his wicked will. But to follow after peace aright is clean an other, and the
same an excellent thing; requiring at the least these three particular virtues.
First, a truly affectioned heart unto it, in conscience of God, and love to
men, out of a due valuation of its excellency; as Elisha loving, and
reverencing his master Eliah, would follow after him, and not leave him. The
second is, to deal justly, and equally with all men, without wronging any. It
is double injury to beat men causelessly till they cry, and then to beat them
for crying. Thus many breed strife by injury, and oppression; and then cry out
against it; as Athalyah cried out of treason. There are two friends (says the
Father) Righteousness Psalm. 85. Austin.
and Peace; He that will have the one, must do the other. All would have peace;
but all will not do righteousness. But he that puts the one away, and loves not
the friend of peace; peace loves not him, nor will come at him. A third thing,
is forbearance of others, what may be, though in our own wrong. For considering
how ready all sorts of 1 Cor. 6. Ephesians. 4.
men are to wrong one another, and withal how apt to think themselves wronged,
when they are not, yea often times, when they themselves do the wrong: except we
mingle with the former two, such moderation, and Christian forbearance, as to
bear, and tolerate for peace sake, persons, and things not intolerable, we
follow strife in effect; whatsoever we either pretend, or intend otherwise.

It is ill when good men have not peace, and unity amongst Austin.
themselves; and as ill, yea worse, when there is peace amongst wicked, and
godles persons; seeing thereby their strength in evil is increased. It is
better the work of God go on weakly, as it does, when peace among the good is
wanting; then the devils work strongly, as it does, in the conspiracy of
wicked men. It is therefore a special Psalm. 38.
work of Gods good, and powerful providence to cast a bone amongst such, and
to set them one against another, that a fire may come out from Abimelech, and
devour Judge. 9.
the men of Shechem: and from the men of Shechem, and devour Abimelech: by
which God makes one of them the others exequutioner in his just judgment; and
therewith provides many times for the peace of his people, whose utter ruin
otherwise, their accord in evil and violence against them, would endanger.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Society, and Freindship.
GOD has made man a sociable creature; and has not only ordained several
societies, in which persons are to unite themselves for their mutual welfare;
but withal so dispensed his blessings, as that no man is so barren, but has
something wherewith to profit others: nor any so furnished, but that he stands
need of others to supply his wants. The head cannot say to the foot, (much
less the foot 1 Cor. 12
to the head) I have no need of thee. And the less need thou, by reason of
thine abundance of bodily, or spiritual endowments, have of others; the more
need they have of thee, and thy plenty. To which purpose tended his saying,
who having many servants, some better, and some worse; and being moved by one
to disburden himself of such as were unprofitable, and to keep the rest,
answered; that he stood need of the better; and the worse of him. The king
himself is served by the field; Eccles. 5.
and stands need of the husbandman; and so does he of many of far meaner
condition.

Some wrong humayn societies by being too divine; many more, and much more, by
being too bestiall. By the former I understand such as in the profession of
devotion toward God swallow up, and dissolv such natural, and civil bonds,
as wherein God has tied them unto men; by choosing solitary, and monastical
lives. All Christians Phil. 3. 1 Cor. 7.
ought to have their conversation in heaven, and to use this world, as though
they used it not: And herein such as are called to the holy ministry ought to
be ensamples to others, and to go before them; but not to hide themselves in
holes from them, as melancholic monks do. So for others; the lesser helps, and
provocations of grace they can have from them with whom they are occasioned to
converse; they are to be the more frequent with God in the personal exercises
of piety: but so as they take heed that they wrong not father, and mother by
their Corban: nor make a special calling of the common works of all
christians. Others are grown more out of kind, who take greater delight in the
following, and fellowship of horses, and hauks, and dogs, then in men's
company. Such have drunk deep of the cup of Circes, by which she is said to
have transformed men into beasts. That which was Nabuchad-nezzars punishment,
they make their chief pleasure.

As God has established fellowships, and communities of men to procure their
mutual good; and to fence them the better, on every side, against evil; so
sin and wickedness being the greatest, and only absolute evil; christians are
most bound by virtue of their association, to help, and assist, within the
bounds of the callings in which God has set them, their brethren, and
associates against it: according Seneca.
to that of the Philosopher; He that bears with the vices of his friend makes
them his own. Hence all Israel was punished, and is said to have sinned, for
not preventing, or reforming one Achans transgression. The sin of another,
Josh. 7.
how near soever unto me, cannot defile me, because he does it: for then that
which neither goes into a man, nor comes out of him might defile him: but when
either I do something for the furthering of it, which I should not do; or
neglect something which I should perform in my place for the preventing, or
reforming of it; by these means I become accessorie either before, or after the
fact; and not otherwise.

Although it be to be desired, and that, unto which we are bound, as humanity,
and our special places, and occasion will permit; that we converse only with
such, as either may make us better, which is wisdom; or which we are like to
make better, which is charity: yet will a good, and wise man make good use of
all companies. Amongst the good he will learn to love goodness the more: amongst
the evil (and most amongst the worst) the more to hate evil. But yet
notwithstanding, there is a difference. In evil company we see what to avoid;
which is good: but in good, what to follow; which is better. Besides, there is
danger (if of no worse thing) lest the edg of our zeal against evil should be
taken of, if we be occasioned continually to be grateing against it. The spirit
of grace, and goodness had need to be strong in him, that is not tired with
continual struglings, and stryvings with the malice of others. He that, at
the first, with righteous 2 Pet. 2.
Lot vexes his righteous soul daily with the wicked deeds of them, with whom
he lives, yet will in time, be in danger, to be vexed daily less, and less,
with them, as things growing by custom, more familiar to him. Also there is a
second danger, lest living amongst fools, or wicked persons, we content our
selves with the little model of goodness, or wisdom which we have; because we are
some body in comparison of them, (as he that has but half an eye, is a king
amongst them that are blind:) whereas amongst the wise, and good, we have
still matter of imitation, and provocation to aspire unto greater perfection in
goodness. I conclude with that of the father. If men good, and bad be Chrisost.
joined together in special bond of society, they either quickly part, or
usually become alike. Friendship either takes, or makes men alike.

Much acquayntance shows either great employment in the world, which puts men
necessarily upon the acquayntance of many: or great ability, and endowments,
which draw the acquaintance of many to a man, for their benefit: or an
ambitious heart, which seeks to be known and acknowledged by many: or an idle
head, that has little else to do, but to occupy it self, in seeking, or getting
friends.

As many, who, if they walked alone, would, by reason of their richer
apparel, be thought men of better estate, then they are: and others meaner
then they are, by reason of their russet coats: who yet both are discerned of
what condition, and rank they be, by their companions and consorts: so the
virtuous, or vicious dispositions of men are much discovered by the company,
which they affect, and with which they sort with most gladness, and content: For
like will to like, whether good, or evil.

There is a difference between love, goodwill, and freindship. Dan^^^.
We may love other things besides men: bear goodwill to the persons that know
us not: but we have freindship only with men; and that with mutual consent,
arising from mutual love, and goodwill, for our mutual good. Now though diverse
other contracts be more streyt in several relations; yet is there in this of
freindship a kind of inwardnes, arising from conformity of judgment, and
affections ( the conjunction of the mind being the nearest kindred) Seneca.
by which persons are more streitly tied together, then any other way. There is
a friend (says Solomon) that Prove. 18.
sticks closer then a brother: And Moses passing from brother Deuteronomy. 13.
to child, and from child to wife, places her as near, as the man's bosom; but
a friend nearer, as reckning him as his own soul. Such a friend Jonathan was;
whose love to David 2 Samuel 1.
passed the love of women. Him whom we are to take so near unto us, so
constantly to keep, and so freely to communicate withal, we must not lightly
make choice of; nor as the manner of many is, by meeting together at a Plutarch
feast; or playing a game at bowls, or tables; or lodging in one Inn: but
either after long experience, and having, as the proverb is, eaten a bushel of
salt together: or upon some singular, and extraordinary motive, or trial. And
as Christ John 2.
committed not himself to the Jews, because he knew their hearts; so neither
are we easily to commit our selves to men, because we know not their hearts. We
are wisely to judge before, but freely to credit after, the knot of freindship
tied: yet so as we try the wisdom, secrecy, and faithfulness of our friends
Seneca.
in smaller matters, before we trust them in greater; as men use to try,
whether their vessels will hold water, or no, before Plutarch.
they put wine into them. And albeit that christian love, which is the bond of
perfection, and first fruits of the spirit, be Colos. 3. Galat. 5.
due to all christians from all; yet are not all fit friends for all, of that
fellowship. David notwithstanding the many worthyes in his kingdom, had
specially Husha^ the kings 1 Chr. 27.
friend: and so had our Lord, whilst he lived upon earth, specially John, among
all the twelv, the disciple whom he John 14.
loved. This special affection to one above the rest in Christ, was holy, yet
humayn.

Many complayn of the perfidiousnes of friends, and how vilely they have been
used by them whom they have trusted: and not without cause; it being as vile,
as common, to deccav him, whom we could not have deceaved, if he had Seneca.
not trusted us: But if all things be rightly weighed, the most have most cause
to complain of themselves, for making no better choice. He is but right served,
in all men's judgments, that has his broth running out, which he puts into a
riven dish. And first, God is love; and no marvayl 1 John. 4.
then, if there be no firmnes in that love, which is not founded in God, and
goodness. As, on the other side, if a man be deceaved by such a friend as he
trusts upon the show of piety and goodness, which he makes; he has comfort
with God, unto whom he had respect in trusting him. Men that trust others upon
the testimony, and commendation of any, and are deceaved by them, use to
complayn to them, for whose cause they trusted them: He that looks, in his
league of freindship, to the appearance of godlynes, and virtue, which the
other makes, takes his friend, after a sort, upon Gods word, and testimony; and
if he happen to be deceaved by him, may complayn, and moan himself to God; as
David complained of Achitophell the traitor, with whom he had taken sweet
counsayl, Psalm. 55.
and walked into the house of God, as a friend. But on the contrary, he that
leagues himself with a vayn, and godles person, especially with respect and
liking to any vanity, or leaud quality in him; if he be deceaved by him
afterward, (as like enough he will be) may go to the devil to complayn; upon
whose word, in effect, he took him.

Some do discover their pride, and ambition by affecting acquaintance, and
society with their superiors; thereby either to become, or to seem greater
then they are. So do others not a little, if not more, bewray their pride, by
affected sorting with much meaner persons then themselves; that they may have
honor, and respect from them, and domineer amongst them: which in truth,
though under an appearance of humility, shows the prouder mind. It was
swelling pride in Caesar, that he rayther desired to be the first in the least
village of Italy, then the second in Rome it self.

He that will thoroughly reform, and correct his faults, had need either of
singular circumspection, and jealousy over himself, and his ways, for the
finding out of his own faylings: or of faithful friends who will seriously
admonish him; in which duty christian freindship is specially differenced from
all other: or else of bitter enemies, who will not spare, nor fayl to cast his
faults in his teeth; that so he may make a medicine of their malice, as
physicians make triacle of venomous serpents. And as Jason had his impostume
opened, and so healed by his enemies sword, in Plutarch.
the wars, which his friends the physicians could not cure; so we receav
sometimes, that good by our enemies reproaches, which our friends either
cannot, or will not affoard us, by their loving, and faithful advertisements.
A wise man makes better use of his enemies, then a fool of his friends.

To him that knows the use of true freindship, no earthly thing is more
delightful, then the sweet society of wise, and honest friends, whether for
recreation after study, or labor; or communication in a prosperous state; or
comfort in an afflicted. He that so esteems not this benefit, is unworthy of
it. Yet, for my self, though I have ever thus valued truly loving friends;
notwithstanding, considering unto how many dangers, and calamities mine
afflicted state has been exposed, I have counted it a benefit, that I have not
had many such, as were in danger to take excessive sorrow for my misery that
has, or could befall me.

Some friends, in this respect, have a very ill, and unfreindly fashion. If any
good come to them, they conceal it from their friends: if any hurt, they hasten
to fill their ears with that, to the utmost. Such are more perversely chyldish,
then children. For as they will straight complayn to their mothers, of any hurt
that befalls them: so, on the other side, if any good come to them, though it be
but an apple, or nut; they will as readily run, and acquaynt them with it also.
Such persons are commonly lovers of themselves, envious, and unthankful. We, on
the contrary, should rayther hasten, and desire to manifest to our friends
matter of gladness, when good befalls us; then of sorrow, in our crosses: and
show therein both our love toward them, in procuring their rejoicing with us;
and also our wisdom, and strength of faith, and patience, in the silent
swallowing of our sorrows, without greiving our friends more then needs must.
So we read of Luke 15.
the woman, that had lost her piece; she lighted the candle, swept the house,
and sought it diligently; and all this she did alone: but when she had found
it, then she called in her friends, and neighbors to rejoice with her. It is
best mourning alone; and best rejoicing with company.

Some friends are rayther to be used, then trusted: namely such as are more
able, then entire, or free-hearted: Some again are rayther to be trusted, then
used, save in case of necessity, and then also sparingly: and those are such,
as whose truly loving affections exceed their ability. And in these
considerations, the proverb often times fitteth: Rich men's purses, and poor men's
hearts.

Wealth makes many friends, and poverty tries them; as the wind shows which
clouds have rayn in them, and which not. And so, though the rich have the more
friends; yet the poores better appear to be faithful, in giving testimony that
they love their friends for God, and the persons themselves: which to know is
not a small priveledg, that poor men have above others; who can Gregory.
hardly discern, whether their persons, or riches be loved. A friend (says the
wise man) loves at all times: and a brother Prove. 17.
is born for adversity. He says not, A friend is born for prosperity; though
it be one end of freindship, that we might have with whom to communicate, and
rejoice in a prosperous state of things; but for adversity; this being the more
principal end (specially in our sinful, and sorrowful state) for which God
has linked men together in all societies: which the wiser sort of the heathen
have seen by the dim light of nature, and that it apperteyns specially to the
office of a true friend to ease his friends grief by speech, to affoard him
counsayl in doubtful cases, to drive away Seneca.
sadness by his chearfulnes, and to refresh him with his very presence.

And for such persons in societies, as, in effect, make account, that they are
only for other men's prosperity, and not for their afflicted state; and that
others are for their help, and benefit; and they for their own: these are the
very moths, and caterpillars of family, church, and common wealth: and so far
from deserving the fellowship of men, as they are scarce worthy of the flocks,
and herds of beasts: of which diverse are helpful to their fellow, as they are
able, and the other need.

As none can sin against the Holy Ghost, and irremissibly, but they, whom God
has received into some degree of fellowship with him, at least, in the
knowledge of the truth: so there is no so great enmity amongst any others, as
amongst them; who of friends become enemies. A brother offended is harder to be
wonn, then a strong city: Prove. 15.
and such contentions are like the bars of a castle. A twyne Cartwr.
thread, if it be broken, is more easily knit together, then a cable. And the
hard Adamant, if it hap to be beaten in pieces Pliny.
with the hammer, flies into such small dust, as is scarce discernable. And no
marvayl, if, where men look for love, and kindenes, they find, in truth, or
supposition, the contrary, and that which agrees not with a freindly affection;
that there they conceave most indignation, and greatest matter of alienation.
It is therefore requisite, that a friend show himself freindly, for the
preserving inviolated that bond of Prove. 18.
amity with his friend: and avoid all make-bates, persons or things. And of
this sort, not only greater unkyndenesses use to be, but even smaller also, if
they be frequent: as men consume their states, many times, by small (if daily)
losses, and mispendings. And if it so come to pass, that our friends become,
or appear so ill, as that in their freindship Is^dorus.
there is more hurt, or danger, then in their hatred; it is yet better we
untwyne, then break the coard of former Cicero.
freindship: save where some extraordinary unworthines suddeynly breaks out,
and which urges present renunciation. Lastly, when we are necessarily pressed
either to the one, or other; let us rayther do it with sorrow, then anger: and
withal, have in us a disposition to reassume our old course of kindness, if
there appear cause afterward: as the storks, when the winter is over, do
affect their former Pliny.
nests.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Credit, and good name.
CRedit, and good name with men so follows virtue, and good deserts (like the
shadow the body) as it remayns notwithstanding Gods good gift, sundry ways.
First, in bestowing upon men virtue, and goodness to deserv it: for which also
the gifts of God are to Austin.
be the more welcome. Secondly, in guiding them to manifest, and improve their
endowments to the advantage of their good name; not as stage players, but as
good stewards of the gift of God that way. Thirdly, by moving the hearts of
other men to have them in due respect, and estimation: to which purpose it is
said of Joseph, and others (though of most singular desert in regard of men)
that God gave Genesis 39.
them favor in their eyes.

Many rayther desire a great name, then a good: and therefore rayther
enterprise great, then good matters. Some matters greatly great; as they in the
East, who to get Genesis 11.
them a name, would build a tower, whose top should reach heaven. Such also was
the level of the huge, and high Pyramides built by the Egiptian kings. Some,
things greatly strange though mean, as Parmeno in his artificial imitation
Plutarch.
of the gruntling of a sow. Some, greatly dangerous; as those Funambuli, who
rayther will venture their necks, then want a name. Some again, things, if no
otherwise, yet greatly odious; as Herostratus, in burning the temple of Diana,
in Ephesus, with wild fire. And so Pilate is famous for crucifying Christ; and
Judas for betraying him: so is Jeroboam known by this brand, He that made
Israel to sin. But a great name so got, and left to posterity, is like to the
great stinck of a lamp, or candle, when it is gone out: whereas the memorial
of the righteous is blessed; and Prove. 10.
like the smell of the costly ointment of spykenard, wherewith Mary anointed
our Lords feet: the sweet sent whereof filled the whole house. And this good
name of the godly, and John. 12.
virtuous, living amongst good men upon earth, when they are dead, is a kind
of pledge of their souls living for ever with God in heaven. This none neglect,
but they, who mean to do nothing to deserv it: nor despise, but with
endangering their own hardening in evil, both against the fear of God, and
shame of the world.

This good name is rayther to be chosen then great riches, Prove. 22.
says he, who could well discern what was best. Which shows, both that he, who
impayrs another credit by slander is worse then a theif, and steals a more
precious thing; as also that he, who seeks, and gets it to himself
undeservedly, is as well to answer to God for his undeserved credit with men,
as is a theif for his stolen goods.

This credit, and good name we may desire, as a good pleasing natural thing,
and for our more comfortable living amongst men: and so David prayed sundry
times in one Psalm, that God would turn away reproach from Psalm. 119.
him, which he so feared. But this good name, and note with men, we are
specially to desire to honor God withal, and to further, and prefer goodness
with others: as otherwise, so chiefly, by the good regard, and respect, wherein
they have us, to advantage the example, and other provocations of virtue, and
godlynes proceeding from us, for more ready imitation by, and better acceptance
with them. And them, who thus labor to honor God with the honor, and
respect, which he vouch safes them from others, he will surely honor with men
(so far as is meet) and with himself for ever. Whereas the vaynglorious, and
ambitious, that either seek honor above their desert, or only thereby to
advance themselves, and theirs, above other men; they lift up themselves against
God, and climb higher, then that the bow will bear them: and God, first or
last, will throw them down into perdition.

And whereas God would have us seek good name, and fame by well doing; if any
seek it by evil, (as in evil times, and companyes too many do, as Austin
confesses Austin.
of himself, that in the days of his vanity, he often did evil, not only in
lust of the thing, but for praise by it, amongst his consorts; and sometimes
also slaundered himself with the evils, which he had not done, lest seeming
more chaste he should be more contemptible then the rest) such do no better then
set the devil in Gods place, and glory in their Phil. 3.
shame, whose end, without repentance, is damnation. For God will keep his
place in heaven; and from him shall men at length, and for ever, receave praise
for well-doing; and not from the devil for evil. Neither yet is credit always
gotten with men, by following it, no more then a man's shadow is: but he that
seeks to honor God in his mayn intention, God will cause some strinkling of
his own praise to reach unto him; and covering his sins from his divine eyes,
will so far, as is meet, cover them from the eyes of men also; and therewith,
as it were, commend his virtues to their acceptance: specially, if withal,
such a man join with his zealous heart toward God, good thoughts, and speeches
of other men, and good doings unto them. God will provide, that others shall
mete the like measure Math. 7.
to him again, in thinking, and speaking well of him.

As the whitenes of the Ethiopians teeth is the more remarqueable by reason of
the blacknes of his whole body: so are the few virtuous doings of some persons
the more noted; and they the more famous for the same; by reason of their
contrary course in evil. Things either rare in themselves, or not expected
from such or such persons, are most observed: so are the commendable actions,
in them, whose ordinary course in evil gives men little cause to look for
better. And by this means it comes to pass, that diverse (specially great men,
who have many trumpetters of their few virtues, and scarce any that dare so
much as see their vices) get often times a greater name of just, merciful, and
pious, for some one, or a few works of those kinds (like the Ethiopians
teeth;) though in a course of injustice, and impiety; then many others do by
the constant practice of those, and other virtues.

Seeing honor, and respect is in the hand of the honoring, Cicero.
and not of the honored; we are for the right valuation of men's credits in the
world, to have special regard to the persons that honor others; whether by
praising them, or otherwise. For fools will praise men lightly, and at a
venture: flatterers, having linguas venales, for their own advantage: vayn and
leaud persons, such as are like themselves; in praising of whom, they praise
themselves by reflection: But to be praised by them, who themselves are
prayse-worthy, is both a reward of virtue, and a blessing of God. But above all
things, we must remember, that whatsoever either we think, or speak of our
selves, or others of 2 Corin. 10.
us; only he, whom the Lord commends, is approved: without, or against whom,
he that would be commended Austin.
of men, shall not be defended of men, when God judges him; nor delivered by
men, when God condemns him. And what does it advantage him, that runns a
race, that the standers by approve of his running; if the Agonothetes, or
Judges of the course disalow him? And what will it avayl any, if all men, and
Angels should extol him never so highly, and even clap their hands at him, in
admiration of his excellency; if God the judge of all, and by whose sentence he
is eternally happy, or miserable, should condemn him, and cast him of, as
unworthy? Let our mayn care then be, that we may always be accepted of God:
And for acceptance 2 Corin. 5.
with men, let us not neglect it; for that were desperatenes; nor yet set our
mynds too much upon it: lest to procure, or keep it, we loose favor in a
better place. Let us rayther fear, with the Apostle, lest any think of us above
that which indeed 2 Corin. 12.
there is cause: and if we be approved, or happen to be praised by any; let us
with the godly Father (considering both our wants, and other things amiss)
take thereby occasion of blushing in our selves: Ignatius.
and, with another, of begging at Gods hands, that he Greenham
would make us answerable to the good, that any think, or speak of us.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Contempt, and Contumely.
Contumely has a sting; as the saying is: and Cicero.
is hard to be born either by wise or good men, how mean otherwise soever. Even
the worm being trodden upon will turn again: neither can any esteem either so
highly of another, or so meanly of himself, as to think he deserves to be
contemned by him. And therefore Jonathan, though 1 Samuel 20.
both wise, godly, and humble-mynded, being reviled by king Saul his father,
scarce kept himself within the bounds of due respect either to a Father, or
king. Many, says one, Ambrose.
can better endure paynfull stripes, then contumelious words. And hence it is,
that poverty is more grievous unto many then other ordinary crosses, because
it brings with it more contempt in the eyes of others. Now, although the fear
of God in a person, should, in all equity, procure him honor, and respect
from all: yet as the philosopher advised, in his time, Would thou take up the
study of wisdom, prepare thy self to become a laughing stock to many, etc. so
in Epictetus.
ours, and all ages, must Gods most faithful servants much more arm themselves
against contemptuous, and contumelious caryages by many; if against any other
temptation: following therein the Holy Apostle, who approved himself 2 Cor. 6.
to God in honor, and dishonor: yea the son himself, the author, and finisher
of our faith, who for the joy set before Hebr. 12.
him, not only endured the cross, but also despised the shame. And this the
more carefully we must do, because the devil will never fayl to stir up his
cruel instruments to ply the servants of God, with the most sharp, and byteing
rods of contempt, and vilitie, in the midst of their other most grievous
afflictions; as is to be seen in Christ our Lord, and Math. 27.
David his type: that they finding themselves despised in 2 Samuel 16.
those their calamities, which should move compassion toward them, in all men's
eyes, might even be broken in their hearts, and so, through de^payr, fall from
their stedfastnes; as many do, not being sufficiently rooted in Gods promises
by faith, whereby to bear this sore-pressing temptation.

Many buy at a dear rate the use of a few contemptuous speeches, and that not
only at the hands of superiors, and equals; but often times, of meaner persons,
then themselves: with whom they loose more love, and respect by one contumelious
passion, then they can recover by many freindly actions. Yea men (so impatient
are all of contempt) are better satisfied and contented with a respective
denial of a benefit, then with a contumelious grant of it; yea, I add
further, with a plain injury of some kind, then with a favor so sauced:
because in some injuries persons are thought worthy to be minded, though not
for good toward them: in the other case, worthy to be despised, even by them
from whom they receav good.

He that despises the poor, either such in estate, or naturally Prove. 17.
impotent in mind, or in body; despises God that made him so: at which he is
always as truly displeased in a measure, as he was at the children, upon whom
he sent a 2 Kings. 2.
shee-bear to tear them in pieces, for mocking at the prophets bald-head,
though he do not so visibly manifest his anger. He that despises a man for the
grace of God appearing in him (which is too frequent in ours, and all evil
days) despises, and almost despyteth the very spirit of God, which made him
so. But he that despises a wicked, and vile person, in liew of his vileness,
despises the devil, and sin, that made him so. And albeit the followers of
Christ should not come near a proud, or disdaynfull spirit: yet ought they to
get, and mainteyn in themselves a kind of spiritual highness of mind, by
which, vileny, and a vile person for Psalm. 15. Seneca.
it, may be contemptible in their eyes: and vices, as said one, not only
odious, but ridiculous.

Some have gotten the foxes cunning, in scorning the grapes for their sowernes,
which for their height he could not reach to; affecting the contempt of that
good which they want, and cannot obteyn; that so they may seem to want it upon
judgment, as a thing not worthy the having; and not of impotencie. So some
contemn learning, others policy, others other things, as unworthie their
having; which they indeed are unworthy to have, and unable to attain to. Others
partially say, with Salomons buyer, that things are Prove. 20.
naught, when they would have them easily, and for naught: Thus Lot said of
Zoar, which he would have God spare for his cause, Is it not a little one?
Lastly, there are, who, in Genesis 19.
a cruel craft, use to vilify, and debase, what they can, such persons, and
things, as they either have oppressed unjustly, or mean to oppress. Thus Saul
purposing to oppress David, still terms him, in contempt, The son of Ishai:
So 1 Samuel 20.
did the Ephramites term the Gileadites, for like purpose, fugitives of Ephraim
amongst the Ephramites, and amongst the Judge. 12.
Manassites: The Jews and others Christ a Samaritan, and Gal^lean: And wicked
men now the faithful servants of Christ, Lutherans, Hugonites, Calvinists, and
by other more contemptible names, that so they may make themselves, and others
the better beleev, that it matters not, what is done to, or becomes of so vile,
and unworthie persons. But men are men, though they be sowed in bears skins,
that dogs might worrie them: And the contempt cast upon the Lords servants, by
those carnal and crafty enemies, neither makes the oppressed by them less
precious in Gods sight, nor their oppressions less odious. Men, on the
contrary, when they have in hand any thing hard, or grievous to an other,
should bethink themselves of what is good, and commendable in the person; that
thereby they may breed in their hearts due respect of him, and not wrong him:
If the grace of God, though in never so great weakness; that we wrong not it. If
the image of his authority, wisdom, or other honorable attribute; that we
wrong not it: If nothing else, yet that he is a man, and so deserves all humayn
respect to be given unto him, as the Apostle bids, Honor all men. 1 Pet. 2.


Men say, Familiarity breeds contempt; whereupon many fearing to be contemned
by others, dispose themselves to contemn others by a supercilious, and overly
behavior. But as there is a mean in familiarity, as in all other things; so
they most fear contempt by it, who have least worth in them, to free themselves
therefrom: and therefore in jealousy, and consciousnes of their own wants,
take up a theatricall, and affected strangenes, and statelynes, specially
toward their inferiors, and equals. Such are like the ass in the Lions skin:
but by braying when they should roar, are discovered, and become more
ridiculous, then if they had always showed their asses ears.

Considering how grievous a thing, and hard to be born contempt is; it is
wisdom in a man, not easily to think himself despised by others; and that even
for his own peace. But if an injury be offered, rayther, if it may be, to
impute it to unadvisednes, or negligence, or almost to any other original, in
the offerer, then to contempt. Besides, an aptnes to conceave a contempt shows
a mind uncharitable, discontented, and usually proud withal, as looking too
much for respect. Sene^a.
Lastly, he that judges himself despised by another, (specially being troubled
at it) honors him therein: since it cannot be, but that he desires to be
respected of him, with whose contemptuous carriage toward him he is troubled.

CHAP. XL. Of Envy.
Envy is a grief conceived at the good of another; Plutarch.
specially by him that wants it himself: whereof the highest degree is, so to
envy it to Cyprian. Scaliger.
him, as we desire it our selves. It is a very shameful affection, and which
no man will own, how many so ever use it. Some will confess, and profess,
upon occasion, that they hate, or fear, or scorn others: but none that they
envy any. And no marvayl; for though many deserv to be Plutar^h.
hated, feared, and despised; yet none to be envyed. Good, and wise men are to
be honored in, and for all the good things that God has given them: Foolish,
and corrupt to be pitied in their greatest jollitie, considering what their
end shall be. And though there be cause to greiv, in a sort, at the
prosperity, and power of unworthy persons: yet this is not because those
things (good in themselves) are good to them; but because they abuse them to
their own, and others hurt.

It is like a fire ascending upwards, still aiming at that Politian.
which is above it: for though superiors oftens grudg at the good of
inferiors, yet raither this is indignation then envy. Or rayther it is like
smoke, not only in the former respect; but also for that, as smoke is greatest
at first, and before the fire burn clear, but after the flame Plutarch.
bursts out, vanishes away: so is envy greatest in the first rising of any in
virtue, or honor, or other eminent good; but by continuance of time, and
virtue in the envied is tired out, and gives over.

He that envyeth makes another man's virtue his vice, as Bernard.
Bernard confesses of himself: and an other man's happiness Politian.
his torment: whereas, he that rejoices at the prosperity of another, (even
thereby, if no other way) is partaker Chrysostom.
of the same. Yet were this vice the more tolerable, if, besides men, our
selves, and others; we in it did not so directly wrong the Lord; and that (which
is worst) even in his goodness, which it not only perverts, as other vices do,
but abolishes, as much as it can. It is (and worthily) accounted in some,
horrible impiety, to complayn of God, that he made the world no better: But
what is it then to quarrel with him for making it so good? As in truth, an
envious person does: saying unto God, in effect, why have thou bestowed this
virtue, this knowledge, this honor, these riches, or the like good upon this
man, or woman? So the first laborers Math. 20.
in the vyneyard said of the last, to him which hired them; why give thou so
much unto them? How injurious soever notwithstanding this cancker worm is both
to God, and men; yet is it in this point most just; that it punishes and
tormenteth, with no small torment, him in whom Basil.
it bears swey; consuming his heart, as rust does the iron, whereon it
grows; and rotting his very bones, Prove. 14.
whiles he lives.

The good gifts of God, as riches, honor, wit, learning, etc. in any eminency
often endanger their owners by puffing them up with pride in themselves: And if
they have the grace, and modesty to use them aright; yet are they dangerous to
others, becoming oftens fuel to kindle their fire of envy withal. And so it
fell out between Joseph, and his brethren; David, and King Saul; and many mo:
verifying that of the wise man: Every perfection of work is the envy of a man
from his neighbor. Eccles. 4.
By means whereof it also hurts its owner, many times, by a kind of unnatural
rebound, as it were, from the envious; and that so violent, as none, but God in
heaven, can stand against it. Not Adam in Prove. 27.
paradise against the devils envy; nor David against Saul's; nor Christ against
the Pharisees. And in this regard, a mediocritie in any good is the more
thankfully to be accepted from God; considering unto what danger this way, all
eminency exposes a man. The highest trees are soonest, and soarest shaken
with tempests.

The best remedy for preventing envy by others is to carry a low Sail in the
most prosperous gayl that can blow: and to ascribe the good a man has rayther
to any other cause, then to himself, or his own wit, industry, or worth any
way. Therein he least disparageth others that want it, and so frees himself
best from their envy at him.

CHAP. XLI. Of Slander.
HE is a Slaunderer, who wrongs his neighbors credit, either by unjust
raising, or Bernard.
upholding an evil report against him. Of which two, viz. the raising, or
receaving a false report, (seeing that if there were no receavers, there would
be no thieves) one of good skill in discerning doubts whether is more
damnable. We must then get amongst others, this mark of him that shall sojourn
in the Lords tabernacle, and dwell in his holy Psalm. 15.
mountayn, that we neither raise, nor take, or hold up a reproach against our
neighbor. Though the North wind be Prove. 25.
not always to be wished, because it drives away rain: yet is an angry
countenance to drive away a backbyting tongue. As a man may be wounded in his
body with the sword taken out of his own hand^ so may he in his credit, by the
injurious relation of the very thing, which his hand has done, or tongue
spoken. And the same also sometimes being good in it self; and either wrested
to some other sense then he intended; as were the words of Mark. 14.
Christ by false witnesses: or craftily made an opportunity whereupon to build
some false, but colorable insinuation of evil; as was David's being at Nob
with the High priest, 2 Samuel 21. and 22.
by Doeg: Sometimes also being evil; as when men without just, and necessary
occasion blaze abroad the faults of others; either in idleness, for want of
other talk; or of hatred, by way of revenge; or in flattery, to please other
men; or in envy, as grudging at their good name. And it may well be thought,
that persons oftener calumniate others of love to themselves, then of hatred to
them: thinking therein to build their own credit, upon the ruins of other
men's: which is, as if one, to make his own garment seem the fayrer, should cast
mire upon his neighbors.

Some slanders are such as confute themselves in the Hubert.
eyes of all reasonable men, as either being so great, or so senseless, as are
incredible: or when the known quality of the person accused, fastens a
slander upon the accusation: as did Platoes with Diogenes, when he heard one
accuse him of evil. Some also there are, which turn to the advantage of the
slaundereds credit afterward, namely such, as a little time will plainly
manifest to have been false, and feyned. For then they, who before have wronged
them, through credulity, will hold themselves their debtors for amends
afterward; which also it may come to pass they may make them, by not
believing some ill (though just) report of them, in after time.

Slaunderers of any others may rightlyest be called divelish, Taffin.
seeing the devil has his name of Slaundering. He sometimes slanders God to
men; as to Eve, of envy, in Genesis 3. Job 1.
the beginning: sometimes men to God, as Job of hypocrisy: and continually man
to man, by his venomous instruments thus anotamized in their parts, by the
Apostle. Romans 3.
Their throat is an open sepulcher; with their tongue they have used deceit;
the poison of asps is under their lips; whose mouth is full of cursing, and
bitterness. And truly it may be, he should not much miss the mark, that
affirmed, slanders, and false reports to have raised as great, and many
quarrels amongst equals; conspiracies from inferiors; and from superiors
violent oppressions; as all injuries in truth offered, or other provocations
whatsoever.

Men commonly with one stroke wound, or kill but one: whereas a slanderous
blow reaches to many. He wounds himself with his own slanderous tongue; his
mouth making his flesh to sin: He wounds him in the ear, to whom he
slaundereth; specially if credulous, as the most are, in receaving false
reports: And as for him, whom he slaundereth, he wounds him in his good name
(though him only Herodotus*
by suffering evil, the former two as workers of it) and withal, oftens makes
way by so doing for further wrong to be offered him, either by himself, or
others. Thus Maximinus Eusebius.
the tyrant set awork certain vile persons to accuse the Christians of heinous
evils, that so he might persequute them with more show of reason: like as men,
when they would have their dogs killed, give out, that they are mad.

David never complayns of the sharpnes of the swords of the Philistims, or
other enemies; but of the sharp swords Psalm 3. 57. 58. 64. etc.
of the tongue of slaunderers, he often, and piteously complains, in the book of
the Psalms, as peirceing deeper then the former. And yet for fence against
those sharp swords God has put into the hands of his innocent servants two
bucklars: the one inward, viz. a conscience, upon due knowledge, and
examination, excusing before God; and this is of proof: The other, such a
conversation before men, as may ward our credit and good name from being
wounded in the eyes of such as know us, and are equally minded; and such, as
are not apt either greedily to devour, or lightly to admit slanders, and
vituperies raised against us. Calvin.
Yet, if the devil could by the serpents slanders impeach the credit of God
himself with our first parents, in their state of innocence; no marvayl, if
his serpentlike instruments can prevayl with sinful men, and women this way,
even against Gods faithful servants. We must therefore prevent slanders what
we can; bear what we cannot avoid; and always be mindful, by earnest prayer,
as well to commend our good name to God, that he may take charge of it, as our
persons and estates.

Better never accused, then quit, though after the clearest, and most
honorable manner, that may be: seeing after a bold slander something ever
will stick behind: by which the ignorant of the truth will be abused, and
adversaries take advantage to upbrayd. But how great soever matter of grief or
shame unjust slander causes; yet he that is reproached for well doing, has
the spirit of glory 2 Pet. 4.
resting upon him, and being innocent, may say, that the evil is not against
him, but against another, whom the slaunderer Chrisost.
takes him to be. The advised consideration partly of the cause, and partly of
the end, which the Lord will make, abundantly sweetens all the sowrnes of the
reproaches, which he suffers: and such a one may know himself to have atteyned
to the highest pitch of Christianity, and conformity with Christ, when for
weldoing he is ill dealt with. It is kingly, says one, say we, Antisthenes.
Christian like, to do well, and to be ill spoken of. Yet is it not enough,
that when we are slaundred, we be from under the desert of it directly: but we
must withal consider, whether we have not drawn it upon our selves deservedly,
in regard of God by slaundering others, and that so God pays us home in our
kind: or by some other scandalous sin, which the Lord will punish in us by
slanderous tongues; as he did David by Shemei: or whether we have not given
vehement occasion of men's suspecting us; and so accusing our selves as one
says, of suspicion; what marvayl, if others think, and speak evil of us?

CHAP. XLII. Of Flattery.
THE reproof by Diogenes is not more Plutarch.
known, then just, upon flatterers; that as tyrants are the worst of all wild
beasts, so are they of all tame. And yet there is (and the same very common) a
worse beast, then either of them severally; to wit, a monster-gendred of them
both. Men flatter their superiors, or others able to oppose them; to the
intent they may tyrannize over their inferiors the more freely, without
danger, or fear: and so become both flatterers, and tyrants.

A man needs no other flatterer then his own partial heart to infatuate him.
Notwithstanding, though few would rayther buy a false, then a true glass to
see their faces in: yet how fewer are there so truly ha^eing their own vices,
as that they had not rayther seek, or at least, enterteyn such friends, as may
rayther cover their faults by flattery, then cure them by faithful reproofs?
And this benefit men of a poor, and despised condition may set against diverse
miseryes incident thereunto: that they are thereby out of danger of being much
flattered. Every one will be bold to call a poor man fool, or knave, and to
speak of, and to him, all the ill which he knows, and more also. Whereas the
rich, and mighty in the world are, for the most part, soothed up, to their
destruction; as the fat ox is clawed by the same hand that strikes him down.
And this is just from God upon the most of them, because they desire rayther to
be pleased by flatteries, then bettered by hearing the truth. Few coming near
David's order, will say as he did, Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a
kindenes: let him reprove me, it shall be a precious oil. Where yet the Psalm.
141.
excuse is not nothing, which the Philosopher makes; that Plutarch.
as worms soonest breed in soft and sweet woods: so gentle and noble spirits do
most easily admit* flatteryes.

He that reads the Epistles dedicatorie of learned men's books in all faculties,
divinity not excepted; if either he knew not the contrary, by experience, or
suspected not, how easily ambition (the canker of learning, and mother of
flattery) might grow in learned men's breasts: would soon be brought to think,
that almost all the great men in the world were so good, so virtuous, so
religious, such, and so wise, and worthy patriots, as nothing more could be
wished, or hoped for. But how often, God and men know, whilst they labor to
honor many of them unjustly, do they most justly shame themselves, in
proclayming those things of their benefactours to the world, with all
confidence, which a modest man that knows the persons, cannot read without
blushing? and giving men just cause to suspect (as Lactantius speaks of a
Philosopher in Bithynia, writing against Christians, and pouring out himself
into the Lactant.
praises of persequuting princes) that often times they write their books rayther
to flatter in their prefaces, then for other matters prosequ^ted in the
treatises themselves.

Flattery is in all cases, and persons a base sin, and which Prove. 28.
will make one man (dog-like) to fawn upon another, for a morsel of bread: But
in the ministers of Gods holy word, above all other men, it is most pernicious.
For whereas in other cases a man makes himself a claw-back; in this he makes
God himself, in whose name he speaks, no better, what in him lies: Besides
that, he turns into deadly poison the only sovereign medcine of the soul. This
made the Apostle take God to witness, that he never used 1 These. 2.
flattering words: and to protest against others, that they in doing it, served
not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellyes. Romans 16.
Such are not to be accounted the servants of Christ, whom they make their
stayl; nor yet of their flattered Lords, and masters, how loud soever they
profess themselves their obedient servants: but they have a base master, whom
they serve, and are ashamed to own; their belly, and the devil in it. It is
not for nothing that the prophets, and Apostles have so thundered against the
flatterers of the mighty; who both look so much for it, as that they think
themselves half maligned, and Seneca.
envyed, if they be but sparingly flattered; and yet are so deeply endangered
by it. Here notwithstanding, we must beware, that to avoid the note of
flatterers we become not raylers, affecting to speak evil of dignities, either
Jude 8.
in pride, (as many scorn to flatter, that is, love to revile* or out of
coffeehouse in our selves, or to nourish it in others.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Suspicion.
SVspicion (as it is commonly taken) is, as it were, a looking under an hidden
thing, with an inclination to judge it evil, and amiss. It sets the person
suspected in a kind Seneca.
of middle state, (but something bended the worse way) and neither quit,
because he is suspected: nor condemned, because he is but suspected.

He that should deal by all persons, and things, as Caesar Swetonius.
did by his wife, whom he put away, because she was suspected of uncleannes,
though solemnly cleared in judgment; should leav himself neither friend, nor
wit, nor honesty neither: For all these, and whatsoever else he has that good
is, are subject to unjust suspicion, by others. Suspicion indeed, how unjust so
ever is a blemish, and so may justly occasion refusal, where there is free
liberty; but not rejection in way of punishment, This is to right a former
wrong by a second greater.

Some suspect all men, and some none: both are in fault; the former in the more
sinful fault; the latter in the more honest, but more dangerous to themselves.
And yet even for that; there want not, who by causlesse suspicion teach their
servants, friends, yea wives, and Seneca.
children also, to deceav them. For many respecting more their credit with men,
then a good conscience before God, by being suspected (though causlesly) grow
desperate: yea think themselves half privileged to deceav them that suspect
them; seeing that by so doing, they but become that, which they are deemed to
be before. It is best therefore, first not to suspect without good cause: next,
not to bewray our suspicion, except we have great hope to over-aw thereby the
suspected person.

There are many unreasonably (though not altogether unoccasioned) transported
from the one of the extremes formerly mentioned to the other: who being at
first credulous, and light of belief, and thereby often deceaved; at length come
to trust none; but would burn, as they say, their shirt, if they thought it
knew their secrets: and therefore set it down for a rule, to have al men in
jealousy. Such overwise men are like the fool, that because the sive deceaved
him, and let his drink run out, would not trust his dish with it afterward.
Howsoever things fall out, it is best to keep our byasse always on the right
side: and to incline still to a better, rayther then to a worse opinion of men*
then they deserv. For though it be best of all, to judge of others just as they
are: yet seeing, that is always hard, and sometimes impossible; we shall less
offend God in judging of men too well (though sometimes to our own damage) then
too ill, with certain injury to them, and sin in our selves, in the violation
of 1 Corin. 13.
the law of charity, which is not suspicious.

The general cause of suspicion is the want of this true love, whose property
is to beleev all things, and to hope all things, which with reason, can be
believed, or hoped for: and so men are in danger to presume of, and promise to
themselves more good of their wives, and children, and friends, whom they
entirely love, then there is cause; rayther then otherwise. Notwithstanding, a
very inordinate, and doting affection also breeds causlesse jealousy. Another
general cause of suspicion is the knowledge and consciousnes which persons
have of their own inability, and weakness any way. Of beasts, and birds, hares
and doves, and such impotent, and unarmed creatures; and of men and women; the
childish; weak, silly, and decrepit are most given to suspicion, as being most
subject to be circumvented, or oppressed. So it has been observed, how the
Scythians, and other barbarous nations have labored to supply Bodin.
their defects of wisdom for prevention of hurt from enemies, by excess of
suspicion. It is true, that this disease sometimes befalls very wise men: But
this aryseth from an other, and worse cause, to wit, an evil conscience. Men
muse, as they use: and suspect others by themselves: as is common with all leaud
persons. He that is good himself, does Chrisost.
not easily suspect an other to be evil: nor the evil, that an other is good.
Besides, an evil conscience accusing men, and women, that they in truth deserv
not love, nor respect, nor credit, easily persuades them, that they are not
loved, nor respected, nor credited by others. Lastly, it is oftens a punishment
from God, that as a man in debt, suspects that every bush which he sees, is a
sargeant to arrest him; so they which are without true grace, and assurance of
the pardon of their sins from him, should be suspicious, that every one would
deceav, or hurt them otherwise. It was Gods curse upon Cain, when he had killed
his brother Abel, Genesis 4.
to suspect, and fear, that every one that he met with, would kill him.
Notwithstanding all these things; sometimes God sends a spirit of jealousy
upon interessed persons, for the discovery Numb. 5.
of evils in others formerly hidden; which out of probable suspicion come to be
searched into, and by searching are found out. And always we must strive for
that discretion, and wisdom, as not to take our marks amiss, by censuring any
rashly, as Eli did Hannah for drunken, because her lips went, and her voice
was not heard: nor yet to be so fondly charitable, as not to see the spots of
men's leprosy breaking out in their foreheads.

We are not only by innocence to prevent just blame; but withal, by
christian care, and wisdom, to provide that we hurt not our good name by coming
under colorable suspicion of evil. We provide things honest before God by
preserving innocence: but before men, by giving no probable cause of their
suspecting us. And so doing, if yet God by his providence, so order, that we
come under it; we must bear it patiently, as a burden laid upon us by him;
either to prove us; as it was not the least trial upon Job, to be suspected by
his friends, and others, of hypocrisy: or, it may be, to warn us to take heed
of some sin, of which we are in danger, though not guilty: it may be, for our
present peace, and safety, as it happened to David, by being suspected of the
Lords of the Phylistims; or, it may be, for their just punishment, by whom we
are unjustly suspected; as in the same David's case, in being suspected by king
Saul of affecting the kingdom; to his own great harm in wanting him, and the
worthyes with him in the battle with the Philistims.

CAP. XLIIII. Of Appearances.
IT is the royal prerogative of Gods infinite wisdom to judge of persons, and
things, as, in truth, they are. It is men's, yea angels unperfit condition, in
comparison, (under which God has humbled them) to judge of the one, and other,
according to outward appearances; leaving to him alone and the persons
themselves, the hidden things of the hea^^. To appear evil to a righteous
judgment, is always evil, whether the person be evil, or good. If evil, his
evil appearance is but his inward evil manifested to be, as it is; and his
inside turned outward: If good; he slanders himself in appearing evil. He
that makes an ill show, we may well account evil, and corrupt, ordinarily;
seeing all (save in the case of some special temptation) desire to seem, as
good, as they are, and to put the fairest side outward.

He that is once well known to me for good, and virtuous I will always esteem
so, except I come to take certain knowledge of his after-declyning to evil. So,
on the contrary, if I have once rightly and certeynly branded a man for evil,
I shall not easily come to think good of him, except his after-repentance as
plainly appear to me. The reason is, because bare time makes none of evil
good; or of good evil: but only confirms men in that which they are, whether
the one, or other.

Although it be not simply a sufficient warrant for our answerable judgment of,
or caryage toward persons, or things, that they appear good or evil unto us;
because we often err in our judgments about them, through ignorance,
negligence, or partiality: yet is it a certain rule, that we must never
proceed, either in judgment, or practice against appearances: for in so doing*
we condemn our selves in the thing, which we approve; if it appear good, and yet
we condemn it: so do we also in the thing which we condemn; by holding any
course of approbation toward that, which seems evil unto us. Notwithstanding,
such is the force of outward appearances, as that, in cases, they bind us in
conscience, both for judgment, and practice, to that which indeed is not true,
nor due; but wherein we are altogether deceaved. As when we receav a matter for
truth (which yet indeed is not so) upon the clear testimony of two, or three
witnesses worthy of credit, so far as we can discern: or when we esteem an
hypocrite (cunningly dissembling) for good and godly, as did Phillip Acts 8.
Simon Magus. It is a fortunate sin to suspect him, without apparent cause,
that dissembles: and an unfortunate virtue to be deceaved in him.

The appearance of evil (by the Apostles prescript) is to be absteyned from.
Which yet we must not understand absolutely 1 These. 5.
of whatsoever seems evil unto others: for then we should absteyn from all, or
the most good; whereof there is little, but some, or other misdeem it. But the
meaning is properly, that, in prophesying (of which the Apostle speaks) as we
are to hold that which is good, and proved so to be; so if any thing be
delivered, of which we have a sinister Calvin.
suspicion, as fearing that some poison cleaves to it, though not plainly so
discerned by us, we withold our assent, till by faith we can receav it. And
in the general, that, if a thing appear amiss, and evil unto others,
especially unto weaker brethren, though it be not such of it self, yet we
forbear it; except either conscience of duty simply bind us unto it; or that
some greater convenience appear in doing it, then is the inconveniency of, or
to others, in misconceaving of us, and our doings.

If it be a good thing to appear good, how much more to be so indeed? It is
also the readiest way, and most compendious for any to appear, and be thought
wise, virtuous, or godly; to be, in truth, such. For God will both (so far, as
it stands with his glory, and the persons good) give occasion of manifestation
of that good which is; and also provide, that others may accordingly take
knowledge of it. And though many things be secret in the mean while; yet, when
the Lord shall come, he will both bring to light the 1 Corin. 4.
hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the hearts, and
then shall every one have praise of God.

The Lord bestows his graces upon men not only for their own good, but for
the good of others also: and that, as otherwise, so for the manifesting, and
showing forth 1 Pet. 2.
the virtues of him, who has called them out of darkness, into his marveylous
light. Who must therefore provide carefully, both to be, as they appear, for
their own comfort; and to appear, as they are, to the glory of God, and good of
men. Yet so as their first, and greatest care herein be, that their appearances
be not above their existences; and that they make show of no more then they
have. As in the outward estate, it is the high way to poverty, or worse, for a
man's expenses to exceed his receipts; and his layings out his comings in: so in
the spiritual course, to overstreyn in outward manifestations is a way tending
to all impudent, and desperate hypocrisy, under a form of godlynes, without
the power thereof. And for other gifts, as knowledge, wisdom, learning,
eloquence, or the like; he that in the manifestation of them will streyn above
his reach, may easily crack his credit, and make himself ridiculous to others;
like the stage player, who with too much wypeing of his borrowed beard pulls it
from his face, and so bewrayes his bare chin. And though a forth-putting man
play his part so well (as many do) that he not only satisfy, but draw into
admiration his simple spectators, who cannot discern between shadow, and body;
yet shall he hardly, or not at all, escape the censure of vayn-glorious, and
arrogant, by more judicious men.

We are oftens angry, and offended at others, for wronging us, by conceaving a
worse opinion of us, then we deserv: whereas, in right, we should be angry at
our selves, for giving them occasion so to judge, by our ill, and suspicious
appearances. For, albeit thereby, he, whose heart, and way is upright in Gods
sight, loose not his comfort with him, who sees the heart: yet by his
misappearances made in word, or deed, he may justly forfeyt his credit with
men; to whom it apperteyns to judge of the tree by the fruit, or leaves, or any
other outward mark, or note, rayther then by the sap. Cunning naughtines has
oftens more credit in the world, then unadvised honesty.

CHAP. XLV. Of Offenses.
IT must needs be (considering man's frailty, Math. 18.
Satan's malice, and Gods providence) that offenses come, says Christ our
Lord: but w^ be to the person by whom they come. Woe be to him, first, that
gives offense; next, to him that takes it, where he should not: as the same our
Lord teaches else where, saying, Blessed is he, Math. 11.
whosoever shall not be offended in me: that is, who takes not occasion of
stumbling, to hinder himself in the way of godlynes, either at my person, or
doctrine, or works, or followers; or at the persequutions, and contradictions
raised against me, and mine, by mine, and their adversaries. And considering
how many such like stumbling stones are in the narrow way of Christ, which
leads unto life; he is a happy man indeed, that has either power to remove
them, or wisdom to decline from them, or nimblenes of grace to leap over them.

Offense may be given, where none is taken; as in such evil actions, as
whereby others may or might be, but are Math. 15.
not provoked to evil; and so Peter was an offense, or scandal to Christ: Or
offense may be taken, where none is Esaias 8. 1 Pet. 2.
given; and so Christ, and the gospel were a stone of stumbling, and rock of
offense to both the houses of Israel; and so are many good, and lawful things,
yea necessary also, to many now. Offense also may both be given, and taken in
the same action: and that either in things simply evil; as when one provokes,
and an other is provoked to evil, by false doctrine, corrupt counsayl, ill
example, or the like: or in things of indifferent nature, but unseasonably
used, to the effectual hindrance of others, in the way of godlynes. In such
cases, as I last mentioned, offense is given through want of charity; and
taken through want, or weakness of faith in the particular. Romans 14.


God would have us walk in faith toward him, and love 1 Corin. 13.
toward men: that so doing we may neither offend God, nor men. But these two,
which the Lord has joined together, Satan would not only disjoyn in many,
but so oppose, as either may oppress, or destroy other. Hence some are so
strong in faith, and zealous for faythfulnes toward God, as they are lifted up
above charity toward men; not considering how they ought to receav the weak,
Romans 14.
and bear, and forbear them, yea apply unto them in many things, and drive
according to their pace, as fearing to offend one of those little ones. And
though we may do nothing simply evil to please men; (for that were to prefer
them before God) nor betray the truth to gratify them; (so better Austin.
Bernard.
scandal arise, then truth forsaken) yet are we not only to do, or leav
undone things of indifferent nature, wherein we have liberty, for the
preventing of offense, and so to Math. 17. John 16. Math. 9.
depart from our own right: but withal, both to do diverse things, which out of
the case of offense were sin, as Paul circumcised Timothy; and for a time also
to forbear both the publishing, and practicing of some truth, to the which in
time we do ow testimony both ways. Others, on the contrary, are so full of
charity toward men, and fear of offending them, as that for, and sometimes
under pretense thereof, they will both adventure to do many things, which God
plainly enough forbids; and neglect the practice of other things commanded
them, and all Christ's disciples, in his gospel. Many pretend the weakness of
others, where, in truth, they show their own weakness; others, that they would
do such and such things, (to which indeed both conscience of God, and duty to
men binds them) but for offense. And what is this offense many times? Surely
oftens nothing else but the waspishnes of some peevish and imperious persons
carried against others with hatred, or contempt, or envy, or diverse of those
passions. But this is not to respect the weak in faith, but the strong in
passion.

To be offended at good things in men (which is the property Tertul.
of an evil mind) is to be offended at God in men: To be offended at things
indifferent, is to be offended, as it were, at men in men: But to be offended
at evil in men in due manner, and measure, is to be offended at the devil in
men. In this last case no man should think much at due opposition, and reproof,
seeing it is not properly against him, but against Satan in him.

Readiness to take offense, and exception at, and against other men in their
faylings, shows either weakness of understanding in the offended, when they
discern not either of men's temptations, under which they lie; or what they may
and ought to bear in their brethren: Or it shows pride which makes men either
out of envy apt to bark at others upon every small occasion; or to despise them
in their wants and weaknesses, through over-valuation of their own excellency;
whereas, on the contrary; they should support them, that they sinck not under
the burden of their infirmities: or else it comes from hypocrisy, out of which
many seek to cover both from other men's eyes, and from their own also, their
proper beam-like corruptions Math. 7.
by quarreling at the moats in their brothers eye. I never knew any more
forward to take offense; then such as were most apt to give it: nor any more
hardly brought to bear with saylings at the hands of others; then such as stood
in greatest need to have both God, and men to bear with no small things amiss
in themselves. Oh hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own ey: and
then shall thou see clearly to cast out the moat out of thy brothers ey.

None should plead his own offense against a thing, but his reason; nor say,
this should not be done, because it offends me: but it offends me, because it
should not be done, being contrary to the word of God. To say to another, do
not this because it offends God, shows love to God: and, do not this, because
it offends others, love to men: But to say, do it not, because it offends me
(without rendering further reason against it) is from plain self-love; and is an
absurd, and insolent request, and motion. All should take care not to offend
one another: but none should look much not to be offended by others: for that
is to nourish weakness in himself, and to provide trouble, and disquietnes for
himself before hand.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Temptations.
GOD tempts a man, and Satan tempts him, and one man tempts another. Gods
temptations are as he is; good, and for good: and no other thing, but so many
trials of the faith, patience, love, wisdom, and obedience of his creatures:
not that he might know them (for he understands the Psalm. 139.
thoughts a far of) but that they might have use, and make manifestation of the
grace of the heart in outward acts, that others might know them, and they
themselves: or that (by accident, as they speak) the contrary vices of
unbeleif, impatiencie, and the like might be discovered where they lie hid,
which is good also. It is good, on Gods part, and for his church, that men's
naughtines, where it is, should in its time, be discovered. Where also we
gather it to be our Saviors meaning to teach his disciples, and us all in
them, to pray against temptations, Math. 6.
as they are provocations unto sin; but not, as they are moderate trials of
faith: and therewith, that our heavenly father would so sweeten the bitterness
of them with the sprinklings of the sense of his love in Christ, as that they
may not be excessive, or intolerable. Satan's temptations, on the contrary,
are as he is; evil, and for evil, and sin: either outwardly by fitting of
objects, or stirring up of instruments, or provyding of furtherances of evil
of all sorts: or in regard of the heart and soul, by suggestion of evil
thereto, together with the so disposing, and stirring up of the humors of the
body, as that they may be ready instruments for the minds inordinate passions.
And albeit he cannot compel either the understanding to assent, or the will to
consent, or the affections to liking; and so not the body to the acting of
evil: yet being a spirit, he is undoubtedly able to unite himself in his
suggestions with our spirits, after an unknown manner; and the same also very
persuasive, specially with such, as upon whom he is by the Lord in anger let
loose, for the punishment of former sins by latter. So we read that Satan
filled Acts 5. Luke 22. Ephesians. 4. 2 Cor. 4.
the heart of Annanias: entered into the heart of Judas: works in the children
of disobedience: and blyndes the mind of the unbeleevers. Notwithstanding all
which his both power and malice; seeing he can do nothing to hurt, but by the
permission Ambrose.
of God, and power which he has from him; and that justly given, though, on
his part, unjustly used; we are still to remember the good counsayl by one
given us, Gregory.
which is, never to fear the power of the devil more then the offense of God.
This were to fear the exequutioner more then the judge.

Though a man cannot be drawn away, but by his own James 1.
concupiscence; yet may he be tempted otherwise: and be compelled to suffer
temptations, which is humayn; and divelish only, to be overcome of them, by
assent, consent, or Gregory.
liking: And where none of these three is; there is the devils sin, and but
man's cross, as one says, in the temptation. If the thought of evil arising
in the heart be such, as unto which not so much as our affections do incline;
but that, on the contrary, we wholly abhor from it, in the very first rising;
we may gather it to be rayther by suggestion from Satan, then of our own
concupiscence. And as it is not in our power to avoid the outward presentations
of evil, by wicked men, to our eye, or ear; but we are compelled oftens to
see, and hear their unlawful works, and ^ Pet. 2.
words, as did Lot the Sodomites: so neither seems it to be in our power to
avoid the bare thoughts of evil, (which are not always evil thoughts) by
Satan's Suggestions: but that he being a spirit, and spiritual wickedness, can
present them to our spirits more effectually, then can any man object, and
offer outward, and corporeal provocations to our outward, and bodily senses.

As Christ our Lord, after the glorious testimony given of him by his Father
from heaven, and by the Holy Ghost sitting Math. 4.
upon him in the form of a dove, and by Ihon the baptist both in word, and
deed; was immediately led into the wilderness, by the spirit, to be tempted of
the devil: so must christians make account, after the special testimonies of
Gods love received, of some singular combat of temptation, for their trial;
wherein, if they overcome, the love of God is thereby, as it were, sealed up
unto their hearts. Holy men therefore prospering in virtue must exult, and
count Gregory. James 1.
it all joy, when they fall into diverse temptations, and are exercised in them
by the divine providence, for the trial of their faith: and therewith of Gods
gracious power, which is perfited 2 Cor. 12.
in their weakness, this way.

There are none of Gods servants, but in the case of temptation have reaped the
fruit of his singular providence toward them: sometimes in preventing such
temptations, as if they had come upon them in their full strength, would have
been most like, if not clean to have overthrown them, yet to have caused their
grievous fall; by which, they have, through Gods providence sitting at the
stern, glyded, as a ship by the side of a rock: sometimes in guyding them even
in the very midst of temptations compassing them about, like so many sands:
and sometimes by helping and haleing them off, even when they have stuck fast,
and been ready to sinck in them. Many have been the bodily dangers known, and
not known, which, by Gods good providence, we have escaped: but how many more
those that are spiritual; in which we had been utterly swallowed up, a
thousand times, if his gracious hand from heaven had not releived us? Now,
besides those common to all, every person has his special temptations,
arising either from his temper of body, or sex, or age, or education, or
custom, or state, or calling, or company, or other occasion, against which he
must watch most carefully, as men use to watch in the gates of a c^ity
beseiged, and in such other places, as in which the enemy is likest to make his
assault: in which, if we quit our selves as men, and stand fast, we shall have
our part in his comforts, who said, I was upright with him, and I kept my self
from mine iniquity. Psalm. 18.


Some have thought it a wise Christian course in the confession of our secret
sius, resydeing in the heart, unto God, not to use the outward voice, for fear
of acquainting Satan with them thereby, and so of advantageing him to tempt
us, by applying himself to that, wherein he sees us likest Hugo.
to sin. As it is certain that he knows not our hearts at all, as God does, by
immediate insight, but gathers them by the motions, and manifestations of the
body: so considering that Austin.
he himself is the original of all evil, mediately, or immediately; it is
like, he is, for the most part, acquainted with his own work in men. And so it
is good wisdom in us to prefer the best manner of acknowledging our sins to
God, for the advantaging of our repentance, before the fear of discovering our
corruption to the devil.

Christ our Lord teaching us to pray, that God would not lead us into
temptation, but deliver us from the evil one, Math. 6.
would warn us not to lead our selves into temptations, nor to deliver our souls
into Satan's hands: which yet we do by affecting familiarity with wicked men,
which are as it were his brokers; by omitting duties of religion publicly, or
privately, or doing them unfruitfully; by neglecting our special callings, and
doing nothing, and thereby giveing him opportunity to tempt us to do evil;
and lastly, by opening too wide the windows of our outward senses toward
allureing objects. By these means we not only tempt God to leav us; but the
devil, after a sort, to tempt Prove. 23.
us. We have a promise, that if we resist him, he will fly from us: but that
is, when he assalts us; and not when we challenge James 4.
him, as it were, with his own weapons, wherewith he has foiled so many. He
that thus puts himself within the reach of his paws, shall hardly escape being
torn in pieces by him. Let us commit our selves unto Gods safe keepin Psalm. 91.
all our ways: but not come in Satan's way, lest we advantage his malice, and
put our selves out of Gods protection.

As the sailors skill is seen in carrying his ship through a storm: so is the
strength of faith in vanquishing dangerous temptations. Yet must we not measure
the state of a man too much by that which befalls him in some, or other such
dangerous trial. There are few so evil but have at times, their temptations
(that I may so speak) to some particular good, by which they are carried less
or more that way: and few or none so good, but, on the contrary, have
temptations to evil, in which, at times; something humayn befalls them. Now to
judge of men's persons according to some such few particulars, contrary to their
general course, were partiallitie. The wicked fall not into evil, but lie
grovelling in evil: The godly fall sometimes by occasion; but God is faithful,
who with the temptation makes a way for his to escape, by their renuall 1 Cor.
10.
of repentance, and victory of faith. And though in those their wrestlings
they get a wrench, and limp afterward, as Jacob did; yet they have power, and
prevayl, and go on, as he did, in their way.

CAP. XLVII. Of Conscience.
Every man's conscience is, as it were, a second God within him, both to judge
of his actions within, and without him, and also of his person, and personal
state, and whether in* it he be accepted of God, or not. And surely, a great
good work of God it is, that he has created, and set such an overseer as this
conscience is, in the soul of man, by which, if he do any thing amiss,
Perkins.
he is checked in secret, that so by repentance he may find mercy at Gods
hands. And how good is it, says one, that this worm should be felt, whilst it
may be killed; and gnaw for a Bernard.
time, that it may be choked for ever? As, on the contrary, if a man do the
thing which good is, the conscience gives 1 John. 3.
testimony of Gods acceptance, and therewith boldness before him: making him
cheerful even in the sorrows of the Seneca.
world, quiet in its turmoyl, and happy in all extremity of torments, and
withal satisfying him with the testimony from within himself, against men's
unjust accusations. This Conscience makes a man either a conqueror over the
whole world, or Politian.
a craven; and ready, specially in danger, and being wakened, to thrust his
head in a hole.

But now the comforts are not greater in having this good conscience, then are
the dangers in mistaking it. Many do craftily pretend it without cause, merely
for their credits before men, whose hearts condemn them before God: and whom
God who is greater, will condemn much 1 John. 3.
more. Many more are securely presumptuous; and being ready to beleev that,
which they wish true, are bold upon their good conscience so deemed; not
because they know, and try themselves, and their ways before the Lord, by his
word, as they ought; but because they know not, nor will know, and examine
them. And this is the vulgar conscience of ignorant persons, that are free from
those grosser sins, which the light of nature condemns: and of some others also
not without understanding, being of bold spirits, and stout hearts, and which
will not easily be in fault, either before the world, or God himself. There are
besides these, whose consciences are benumbed; and seared with 1 Timothy 4.
an h^at iron; who by practicing at first, and continuing after in sins against
their natural conscience, have obtained from the Lord this miserable
priveledg, and seal of their condemnation, that their minds should be void of
understanding, and hearts of sense, and feeling even of heinous sins, in time.
Better (said the godly martyr) sit in the stocks Philpo^.
of this world, then of an ill, or accusing conscience: And yet better a
conscience accusing, if not desperately; then benumbed, and without feeling.
The dead flesh must be eaten out of the wound, and sorenes come before
soundnes: so must a benumbed conscience become accusing, before it can become
excusing aright.

The larger conscience the better, if rightly informed. To know that to be
lawful for me, which indeed is lawful, is the perfection of understanding,
and strength of faith: Romans 14.
as, on the other side, to be ignorant of it, is to be weak both in knowledge,
and faith. But we must here put a difference between the conscience it self,
and the use of it: for the largest use of conscience is not always best,
though the judgment be. Some things are so commanded, as they absolutely bind
conscience, as to love God and our neighbor, etc. Some things again are so
commanded in the general, as for example, the obedience of the Magistrate,
keeping peace with all men, and the like, as yet they have this particular
exception. If we can without sinning on our parts: for we must not do evil
that we may do good. But yet in these cases we are to be as large, as we can,
and to go as far, as possibly we can see it lawful, in conscience of the
commandment of God. Other things are in their kind indifferent, and such as
we perform for our profit, pleasure, credit, or other worldly commodity. In
these we are to use less liberrie of conscience, and to take heed that we give
not the devil advantage, by some blast of temptation, or other, to blow us
into the ditch, if we go to near the side of it. And in observing this
difference, we have a conscionable use of our conscience.

It is a great question, whether an erroneous conscience be to be followed, or
no: and as ill resolved by many affirmatively, after much dispute. Not to
follow it is evil, and to do, or leav undone that wherein the man so doing, or
not doing, condemns himself; and therein has God also condemning him: To
follow it, is for the blind to follow the blind (the blind person his blind
conscience) into the ditch; and to have God condemning him in his word, though
he justify himself. Besides then the violation of the conscience, which is
always evil, and a bypath on the left hand; and the following it in evil, as
a by-path on the right (which is sometimes worse, then the former, as in sins
against the light of nature;) there is a third, and middle way, safe and good;
and that is, the informing of the conscience better by Gods word, and following
it accordingly; unto which also every person is bound, for the duties of his
general, and special calling. It is the first duty of a man to inform his
conscience aright; and then to follow the direction which it gives.

A good conscience is as the ship, in which faith sayleth to heaven: and which
they that put away, make shipwreck 1 Timothy 1.
of faith. We must therefore first get a good conscience by the sprinkling of
the heart with the blood of Christ from Heb. 10.
the guilt of sin; and with his spirit from the filth thereof: and having got
it, must keep the same with all care, and tenderness, specially by eschewing
presumptuous sins, Psalm. 25.
in which is much transgression; and by which the conscience is wasted, and
consumed, as iron by the rust. We offend too much, alas, through ignorance,
and infirmity: let us not ad to provoke the Lord by sins against conscience:
in which we sin against a double voice of God, first speaking in his law, and
secondly, in our own hearts. Where this is, no marvayl though the voice of
faith, and witness of Gods spirit cease: and that the conscience so violated
excuse not, but accuse.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Prayer.
NO christian exercise has so many counterfeyts as, prayer: which whilst all
would seem to practice, few in truth, and experimentally know. We may say
prayers, and sing prayers, and read prayers, and hear prayers, and yet not pray
indeed. Yea, we may out of a kind of natural instinct, by reason of the
indissolible relation between the creature, and creator, be carried toward
God, so far as to appeal unto him, Tertul.
or heartily wish good from him (wherein, as one says, the soul gives
testimony to God;) and yet be far from praying aright; that is, from making
known our requests to God, Phil. 4. 1 John 5. 1 Kings 8.
according to his will, with faith in his love, and the feeling of our own
wants, in our hearts. And the reason why this true prayer is not every man's
work, is, because God must first work it in men's hearts, by pouring upon them
Zach. 12.
the spirit of grace, and supplication, thereby to teach them both what to
pray, as they ought, for matter; and how, for Romans 8.
manner: and without the hand-leading of which spirit we Calvin.
dare not in truth approach unto God, but do, by reason of the guilt of sin,
fly from his presence, as Adam did, how nigh unto him soever we seem to draw.

Where, with the Apostle, I speak of making our requests known to God, my
meaning is not, that we pray to the intent to inform God, but our selves, both
what our wants are, which we desire supply of; and from whom also we expect it:
nor yet to move God to do that which before he purposed not, as one man is
moved by the importunity of another; but to move our selves, and make our own
hearts beleev the performance of that Austin.
which God before both purposed, and promised: for therefore David found in his
heart to pray unto God to 2 Samuel 7.
establish his house, because God had revealed unto him, that he would build
his house. And if we look for this honor at our childrens hands, that they
should ask of us such things, as they want, and as we purpose to bestow upon
them: how much more is it agreeable to our duty, and Gods right, that we by
prayer beg at his hands all good things both purposed, and promised by him
before hand.

By this all things are sanctified to our use, which are sanctified in
themselves by the word of God: by it we have 1 Timothy 4.
spiritual right to our daily bread, in what abundance, and by what natural,
or civil right soever we possess it before: by it we obteyn many good things
of all sorts, at Gods hands, unto which we could atteyn by no art, or industry,
or other help: as the favorites of kings get more by begging, then any other
can do by any other faculty. Besides, as by conversing with men, we Taffin.
do by little, and little, learn their manners, and have bred between them, and
us a certain mutual affection: so by our conversing with God in prayer, we
learn the manners of heaven, and feel increase both of love in us to God, and
of God to us. Lastly, by prayer we obteyn with the good things prayed for, the
confirmation of our faith in Gods goodness toward us, whereof he gives us
testimony in hearing, and granting our requests, put up unto his majesty. And
in this respect, a good thing received by prayer has a double good in it.

God is to be invocated not only with the heart, and Seneca.
with the tongue, but, as one speaks, with the hand also; as Asa and the men of
Judah prayed to God, and fought with 2 Chronicles. 13. and 14.
their enemies. And for us to ask any thing at the hands of the Lord, which
withal we do not offer our selves ready instruments to effect, and bring to
pass; is to tempt Gods power, and to abuse his goodness. To pray for that which
we desire not, is to mock with his majesty, Austin.
as Austin confesses of himself, that in his youth he begged of God chastity,
and continency, but was affrayd, lest he should be heard too soon of him. All
things live by heat: and the life of prayer stands in the heat of earnest, and
fervent desire. And how should we make account, that Cyprian.
God should hear us, if we hear not our selves? or look that God should be
mindful of us, if we our selves mind not, with intention of thought, and
desire what we ask of him? I, Austin.
says the Father, prayed, when I was little, with no little affection, that I
might not be beaten in the school. But how many grown men pray but with little,
(if any) affection, that they may not be beaten in hell? Our prayers must be
earnest, as well for small things, as great; temporal, as eternal; but with
difference of degrees of earnestnes, according to the degrees of goodness, or
necessity of the things prayed for. But as for faith, our very degree should be
the same, whatsoever the thing be, which we pray for, according to Gods will:
seeing the truth of his promise, upon which our faith rests, is the same in
all things small, and great, and always infallible. We ought as well, and as
much to beleev a small thing, as a great, if God have promised it, and as he
has promised, because his truth, and power are as great in performing all
things, though with different degrees of his love. He has not absolutely
promised temporal good things in the particulars, and so sometimes denies them
in love to his children, as seeing them unfitting for them: and sometimes again
he grants the desires of his enemies in wrath, and indignation; as he did of
the rebellious Israelites desiring quayls. Besides, if the Lord should not
sometimes grant unto his that ask them, Psalm. 78.
the good things of this life, even plenteously, men would think they belonged
not to him: If he should grant them to all, and Austin.
always, it would be thought, that for them, and them alone, he were to be
served; and so in serving him men should not be godly, but covetous. But above
all things, we must take heed we ask nothing evil of God: for that were to
transform, and turn him, what in us lies, into Satan himself.

Whosoever, says one, will bring his enterprises to good effect, Nazianz.
must begin with prayer to God, and end with praising of him. And he that
begins not his work in that manner, specially being of any difficulty, or
weight, is in danger, if it succeed, rayther to end in his own praises, then in
Gods: And if it succeed not, he may thank his own prophanenes in passing by
God. And as we are to pray upon all occasions, so specially in the time of
trouble; as children are always running to their fathers, but chiefly, when
they get hurt, or fear danger. Then even hypocrites are forced to God; and this
partly out of a natural desire of releif; and partly by a natural persuasion
of the power, and goodness of the creator, by which he is able, and willing to
help his distressed creature: and so Ionahs maryners in the extremity Jonah 1.
of the storm, went every one to his God. But as God is a sanctuary to fly
unto for his faithful servants, in the time of need, whither he leads them by
his holy spirit given them: so is it not faith, but impudency, for hypocrites,
and such as in their quiet, and prosperous estate, have not hearkened to God,
speaking to them in his word, and works, to press upon him in their
affliction, for help, and succor, without true, and unfeyned repentance, and
sorrow, as well, yea more, for sin, then punishment, accompanying it. And
though they call upon him, he will not answer: Prove. 1.
though they seek him early, they shall not find him. And Chap. 21.
if he that stops his ears at the cry of the poor, shall cry himself, and
not be heard, how much more he that stops his ears against the Lord calling and
crying unto him in his word? The prayers of such are abominable, and sin: And
Prove. 28. Psalm. 109.
how miserable must his state needs be, unto whom that becomes sin, by which
the godly obteyn remedy against sin, and all other miseryes?

A readiness to pray earnestly to God for good things, and the same improved
accordingly, is a kind of pawn from heaven to him that has it, that he shall
receav the good things prayed for: both because all true prayer is by the Romans
^. 1 Cor. 2.
teachings of the spirit of God, which searches the mind of God, and so
acquaynts him therewith, in whom it dwells: and also because such a disposition
has faith not only joined with it as a companion, but as the very parent of
it: which faith on man's part, ever presupposes a promise on Gods.

From the use, and fruit of this heavenly grace of prayer nothing can keep him,
that keeps himself in the favor of God; though many things can from other
exercises of religion. Not want of fellowship of men, nor solitarines of place,
nor depth of dungeon, nor darkness of the night, nor thicknes of walls neither:
but his devout prayers will Cyril.
find way of ascending unto God. Blessed be his name, who has provided for
his poor servants in their most doleful, and desolate estate, this ready
means of divine comfort, whereof they, in whom his spirit dwells, cannot
possibly be deprived.

Prayer in secret, and by him that is alone with God, has these advantages
above that, which is public, and in the church: First, that it is less in
danger of the taynt of hypocrisy. The proud Pharisee, as well as the humble
publican goes to the temple to pray: And the hypocrites love to pray Luke 18.
Math. 6.
standing in the Synagogu^s, and in the corners of the streets, that they may
be seen of men: He that prays in secret, does it to be seen of God. Secondly,
In private, a christian may descend to such particulars; as in public, or
before others, he will not, nor ought to mention. Thirdly, He may in private,
use such expressions, and outward manifestations, for the better passage of his
hearts affection, specially being perplexed with sorrow, or fear, as before
others were unseemly, and immodest. In that day of the great mourning in
Jerusalem, when they shall look upon him whom they have Zach. 12.
peirced, and shall mourn for him in bitterness; every house, and family shall
mourn apart, and their wives apart. On the other side, public prayer wants
not its prerogatives: as first, that it is performed in the order, and
ordinance of the church, which the other is not. Secondly, that in the Church
and Congregation, many agreeing touching a thing to Math. 18.
be asked, have a special promise, that it shall be done for them of their
father in heaven; upon whom they set, by their prayers, Tertull.
as it were, in a troup. Lastly, in our public prayers, and praises of God,
we do give testimony of his providence in governing the world, and all our
affayrs; and that he is present with his Church, and hears their requests; for
the convinceing of Atheists, and Epicures; and confirmation of others in
believing undoubtedly his care over his people, and servants.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Oaths, and Lots.
THere is great affinity between an Oath, and Hebr. 6. Prove. 18.
a Lot. Both the one, and other serve to end controversies, and cause
contentions to cease, not easily, or conveniently otherwise to be decided. In
both, men as it were, renounce themselves, and all other creatures; and appeal
to Gods special providence. In an oath we appeal to God, as a wise, and
righteous witness, and judge; 2 Cor. 1.
knowing what is truth; and hating, and punishing falsehood, and lies. In a Lot
we appeal to God, as to an absolute Lord, for the disposing of persons, and
things, by his Prove. 16.
more singular work of providence: unto which alone he that casts the Lot,
referrs himself, if he mock not both God, and man; wholly renounceing his own
wit, and skill every way, for the furthering of this chance, event, or Lot,
rayther then that. Some may be, and are too scrupulous in both: But a thousand
times more are too profanely prodigal of the one, and other.

In an oath we desire God, as the searcher of hearts, and patron (...).
of truth to testify with us, that we deceav not: and withal, to take
vengeance on us, if we do deceav. It is a part of Gods worship, though much
used civily (as civil things are religiously): in which we make clear, and
solemn confession of Gods presence, wisdom, truth, justice, and omnipotency.
There is in it no shadow of any shadow, or type: and therefore no color, why
it should not be moral, and perpetual, and as lawful for us now, as for the
Church before Christ.

It must be taken in truth, in wisdom, and in righteousness. Ier. 4.
In truth of thing, and so the same known to him that takes it, in an oath
assertory: and with firm purpose of heart, in an oath promisorie. There are
(says one) three bonds or Perkins.
degrees of confirmation of truth. First, a bare affirmation: Secondly, an
assertion: Thirdly, an oath. In the first of the three we only give our word,
as they say, by yea, or Math. 5.
nay: and whatsoever is above this, (to wit, in ordinary communication) is of
evil. When our bare word will not be taken, and the weight of the matter
requires it, we do pawn our best jewels, as our truth, faith, and verity, in
an asseveration; as Christ our Lord confirmed diverse his weighty sayings with
a doubled Amen. But now, if men will not accept of our pledge neither, we
procure God for our surety in an oath: unto whose justice we also enter
counter-bond, for punishment by him, if we deceav. And an oath being the
strongest bond of truth that is, and so avowed by God himself, who when he
would confirm unto the Hebr. 6.
heyrs of promise the immutabilitie of his counsayl, when he had no stronger
bond, interposed an oath, and swear: and when he had no greater to swear by,
swear by himself; it follows, that they, who are either without conscience
what they swear, or can dispense, or be dispensed with Psalm. 15.
in their consciences having sworn (though to their own hinderance) are both
impious toward God, and trea^herous to men; and such as do really outlaw
themselves from all humayn societies; as neither deserving credit with them, nor
fellowship amongst them. Secondly, we must swear in judgment, with prudent
consideration of the thing together with the circumstances, to which we so
streytly bind our selves: as in an oath promissorie, first, that it be possible
unto us; else we mock both men to whom, and God, by whom we swear: Secondly,
that the thing be lawful which we tie our selves unto; To bind our selves to
that which is evil by an oath, is to make sure work to do evil. Lastly, the
matter must be of some weight, and such as becomes the Majesty of God, whom we
thus far interest in it. Now what Christian heart (any way tender of Gods
glory) bleeds not at the worlds impiety this way? which fears not to call the
glorious majesty of God to witness, upon such trifling occasions, as for
which no wise man but would be ashamed to call his meanest neighbor, yea or
servant either? Lastly, we must swear in righteousness, Bernard.
that is both according to his meaning (being made known unto us) to whom, and
for whose satisfaction we Cicero.
swear; as also for warrantable, and good ends: as the glory of God; our own
and others good; his satisfaction to whom we swear; and for the ending, and not
the beginning of strife: else we prostitute Gods name either to our own, or
other men's lusts.

Common, and light swearing argues such a degree of irreverence of Gods
Majesty, as we may truly, and boldly say, that the heart of a common, and
customary swearer is void of all grace, and true fear of God. And in weighing
with my self with admiration, and horror, the customarie swearing amongst so
many; considering that there is nothing in it, as in other sins, either
profitable, or pleasant, or of credit in the world, or that brings either
reasonable, or sensual good; I have made account, that, besides imitation of
one another; and custom, which makes it half natural to some; and a conscience
guilty of want of credit in others, which moves many to swear that they may be
believed; and want of wit in not a few, who strive by accessory oaths to supply
their defect of matter, or other inabilitie of speech; there is in this
swearing* veyn a deeper mystery of mischief, then ordinary: and that indeed,
men take it up (specially, in the devils intention, who sets them a work; and
not a little in their own) in direct opposition of God, and because he in his
law has so severely prohibited it. If God had not in his word so expressly, and
severely forbidden it, as he has done, certeynly there would not be the least
part of it used, that is. Graceless men seem therein, to affect a professed
contempt of God; and withal, an opinion from men, that they fear nothing;
neither God, nor devil, as they say. But God will make them feel, that fear
not the guilt of taking his glorious name in vayn, which all creatures Exodus 20.
ought to honor, and reverence.

This sin being directly against Gods majesty; he reservs, by his providence,
the punishment of it ordinarily to himself: spiritually, by hardness of heart,
and impenitencie in this life, usually to the end thereof: and both bodily, and
ghostly, by hellfire for ever Where it is also like, that the devils, and
damned men do, and will swear, and curse in their utter rejection from God, and
intolerable torment; and so make their sin, and course of blaspheaming as
endless, as their punishment for it.

CHAP. L. Of Zeal.
ZEal is by some well defyned the heat, and intention of all affections; and
not either any one simple affection, or composition of diverse: I add of the
understanding also: So men meditate zealously, and love zealously, and hate
zealously, and rejoice zealously, and mourn zealously, and with great intention
of heart. The like is to be said of all the rest of the affections. As nothing
lives without natural heat; so neither lives he the life of Christ indeed, who
is destitute of christian zeal to warm him in his affections, and actions,
specially in matter of Gods worship, and service; in which whether wrong, or
right, luke-warmnes is odious, and loathsome. The Lord Rev. 3.
will spue out of his mouth the lukewarm, whether wine, or water.

Worldly wisemen despise zeal, as prejudicial to wisdom, and discretion: So
Festus judged Paul mad; and Michall accounted David as one of the fools, for
the singular zeal of God which they manifested. But even 1 Cor. 1.
this foolishnes of God is wiser then men. Yet is it certain, that men of great
knowledge, and judgment do seldom make that manifestation of Zeal, which weaker
persons do. The former have their spirits most in their brayns, and are
exercised specially in the disquisition and discerning of truth from falsehood,
and of good from evil: The latter have them most in their hearts, and
accordingly give themselves to the affectionate pursuit of that, which they
conceav to be true, and good; and alike to the avoiding, and impugning of the
contrary.

Some deceav others by the pretense of zeal, which they put on for their
advantage, as stage players do vizours, till their part be played: And thus
Ismaell deceaved the forty Ier. 41.
men of Samaria with his crocodiles tears. Also there are not a few, who deceav
both others, and themselves, by seeming to both, either to have the Zeal of God,
which they wholly want; or much more, then they have: And of this number was
Iehu, how loud soever he cried to Ionadab, Behold the zeal, which I have for
the house of the Lord: ^ Kin. 10.
whereas in truth, that, which most set him awork, was zeal for his own house;
though it may be, he thought not so. Besides craftines in this Iehues zeal,
there are two other properties: the one suspicious, where it is found; and the
other odious. The former is a furious march against evil, without an
answerable pursuit of, and affection unto the contrary good: Many are
vehemently carried against Antichristian devises in truth, or so appearing unto
them: in whom yet appears little love and affection to that which is of Christ
in their own judgment. Such are rayther carried by their own flesh, then led by
the spirit of God. The other is cruelty. To be aright, and truly zealous
cannot but be good; seeing so many (and those wise men) desire, at times, to
seem so, though they be not.

True zeal must be for God, and from God, and according to God: and having God
both for beginning, and end, and rule of direction; it cannot but it self be
good, and godly. It must be for the Lord, and for the furtherance of his glory
in the obedience of his will, and in man's salvation; and not for our own, or
other men's by-purposes. And if it so fall out, that by one and the same thing
Gods cause, and our own profit, credit, or other worldly advantage be promoted;
we had need keep a jealous eye over our selves, that we serve not our turn on
God, by making his ends, as it were, a bridge to our own, as Iehu did. Secondly,
as the fire of the altar came from heaven; so must our coal of zeal be fetched
thence, as being the work of Gods spirit in our hearts, in the use of prayer,
meditation upon the word of God read, and heard, the examples of others godly
(as it were, ryding in the fiery chariot of Elyas) and the like holy means; by
which this divine fire is kindled, and nourished in men's breasts. Thirdly, it
must be according to God, both for the quality of the matter, and quantity of
the intention of affection. For the former, It is good always (even then, and
then only) to be Gal. 4.
zealous in a good matter; and that neither lightly presumed, nor partially
conceipted so to be, but certeynly known: else we burn not sweet incense with
holy fire, but dirt; and doung in stead thereof. Our zeal also must be
apportioned to the object; and that not only considered in it self, but also
in the circumstances attending upon it: in regard whereof, things not always
the most good, or evil in themselves, may justly deserv at our hands, a great
bent either of love to them, or hatred against them. And amongst other
circumstances we must be careful so far to have respect to that of persons, as
to hate evil most in them whose persons we most love; and so in our wives,
children, and friends, more then in strangers; and in our selves most of all.
And he that has not learnt to bear things amiss in others, which he will not
bear in himself, has either too much fleshly zeal, or too little spiritual, or
both: which two oftens lodge in one breast: by which it comes to pass, that
many are earnest to pluck the moat out of their brothers eye, that perceav
Math. 7.
not the beam in their own. Notwithstanding, as it does not detract either from
the dignity, or necessity of natural heat in our bodies, that there is found
in some, an agueish, and unnatural heat far greater then the natural; so
neither, in truth, and just valuation of things, does it derogate from the
excellency, and necessity of the heat of true zeal, and life of grace in the
godly, consisting therein; that many are zealous amiss, whether knowing, (and
so deceaving others): or not knowing, (and so deceaving themselves) of what
spirit they are. Luke 9.


CAP. LI. Of Hypocrisy.
HYpocrites have their names from stage players, Chrisost.
as rayther playing then working that which is good and virtuous; and the same
only upon the stage, and to please lookers on. And as amongst stage players
the same persons act diverse parts, at diverse times, and those very different
one from another; so is it with the actions of hypocrites: They hold no
correspondencie one with another; but some of them cover, and others discover
their masters shame; as Noah's sons did their fathers. And as such persons are
never constant; for none can long play Seneca.
the counterfeyt untyred: so neither are they free in any one kind of good;
but have a goodness rayther like the water in a dead pit, forced out at times,
with buckets; then of a living spring, which sends out its streams freely, and
constantly. Yea further, as Jacob (though for his fathers blessing he covered
his hands, and neck very cunningly) was bewrayed by his tongue and voice: so,
hardly can a counterfeyt carry his matters so close, but that often times, even
in one and the same work, there will be found a jarr of the parts one with
another; so as either the tongue will check the hands, or the hands the tongue,
or both mutually; to the showing, and shaming of all.

When great hypocrites, and deep dissemblers are left of God to fall into any
gross, or scandalous evil, they seldom, or never recover their former show of
religion: neither (as one says) will the lambs skin, which the wolf wears,
being once shorn, ever grow again: but God in judgment leaving them in some
special temptation to gross wickedness, in which they loose their credit in
the world, which alone they sought, and so break the hedge which formerly
restreyned them, does punish their former close dissimulation with after open
profanenes. Young hypocrites commonly prove old Atheists.

It may well be said, as it is in the Proverb, that, Hypocrisy is spun with a
fine thread: considering how hypocrites deceav, and overreach others; and often
times, weaker persons those that are wiser then they; how much more,
considering, how thereby they deceav themselves. In which latter there is a
transgression and evil both in deceaving, and being deceaved. For albeit a man
may often without sin be deceaved by another; yet never so by himself: seeing
the spirit of a man may (if it do not) always know the 1 Cor. 2.
things of a man. This self deceavablenes arises in men either from
presumption, when they think they need not; or from sloth, that they will not
take the payns; or from an evil conscience, that they dare not try, and
examine themselves, and their works, and estates with God, as they ought.
Besides hypocrites by false appearances getting credit with others, come to
esteem themselves better then they Gregory.
are, because others esteem them so.

This hypocrisy is indeed not only a base, but a foolish evil. Base in
dissembling the evil, which it has, and is ashamed of: and in counterfeyting
the good, which it has not, and is ashamed to seem to want: And therefore
notably proud people (scorning, as they use to boast, to dissemble) seldom come
under this coat; but do usually appear to men, as void of grace and goodness, as
they are before God. Foolish it is, if in nothing else, yet in covering from men
that evil, which God sees, and hates, and will punish with infinitely
greater both loss, and shame, and torment, then any, or all men will, or can:
and not only the evil dissembled, but therewith the dissimulation also: which
men legally do not. Great must the hypocrites portion be in Gods plagues; with
whom as the principal, the apparently evil, as but an accessorie, has his
portion Math. 24.
appointed.

It is one thing to do a work in hypocrisy, which only hypocrites do; and
an other thing to do it with hypocrisy; which is still ready, alas, to
mingle it self with the work of Gods grace in all our best actions; as Tobyah,
and the rest of the heathen would have mingled themselves with the Lords people
in the building of his temple. The same may be said of unbelief, indevotion,
and the like corruptions.

It is no marvayl, that Atheist, and Epicures judge all that make show of piety
and godlynes (specially above the size, and custom of the times) conceipted,
fantastical, and very hypocrites; seeing they measure others by themselves: And
knowing, that if they should make the semblance of godliness, which the others
do, it should be no better in them, then hypocrisy, and fancy; they conclude
the same roundly upon others, from their own premises. And of this they are
also desirous to persuade both themselves, and others: Themselves, for a kind of
envious comfort in evil, that others are as ill as they; and for their own
hardening out of that imagination: Others, for their miserable credit, when they
are not thought leaud alone. They being themselves Sad^cees, would fayn think
others, and have them thought Pharisees by others. A tang of this also is to be
found even in them, who are not void of all goodness, toward such, as a little
overstep them in the ways of godlynes.

Though hypocrisy be in it self a very odious thing, and so evil as it
corrupts all good in him, in whom it reigns; making both his works of devotion,
and of mercy abominable to the Lord: yet considering how little true good is in
the world; it were well (for others, at least) that there were more hypocrisy
in many, then there is. Which would help both to repress in them many gross
enormities, for shame, and to keep credit with men; which now shamelesly they
practice: and also provoke them to many outward good works (for the good of
others at the least) which now they wholly, and boldly neglect in professed
godlesnes, and dishonesty.

Besides, hypocrisy yields, though it intend it not, a full and loud
testimony to true virtue and godliness: seeing no man ordinarily desires to
seem but good. Now if it be a thing so desirable, even by their testimony,
who want goodness, to appear good; how much more to be so in deed: what is the
empty shadow to the solid body? To shut up this Head: As the shadow follows
the body, so does the name, and fame of good; true goodness, with equally-mynded
men. And in stead of a thousand compasses of devise which men fetch about to
obteyn the name of good, and virtuous, this one short, and right-on way of
being good indeed would serve the turn for the procureing it from all
indifferent, and wise judges. The most compendious way to this honor is, that
in truth a man be, as Cicero.
he would be accounted, says the Heathen: how much more ought Christians, who
are persuaded of Gods providence in ordering this, and all his other blessings
upon themselves, and others, thus both to say, and think, and proceed
accordingly? And look what recompense of honor, or other reward, this plain,
and homely uprightnes (which of all other virtues Laudatur, and alget) is
denied from men; God who sees, and loves it, will plenteously supply. Blessed
are the perfect in way: who walk in the Psalm. 119.
Law of Jehovah. To choose the right way of Gods law first, and then to walk
uprightly in it, is to be guided by Gods own spirit to heaven.

CHAP. LII. Of Sin, and punishment from God.
WHatsoever swarveth from the law of God (written in the table of the heart, or
of stone) whether in our nature, or actions, either in the not being of that
which should be, or being of that which should not be (which two are always
joined together in original sin, and oftens in actual) is sin, and evil: yea
the greatest; yea the only evil indeed. Sin is worse then the devil, as
having made him evil, whom God made good: yea then all punishments, yea then
hell it self, which God prepared, and made (and is therefore Math. 25.
good) to punish sin, and sinners by. And accordingly, it was godlily said of
one, that if sin, and hell were set before Auselmus
him, the one on the one side, and the other on the other; and that he must
needs go through the one of them; he would rayther enter upon hell, then sin.
But blessed be God, who will assuredly keep them from hell, whose hearts are so
set to keep themselves from sin, by his grace.

This sin is incident only to reasonable creatures: God the creator being
above sin; and unreasonable creatures beneath it. For the disorders in bruit
beasts; they are not Romans 8. Beza.
sin in them, to whom there is no law; but punishments of man's sin against God;
who has subjected them to vanity, thereby to testify how greatly he is
offended at man's, for whom at first he made them, and all other creatures in a
more excellent state. The case of children is otherwise, as being reasonable
creatures, made after Gods image in Adam, and having the law written in their
hearts, as a subject capable both of good and evil; which bruits are not.

Although sin be only in reasonable creatures, yet is it a most unreasonable
thing: otherwise it were not sin, save as it crosses true reason, either by
lust against reason, or show of reason against truth. So for particular
enormities; the more unreasonable, the more sinful: as lusts against nature;
adultery in a married person; pride in a mean, prodigality in a needy;
covetousnes in him that abounds in riches; prophanenes in a preacher; and so of
all other vices.

All sins, save that first of Adam, and men's very last, are both sins in
themselves, and effects of former sin, and causes of latter: and that not only
by Gods just, though severe judgment, in punishing one by another; but often
times also by a kind of natural, and necessary coherence, and affinity.
Sometimes one sin brings on an other by provoking unto it, as rash anger unto
strife: sometimes to Prove. 15. Math. 26.
back it, as Peter's denying of Christ did his after forswearing him: sometimes
to conceal it, as all other evils draw on lying; and theft murder many times:
sometimes to mainteyn it, as pride does covetousnes, and oppression; and
sometimes to countenance it, that it be not disgraced, as Herod's rash oath drew
after it the beheading of John the Baptist. Math. 14.
And of these commonly a lesser draws on a greater, as lesser sticks set the
greater on fire. So also by those degrees of iniquity do men proceed in one
and the same particular enormitie: in which, as in a chayn drawing from heaven
to hell, each link moves his next, from the one, and smaller end, to the other
greater. First, there is in a man concupiscence, by which he is drawn away from
God, James 1.
unto whom he ought to cleave with the whole heart. And having once let go his
hold on him, the true, and unchangeable good; he is forthwith seized by some
appearing, and counterfeyt good, and thereby entised; as the byrd by falling on
the ground is taken in the s^are, from which, whilst she held aloft, she was
free. Upon this inveigled affection, and deceaved judgment thereby, comes
consent of will to have, or do the thing which is evil, called by the Apostle
the conception of lust: which that it may bring forth sin in outward act, and
exequution, wants nothing but opportunity. This sin perfited by a continued
course therein without repentance, brings forth death unavoydably. He therefore
that begins to do evil, or to forsake that which is good, in the affection of
his heart, is like him that puts his feet into a pit, and lets the hold of his
hands go: and without Gods gracious hand catching hold of him, can never stay,
till he come to the bottom of the pit of perdition. And no marvayl of this
progress in evil; seeing every sin (how small soever in degree) has joined
with it the contempt of God. As therefore the safest way against the flame is
to quench the spark, by which it may be kindled; so against this fire of hell,
to quench betymes the spark of concupiscence, and lust. This is done partly by
withdrawing from it the occasions, and incitements of, and unto sin; which are
as fuel for nourishing it: as if it be the lust of anger, and revenge; not to
give ear to Eccles. 7. Psalm 38. Job. 31. Prove. 23.
words of provocation, but to be as a deaf man that hear^ not: If of
uncleanenes; not to look upon a maid: If of drunckennes, or excess that way;
not to look upon the wine, when it is red; etc. The second help is by
smothering the corruption in the beginning; which as fire, if it have no vent,
goes out; but getting passage, breaks out into a flame. Lastly, as water (fires
contrary) quenches it; so do the spiritual means of grace, as prayer,
meditation upon Gods word, and the like, quench by degrees, the sparks of sin,
and fire of hell.

The greatness of the sin is not always to be esteemed by the thing done. For,
as much crookednes may be found in a small line; so may a great evil be
committed in a small matter. Hereupon, he that but gathered sticks on the
Sabbath with a high hand, (viz. in contempt Numb. 15
of Moses, and of God in him) was to be stoned to death without mercy The sin
is also greater, as the temptation, or occasion is less; and therefore the
rich man, that having many sheep of his own took his poor neighbors lamb, 2 Samuel 12.
to enterteyn his stranger withal, was adjudged worthy of death; whether we
take the words, as they seemed to David, or as Nathan meant them. Likewise, the
forecasting of evil exceedingly aggrevates it: as with him Psalm. 36. Galat. 6.
who devised mischief upon his bed, and after, set himself in a way to practice
it: Others are overtaken by sin, but such overtake sin. So does it not a little,
if men sin, that they may sin: as it seems many swear, that they may swear: and
as Austin confesses of himself, that being a boy, he Austin.
stole apples, and cast them away, when he had done. He stole, that he might
steal. Lastly, sin becomes more sinful, if it have scandal, and offense of
men, or other damage joined with it. Yet even for the least sin; (if any sin by
any, being against Gods infinite majesty, may be accounted little) if God
should press the same upon the conscience, and suffer Satan to urge it to the
full; it would be a burden intolerable: and such as neither the heavens could
bear; for the angels that sinned were cast from thence: nor paradise; for Adam
for transgression was driven from thence: nor the earth; for that swallowed up
Dathan and Abiram for their sin: neither could any men, or angels undergo it,
without being born down into the bottom of hell by it: and there only it
rests, as in its proper center. Happy are they, who in the sense, and feeling
of the intolerable burden Math. 11.
thereof, come to Christ by faith, that he may ease them.

The sin against the Holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven in this world,
or the world to come, is not only committed by them, who have sometimes
professed the gospel; but by others also, though never coming so far; but
being convinced of the truth thereof, do maliciously hate, blaspheme, and
persecute it: and therein sin against the work of the Holy Ghost in their own
hearts. And this Christ insinuates against the Scribes, and Math. 12.
Pharisees, who yet never came to profess Christianity. The reason of the
(...) of this sin is not any de^ect either in the mercy of God or mer^^s of
Christ* as though the evil in it were greater, then the good in them; but for
that God has s^t those bo^nds of his grace, and mercy; that he will never
vo^c^^afe faith, and repen^^^ce to that person, who once so despyteth his
spirit, in that its holy work. And considering how often the Scriptures speak of
this sin, not only for warning of persons in themselves, but also for direction
^o^ching Math. 1^. Mark 3. ^ John ^. H^b. 6. and ^^. 2 Pe^. 2. ^od^.
others so ^inning; it is to be feared, that the same is more ordinary, where
the gospel is preached, then the most make account of; and that many
maliciously ha^eing and persequuting (specially after some singular profession
made, and forsaken) true, and conscionable gospellers, would do the same by the
gospel it self, if they were not restreyned by fear of men, and shame of the
times.

The Lord oftens punishes men in the same kind, Math. 1^.
wherein they have sinned: and causes to be ^ea^^d unto them with the measure,
wherewith they meat to others. Exodus 1. and 1^.
Thus he dr^^^ed Ph^rao^ in the sea, who had formerly drowned the Israelitish
infants: and served king A^o^^bezek, Judge. ^.
as he had served other kings before. And this God does to make his justice the
more conspicuous; and that men's punishments may be as glasses, wherein their
sins may be seen more clearly; if not for their repentance; yet for the warning
of others.

When I seriously weigh and consider the fearful and grievous punishments,
which God (so good, and gracious has partly exequuted, in this life; as upon
the old world; Sodom, and Gomorrah; Corah, and his company; and the like: and
partly threatened; as in the end of this life, in the soul; so in the end of the
world, both in soul and body; and the same for measure, intolerable; and
endless in continuance: Lord, think I, what sin can procure such punishment? But
when, on the contrary, I consider the horrible contempt of God, and his word,
even in them to whom it is daily and diligently offered: Lord, think I, what
punishment can be sufficient for such sin? What is it then? Man is fearfully
wicked in sinning: and God fearfully just in punishing; where by faith, and
repentance mercy is not obtained. My flesh trembles for dread of thee: and I
fear for thy judgments. Psalm. 119.


CHAP. LIII. Of Rewards, and punishments by men.
MEN that are able, and ready accordingly to reward the virtues of good men,
and well-deserving, do therein not only give them, and God in them, their due;
but do give others encouragement also to apply themselves to virtuous courses,
which find so good acceptance, and reward at men's hands, specially at theirs,
who are of place, and ability in the world. Whereas, on the contrary, for
such to favor wicked, and leaud persons, is really to invite, and persuade men
to evil, and little better then plainly to hyre both them, and others to do
naughtily. The former in that their approbation, and remuneration of goodness,
and virtue, bear the Image of God, who plenteously rewards the well-doers: the
latter plainly resemble the devil, who offered Christ the glory of the
kingdoms of the earth, if he would fall down and worship him. Math. 4.


It is a known, and approved saying, that by rewards and Cicero.
punishments societies are preserved. And of these two, though occasion of
rewards be more to be desired; yet the exequution of punishments is more
diligently to be looked unto, for the preserving of humayn societies. The
reason is; because, whereas virtue (as the philosopher said) rewards it self;
or more truly, if it be true, expects it reward from God; vice, and vileny, on
the contrary, can be restreyned in the most, and worst, only by the fear of
Bodin.
punishment: Neither serve humayn laws to make men good; but to keep them from
such outrages, and extreamities of evil, as into which otherwise they were in
danger to break. The special use of the law of God it self, where by his
spirit he puts it not in men's mind, and writes it not in their hearts is to
restreyn lawless persons, as murderers, 1 Timothy 1.
whoremongers, and the like; how much more of men's.

There is then a merciful cruelty, when men save, by severitie, the persons
themselves that are punished, and others also; the punishment reaching to one,
or a few; and the fear, and warning to many: There is, on the other side, a
cruel mercy, when men by spareing spoil both the persons offending, and
others; who by their impunity take boldness to offend. This foolish pity spoils
the city, if the magistrate use it: so does the fond love of parents the
family. This love, Solomon (respecting the effect more then the affection) calls
hatred, saying: He that spares his Prove. 13.
rod hates his son. Notwithstanding this, and that God has left power, and
charge also of punishments in all societies, family, church, and common wealth,
which they that exercise, bear the image of Gods justice, and holiness; the
honor whereof they are to preserv, and to breed, and continue in them over
whom they are set, a reverend aw of their authority for their good: yet
considering both man's frailty, and pronenes to offend; and misery in
suffering for offenses: all in authority should still incline to the more
favorable part, and rayther to come short, then to exceed measure in punishing
even where the offense is evident; and where it is doubtful, to forbear, at
any hand. He that punishes another, whether as judge, or exequutioner either,
must know legally, that he has done evil, and deserved it: otherwise the
authority of the whole world cannot bear him out, from being a murderer
before God. The law which says. Thou shall not murder, forbids specially
violence in judgment. Besides, punishments must be administered with sorrow, and
commiseration; as rewards with joy and gladness. It is pity men should deserv
punishments; and deserving them, pity but they should have them: yet are we
to pity them in their misery also: which he that does, remembers himself to
be a man. Lastly, it is worthy the observing, which one has, that in all
punishments respect is to be had to things to come, rayther then Seneca.
past: For howsoever the punishment be just only in lieu of the offense
committed; yet is it profitable only, because it tends to prevent after
offenses, either in the person punished, or in others warned by it. And
hereupon another Plutarch.
would not have a wise man punish because an offense is committed, but least it
should be committed afterward: of which the former renders this reason, that
things past cannot be recalled; but things to come may be prevented.

Temporary torments, specially those more great, are grievous to conceav of;
how much more to undergo? yet will the sad, and serious consideration of those
that are eternal eat them up, as it were, and make them seem nothing in
comparison. Whereupon it was, that Polycarpus told the proconsul, (who
threatened to burn him, if he did not renounce Christ) Thou threatnest me with
the fire, which Eusebius.
would burn for a time, but presently after should be extinguished: because
thou art ignorant of the fire of the judgment to come, prepared for the
eternal punishment of the wicked. Fear not them then which kill the body; but
are not able to kill the Math. 10.
soul: But rayther fear him who is able to destroy both soul, and body in hell.

CHAP. LIIII. Of the Affections of the mind.
OUR affections, as love, sorrow, fear, and the rest, are common to us with
bruit beasts; which therefore the understanding must order, that they be not
bruiteish; and with them, the will, for its yiedling of consent to their
motions, or withholding it from them. But as the little sticks set the greater
wood a burning: so do they most what set the understanding, and will aworking
in sensual objects. For example. One sees a naturally pleasing good thing, but
belonging to another, or not to him, as Achans wedg of gold: His affection of
love, and appetite is inordinately carried unto it; and is ready to solicit the
will to consent to the getting, and enjoying of it. But now, if the
understanding do its duty, it steps in, represseth the affection, and
restreyneth the will, by discerning, and discovering, that the good thing
desired is another, and therefore not to be desired, or had by him. But as the
fumes arysing from a corrupt stomach darken, and dim the bodily eyes: so in
sensual persons the understanding is commonly (besides its own inherent
blyndnes) so corrupted with partial, and brutish affections, as that it
neglects all due search, and disquisi^ion; and unadvisedly judges that good,
which is pleasing to appetite, and sense: and so being sweyed, and led by the
affections, as a foolish waggoner by his horses, draws with it the wills
consent; which obtained, the evil is done in Gods account, and wants only
opportunity for outward effect.

Although the seat of the affections be the soul, whose motions they are, and
not the bodies: yet do they more or less vehemently, and efficatiously act,
and exercise themselves, as the blood, and spirits, (the souls immediate
instruments) are more, or less fitted to their hand. Hence is it, that anger
in the heart moved by some occasion, is so vehement in a choleric body;
sorrow, or fear in a melancholic; and so for the rest.

These our affections are either merely natural in us; or sanctified by grace;
or morally corrupt, and inordinate. Nature (and so natural affections) is
content with a little: corruption not with a great deal: as the thirst, which is
natural, is quenched with a draught, or two; but that which is unnatural, and
agueish, not with a whole vessel of drink. This and the reason of it he lays
down wittily, that says, Natural desires are finite, but those arysing from
false opinion have no limits: as he that goes his right Seneca.
way, has some end of his journey; he that wanders, none. And as for
sanctified affections, they, alas, are too feeble in us: and as Iehu was
known by his furtous marching; so may they be, by their soft, and lazy pace:
neither, if they were excessive, were they sanctified, that is, directed by
grace, and good reason: nor are they easily so, if they be any thing vehement;
but have commonly too much flesh mingled with them. And no marvayl: for setting
our affections above, where Christ is, and whither the spirit of Colos. 3.
grace advances them, we clime up the hill, and withal draw after us the clog
of our flesh, lusting the contrary way: Galat. 5.
whereas sensual men led by their lusts, go down the hill, and are carried
headlong to evil. Besides, sensual objects are present to the outward senses,
by which the affections are moved: but things spiritual are seen a far of, as
needing 2 Pet. 1.
the direction and discourse of faith for provokeing of affection unto them;
which makes their work in this case more weak and slow. Yet being created
faculties, they are the greater the better, if rightly ordered. And so it is
not unbrobably said by some, that Christ had the greatest fear, sorrow, anger
etc. upon him, that ever man had, or could have. But as the stronger the horses
in the wagon are, Plato. Lacta^^.
though the better, yet the more dangerous; so are those horses of the soul in
us, lest by misguidance they overthrow all.

And as for violent, and inordinate affections; the person, in whom they are
found, how wise, or well meaning soever otherwise, or howsoever bent upon some
good course, is no more to be trusted to; then the charyot drawn by unbroken
horses, going, for the present, quietly on, and in a good way, but which will
quickly take a toy, and endanger the overthrow of all.

As in a tempestuous sea, the waves, in the same place, are sometimes lifted
up; and the depths, at other times, disclosed: so in an unmortifyed, and
passionate heart, one unlawful, and inordinate passion often breaks into the
contrary, as evil, and inordinate, as it: as did Ammons inordinate love to
his sister Thamar into as excessive hatred. So 2 Samuel 13.
some of extremely prodigal become extremely covetous; of credulous,
suspicious; of mad-merry, sad without measure. The cause is, for that such
persons are not led by the lore of reason, or conscience; but carried headlong
by pangs of passion; and withal driven by the devil, and so must needs go,
and run too; though up, and down the same way; and forward, and backward, after
his will.

As in a fish pond some one great pike devours both the lesser fish of other
kinds, and of its own also; so in diverse, some one affection is so
predominate, as it eats up not only reason, and conscience, but with them,
almost all other affections. Many are so sowred with coffeehouse, and
sorrow; that they appear to have place left for nothing else in their heart:
some are set upon so merry a pin, as if they had the image of laughter which
Licurgus set up for the Lacedaemonians ever before them. Others again are so
overgrown with anger; as they seem to have no blood but choler running in
their veyns. If any danger be comeing toward them, (which all reason would
teach them to fear specially) they will pick a quarrel at something in, or
about it, to set anger, and indignation awork. If God send grievous crosses
upon them, and thereby call them to mourning; it shall go hard but they will
find what to be angry at, in some person, or other, to turn the stream that
way.

It is some disparagement ordinarily to the government of a wise man (specially
in their eyes, who have no share in the motive) to make great manifestation of
affection, one or other: and therefore Joseph when he would make himself Genesis
45.
known affectionately to his brethren, commanded all the Egiptians out of the
place. So Zachariah foretelling the extreme mourning, which shall be by the
familyes in Jerusalem, Zach. 12.
when God shall pour upon them the spirit of grace, shows, that every family
shall mourn apart, and their wives apart. Yet are there cases, in which it
stands as well with wisdom to manifest great affections, as with grace, or
nature to have them. And this David prudently considered, and practiced, 2 Samuel
9.
at Abners Funeral.

We should order our affections before we have any special provocations; and
set down with our selves (what may be) before hand, that if such, or such a
thing come to pass, we will allow it such, and such a measure of its
compatible affection, and no more: that as feirce dogs, though provoked by
other men's voices, yet are quieted by their masters Plutarch.
voice, to which they are used; so the feirce motions of the mind may be, by
reasons voice, with which they are formerly acquainted, for that purpose, made
still, and quiet.

These motions and affections are well ordered, when Lactant.
they rise, and fall according to the variety, and weight of objects. To be
greatly affected with small occurrences, is womanlike weakness: little with great
matters, stoicall block^shnes. And methinks, he that has a life to loose and
considers it well, should not easily come to fear excessively the loss of his
goods: nor he the loss of his bodily life, who has a soul to loose, or save
for ever. And therefore Christ our Lord bids, Fear not him that can kill the
body, Math. 1^
and then has shot his sting, and can hurt no more; but fear him, who can cast
both body, and soul into hell.

As physicians fearing a man's over-bleeding at the nose, open a veyn in the
arm, thereby to turn the course of the blood another way: so we* finding one
affection, or other inordinate in us, and like to overflow; if we cannot so
rule, and repress it, as is meet, by good reason, shall do well to set some
other affection a working by some moveing, and lawful object; that so the
stream being turned another way, we may disappoint the passion, which we cannot
so well order. For example, If a man find himself in danger of exo^bitancy in
anger, it is good for him to set afoote sorrow, or fear, by some such lawful
object, as God offers him: and so for other passions of the mind. Or if the
stream of the affection happ to run so strong, as that we can not well turn it
another way; it is wisdom to get it upon some such object in the same way, as
wherein it may freely take its scope: as the horse that can not be stayed, yet
may be guided into such a way, as in which there is no great danger, how fast
soever he runs; which may also be so heavy, as will keep him from running fast
in it.

Thus, if sorrow, fear, or anger be like to work inordinately in us, let us set
them upon our sins; and so the danger of all excess will soon be over, for the
most part. And indeed, it is no small point of christian wisdom, for a man to
provide fit matter for his affections (especially predominant in him) to be
exercised in. Is any among you afflicted? says the Apostle, let James ^.
him pray: Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. And by this means he shall
neither loose his own advantage for good; nor further Satan's for evil, by any
passion, or affection in him.

CAP. LV. Of Fear.
FEar has only evil for the object; either evil in it self; as is sin: or
to him that fears; as are the effects thereof; temporal, or eternal
punishment, and the anger of God inflicting them. It is a base affection, and
the cognizance of the creatures infirmity, showing him to be subject to evil;
from the fear whereof only the creator is absolutely free. And so, whereas
courage, and stoutnes of heart (though none of the best) procures unto men a
kind of respect in the eyes of others: fear, though better used, makes them
more contemptible. A lion is more regarded, then many oxen; though one ox be
of more use both for labor, and meat, and otherwise; then many lions. But God
loves rayther a good, then a great heart. And in the law, Gods sacrifices were
to be offered of lambs, and kids, and doves, and pigeons ( fearful creatures,
and innocent withal); and not of Lions, and Eagles; though they be the kings
of beasts, and birds.

There is in man, a threefold fear of God, arising from a threefold
apprehension of his Majesty: the first, is of God, as our glorious creator,
and governor; and this is natural: The second, as of a just, and angry Lord;
which is servile: The third, as of our gracious Father in Christ; called, and
being filial. All these are found in the true fearers of God in this life:
though the middle least, (which per^it love drives out) and in them the 1 John
4.
last only reigns. To fear sin more then punishment, (which they of the last
sort do) is to love God more then our selves: On the contrary, to fear
punishment more then sin (which the second disposition leads to) is to love our
selves more then God: considering, that by sin God is offended; and we by
punishment: and that sin in the committing of it seems good to us, and ill to
God: and that punishment, in the exequuting of it, is good in respect of Gods
justice, though evil to our sense.

The holy fear of God the Scriptures put many times for the whole service of
God, as being a general virtue diffusing it self into all the parts thereof.
For we must trust to God with fear, love him with fear, obey him with fear: and
in conscience, and consideration of his excellency, and our own frailty, work
out our salvation with fear and trembling: Phil. 2.
that is, do all things tending thereunto, with that affection of heart. And
considering our boldness, as king Saul says of himself, to step aside, to our
destruction; it is worthily advertised by the wise man; that he is blessed,
Prove. 28.
who fears always: that is, who sets himself in Gods sight continually,
making him the judge of all his ways, and works, out of a serious consideration
within himself, unto what sin, and misery for sin, he is exposed, poor
creature, as he is. Besides, this fear of God, is called the beginning of
wisdom; and that partly, because the true reverence of his Majesty in the
heart makes a man careful, and studuous to know, and do the things which
please him, and to avoid the contrary: as also for that God blesses such an
affection with good understanding, and reveals his Psalm. 25.
secrets to them that fear him. Whereas, on the other side, a profane heart is
commonly punished with a foolish head, and mind void of discerning, specially
in particulars, what is good, or evil.

God would have them that hearken unto him, not only safe, but also secure,
and quiet from fear of hurt, and evil. Prove. 1.
For which purpose the Scriptures so often both exhort them, not to fear, and
propound arguments of encouragement unto them: Not to exempt their hearts
wholly from fear, for that were to exalt them above the condition of mortal,
and frayl men; but so far to bring that unruly passion under the regiment of
faith, as that by it a man be not drawn to do any thing evil, and unlawful;
nor to forbear any requisite good in his place; nor to be divided in his heart;
nor to shame himself; nor to discourage others in that which is good. It is
wisdom for us so far to fear an evil, as to quicken our careful use of all
good means to escape it; or being a cross inevitable to prepare us the more
patiently to bear it, as not comeing unlooked for: In which regard, Christ
spoke to his disciples, before John. 16.
hand, of their approaching persequutions, that when they came, they should not
be offended. And further to fear evil, Calvin.
is an evil both of sin, and punishment: and that of unbeleif specially, if
being hindered by fear we dare not do that, which apperteyns to our calling; or
be driven by it, to do that which becomes not piety. Otherwise, to be fearful
of Chrisost.
heart, and yet not to be overcome by it, more commends a man, then if he were
without fear. This fear though it be something excessive, if not extreme, has
this good in it, that it makes a man the more circumspect, and causes him to
call his wits, and other helps, about him, as men in danger use to do: It
helps in deliberation, and preparation; though it hinder something in
exequution. But and if it once get dominion over a man, and rule in him; there
is no such cruel, and tyrant-like master within, or without him. It makes him
cruel, and a tyrant to others, from whom it may any way be suspected, that
danger can come unto him; and provokes to the oppression of whatsoever is in
his way. Neither yet does it exercise less tyranny over the fearful himself.
It bereavs him of the use of understanding; drives sleep from his eyes, which
sorrow procures; disables the tongue from speaking; and all the other parts of
the body from doing their office, by withdrawing the blood, and spirits from
them to the affrighted heart. And whereas men by serious consideration, and
thought of things in hand are helped against most other affections; the objects
of fear the more they are minded, and thought upon, are the more terrible. Some
have through extreamitie of fear become grey-headed in a week or two, as one M.
Ba^ning of ^ondon, as I have heard: and some in one night, as is testified of
the Duke of Mantua^s ^^^sman F^a^^^s us Gonzaga, unto whom (being committed
Scaliger.
to prison upon suspicion of reason) thought and care, in one night brought
gray hayr, by subduction of nourishment. And if we would further and in another
and worse kind, take knowledge of this tyrants cruelty, in constreyning even
good men to do evil; we may see Abraham, for fear, denying his wife; David his
reason, Peter his master Christ in his person; and many continually in his
truth, less, or more. He is a man, that can overcome excessive fear by reason:
but a child of God, that can overcome i^* by true, and sound faith in Gods good
providence over him.

Some, though lambs amongst lions, yet are lions amongst lambs; feirce, and
terrible toward their underlings, which cannot, or dare not resist them: and
like the young ruffian in the Poet, tha^ showed his courage in beating a
sill^-woman; and poor bond slave, that durst not strike Terence.
again. Such beleev not, or forget, that they have a master in heaven; whose
terrors if they knew, with the Apostle; Col. 4. 2 Cor. 5.
they durst not, in such sort be terrible unto others. There are many governers
in families, and common wealths; who (if difference arise between them of the
last sort, and their subjects; or between them of the first, and their wives,
children, and servants) will dominere marveylously; and be so stout, and stern,
as if they were made of iron and steel: Whereas, on the contrary, if they have
to do with such as stand upon even ground with them, specially such as have a
li^le the higher ground; they show all cowardice, and base fear, suffering them
even to play with 2 Chr. 10. and 12. and 13.
their noses. Such a one was Re^oboam, who spoke ^o^ghly to the people under
him; but had no courage against the king of Egypt: and so little against
Jeroboam that rebelled against him, as that his own son Abijah taxed him of
tenderness, that is, feeblenes of heart, after his death. Such another also was
Naball: so evil, that none of his servants, 2 Samuel 25.
or family, or others of whom he was secure, might speak to him: but perceaving
himself to have been in danger (though it were over) by David, whom, and whose
men he had rated, and reviled, in his drunken security; at the very hearing
of it, his heart dyed in him, and he became like a stone. These lions paws, and
roarings amongst the poor beasts, are odious in civil administrations; more
in domestical; most of all in churchgovernments, where they are found; which
ought to Tit. 1.
be specially doctrinall and exemplarie. Let us fear, as we ought, the doing of
wrong to others, over whom we 1 P^t. 5.
have advantage: and God will so provide, that we shall not excessively fear
hurt from them, who have power to hurt us.

CHAP. LVI. Of Anger.
ANger (as fear, and sorrow, and other affections of aversnes) has only evil
(in truth, or appearance for the object, on which it works. But whereas fear,
and sorrow out of a kind of impotency, withdraw the person fearing, or
sorrowing, from the evil feared, or sorrowed for; A^ge^ in Scaliger.
strength, and stoutnes (as being the strongest of a^^ ^ffections) intends the
driveing away, and d^pe^i^g of the evil; at, and against which it rises.
Which, being also, as Chrisipp^s calls it, and experience confirms, a blind
thing* there is nothing so sacred, and precious which it will spare; Plutarch.
but without difference it flies (where the wings are not clipped) upon friends,
as well as foes; and upon unreasonable creatures, as well, as upon men. And so
Zerxes in anger Seneca.
bet the sea, and threatened the mountayns, if they hindered his passage. Yea it
will not spare the truth it self, if it be against Levit. 24.
its purpose: No nor God neither, as we may see not only in furious
blasphemers, or peircers of God (as the word imports;) but even in the prophet
himself, who Jonah 4.
was angry even to the death at God, for sparing Ninive^. It is therefore
rightly called a short fury, as differing from Cato.
plain madness in nothing, but time. And, in truth, it is pity, that they, in
whom it reigns (specially pleasing themselves in its fits) are not chayned up
like mad men; or that they have either riches, or strength, or authority, or
wit, or any thing else to hurt with. It were good he had no other thing in his
power, who is not in his own power; Seneca.
as no angry man is.

If a wrathful man saw himself in a glass, when his fit is Plato. Seneca.
Ierem.
upon him: his eyes burning, his lips ^umbling, his face pale, his teeth
gnashing, his mouth foaming, and other parts of his body trembling, and
shaking: or but some of these deformities: he would (and worthily) loath,
himself, and it may be amend things, for after, as some have done. But if the
same person saw the face of his soul, in the glass of Gods word, and the
deformities thereof in Gods sight; he would much more abhor himself, and start
aside, as terrified at the sight of so hideous a monster. This rash Math. 1.
anger (whether causlesse, or unmeasurable, where some cause is) has always
evil in it; though it be never so speedily repressed: upon which if the sun be
let go down, and that it lodge all night in the heart, it becomes malice by the
morning. Men nourish it in pride, and because they will not give place to other
men; not considering; that in so doing, they give place to the devil, and
become like Ephesians. 4.
him in malice, wherein he exceeds himself. This anger God so brands, as he
scarce does any created affection: in forbidding the making of friendship with
an angry Prove. 2.
man, and walking with the furious, for fear of learning his ways, and getting
a snare to the soul. For though all affections becoming inordinate, are
vicious, and that God would have his servants watch diligently against the
excesses of sorrow, fear, joy, and the like: yet does he never give warning of
the fellowship of such, as in whom they reign, for fear of learning them:
Neither is there that danger of smitling by other passions, which is by this.

If Solomon were a wise man, and took not his marks amiss, who so often, and
plainly sets out a fool by rash anger, and wrath; there are many more fools in
the world, then go in the mo^ly coats; and the same no small fools neither:
considering how many (specially of them who take a priveledg from their
greatness, to give scope to their passions) either affect, or give way to
inordinatenes in this kind: as if otherwise they could not sufficiently
manifest their wisdom and discerning, and goodness in dislikeing, and greatness
in controuling things amiss in others. But as vainglorious men desire to show
their authority in needles commands: so do fools affect the showing of their
wisdom, goodness, and greatness, in needles anger.

The links whereof a chayn may be made to tie up this feirce dog, that he do
not more hurt, then good in byteing, and commit not a greater offense by
unadvisednes, Ierom.
and excess, then the person has done, which he is set upon; are specially
these: First, lowlines of mind, by which he that thinks not himself great,
thinks no great hurt done if he be a little wronged: Whereas on the otherside,
the high minded conceavs great indignation, that his understanding should be
opposed; his authority neglected; his will crossed; his credit impeached; or
any thing said or done importing any undervaluation of his presumed worth of
himself. Christ the Lord teaches both by example, and doctrine, that
humility, and meeknes Math. 11.
are inseparable companions. A second, consideration what is just with God (in
regard of our sins) to bring upon us, though by man's unjust provocations and
injuries: And this was David's remedy, when Shemei reviled him. A third, True
love to others, which is not easily, no^ 1 Cor. 13.
excessively provoked to anger at such as wrong us; but rayther moves to pity
them, as the Father wished Scapula (a great persequuter of the Christians) that
if he would Tertull.
not spare them, he should spare himself, who should have the worst of it. A
fourth is a little delay, and forbearance either for the inward working, or
outward uttering of anger, whilst we gather our wits about us: which he that
can bring himself to, will oftens by finding just cause of anger at himself,
forbear being angry at others. And to Seneca.
this tended the counsayl given unto* C^s^^, that he should neither do, n^r
speak any thing in anger; till he had sa^d over the Greek A^phabet. A fifth is,
not to take liberty to be a little angry at tr^^^e^: for he that Plutarch.
uses himself to that, will not keep from extreamitie ^^ great matters. The
last is to avoid occasions of provocation^, whether persons, or things: which
whilst angry folk, for the most part* aff^ct, they gather such for the fire,
wherewith to burn themselves; hasten to discover their own sh^me; and make w^y
for the devils temptations, unto which they give way afterward.

CHAP. LVII. Of Humility, and Meeknes.
HVmilitie is that virtue by which we are taught to v^lue according to, and not
ab^ve the worth, ourselvs, and all the good things* which God ^ath given us. I
say, according to the worth; for men may, as one says, not subject, but Seneca.
a^j^ct themselves: and sometimes, we see men, specially pressed with great
burdens of temptations, in a kind of abjectnes of mind, to moulder away, and
make their gold little better then dross, by undervaluing Gods goodness toward
them. Such are unthankful to God, uncomfortable in themselves, and unprofitable
unto others, in comparison. Besides, there is an humble hypocrisy, when men so
subject thems^lvs to others (specially superiors) Gregory.
as they reverence their vi^es; or suffer their reason, (more, if their faith,
and consciences) to be captived to their lusts: And hence comes the worshipping
of Angels, Col. 2.
and other points of will worship: in which the show of ^isdom in the
inventers, and imposers; and of humility in the followers bear ^w^y. Lastly,
there is a desperate humility, when out of an evil, and accusing conscience,
a man knows, and judges himself out of Gods favor, and a vile person. But now
the most of this humility has joined with it no small pride. That of the
first kind is very rare: and the infinitely more common, and dangerous disease
is the overswelling of the heart, through excess of self-love, and
presumption. Self-love disposes a person to think himself, and to desire to be
thought of others to have the excellency, which he has not. Herewith the mind
is easily corrupted, and vayn man induced to presume of that goodness in
himself, which he wants; and to be lifted up with that, which he has. Many by
stouping loose of their bodily height: but few stoop too low, in conceit of
themselv^. Yet as Christ Jesus ceased not to be God, though he humbled himself
to the taking upon him the form of a servant: so neither is any man either in
truth, Phil. 2.
or account of God, or good men, the less, but much the more excellent for his
lowly appearance to himself, or others. Yea, as the same Christ our Lord
stepped from the shameful cross to the height of his glory, and exaltation:
Austin.
so he that will make any high building in christianity, must first think of,
and lay this low foundation of humility.

This lowlynes of mind is the mother of meeknes, as Christ insinuates, saying,
Learn of me, for I am lowly and Math. 11.
meek. The humbly-mynded, if a cross come, or injury be offered, bears them
moderately, as thinking moderately of himself: yea meanly in regard of his
sins, and the misery to which they expose him. The proud through want of
consciousnes hereof, if he be a little crossed; is feirce, and violent: love
dignas concipit iras. What? He? A man of his worth so to be used? specially by
such a one? And as the boar whe^s, and sharpens his ^uskes in his own foam; so
does a proud person whet, and sharpen his heart, hands, and tongue to
indignation, and revenge in the froathy, and foamish imagination of his own
worth.

Seeing that in evil days the meek and mild in spirit following Christ's
example, who was as a lamb dumb before Isa. 53.
the shearer, not opening his mouth, are in danger not only to be shorn, but
to be flayed also; the most in the wisdom and lust of the flesh, think it
better to ^owl with the Calvin.
wolves, and to byte too, then by departing from evil, specially Isa. 59.
by bearing wrongs patiently, to make themselves a pray. But here faith steps
in, and leads the meek to Gods promises, that he shall inherit the earth: and
that God will Math. 5. Psalm. 76.
arise to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth: and that he will see,
and hear, and in due time right the wrongs Number. 11. Psalm. 78.
of meek Moses, though he pass them by, and as a deaf man hears not: But for
the violent, and self-avenger, he puts himself out of Gods protection, and goes
upon his own hazard.

As the stommack swells either with good meat excessively used, or with wind,
and ill humors: so there is ^carse any thing either so good, or so evil; but
man's corrupt heart takes occasion of prydeing, and puffing up its self by it.
The prophet speaks of some, who boasted in evil: Psalm. 52.
and the Apostle of others, whose glorying was in their shame. Phil. 3.
If former ages have been bold; ours is impudent this way: in which it is hard
to say, whether the pride which persons take in good, or in evil be greater.
Many shame not to boast of the evils practiced by them, which modest men are
ashamed to hear of; and some of the evils which they never did, nor dare, nor
can do, thereby to get credit with vayn persons. If pride in good be hateful,
it is abominable in evil: specially when men belly themselves to get matter
Austin.
of glorying in mischief; as Austin confesses he in his youth had done. Fools
glory in their mo^ley coats; and therein show why they wear them: But worse
then mad are they who glory in sin, and are lift up for that, which cast the
Angels from heaven; Adam out of Paradise; and Nabuchadnezzar out of his kingdom
amongst the beasts of the field: and which will cast all into hell, that
delight in it.

As wicked men pride themselves in their evils: so are the good in danger to be
enamoured of their goodness. And as he that beseigeth a city, if he can
neither obteyn it by composition, nor take it by assault, nor constreyn it by
hunger, will, in the last place, if he can, undermine, and blow it up with
gunpouder: So our, and Gods enemy, Satan, when he cannot corrupt, or destroy
Gods servants otherwise, attempts (and that often successively) the lifting them
up with vayn conceiptednes of themselves, and their own worth. The holy Apostle
was in danger to be exalted above measure with the number of revelations; for
the 2 Cor. 12.
preventing whereof he needed a messenger of Satan to buffet him, So God for
the keeping, and driveing of pride from his servants, sometimes brings great
afflictions upon them; and humbles them thereby; and sometimes he does this, by
suffering them to fall into other sins, to remedy that greater sin of pride: as
men use to drive out a greater pin with another somewhat smaller. How close
does this corruption cleav unto us, and how dangerous is it withal; for the
purging out of which, the Lord uses such a medicine?

There are in this pride many strange touches: some being proud in, and some of
their humility. Of the first sort were they, who being vaynly puffed up by
their fleshly mind^, in voluntary humblenes worsh^ped Angels: From a touch
Colos. 2.
of this kind Peter was not free, when he so refr^ct^rily refused to suffer
Christ to wash his feet. There is also danger of Calvin.
being proud of not being proud, nor ^oftie in caryage, apparaell, or contempt
of inferiors: and of being called rayther goodman, then master; and rayther
master then Sir knight. Besides all these, many will go on their tiptoes,
though barefoot: being proud of no man knows what either within, or without
them: and none more then they. There want not, also amongst the rest, who put
out pride to usurie, that by forbearing it a while, and u^ing for it, humble,
and submissive appearances, they might after receav it with advantage. Of this
sort are they, who use to dispraise themselves, that others may the more commend
Perkins.
them: and who, forsooth, will always come the hindmost, and sit the lowest,
that they may be the more solemnly preferred to the first place. Others also
(their crafts-maysters in this trade) will be very submissive to their
superiors, which are but a few, that their inferiors, being many, may learn
thereby to honor them the more. So Herod showed how desirous he was of honor
Josephus.
from his subjects, by the honor which he gave to Caesar, and Agrippa. Lastly,
there are who put on pride, by strutting, and looking, and speaking stately,
and other affected forth-puttings, to free themselves from contempt. Such are
like Esops Ass, in the Lions skin: and have like success with him, in the end.

The proud so loves himself, as none other can endure Prove. 16*
him. Not God, for to him he is abominable: nor humble men, because he is not
as they are, and as he should be: nor other prouds, because he is as they are;
who would be singular, and have none other like them. And as God hates the
proud, so he resists them: and no James 4.
marvayl, for they in a singular manner resist him. Some sinners are most
directly, and immediately against themselves; as the ^louthfull, prodigal, etc.
some against other men; as the covetous, slaunderer, cruel, etc. But the proud
exalts himself most directly against and above 2 These. 2.
God, whom alone all creatures should exalt, and magnify. And he, whom God
resists, must needs fall, though the whole world would take his part.

Persons are vulgarly most noted for proud by their apparaell. And indeed by it
(if either too costly for stuff, or affected for fashion, or curiously put on)
not only the flag of pride, as Augustine called it, is displayed; but the vice
nourished. Many say to their fine clothes, Sw^ton^us.
in effect, as Saul said to Samuel, Honor me before the people. And this also
they may effect with them that know them not, nor their estates, and may get
them more credit with such, then they deserv; for which they are to answer God:
But to them that know them, and their condition, they thereby make themselves a
byword, and ridiculous for their pride, and vanity. A second mark of pride may
be taken from men's lof^ie eyes, stretched forth necks, and other the like
strutting gestures. Psalm. 131.
A third, contempt of mean persons, and things. A fourth, excessive care not to
be neglected, or contemned by others, and trouble, if so it fall out. A fifth,
Continual striving, and janglings with others. A sixth, Cruelty in word or
deed toward feeble adversaries. A seventh, Affectation of singularity, and
being unlike to others. Good men in evil days are compelled to be singular in
many things, as Lot was in Sodom; but never affect it. An eighth, An aptnes to
observe, and task others, as proud. Lastly, A readiness to speak of ones own
worth, or of his great acceptance with others of worth, Thraso like.

The special remedies against pride are, first, Consideration how God forbids,
hates, and resists the proud: who will therefore have a fall, if not upon
earth, into hell. Secondly, Meditation upon our sins, and misery for the same.
Thirdly, Thinking ra^ther what good we have not, then what we have. Fourthly,
That, if in any Austin.
good thing we go before others, we remember, that it is God that has
differenced us: and that having received it, we should not glory, as if we had
not received it. Fifthly, 1 Cor. 4.
A serious fore casting with our selves, that the more our receipts are, the
greater our account to the Lord must be: which if we consider, as we ought,
will rayther make them matter of humiliation unto us, then of arrogancy.
Lastly, it will something help to keep the heart down, if we consider, that
others are instruments of Gods Melanct^
glory, and of good to men, as well as we.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Modesty.
Modesty adorns other virtues, and good Cicero.
things in a person; as blushing does a comely countenance. And though many
virtues (of which it is a very unperfit Ambros.
one, as some call it; and as others, the keeper of other virtues) be more
serviceable; yet none is more graceful, in the eyes of others, then this
maiden, and sw^et grace, modesty. For this, some have thought our savior bare
that singular affection to the beloved disciple. And what a loadstone it is to
draw men's affections, we all find in our own experience; as being prone in
matters, of comparison, and controversy between others, rayther to favor the
more modest, then the more able, or more worthy either otherwise. Where it is,
it covers many faults, and inabilities from being seen: and where they do
appear, procures sometimes excuse, and always commiseration. It commends a Man
not only for that which he has; but often even for that which he has not:
For as some by arrogateing to themselves something which they have not, or know
not, give others occasion to think them destitute of that which they have, or
know indeed: so others modesty in the things, which they have received,
procures unto them often times, the opinion, from other men, of having that
which in truth they want. Even a fool, when he holds his peace, (which
modesty will teach him to do) Prove. 17.
is accounted wise.

It is an odious thing to see men deserving little to arrogate much to
themselves: which yet is as usual, as for a wyndy stommack to swell; and that
specially, in vain confidence, and conceit of knowledge: whereas men of
understanding indeed, are more modestly minded. The formers brayn, by streytnes
of apprehension, can hold but one thing at once: whereas men of larger
discourse so apprehend this, or that reason for, or against a matter, as that
at the same instant, other things also offer themselves to their consideration,
which may justly occasion modest doubting about it. And as an advised person by
the reflection of his understanding, knows his knowledge; so does he his
ignorance; as we see a shadow by the light about it, without which, all would
be black darkness. So Menedemus was wont to say, that men comeing to study in
Athens, were at first wise men, after that, very punyes, and ignorants:
Plutarch.
for that, as leather vessels, or bags, being empty, are stiff, and hard: but
being filled with ^^quour, are soft and pliable: so is it with men commonly, as
they have less, or more knowledge.

This tincture of virtue, as Diogenes calls it, though it be more useful for
the young, then old; and for women, then men, for the covering of their
infirmities; which through immodest boldness, irrespectivenes, and want of fear
of shame, and reproof, (in which modesty consists) they Scaliger.
proclaym to the world: yet is it necessary for all states, sexes, and
persons, at all times; whether alone, or in company with others* whether
conversing with God, or men. The Apostle testifies of himself, that he served
God amongst Act. 20.
the Ephesians in modesty of mind, and many tears: giveing therein an
ensample to all, how far they ought to put from them a secure, and impudent
heart, and countenance. And though that monster of men Caligula accounted it
the most commendable thing in his nature, that he was ashamed of S^etoni^^*
nothing: yet does both nature, and grace teach it, to be a most odious thing
for a man to have a dogs face, as the proverb is: or as the prophet speaks, a
wh^res forehead, Ier. 3.
that refuses to be ashamed.

It is pi^ttie any should speed so well, by mere boldness, without reason or
other defect, as many do: who become thereby of audacious impudent, having once
broken Cicero.
the bounds of modesty, specially to their advantage. Toward men of such
foreheads the proverb must be put in practice, A bold beggar must have a bold
nay-sayer. It was the unrighteous judge, that did that for the widows
importunity, Luke 18.
which conscience would have had him done, for the goodness of her cause, and
poverty of her person. Though to speak, as the thing is; to be overcome by
importunity argues no^ so properly injustice, in what case soever, as
impotency of mind to resist.

Peter and John with the other Apostles prayed to the Act. 4.
Lord for boldness in the speaking of his word. Many others also pray for
boldness, as they did; but forget, that they are not Apostles, nor infallibly
directed, as they were. Who, if they knew themselves aright, and how prone they
are to speak their own word in stead of Gods, would rayther pray for modesty
and advisednes, that they rush not upon the rock of error. Besides, they so
prayed in regard of the threatenings of unbeleevers, with whom they had to do.
But amongst brethren, and christians, let us rayther affect the lambs bleat,
then the Lions roar.

CHAP. LIX. Of Marriage.
GOD has ordained marriage, amongst other good means, for the benefit of man's
natural, and spiritual life, in an individual society, as the Lawjers speak,
between one man, and one woman: and has blessed it alone with this
prerogative, that by it, in lawful order, our kind should be preserved, and
posterity propagated. And though the Lord have sometimes suffered, and that
almost unreproved by the prophets, other bodily conjunctions, then between the
proper husband and wife; and altogether unpunished by the magistrate: and
withal showed the effect of his powerful providence, as still he does, so
far, as for the procreateing of children, in that disorder: yet did he never
approve of any other, or exempt the same from guilt of sin, in the court of
conscience; and seldom from manifest signs of his displeasure; as experience,
and the scriptures teach.

Not only heathen poets (which were more tolerable) but also wanton
Christians, have nicknamed women, necessary Menander
evils: But with as much shame to men, as wrong to women, and to Gods singular
ordinance withal. When the Lord amongst all the good creatures which he had
made, could find none fit, and good enough for the man; he made the woman of a
rib of him, and for a help unto him: Genesis 2.
neither is she, since the creation, more degenerated then he, from the
primative goodness. Besides, if the woman be a necessary evil, how evil is
the man, for whom she is necessary?

Some have said, and that (in their own, and others judgment) both wittily, and
devoutly, that Marriage fills the earth, and virginity heaven: But others have
better answered, How should heaven be full, if the earth were empty? I ad, that
(because Christ has said, that the children of the regeneration Math. 22.
neither marry wives, nor are married, but are like the angels in heaven. many,
whilst they would, by preposterous imitation, become like the angels in heaven,
have in truth become liker the devils in hell: for they also neither marry
wives, nor are married. But this is, indeed, the very dr^gs of popery, to
place special piety in things either evil; or indifferent, at the best, as
is abstinence from marriage, and the marriage bed: which is no more a virtue,
then abstinence from wine, or other pleasing natural things. Both marriage, and
wine are of God, and good in themselves; either of them may in their abuse,
prejudice the natural, or spiritual life: neither of them is unlawful, no
not for them which simply need them no^: which also not to need, argues bodily
strength in the one; but a kind of weakness in the other.

The ancient heathen used to place Mercury by Venus, to Plutarch.
show what need the affections of marriage have of the rule of reason, and
wisdom, to order them. Neither in truth is there any thing wherein persons more
need, and less use reason, and true discretion, then in their marriage choice:
in which the most are unreasonably transported by one affection, or other. And
if he moralized well, who made Genesis 2*
this a reason, why God cast Adam into a heavy sleep, whilst he prepared; and
made him a wife of one of his ribs; that the affections ought to sleep about
this work, and the reason to w^k^; how do they miss, whose manner is to have
their affections only wakeing, or working in this business* whilst their
reason, and conscience also is fast asleep? I have always thought, that good
men crossed with ill wives, or good wives with ill husbands, are ordinarily
least to be pittyed of any others in misery: considering how wilfully, and
presumptuously (for the most part) they tempt God in their choice. I ad
herewithall, that there is no one particular, in which men; and women bewray,
whether their hearts be set upon worldly riches, and honors or sensual
pleasures, on the one side* or, on the other side, upon the nourishing, and
promoteing of virtue, and godlynes both in themselves, and their posterity,
then in their choice this way. When the sons of God take for wives the
daughters of men, Giants are born, and all monstrous confusion follows, Genesis
6.
first in the family, and after in church, and common wealth. But when the sons
of God take the daughters of God to wives, and the daughters of God are taken
by the sons of God: there is an equal yoke, for the persons themselves to draw
in with comfort, and a right course taken, for the leaving of an holy seed
behind them.

Some marry by their eye, as did those sons of God formerly mentioned; and
therein follow favor, which is deceip^full, and beauty, which is a vain thing:
others by their fingers, as mynding what the woman is worth, in the Prove. 31.
Erasmus.
worlds sense: Others by the ear, as specially respecting their wives title,
and high birth; and so, many times, get themselves so many Lords, and masters
over them, as she has friends: But they that specially respect virtue, and
godlynes (which being attended by the other handmayds, Ester. 2.
as Hester by her seven mayds, is the more beautiful, and desirable) they
marry not only the daughters of such, or such men, but the daughters of God
himself. A woman that fears the Lord, she shall so be praised: and the man so
Prove. ^1.
blessed that marry^th her.

We say, In wiveing, and thriveing take counsayl of all the world; and so men
had need. But in this business affection so far overrules reason in the most,
as they could willingly make their choice without the counsayl of their
nearest, and wisest friends. Herein therefore friends should be officious, and
forth*putting; and that both in love of their friends, and for their own sakes
also: who so often as their friend marryes, make an adventure; and the same full
of danger, whether they shall not wholly, or in a great measure, loose their
friend; which is oftens seen. Herein parents specially must both preserv the
right which God, and nature has given them; and do the duty, which the one,
and other has laid upon them: as accounting their children theirs, most of all
other things. Whom if they this way bestow conveniently, and in due time; they
provide well both for them, and themselves. For them, in preventing two
dangerous evils; uncleannes, and unfit matching. For themselves, according to
the saying of Democritus, that he who gets a good husband to his daughter,
finds another son: as he loses his daughter, that gets an ill one.

The virtue of the wife is the housbands ornament, so is the housbands the
wives much more. And therefore Philons S^obe^^.
wife being demanded, why she alone went so plainly apparreled, made answer,
that her housbands virtues were ornament sufficient for her. If her practice
were a rule, and that housbands virtues were to be measured by their wives
homelynes in at^yre; either fewer housbands would be thought virtuous then are;
or more wives ^ound soberly apparreled then are.

After goodness fitnes in marriage is most to be regarded: and that so much,
that, as, for a pare of gloves, or yoke of oxen, two alike, though meaner both
of them are fitter, and better for use, then if the one were more excellent; So
in this marriage pare, and yoke, the woman best qualifyed is not always the
best wife for every man; nor every man the best qualifyed the fittest housband
for every woman: but two more alike, though both meaner, sort better usually.
And according to this, Pittacus being demanded Laertius.
by a friend what kind of wife he should marry, answered* one fit for him.
Fitnes of years is requisite, that an old head be not set upon young shoulders;
nor the contrary, which is worse: Fitnes in estate, lest the excelling person
despise the other, or draw him to a course above his reach: Fitnes for course
of life, and disposition unto it; the dislike whereof in either by other breeds
many discontentments. Lastly agreement of affection, and inclination, what may
be, to all good persons, and things. Only, it is good, if the one be too
fierie-hoat, and suddeynly moved; that the other can cast on the more cold
water of forbearance. But now seeing there is seldom, or never found such
conformity between man, and wife, but that differences will arise, and be
seen; and so the one must give way, and apply unto the other: this God, and
nature lays upon the Genesis 3. 1 Cor. 11 and 14. ^ Tim. 2. Hester. 1.
woman, rayther then upon the man; although the man should not to much look for
it, nor use all his authority (ordinarily at least) which none but fools will
do. As the glass, says one, though never so rich of gold, and pearl, if it
represent not the face of him that looks into it, is not to be regarded; so
neither is the wife, how well endowed soever otherwise, except she frame, and
compose her self, what may be, unto her housband, in conformity of manners.

Many common graces, and good things are requisite both for housband, and wife:
But more specially the Lord requires in the man love, and wisdom; and in the
woman Ephesians. 5.
subjection. The love of the housband to his wife must be like Christ's to his
church; holy for quality, and great for quantity, both intensively, and
extensively. Her person, and whatsoever is good in her he must love fervently;
mending, or bearing (if not intolerable) what is amiss: by the former of
which two he makes her the better; and himself Gelliu^.
by the latter. And if her faylings, and faults be great, he by being inured to
bear them patiently, is the fitter to converse quietly, and patiently with
other perverse persons abroad; as Socrates said, he was, by bearing the daily
home-brawlings of Zantippe. Neither suffices it, that the housband walk with
his wife as a man of love; but before 1 Pet. 3.
her also as a man of understanding: which God has therefore affoarded him,
and means of obteyning it above the woman, that he might guide, and go before
her, as a fellow heyr of eternal life with him. It is monstrous, if the head
stand where the feet should be: and double pity, when a Naball, and Abigail
are matched together. Yea experience teaches, how inconvenient it is, if the
woman have but a little more understanding (though he be not wholly without)
then her housband has.

In the wife is specially required a reverend subjection in Ephesians. ^.
all lawful things to her housband. Lawful, I mean, for her to obey in, yea
though not lawful for him to require of her. He ought to give honor to the
wife, as to the weaker 1 Pet. 3.
vessel: But now, if he pass the bounds of wisdom, and kindenes; Yet must not
she shake of the bond of submission, but must bear patiently the burden, which
God has laid upon the daughters of Eve. The woman in innocence was to be
subject to the man: but this should have been without all wrong on his part, or
grief on hers: But she being first in transgression, has brought her selfunder
1 Timothy 2.
an other subjection; and the same to her, grevious; and in regard of her
housband, oftens unjust; but in regard of God, always most just: who has
ordained that her desire should be subject to her housband, who by her
seduction Genesis 3.
became subject to sin. And albeit many proud women think it a matter of scorn,
and disgrace, thus to humble themselves to God, and their housbands; and even
glory in the contrary: yet therein they but glory in their shame, and in their
housbands shame also: and whilst they refuse a cross, choose a sin of
rebellion, both against God, and their housbands. Which shall not escape
unpunished from God: though many fond housbands nourish them therein; and by
pampering, and puffing them up by delicate fare, costly apparel, and idleness,
teach them to despise both them themselves, and all others.

Marriage has diverse ends that make it convenient; and one that makes it
necessary, for the most; which is the preventing of that most foul, and filthy
sin of adultery. And this brand it deserves in special manner; seeing, he who
coupleth himself with an harlot becomes one body with 2 Cor. 6.
her: which cannot be said of him that consorts with a theif, or murderer, or
drunkard in their sins: as also for that such a one sins against his own body.
Not that he sins not against his own soul too; or that* all others sinning, sin
not against both body, and soul; but in regard of that special blot, and
blemish wherewith this sin steyns the body; which never after can be wiped of,
though the guilt of the sin may be repentance. He that commits adultery
lacks understanding; gets a wound, and dishonor, Prove. 6.
and his reproach shall not be wiped away, says Solomon.

As marriage is a medicine against uncleannes: so adultery is the disease of
marriage; and divorce the medicine of adultery: though not properly for the
cureing of the guilty, but for the easing of the innocent: which remedy he
may, but is not simply bound to use, as some are the former. Some have said,
that he who conceals the fault of Chrisost.
his wife this way, becomes a patron of her ^^^^hynes: but this is rightly
restreyned by others to certain cases. The divorce Genesis 38. Levit. 20.
for adultery both under, and before the Law was to be made by the magistrates
sword. Where that is not drawn, the innocent may use this remedy against the
peccant, as directly violateing the marriage bond; which other sins, though
greater otherwise, do not. In other cases, divorce, though much used amongst
the Jews, was never Math. 1^
approved by the Lord in the court of heaven, as no sin; but permitted only in
civil courts, without bodily punishment; and only the giving of the bill
commanded, Josephus.
and that for the advantage of the divorced, and to testify, that the housband
had so freed the wife, as he might not require her after-returning unto him,
though he would. This permission unto the Jews being only for the hardness of
their hearts, may Pare^^
justly by the magistrate be denied to Christians, whose hearts should be more
softened by the blood of Christ.

As a man may surfeit at his own table, or be drunken with his own drink; so may
he play the adulterer with his I^ro^^.
own wife, both by inordinate affection, and action. For howsoever the marriage
bed cover much inordinatenes this Calvin.
way: yet must modesty be observed by the married; left the bed which is
honorable, and undefiled in its right use, become Hebr. 1^.
by abuse hateful, and filthy in Gods sight. It has been by some well
observed, that diverse of the patriarks conversed with many wives (whom they
took out of a singular desire of a plentiful progeny more chastely, then many
others did, and do, with their one.

CAP. LX. Of Children, and their education.
GOD, that made all things good, and blessed Genesis 1. and 2.
them; imparted expressly this blessing first to his creatures (capable thereof)
that they should increase, and multiply in their kind. More specially, God
created our first parents, male and female, and blessed them, saying, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth. This order then set he has
preserved to this day, and mankind by it. By this, parents when they are dead,
live in their children, as parts of them, and imps taken from their stock, and
in special manner, one with them. This onenes Gods gracious covenant with the
faithful and their seed confirms, and commends: blessing even the godly dead
parents in their living children; and so cursing the wicked in theirs; and that
oftens, sundry ages afterward; as both the Scriptures, common sense, and
experience teach. Such parents as leav their seed under Gods covenant, and
blessing, as heyrs of their fathers piety, as Ambrose said of Theodosius,
provide a good Ambrose.
inheritance for them, if they afterward by their own rebellion, and
unthankfulnes disinherit not themselves. And a sweet comfort it is to Christian
parents, when they can commend their little ones, liveing, or dying into Math.
19.
Christ's hands in heaven; who being upon earth testified both in word, and
deed, their interest in his blessing. The generation of the upright shall be
blessed: but the posterity of the wicked shall be cut off. And as we judge of
Psalm. 1^2.
the plant, or graffe, by the stock whence it was taken, till it be grown able
to bring forth its proper fruit, and that the tree be known by the fruit; so do
we of children by their parents, till coming to years of discretion they choose
their own way. Not that grace is derived by natural generation, but by the
supernatural covenant with believers, and their seed, confirmed in Christ, and
Genesis 17. Gal. 3.
by godly education on the parents part, which promise of blessing, as it is
ever effectual in some, according to Romans 11.
the election of grace; so where it follows not, usually the negligence, and
indulgencie of the parents; and always the parties proper rebellion is the
cause thereof; as we may see, both in the word of God, and daily experience. We
read of Dionisius the tyrant, that, meaning Aemil. probus.
to revenge himself upon Dion, who made war against him, he caused his son
(whom he had in his power) to be brought up in riot, and wantonness. This labor
many save their enemies, and do it themselves, and so prove miserable parents of
dissolute children. It was an odious thing in the Israelites to sacrifice to
devils their sons, and daughters Ezech. 16*
which they had born unto God, and whom he avoweth for his children. Which, in
a spiritual sense, we certeynly do, if we either neglect instructing them; or
praying to God for them; or walking exemplarily, as we ought, before them; or
correcting them duly; or any other such means, as by which the seeds of grace
may grow, and prosper in them. And let us remember, that as bruits bring forth
in their kind, and all parents their children; so we (being in the Lords
covenant of grace) bring forth, as by nature ours, so by supernatural covenant
and grace, his children also; and that he trusts Ephesians. 6.
us with the bringing them up for him, and in his nourture, and instruction;
which is a great matter, and wherein we must deal faithfully with him; that so
under his blessing, we may fit them for his heavenly inheritance, provided for
them with us. It is a during fruit of Gods gracious covenant, when good parents
by their godly care have gracious children; and that by which our faith is much
confirmed.

Children, in their first days, have the greater benefit of good mothers, not
only because they suck their milk, but in a sort, their manners also, by being
continually with them, and receaving their first impressions from them. But
afterward, when they come to riper years, good fathers are more behooffull for
their forming in virtue, and good manners, by their greater wisdom and
authority: and often times also, by correcting the fruits of their mothers
indulgencie, by their severitie. Aristotle.


They are a blessing great, but dangerous. They come into the world at first
with danger both in respect of themselves, as passing sometimes, from the womb
to the grave; sometimes being born deformed in body, sometimes incapable of
understanding: as also in regard of the Mother; the first day of their being in
the world being oftens her last in it. After their coming into the world
through so many dangers, they come even into a world of dangers. In their
infancy, how soon is the tender bud nipped or bruised by sickness, or
otherwise? In their ventersom days, into how many needles dangers do they
throw themselves (in which many perish) besides those into which God brings
them, and that all their life long? Above all other, how great, and many are
their spiritual dangers both for nourishing, and increasing the corruption
which they bring into the world with them; and for diverting them from all
goodness, which Gods grace, and men's endeavor might work in them? These
dangers, and difficulties, howsoever they make not Gods blessings in giving
children to be no blessings; or deserving to be lightly esteemed; yet should
they moderate our desire of them, and grief for their want: that none should
say either to God, or one to another, as Rahell did to Iakob, Give me children,
or else I dye: specially if we weigh Genesis 30.
withal, that though the Lord give us diverse towardly, and good; yet one, or
two proving leaud, and wicked will break our tender hearts more, then all the
rest will comfort us: like as in the natural body there is more grief by the
akeing of some one part, though but a tooth; then comfort, and ease in the
good, and sound state of all the rest. If children considered aright of the
careful thoughts, sorrows, and fears, and, sore peyns withal of their
parents, they would think they ought them more honor, service, and obedience,
then, for the most part, they do. We seldom consider* and prize worthily the
cares, and peyns of parents, till we become parents our selves, and learn them
by experience.

Many bodily diseases are hereditarie; and so are many spiritual, in a sort;
and that both by natural inclination, and moral imitation much more: that, as
the Lord says Ezec. 16.
of Israel, Thou art thy mothers daughter, so may it be said of many, that
they are their fathers and mothers sons, and daughters in evil. Yet, if it so
come to pass, that God vouchsafe grace to the child of a wicked father, and
that he see the sins which he has done: he commonly hates them more
vehemently, then if they had been in a stranger: and good reason, considering
how they have been his dearest parents ruin. Yea further, even where grace is
wanting, the child, often times, by observing, and sometimes by feeling also the
evils of his fathers sin, is driven though not from his evil way into a good
way, yet into the contrary evil. Thus a covetous father oftens makes a
prodigal son; so does a prodigal a covetous. The son of the covetouse taking
knowledge how odious his fathers covetousnes is to all; and therewith persuading
himself, and being persuaded by others about him, that there is enough, and,
more then enough for him; takes occasion as prodigally to pour our, as his
father has mizerly hoarded up: as on the contrary, the son of the prodigal
both seeing, and feeling the hurt of his parents lavishnes, is thereby provoked
to lay the harder about him, for the repayring of his fathers ruins.

Love rayther descends, then ascends; as streams of water do: and no marvayl,
if men love where they live, as parents do in children, and not they in them.
Hence also is it, that grandfathers are more affectionate toward their
childrens children, then to their immediates; as seeing themselves further
propagated in them, and by their means proceeding on to a further degree of
eternity; which all desire naturally, if not in themselves, yet in their
posterity. And hence it is, that children brought up with their grandfathers,
or grandmothers, seldom do well; but are usually corrupted by their too great
indulgencie.

It is much controverted, whether it be better, in the general, to bring up
children under the severitie of discipline, and the rod; or no. And the wisdom
of the flesh out of love to its own, alleges many reasons to the contrary: But
say men what they will, or can, the wisdom of God is best; and that says, that
foolishnes is bound up in the heart of a child, which the rod of correction
must drive out: Prove. 22. Chap. 13.
and that he, who spares his rod, hurts his son; not in the affection of
person, but effect of thing. And surely there is in all children (though not
alike) a stubbernnes, and stoutnes of mind arising from natural pride, which
must, in the first place, be broken, and beaten down; that so the foundation of
their education being laid in humility, and tractablenes, other virtues may,
in their time, be built thereon. This fruit of natural corruption, and root of
actual rebellion both against God, and man must be destroyed, and no manner of
way nourished; except we will plant a noursery of contempt of all good persons,
and things, and of obstinacy therein. It is commendable in a horse, that he be
stout, and stomackfull, being never to be left to his own government, but
always to have his rider on his back, and the bit in his mouth. But who would
have his child like his horse in his bruitishnes? Indeed such as are of great
stomach, being thoroughly broken, and informed, Erasmus.
become very serviceable, for great designs: else, of horses they become
asses, or worse: as Themistocles his master Plutarch.
told him, when he was a child, that either he would bring some great good, or
some great hurt to the common wealth. Neither is there need to fear, left by
this breaking, the children of great men should prove base spirited, and abject
and so unapt to great employments: for being Adams sons, whose desire was to
have been like unto God; and having those advantages for maysterfulnes, and
highthoughts, which great men's children want not, (unto whom great affayrs are
appropriated usually) they will not easily be found unfurnished of stomach, and
stoutnes of mind more then enough; wherein a little is dangerous, specially for
making them unmeet for Christ's yoke, Math. 11.
and to learn of him, who was lowly, and me^k.

For the beating, and keeping down of this stubbornnes parents must provide
carefully for two things: First that childrens wills, and wilfulnes be
restreyned, and repressed, and that in time; lest sooner then they imagine, the
tender sprigs grow to that stiftnes, that they will rayther break then bow.
Children should not know (if it could be kept from them) that they have a will
in their own, but in their parents keeping: neither should these words be heard
from them, save by way of consent, I will, or I will not. And if will be
suffered at first to swey in them in small, and lawful things, they will hardly
after be restreyned in great, and ill matters, which their partial conceit,
and inexperienced youth with the lusts thereof, and desire of liberty, shall
deem small, and lawful, as the former. And though good education, specially
the grace of God may afterward purge out much other evil, and weaken this
also: yet will such unbroken youth most commonly draw after it great
disquietnes in crosses, when they fall; and in the whole course of life, a
kind of unweyldines, inflexibilitie, and obstinacy, prejudicial to the
parties themselves, and uncomfortable (at least) to such as converse with them.
The second help is an inureing of them from the first, to such a meannes in all
things, as may rayther pluck them down, then lift them up: as by plain, and
homely diet, and apparel; sending them to school betimes; and bestowing them
afterward, as they are fit, in some course of life, in which they may be
exercised diligently, and the same rayther under then above their estate: by
not abetting them one against another, nor against any, (specially before their
faces) without great cause: nor by making them men, and women, before they
become good boys, and girls. How often have I observed, that parents, who have
neither failed in diligent instructing of their children, nor in giving them
good example, nor in correcting them duly, have only by streyning too high
this way, either endangered, or utterly overthrown their posterity? hereby
lifting them up in their vayn hearts, and teaching them to despise both mean
things, and persons; and themselves also, many times, amongst others: thereby
drowning them ( Icarus like) in a sea of mischief, and misery, by their flying
too high a p^^ch. And this must be the more minded, because there is in men an
inbred desire, and that inordinate usually, to hoyse up their children, as
high, as may be: so as they half think they do them wrong, if they set them not
higher, or as high, at least, as themselves; almost whether God will, or no. Yea
what place affoards not some such, as make themselves their childrens slaves;
not careing how basely they themselves grovell in the earth, so they may set
them on their tiptoes?

But first of all for childrens competent education, specially for their
disposeing in some particular course (on which all are to settle at last,
though some liberty of stepping this way, or that be given them for a while;
as a man Plutarch.
though for his pleasure he see many places, yet seeks his abode in some one in
the end) there is required in their parents a through discerning, and right
judgment of their disposition: which is as difficult, as necessary. The
difficulty aryseth from the partiality of parents toward their own: for that,
as the crow thinks her own bird fairest, so do they commonly their children
towardlyer, and better then they are, or then any other indifferent judge does.
This partiality in many is so gross, as they not only deem small good things
in them great, and great evils small; but oftens account the same things well
becomeing them, and commendable, which in others they would censure as
undecent, and it may be, enormous. This perni^ous error arises from self
love. For, as in nature, the object cannot be seen, which is either too near
the eye, or too far from it; so neither can the disposition of that ^^i^de be
rightly discerned, which lies too near his fathers heart. And yet is the
knowledge of this so necessary, that we build not either upon a vain, or
uncerteyn foundation, with great hazard of loss, both of labor, and expense,
in sorting our child to his particular calling, and course of life; as all
without it, is but a very rash adventure. For as none is fit for every
course, nor hardly any for many, in any great degree; so every one is fit for
one, or other: to which if his ability, and disposition be applied, with any
convenient diligence on his part, and helps by others; he may easily come to a
mediocritie therein, if not to some rarenes. Hence was it, that fathers in some
places, used to lead their children to the shops of all kind of artificers, to
try how they could both handle their tools, and like their works; that so they
might bestow them accordingly. Some wise men also have wished, that there might
be established, by public authority, a course for the due trial, and choice
of wits for several sciences. And surely, where there goes not before a
natural aptnes (and moral disposition also for some callings); there will
follow nothing but loss: loss of time, loss of labor, loss of charges, and
all; as when the seed is cast into the barren ground. And as the midwife how
skillful soever in her art, cannot make the woman to be delivered, that was not
first with child; so neither can the best masters make Plat^.
their scholars, or servants, to bring forth sciences, unless they have an
aptnes thereunto first conceaved in their brayns.

There is running in the breasts of most parents a strong stream of partial
affection toward some one, or other of their children, above the rest, either
for its beauty, or wit, or likeness to themselves, or some other fancyed good in
it; which is always dangerous; and often hurtful. Sometimes the Lord takes away
such before the rest, to punish the fathers fondnes: And most commonly such if
surviveing, prove the worst of all the rest, as growing hereby proud, and
arrogant in themselves, presumptuous upon their fathers love, and contemptuous
of the rest of their brethren, and sisters; as we may see in Esau, Absalom, and
Adoniah, their fathers darlings; and in many mo, in our daily experience. And
though they in themselves (which they seldom are free from) be not corrupted
with pride; yet will the rest seldom, or never escape the infection of envy at
it; as is to be seen in Joseph's brethren. It is natural for parents tenderly
to love all their children; and best for them to be as equal toward all, as
may be, reserving the bestowing of their best and greatest love, till they see,
where God bestows his. And if so be they cannot, or will not command their
inordinate affections, as they should; yet it is wisdom to conceal them from
their children; whom else they may hurt so many ways; as the ape is said, many
times to kill her young ones by too streyt embraceing them.

The Lord promises, and affoards long life to such as Exodus 20.
honor father, and mother: whose days if he shorten in this life for their
good, he lengthens out with immortality in glory. On the other side, he cuts
off from the Calvin.
earth stubborn, and disobedient children suddeynly, and sundry ways: And if
he give them long life, it is for a curse unto them. They also oftens dye
without children themselves; and if not; their children oftener pay them that
which is due, and owing them from their parents. The history is note worthy of
the father who being drawn Melanct.
by his son to the threshold of the house, by the hayr of the head; cried to
him, to draw him no further; for that he had drawn his father no further. And
how should they expect honor from their children, who have dishonored their
parents? or a happy life, who despise the author of their life under God? This
honor is due not only to them by whom we have our being; but to them also by
whom our well-being is furthered.

CHAP. LXI. Of Youth, and Old age.
THat city, or common wealth (says one) flourishes most, where old men's
counsayl, and young men's swords are in request. And a little (says another)
avail weapons abroad, and in the hands of young men; if there be not counsayl
at home, and in the breasts of the aged. And as some fruits are ripe before
others, and diverse fit for diverse seasons of the year: so God, and nature has
so ordained, that the bodies of young men should be ripe in their youth, and
fittest for bodily employments, by reason of their natural heat, and spirits:
and the counsayls of old men in their age, through their long experience, and
observation. Things go well, where both do their parts in societies.

It is worthily said of one, that Childehood should be manly, Austin.
that is, not without all wisdom: and age childe-like, that is, without pride,
and arrogance. Yet may the aged above the younger sort, challenge, and use a
kind of authority, and confidence in their words, and caryage. So is there to
be permitted unto childhood that childeishnes, which without violence to
nature, and the God thereof, cannot be driven from it. Many, in pride,
striving, and streyning to have their children men, and women too soon, and ere
they be full boys, and girls; force them above their pace; and either cause
them to tire, as discouraged; or occasion them to content themselves, in after
time, with certain manly forms, without substance, unseasonably forced upon
them, in their childehood. Fruits ripened by art, before their time, are
neither toothsom, nor wholesome: So children made men when they should be
children, prove children when they should be men. Notwithstanding stubbornnes,
and corruption cannot too soon be forced out of them: Neither is half that
liberty to be given to the younger sort, which they would take; not knowing,
nor being easily brought to beleiv, how slipperie their state is, till they
come to feel it by their falls: which if they did, they would not complayn with
the foolish young man, in the poet, that all parents keeping any hand over
their children Tereno^.
(though for their good) are injurious unto them.

As all men are to honor all men, because they are men, 1 Pet. 2.
and made after Gods image; so should the younger sort specially be trained up
to a bashful, and modest reverence toward all, and chiefly toward their
ancients. Which so Tit. 2.
well becomes their maiden years, as that the philosopher accounts blushing a
virtue in young folks, though a fault in Aristotle.
the aged. Many parents desire to have their young ones trained up in such
exercises, and courses, as may inbolden them: But they should, for the most
part, provide much better for them, (specially in our audacious age) if they
got them held constantly in courses of modesty, and ^hamefastnes; that so
Demetrius might have his wish in them; which was, that young folks would
reverence their Tertul.
fathers at home, all men abroad, and themselves being alone.

The Apostle writeing to Timothy warns him to fly the 2 Timothy 2.
lusts of youth. If Timothy, who was brought up in the knowledge of the
Scriptures from a child, and who had profited so well therein, and whose place
in the church was so eminent for the teaching, and governing of others, stood
in need of such advertisement, and warning; what warning can be sufficient for
ordinary young people to eschew and fly from such lusts, and vanities, as to
follow after them, and unto which the heat and heedlesnes of youth carries
them? It is indeed a great mercy of God, when young persons get over that their
slipperie, and inexperienced state without either such public scandal, or
secret wound of conscience, as the scar whereof they carry to their graves with
them. How much more, and greater a mercy is it, when they receav the grace to
consecrate their youth and best days to God in holiness? offering their souls,
and bodies as the sacrifices of young lambs unblemished, upon the Lords altar.
Wicked men, who hate goodness both in youth, and age, use to say, young saints,
old devils: But the truth is young devils old Beelzebubs, for the most part. To
whom yet, if God, in singular grace, vouchsafe repentance in after age; what a
corasive will it be to the heart of such a convert, casting back his eyes to
his youth consumed in lusts, and vanity, to think how great dishonor he has
brought to Gods name, and hindrance to others salvation; which he may repent
of, but cannot redeem? On the contrary, sweet is the remembrance in old age of
a youth led in true virtue, and godlynes.

Some would enjoy both the honor of age, and liberty of youth: But curled gray
hayr is not comely. Either state has its benefit, and burden allotted of God.
He that obteyns the benefit must be content to bear the burden. Young men must
be content to want the honor, which is due to the aged of their order
otherwise, in regard of the image of Gods eternity, which they bear: And so
must the aged be content to forbear even the lawful liberty, and delights of
youth.

Multitude of years should teach wisdom, says young Elihu Job 32.
in Job, to his three ancients. And this the younger sort should with
reverence, and may with good reason look for, at their elders hands,
considering their long experience, and manifold advantages above them, for the
getting of wisdom. This wisdom makes their age honorable indeed, and their
gray head a crown of glory, being founded in the way Prove. 16.
of righteousness: whereas an elementarie old man, having Seneca.
no other argument to prove that he has lived long, but his gray hayrs, and
wrinkled forehead, is a contemptible, and ridiculous creature. How many such a
b c old folks are there in the world, whose gray hayrs promise wisdom, and
knowledge; and to whom opportunity, and means of atteyning it has not been
wanting; who yet being proved, and known, will appear very babes in
understanding, and such as, for that skill, had need to begin to live again?
This is not merely a want of wit in them, or of the love of knowledge either;
but withal a curse of God upon them, usually punishing a lustful, and
rechlesse youth with a doltish age: in whom the proverb is true, in another
sense: Ab equis ad asinos: Such of young horses become old asses.

A wise man should live well in youth, and before old age Seneca.
come, that he may dye well in age, if it come; and may be ready for death, as
the white regions are for the harvest: and John* 4.
so may both wayt for it, and even meet it the more boldly in the way of such
virtuous actions, as expose unto it. For though youth and likelihood of long
life should make none withdraw from any good duty, or do amiss for fear of
danger of loss of life; yet age should (though in course of nature the more
fearful) upon ground of good reason, wisdom, and grace, make men the more
ventersom of that, in a good cause, which God and destiny will deprive them of
ere long, though other men let them alone: as Solon was bold upon his old age
to oppose himself to Pisystratus Plutarch.
the tyrant. One advises to be old betimes, that so we may be old long. But
who would desire to be that long, which Seneca.
is but a long infirmity; Save as age accompanied with Austin.
wisdom and godlynes ads authority to the aged for the more effectual
enforceing of these and the like virtues upon others.

CAP. LXII. Of Death.
Natural death stands in the separation of the soul from the body: spiritual
of the soul, and whole man from God, in respect of grace: eternal in respect
both of grace, and glory, with the sense of the contrary evils. By sin death
in all three degrees came into the Romans 5.
world. For albeit God only have immortality, and unchangeablenes from, and
in himself, and that all creatures 1 Timothy 6.
(and so man, with the rest, in regard of his elementarie body) be subject to
change, save as they do depend upon him that uncreated being, and are
sustained, and upheld by the word of his power, and by a continual influx from
Hebr. 1.
him; yet God having engraven his image in man, did both so temper his body,
and order all creatures, under his providence, for him; as that nothing but sin
could possibly impeach his life, or welfare. By his sin he actually lost
spiritual life; and the right both to temporary, and eternal. The first
death is a natural evil: the second a spiritual: the third both. For
although in regard of the universal, and of Gods supernatural ends, it be
better that a man be, to be continued, though in eternal misery; then that
he should cease to be altogether: yet in regard of the persons particular (as
better Math. 18.
eye out, then ever akeing) better never to have been born, or by death utterly
to be abolished, as the bruit beasts are; then to live, and continue always
accursed, and miserable.

By natural death diverse men, how like soever they have been in their
temporal state, become most unlike in their eternal: the wicked miserable
without hope; and the godly happy without fear: And by the same death, both
they and all other, in other things, altogether alike, how unlike soever they
have been in them formerly. After death remayns no natural or civil relation;
as of father, son; housband, wife; or the like: all these are for this life
only. The liveles earth unto Eccl. 12.
which the body returns, is altogether incapable of them: so is the soul, being
a spiritual substance, whether in heaven or hell. With them in glory, after the
end of 1 Cor. 15. Math. 22.
the world, God shall be all in all: and men shall be like the angels, neither
taking wives, nor giving in marriage, nor remaining married. Peter and Paul
neither are, nor shall be Apostles there; neither is the virgin Mary Christ's
mother there: but they only remayn those persons which sometimes, upon earth,
had these states, and relations upon them. If there be any natural, or bodily
difference Ambrose.
after death, it is, that the bodies of the richer s^inck the more by reason of
their greater fulness, and abundance whilst they lived. And for the good, and
bad, which are mingled together Austin.
in this life, but cannot agree; death parts them for ever: being hastened of
the Lord, that the godly dying may no more be vexed with, or by the wicked: nor
the wicked any longer persequute the godly.

If men should live always in the world, or but so long in our age, as did the
first patriarks; to what a height would many come in worldly happiness, or
misery? How extremely rich would many be? how many extremely poor? How
mighty, and powerful some? how dejected, and depressed many more? But the
wise providence of God is to be honored herein: by which it comes to pass,
that the more men are set to drive things to extreamitie, the less time should
be allowed them for their courses one or other in the world.

Only man being both mortal, and reasonable, can think of his death. Not the
angels; for though they can by understanding conceav of death, yet are they by
their spiritual state, set without the reach of it: nor bruit beasts, though
mortal; because it is not perceaved by sight, or other sense; but being a
privation, to wit, of life, is only Scaliger.
discernable by understanding. If a beast see never so many of its own kind
slaughtered before its eyes, it fears not death, which it sees not; though it
may fear the instrument which it sees, or other terrible, and sensible object.
And hence it comes to pass, that the more brutish men are, they have the less
thoughts or fear of death for the most part.

It is appointed unto men once to dye ordinarily; and after Hebr. 9.
this the judgment. I say, as the Apostle means, ordinarily: for some dye not,
but are changed only: Some dye twice, as ^ Cor. 15.
Lazarus, and others. This death, which will certeynly once come, and with it
eternal, and unchangeable happiness, or misery; we should always bear in
mind; as if Phillips deaths head were set before us. For though the thoughts
of death be not sufficient to raise the heart to heavenly things; yet are they
so avaylable to draw it from earthly (which is first to be done) as no thing is
more, then Ierom.
the frequent, and serious meditation thereof. We should think seriously of
that part of our life, which remayns unfinished, that we may provide things
necessary for it: and also of our death, that we may cut off superfluityes;
and use that moderately, which we must not use long.

The saying, Nothing more certain then death, and yet nothing Bernard.
more uncertayn then the hour of death is common, and commonly abused. The
certayntie of it should teach us moderation in the use of the world, and all
worldly things, 1 Cor. 7.
and that we abuse them not: because the fashion of this world passes away.
But contrary-wise, many take hereby occasion to lay the faster hold of it,
either in the profits thereof for themselves, or theyrs; or pleasures; saying,
let us eat, 1 Cor. 1^
and drink; to morrow we shall dye. And whereas God would Austin. Gregory.
have us ignorant of our last day, and hour, that suspecting it always, we
might always be ready; we are apt, on the contrary, because we know not the
certain time, to be the less ready at all times: and (which is worse) not to
take warning neither, as we ought, by any, or all those known messengers of
death; which are reckned three: 1. Casual^ie, Hugo.
2. Weakness, and 3. age: the first showing our death to be doubtful; the
second and third to be near, and at hand. Hardly any so old, but thinks he may
yet live a year; or so sick, but that he may live a day longer. Not only the
foolish, but even Math. 25.
the wise virgins are too prone to slumber, if the bridegroom defer his coming
a little. Few regard the good counsayl given, to account every day the day of
our death, and as that, Perkins.
wherein we are (it may be) to appear before the Lord. Few watch because they
know not what hour the Lord w^^l Math. 24.
come, (as all are warned). But the servant that so does, and is ready; blessed
is he, whom his Lord when he comes, finds so doing.

Young folk may dye shortly; but the aged cannot live long. The green apple may
be plucked off, or shaken down, by violence; but the ripe will fall of it self.
It is wisdom therefore to provide for death in youth, (there being many more
that dye in youth, or childehood, then that survive till old age); but madness
it is to neglect preparation, when age comes: Though in truth few dye well in
age, Seneca.
that have not lived well in youth. That we may once dye the great death
aright, and in peace; it is requisite, that we 1 Cor. 15.
dye daily many little deaths, both by outward afflictions; and inward
mortifyings of our worldly, and corrupt lusts.

We should so live, as being content to dye, when God calls us hence: and that
upon knowledge of the nature, cause, and event of death; and out of a good
conscience toward God, and men: And not in senseles blockishnes, overcomeing
death, as the most do, by forgetting it; as if a man overcame his enemy, by
getting as far from him as he could: nor yet by desperate wearisomnes of life
for any troubles in it; but as being willing, yea desirous to live to serve Gods
providence for good, upon earth. It is ill (says the wise heathen) to wish
death; but worse to fear it. Seneca.
But godly Christians are to do both in different respects. To desire it (as
it stands with Gods will) that they may be free from sin, and misery; it being
best for them to be dissolved, and to be with the Lord: To fear it, as being in
it Phil* 1.
self a fearful punishment of sin; the dissolution of the most excellent
creature upon earth; and an end of further praising God in his church, and
performing particular offices of goodness, and love to men. And in truth, though
grace have this effect with them that desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, that they do not dye only patiently; Austin.
but even dye with delight, and live patiently: yet nature causes, that not
only they that know they must dye, as all do; but they also which beleev,
that after death they shall enjoy a more happy state, desire the deferring of
it: so loath to Idem.
part are the two old acquayntances, the body, and soul.

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints, Psalm. 16.
when they dye for, or in ^ayth, and a good conscience: as the gold melting,
and dissolving in the furnace is as much esteemed by the goldsmiths, as any in
his shop, or purse. Precious also it is, whilst they live, and that which God
will not lightly suffer to befall them. And if he put their tears in his
bottle, he will not neglect their blood, nor easily suffer it to be shed:
Neither does death, when it comes, part him, and them; though it part man, and
man; yea man and wife; yea man in himself, his soul, and body. Friends show
themselves faithful in sticking to their friends in sickness, and all other
afflictions: but they (how affectionate soever) must leav them in death: and
are Genesis 23.
glad to remove them, and to have their dead buried out of their sight. But the
fruit of Gods love reaches un^o death it self: in which he does his beloved
ones the greatest good, when friends can do no more for them.

He that said, Before death, and the funeral no man is happy, spoke the truth,
as he meant, of the happiness which can be found in worldly things. But both he,
and they, who have so admyred his saying, should have considered, that he who
is not happy before death in worldly things, cannot be happy in them, by it;
which deprives him of them all, and of life it self, which is better then they,
and for which they are. But miserable indeed is the happiness, whereof a man
has neither beginning, nor certain^ie, but by ceasing to be a man. The godly
are truly happy both in life and death: the wicked in neither.

We are not to mourn for the death of our christian friends, as they which are
without hope: either in regard ^ These. 4.
of them, or of our selves. Not of them, because such as are asleep with Jesus,
God will bring with him to a more glorious life, in which we (in our time, and
theirs shall ever remayn with the Lord, and them: Not of our selves, as if that,
because they had left us, God had left us also. But we should take occasion by
their deaths to love this world the less, out of which they are taken; and
heaven the more, whether they are gone before us, and where we shall ever enjoy
them.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE TABLE Containing the Contents of every Chapter.
CHap. j. Of man's knowledge of God. fol. 1. Chapter ij. Of Gods love. 4. Chapt. iij.
Of Gods promises. 9. Chapt. iiij. Of the works of God and his power, wisdom,
will, goodness, etc. shineing in them. 13. Chapt. v. Of created goodness. 21.
Chap. vj. Of Equab^litie, and perseverance in well-doing 29. Chap. vij. Of
religion, and differences, and disputations thereabout. 38. Chap. viij. Of the
holy Scriptures. 53. Chapt. ix. Of authority and reason. 65. Chapt. x. Of
faith Hope, and Love Of faith Reason, and Sense.
73. Chapt. xj. Of Atheism, and Idolatry. 84. Chapt. xij. Of Heresy, and
Schism. 87. Chap. xiij. Of truth, and falsehood. 90. Cha. xiiij. Of knowledge,
and ignorance. 95. Chapt. xv. Of simplicity, and craftines. 101. Chap. xvj. Of
wisdom, and folly. 104. Chap. xvij. Of discretion. 110. Cha. xviij. Of
Experience. 112. Chap. xix. Of examples. 114. Chapt. xx. Of counsel 119. Chap.
xxj. Of thoughts. 124. Cha. xxij. Of speech, and silence. 127. Cha. xxiij. Of
books, and writings. 135. Cha. xxiiij. Of good intentions. 139. Cha. xxv. Of
means. 141. Cha. xxvj. Of labor. 143. Chapter xxvij. Of callings. 147. Chapter xxviij.
Of the use, and abuse of things. 152. Cha. xxix. Of riches, and poverty. 155.
Chapt. xxx. Of sobriety. 162. Chap. xxxj. Of liberality. 166. Chap. xxxij. Of
health. 172. Cha. xxxiij. Of afflictions. 176. Chapter xxxiiij. Of injuries. 184.
Chap. xxxv. Of patience. 190. Cha. xxxvj. Of peace. 195. Chapter xxxvij. Of
Society, and friendship. 199. Chapter xxxviij Of Credit, and good name. 209. Cha.
xxxix. Of contempt, and contumely: 214. Chapt. xl. Of envy. 218. Chapt. xlj.
Of slander. 221. Chap. xlij. Of flattery. 225. Chap. xliij. Of suspicion. 227.
Chap. xliiij. Of appearances. 231. Chapt. xlv. Of offenses. 235. Chap. xlvj. Of
temptations. 238. Chap. xlvij. Of conscience. 244. Cha. xlviij. Of prayer. 247.
Chap. xlix. Of oaths, and lots. 253. Chapt. l. Of zeal. 257. Chapt. lj. Of
hipocrisy. 260. Chapt. lij. Of sin, and punishment from God. 264. Chapt. liij.
Of rewards, and punishments by men. 270. Chap. liiij. Of affections. 273. Chap.
lv. Of fear. 278. Chapt. lvj. Of anger. 283. Chap. lvij. Of humility, and
meeknes. 287. Chap. lviij Of Modesty. 293. Chapt. lix. Of marriage. 296. Chapt.
lx. Of children, and their education. 304. Chap. lxj. Of youth, and old age.
314. Chap. lxij. Of death. 318.
FINIS.

