A Handefull of pleasant delites, Containing sundry new Sonets and delectable
Histories, in diverse kinds of Meeter. Newly devised to the newest tunes that
are now in use, to be sung: every Sonet orderly pointed to his proper Tune.
With new additions of certain Songs, to very late devised Notes, not commonly
known, nor used heretofore,

By Clement Robinson, and diverse others.

AT LONDON Printed by Richard Ihones: dwelling at the sign of the Rose and
Crown, near Holburne Bridge 1584.

The Printer to the Reader.
YOu that in Music do delight your minds for to solace:
This little book of Sonets m^^ well like you in that case,
Peruse it well ere you pass by, here may you wish and have,
Such pleasaut songs to each new tune, as lightly you can crave.
Or if fine Histories you would read, you need not far to seek:
Within this book such may you have, as Ladies may well like.
Here may you have such pretty things, as women much desire:
Here may you have of sundry sorts, such Songs as you require.
Wherefore my friend, if you regard, such Songs to read or hear:
Doubt not to buy this pretty Book, the price is not so dear.
A Nosegaie alvvaies sweet, for Lovers to send for Tokens, of love, at Newyeres
tide, or for fairings, as they in their minds shall be disposed to write.
A Nosegaie lacking flowers fresh, to you now I do send.
Desiring you to look thereon, when that you may intend:
For flowers fresh begin to fade, and Boreas in the field,
Even with his hard con^ealed frost, no better flowers does yield:
But if that winter could have sprung, a sweeter flower than this,
I would have sent it presently to you withouten miss:
Accept this then as time does serve, be thankful for the same,
Despise it not, but keep it well, and mark each flower his name.
Lauander is for lovers true, which evermore be feign:
Desiring always for to have, some pleasure for their pain:
And when that they obtained have, the love that they require,
Then have they al their perfect joy, and quenched is the fire.
Rosemarie is for remembrance, between us day and night:
Wishing that I might always have, you present in my sight.
And when I cannot have, as I have said before.
Then Cupid with his deadly dart, does wound my heart full sore.
Sage is for sustenance, that should man's life sustain,
For I do still lie languishing, continually in pain,
And shall do still until I die, except thou favor show:
My pain and all my grievous smart, full well you do it know.
Fenel is for flaterers, an evil thing it is sure:
But I have always meant truly, with constant heart most pure:
And will continue in the same, as long as life does last,
Still hoping for a ioiful day, when all our pains be past.
Violet is for faithfulness, which in me shall abide:
Hoping like wise that from your heart, you will not let it slide.
And will continue in the same, as you have now begun:
And then for ever to abide, then you my heart have won.
Time is to try me, as each be tried must,
^^^ting you know while life does last, I will not be unjust,
And if I should I would to God, to hell my soul should bear.
And eke also that Beelzebub, with teeth he should me tear.
Roses is to rule me. with reason as you will,
For to be still obedient, your mind for to fulfill:
And thereto will not disagree, in nothing that you say:
But will content your mind truly, in all things that I may.
Ieliflowers is for gentleness, which in me shall remain:
Hoping that no sedition shall, depart our hearts in twain.
As soon the sun shall loose his course, the moon against her kind,
Shall have no light, if that I do once put you from my mind.
Carnations is for gratiousnesse, mark that now by the way,
Have no regard to flatterers, nor pass not what they say.
For they will come with lying tales, your ears for to fulfill:
In any case do you consent, nothing unto their will.
Marigolds is for marriage, that would out minds suffice,
Least that suspicion of us twain, by any means should rise:
As for my part, I do not care, my self I will still use.
That all the women in the world, for you I will refuse.
Peniriall is to print your love, so deep within my heart:
That when you look this Nosegay on, my pain you may impart,
And when that you have read the same, consider well my woe,
Think ye then how to recompense, even him that loves you so.
Cowsloppes is for counsel, for secrets us between,
That none but you and I alone, should know the thing we mean:
And if you will thus wisely do, as I think to be best:
Then have you surely won the field, and set my heart at rest.
I pray you keep this Nosegay well, and set by it some store:
And thus farewell, the Gods thee guide, both now and evermore.
Not as the common sort do use, to set it in your breast:
That when the smell is gone away, on ground he takes his rest.
FINIS.
L. Gibsons Tantara, wherein Danea welcommeth home her Lord Diophon from the war.
To the tune of, Down right Squire.
YOu Lordings, cast off your weeds of woe
me thinks I hear
A trumpet shril which plain does show
my Lord is near:
Tantara*tara tantara,
this trumpet glads our hearts,
Therefore to welcome home your King,
you Lordings play your parts,
Tantara tara tantara, etc.
Hark hark, me thinks I hear again,
this trumpets voice,
He is at hand this is certain,
wherefore rejoice.
Tantara tara tantara, etc.
this trumpet still does say,
With trumpets blast, all dangers past,
does show in Marshall ray.
A ioifull sight my hearts delight,
my Diophon dear:
Thy comely grace, I do embrace,
with ioiful cheer:
Tantara tara tantara,
what pleasant sound is this,
Which brought to me with victory,
my joy and only bliss.
Tantara tara tantara, etc.

Diophon. My Queen and wife, my joy and life
in whom I mind:
In every part, the trustiest heart,
that man can find.
Tantara tara tantara,
me thinks I hear your praise,
Your virtues race in every place,
which trumpet so does raise.
Tantara tara tantara, etc.
Now welcome home to Siria soil,
from battered field:
That valiantly thy foes did foil,
with spear and shield:
Tantara tara tantara,
me thinks I hear it still,
Thy sounding praise, abroad to raise,
with trump that is most shrill,
Tantara tara tantara, etc.
If honor and fame, O noble Dame,
such deeds do ask:
Then Diophon here to purchasr fame,
has done this task:
Tantara tara tantara,
returned he is again,
To lead his life, with thee his wife,
in joy without disdain.
Tantara tara tantara, etc.

Finis.
L. G.

A proper new Song made by a Studient in Cambridge,
To the tune of I wish to see those happy days.
I Which was once a happy wight, and hie in Fortunes grace:
And which did spend my golden prime, in running pleasures race,
Am now enforst of late, contrariwise to mourn,
Since fortune ioies, into annoies, my former state to turn.
The toiling ox, the horse, the ass, have time to take their rest,
Yea all things else which Nature wrought, sometimes have ioies in breast:
Save only I and such which vexed are with pain:
For still in tears, my life it wears, and so I must remain.
How often have I in folded arms, enioied my delight,
How often have I excuses made, of her to have a sight?
But now to fortunes will, I caused am to bow.
And for to reap a hugie heap, which youthful years did sow.
Wherefore all ye which do as yet, remain and bide behind:
Whose eyes dame beauties blazing beams, as yet did never blind.
Example let me be, to you and other more:
Whose heavy heart, has felt the smart, subdued by Cupids lore.
Take heed of gazing over much, on Damsels fair unknown:
For oftentimes the Snake does lie, with roses ouergrowde:
And under fairest flowers, do noisome Adders lurk:
Of whom take heed, I thee areed: least that thy cares they work.
What though that she does smile on thee, perchance she does not love:
And though she smack thee once or twice, she thinks thee so to prove,
And when that thou do think, she loves none but thee:
She has in store, perhaps some more, which so deceived be,
Trust not therefore the outward show beware in any case:
For good conditions do not lie, where is a pleasant face:
But if it be thy chance, a lover true to have:
Be sure of this, thou shall not miss, each thing that thou will crave.
And when as thou (good Reader) shall peruse this scrole of mine:
Let this a warning be to thee, and say a friend of thine,
Did write thee this of love, and of a zealous mind:
Because that he sufficiently, has tried the female kind.
Here Cambridge now I bid farewell, adue to Students all:
Adue unto the Colleges, and unto Gunuil Hall:
And you my fellows once, pray unto Jove that I
May have releef, for this my grief, and speedy remedy.
And that he shield you euerichone, from Beauties luring looks:
Whose bait has brought me to my baine, and caught me from my Books:
Wherefore, for you, my prayer shall be, to send you better grace,
That modesty with honesty, may guide your youthful race.
Finis
quod Thomas Richardson, sometime Student in Cambridge.

The scoff of a Lady, as pretty as may be,
to a young man that went a wooing:
He went still about her, and yet he went without her,
because he was so long a doing.
ATtend thee, go play thee,
Sweet love I am busy:
my silk and twist is not yet spun:
My Lady will blame me,
If that the send for me,
and find my work to be vndun:
How then?
How shall I be set me?
To say love did let me?
Fie no, it will not fit me,
It were no scuse for me.
If love were attained,
My ioies were unfeigned,
my seame and silk will take no hold:
Often have I been warned,
By others proof learned:
hot wanton love soon waxes cold,
Go now:
I say go pack thee,
Or my needle shall prick thee:
Go seek out Dame Idle:
More fit for thy bridle,
More fit for thy bridle.
Well worthy of blaming,
For thy long detaining,
all vain it is that thou have done:
Best now to be wandering,
Go vaunt of thy winning,
and tell thy Dame what thou have won:
Say this:
Then say as I bade thee:
That the little dog Fancy,
Lies chaste without moving,
And needs no threatening,
For fear of well beating.
For fear of well beating.
The boy is gone lurking,
Good Ladies be working,
dispatch a while that we had done,
The tide will not tarry,
All times it does vary,
The day does pass, I see the Sun,
The frost bites fair flowers,
Lets work at due hours,
Haste, haste, and be merry,
Till our needles be werie.
Till our needles be werie,
Now Ladies be merry,
Because you are werie:
leave work I say, and get you home,
Your business is slacking,
Your lover is packing:
your answer has cut off his comb.
How then?
The fault was in him sir,
He (...) it so trim sir,
Alas poor feelie fellow,
Make much of thy pillow.
Make much of thy pillow.
Finis.
An answer as pretty to the scof of his Lady,
by the yongman that came a wooing,
Wherein he does flout her,
Being glad he went without her,
Misliking both her and her doing.
ALas Love, why chafe ye?
Why fret ye, why sum ye? to me it seems very strange,
Me thinks ye misuse me,
So soon to refuse me,
unless you hope of better change:
Well, well:
Well now, I perceive ye,
You are mindful to leave me:
Now sure it does grieve me:
That I am unworthy:
That I am unworthy.
I mean not to let ye, nor I can not forget ye
it will not so out of my mind:
My love is not dainty, I see you have plenty,
that set so little by your friend.
Go too spin on now I pray you, I list not to stay,
I will go play me:
I am unfit for you, etc.
Leave off to flout now, and prick on your clout now
you are a dainty Dame indeed,
And though of your tau^ting, I may make my vaunting
as bad or worse tha^ I shall speed:
Sweet heart, though now you forsake it.
I trust you will take it:
and sure I spak it, ss fine as you make it, etc
Now will I be trudging, without any grudging
I am content to give you ground:
Good reason does bind me, to leave you behind me,
for you are better lost than found:
To play, go seek out Dame, pleasure:
You are a trim treasure,
Wise women be dainty,
Of fools there be plenty, etc.
If I might advise ye, few words should suffice y
e and yet you should bestow them well:
Maids must be manerly, not full of scurility,
wherein I see you do excel,
Farewell good Nicibicetur,
God send you a sweeter,
A lusty lim lifter, you are a trim shifter, etc.
Finis.
Peter Picks.

Dame Beauties reply to the Lover late at liberty: and now complains
himself to be her captive, Entitled: Where is the life that late I led.
THe life that erst thou ledst my friend, was pleasant to thine eyes:
But now the loss of liberty, thou seem to despise.
Where then thou ioiedst thy will, now thou do grudge in heart:
Then thou no pain nor grief did feel, but now thou pinest in smart.
What moved thee unto love, express and tell the same:
Save fancy thine, that heapt thy pain, the folly learn to blame.
For when thou freedom did enioie, thou gave thy self to ease,
And letst self-will the ruling bear, thy fancy fond to please:
Then stealing Cupid came, with bow and golden dart:
He struck the stroke, at pleasure he that now does* pain thy heart:
Blame not the Gods of love, But blame thy self thou may:
For freedom was disdaind of thee, and bondage more thou waiest.
Who list, thou say. to live at rest, and freedom to possess:
The sight of gorgeous Dames must shun, least love do them distress:
Thou blamest Cupidoes craft, who strikes in stealing sort:
And sets thee midst the princely Dames, of Beauties famous fort:
And meaning well thou say, as one not bent to love,
Then Cupid he constrains thee yield, as thou thy self can prove.
Fair Ladies looks in liberty, enlarged not thy pain:
Ne yet the sight of gorgeous Dames, could cause thee thus complain.
It was thy self indeed, that causd thy pining woe,
Thy wanton will, and idle mind, causd Cupid strike the blow:
Blame not his craft, nor us that Beauties darlings be,
Accuse thy self to seek thy rare, thy fancy did agree.
There is none thou say, that can more truly judge the case:
Than thou that have the wound receiu'de, by sight of Ladies face.
Her beauty thee bewitched, thy mind that erst was free:
Her corpse so comely framd, thou say, did force thee to agree:
Thou gave thy self it seems, her bondsman to abide,
Before that her good willingness, of thee were known and tried.
What judgment can thou give: how do thou plead thy case:
It was not she that did thee wound, although thou see her face:
Ne could her beauty so, inchaunt or vex thy sprites,
Ne feature hers so comely framde, could weaken so thy wits.
But that thou might have showile the cause to her indeed,
Who spares to speak, thy self do know, does fail of grace to speed.
By this tho^ safest, thou soughtss ye means of torments that you bear,
By this thou would men take heed, and learn of love to fear:
For taking hold thou telst, to sly it is too late,
And no where can thou shroud thy self, but Ca^e must be thy mate.
Though love do pleasure seem, yet plagues none such there are:
Therefore all lovers now thou (...), of liking to beware.
Thy self has sought the mean and way, and none but thou alone:
Of all the grief and care you bear, as plainly it is shown:
Then why should men take heed, thy counsel is unfit:
Thou sparedst to speak, and faildst to speed, thy will had banished wit.
And now thou blamest love, and Ladies fair and free:
And better lost than found my frind, your cowards heart we see.
Finis.
I.P.

A new Courtly Sonet, of the Lady Green sleeves.
To the new tune of Greensleeues.
Greensleeues was all my joy,
Greensleeues was my delight:
Greensleeues was my heart of gold,
And who but Lady Greensleeues.
ALas my love, ye do me wrong,
to cast me off discurteously:
And I have loved you so long,
Delighting in your company.
Greensleeues was all my joy,
Greensleeues was my delight:
Greensleeues was my heart of gold,
And who but Lady Greensleeues.
I have been ready at your hand,
to grant what ever you would crave.
I have both waged life and land,
your love and good will for to have.
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
I bought thee kerchers to thy head,
that were wrought fine and gallantly:
I kep^ thee both at board and bed,
Which cost my purse well fauouredly,
Greensleeues was al my toie, etc.
I bought thee peticotes of the best,
the cloth so fine as fine might be:
I gave thee jewels for thy chest,
and all this cost I spent on thee.
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
Thy smock of silk, both fair and white,
with gold embrodered gorgeously:
Thy peticote of Sendall right: a
nd thus I bought thee gladly.
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
Thy girdle of gold so red,
with pearls bedecked sumptuously:
The like no other lasses had,
and yet thou would not love me,
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
Thy purse and eke thy gay g^ilt knives,
thy pincase gallant to the eye:
No better wore the Burgess wives,
and yet thou would not love me.
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
Thy crimson stockings all of silk,
with gold all wrought above the knee,
Thy pumps as white as was the milk,
and yet thou would no* love me.
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
Thy gown was of the grossie green,
thy sleeves of Satin hanging by:
Which made thee be our harvest Queen,
and yet thou would not love me.
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
Thy garters fringed with the gold,
And silver aglets hanging by,
Which made thee blithe for to behold,
And yet thou would not love me.
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
My gayest gelding I thee gave,
To ride where ever liked thee,
No Lady ever was so brave,
And yet thou would not love me.
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
My men were clothed all in green,
And they did ever wait on thee:
All this was gallant to be seen,
and yet thou would not love me.
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
They set thee up, they took thee down,
they served thee with humility,
Thy foot might not once touch the ground,
and yet thou would not love me.
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
For every morning when thou rose,
I sent thee dainties orderly:
To cheer thy stomach from all woes,
and yet thou would not love me.
Greensleeues was all my joy, etc.
Thou could desire no earthly thing.
But still thou had it readily:
Me thinks they do resound,
with doleful tunes, me to lament,
And in my sleep unfound, alas,
Me thinks such dreadful things to pass:
that out I cry in midst of dreams,
Wherewith my tears run down as streams,
O Lord, think I,
She is not here that should be by:
What chance is this,
That I embrace that froward is?
The Lions noble mind,
His raging mood (you know) often stays,
When beasts do yield by kind,
On them (forsooth) he never prays:
Then sithence that I am your thrall,
To ease my smart on you I call.
A bloody conquest is your part,
To kill so kind a loving heart:
Alas remorce,
Or presently I die perforce:
God grant pity,
Within your breast now planted be.
As nature has you decked,
with worthy gifts above the rest,
So to your praise most great,
Let pity dwell within your breast,
That I may sa^e with heart and will,
Lo, this is she that might me kill:
For why* in hand she held the knife,
And yet (forsooth) she saved my life.
Hey-ho, darling:
With lusty love, now let us sing,
Play on, Minstrel,
My Lady is mine only girl.
The History of Diana and Acteon.
To the Quarter Braules.
DIana and her darlings dear,
Walked once as you shall hear:
Through woods and waters clear, themselves to play:
The leaves were gay and green,
And pleasant to be seen:
They went the trees between, i^ cool array,
So long, that at the last they found a place, of waters full clear:
So pure and fair a Bath never was found many a year.
There she went fair and gent,
Her to sport, as was her wonted sort:
In such desirous sort:,
Thus g^eth the report:
Diana dainteously began her self therein to bathe
And her body for to l^ue,
So curious and brave.
As they in water stood,
Bathing their lively blood:
Acteon in the wood, chaunst to come by:
And vewe^ their bodies bare,
Maruailing what they wear,
And still deuoid of care, on them cast his eye:
But when the Nymphs had perceived him, aloud then they cried,
Enclosed her, and thought to hide her skin, which he had spied:
But too true I tell you,
She seen was,
For in height she did pass,
Each Dame of her race,
Hark then Acteons case:
When Diana did perceue, where Acteon did stand,
She took bow in her hand,
And to shoot she began.
As she began to shoot, Acteon ran about,
To hide he thought no boot, his sights were dim:
And as he thought to escape,
Changed was Acteons shape,
Such was unlucky fate, yielded to him:
For Diana brought it thus to pass, and played her part,
So that poor Acteon changed was to a ^ugie Heart,
And did bear, naught but hair:
In this change,
Which is as true as strange,
And thus did he range,
So that his sorrows importunate,
Had ended his life incontinent,
Had not Lady Venus grace, Lady Lady,
Pitied her poor servants case, My deer Lady.
For when she saw the torments strong,
Wherewith the Knight was sore oppressed,
Which he God knows had suffered long,
Al through this Ladies merciless,
Of their desires she made exchange, Lady, Lady.
And wrought a miracle most strange, My deer Lady.
So that this Lady faithfully,
Did love this Knight above all other:
And he unto the contrary,
Did hate her then above all measure,
And pitiful she did complain: lady, lady.
Requiring favor, and might not obtain. My deer lady.
But when she saw, that in no case,
She might unto his love attain:
And that she could not find some grace,
To ease her long enduring pain,
And y^ his heart would not remove.
Without all cure he died for love, My deer. Lady, ladi^
Besides these matters marvelous,
One other thing I will you tell:
Of one whose name was Narcissus,
A man whose beauty does excel*
Of natures gifts he had no miss, Lady, lady
He had y^ whole of beauties bliss, My dear.
So that out of many a far Country,
I read of many a woman fair,
Did come this Narcislus to see,
Who perished when they came there,
Through his default I say in fine, lady, lady
Who unto love would not incline. My deer.
Whose disobedience unto love,
When unto Venus it did appear.
How that his heart would not remove,
She punished him as you shall hear:
A thing most strange forsooth it was, Lady, Lady.
Now harken how it came to posse, My deer.
For when he went upon a day,
With other me in strange disguise,
Himself forsooth he did array
In woman's attire of a new devise,
And over a bridge as he did go. Lady, lady.
In the water he saw his own shadow, My.
Which when he did perceive and see,
A Lady fair he says it seems:
(...) himself that it was he,
And iudgde that it was Dianaes Nymph,
Who in the waters in such fashion, Lady, la
Did use themselves for recreation, My deer.
And through the beauty of whose looks,
Taken he was with such sond desire,
That after many humble suits,
Incontinent he did aspire.
Unto her grace him to refer,
Trusting y^ merry was in her, My deer, etc. Lady, Lady
With arms displaid he took his race,
And leapt into the river there,
And thought his Lady to embrace,
^eing of himself, d^uoid of fear,
And there was drowned without redress, Lady, Lady.
His cruelty rewarded was, with such folly.
Lo, hereby you may perceive,
How Venus can, and if she please,
Her disobedient Subjects grieve,
And make them drink their own disease,
Wherefore rebel not I you wish Lady, lady.
Least that your chance be worse than (...), if worse may be.
Finis.
The Lover co^plaineth the loss of his Lady
To Cicilia Pauin.
HEart, what makes thee thus to be,
in extreme heaviness?
If care do ca^se all thy distress,
Why seek thou not some redress,
to ease thy carfulness?
Has Cupid stroke in Uenerie,
Thy woeful corpse in ieoperdie:
right well then may I sob and cry,
Til that my Mistress (...), my faith may (...)
Why would I cloak from her presence,
My love and faithful diligence?
And cowardly thus to die.
And cowardly thus to die.
No, no, I will show my woe,
in this calamity.
To her whom Nature shapte so free:
With all Dianaes chastity,
or Venus rare beauty:
Then shall I brace felicity,
And live in all prosperity.
then leave off this woe, let tears go,
thou shall embrace thy Lady deer (...) joy*
In these thy arms so lovingly,
As Paris did fair Helenie.
By force of blinded boy.
By force of blinded boy.
If Venus would grant unto me,
such happiness:
As she did unto Troylus,
By help of his friend Pandarus,
To Cre^sids love who worse,
Than all the women certainly:
That ever lived naturally.
Whose slight falsed faith, the story says,
Did breed by plagues, her great and sore distress,
For she became so leprosy,
That she did die in penury:
Because she did transgress.
Because she did transgress.
If she, I say, will me regard,
in this my ieoperdie,
I will show her fidelity,
And eke declare her courtesy,
to Lovers far and nie:
O heart how happy should thou be,
When my Lady does smile on me:
Whose mild merry cheer,
Will drive away fear,
Clean from my breast, and set joy in y^ plac^
when I shall kiss so tenderly:
Her fingers small and slenderly,
which does my heart solace, etc.
Therefore ye amorous imps who burn
so still in Cupids fire,
Let this the force of my retire
Example be to your desire,
That so to love aspire:
For I did make deniance,
And set her at defiance:
Which made me full woe, it chanced so,
Because I look at my mistress so coy:
Therefore, when she is merrily
Disposed, look you courteously:
Receive her for your joy.
Receive her for your joy.
Finis.
I. Tomson.

The Lover compares some subtle Suitors to the Hunter.
To the tune of the Painter.
WHen as the Hunter ^oeth (...), with (...) in brace.
The Heart to hunt, and set about, with wily trace,
He does it more to see and view,
Her wiliness (I tell you true.)
Her trips and skips, now here, now there,
With squats and flats, which has no pere.
More than to win or get the game to bear away:
He is not greedy of the same, (thus Hunters say:
So some men hunt by hot desire,
To Venus Dames, and do require
With favor to have her, or else they will die,
they love her, and prove her, and wot ye why?
Forsooth to see her subtilnesse, and wily way,
When they (God knows) mean nothing less than they do say:
For when they see they may her win,
They leave then where they did begin
. they pra^e and make the matter nice,
And leave her in fools paradise.
Wherefore of such (good Lady now) wisely beware,
Least flinging fancies in their brow, do breed you care:
And at the first give them the check,
Least they at last give you the geck,
And scornfully disdain ye then,
In faith there are such kind of men.
But Iam none of those indeed,
believe me now:
I am your man if you me need,
I make a vow:
To serve you without doubleness:
With fervent heart my own mistress,
Demand me, command me, what please ye, and when,
I will be still ready, as I am true (...).
A new Sonet of Pyramus and Thisbie.
To the, Down right Squier.
YOu Dames (I say) that climb the mount of Helicon,
Come on with me, and give account, what has been don:
Come tell the chance ye Muses all, and doleful news,
Which on these Lovers did befall, which I accuse.
In Babylon not long agone, a noble Prince did dwell:
whose daughter bright dimd each ones sight, so far she did excel.
An other Lord of high reuowne, who had a son:
And dwelling there within the town, great love begun^e:
Pyramus this noble Knight,
I tell you true:
Who with the love of Thisbie bright, did cares renew:
It came to pass, their secrets was, beknowne unto them both:
And then in mind, they place do find, where they their love unclothe.
This love they use long tract of time, till it befell:
At last they promised to meet at prime, by Minus well:
Where they might lovingly embrace, in loves delight:
That he might see his Thisbies face, and she his sight*
In joyful case, she approcht the place, where she her Pyramus
Had thought to viewd, but was renewd, to them most dolorous.
Thus while she stays for Pyramus, there did proceed:
Out of the wood a Lion fierce, made Thisbie dreed:
And as in haste she fled away, her Mantle fine:
The Lion tare in stead of pray, till that the time
That Pyramus proceeded thus, and see how lion tare
The Mantle this of Thisbie his, he ^esperately does fare.
For why he thought the lion had, fair Thisbie slain.
And then the beast with his bright blade, he slew certain:
Then made he moan and said alas, (O wretched wight)
Now art thou in a woeful case for Thisbie bright:
Oh Gods above, my faithful love shall never fail this need:
For this my breath by fatal death, shall weaue Atropos thread.
Then from his sheathe he drew his blade, and to his heart
He thrust the point, and life did vade, with painful smart:
Then Thisbie she from cabin came with pleasure great,
And to the well apase she ran, there for to treat:
And to discuss, to Pyramus of al her former fears.
And when slain she, found him truly, she shed forth bitter (...).
When sorrow great that she had made, she took in hand
The bloody knife, to end her life, by fatal hand.
You Ladies all, peruse and see, the faithfulness,
How these two Lovers did agree, to die in distress:
You Muses wail, and do not fail, but still do you lament:
These lovers twain, who with such pain, did die so well content.
Finis.
I. Tomson.

A Sonet of a Lover in the praise of his lady.
To Calen o Custure me: sung at every lines end.
When as I view your comely grace, Ca. etc
Your golden hairs, your angels face:
Your azured veins much like the skies,
Your silver teeth your Crystal eyes.
Your Coral lips, your crimson cheeks,
That Gods and men both love and leekes.
Your pretty mouth with diverse gifts,
Which drives wise men to their shifts:
So brave, so fine, so trim, so young,
With heavenly wit and pleasant tongue,
That Pallas though she did excel,
Could frame ne tell a tale so well.
Your voice so sweet, your neck so white,
your body fine and small in sight:
Your fingers long so nimble be,
To utter forth such harmony,
As all the Muses for a space:
To sit and hear do give you place.
Your pretty foot with all the rest,
That may be seen or may be gest:
Does bear such shape, that beauty may
Give place to thee and go her way:
And Paris now must change his doom,
For Venus lo must give thee room.
Whose gleams does heat my heart as fire,
Although I burn, yet would I nier:
Within my self then can I say:
The night is gone, behold the day:
Behold the star so clear and bright,
As dimmes the sight of Phoebus light:
Whose fame by pen for to discriue,
Does pass each wight that is alive:
Then how dare I with boldned face,
Presume to crave or wish your grace?
And thus amazed as I stand,
Not feeling sense, nor moving hand.
My soul with silence moving sense,
Does wish of God with reverence,
Long life, and virtue you possess:
To match those gifts of worthiness,
And love and pity may be spide,
To be your chief and only guide.
A proper Sonet, Entitled, Maid, will yon marry.
To the Black Almaine.
MAid, will you marie? I pray sir tarry,
I am not disposed to wed a:
For he y^ shall have me, will never deny me
he shall have my maide^hed a.
Why then you will not wed me?
No sure sire I have sped me,
You must go seek some other wight,
That better may your heart delight.
For I am sped I tell you true,
beleeu me it greeus me, I may not have you,
To wed you and bed you as a woman should be
For if I could, be sure I would,
consent to your desire:
I would not doubt, to bring about,
each thing you would require:
But promise now is made,
Which cannot be staide:
It is a woman's honesty,
To keep her promise faithfully.
And so I do mean til death to do.
Consider and gather, that this is true:
Choose it, and use it, the honester you.
But if you seek, for to misleeke,
with this that I have done:
Or else disdain, that I so plain
this talk with you have begone:
Farewell I will not let you,
He (...) well that gets you.
And sure I think your other friend,
Will prove a Cuckold in the end:
But he will take heed if he be wise,
To watch you and catch you, with Argus eyes,
Besetting and letting your wonted guise.
Although the Cat does wink a while,
yet sure she is not blind:
It is the way for to beguile,
the Mice that run behind:
And if she see them runniug,
Then straightway she is coming:
Upon their head she claps her foot,
To strive with her it is no boot.
The seely poor Mice dare never play,
She catches and snatcheth them every day,
Yet whip they, and skip they, when she is away.
And if perhaps they fall in trap,
to death then must they yield:
They were better the^, to have kept their den
than straie abroad the field:
But they that will be ranging,
Shall soon repent their changing:
And so shall you ere it be long,
Wherefore remember well my song:
And do not snuff though I be plain,
But cherily, merrily, take the same.
For huffing and snuffing deserves blame.
For where you say you must obey,
the promise you have made,
So sure as I will never fly,
from that I have said:
Therefore to them I leave you,
Which gladly will receive you:
You must go choose some other mate,
According to your own estate.
For I do mean to live in rest,
Go seek you, and leek you an other guest,
And choose him, and use him, as you like best.
The joy of Virginity:
to, The Gods of love
I Judge and find, how God does mind,
to furnish, to furnish
his heavenly throne above.
With virgins pure, this am I sure,
without miss, without miss:
with other Saints he does love:
It is allowed as you may read,
And eke auowed by Paul indeed,
Virginity is accepted,
a thing high in Gods sight:
Though marriage is selected,
a thing to be most right:
yet must I praise Virginity,
For I would feign a Uirgin be.
You Uirgins pure, your selves assure,
and credit, and credit:
great joy you shall possess,
Which I (God knows) cannot disclose,
nor spread it, nor spread it,
ne yet by pen express.
Nor half the ioies that you shall find,
I can not judge for you assignde:
When hence your ghost shall yielded be,
into the throne of bliss:
In chaste and pure Uirginitie,
for thought or deed y wisse:
Where you shall reign, with God on hie
For evermore eternally.
And when doubtless, you shall possess,
with Jesus, with Jesus,
these ioies celestial.
Then Lady Fame, will blaze your name,
amongst us, amongst us,
which then on earth reign shall.
She will resound in every coast,
By trumpet sound, and will you boast?
So that although you do depart
This mortal life so vain:
Your chastity in every heart,
by memory shall remain.
But hard it is, I say no more,
To find an hundredth in a score.
Finis.
A warning for Wooers, that they be not over hasty, nor deceived with women's
beauty.
To, Salisburie Plain.
YE loving worms come learn of me
The plagues to leave that linked be:
The grudge, the grief, the great anoy,
The fickle faith, the fading joy:
in time, take beed,
In fruitless soil sow not thy seed:
buie not, with cost,
the thing that y^elds but labor lost.
If Cupids dart do chance to light,
So that affection dimmes thy sight,
Then raise up reason by and by,
With skill thy heart to fortify
Where is a breach,
Often times too late does come the Leach:
Sparks are put out,
when furnace flames do rage about.
Thine own delay must win the field,
When lust does lead thy heart to yield:
When steed is stolen, who makes al fast,
May go on foot for all his haste:
In time shut gate,
For had I wist, does come too late,
Fast bind, fast find,
Repentance always comes behind.
The Sirens times often time beguiles,
So does the tears of Crocodiles:
But who so learnes Ulysses lore,
May pass the seas, and win the shore.
Stop ears, stand fast,
Through Cupids trips, thou shall him cast:
Fly baits, shun hooks,
Be thou not snarde with lovely looks.
Where Venus has the maisterie,
There love has lost her liberty:
where love does win the victory,
The fort is sacked with cruelty.
First look, then leap,
In surety so your shinnes you keep:
The snake does sting,
That lurking lies with hissing.
UUhere Cupids fort has made a way,
There grave advise does bear no swaie,
Where Love does reign and rule the roste,
There reason is exilde the coast:
Like all, love none, except ye use discretion.
First try, the^ trust, be not deceived with sinful lust,
Mark Priams son, his fond devise
When Venus did obtain the price:
For Pallas skill and Iunoes strength,
He chose that bred his bane at length.
Choos wit, leave will, let Helen be with Paris still:
Amiss goes al, where fa^cie forces fools to fall.
Where was there found a happier wight,
Than Troylus was til love did light?
What was the end of Romeus.
Did he not die like Piramus
who baths in blis? let him be mindful of Iphis
who seeks to plese, may ridde^ be like Hercules.
I loathe to tell the peevish brawles,
And fond delights of Cupids thrawles,
Like momish mates of Midas mood,
They gape to get that does no good:
Now down, now up as tapsters use to toss ye Cup
One breeds joy, another breeds as great anoy
Some love for wealth, and some for hue,
And none of both these loves are true.
For when the Mil has lost her sails,
Then must the Miller lose his vailes:
Of grass comes hay,
And flowers fair will soon decay:
Of ripe comes rotten,
In age al beauty is forgotten.
Some loves too hie, and some too low,
And of them both great griefs do grow,
And some do love the common sort:
And common folk use common sport.
Look not too hie,
Least that a chip fall in thine eye:
But hie or low,
Ye may be sure she is a shrow.
But sirs, I use to tell no tales,
Each fish that swims does not bear scales,
In every hedge I find not thorns:
Nor every beast does carry horns:
I say not so,
That every woman causes woe:
That were too broad,
Who loves not venom must shun the tode.
Who uses still the truth to tell,
May blamed be though he say well:
Say Crow is white, and snow is black,
Lay not the fault on woman's back,
Thousands were good,
But few scapte drowning in Noes flood:
Most are well bent,
I must say so, least I be shent.
Finis.
An excellent Song of an outcast Lover.
To, All in a Garden green.
MY fancy did I fix, in faithful form and frame:
in hope there should no blustering blast have power to move the same.
And as the Gods do know, and world can witness bear:
I never served other Saint, nor Idol other where.
But one, and that was she, whom I in heart did shrine:
And made account that precious pearl, and jewel rich was mine.
No toil, nor labor great, could weary me her^in:
For still I had a Iasons heart, the golden fleece io win.
And sure my suit was heard, I spent no time in vain:
A grant of friendship at her hand, I got to quite my pain.
With solemn vow and oath. was knit the True-loue knot,
And friendly did we treat of love, as place and time we got.
Now would we send our sighs, as far as they might go,
Now would we work with open signs, to blaze our inward woe.
Now rings and tokens too, renude our friendship still,
And each device that could be wrought, expressed our plain goodwill,
True meaning went withal, it cannot be denide:
Performance of the promise past, was hopte for of each side:
And looked for out of hand: such vows did we two make,
As God himself had present been, record thereof to take.
And for my part I swear, by all the Gods above,
I never thought of other friend, nor sought for other love.
The same consent in her, I saw full often appear,
If eyes could see, or head could judge, or ear had power to hear.
Yet lo words are but wind, all other new come guest,
Has won her favor (as I fear) as fancies rise in breast.
Her friend that well deserves, is out of countenance quite,
She makes the game to see me shoot, while others hit the white.
He way well beat the bush, as many thousands do:
And miss the birds, and happily loose his part of feathers too.
He hops without the ring, yet daunceth on the trace,
When some come after soft and fair, a heavy hobling pace.
In these unconstant days, such troth these women have:
As wavering as the aspen leaf they are, so God me sane.
For no deserts of men are weid, what ere they be:
For in a mood their minds are led with new delights we see.
The guiltless goes to wrack, the gorgeous peacocks gay:
They do esteem upon no cause, and turn their friends away.
I blame not al for one, some flowers grow by the weeds,
Some are as sure as lock and key, and just of words and deeds.
And yet of one I wail, of one I cry and plain:
And for her sake shall never none, so nip my heart again:
If for offense or fault, I had been floong at heel:
The less had been my bitter smart, and gnawing grief I feel.
But being once reteind, a friend by her consent:
And after that to be disdaind, when best good will I meant,
I take it nothing well, for if my power could show,
With Larum bell and open cry, the world should thoroughly know.
The complaint of a woman Lover,
To the tune of, Raging love.
THough wisdom would I should refrain,
My heaped cares here to unfold:
Good Ladies yet my inward pain,
So pricketh me I have no hold:
But that I must my grief bewray,
Bedewed in tears with doleful tunes,
That you may hear, and after say,
Lo, this is she whom love consumes.
My grief does grow by my desire.
To fancy him that ^ormes my woe:
He naught regards my flaming fire,
Alas why does he serve me so?
Whose fained tears I did believe,
And wept to hear his wai^ing voice,
But how, alas, too soon I preeue,
Al men are false, there is no choice.
Had ever woman such reward,
At any time for her goodwill?
Had ever woman hap so hard,
So cruelly for love to spill?
What paps (alas) did give him food,
That thus unkindly works my woe?
What beast is of so cruel mood,
to hate the heart that loves (...)*
Like as the simple (...) tr^e,
An mourning (...) ^ spend the day.
My daily cares night ^ooth ^enew,
To thin^e how he did (...) betray:
And when my weary ^ommes wol^ re^t,
My (...) (...) has dreadful (...),
Thus (...) gree^es my heart does (...)
That (...)* (...) (...) run down like (...)*
And yet, full often it does me good,
To (...) the place where he has been,
To kiss the ground whereon he stood,
When he (alas) my love did win.
To kiss the Bed whereon we laye^
Now may I think unto my pain*
O (...) place full often I say:
Render to me my love again,
But all is lost that may not be,
Another does possess my right*
His cruel heart, d^sdaineth me,
New love has put the old, to flight:
He loves to see my watered eyes,
and laughes to see how I do pine:
No words can well my ^oes comprise,
alas what grief is like to mine?
You comely (...) beware by me,
To r^e sweet words of fickle trust:
For I may well example ^e,
How filed talk often proves unjust
But (...) deceit (...) to my pay,
Good Ladies help my (...) (...),
That you may here and after say:
Lo^ this is she whom love consumes*
A proper sonet, Entitled: I smile to see how you devise.
To any pleasant tune.
I Smile to see how you devise,
New masking nets my eyes to bleare:
Your self you cannot so disguise:
^ut as you are, you must appear.
your privy winkes at board I see,
And how you set your rouing mind:
your self you cannot hide from me,
Although I wincke, I am not blind.
The secret sighs and fained cheer,
That often does pain thy careful breast:
To me right plainly does appear,
I see in whom thy heart does rest.
And though thou make a fained vow,
That love no more thy heart should nip,
yet think I know as well as thou,
The fickle helm does guide the ship.
The Salamander in the fire,
By course of kind does bathe his limbs:
The floting Fish takes his desire,
In running streams whereas he swimmes.
So thou in change do take delight,
Full well I know thy slipperie kind:
In vain thou seemst to dim my sight,
Thy rolling eyes bewraieth thy mind.
I see him smile that does possess
Thy love which once I honored most:
If he be wise, he may well guess,
^hy love soon (...), will soon ^e (...).
And ^ith thou can no man entice,
That he should still love thee alone:
Thy beauty now has lost her price,
I see thy sauorie sent is gone.
Therefore leave off thy wonted play,
But, as thou art, thou will appear,
Unless thou can devise a way,
To dark the Sun that shines so clear.
And keep thy friend that thou have won,
In truth to him thy love supply,
Least he at length as I have done,
Take off thy Belles and let thee flee.
A Sonet of two faithful Lovers, exhorting one another to be constant.
To the tune of Kypascie.
THe famous Prince of Macedon,
whose wars m^rest his worthy (...)
Triumph^n not so, when he had won
By conquest great, immortal fame,
As I re^oice, reioi^e,
For thee, my choice, with heart and voic^,
Since thou art mine,
Whom, long to love, the Gods assign.
The secret flames of this my love,
The stars had wrought ere I was born^,
Whose (...) force my heart does move,
And eke my will so sure has sworn*
that Fortunes lore, no more,
though I therefore, did life abhore:
Shall never make,
Forgetful dewes my heat to slake.
If that I false my faith to the^,
Or seek ^o change for any new:
If thoughts appear so ill in me,
If thou thy life shall justly ^ew,
Such (...) of woe, of woe:
As friend or (...), might to me show:
Be^de (...) (...)
Or must if it may ^y to man.
Then let us joy in this ou^ ^oue:
In spi^e of Fortunes wrath (...) (...):
^,
One ^oue in (...) (...) still appear:
^
Pi^sus (...) (...) my ^ne T^isbie,
So thou again*
^.
A proper new Dity Entitled (...) Love and al his laws.
To (...) (...) (...) ^mber me.
SUch (...) from thy love vp^ yield,
Such broken (...), such hope ^sure,
Thy call (...) (...) has me (...).
That I vn^th ^an well i^dure:
But (...) ((...)) as I have ^use,
F^ upon Love and all his ^awes.
Like (...) (...) and g^ue,
(...) St^e wa^s, keep^ from his love,
And as the (...) (...) (...),
A thousand (...), for th^e I ^oue,
Yet thou a ^uelt ^igers* (...),
All (...) the heart, whom thou may h^lp.
A craggie ^ocke, thy Cra^e, was,
And Tigers milk s^e was thy food.
^herby ^ame Nature br^ought to pass,
That like the Nu^se should be thy (...):
(...) and vn^inde, (...) (...) and fell,
to (...) (...) that loves th^e well.
The Cro^ile with (...) tears,
The (...) ^ot so (...) (...):
As thou (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
^
that I may (...) (...) (...),
UUo worth the (...), (...) ^o love.
Si^ the ^ast (...) t^ work my (...)
And h^st (...) will my wealth to way:
Farewell ^kinde, I ^ill keep ^acke*
Such toys as may my health decay:
and (...) will cry as I have cause.
Fie upon Love and all his laws.
The Lover being wound^ with his (...) beut^ requires (...)^o
To the tune of Apelle^.
THe (...) sparks of th^se two eyes,
my wounded heart has ^et on (...) (...)
^
^,
with sighs and (...) tears I (...)
my dear on me some pity han^.
In (...) thee, I (...) such joy,
As one that sought his quiet rest:
Until I felt the (...) ^oy,
Ay ^lickring in my captive breast:
Since that time lo, in d^epe despair,
all void of joy, my time I wear.
The woeful prisoner Palemon.
And Troylus eke king Pyramus son,
Constrained by love did never moan:
As I my deer for thee have done.
Let pity then requite my pains,
My life and death in thee remains.
If constant love may reap^ his hire,
And faith unfeigned may purchase:
Great hope I have to my desire.
Pour gentle heart will grant me grace,
Til then (my deer) in few ward ^ plain,
In pensive thoughts I shall remain.
The lamentation of a woman being wrongfully de^med.
To the tune of Damon and Pi^ias.
YOu Ladies falsely deemd, of any fault or crime:
Command your pensive hearts to help this ^olefull tune of mine:
For spiteful men there are, that faults would fain e^pie:
Alas, what heart would hear their talk, but willingly would die.
I wail o^t times in woe, and curse mine hour of birth,
Such slanderous pangs do me oppress, when others joy in mirth:
Belike it was ordaind to be my destiny.
Alas what heart would hear their talk, etc.
A thousand good women, have guiltless been accusde:
For very spite, although that they, their bodies never abusde:
the godly Susa^na accused was falsely alas etc.
The poisoned Pancal ier, full falsely did accuse
The good Duchess of Sauoy, because she did refuse.
To grant unto his love, that was so ungodly. Alas what, etc
Such false dissembling men, stoong with Alectos dart:
Must needs have place to spit their spite, upon some guiltless heart:
Therefore, I must be pleased, that they triumph on me, Alas, etc.
Therefore, Lord, I thee pray, the like death down to send,
Upon these false suspected men, or else their minds t'amend:
As thou have done ^ofore, unto these persons three. Alas what, etc.
A proper Song, Entitled: Fain would I have a pretty thing to give unto my
Lady.
To the tune of lusty Gallant.
Fain would I have a pretty thing,
to give unto my Lady:
I name no thing, nor I mean no thing,
But as pretty a thing as may be.
Twenty iorneyes would I make,
and twenty ways would hie me,
To make adventure for her sake,
to set so^e matter by me:
But I would ^aine have a pretty thing, (...),
I name nothing, nor I mean nothing, etc.
Some do long for pretty ^nackes,
and some for strange devices:
God send me that my Lady lackes.
I care not what the price is, thus ^aine (...)
Some ^oe here, and some go there,
wheare ga^es ^e not geason:
And I go gaping every where,
but still come out of season. Yet feign, etc.
I walk the town, and tread the street,
in every corner seeking:
The pretty thing I cannot meet,
^hats for my Ladies liking. Feign, (...)
The Merce^s ^ull me ^oing by,
the Silkie wives say what lack (...)
The thing you have not, then say I
ye foolish fools, go pack ^e. But fai^ (...)
It is not all the Silk in Cheap,
nor all the golden treasure:
Nor twen^e Bushels on a heap,
(...) ^o my Lady ^e asure. Put ^aine, etc.
The Grauers of the golden shows,
with Iuelles ^o (...) me.
The (...) in the shappes that ^owes,
they do nothing but let me: But feign, etc.
But were it in the wit of man,
by any means to make it.
I c^ld for Money buy it than,
and say, fai^e (...) ^ake it. Thus, fain, etc.
O Lady, what ^ ^ke is this:
that my (...) willin^ ^isse t^:
To find what pre^ie thing it is,
that my good Lady (...).
Thus fain would I have had this preti thing
to give unto my Lady (...)
^
^
A proper wooing Song in^tuled: Ma^de (...) a love me: ye or no?
To the tune of the M^rchaunts Daug^ter went over the ^elde.
My ^yde will ye love me yea or no?
tell me the trothe, and let me go^.
It can be no ^esse th^n a sinful deed,
trust me truly.
To ^inger a Lover that looks to (...),
in due time (...).
^ou Maids that think your (...) as ^ne,
As Venus and all the Ma^es (...)
The father himself when he first made man
trust me truly:
Made you for his help when the world began
in due time duly.
Then since Gods will was even so.
Why should you disdain you Lover the*
But rather with a willing heart,
Love him truly?
For in so doing, you do but your part,
Let reason rule ye.
Consider (sweet) what sighs and sobbes,
Do nip my heart with cruel throbbes,
And al (my deer) for the love of you,
Trust me truly:
But I hope that you will soon mercy show,
In due time duly.
If that you do my case well way,
And show some sign whereby I may
Have some good hope of your good grace,
Trust me truly:
I count my self in a blessed case,
Let reason rule ye.
And for my part, whilst I do live,
To love you most faithfully, my hand I give,
Forsaking all other, for your sweet sake,
Trust me truly:
In token whereof, my troth I betake,
to your self most duly.
And though for this time we must depart,
yet keep you this ring true token of my heart,
Til time do serve, we meet again,
Let reason rule ye.
When an answer of comfort, I trust to obtain,
In due time duly.
Now must I depart with sighing tears,
With sobbing heart and burning ears:
Pale in the face, and faint as I may,
trust me truly:
But I hope our next meeting, a joyful day,
in due time duly.
The painful plight of a Lover oppressed with the beautiful looks of his
Lady.
To the tune of, I loved her over well.
When as thy eyes, ye wretched spies
did breed my cause of care:
And sisters three did full agree,
my fatal thread to spare.
Then let these words engraven be,
on toomb whereas I lie,
That here lies one whom spiteful love,
has caused for to die.
Sometimes I spend the night to end,
in dolors and in woe:
Sometime again unto my pain,
my chiefest joy does grow.
When as in mind, thy shape I find,
as fancy does me tell:
Whom now I know, as proof, does show
I loved thee over well.
How often within my wreathed arm,
desired I to fold:
Thy Crystal corpse, of whom I ioyed,
more dearer than of gold,
But now dosdaome, does breed my pain,
and thou ^anst not deny:
But that I loved thee over well:
that caused me to d^e.
The (...) that serut^ his (...) will,
in (...) here and there*
The moyling Horse, that labors still,
his burden great to (...)
In ^ew of pain^* (...) again,
of him which did him owe:
As Natures heast, (...) (...) and lea^t
them thank of (...) of to show^.
The Lion and the (...) (...),
as Nature does then (...):
For (...) like love (...) (...) gain:
in Stories (...) find::
Those (...) (...) both (...) and ^ame,
of (...) (...) (...) (...):
But thy reply, willis (...) to ^ie.
that loved thee over (...).
Therefore, my dear (...) Darling (...),
ensample (...) (...)*
Which equally wi^h (...) (...),
their loving (...) (...)
And give him (...) (...) death we
^
^
which loved (...) (...).
Then shall thy (...) (...) (...) (...) same,
where ever that they go:
And wish for ay, as for thy pay,
all Nestors years to know:
And I no less then all the rest,
should wish thee health for aye:
Because thou have heard my request,
and saved me from decay.
A faithful vow of two constant Lovers
To the new Rogero.
SHall distance part our love,
or daily choice of change?
Or sprites below, or Gods above,
have power* to ma^e us strange:
No nothing here on earth,
that kind has made or wrought,
Shall force me to forget.
goodwill so dearly bought,
And for my part I vow,
to serve for term of life:
Which promise may compare with her,
which was Ulysses wife.
Which vow if I (...) break,
let vengeance on me fall,
Each plague that on the earth may reign,
I ask not one, but all.
Though time may breed suspect,
to fill your heart with ^oyes:
And absence may a (...) breed,
to let your wished joys:
Yet think I have a (...),
and honesty to keep:
And weigh the time your love has dwelt,
within my heart so deep.
And peise the words I spoke,
and mark my countenance then:
And let not slip no earnest sigh,
if thou remember can.
At least forget no tears,
that trickled down my face:
And mark how often I wroong your hand,
and blushed all the space.
Remember how I swear,
and struck therewith my breast:
In witness when thou partst me fro,
my heart with thee should rest.
Think on the eger looks,
full loath to leave thy sight,
That made the signs when that she list,
to like no other wight.
If this be out of thought,
yet call to mind again,
The busy suit, the much ado,
the labor and the pain,
That at the first I had,
^re thy good will I gate:
And think how for thy love alone,
I purchase partly hate.
But all is one with me,
my heart so settled is:
No friend, nor foe, nor want of wealth,
shall never hurt in this.
Be constant now therefore,
and faithful to the end?
Be careful how we both may do,
to be each others friend.
Wish free and clean consent,
two hearts in one I knit:
Which for my part, I vow to keep,
and promise not to flit,
Now let this vow be kept,
exchange thy heart for mine:
So shall two hearts be in one breast,
and both of them be thine.
A sorrowful Sonet,
made by M. George Mannington, at Cambridge Castle.
To the tune of Labandala Shot.
I Wail in woe, I plunge in pain,
with sorowing sobs, I do complain,
With wallowing waves I wish to die,
I languish sore whereas I lie,
In fear I faint in hope I hold,
With ruthe I run, I was too bold:
As lucklesse lot assigned me,
in dangerous dale of destiny:
Hope bids me smile, Fear bids me weep,
My seely soul thus Care does keep,
Yea too too late I do repent,
the youthful years that I have spent,
The retch less race of careless kind,
which has bewitched my woeful mind.
Such is the chance, such is the state,
Of those that trust too much to fate.
No braggiug boast of gentle blood,
What so he be, can do thee good:
No wit, no strength, nor beauties hue,
No friendly suit can death eschew.
The dismal day has had his will,
And justice seeks my life to spill:
Reuengement craves by rigorous law,
Whereof I little stood in a we:
The doleful doom to end my life,
Bedect with care and worldly strife:
And frowuing judge has given his doom.
O gentle death thou art welcome:
The loss of life, I do not fear.
Then welcome death, the end of care.
O prisoners poor, in dungeon deep,
Which pass the night in slumbring sleep:
Well may you rue your youthful race.
And now lament your cursed case,
Content your self with your estate,
I mpute no shame to fickle fate:
With wrong attempts, increase no wealth,
Regard the state of prosperous health:
And think on me, when I am dead:
Whom such delights have lewdly led.
My friend and parents, where ever you be
Full little do you think on me:
My mother mild, and dame so deer:
Thy loving child, is fettred here:
Would God I had, I wish too late,
Been bred and borne of meaner estate:
Or else, would God my rechlesse ear,
Had been obedient for to hear,
Your sage advice and counsel true:
But in the Lord parents adue.
You valiant hearts of youthful train,
Which heard my heavy heart complain:
A good example take by me,
Which run the race where ever you be:
trust not too much to bilbow blade,
nor yet to fortunes fickle trade.
Hoist not your sails no more in wind,
Least that some rock, you chance to find,
or else be driven to Lybia land,
whereas the Barque may sinck in sand.
You students all that present be,
To view my fatal destiny,
would God I could requite your pain,
wherein you labor, although in vain,
if mighty God would think it good,
to spare my life and vital blood,
(...) your proffered courtesy,
^^ld remain most steadfastly,
Your servant true in deed and word,
But welcome death as please the Lord.
Yea welcome death, the end of woe,
And farewell life, my fatal so:
Yea welcome death, the end of strife,
Adue the care of mortal life,
For though this life does fleet away,
In heaven I hope to live for ay:
A place of joy and perfect rest,
Which Christ has purchaste for the best:
Til that we meet in heaven most hiest:
Adue, farewell in Jesus Christ.
A proper Sonet, of an unkind Damsel, to to her faithful Lover.
To, the nine Muses.
THe ofter that I view and see,
That pleasant face and fair beauty,
whereto my heart is bound:
The near my Mistress is to me,
My health is farthest off I see:
and fresher is my wound:
Like as the flame does quench by fire,
or streams consume by reign,
So does the sight that I desire,
appease my grief and pain:
Like a fly that does hie,
and haste iuto the fire:
So in brief, finds her grief,
that thought to sport aspire.
When first I saw those Crystal (...)
I little thought on beauties beams:
sweet venom to have found,
But wilful will did prick me forth,
Perforce to take my grief in worth,
that causd my mortal wound:
And Cupid blind compeld me so,
my fruitless hope to hide?
Wherein remaind my bitter woe:
h^hus still he did me guide *
Then his dart, to my heart,
he slung with cruel fist:
Whose poison fell, I know right well,
no lover may resist.
Thus vainly still, I frame my suit,
Of ill sown seeds, such is the fruit,
experience does it show:
The fault is hers the pain is mine,
And thus my sentence I define,
I happened on a shrow:
And now beware, ye yongmen all,
Example take by me:
Least beauties bait in Cupids thrall,
do catch you privily:
So stay you, I pray you,
and mark you my great wrong,
Forsaken, not taken,
thus end I now my song.
The Lover complains the absence of his Lady, wishes for death.
To, the new Almaine.
Since spiteful spite has spide her time,
my wished ioies to end:
And drowping dread has driven me now
from my new chosen friend:
I can but wail the want,
of this my former joy:
Since spiteful force has sought so long,
my bliss for to annoie.
But though it be our chance
asunder for to be,
My heart in pawn til we do meet,
Shall still remain with thee:
And then we shall (...),
our sugared pleasures past:
And love that love, that seeks no change,
whilst life in us do last.
Perhaps my absence may,
or else some other let:
By choi^e of change, cause thee my deer,
out former love forget:
And thou renounce the oath,
which e^st thou vowdst to me:
My dearest blood in recompense,
thou sure s^onldst shortly see.
A thousand sighs to se^d to thee I will not let,
Ne to be wail the l^sse of thee, I never will forget
But still suppose I see,
the same before my face:
And lovingly between my arms,
thy corpse I do embrace.
Thus fe^d I fancy still,
for lack of greater joy:
With such like thoughts, which daily does,
my wo^ull heart annoy:
thus still in hope I live,
my wished ioies to have:
And in despair often time I wish,
my feeble Corpse in grave.
This is the life I lead, til I thee see again
And so will do, til dreadful death,
do seek to ease my pain,
who^ rather I do wish, by force to end in woe,
than for to live in happy state, thy love for to forgo.
And thus farewell my deer,
with whom my heart shall rest,
Remember him that this did write,
since he does love thee best:
And will ^il greedy death,
my days do shorten now:
Farewell my dear, lo here my faith
and troth to thee I vow.
Finis.
The Lover compares him self to the painful Falcouer.
To the tune, I loved her over well.
THe soaring hawk from fist that flies, her Falconer does constrain:
Sometime to range the ground unknown, to find her out again:
And if by sight or sound of vell, his falcon he may see:
woe ho he cries, with cheerful voice, the gladdest man is he.
By Lure then in finest sort, he seeks to bring her in:
But if that she, full gorged be, he can not so her win:
Although her becks and ven^ing ele^, she many proffers makes:
Woe ho ho he cries, away she flies, and so her leave she takes.
This woeful man with weary limbs, runs wandering round about:
At length by noise of chattering Pies, his hawke again found out
His heart was glad his eyes had seen, his falcon swift of flight:
Woe ho ho he cries, she empty gorgde, upon his Lure does light.
How glad was then the falconer there, no pen nor tongue can tell:
He swam in bliss that lately felt like pains of cruel hell.
His hand sometime upon her train, sometime upon her breast:
Woe ho ho he cries with cheerful voice, his heart was now at rest,
My deer likewise, behold thy love, what pains he does endure:
And now at length let pity move, to stoup* unto his Lure.
A hood of silk, and silver belles, new gifts I promise thee:
Woe ho ho, I cry, I come then say, make me as glad as he.
FINIS.

