VVARREFARE EPITOMIZED, In a Century, OF MILITARY OBSERVATIONS: Confirming by
Ancient Principles The Modern practice of Arms. By Captain JEWS ROBERTS.

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD OVLTON, for RALPH MABB 1640.

To my worthy friends, and Brethren the Captains of the trained Bands, Of the
famous CITY of LONDON.
CAPTAIN.
Martin Bond. George Wawker. Marmaduke Royden. George Langham. John Venn.
Edward Dichfield. Thomas Covell. Edmond Forster. William Ge^re. Samuall
Carlton. Tobias Massy. Randolph Mo^wareing Henry Sanders. Nicolas Beale. Robert
Davis. Matthew Forster. John Bradley. Rouland Wilson. James B^nce.

WORTHY FRIENDS.
MOst Certain it is, that War has bad its Original from the very
foundation of Soveraignety, and thence was reduced to an Art, confined within
limited rules, and principles, and may (in these our times) be said to be
either foreign or Domestique, and that either offensive, or defensive,
preserving, and upholding some Nations, and Countries, and destroying, and
running others; but still the rule, and true scope of a lust War amongst all
Nations, is held to be a firm Peace, which as it is best obtained with the
Sword in hand, so is it best confirmed, by a prevalent Victory, to compass
which many Authors have undertaken to lay down Rules, some through Military
Discipline, some through Valor and Policy, and most through bloodshedd, yet
such defects are found in many of their precepts, that no positive rules can be
collected thence, which in all points can make good the same, for it must be
confessed, that they who frame to themselves, in their studies a model of le
deing of an Army, to be come Victorious, find the same as full of Errors, as of
Rules, when the application is made for a measure of War taken by book,
falls out either too long, or too short, when it is brought into the field,
to be put in practice, and sometimes such unlooked for chances, arest even the
best, and most experienced Captains (though long acquainted with the Wars)
that their skill is not privileged from casualties, nor their Judgments, and
knowledge* from Vaniety of accidents, because a minute produ^eth that in the
field which an Age has not seen no n^r heard of before.

Notwithstanding these difficulties, and uncertainties, I have indeavored for
my own recreation, to collect the most certain of these rules of Warrefare,
being such as admit of the least contradiction, and concluded the same in three
Centuries, which I have termed Military Observations, and are the most
material within the compase of a Soldiers and Captains knowledge, either before
the War begun, or in the prosecution thereof, or after the Victory gained:
the first is confirmed by the authority and aprovement of Ancient authors, and
serves as a groundwork to the second, confirmed by reason, and experience,
and both of these to the third, confirmed, and made good by practice, and the
example of the greatest Captains that have left their memories registered in
the books of honor behind them to posterity; the two latter may hereafter see
the light; if this former find a fav^rable construction in the World, and a
friendly acceptance from you, to whose love in respect of our United brotherly
affection, and friendship, I have presumed to Dedicate the same, and that in
testimony of the Obligement dew to your place from him that Intitles himself

Your friend and Brother in Arms, L. ROBERTS Captain.

To the Readers.
GENTLEMEN.
MY love to Arms drew me as first to be a practitioner thereof, in the
Artillery Garden of London, and when occasions withheld me from the exercise it
self, my mind was b^sied in perusing of such Anchors, as treated of that
subject in sundry languages, which as length proved to be so many, and so
Various, and withal so differently handling the several parts of War, that
I found not thereby either my curiosity wholly satisfied, or yet my knowledge
much bettered, whereupon I indevour'd to gain some benefit by my labor, and
somepleasure by my toil, collecting into one Epitome those quotations, which I
had thus scatteringly met withal in my reading, reducing at length the ^a^e
into three centuries of Military Observations; the first confirming the modern
practice of Arms, by the authority of Ancient Authors: the second confirming
the same by reason, and experience, and the third, by the practice and example
of sundry Commanders, and Chieftaines, ^he second being grounded upon the
former, as the ^atter is upon both: In all which I cannot boast of ^nygreat
pains taken, because they were done for delight, and to please my own fancy,
nor yet appropriate therein, anything worthy note to my self save the labor,
because they are for the most part collections, how soever yet we see
oftentimes, that thereis a labor in recreation, and a toil sometimes in
pleasures, and that the builder is many times found to take more care, and
pains, to collect, and gather his materials, then to erect the Structure, or
to beautify the whole Edifice: But whatsoever my pains, and industry was, I
take it to my self; and whatsoever the benefit is, or may be, I am contented
to bestow upon my friends, and amongst the rest (if thou art one of them) upon
the encouraging me thus by afaire construction, and friendly acceptance of this
first, to present thee with the two latter, and in the interim to style my self

Thy indebted Friend, JEWS ROBERTS Captain.

MILITARY OBSERVATIONS.
Observation first: OF MILITARY ART.
THe Art Military is of its self so Excellent, that it is fit for the
knowledge of all Noble Personadges, and a quality most especially necessary for
all Kings and Princes, whether they live either in peace or war, for without it
their tranquillity cannot be preserved, nor their war prosecuted, nor yet
their own persons and subjects defended, for force and strength of men though
valorous, suffices not unless the same be governed by Military Counsel and
Martial wisdom, Duo sunt quibus Respub: servatur, in hosts fortitudo and
dom^ concordia. (...) cipiatur, ut nihil aliud quam pax quaesita videatur.
Cicero etc. Let war be so undertaken, that naught else but peace may seem to
be sought for thereby.

Observation XI.
Of unadvised War.
AS we have showed unjust War to be unlawful, so we will show that temerity
and unadvised war is an Enterprise most worthy of discommendation. Omnes
bellum sumunt facile, aegerrime definunt, net in ejusdem potestate initium and
finis est. Sallust. etc. All Princes undertake a war easily, but leave it off
difficultly; neither is the beginning and end in the power of one and the same
person.

Observation XII.
Not to Enter into war without cause.
AS a wise Prince ought not to undertake any unlawful invasion, so ought he
not without mature deliberation enter into any war at all, as one that is
unwilling to offend others, though yet of courage enough to defend himself and
his, Nec provoces bella, nec timeas. Plin: Neither may thou stir up,
neither stand in fear of war.

Observation XIII.
Things required to make a War.
TO make a war three things are required, 1. Money. 2. Men. 3. and Arms, and
to maintain this war, Provision, and Counsel are needful; therefore the
undertaking Chieftaine before he begins a war, does carefully consider not
only his forces, but the charges that does belong thereunto, Diu apparandum
est bellum, ut vincas melius, Pub: War is long before hand to be provided
for, that so thou may conquer the better.

Observation XIV.
Bread needful in War.
ABove all the provisions of war, Care must be held, that Bread be not
wanting, for without it nor victory, no nor life can be looked for or
expected. Quifr^mentum necessariumque c^mmeatum non praparat vincitur
sineferro: Vigetius. He is vanquished without weapon, who prepares not bread
and other necessary provision of victuals.

Observation XV.
Arms needful for War to be ever in readiness.
A Prince or Chieftaine that intends war either offensive or defensive, must
have arms always in readiness, whereby is understood Harness, Horses,
Weapons, Engines of artillery, powder and every other thing necessary for
service, either of foot, or horse, and where the Princes territories are
marittime, we may add hereunto ships and shipping of all sorts, with every
furniture thereto belonging both of defense and offense: these preparations
make a Prince formidable, because no man dare do or attempt against that King
or people, where preparation is ever ready to revenge. Qui desider at pacem,
praeparet bellum. Caes. He that desires peace, fore-provide's for war.

Observation XVI.
Of Captains and Souldjers.
When I say people, men etc. I mean a multitude of Subjects, armed and
trained to defend or offend, and these by the custom of these times are of two
sorts, Viz. Souldjers and Captains, and soldiers are also of two sorts,
footmen and horsemen, the one most useful in the Champion, and the other in
mo^tan^us places, and likewise for defense, or assault of towns or grounds
fortified, they are most necessary, and consequently meet for service in all
places, which moved Tacitus to say, Omne in pedite Robur Iacet. etc. All the
strength lies in the footmen.

Observation XVII.
Of Horsemen and Footmen.
FOr sudden service, the horse has ever been judged most meet, and the
Execution of any speedy service is by them soonest performed: Nevertheless all
Captains do judge the actions of the footmen, most certain of Execution,
chiefly if well trained, and skilfully lead, for so Experience has of late
days proved, besides that, they carry with them ever a less Expense, and are
commonly of greater number. In universu^ aestimar^ plus penes pedittem roboris
esse, Tacit. etc. Generally more strength is reputed to be in the forces on
foot.

Observation XVIII.
Soldiers not serviceable are to small purpose.
BY these aforegoing observations, it is sufficiently proved that both horsemen
and footmen be necessary: yet let us remember withal, that unless they be
also serviceable, great numbers are but to small purpose. Manibusopus est
bello, non multis nominibus. In war not many names, but many hands are
requisite.

Observation XIX.
To make Soldiers serviceable.
TWo things is conceaved to make soldiers serviceable, the first consists in
good choice, and the other in good discipline: both of them, but especially the
latter, at this day little regarded. Emunt militem, non legunt. Live. etc. They
do not carelessly take up, but purchase a souldjer.

Observation XX.
The Election of Souldjers.
THe Election of soldiers ought ever to be out of the most honest and able
number of bodies, and every camp is ever ablest, when it is composed of men
known to one another, for thereby they are made the more confident, and their
love to each other will make them adventure the one for another, but small heed
is taken hereof in these days, for they are for the most part Purgamenta
Vrbium suorum. Curtius etc. The offscouring of their Cities.

Observation XXI.
The Discipline of Soldiers.
IN discipline it is now a days seen in armies, that the External form, and
not the certain substance thereof is observed, for whereas soldiers in former
ages endeavored to be virtuous and modest, so now they study rather how to
excel in Riot then in Martial knowledge. Exercitus lingu^ quam Manu
promptior: praedator ^ sociis, and ipse praeda hostium, Sall: The Army is
nimbler in their tongue than their hand; a robber among it is companions, and it
self becomes the enemies booty.

Observation XXII.
Stranger Soldiers what.
NOw in as much as soldiers are made good by choice and Election, and that the
foundation and ground of service seems to consist in the discretion, and
judgment of those that have authority to make this Election, yet we must add,
that they must be chosen of the number of Natural subjects, for strangers are
covetous, and consequently corruptible, they are also mutenous, and not seldom
time cowardly: the custom likewise is to rob, burn; and spoil, both
friends and foes, and consume the Princes treasure. Ossa vides regum vacuis
exsucta medullis. Iuvenal. etc. By this means I profess Kings bones behold
you may clean marrowlesse.

Observation XXIII.
The natural Soldier what.
NOw in the natural soldier, few or none of these exorbitances are found, for
he is faithful and obedient, resolute in fight, loving to his country, and
loyal to his Sovereign. Gentes quae sub regibus sunt, pro Deo colunt, Curtius
etc. Nations which are under King^, honor them for Gods.

Observation XXIV.
Natural soldiers, two sorts.
STatesmen and Politicians have noted, that Natural soldiers are of two
sorts, the first are they that are in continual pay, and the second are they
that are trained ready to serve, but do notwithstanding attend their own
private affairs until they be called, the first sort are necessary for all
Princes. In pace decus, in bello prae^id^^^, Tacit. An ornament they are in
peace, a guard in war.

Observation XXV.
Levy of Soldiers.
But these do hold, that of this sort, no great numbers ought to be, partly to
eschew disorders incident thereto, and partly to avoid the expenses thereof,
the second kind of foot soldiers, are to be trained in Shires, Towns, and
Villages, as people more patient of pains, and fit for the wars, yet not so
ambitiously disposed, as the citizens of Eminent Cities. Odio praesentium, and
cupidine mutationis. Tacit. etc. With a loathing of the present, and a desire
of change.

Observation XXVI.
The number of soldiers extraordinary.
Diverse have left us their several opinions touching the number of their
Extraordinary soldiers, but this must be referred to the discretion and
wisdom of the Prince, and Chieftaine. Bellum parare, and simul aerario
parcere, Sa. To make provision for the war, and with all to favor the
treasury.

Observation XXVII.
The number of ordinary soldiers.
THe number of ordinary Soldiers, as well as of the extraordinary, must also
be left to the wisdom of the Prince commanding, yet some hold that the same
ought to be according to the number of common people in a kingdom, not
inserting the Gentlemen, for to such say they, is only proper the service on
horseback. Alas rusticis non tribu^; in nobilitatem and in divites, haec a
pauperibus onera inclines. Livins, etc. I do not allot the wings of the army
among country fellows; decline these charges from the poorer sort, and lay
them upon the Nobility, and wealthy men.

Observation XXVIII.
Of the Country of the Soldiers.
FIve certain notes have been observed whereby the disposition of men fit to
become soldiers has been discerned. First the Country, where they are borne,
second their Age, third their Proportion of body, fourth their quality of
mind, fifth their faculty. Touching their Country, it is a thing apparently
opened, that mo^^anous regions, or barren places, and northern habitations,
do breed wits well disposed to the war. Locorum asperit as hominum quoque
ingenia durat. Curt. etc. The ruggedness of their habitation does also make
the disposition of the inhabitants hardy.

Observation XXVIII.
of the Age of Soldiers
THe age in the second place most apt for the war, was anciently observed to
be about eighteen years, and so the Romans used. Facilius est ad virtutem
instruere novos milites quam revocare praeteri^os, Vig. etc. It is easier to
train up freshwater Soldiers to Discipline, then to reclaim over-growne ones.

Observation XXIX.
of the stature of the Soldiers.
IN the third place the stature of the soldier ought to be observed: C. Marius
liked best the longest bodies, Pirrhus prefered large and well proportioned
men, but Vigetius seemed in his choice rather to esteem strength then
stature,. Utilius est fortes milites esse qu am grandes. Viget. etc. It is more
advantageous, that the Soldiers be strong then great.

Observation XXX.
of the spirit of a Soldier.
IN the next place, the mind and Spirit of a Soldier, is to be considered, for
that mind which is quick, nimble, bold and confident, seems apt for War: he
also is of good hope that loves honor more then Ease, or profit. In brief: Is
qui n^hil metuit, nisi turpem famam. Sall. He that is afraid of nothing but an
ill name.

Observation XXXI.
Of the Faculty of a Soldier.
IN the last place, it is to be marked in what Art or Faculty a man has been
brought up, for it may be presumed, that Fishers, Fowlers, Cooks, etc. trained
up in esseminate Arts, are unfit for Martial endeavor, and as these men were
in respect of their Trades, thought unmeet; so in old time, Slaves, and
Masterlesse-men, were repulsed from Arms, as in famous persons. Sed nunc tales
sociantur armis quales domini habere fastidiunt. Vig. etc. But now a days such
fellows are entertained in their Armies, as they fowlely scorn to keep in
their houses.

Observation XXXII.
Discipline makes Soldiers.
HOw Soldiers are to be chosen, these few words which we have spoken may
suffice to demonstrate: let us now in the next place say somewhat of Discipline,
for though choice finds out Soldiers, yet it is Discipline does make them
such, and continues them fit for service. Paucos Viros forles Natura procreat,
bona institutione plures reddit industria. Vig. etc. Nature bring's forth but a
few very strong-men; Industry by good instruction breed's up very many.

Observation XXXIII.
Military Discipline What.
Military Discipline is a certain severe confirmati^ion of Soldiers, in their
Valor and Virtue, and is seen to be performed by four means, I Exercise, 2
Order, 3 Compulsion, 4 Example; the two first of these do appertain to Valor,
the third to Virtue, and the last both to Valor, and Virtue.

But first for Exercise, I say that a Soldier being chosen, ought to be
informed in Arms, and used in action, the word it self Exercitium imports
nothing else. Exercitus dicitur quod melius fit Exercitando, Varro. It is called
Exercitus, an Army, because it is made better by often exercising.

Observation XXXIV.
Military Order What.
ORder in Martial Discipline consists in dividing, disposing and placing of
men, aptly at all occasions, to be commanded, as the leaders shall direct: this
in it self requires with the parts thereto appertaining a longer discourse,
therefore I refer it to Experienced Captains, and skillfull. Leaders, that
have written thereof, as Polibius, Vigetius, Dela-Nove, and others etc.

Observation XXXVI.
Military Compulsion what.
MIlitary Compulsion, or coertion, is that which bridleth, and governs the
manners of Soldiers, for no order can be observed a among them, unless they
be indewed with the qualities of Continency, Modesty, and Abstinency, but first
Continency is chiefly to be showed in their Diet, and moderate desires.
Degenerat ae Robore ac Virtute miles assuetudine Voluptatum, Tacitus. A
Soldier, by custom of Pleasures, degenerates from's Courage, and Manliness.

Observation XXXVI.
Military Modesty what.
THe modesty of a Soldier is best perceived in his words, his apparel, and his
actions, for to be a Vanter or a vainglorious boaster, is far unfit in him
that professes honor, or Arms, but that which has been held true Virtue is
silent, Viri militiae natifactis magni ad Verborum linguaeque certamina rudes.
Tacit. etc. Men borne to Martial Discipline, and renowned by famous exploits,
are altogether unacquainted how to skirmish with words, or the tongue.

Observation XXXVII.
Military Apparel.
THe modesty of a Soldier is also showed in his apparel, if therein he do not
Exceed: for albeit it fitteth well the Profession of Arms, to be well Armed,
and decently apparelled, yet all superfluity and Excess, savoreth either of
ignorance or Vanity; Horridum militem esse decet, non caelato auro argentoque,
sed ferro. Live. It best beseemes a Soldier, to appear terrible: not to be
garnished with Gold and Silver, but with Steel.

Observation XXXVIII.
Military Abstinence.
ABstinence is also fit for all Soldiers, for thereby guided, they refrain
from Violence, and insolency, by which rule also they are informed to govern
themselves civilly, in the place or country where they serve, and likewise in
their lodgings, never taking away any thing from the owners, nor yet committing
outrage, though urged thereto by great necessity; Vivant cum provincialibus
jure civili, nec insolescat animus, quise sentit armatum. Cast.

Let them live with their provincialls in a civil manner; neither let his mind
grow insolent, who perceives himself Armed.

Observation XXX.IX.
Military Example what.
THe last mark of Military Discipline, we called Example: under which word is
comprehended Reward, and Punishment, for Soldiers are rewarded, whenever they
receve for any Excellent or singular service, Honor, or Riches, and for Evil
they have their due, when they taste the punishment thereunto belonging,
Necessarium est acrius ille dimicet quem ad opes ac dignitates ordo militiae et
imperatoris iudicium consueuit evehere. Vig. etc. It Is requisite that they
should stand to it more stiffly, whom the course of Service in the Wars, and
the respect of the General has thought good to advance.

Observation XL.
Military Reward, and Punishment.
AS gold and glory does truly belong to the good and welldeserving Soldier, so
punishment is dew to those, that be Vicious and Cowardly, for nothing is
conceived so much to hold Soldiers in dew obedience, as the severity of true
Martial Discipline: Milites, imperatorempotius quam hostem metuere debent.
Vig. etc. Soldiers ought to stand in more awe of their General, then fear of
their Enemy.

Of Soldiers let these observations suffice: We will now speak of what quality
Chieftaines, and Leaders ought to be, for upon them depends the welfare of
whole Armies; Militar is turba sine duce, Corpus fine spiritu, Curtius. A Band
of Soldiers without a Captain, is a Body without breath.

Of a General. Observation XLI.
Of a Chief, or General.
A Chief or General in War, is either of his own authority, a Chief, or a
General, that does command in the name of another; of the first sort are
Emperors, Kings, and Princes: of the second, be the Deputies, Lieutenants,
Colonels, and indeed all General Commanders, in War: Now whether it be more
Expedient that the Prince should command in person, or by his Deputy, diverse
wise-statesmen have diversely discussed, from which it may be in effect thus
far concluded, that if the War do only concern some particular part or
province, then may the same be performed by a Lieutenant; but if the whole
fortune of the Prince do thereupon depend, then is he to command in his own
Person, and not otherwise.

Dubijs praeliorum exemptus, summae rerum et imperij seipsum reservat. Tacit.
etc. Being freed from the dangers of battle, he reserves himself for
authority and chief command.

Observation XLII.
One only Commander, best in an Army.
AS therefore it imports the Prince by his own presence, and sometimes by
deputation, to perform this most eminent office, yet how ever occasion shall
require, it ever behooves according to the greatest, and general opinion of
Authors that but one only Commander, ought to be in chief, for Plurality of
Generals, do rarely or never work any good effect: with this proviso and
caution that to his experience, and wisdom, he have the other properties of
such a Commander. In bellica praefectura major aspectus habendus peritiae, quam
Virtutis aut morum. Aristot. etc. In Warlike authority, a greater consideration
is to be had of the experience, than of the Virtue or condition of the
Commander.

Observation XIII.
Qualities of a General.
MAny are the qualities required by Authors, in a complete Chi^taine, the
principal insisted upon are five, Skill, Virtue, Providence, Authority, and
Fortune. First by Skill, is meant, he should be of great knowledge, and long
experience, for to make and fashion out a sufficient Captain, neither the
information of others, nor yet his own reading, is not prevalent. Qui nor it
quis Ordo agminis, quae cura explorandi, quantus Vrgendo trahendoue bello
modus. Cicero. etc. Who knowe's what is the Order of a troop, what the care,
of espying, how great the measure of hastening or delaying the War.

Observation XLIIII.
Virtue in a General.
BY the V^rtue of a General, is understood a certain Vigor or force, both of
body and mind, to exercise Soldiers, as well in feigned war as in a real
fight with the Enemy, and therefore to say summarily, a Captain ought to be
laboriosus in negotio, fortis in periculo, industriosus in agendo, et celeris
in conficiend^. Cicero. Painful in employment, hardy in danger, industrious
in action, and swift in execution.

Observation XLV.
Providence in a General.
NExt to Virtue is placed providence, to be a needful quality, in a General:
for being of such wisdom, they will not hazard, nor yet commit more to fortune,
then necessity shall enforce: yet too true it is, the fools, and vulgar
folks, that commend, or discommend actions according to the issue or success,
were wont to say, Cunctatio servilis, statim exequi regium est, Delay is base;
to put in present execution, is Princely. But the more advised, and provident
Captains, do think, Temeritas, praeter quam quod stulta, est etiam infaelix,
Livius. That Rashness is not only foolish, but also unfortunate.

Observation XLVI.
Of fortune in a Gener^ll.
THough Providence be ever accounted the best means of good speed, yet some
Captains of that Quality, and in skill excellent, have been in their actions,
and Enterprises, vn^ucky; when others of less sufficiency, by good fortune,
have mervailously prevailed, as is plentifully manifested to us by Histories,
in all ages; we may therefore reasonably say with Cicero, Quodolim Maximo,
Marcello, Scipioni, Mario, et caeter is magnis Imperatoribus, non solum propter
v^rtutem, sed etiam propter fortunam saepius imperia mandata, atque exercitus
esse commissos. Cicero. That heretofore not only for their Valor, but also
for their good Fortune, that authority was frequently imposed, and the command
of the Army was committed to Maximus, Marcellus, Scipio, Marius, and other
those great Generals.

Observation XLVII.
Of authority in a General.
AVthority was the last thing we wished to be in a General, for it greatly
imports his actions, and designs; what opinion, or conceit the Enemy may
have of such a Commander, and likewise how much his friends, and confederates
do esteem him: but the only chief and principal means to maintain this
authority, as sundry authors have left us in their writings, is Austerity, and
Terror. Dux authoritatem maximam sever^ta^e sumat, omnes culpas militares
legibus vindicet, n^lli Errantium credatur ignoscere. Viget. etc. Let a
General take upon him self very great authority, with gravity; let him punish
the Soldiers delinquencies according to the laws, let him be believed to
pardon no Offenders.

Observation XLVIII.
Of Affability, and severity in a General.
TO conclude these Observations, collected upon the due properties, of a
General; experience has proved, that such Chieftaines, as were affable, and
kind to their Soldiers, became ever much loved, yet did they incur contempt;
but on the other side, those that have commanded severely, and terribly, albeit
they gained no good will, yet were they ever best obeyed. Dux facilis inutilis.
App. A favorable General is worth little.

Observation XLIX.
Good Soldiers without good Counsel, Bootlesse.
AFter that a Prince has found out, and elected his men, and framed them fit
for the Wars, whom now I term Soldiers; yet serve they to small or no
purpose, unless they be employed according to Military wisdom, of warlike
counsel. Non minus est Imperatoris consilio quam Vip^rfecisse. Tacit. It is of
no less moment to be instructed by the advice, than the valor of the General.

Observation L.
Of Counsels in War.
Counsel in War, or Military Counsels, is by some wri^ers branched into two
several sorts, that is, Direct Counsel, and indirect Counsel: the first
extends it self to a plain and orderly demonstration and course, for
proceeding; as to lay hold upon fit and due occasion: for as in all other
humane actions, so (chiefly in War) Occasion is of great force, and
consequence. Occasio in bell^, solet amplius juvare quam Virtus. Vig. etc.
Opportunity in War commonly help's more than Valor.

Observation LI.
Constancyin Military counsels.
MAny Authors have left us in writing, that occasions presented, being then
taken hold of, have often be the means of good success, and that the fame of
him, that knows when to embrace the same, has wrought great effects:
Constancy in Resolutions, determined in Counsels, is then behooffull:
Therefore a Captain ought not to give credit, nor be apt to believe the vain
Rumors, and reports of every man. Male imperatur cum regit V^lgus duces suos.
Seneca. Things are ill governed, when the foot rules the head.

Observation LII.
Confidence in Military counsels.
AS inconstancy is to be avoided in counsels of War, so confidence is
likewise to be eschewed; for no man is sooner surprised, then he who fears
least: and who knows not, but that the contempt of the Enemy, has been the
maine cause of great discomfitures: Therefore as a Captain that commands an
Army, or a Town, ought not to fear, so should he not contemn his Enemy.
Nimia fiducia semper noxia. Emil. Too much confidence is always hurtful.

Observation LIII.
Good information in Military counsel.
AS overmuch estimation, of our own Virtue and Valor, is hurtful to us,
causing thereby a security in us; so to prevent the same, it does import every
good Captain, to be well and truly informed, not only of his own forces,
but also of the strength, and Virtue, of his Enemy, to which is to be added,
the knowledge of the situation, of the place and Country, where he abides, or
is seated, the quality of the people, and Soldiers he commands, together with
every other needful circumstance, thereunto belonging; moreover the G^neralls
humor, and capacity, is not to be omitted; together with the particular
condition and Nature, of the Enemy. Impetus acres cunctatione languescunt, aut
in perfidiam mutantur. Tacit. Violent resolutions languish through delay, or
else are turned into treachery.

Observation LIIII.
Temerity to be avoided.
TEmerity in Military actions is to be avoided as most dangerous, for judicious
Captains are not to enterprise any thing without Mature delibration, and fair
opportunity, unless they be thereto by necessity enforced. In rebus asperis et
tenui spe, fortissima quaeque consilio tutissima sunt. Livi. etc. In dangerous
matters, and slender hopes, the strongest things are safest by counsel.

Observation LV.
Prodigious signs, not to be neglected.
SOme wise men, and those not superstitiously, but discreetly, do think and
have noated to Military-men, that Prodigious Signs from Heaven, or on Earth,
are not to be neglected; neither yet, according to their opinion, are dreams
to be contemned. Nam amat benignit as numinis, seu quod merentur homines, seu
quod tangitur eorum affectione, his quoque rationibus prodere quae impendunt.
Ami. etc. For the goodness of the Deity, whether because that mortals deserve
it, or else being with their afflictions, loves by these means, to fore-shew
those things, which hang over their heads.

Observation LVI.
Time to be observed.
OPportunity is by a judicious Captain, to be awaited, and fit time to be
spied out, when either the Enemy is wearied, or by pretending fear, draw him
into ambushes, and danger, all which advantages? with many others, is
principally gained, by observations, of time and seasons. Quia si in occasioni^
momento, cujus praetervolat opportunit as cunctatu^ paulum fueris, nequicquam
mox omissam quierare. Live. Because if thou shall never so littleslacken, in the
very nick of occasion, whose opportunity slips quickly away; 'twill be too late
afterward to seek for what is let pass.

Observation LVII.
Place to be considered.
AS Time, and the observation thereof is to be laid hold on; so likewise is
place also to be well and judiciously considered, especially whether it conduce
to a Captains advantage, or to his Enemies. Amplius prodest locus saepe quam
Virtus. Viget. etc. Often times, the Place more advantageth, than Valor.

Observation LVIII.
The well ^raining of the men to be noated.
Doubtless in a Military action, or design, it imports much, that the
Soldiers be well trained, ordered, and prepared for the fight: for it is ever
seen that the want of Art, either in Captain or Soldier, is cause of many
disadventures, and we find in a skirmish-battell, or such encounter, that many
times a small supply of there Soldiers coming opportuely, whether on Horseback,
or on foot, does seem to the Enemy, very terrible, and much daunteth them:
And in Histories, we find noted, that a sudden showt, or such conceit, has
oftentimes amazed a whole Army. Milites Vanis and inanibus, mag is quam justis
formidinis causis moventur. Curtius. Soldiers are terrified, more with Vain,
and naked, then with just causes of fear.

Observation LIX.
National Soldiers, together in battle.
THe most expert Commanders, have ever found it to best end, and purpose, that
in ordering of Soldiers to fight, those of one, and the same country and
Nation, should be still placed and ranged together; and have ever been so
vigilant and careful, to foresee, that the least loss of blood may fall upon
the natural Subjects, and so handle the design and skirmish as the chief
slaughter may light upon the mercenary-men, and strangers. Ingens victoriae
decus citra domesticum sanguinem bellanti. Tacit. In a victory, the chief
renown arising to the Commander, is that which is got without domestique
bloodshedde.

Observation LX.
To be first in a readiness, for the onsett.
Questionless, it is to a Commanders great advantage, that his forces should
be ordered, and in a readiness for the fight, before the Enemy be prepared:
first, for that he may the better perform what he thinks fittest to be done,
and secondly, that^ thereby his own forces will thereof receive great courage,
being readiest to assatle the Enemy, and to begin the Combat. Plus animiest
inferenti periculum quam propulsanti, Lin. etc. He certainly has greater
courage who inforceth, and rusheth violently upon a danger, than he that
withstands it.

Observation LXI.
The Commanders disposition to fight.
THe Genera^ls, or Commanders own readiness, courage, and lively disposition to
fight, does undoubtedly, greatly animate, the multitude of Soldiers, to the
Battle: as a contrary countenance or the least appearance, of fear, will
exceedingly amaze, and daunt, his company, and Army. N^cesse est, ad fugam
parati sin^, qui ducem su^m sentuint desperare. Viget. Needs must they prepare
themselves for flight, who perceive their Commanders despairing.

Observation LXII.
Moderate execution after Victory.
SOme Captains have held it good policy, to make the Victory famous by much
bloodshed: but in the opinion of most Chieftaines, to execute the Enemy, with
an extreme cruelty, is no sound policy, nor Christianlike practice: But
rather to proceed with dew ^oderacy, for to such it suffices the Victory is
theirs, and the honor thereof, dewly both his, and his Soldiers. Clausis ex
desperatione cresct audac i^, et* cum spei ^ibil est, sumit arm^ formido. Vig.
etc. Those who are encompassed, with despair, take stomach afresh, and fear
reassume's weapons, when no hope at all remains.

Observation LXIII.
To frustrate, Pilledg, and spoil.
HEreto it is to be added, that the provident Commander, be circumspect, in all
his enterprises, and every of his actions, that the common Soldier be
frustrated from spoil, and Pilledg. S^pe obstitit vince^tibus pravum
interipsos certamen omissohoste, spoli^ consectandi. Tacit. The pursuit of the
Conquered ommitted, many times a greedy strife among themselves for the
Pillage, has not a little hindered the Conquering.

Observation LXI^II.
Of Indirect Counsels.
OF direct Counsels, let that we have said suffice, and now speak of Indirect
Counsels, commonly called by the Greek word, Stratagems, or subtle practices;
which manner of proceeding has been in times-past, and of diverse grave
writers, greatly condemned. Vir ^em^ mentis al^ae clanculum Velit
occiderehostem. Eurip. No one of a Noble Spirit will privily kill his Enemy.

Observation LXV.
Stratagems without Fraud.
BUt waving in these days, the opinion of this, and of diverse other writers
worthy credit; it seems reasonable in these times, and in piety allowable,
that Stratagems, or subtilties, may be used in War; yet with this caution,
that the same be such, as may stand with fidelity, and honor: for fraud, being
used contrary to contracts, or agreements, made with the Enemy, is mere
treachery, to poison him or hier a murderer to kill him, were plain impiety.
Foederatum injuste fallere impium. Live. etc. It Is a wicked part, to deceive him
unjustly, with whom a truce is made.

Observation LXVI.
To Murder an Enemy not warrantable.
IN the like nature, out of the War covertly to murder or kill, a particular
Enemy, or by secret assault, or practice; to do him to death, is not
warrantable, either by faith or honor: yet to use all craft, cunning, or
subtilty, in open War, is both avowable, and praiseable, and so it is thought
by Christian writers. Cum justum bellum suscipitur ut aperto pugnet quis, aut
exinfidijs, nihil ad justiciam interest. August. etc. When a just War is
undertaken, it does nothing concern justice, whether any one do fight openly,
or entrap by wiles.

This is also approved by diverse Authors, of great credit. Confice sive dolo
seu stricto comminus ense. Plut. etc. By treachery do it, or fight it out at
sharp.

And this is also confirmed by Xenophon. Reipsa n^hil utilius in bello dolis
etc. Verily there is not any thing better in War, then guile.

Observation LXVII.
The true use of Victory.
THe end of every just War is pear and having briefly showed what is
observable in War, and what counsels are required thereto: Let us now
consider, how Victory ought to be used: to the enjoying then of a victorious
peace, three things are required, 1. Warines, 2. Mercy, and 3. Modesty:
Because that overgreat confidence may happily impeach the end, of good
success. Res secundae, neg ligentiam creant. Live. etc. Prosperous success
begets negligence.

Observation LXVIII.
Mercy in Victory.
VIctory requires in the second place, to be handled mercifully; for in their
own nature we find all conquests, are crueell enough, and the fury and ire of
insolent Soldiers do oftentimes force the people conquered, to become
desperate. Gravissims morsus irritat aenecess^tatis. Curtius. etc. The nips of
provoked necessity are most int ollerable.

Observation LXIX.
Modesty in Victory.
MOdesty, is the third thing, required in a Victory, being of it self, an
honorable quality, in him that conquereth; for in prosperous fortune men, but
especially Commanders in War, do hardly refrain, covetous, insolent, and
proud actions; yea it has been found, that some good, and great Captains,
have in the like cases, forgotten, what did best become them. In rebus secum
dis etiam egregij Duces insolescunt. Tacit. In fortunate events, even excellent
Commanders, have done things most unworthy themselves.

Observation LXX.
Peace the end of War.
IF War should ever continue in a Kingdom, or Country, no estate, or
Government could stand, therefore after Victory, follows peace, therefore how
great, or how long soever, the War chance to be, the end thereof, must of
necessity determine in peace: the name whereof, is not only sweet, but also
comfortable. Pax una triumphis innumeris potior. Live. etc. One peace alone, is
more worth than a multitude of Triumphs.

Observation LXXI.
The profit of Peace.
PEace truly considered, and in it is own nature, is not only good, and
profitable to him that is Victorious, but also to those, that are Victored.
Pacem reduci Velle. Victori expedit Victo necesseest. Tacitus. It Is profitable
for the Conqueres, and needful for the Conquered, that Peace be reestablished.

Observation LXXII.
Of Honorable Peace.
PEace is distinguished, by some, to be of diverse kinds, the best of which, is
that which is by them termed the good, and honorable Peace; and until that be
offered, Arms may not be laid aside, wherein may be wished, that Tullius
advice may be followed. Bellum gerendum est; si bellum omittamus, pace nunquam
fiuemur. Live. etc. War is to be kept afoote; for if that be laid down, we
are never like to enjoy peace.

Observation LXXIII.
Treaties of Peace.
MAny things are considerable, in Treaties, of Peace: but especially, most
Statesmen have held opinion, that first, the conditions be honorable; for
that to condescend to any base conditions, is unto a Princely mind, not only
great indignity, but also intolerable. Cum dignitate potius cadendum, quamcum
ignominia serviendum. Plutarch. etc. Better it is, to die with Honor; then to
live in disgra(...)

Observation LXXIIII.
True and unfeigned Peace.
IT is also important, that Peace obtained, should be in it is self, and
simple, true, real, and unfeigned Peace; for all fained, and dissembled amity,
is to be doubted. Pace suspectatutius est bellum. Mithrid. etc. War is much
more safe, then a feigned Peace.

Observation LXXV.
Time for Treaty of Peace.
THe fittest season to speak of Peace as wisemen have observed, is either when
the war begins, or during the time that the Enemies be of equal force,
for in the continuation, of the War, it must at last behoove the weaker, to
yield unto necessity, and to receive conditions of peace, from the stronger,
and according to the inforcement of his wants, not unlike the Pilos, and
Ship-master, who to save himself, is constrained to cast the greatest part of
his lading, into the Sea. Necessitatipare, quam ne Dij quidem superant. Live.
etc. Obey Necessity, which the Gods themselves could nere over-master.

Observation LXXVI.
Peace when to be accepted.
TO conclude these observations of Peace, when then a Comander has generously
defended himself, and performed all things required in a magnanimious
Captain, and finding never the less, his force insufficient, it cannot be
dishonorable to accept a Peace, wherefore laying aside hatred, the effect of
revenge, and hope the effect of better success, which are then, but two weak
supporters of war fare, he may recommend both himself, and his estate, unto
the aproved discretion, of an honorable Enemy. Victores secundae res in
miserationem ex irae vertunt. Live. Good success turns the Conquerers
displeasure into compassion.

Observation LXXVII.
Gain to Conquerers by Peace.
FOrasmuch as every Peace promises rest, and quiet, as well to the Victorious,
as to those that are Victored, we may ad thereto; that the Prince Victorious,
receives also thereby Honor, Profit, and Security; for albeit, his present
happiness, may occasion a hope of greater success, yet in respect of fortunes
mutability, it shall be good and glorious to consent to Peace. Decorum Principi
est, cum Victoriam prope in manibus habeat, pacem non abnuere, utsciant^
mnest^, et suscipere just bella, et finire. Live It Is seemly for a Prince, not
to refuse Peace, even when the Victory is wel-neare in's own hands, that all
may see, and know, how he both undertakes and lays down Arms justly.

Observation LXXVIII.
Moderation in Victory.
THis point also seems to the Victorious an houorable thing to give peace,
and not to take it, whereby he likewise shows himself discreet, by using a
moderation in his Victory, and no extremity in spoiling; which course, both
wise, and godly writers have commended. Pacem contemnentes, et gloriam
appetentes, pacem perdunt and gloriam. Bar. Who so despise Peace, and desire
Glory, thereby lose both.

Observation LXXIX.
Profit by Peace to the Victorious.
MOreover it is ever seen, that Peace is in its self profitable to the
Victorious, because continual War breeds weariness, poverty, and many
other calamities, and of violent proceedings, desperation, and peril comes.
Maxim (...) ri morsus esse solent morientium bestiarum. Seneca. The bitings of
dying beasts are wont especially to prove mortal.

Observation LXXX.
Peace assures more then Victory.
IT is out of question, but that Peace is more assured then any Victory; for
hope of the one, is in our own power, but the other is in the hand of the
Almighty; and hereto we may add the force, and effects, of fortune, which as
some write, has power in all humane actions. In secundis rebus nibil in
quenquam superbe ac violenter consulere decetnec praesenti credere fortunae,
c^m quid Vesper fer at incertus sis. Seneca. In prosperity it is unseemely to
give counsel, against any one disdainfully, and fiercely, not to trust too
much unto a present fortune, since thou art uncertain, what the Evening may
bring with it.

Observation LXXXI.
Conditions of Peace reasonable.
IN a Peace granted, or received, the conditions of Peace ought to be
reasonable, for no people can live contented under such a law, as forces them
to loath the state wherein they are. Misera pax, bello been m^tatur. Seen. A
miserable Peace, may well be turned to War.

Observation LXXXII.
Civil War a great Misery.
HAving handled these observations that we have collected upon foreign War,
which happens between one Prince, and another, and observations, gathered
upon Peace, which is obtained, and reaped, by a modest Commander? we come now
to those observations collected upon Domestique, or Civil War, which is the
greatest, and most greevous calamity, that can come to a Commonweal, for
therein Subjects do take Arms, either against their Prince, or amongst
themselves whereof follows many miseries; indeed more lamentable, then can be
described. Non atas, non dignitas quenquam protegit, quo minus stupra caedibus
et caedes stupr is misceantur. Tac. Nor age, nor feature can securely protect
any one, or withhold Rapes to be interlac'd with slaughters, and blood with
ravishing.

Observation LXXXIII.
Destiny first cause of Civil war.
DEstiny some hold in opinion is the first cause of Civil War, for GOD in
his divine providence, does fore see many years before that great, and mighty
Empires shall be ruined. In semagna ruunt: laetis hunc numina rebus Crescendi
modum. Lucan. Thus Heavens great Destiny denies to greatest States more growth
thereby.

Observation LXXXIIII.
Riot etc. The second cause of Civil War.
THe second Cause is Exoesse, Riot, and dissolute life: for nothing breeds
civil fury, so soon as over great happiness, also pompous apparel,
b^nquetting, and prodigal spending, consumes riches, and plenty is turned to
poverty, for by these means men may be brought to desperation. Rapacissimo
cuique ac perditissimo non agriaut foenus, sed sola instrumenta Vitiorum
manebunt. Tacit. Every ravenous, and dissolute fellow, has neither fields nor
their increase, but the instruments only of his Vices remaining.

Observation LXXXV.
Destiny in evitable
NOw to consider how destiny might be eschew ed were in Vain, for no wit, or
wisdom of man, can find a remedy thereto, because it is the decree of GOD, and
doubtless inevitaole. Ita fato placuit nullius rei eodem semper loco stare
fortunam, Seneca. GODS, providence has so determined, that nothing shall
continue always in the same place and condition.

Again, nothing is Exempt from the peril of mutation; the Earth and Heavens,
and indeed the whole world is subject thereunto. Certis cuncta temporibus
nascie debent, cresecre, extingui. Seen. All things fade at their appointed
times, they must take a beginning, afterward grow up, and then be dissloved.

Observation LXXXVI.
Remedy against Civil Wars.
BUt yet some remedies may be used touching the second Causes of Civil war,
because the same proceeds from faction, sedition, or tyranny: Now faction I
call a certain association of diverse persons combined to the offense, it
proceeds many times of private or public displeasure, and more oftentimes of
ambition. Nemo eorum qui in Repub: versantur, quos Vincat, sed a quibus
vincatur aspicit. Seen. None of those, who intermeddle thus in the
commonwealth, regard so much whom he overcomes, but of whom he may be overcome.

Observation LXXXVII.
Offactions.
FActions may be distinguished, to be of two sorts: for either they consist of
many, or of a few personsi both which be dangerous, but the former more apt to
take Arms; and that party which proves weakest, prays oftentimes aid of
foreign forces, the other faction wherein are fewer partakers, becomonly great
presonages, of more importance, then ordinary people, and that proves most
perilous, and bloody. Nobilium factiones trahunt ad se et in parts Vniversum
etiam populum. Arist. The factions of the Nobility, draw even all the
Commonalty to side with one, or the other part.

Observation LXXXVIII.
Factions how fatre and where necessary
I Confess I have heard the opinion of some that have had the report, and
esteem of wise men alledg that factions, are necessary, yet doubtless that
conceit cannot be well maintained unless it be upon confines and in such
places where conspiracies is feared, which Cato in his private famely used.
Semper contentiunculas aliquas, aut dissidentiam inter servos callid^ serebat,
suspectam habens nimiam concordiam eorum metuensque. Plut. Suspecting, and
feareing their friendly agreement, craftily he gave occasion for petty
quarrels, and disagreement to arise among his servants.

Observation LXXXIX.
Factions amongst Nobility to be suppressed.
NOw factions amongst the Nobility is sometimes suppressed by forbidding of
Colors or noted and known badges to be worn, sometimes also by inhibiting of
names, and watchwords of ^^times, and this we learn was the counsel of
Mecaenasto Augustus, and Aristotle thinks it fit that laws should be made
against the factions of Noble men. Nobilium comemiones, etpartes etiam leg^bus
oporte^ prohibere conari. Aristo. It is very requisite that the Laws endeavor
to restrain contentions and sidings among Noblemen.

Observation 90.
Sedition a cause of Civil War.
A Another cause of civil War, we called sedition, which is a sudden
co^^otion, or assembly, of common people against their Prince, or his
Magistrates, the original of which disorders may proceed from diven causes,
but commonly we find oppress^^ the prime. (...) periculorum^ vem edi^ ^^sa
peric^la arbir^^^. Aristotle. They supposing present dangers to be the very
remedy, for those mischiefs which are nere at hand.

Observation 91.
Fear a cause of sedition.
Again we find, that fear may be an occasion of sedition, as well in him that
has done injury, as in him that looks to be injuried, as being desirous to
prevent it before it comes: It may also proceed of over great mildnes in
government. Non miserijs, sed liscentia tantum concitum turbarum lascivire mag
is plebem quam s^vire. Live. The insurrections of the Commons are occasioned not
so much through oppressions, whereby they grow wild, as through too much
liberty, whereby they play the wantons.

Observation 92.
Poverty a cause of sedition.
SEdition is also seen sometimes to arise of poverty, or of those Artificers,
whose Arts are grown out of use, and consequently no means whereof they can
live, as is noted in the silver s^iths, by the neglect of Dianaa's shrine and
Temple, Semper in civitate, quibusopes nullae sunt, bonis invident, Vetera
odere, nova expetunt, odio suar^^ (...) om^ia student. Salust. Evermore in a
City those who are poor envy the rich, distaste the old, and desire new; and
being out of love with their own conditions, they devise how they may alter
every thing.

Observation 93.
Tyranny a cause of Sedition.
IN the last place Sedition comes of Tyranny, I^soleney, or mutinous
disposition, of certain Captains, or ring leaders of the people, for albeit
the multitude is apt to innovation, it does ill stand firm until some first
mover takes the matter in hand. Multitudo omnis, sicut mare, per seimmobilis.
Live. etc Every seditious multitude (as it is their condition) is of it self
unalterable.

Observation 94.
Movers of Sedition.
THe movers of Sedition are many, and those of many qualities: In the first
rank I account the Ambitious, who commonly wanting other means to aspire, do
hope by a practice of Sedition, to compass their intended design, in the next
I reckon unthrifts, who having consumed their own do seek by that means to
possess themselves of other men's: In the last I hold the Vain, and light
persons, who without cause, or reason, do attempt innovation, themselves not
knowing why, nor wherefore. Non tam praemijs periculorum, quam ipsis periculis
laeti, pro certis, et olim partis, nova, ambigua, ancipitia malunt. Tacit. Not
more joyful with the booties they expect to get through these dangers they are
to undergo, but even with the very dangers, instead of those certaineties and
what they are now owners of, they rather choose to have new, ambiguous and
uncertain ones.

And thus having told the causes of Sedition: I wish the remedies were in time
prepared; for, Omne malum nascens, facile opprimitur, inveter atum fit
plerunque robustius. Any mischief is easily oppressed in the beginning, after
long continuance it grows more sturdy.

Observation 95.
The way to suppress Sedition.
MAny Politicians have noted there are several ways to suppress this
Sedition, before named: The first whereof is E^oquence, and excellent
persuasion, which oftentimes is seen to work great effects amongst the
multitude, chiefly then, when it proceeds from some reverend, and grave
person, for wisdom, and honored for i^tegrity of life, for by their opinion,
the Prince himself is not to take this office in hand, unless necessity does
thereto enforce him. Integra a^thoritas Principls majoribus remedijs servetur.
Tacitus. Let the Princes authority be reserved entire, for greater cures.

Now if persuasion cannot prevail, then must force compel, but before such
Violent proceeding, both Art, and Cunning, is to be used, either totally to
apease, or at least to disunite the people, and the rather, if it apeare to the
multitude, that the Prince do offer fair, and promise plausible. Verba apud
populum, plurimum valent. Tacitus. Words do most exceedingly prevail with the
multitude.

And in these, or in such like Cases, it is held, by reason of state, lawful
for Princes to use craft, and the same not prevailing to wash away the infany
thereof with clemeucy, for when Arms are laid down, and every one yields,
general punishment were needles. Omnium culpa fuit, paucorum sit poena. Tacit.
Though all have alike offended, yet let but a few be punished.

Observation 96.
The difference betwixt Kings and Tyrants.
THe last and principal cause of Sedition, we named Tyranny which is a
certain Violent government exceeding the Laws of GOD, and Nature: The
difference, between Kings, and Tyrants, may be this: The one imployeth Arms
in defense of Peace, The other uses them to terrify those of whom his cruelty
has deserved hate. Aferre, tr^tidare, rapere, fallis nominibus imperium, atque
vhi solitudinem fecerint, pacem appellant Tacit. By false titles to take by
violence, cruelly to murder, and enter fiercely into the authority royal; and
when they have eaused desolation, to call it Peace.

In the next place, the quslity of Tyranny, is to esteem pro^oters more then
good Ministers, because those men are the scourge of infinite others, they are
also protectors of imptous persons, and stand in daily doubt of Noble, and
Virtuous men. Nobilitas, opes, omissi gestique honores pro crimine, et ob
Virtutes certissimum exitiu^. Tacitus. Nobleness of birth, wealth, dignities,
or formerlyundergon; are wither now borne accounted for a crime, and death is a
most certain reward, for virtue.

Moreover, Tyrants do endeavor to suppress the knowledge of letters and civil
life, to the end all good Arts should be exiled, and barbarism introduced.
Pellunt sapientiae professores and omnes bonas arts in exilium agant. Tacit.
They expel professors of wisdom, and banish all good Arts.

To conclude; these, and such like are the conditions of Tyrants; who for the
most part are either deposed, or slain, for as Kings do live long, and
deliver these dominions to their children, and posterity, so Tyrants being
hated, and feared, cannot continue in their estate. Ad generum Cereris sine
caede and Vulnere pauti descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni. Inven.

Few Tyrant Kings went ever hence down to Hell, Without a Stab; nor heard their
passing Bell.

Observation 97.
Remedies against Tyrants.
THe Remedies which politicians have prescribed against these mischiefs which
proceed from the Violence of such a Prince, is either persecution, or patience:
many generous spirits have used the first, persuading themselves rather to die,
then endure the sight of a Tyrant: in like manner we find that the Grecians did
conceive it a service thrice acceptable to murder the person of such an Impious
Prince. Graecihommines Deorumhonores ^ribuebant ijs qui Tyrannos necaverunt.
Cicero. The Grecians dei^^'d such as slew Tyrants.

Nevertheles, in consideration of Christianity, the other course is to be
taken, and Patience is fitter to encounter this mischief, for seeing that all
Kings, as well the good, as the bad, are sent by GOD, they must be endured. Res
est gravis occidere Regalem stirpem. Homer. It is a heavy thing to be guilty of
a Princes death.

Observation 98.
Persecution of Tyrants.
AGainst those that advise, the persecution of Tyrants many things are to be
disputed of, for it is not only a thing perilous in its self to effect, but
for the most part unfortunate: for commonly it is noted, that present revenge
is taken thereof by the succeeding Prince. Facinoris ejusultor est quisquis
successerit. Tacit. The successor commonly revengeth that vile and villainous
act.

And the murderof Tyrants is noted to have been commonly followed with many
inconveniences, as public slaughter, and intestine War, with other
dangerous mischiefs, and that in some nature, worse then civil War it self.
Principes boni, Voto expetendi, qualescunque tollerandi. Tacitus. Good Princes
are to be wished for; and whatsoever they be, they are to be borne withal.

Observation 99.
Evil Princes to be endured.
SOme punishment upon mankind, such as fire, floods, and other inevitable
plagues, are necessarily to be suffered, and so evil Princes in their
Coveteousnes, cruelty, and other enormous vices, ought patiently to be endured,
because their offices is properly to command, and to bear sway, and the
Subjects to yield and obey. Indignadigna habenda sunt Rex quae facit. Plaut.
Whatsoere unworthy things a King does, are to be thought of otherwise.

And as we see it is the use of Vulgar people to find sa^iety in the long
reign of Princes, so the ambition of greater Subjects, is ever desirous of
Novelty. Praesens imperium subditis semper grave. Thucid. The present Rule is
always grievous.

Observation C.
Patience against Tyranny.
TO conclude this mischief here in the conclusion of this warfare, we will say
that the best remedy against Tyranny, is Patience, for questionles, so long as
men are, so long will Vices reign, and have their being. Ferenda Regumingenia,
neque usui crebrae mutationes. Tacit. The dispositions of Kings, are to be
borne withal; nor are often changes profitable.

FINIS.
A Table of the Observations noted in the Precedent Tract.
OF the Art Military 1 OF Military Knowledge. 2 OF Martial Laws. 3 Things
observable in ajust War. 4 Wars are of two sorts. 5 Defensive War two
sorts. 6 TO assist ourfriends by War. 7 TO Invade our Enemies by War. 8 TO
Invade Barbarians lawful. 9 True causes of Invasion. 10 OF unadvised War. 11
Not to enter into War without cause. 12 Things required to make a War. 13
Bread needful in War. 14 Arms needful in Wars. 15 OF Captains and
Soldiers. 16 OF Horsemen and Footmen. 17 Soldiers not serviceable are to small
purpose. 18 TO make Soldiers serviceable. 19 OF the Election of Soldiers. 20 OF
the Discipline of Soldiers. 21 Stranger Soldiers What. 22 Natural Soldiers
What. 23 Natural Soldiers two sorts. 24 OF the leavy of Soldiers. 25 The
number of Soldiers Extraordinary. 26 The number of Soldiers ordinary. 27 OF the
Country of Soldiers. 28 OF the Age of Soldiers. 29 OF the stature of Soldiers.
30 OF the Faculty of a Soldier. 31 Discipline makes Soldiers. 32 M^litary
Discipline what. 33 Military Order what 34 Military complusion what. 35
Military Modesty what. 36 Military apparel What. 37 Military abstinence what,
38 Military Example what. 39 Military reward and punishment. 40 OF a Chieftaine
or General. 41 One only Commander best in an Army. 42 Qualities of a
General. 43 Virtue of a General. 44 Providence in a General. 45 Fortune in a
General. 46 Authority in a General. 47 Affability and severity in a General.
48 Good Soldiers without good counsel bootlesse. 49 Of counsel in War. 50
Constancy in Military Counsels. 51 Confidence in Military Counsels. 52 Good
information in Military Counsels. 53 Temerity to be avoided in Counsels. 54
Prodigious signs not to be neglected. 55 Time to be observed. 56 Place to be
considered. 57 Thewell training of men to be noted. 58 National Soldiers to be
placed together in fight, 59 To be first in readiness for Battle. 60
Disposition in the General to fight. 61 Moderate execution after Victory. 62
To frustrate spoil and pilledg. 63 OF Indirect counsels 64 Stratagems without
fraud. 65

