A SHORT AND SVRE WAY TO HEAVEN, and present Happiness.

TAVGHT IN A TREATISE OF OUR CONFORMITY WITH THE WILL OF GOD.

Written by the Reverend Father ALFONSVS RODRIGVEZ of the Society of Jesus, in
his work entitled, The exercise of perfection and Christian virtue.

Translated out of Spanish*

Ira in indignatione eius: and vita in voluntate eius. Psalm. 29.6. Wrath in his
indignation: and life in his will.

Permissu Superiorum 1630.

TO THE REVEREND AND RELIGIOUS MOTHER ANNA OF THE ASCENSION. PRIORESSE OF THE
ENGLISH Teresians in Antwerpe.
Reverend and Religious Mother,
Many excellent Treatises have seen light by the happy pe^ne of F. Alfonso
Roderigues, that great Master of spirit. But this alone may worthily seem to
carry the nature of a Centure, wherein all the lines of perfection drawn
through his other works come jointly to meet. The highest aim of virtue both
in time and eternity, is to set an exact conformity between our soul and God:
and the best ways of spirit, such, as lead to this top. What store of
excellent precepts, solid helps, and most effectual means our Author has
here collected to so noble an end, diligent perusal will discover. To which
purpose as I chanced upon the work apparelled in English, so my singular
affection and respect to your self and yours, would not permit me to stand
long in deliberatio^ whether I should first address it, after it had received
life from the print. For to whom can a treatise of divine conformity be more
due, even in rigor of claim and challe^ge, then to a family of that
illustrious Order, the Fou^dresse whereof reflected upon the world admirable
light of example in this kind; having been trained in spirit as herself
testifies, under the conduct of three most eminent men of the Authors
Profession; as of B. Father Borgia Duke of Gandia and third General of the
Society, Beatified by the holy Church, Father Baltazar Aluarez, who^ by divine
revelation she understood to have been the greatest Saint then living in this
world, and Father Francis Ribera, whose rare virtue was accompanied with equal
learning. And who more worthy of the first view, then a Superior of the same
family, by whose discreet and pious government the whole company maintains in
flower and vigor the primitive spirit of their Foundresse, especially in this
high point of true Conformity. Accept therefore Reverend Mother of this little
present, rather as a pledge of co^gratulation, then a spur of new inciteme^t,
with my best wishes that your house may ever prosper, grow up, and flourish, as
it does, to the glory of our Lord, the honor of your Fou^dresse, the Comfort
of your souls, and the good of our whole Nation.

Your R. ever humble servant in Christ Jesus. I. C.

A TREATISE OF OUR CONFORMITY WITH THE will of God. Ian. 2^.

THE I. CHAPTER. In which there are laid two princicipall foundations.
NOn sicut ego volo, sed sicut ut, Matt. 26.39.
not as I will, but as thou will, O Lord. The Holy Fathers assign two reasons,
why the son of God would descend down from heaven, and become perfect man by
vesting himself with our humanity: the one was, to redeem us with his
precious blood; the other, to show us by his example, and teach us by his
doctrine the right way to heaven. For as it would have auailed us nothing to
have known the way, if we had been still detained in prison; Ber. ser. 2. in
Circumcis. Dom.
so likewise (says S. Bernard) it would have little profited us, to have been
delivered out of prison, if we had not known the way: and seeing God was
invisible, it was necessary (unto the end we might see him, and by seeing
imitate him) that he should become visible and cloth himself in our humanity,
as shepherds go apparelled in the skins of sheep, that their flock may be
allured to follow them, by seeing in them their own resemblance. And so that
holy Pope. S. Leo sais; Nisi enim esset verus Deus, Leo Papa 1. ser. 1. de
Natiui. Do.
no^ adferret remedium; and nisi esset verus homo, non praeberet exemplum.
Unless he had been true God, he could not have brought us remedy; and unless he
had been true man he could not have afforded us an example. But he has done
both the one and the other most abundantly, out of that excess of love which
he bare to man, and therefore as our redemption has been most amply great, and
copiosa apud eum redemptio, Psalm. 129 7.
so also has his doctrine been, since he has not delivered it unto us alone
in words, but much more by the example of his works, caepit Jesus facere and
docere, says the Evangelist S. Luke, Act. 1.(...)
Jesus first begun with the practice and execution (and that for the most part
of his Blessed life) and afterward began to preach in the last three years,
or two years and a half, before dyed.

Now among many other things which our Savior Christ has taught us, one of
the principal is, an entire conformity with the will of God, in all
occurrences and occasions: the which he teaches us not only in words, when
setting down unto us a form of prayer, he tells us, that one of those things
which we are to beseech, and beg of our heavenly Father, is: Mat. 6.10.
fiat voluntas tuasicut in coelo and in terra, thy will be done in earth as it
is in heaven: but he much more confirms this doctrine by his blessed example,
seeing he professes to have descended from heaven unto no other end, descendi
de coelo non vt faciam voluntat^^ meam, sed voluntatem eius qui misit me. I
have descended from heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of him who
sent me. And on that sacred day, when having instituted his holy supper, and
almost ended the work of our redemption, in that prayer of his in the Garden,
although his flesh and blood, and sensitive powers had a natural horror, and
auersion from death, by which he witnessed that he was perfect man, Mat. 26.39.
saying; Pater mi^si possibile est transeat a me calix iste, Father if it be
possible let this chalice pass from me: notwithstanding his will was always
prompt and desirous, to drink of that chalice, which his Father sent him; and
therefore he presently adds, nevertheless, be it not as I will, but as thou will o Lord.

But unto the end that we may descend unto the very depth, to ground our selves
very well in this conformely, we must first lay two brief, but substantial
foundations; upon which as upon two hinges our whole matter must be sustained.
The first is, that all our profit in virtue and perfection consists in this
conformity with the will of God, which according as this shall be more full and
perfect, shall likewise be more excellent and great. This foundation is easy to
comprehend, since it must be granted, that perfection essentially consists in
the charity and the love of God, and that the more perfect we shall be, the
greater shall our love be to Almighty God: the holy Euangell is full of this
doctrine, as also the Epistles of S Paul, and the lives of Saints. Hoc est
maximum and primum ma^datum etc. Mat. 22.38. and Colos. 3.14. 1. Corin. 13.13.
This is the greatest and the first comaundment, Charity is the band of
perfection and the greatest of all these is charity, the love of God is of all
things the most high and perfect, and the most excellent and dearest part
thereof, and (as it were the abstract and quintessence of this charity) is an
entire conformity with the will of God, in desiring nothing but what may be
most pleasing unto his Divine Majesty. Eadem velle, Hier ep. ad Demetriad lib.
de amicit.
and eadem nolle ea demum firma amicitia est, says S. Hierom borrowing the
sentence from an other Philosopher: so that the more one is conformable and
united with the will of God, the better and more perfect he shall be, it being
moreover most certain, that the will of God, is the most excellent and perfect
thing, which may be imagined, and so by consequence he is better and more
perfect, who comes the nearest to the will of God. And it was the Argument of
an other Philosopher; if God be the most exquisit and perfect thing of all, the
nearer on comes for to resemble him, the more exquisit and perfect he shall be.

The second foundation is; that there can chance and happen nothing in the
world, but by the will and ordinance of God, sin only excepted, of which God
is neither Author, nor ca^ possibly be. For as cold is naturally opposite to
heat, warmth to water, and darkness to the sun, so much and infinitely more,
is it repugnant to the eternal goodness of Almighty God, to have any friendship
or commerce with wickedness, Abacu. 2.3.
as the Prophet Abacuc testifies: Mundisunt oculi tui, nevideas malum, and
respicere ad iniquitatem non poteris, thy eyes are pure that thou may not see
sin, and thou may not look upon iniquity. Affirming that he can not, nor
may not look upon it in that sense as we usually say a man who has a horror
from a thing cannot abid its sight, whereby he gives us to understand, the
great auersion and detestation which God Almighty has from wickedness, Psalm. 55.
that he cannot endure the sight of it. Quoniam non Deus volens iniquitatem tu
es. Seeing thou art not a God (says David) who have any will that iniquity
should be: and again, Psalm. 44.8.
dilexisti iustitiam and odisti iniquitatem, thou have loved justice and hated
iniquity. In brief the holy scripture does every where abound, with
testimonies of Gods mighty hatred and detestation of sin; and therefore he can
no ways be Author of it. But excepting sin I say, all other things, all
miseries and all calamities, inflicted on us for our punishments, proceed from
the ordination and the will of God: which foundation is most infallible; there
being no such thing as chance or fortunate in the world, as the Heathens
erroniously did feign* neither are those goods, which the idle world abusiuely
call goods of Fortune the donatiues of any such thing, as Fortun, or of chance;
since there is no such thing as they are said to be, but they are gifts
bestowed by the hand of God; As the Holy Ghost teaches us, by the wiseman,
bona and mala, Eccl. 11.14.
vita and mors, paupertas and honestas a Deo sunt, both good and evil, life
and death, poverty and riches are all proceeding from Almighty God.

And although these things are often by other secondary causes brought to
pass; notwithstanding it is most certain, that there happens nothing in this
great Republique of the world, without order from this souueraigne Emperor who
has all dominion in it, there is nothing by chance or accidence to God, but
all which happe^s to us, first passes through his hands, and his disposure of
it. He has numbered all the bones of your body, and keep a just account of
every hair of your head, of the which there does not moult or perish one,
without his particular providence* but what do I speak of men? seeing our
Savior himself affirms in the Euangell, that not a sparrow falls into the
Fowlers net, without his ordinance and permission. Mat. 10.29.
Nonne duo passeres ass veneunt, and vnus ex eis non cadet super terram sine
patre vestro? Neither is there any leaf shaken with the wind, but by his good
pleasure: and also the wiseman says speaking of lots, sorts mittuntur in sinu,
Pro. 16.35.
sed a Domino temperentur. Howsoever the lots are cast into the Lapp, yet
according to the pleasure of God they are mingled there, and by his appointment
drawn out and distributed, Act. 1.26.
cecidit sors s^per Matthiam the lot fell upon Matthias but not by chance, it
being the pleasure of God by that means, to elect him for his Apostle; This
verity, the better and more moral Philosophers, have by the only help of
natural light found out, and so they say, that diverse things, in respect of
their secondary causes, are fortuit and casual, whereas if you regard their
primitive cause, they are no ways casual, but done with mature deliberation
and design: which they declare by the example of one sending a servant upon
some occasion to a certain place, and dispatching another unto the same place,
by an other way; now they meeting both together there, and one not knowing of
the others se^ding do straight imagine that they are met by chance, whereas
unto him who sent them it is no casual thing, but done with purpose and
deliberation. In like manner although oftentimes some things for as much as men
can perceive fall out as it were by chance, because they are unexpected unto
them, nevertheless unto God Almighty they are no ways so, he having so ordained
them, for ends secret and hidden to the eyes of men, and only known unto his
providence. That which we are to gather from these two foundations, which we
have laid, is the conclusion of what we have proposed: which is, that seeing
all things which happen to us, are proceeding from the hand of God; and that
all perfection consists in the conforming of our selves unto his will; we are
therefore to roceaue all things as coming from his hand, and conform our
selves in them, unto his divine and holy will, we are not to esteem any
accident to come by chance, or that any man has had his hand in it; for this
only serves to vex and disquiet us: neither are we to think that this or that
is happened unto us, by any one procurement, and that otherwise it would not
have chanced, for such and such reasons as may occure unto us. But letting
pass all such imaginations, we are to receive all things, as being sent us
from the hand of God, by what way soever they arrive unto us. For it is he who
does direct them so. One of those renowned Fathers of the desert, was wont to
say, that a man should never attain true quietness and content, until he could
persuade himself, that there was no body else in the world but God and he;
Doroth. doct. 7.
And S. Dorotheus says, that those au^tient Fathers were very conversant in
receiving all things as coming from the hand of almighty God, how slight so
ever they were in themselves, and in what manner so ever they chanced to them,
and that by this means, they attained unto a great quietness and peace, leading
even in their mortal bodies heavenly lives.

THE II. CHAPTER. Wherein the second foundation is more amply declared.
IT is a verity so confirmed by holy scripture, that all afflictions, and
evils which happen unto us for punishment of our sins, are procecding from
the omnipotent hand of God, that it were needles for us to spend more time in
proof thereof, did not the devil seek to obscure it with his malicious craft,
seeing from an other verity which we affirmed to be infallibly true, to wit
that God is neither Author nor cause of sin, he infers a false and lying
conclusion, in persuading some that, how ever those harms which a^ incident
unto us by natural causes, and by creatures deuoid of reason, as sickness^
famine, sterility and the like, are all proceeding from the hand of God, seeing
that they commit no sin, in what they do neither is it possible they should,
in tha^ they are incapable of sinning: neuerthele^ those harms and domages
which arriu^ unto us through the faults of others, a when any one does strike
and wound or rob and iniure me, are not proceeding from the hand of God,
neither happening through his appointment and providence, but through the malice
and peruersity of the others will; which error and such who receive not every
thing as coming from the Almighty hand of God, Doroth. doct. 7.
S. Dorotheus does excellently reprehend where he sais. We when we hear any
word spoken against us, or chance to be injured of any one, do imitate dogs,
who when any one throws a stone at them, not regarding him who threw it, do
run and bite the stone; so we consider not God Almighty to be him, who
procured us this affliction, to cleanse us from our sins, but straight run
unto the stone, which is to wreake our anger on our neighbor.

To free us from this error, as also to ground us surely in the Catholic
truth, the Diuins consider in the sins which man comits two things which do
concure; the one is the motion and exterior act; the other the disorder of
the will, whereby we come to transgress the comaund of God. Of the first God
is the Author; and of the second man. Let us put the case; on entering into
quarrel with an other kille him: unto the killing of him, there is required,
that he lay hand to his sword, that he lift it up, that he let fall his arm,
and give the blow; with diverse other natural motions, which may be a part
considered by themselves, without the disorder and commotion of that man's will,
by whose interuention that other man is killed: and of all these motions by
themselves and considered apart, God is the Author, and produces them as he
does all other effects in creatures deuoid of reason; seeing that as nothing of
it self, without the help of God can put it self in act, or motion; so also
(without him) this man could not have stired his arm, nor handled his sword,
and more over these natural acts in themselves are not bad, seeing that if a
man should make use of them in his defense, in a lawful war, or as
executioner of Justice, and so kill an other, he should commit no sin; but of
that fault, which is in the disorder of the will, by which this wicked wretch
co^mits that outrage, and of the disaray of reason, God is not the cause, how
ever he permit it, in that he could have hindered it, and yet out of his just
judgments, does not. They use to declare this by a comparison, a man has a
wound in his foot, and by reason thereof he haults, the cause why he does go
upon his foot, is the virtue and motive power of the soul, but the occasion of
his lamenes in his wound, and not the virtue of his soul: so likewise, in
those actions by which men come to sin, God is the cause of the action; but
the defect and sin, proceeds merely from the man's free will.

So that although God neither is nor can be the Author of any sin, yet we are
assuredly to hold, that all the evil inflicted on us for punishment of our
sins, whether they arrive by intermission of causes natural, or else by
unreasonable creatures, by what way, or in what manner so ever they are
directed, are all proceeding from the hand of God, and so ordained by his high
providence, it is God alone, who lifts up that hand which strikes you, and
moves that tongue which reuiles and iniurs you si erit malum in ciuitate quod
Deus non fecerit says the Prophet Amos, Amos. 3 6.
is there any evil in the City that God has not done? the holy scripture is
full of this verity, attributing all the evil which one man does to an other,
unto God, and saying that God alone is Author of it.

In the second book of the Kings God took the inflicting of that punishment
upon himself, where with he punished David by means of his son Absalon, for
that adultery and murder which he had committed, saying: Behold I will raise
up against thee, 2. Reg. 12.11.
a plague from thine own house, and bereave thee of thy wives before thine
eyes, and give them to thy neighbor: thou have committed this (thy wickedness)
in private, but I will bring to pass that, which I have said, in the sight of
all Israel, and in the face of the sun, whence also it is, that those
impious Kings, who with great pride and cruelty did execute most cruel
vengeance on the people of God, were called by the holy Scripture, instruments
of the divine Justice, Isai 10.5
woe unto Assure the rod of my fury, and of Cyrus King of Persia, by whom God
purposed to punish the Chaldeans, he sais, Isa. 45.1.
cuius apprehendi dexteram whose right hand I have laid hold of. S. Augustine
herupon discourses excellent well: Aug. su. psalm. 73.
their impiety (says he) is become as the axe of God, they are made the
instrument of the angry, but not the kingdom of the well pleased. God usually
does, as we see men to do. a man sometimes when he is angry, will snatch up
some rod which lies next at hand, perhaps some twig or other, with which he
beats his son, and afterward casting his rod into the fire, he does reserve
the inheritance for his son: in the like manner God sometimes by the evil,
teaches and amends the good: by using them as instruments and scourges of his
wrath.

We read in the Ecclesiastical History, Hist. ecc. p. 1. lib. 3* c. 11*
that Tit^^ General of the Roman army, fetching once a circuit about the
walls of Jerusalem, which he then held besieged, and seeing the ditches all
filled with the dead corses and carcasses of men, and all the neighboring
country, infected with the horrible stench of the^, lifting up his sorrowful
eyes to heaven, to direct thither his lamentable voice he called God to witness
for him, that he was no ways the cause of so great a slaughter and butchery of
men. And also when Alaricus was in his expedition to sack and ruin Rome, p.
2. li. 9. c. 2. hist. lest.
it is recorded that a venerable ancient Monk, went to meet him on his way,
beseeching him that he would not be the cause of such great evils, as were
imminent that day, over that wretched City: unto whom he answered, that he
went toward Rome out of no proper inclination of his own; but there is, said
he, a certain person, which importuns me daily and even seems to holl^w in
mine ears, go to Rome, and distroy that City; And thus we see all things are
proceeding from the hand of God, and disposed according to his will and
ordinance. And so the Royal Prophet David when Semei, reviled and cursed him,
throwing down sand and stones against him, said unto those who counseled him
for to revenge himself; 2. Reg. 16.10.
The Lord has commanded him, to curse and revile David, and who shall dare to
say, why has he done so? as much as to say, the Lord does use him as his
instrument to punish and chastise me with all.

But what marvel is it, to acknowledge men, the instruments of Gods Justice and
divine providence, since even the Devils are so, how ever otherwise obstinat
and enhardned in their malice, and seeking nothing more then our perdition, S.
Gregory notes it excellently well, Greg. li. 18, moral. c. 3.1. Reg. 16.23.
upon that place of the first book of Kings, Spiritus Domini malus arripiebat
Saul the evil Spirit of the Lord did ceaze on Saul, the same spirit being
called the spirit of the Lord, and also an evil spirit; evil (to wit) because
of the desire of its mischievous will; and of the Lord, for that he was sent by
God, to afflict Saul with that plague and torment, which God by its means did
execute upon him, and so it is declared in the same text saying, exagitabat eum
spiritus nequam a Domino the wicked spirit from the Lord, 1. Reg. 16.14.
did torment and vex him, and for this reason sais the saint, Greg. li. 14.
mor. c. 16. Job. 19.12.
does the holy scripture call those devils which torment and persecute the
just, the Thieues of God, Thieues because of the malicious will they have, to
hurt and damage us, and of the Lord, to give us to understand, that all the
power they have for to do any mischief, is derived unto them from almighty
God. And so S. Augustine observes very well, that Job did not say, Dominus
dedit, Aug. in psalm. 31. Job. 1.21
Diabolus abstulit, the Lord has given, and the Devil has taken away; but he
attributs it all to almighty God, saying the Lord has given me, the Lord has
taken away: knowing right well, that the Devil could proceed no farther in
hurting us, then God permitted him. And this Saint prosecutes his discourse
saying; Aug. in psalm. 31.
acknowledge God the Author of thy scourge and punishment, seeing the Devil
can do thee no harm unless he first permit it, who has all superior power.
Let no man say this mischief is happened to me by the Devils means, but
attribut all your punishment and affliction to Almighty God: since the Devil
can do nothing of himself, not so much as touch the least hair which lies
upon our garments, without the permission of God; neither could he enter into
the heard of swine as the Euangell testifies, Math. 8.31.
without having first obtained leave of our Savior Christ, to do it. how then
shall he be able to tempt or indomage us, without the permission of Almighty
God? He who had no power to touch the swine, how shall he come to annoy the
children?

THE III. CHAPTER. Of the great good and profit, which is included in this
Conformity with the will of God.
SAint Basil says that the height of all the sanctity and perfection of a
Christian life, consists in attributing the causes of all things to God, how
little or great so ever in themselves they be, and to conform our selves in
them unto his holy will. But to the end that we may the better comprehend the
importance and perfection thereof, and be incited by our affection toward it,
to seek and procure it with greater diligence; we will more particularly
declare the great good and profit, which is contained in this conformity with
the will of God. The first is that entire and perfect resignation, which the
Saints and all Masters of spiritual life do extol so much, pronouncing it the
root and offspring of all our tranquillity and peace, as being that whereby a man
is wholly submitted and resigned into the hands of God, as a piece of clay into
the Potters hands, to be fashioned and molded as he pleases, without desiring
to have any interest longer in himself, neither to live, to eat, to sleep,
or labor for himself, but wholly and entirely for Almighty God: and this is
effected by this conformity, seeing that man thereby resignes himself wholly
unto the will of God in such manner, as not to desire any thing; but only that
the divine will may be most perfectly accomplished in him; as well in point of
what he is to do, as in all accidents which may happen to him, as well in
prosperity and consolation, as in anxiety and adversity. Which is a thing so
grateful and pleasing to Almighty God, as for this only reason, he styled
David a man according to his own heart. Inueni virum secundum cor meum, 1.
Reg. 13.14. Actuum 13.22.
qui faciat omnes voluntates meas, he having prepared his heart so pliable and
obedient to the heart of God, so readily wrought to a delicate aptnes to receive
each form which he should please to impresse in him, either of joy and
contentment or of pain and grief, as softened wax was not more supple to
receive the figure which a man should imprint in it: and therefore he said,
Psalm 56.8. and Psa. 107.1.
and repeated it again, Paratum cor meum Deus, paratum cor meum, my heart is
prepared, (...) God, my heart is prepared. Secondly he who has this entire and
perfect conformity with the will of God, must with all have attained to an
entire and perfect mortification, of all his passions, and vicious
inclinations; We are not ignorant how highly necessary this mortification is,
how much it is commended and extolled in the sacred scripture and by the B.
Saints. Now this mortification is a means which of necessity must precede the
attaining of this conformity with the will of God, this being the end, and
mortification the means to arrive unto it; and we know the principal end of
any thing, is usually more sublime and perfect then the means. That
mortification is a necessary means to attain unto this union, and entire and
perfect conformity with the will of God, we may understand by this, that there
is nothing which lets and hinders this union and conformity, but only our
proper will, and disordinate appetits, and so consequently the more they shall
be mortified and overcome, the more dear and strait wilt this union be, and
this conformity with the will of God. For to join a rough hewn planch, and
make it ly even with an other which is well smoothed and plained, we must first
pass it over with the plainer and make it even; and so in like manner
mortification goes perfecting and polishing us, until it make us fit to be
joined to God, and applied in all things to his holy will, and therefore the
farther we shall proceed in mortifying our selves, the nigher we shall come to
unite and conioyne our selves unto the will of God, and when we shall once come
to be perfectly mortified, we shall then have attained unto this perfect union
and conformity.

From hence proceeds an other good and profit, which we may reckon for the
third; and that is, that this resignation and enrire conformity with the will
of God, is on of the greatest, and most acceptable sacrifices, which any man of
him self can offer to Almighty God. For as much as in other sacrifices, he
offers only his goods; but in this, himself is offered up: in other sacrifices
and mortifications, he only mortifies himself in part, in temperance, modesty,
silence or patience, he offers but a part and portion of himself; but in this
a perfect holocaust, whereby he offers himself entirely and altogether to his
Divine Majesty to be disposed of, in all things as he pleases, and when, and
how he pleases, without any exception, or any reservation to himself; and
therefore there is as much difference betwixt this sacrifice, and all other
sacrifices and mortifications, as betwixt a man, and those goods which belong
unto him, or the whole of any thing, and any part thereof.

And this God esteems so highly of, that he seems to require nothing else of us,
Prou 23.26.
Praebe fili mi cor tuum mihi, my son give me thy heart; as the Royal Eagle
seeks no other pray then hearts, so the most grateful and acceptable thing to
God, is this heart of ours, and if you give him not this, it is labor lost to
present him with any thing besides, for he regards it not. Neither if we
consider it well, is it so great a thing which he demands of us, when he
requires our hearts; seeing that if we who are only dust and ashes, cannot be
satiat or content, with all those things which God has ever created, and that
our caytiue narrow hearts cannot be filled with any thing which is less then
God, how can we think to give God any satisfaction and content, in affording
him but half our hearts, reserving the other half unto ou^ selves? we are
most grossly abused, if we think our hearts can admit of any such division
coangust atum est enim stratum, Esaias 28.20.
ita vt alter decidat, and pallium breue vtrumque operire non potest, the heart
is a little and strait bed says the Prophet Esaias, and is capable of God alone,
wherefore the spouse in the Canticles does call it her little bed; In lectulo
meo, quaesini per nocles quem diligit anima mea, Gilbert. Abbas ser. (...), in
Ca^t. ap.
in my little bed I have sought in the night him whom my soul dearly loves,
and because she kept her heart so straightened that no other could lodge in it,
Bernarin. Cant. 3.1.
besides her be loved Bridgroom: and who soever should seek to extend his heart
so far, as to make room for any on besides, would chase God out of it. And
it is of that, which his Divine Majesty makes complaint by the Prophet Esaias,
Esaias. 57.^.
quia iuxta me discooperuisti, and suscepisti Adulterum, dilatasti cubile tuum,
and pepegisti cum eis faedus, you have committed Adultery by receiving into the
bed of your heart, any other besides your spouse, and to cloak this your
wickedness, you betray and drive God from you. If we had a thousand hearts, we
were bound to make tender of them all to God, and yet we were to conceit we had
done too little, in regard of what we owe of duty unto so great a Lord.

The fourth is, that whosoever shall have brought himself to this conformity,
will be possessed with the perfect charity and love of God; and the farther
progress he makes in it, the greater and dearer will be his love of God, and
consequently his perfection, which consists in this perfect love and charity,
and besides that which we have already said, may be farther gathered from that
which we are to conclude with all; seeing the love of God co^sists not in words,
Greg ho^ in Eua^g.
but in effects and works: Probatio dilectionis (says S. Gregory) exhibitio
est operis, the proof of our love, is the tender of our works; and the more
hard and painful to accomplish those works shall be, the more do they declare
our love and affection: and so the Apostle and Evangelist S. John, going about
to declare the great love which God did bear unto the world, as also the
greatness of our B. Saviors love unto his eternal Father: Joan. 3.16.
of the first he says: God so loved the world, as he gave his only begotten
son to suffer and die for us; and for the second our B. Savior himself
speaking says: Joan. 14 3.
that the world may know how I love my Father, and that I do according as my
Father has commanded me, rise and let us go hence, and the place to which he
went, was to the cross, to suffer shame, torments and death for us. In which
he made it sufficiently appear unto the world, that he loved his Father, in so
much as he was obedient to him in a command so hard and rigorous. Wherefore we
conclude that our love appears best in our Actions, and most, when they shall
be most great and laborious. Moreover this entire conformity with the will of
God, is (as we have said) the greatest sacrifice which of our selves we can
offer up unto him; and that, because it supposes a most perfect mortification
and resignation, whereby a man offers up himself to God, and wholly resignes
himself into his hands, to dispose of him, in what manner so ever he shall
please, then the which there is nothing in which he can more show his love unto
him, seeing he freely gives and offers up unto his Divine Majesty what so ever
he has, as also what so ever he can have or may desire, and that with a mind
so liberally disposed, as could he, or had he more, with the same willingness he
would depart with it.

THE IV. CHAPTER. That this perfect conformity with the will of God, is a
blessedness and a kind of heaven in earth.
Whosoever shall be arrived to this entire conformity with the will of God
receiving every thing which may happen to him, as proceeding from the hand of
God, and conforming himself in all, unto his most divine and holy will, shall
have obtained here on earth a rare felicity and beatitude, and enjoy a wondrous
great tranquillity and peace, with a perpetual joy and iubily of mind. Which is
that blessedness and felicity which God Almighties great and faithful servants
enjoy in this mortal life, for (as the Apostle says) the Kingdom of God (and
the beatitude of this life) is not meat and drink (nor any other sensual
delight and pleasure) but Justice peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, Ad Ro^.
17.14.
this is the kingdom of heaven on earth, and that Paradise of all delights
which we may enjoy in this life, and which with good reason is called a
beatitude, since it resembles us in a certain proportion, unto the blessed in
heaven: for as in heaven above, there is no change nor alteration, but the
blessed persevere always in one being, in the eternal fruition of Almighty
God; so also they who are once arrived to this entire and perfect conformity to
that, place all their contentment, in the contentment and the will of God, are
never troubled nor disquieted with any mutation or contrary accident of this
present life; in that their hearts and wills are so sweetly united and conformed
unto the will of God, that the consideration how all is proceeding from him,
and how his good will and pleasure is fulfilled in all, makes that pleasing and
delightful to them, which otherwise would be grievous and sorrowful. and
that, because they desire and love more the will of their beloved then their
own. Whence it comes that nothing is able to disturb their peace: for they
rejoice and are particularly glad, when they are afflicted, grieved, and
despised, as knowing it proceeding from the hand of God, and there is nothing
else, which can disquiet them, or bereave them of the peace and tranquillity of
their minds.

And this was the cause of that perpetual cheerfulnes and peace, which those
holy Saints, (whom we admire in story) S. Anthony, Dominicke, Francis, Lib. 5.
c. 5. vitae. P. N ^gnatij.
and others enjoyed, as also of that which we read of our B. Father Ignatius,
and ordinarily see in other great servants of Almighty God. For do we think
that these holy Saints had no adversity? that they had not tentations, and
infirmities like us? that they were never crossed with the success of things?
without doubt they were, and that far more then we: for as much as God uses
most frequently to try his Saints, and exercise them in the like accidents*
whence therefore comes it, that they remained ever in one state of mind,
without any change of countenance, but with a joy and serenity both in the
interior and exterior, so great, as if they had kept perpetual feast and
iubily? The cause was no other then that which we have already declared,
because they were arrived to that degree of perfection, to have entire
conformity with the will of God, and had placed all their delight in the
accomplishment thereof, and so the success of every thing, was their felicity;
Diligentibus Deum omnia cooperantur in bonum, Ad Ro^. 8.28. Match. 12 21.
non contristabit iustum quicquid ei acciderit, all labors, tentations and
mortifications were converted into a delight to them, since they acknowledged
in them the blessed will of God which was all there joy and contentment. They
had already attained unto the greatest height of felicity and beatitude, which
any on could arrive to in this mortal life, and so proceeded in all their
actions as if they had been in possession of the glory of heaven. Sancta
Cathari. de Sien. en ses dialogos
Herupon S. Catherine of Siena said excellently well, that the just in this
world are like our Savior Christ, who never wanted the beatitude of his soul,
how ever great his pains and afflictions were. So likewise the just do never
loose that their felicity, which consists in the conformity with the will of
God, with how many adversities so ever they be oppressed. Seeing that there
remains with them still that joy and contentment which they take in the will
of God which is accomplished in them.

This is a perfection so sublime and of so high prerogative, as the Apostle
auouches it to pass all understanding; Ad Philip. 4.7.
Et pax Dei quae exsap^rat omnem s^nsum, custodiat corda vestra, and
intelligentias vestras in Christo Jesus, he calls it a peace surpassing all
understanding, for as much as it is a gift of God so high and supernatural,
that no human understanding by it self, can comprehend how it is possible
for a heart of flesh and blood, to remain quiet, at peace, and comforted, in
the middle of those storms and tempests raised by the miseries and tentations
of this life; This was notwithstanding to be be found in that wondrous bushe
which Moses saw, all burning in a flame, Exodus 3^ 2.
and yet not consumed, as also in that Miracle of the Children, who at Babylon
thrown into the fiery furnace, remained untouched in the midst of such a mighty
fire, singing praises unto God. This is that which holy Job mentioned in
speaking unto God, mirabiliter me crucies. Job. 1^* 16.
O Lord thou do torment me after a wondrous manner, signifying the great
pain and torment which on the one side he suffered, and on the other the
unspeakable contentment and joy, which he received in the sustaining them,
seeing that such was the good will and pleasure of his Divine Majesty.

Cassian writs of a certain venerable man, who at Alexandria, was incompast
and hemd in by a sort of lewd Infidells, who reviled him with all the injurious
speeches as they could devise; in the mean time he remained in the middle of
them, like a silly lamb, sustaining all, and answering not a word: they all
made their sport with him, striking and shouing him; and doing him a thousand
other injuries; among the rest one demanded of him in mockery, what miracles
his Christ had done? unto whom he answered the miracles which he has done are,
that I in suffering all these injuries, and as many more as you can all invent,
do take all patiently, and am neither moved to anger against you, nor stired up
to passion in my self. This doubtless was a great miracle and wonder, and in
him a most high, and gainful perfection.

The Ancients do recount, Aug. lib. de Genesis ad lit in opere imper fect. c. 13
contra Manicheos* cap. 15. Lucam* l. 2. pha^saica.
and S. Augustine makes mention of it in diverse treatises, how that mountain of
Macedonia called Olympus is of such a^ emine^t height that to the top of it the
wind and rain and clouds have no access; Nubes excedit Olympus; neither can
it be reached by the flight of any bird, it being so high that it transcends
the first and extends it self unto the middle region of the air; wherefore the
air is there so pure and rarefied as the clouds can neither be formed nor
sustained there, they requiring unto their being, a thicker and grosser air:
and for the same reason neither the birds nor men can be maintained there in
life, because the air is so subtle and rarefied, as it is not fit to take
breath or respire with all; And thus much we have from the relation of those,
who went every year up to the top to offer certain sacrifices, carrying with
them wett sponges, unto the end that applying them unto their noses, they might
condense the air, and make it fit for respiration: where if they chanced at
any time to write in the ashes of the sacrifice, they should find the next
year the Character as entire and perfect, as when they drew it first, which
was a sign that neither the wind nor rain had any power there. Behold here
that height of perfection lively disciphered, unto which those are arrived, who
have acquired this entire conformity with the will of God. Nubes excedit
Olympus, and pac^m summa tenent, unto such a glorious height have they
attained, unto such a happy peace are they arrived above all annoiance either
of cloud, swind, or rain, where no foul of rapin can come, to bercaue them of
their peace and pleasure of heart.

S. Augustine on these words; Aug. li. 1. de ser. Dom. in monte cap. 8. Mat. 5 9.
Beati pacifici quoniam filij Dei vocabuntur, says that our Savior Christ has
therefore pronounced the peaceable blessed and children of God, because there
is nothing in them which resists and contradicts the will of God, but they
conform themselves unto it in every thing, like unto good children, who
procure in every thing to imitate their Father, in both willing and not willing
the same with him in every thing.

And this is a point the most spiritual and of greatest importance of all
others in spiritual life. And whosoever shall be arrived to this to receive
all that comes, how ever small or great, as proceeding from the holy hand of
God, and conform himself in all unto his sovereign will, so as to have no
other contentment but the good pleasure of God, and the performance of his holy
will, this man has found a Paradise here on earth, factus est in pace locus
eius, Psalm. 75.3. Be^n. in sente^. tijs ^ccl. 24.11.
and habitatio eius in Sion, and as S. Bernard says, may sing which all
assurance and confidence this Canticle of the wiseman, I have fought in all
these rest and shall make my abode in the inheritance of the Lord: seeing that
there he has incountred with that true solace, and full and perfect pleasures,
which no living creature can bereave him of, Joan. 16.22. and 24.
vt gaudium vestrum sit plenum, and gaudium vestrum nemo tollat a vobis. O that
we could but once attain to this, that all delight might be in the
accomplishment of the will of God, in such manner as our will might be his and
his contentment ours! O Lord that I had no other will, then what your blessed
will is, nor any less desire of any thing, but what I knew would be ungrateful
to you, and that your good pleasure, might be my joy and comfort in every
thing. Psalm. 71.28.
Mihi autem adhaerere Deo bonum est, ponere in Domino meo spem meam, it is
good, (it is best) for me to adhere to God, and to place my hope in the Lord.
Oh how happy should my soul be, to be conjoined to God in such a loving
manner! Oh how blessed should we be to be always united with him, to make no
account of ought we do or suffer, but so fare forth as we are therein
performing the will of God; and from thence receiving al our satisfaction and
content! he (says that all-holy man) unto whom all things are one, Thomas de
Kempis li. 1. de contempl. mundi. c. 3.
who draws all things to one, and sees all things in one, may enjoy a quiet
mind, and remain peaceable in God.

THE V. CHAPTER. That contentment is only in God, and whosoever seeks in it
any thing else, shall never find it.
THose who place their contentment in God and in his divine will, do enjoy a
perpetual quiet and repose, in that being fastened to that firm pillar of the
will of God, they partake of its immutability, and abide allwaies in one state,
immobile and firm: whereas those who have any tie or obligation to the world,
and have placed their hearts and contentments thereupon, can never enjoy any
true or lasting peace, since they are subject to the chaunges of those things
upon which they do rely, and together with them are tossed and whirled about.
Aug. in in psalm. 7.15.
S. Augustine does declare this admirably well, upon that verse of the Prophet,
concepit dolorem and peperit iniquitatem. They have conceived dolor and brought
forth iniquity, saying; non enim poterit labor finiri, nisi hoc quisque diligat
quod inuito non poterit auferri, there would be no end of grief and
affliction, until we came to place our affection upon that, which against our
wills could not be taken from us. For be assured that you shall be always in
trouble and disquieted, as long as you affect those things, which are in others
powers to bereave you of.

We read of our B. Father Francis Borgia how he having conducted the hearse of
the dead Empress to Granada, Lib 1 c. 7 gitae P. N de Borgia.
where before she could be interred, he was enforced for the securing of his
conscience and oath, to disclose the coffin to be able to affirm whether it
were she or no* that he vnueyling her face, and seeing it so ugly and horribly
deformed* as was enough to stricke affrightment into those who saw it, was so
lively moved therewith God at the same instant visiting his heart and storing it
with light to see the deceits and vanity of the world, that it conceived a
firm purpose which in these words he expressed, I vow unto thee, o my God, I
will never serve any prince who can dye again. Let us likewise put on the same
resolution and oblige our selves to God, to bestow our hearts herafter upon no
mortal thing; nor ought which may have end, or which others can bereave us of
against our wills: which unless we do, we shall neue^ be at rest nor quietness*
for when those things are loved (says S. Augustine) which we may loose, Aug.
tra. 24. super Joan.
whether we will or no, we must necessarily remain miserably troubled, and
afflicted for them it is natural unto us, not to depart with that without
grief, which we loved whilst we enjoyed, and the greater our love was unto it,
whilst we po^est it, the greater is our grief when we are bereaved of it, and
in confirmation of this in an other place he says, Qui vult gandere de se,
tristis erit. If you place your contentment, in such an office or such an
imploiment, or are too much affected to any place, or the like, it lies in your
superiors power at pleasure to deprive you of this content; and so you will
never live a contented life: if you take delight in exterior things, or in the
satisfying of your own desire, all things of this kind are subject unto
change; and although they should remain in the same state they are, yet you
your self would be altered, and be displeased with that to morrow, which but
to day you passionatly affected; Of this the Children of Israel afford us an
example, who when they fed upon Manna, were cloyed with it, and demanded other
meat, when they saw themselves at liberty, began presently to love and desire
their former bondage, their wishes even in sighs, did carry them back to
Egypt again, they longed for their fare of onions and garlic to which they
had been accustomed, and their supplication to re^urne did even proceed to
importunity* you will never find content, if you place it in any of these
exterior things, qui autem de Deo vult gaudere semper gaudebit, quia Deus
sempiternus est; but he who will rejoice in God, and in the performance of his
holy will, shall have perpetual cause for to rejoice, since God is eternal
and above all change and mutation, vis habere gaudium sempiternum (says this
Saint) adhaere illi qui sempiternus est, would you have a joy and contentment
which should always last, adheare unto God and set your heart on him, who never
has an end.

The holy Ghost, does put this difference betwixt a foolish man, and one who is
wise and holy, Eccles. 27.12.
stultus sicut Luna mutatur, homo sanctus in sapientia manet sicut Sol. The
ignorant chaunges like the Moon, which to day is in increase, to morrow in the
wain, to day you shall see him iocant and merry, to morrow sad and mela^choly,
now in one humor presently in an other, and this because he has fastened his
heart and placed his contentment in the things of the world, which are still
fading, and ever mutable; wherefore (like as they say) he daunceth after the
music which they make, and his chaunges are according to their inconstancy.
In a word he is lunaticke and like the sea dependent on the alteration of the
moon; but a just and holy man, remains always in one state and being like
the Sun, has no increase nor wain. The true servant of Almighty God, in all
his proceedings is cheerful and content, he has placed all his felicity in
God, and in the accomplishment of his holy will, which can never fail him, nor
any creature ever bereave him of it.

It is reported of that holy Abbot called Deicola, Abbas Deicol.
that his countenance was always composed to smile, and being demanded the
reason, he answered; Christum a me tollere nemo potest: happen what may, come
whatsoever will, there is no man can deprive me of Christ. This holy man had
found out perfect and true contentment, since he sought it in him, who could
not be wanting to him, nor taken away from him by any one; whom if we will be
happy we must imitate. Ps 12.1. Basilius.
Exultate iusti in Domino rejoice ye just in the Lord. S. Basil writing upon
these words observes, that the Prophet says not, that you should rejoice in the
abundance of your temporal goods, neither in any ability, learning, or talent
which you have; not in your health or ablenes of body; not in the praise and
the esteem of men; but that al your delight should be in God, in the
fulfilling of his blessed will, for this is it alone which is sufficient to
satiat and content us, all other things having no perfect nor true contentment
in them.

S. Bernard in one of his sermons upon these words of S. Peter, Bernar. Mat.
19.27.
ecce nos reliquimus omnia etc. goes declaring of it rarely well saying anima
rationalis caeteris omnibus occuparipotest, repleri non potest all other
things, besides God, may possess the heart and soul of man, but satiat them
they cannot, they may provoke, and set their appetits on edge, but cannot
satisfy nor take them down, Auarus non implebitur pecunia. Like as the
auaricious (says the wisman) has a great thirst of gold; but all which he
possesses can never allay nor quench it: so fares it with the things of this
world, which can never satiat our souls and appetits. And S. Bernard gives us
the reason, do you know (says he) why all the things and riches of the world
can never satisfy you? Ber. tra. de dilig. Deo c. 5. in fine.
Quta non sunt naturales cibi animae since they are not the natural food of
our souls; no more then air and wind, the sustenance of our bodies: and as we
should laugh, and hold him for a fool who being ready to die for hunger would
by yawning to receive the air, and Cameleon-like think to nourish himself
with it: so (says this Saint) is it no less a folly, to think of the
reasonable soul of man, which is a spirit, can be satiat with these temporal
and sensual things. Instari potest, satiari non potest, it may be puffed up,
like that other with air, but it is impossible it should be satiat with it;
since it is a food which has no proportion to it, give to each on its requisite
sustenance corporal food to the body, and spiritual to the soul; Panis
namque animae, iustitia est; and soli beati qui esuriunt illam, Bern su. illa
verba. Ecce nos reliquimus omnia.
quoniam illi saturabuntur, the bread and natural nourishment of the soul, is
Justice and virtue, and they are only happy who hunger and thirst after this
Justice, because they shall be satisfied.

S. Augustine in his Soliloquies declaring this reason more amply, Aug. c. cap
30. soliloq.
speaking of the reasonable soul says. Facta est capax maiestatis tuae vt a
te solo, and nullo alio possit impleri, you have made our souls, o Lord,
capable of your divine Majesty, in such manner as nothing can satisfy or fill
them but your self. When the chase or goldworke of a Jewel is made peculiarly
for any precious stone, there is nothing else which can completely fill it,
besides that stone for which it was prepared: as for example the gold indented
in a triangular form, any Jewel which were round would never sit it: in like
manner our soul is created to the Image and likeness of the blessed Trinity,
and proportioned and made to receive nothing else but God, and therefore it is
impossible that any thing besides God can suffice to fill it. Al whatsoever is
contained in this round universe, is not able to do it; Fecisti nos Domine ad
te, Aug. l. 1, conse. c. 1.
and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te, you have made us, o
Lord, for your self, and our heart enioys no quiet until it rest in you.

That common comparison of the needle of a dyall, does aptly serve for to
declare this better: the nature of this needle (being once touched with the
loadstone) is, by a natural instinct from God Almighty to point still toward
the North, and you shall see it always in an unquiet motion, and never resting
until the point of it has reached the North, when instantly it stands quiet
and immovable. In this manner has God created man; with such a natural
reference and inclination unto him, as to his North and final end, that until
we have placed our hearts on God, we shall like this needle, be never at rest
nor quiet; This needle, as long as it regards any point of the heavens which is
in motion, never finds rest, but when it lights upon the North pole, which
remains ever fixed and immovable, is straight at quiet, and stands still: so,
as long as we fix our eyes and hearts on these worldly things which decay and
perish, we shall never find contentment or repose; if we place them on God, we
are instantly at rest.

And this ought to be a great motive unto us to seek Almighty God, even for
our own sakes and interest, since there is no man, who desires not to live
content. S. Augustine says scimus fratres quod omnis homo, gaudere desiderat;
Aug. ser. 30. de Sanctis.
sed non omnes ibi quaeru^t gaudium, vbi oportet inquiri. We know, my dear
brothers, that all men do naturally desire comfort and content, and seek after
it with all their hearts diligence, by reason they cannot live without it; but
all men do not seek it there, where they ought to do, and all the felicity or
infelicity of man consists in the placing his heart and eyes upon a true
content, or upon a false and deceitful on; The Auaricious, the Luxurious, the
Proud* the Ambitious, and the Gluttonous man, seek their contentment and
satisfaction all; but the on seeks it in hording up riches, the other in
pursuit of honor and dignity, the on in feasting the other in luxuriousnes,
and all in taking their marks amiss, and seeking it where it is not to be
found, go on the way never to arrive unto it: seeing that all these things,
and as many more as are in the world, are not sufficient to satisfy a soul,
and put it in a state of true felicity. And therefore says this glorious Saint.
Aug. de spirit. and anima. cap. 54.
Quid ergo per multa vagaris homuncio quaerendo bona animae tuae, and corporis
tut? Ama vnum bonum, in quo sunt omnia bona; and suffic^t: de sidera simplex
bonum, quod est omne bonum; and satis est, why do thou rau^ge abroad silly
man, seeking good for thy soul and body out of this variety of (worldly)
things? love (God) that only good, in whom all other goods are comprehended;
and it suffices: desire that good without all mixture good, which is all and
folly good; and it is enough. It is he alone who can satiat and fulfill the
desires of our hearts. Benedic anima mea Dominum, Psalm. 102, 5.
qui replet in bonis desiderium tuum; may he be praised blessed and glorified for
all eternity. Amen.

THE VI. CHAPTER. Wherein is in an other manner declared, how the only way to
arrive to true contentment, is to conform our selves with the will of God.
THe glorious S. Augustine, Aug. tra. 73. sup. vcan. Joan. 1.15.
writing upon these words of our B. Savior ( Quodcumque petieritis patrem in
nomine meo, hoc faciam; whatsoever you demand of my Father in my name, I will
grant it you) says that no man is to seek for rest and peace, by way of doing
his own will, and obteining that which he desires; seeing it is neither good
nor convenient for him, and may fall out perhaps unto his hurt and ruin: but
that he is to be resigned, to embrace willingly whatsoever good or better thing
God shall allot unto him; and for this only he is to beseech and petition
Almighty God. Qua^do enim nos delecta^t mala, and non delecta^t bona, rogare
debemus potius Deum, vt delectent bona, quam vt concedantur mala, when we find
our selves no ways affected, to the performance of the will of God, which is
the only good, but are strongly carried away with the desire that our own
wills be done; we ought to make it our petition unto God, not to grant us that
which we desire; but to give us a taste and sweetness, in the performance of his
will which is our good, and most convenient for us. and he alleadges for this
purpose that which is recorded of the children of Israel, in the book of
Numbers, Number. 11 4.
who becoming weary and even loathed with the Manna which God showred them
down from heaven, desired and begged of God to send the^ flesh to eat, unto
whose desires he condescended, though much unto their cost: for, Adhuc es^ae
eorum in ore ipsorum, Psalm. 77.30.
and ira Dei ascendit super cos, and occidit pingues eorum, and eleclos Israel
impediuit, as yet the meat was in their mouths and the wrath of God ascended
upon them, the best pampered of them were slain, and the elect of Israel,
were (mightily) hindered, God punished them with a grievous massaker; It is
most certain that that heavenly Ma^na, which God sent unto them, was far
better, the^ that flesh which they desired, and those onions and Garlic of
Egypt, after which they lo^ged so much; and therefore they ought not to have
demanded it of God, but rather that he would have rectified their pallat, that
they might have found gust and savor in that heavenly food; and then there
had been no necessity for them, to wish for other food, Sap. 16.20.
since every one might have sound in Manna that taste which he liked best. And
even so, when you lie under the arrest of any passion or tentation, and have
your taste so much depraved, as to find no sweetness in virtue, no savor in any
good, but do lie wishing, like a sick and diseased man, for that which may be
hurtful and prejudicial to you, you are not then to govern your self
according to your own desire, neither to desire to have your will accomplished,
since this were no way to give you any comfort, but to sow the seeds of a
greater trouble and disquietnes: but that which in such a circumstance you are
to desire of God, is that he would salve and heal your pallat, and give you
taste and sweetness in the accomplishing of this blessed will, which is our good,
and most connenient for us; and so we shall come to obtain a true peace and
content of mind.

S. Dorotheus directs us to it by an other way, Doroth. doctrina 9.
or rather declares this in an other manner: he says, that he who in every
thing conformes himself unto the will of God, in such manner, as to make all
his own inclinations readily serve unto it, is come unto such a pass as to
do his own will in every thing, and to enjoy a perpetual gladness and
quietness of mind. To declare that which we would procure to say, we will give
an example of this in point of obedience, and make but one labor in dispatch
of two affairs. We say commonly to those who desire to enter into Religion,
and to make their lives iourny by the way of obedience; you must make account
when you are entered into Religion, never more to do your own will again: and
S. Dorotheus says on the contrary never fear it you may do your own will, and
that not only lawfully but also holily, and with much perfection. How is this
to be done? Qui propriam no^ habet voluntate^, suam ipsias s^mper facit
voluntatem: that Religious man who is truly obedient, and has no self will of
his own, does always his own will; because he makes the will of an other
his. Et sic nolentes propriam explere voluntatem, inuenimur illam semper
expleuisse, do but procure, that your own will be the same with the
Superiors, and you will be doing your own will continually, and that with much
merit and perfection. And so in conformity to this, I sleep as much as I will,
because I desire not to sleep longer then obedience appoints; I cate as much
as I desire, seeing I require no more, then that which is allotted unto me; I
pray, I read, I labor as much as I please, and take upon me as much penance
as I think is necessary for me, since I do all these, and in like manner all
the rest, according to the prescript and will of holy obedience. And in this
manner a good Religious man, without having any inclination of his own, comes
to do his own will continually. And this is it which makes those Religious,
who are good indeed, appear so cheerful and joyfully disposed; for that which
re^ders them always content and glad, is the making the will of obedience
their own.

In this point of obedience consists all the facility, and difficulty of
Religious life, and on this depends the joy and content of a Religious man. If
you put but on a resolution, to renounce your own will, and receive the will
of your Superior in the place of it, the Religion will be easy and sweet unto
you, and you will live in it with much content and joy; but if you nourish a
will contrary to the will of your Superior, there is no living in Religion for
you. two different wills in one person are incompatible; We see by experience
although our will be but one, yet when our sensual appetit is repugnant unto
reason and to it, how little assurance, and how little rest we have; and yet
this appetit is but an inferior and subordinate to our will: but what shall we
think when two equal wills* Mat. 6.2^.
are striving in us for superiority? Nemo potest duobus Dominis seruire, no man
can serve two Masters. Now for as much as the difficulty which occurs in
Religious life, does not consiste in the exercises and labors themselves, but
in the repugnance of our will, and in the apprehension which our imagination
frames of them; thence it is, that we sometimes find its obseruances more
difficill and insupportable. This we may easily apprehend from the difference,
which we experience in our selves, when we are in tentation, and when we are
free from it: for when we are without tentation, all things seem light and
easy to us; but when we are assaulted with tentation, or subjected to any
grief or melancholy, that which was wont for to be easy to us, is straight
converted into difficulty, and we think we shall never be able to go through
it, but that heaven and earth are come together again, all as it were
co^spiring to bring us difficulty. The difficulty is not in the thing it self,
since it is no other then what it was before; but in our ill disposition of
mind. As when a sickman has an auersion from his meat, the fault is not in the
meat, which is good and sauourly; but in the pe^cant humor of the sick, which
makes his food seem unsavory and disgustfull to him: and it is the like in
that which we endeavor to say.

And this is the grace and favor which God does to those whom he calls unto
Religion, to make it sweet unto them to follow an others will. This is the
grace of our vocation, with which our God has prevented us, with a happiness by
far transcending theirs, whom we have left behind us in the world. For what
is it, that affords and gives you this facility, in leaving your own, and
following of an others? who has placed in your bosom that new heart, where with
you have in horror all worldly things, and find so much sweetness in
recollection, prayer, and mortifying your self? you brought it not out of the
world with you no certainly; but rather a contrary one, sensus enim, Genesis 8.^^.
and cogitatio humani cordis, in malum pronae sunt ab adolescentia sua. It is a
gift and favor of the holy Ghost, who like a dear Mother of ours, has rubbed
with aloes and wormwood the treacherous nipples of the world, to wean us from
them, and make them seem bitter, which nnce we delicious to us; Ambro. psalm.
118 o^ton 4. super illud. Auerte oculos m^os ^e videat van^^ate^^ S. Agath
and honyed the exercises of virtue and Religion, that they might become sweet
and sauoury unto us, which before seemed bitter, and unsavory. Domine qui me
custodisti ab infantia, quia abstulisti a me amorem s^culi. O blested Lord
(said holy S. Agatha) I render infinite thanks unto that dear goodness of thine
which has elected, and def^nded me even from mine infancy, and taken away from
me all love of this wretched world. We are not to think it so great a matter
to be Religious, but it is much, and a great benefit of Almighty God, together
with our vocation to Religion to give us a right taste and relish of this
heavenly Manna, whilst others pallats are longing after the base sustenance of
the garlic and onions of Egypt.

I consider sometimes with my self, how worldly people, even from the Lords and
Noblemen in Court, unto the Grooms and Footboys of the stable depart with the
freedom of their own wills for their particular profit and interest, and put
on the seru^^ livery of an other man's; they eat (as is commonly said) according
to the rate of an others hunger, their sleep is measured by an others
watchfulnes, and they so aptly cloathe and fit themselves with others wills, as
it comes to be in only fashion with them, and they desire no other life then
it. 1. Cor. 9.25.
Et illi quidem vt corruptibilem coronam accipiant; nos autem incorruptam. What
marvel is it, if we can be delighted and content, with that manner of regular
living, which is prescribed us in Religion, and resign our selves unto that
better will of our Superior; since they for a little honor and temporal
interest, so accommodate themselves unto the wills of others, as it is even
their delight and pleasure for to follow them, whilst they make night of day,
and day of night. What great wonder is it, I say, if we perform as much for
the love of God, and for the purchassing of an eternal life? Let us therefore
put on a resolution to make the will of the Superior our own; and in this
manner we shall do our own wills in every thing, and lead a life in Religion
full of all sweetness and cheerfulnes, with a joy and contentment most perfect
and spiritual.

But now to return unto our argument, and apply all this unto our present
subject; We are to procure to make the will of Almighty God our own, and
conform our selves unto it in every thing, and to will or not will the same
with him in every thing; and so you will come, to do your own will
continually, and lead a life full of all content and satisfaction; For it is
most evident, that if you desire nothing else, but what God Almighty would, your
own will shall always be fulfilled: for his will shall be done, and
consequently that which you desire. This verity even Seneca was not ignorant
of; Seneca in prefatione li. 3. not. quaest.
who says, that man has nothing more high or perfect, the^ the knowledge how
to suffer with alacrity all pain and misery, and sustain all, as if they were
procured by his own choice and election: and even this much man is obliged to
do, since he knows it to be the will of God, that it should be so. Oh how
happy should we live, were we but arrived to that perfection, to make the will
of God our own, and to bound our desires with in the limits thereof! and this
not only because by this means our will should be fulfilled; but most of all,
because we should see the will of God accomplished in every thing whom we do
love so dear and tenderly. For although we ought to help our selves with that
which has been hitherto said; yet we are not to set up our rest, until we are
arrived to place all our comfort in delighting Almighty God and in the
fulfilling of his holy will; Omnia quaecunque voluit Dominus fecit, Psalm. 34.6.
in caelo, and in terra, in mari, and in omnibus abyssis, God has done
whatsoever he pleased* in heaven and in earth, in the sea* and in all the
deeps; he both can, and will do all that he pleases as the Wiseman says, Sap.
12.18 Ester. 13 9 Ad Ro^. 9.19.
subest enim tibi cum voluer is posse, and there is nothing which can let or
hinder him. In ditione enim tua, cuucta sunt posita, and no^ est qui possit
resistere euae voluntati. Voluntati eius quis resistet?

THE VII. CHAPTER. Of diverse other felicities and profits which are to be found
in this conformity with the will of God.
AN other great good and profit in this exercise is, that this entire
conformity with the will of God, is one of the best and principal
dispositions, which on our parts we can be prepared with all to the receiving
and in a manner inuiting our blessed Lord to bestow his plentious graces and
benefits upon us. And so when God had resolved to make S. Paul of a
persecutour, an Apostle and Preacher of his saving truth, he prevented and
disposed him by this resignation, aiming at him a great light from heaven,
which struck him from his horse and opened the eyes of his soul in the fall,
enforcing him to cry out: Actu 9.6
Domine quid me vis facere? Lord what would you have me do? behold me here as
a little piece of clay betwixt your hands, mould me and fashion me to what
shape you please, whereupon God made him a vessel of election, which might carry
and diffuse his name through all the world; Act. 9.15
Vas electionis est mihi, vt portet nomen meum coram gentibus and regibus and
filus Israel. We read of S. Gertrude that God said unto her: Whosoever desires
that I should make free repair unto them, S. Gertr. refert. Blo cap. 11.
monit, spir.
must deliver over unto me the key of their own will, without ever requiring
it again: and therefore our B. Father comends this resignation and indifference
unto us, P. N. Ignatius liex 5. spi.
as one of the best dispositions which we can have to the receiving of Gods
most exquisit favors: and he requires that we should enter with it into the
spiritual exercise, and he lais us this foundation even from the beginning of
them, that we should be indifferent, severed from all worldly things, with
affection no more inclining to one thing then an other, but only desiring that
Gods blessed will should be accomplished and done in every thing; and in those
rules or annotatio^s which he gives, as well for the direction of him who gives,
as him who takes the exercise, he says in the fifth of them. It will be of
incredible help unto him who takes these exercises, if coming with a great and
liberal mind he offer up himself wholly unto his Creator to dispose of him,
and every thing of his, according to his best pleasure, and in such manner as
he may be best served by him. And the reason why this same disposition, is of
so great force to obtain any favor and grace of Almighty God, is because on
the one side we rid our selves of all the lets and hindrances of our depraved
affections and desires; and on the other the more confidence we have in God,
and the more freely and entirely we resign our selves into his hands, in
desiring nothing but what may be best pleasing to him, the more we oblige him,
to take upon him the care of us, and to be present with us in all our
necessities.

On the other side this Conformity with the will of God, is a most efficacious
means to attain unto all virtue, seeing that virtues are not acquired but by
the acts of them. This is the natural means to attain the habits of things;
and by this way God Almighty intends to bestow virtue one us, whose pleasure it
is to produce the works of grace, in a manner conformable unto those of
nature. Exercise your self then in this resignation and conformity with the
will of God, and so you shall be continually in the occasion of exercising all
other virtues, which is the only means to attain unto them. Now you shall
have the occasion of exercising humility, now obedience; at other times
Poverty, Patience, and so likewise all other virtues. And in the mean time,
the more you exercise yourselfe in this resignation and conformity with the
will of God* the more you shall go increasing and perfecting your self
therein; as also the greater shall your profit and perfection in all other
virtues be; Ecc. 2.3.
Coniunge te D^o* and sustine vt ^rescat in nouissimo vita ^ua, says the Wise
man, unite yourselfe to God, conform your self in all, unto his holy will; an
other version has conglutinare Deo, be as it were glued unto him, and made one
with him, and so you will exceedingly increase and profit in virtue. For this
reason the Masters of spiritual life do counsel us, Trac. c. 6 14. and 15.
(and it is a most good and profitabla aduic^) to single out some one eminent
and Master virtue, in which may be comprised all the rest, and to bestow our
selves particularly to prayer, and the whole scope of our examen and other
exercises, in the pursuit of it; and that, because att^ding only unto it we may
more easily attain unto it, and having attained it, we may be Masters of all
the rest. Now one of the principal things upon which we are to cast our eyes,
for this effect, is this resignation and entire conformity with the will of
God; and in this both our prayer, and examen will be profitably bestowed,
although it were for diverse years, yea our whole life long; seeing that in
attaining unto this, we should together attain unto all other virtues.

On those words of the Apostle S. Paul. Domine quid me vis facere? Act. 9.6.
Ber. ser. 1, de co^uersione S. Pauli.
Lord what would you have me to do? S. Bernard says, O verbum breue, sed
plenu^, sed efficax, sed dignum omni acceptione! O word short, but full,
comprehending all, excepting nothing. Lord what is your pleasure that I should
do? O short word, but wondrous pithy, but expressed to the life, but
efficacious, and worthy of all praise; If you desire therefore a short
instruction, and an abridgment of the art of acquiring perfection, behold it
here, say always with the Apostle, Psalm. 36.8 and psalm. 107.1.
Lord what would you have me do? and with the Prophet my heart is prepared, for
to do all whatsoever you shall require of me, have this always in your mouth
and heart; and your progress in perfection will be answerable, to the profit
which you make in this.

There is yet an other good and profit in this exercise, from whence we may
furnish our selves with an excellent remedy, against a certain sort of
tentation, which familiarly uses to offer it self unto us; The devil does
labor sometimes to disquiet us, with certain tentations and conditional
thoughts, by way of interrogation demanding of us; what if one should say this
or this unto you, how would you answer him? and in such and such an
circumstance, how would you behave your self? if such a thing should happen
what would you do? and the enemy crafty as he is, will present things unto us
in such a manner, that on which side soever we turn us, we shall remain
perplexed and not dare to venture out, imagining that on either side we shall
fall into the snares: and seeing it is all one unto the enemy, whether those
things by which he does deceive us, be true or only apparent, and counterfeit,
so as he may but play his prize, and wrest from us some ill consent or other,
he has his end, and takes no further care. To such tentations they say
commonly, that there is no necessity to answer I or no, yea they affirm that
it is better to give no answer at all, especially for those persons who are
scrupulous, since it is that which the devil seeks to hold party with them,
and bring them to defend and prove: for he is not to seeeke in his replies; and
how bravely resolved so ever they enter the skirmish with him, they are not
like to come of without a broken head. But there occurs to me an excellent and
profitable answer to put of these te^tations with all, which I esteem to be a
far better remedy, then the not answering them, and it is that which we are
going to declare; to wit to every one of these demands (devoutly shutting of
our eyes) to answer if that be the will of God, it is also mine; if God desire
to have it so, I desire it likewise; that which pleases God in it, shall also
please me; I refer my self in every thing unto his will; I will as far as
I may perform my duty in it; God I hope will give me his grace, that I may not
offend him in it, but do all according to his holy will. Behold here a general
answer, to give satisfaction unto all such demands, and in its generality it
imploys no difficulty, but is rather the more easy and familiar. For if it be
the will of God, it is best and most convenient for me, I may with all
assurance, cast my self, in uttering that which has been said, into the arms
of God Almighties will and hereby the devil will be frustrated of his purposes,
and depart ashamed, and we shall become joyful and courageous with the
victory. And as in tentations against our faith they counsel (especially
those who are scrupulous) to answer nothing in particular, but in general to
say; I believe and hold all which our holy Mother the Church believes and
holds; so also in this tentation whereof we speak, the best remedy is to give
no answer in particular, but to have recourse unto the will of God, which is
both good and perfect in a most high degree.

THE VIII. CHAPTER. Wherein is confirmed by some examples, how grateful unto
God, this exercise is, of the conformity of our wills with his, and of the
great perfection which is contained in it.
CAesarius relates how there was a Monk in a certain Monastery, Csarius lib.
10.
unto whom God had communicated a singular grace of working Miracles; dialog.
cap. 6.
in so much as he cured diseased persons, even with the only touch of his
garments or of the girdle with which he girded himself: his Abbot considering
this attentively on the one side and on the other observing in this Religious
no particular notes of any sa^ctity, called him unto him one day in private, and
earnestly coniured him* to declare unto him the reason, why God did work so
many Miracles by him? the holy man ingeniously confessed that he knew none; for
said he, I fast no more then any of the rest, my disciplines and penances are
not exceeding theirs, I spend no more time in prayer, and allow no less time
to sleep then any of the rest. All that I can affirm of my self is only
this, that neither prosperity does elate my mind, nor adversity depresse it,
there being nothing in chance which can disturb the quiet of my heart; my
soul in all occasions enioyes one tenor of tranquillity and peace, how ever
strange or uncouth they may be unto my self or others. His Abbot wondering
ask't him; were you then nothing troubled the other day, when that same knight
our enemy set fire on our granary, and burnt our wholl provision for the year?
No truly, answered the holy man; the content of my soul was no ways touched
with it: for I had long before, committed all unto the hands of God: whence it
comes, that I recea^e as well prosperity as adversity, as well want as plenty,
as equal benefits proceeding from those holy hands of his. Whereupon the Abbot
acknowledged that to be the cause of the virtue of working so many Miracles.

Blosius recounts how a certain poor beggar, Blosius in appe^dice ad
institutionem spirit. ca. 1. in fine
but otherwise leading a holy and exemplar life, being demanded by a learned
divine, how he was arrived to so great perfection, answered. I have taken a
resolution, to have all my dependancy on the divine will, to which I have so
wholly confotmed mine own, that what soever God wills, I also would have: when
hunger pains me, or the could bites, I praise Almighty God: be the weather
fair, or rainy or tempestuous, I praise God still; whatsoever he sends me, or
whatsoever befalls me through his permission, be it sweet or bitter, be it
unlucky or fortunat, I am always glad, and receive it coming from him, as the
greatest favor he could do unto me; resigning my self with all humility
entirely unto him: My soul has been able to find no rest in any thing, which
is less then God, and now I have found out my God in whom I have eternal
peace and rest.

We read also in the same Blosius of a holy Virgin who being demanded how she
had attained unto so high perfection, Blos. ^b^ sup. etc. 10. monil. spit.
answered: I have received all troubles and adversities, with a great equality
of mind as coming from the hand of Almighty God, if any one chanced to
trouble or iniure me, I presently procured to require him with some special
benefit, I have never made my complaint of what I suffered unto any one, but
have had mine only recourse to God Almighty, from whom I have presently
received redress and comfort.

He writes also of an other Virgin of great sanctity, who being asked by the
exercise of what virtue she had obtained so great perfection, answered. With
much humility, I was never so overwhelmed with griefs and oppressions of heart,
as not even to long to suffer far more for the love of God, esteeming my
self unworthy, of so great graces and favors as they were.

Taulerus recounts of a certain great seruat of Almighty God, Taulerus ser. 1.
de Circumcis.
who had wholly resigned her self into his blessed hands, unto whose prayers
many recommending the happy succe^e of their affairs and businesses: she
denying them unto none, would oftentimes forget to pray for some; and yet
notwithstanding, all things succeeding according to their hearts desire, who had
commended themselves unto her devotions* many came to thank her, and
acknowledge the efficacy of her prayers, who^ she had not so much as thought
upon; when she blushing at their mistake, would bid them render all their
thanks to God, for as for her, she had in nothing furthered their businesses.
At last many coming to her in this manner whom she had forgot, she began to
make an amarous complaint to God for giving such good success and dispatch to
all affairs, which were commended unto her devotions, in so much as they came
usually to give her thanks for them, for whom she never had petitioned* unto
whom her blessed Lord answered* you must know my dearest, that on that day when
you resigned your will to me I gave you reciprocally mine; since when, although
you should ask nothing in particular, yet whatsoever I saw you inclined unto,
I should effect it according to your desire.

We read in the lives of the Fathers of a husbandman whose fields and vines, in
vitis Patrum.
were far more fruitful, then any land of his neighbors there about; who
demau^ding of him how it came to pass he answered them that it was no wonder*
that his ground did bring forth so good increase since he had the times and
seasons in his own hands* whereupon they being far more astonished the before,
ask't him how that could be. Why said he, I never desire other time or season
^h^ what God pleases to send; and because I will, that which God wills, he
gives, me that fruit which I desire.

Seuerus Sulpitius writing the (...) Mar^^n affirms of him, Seuerus Sulpitius.
that (...) long time which he conuers't with (...), he never saw him angry,
nor melancholy, but always cheerful, and quietly composed; and he ascribes it
to this virtue, which he was eminent in, of receiving all what ever happened to
him, as sent unto him from the hand of God; and so he conformed himself, unto
his blessed will in every thing, with a great alacrity and resignation.

THE IX. CHAPTER. Of some other considerations, which may render this exercise
of conformity with the will of God, both easy and pleasant to us.
Unto the end that this exercise of the conformity with the will of God, may be
both easy and delightful to us, Cap. 1. and 2.
it is first necessary that we have always before our eyes, that foundation
which we have laid from the beginning; to wit that no affliction or adversity
can happen to us, which has not passed through the hands of God, being
examined and registered by his most blessed will, which verity our Savior
Christ has not only taught us by word but by example. When he commanded S.
Peter the night of his Passion to sheath his sword, he added: Calicem, quem
dedit Pater, non vis vt bibam illum? would thou not have me drink the
chalice which my Father has sent me? he did not sa^, Joan. 18, 11.
the chalice which Judas, and the Scribes and Pharisees had filled out for him,
since he knew well that they were only as servants to administer that draught
unto him, which his Father had sent, and that al which they out of their
ra^corous envy and malice did, was so ordained by the infinite wisdom and
goodness of his heavenly Father, for the red^ption of the sinful world, and
so he answered afterward to Pilat, Joan. 19.11 Ch^y. ho 8^. in Joan. Ciril.
li. 12 c. 22. in Joan. Ire. li. 4. contra hereses c. 34.
when he boasted that he had power to crucify or to deliver him; Non haberes
potes^atem aduersum me vllam, nis^tibi datum esset desuper, thou should have
no power over me, unless it were given thee from above, which the holy Fathers
explicat: nisi ex diuina dispositione and ordinatione id factu^ esset,
declaring there by, that there is nothing happens but by the disposition and
ordinance of God. S, Peter in the Acts of the Apostles has meru^ilously
explicated this, in his declaration of those words of the Prophet; Quare
fremuerunt gentes, Aug. ser. (...). sup.
and populi meditati sunt inania? astirerunt Reges terrae, Ioa^nem. Act 4.26
Psalm. 2.1.
and Principes conuenerunt in vnum aduersus Dominum, and aduersus Christum eius
where he says: Co^uenerunt enim vere in ciuitate ista, aduersus sanctum pueru^
tuum Iesum, quem vnxisti, Herodes and Pontius Pilatus cum gentibus and populis
Israel, facere quae manus tua, and consilium tuum decreu^runt fieri. The
Princes and Potentats of the world assembled and were in league together
against our Savior Christ, to put that in execution and effect which had been
concluded and decreed, in the consistory of the Blessed Trinity: and more then
what had been there determined of, they could not do. And so we see that when
God would not have it so, all the power of King Herod was not sufficient to
take away his life, when he was yet a child, and he who massacred so many
Innocents, could not sind out the Infant whom he sought; and that, because it
was not his pleasure then to d^e. How often did the Jews and Pharisees seek
to lay hands upon our Savior to put him to death? once they had him on the
very edge of the mountain on which their City was built, to throw him
headlong down and the holy Ghospells says: ipse autem transis per medium
illorum ibat; Lucae 4.30.
he made his way securely through the midst ^f them because it was not his
pleasure then to dye, that kind of death, and therefore they had no power to
procure it him: an other time they would have stoned him, and had even lifted
up their hands to let them fall in showers of stones upon him, and he did no
more but mildely expostulat with them, saying; Joan. 10.32.
Multa bona ostendi vobis ex patre meo, propter quod eorum opus, me lapidatis?
I have showed you many good works, of my Fathers part, for which of them do
you now stone me? he would not permit the^, nor give them leave to discharge
their stones upon him; Quia nondum venerat hora eius; Joan. 7.30.
because his hour was not yet come. But when the hour indeed in which he had
resolved to dye was come, then they could execute what he had decreed to
suffer, because then he would have it so, and gave them leave to do it: haec
est hora vestra and potestas tenebraru^, he told them when they came to
apprehe^d him, Lucae 2^.53.
I was daily with you teaching in your Temple, and you have not taken me,
because as then my hour was not come, but now it is, and therefore come,
behold, here I am he; What did not Saul do? (who was a figure of this) what
diligence used he not, what stratagems to get David into his hands? A King of
Israel against a private man. Reg. 26.20. and ca. 24.15.
Vt quaerat pulicem vnum, as David said, in search of a silly flea, and yet
with all the diligence he could use, he could never entrap him, which the holy
scripture notes, and gives the reason of. 1. Reg. 25.14.
Non tradidit eum in manus eius, because God would not deliver him over unto
his hands; and this is all.

S. Cyprian therefore on these words, and ne nos inducas in tentationem, Cypr.
sermon. de oration. Dominica. Mat. 6.
does well observe, that in tentations and adversities, all our fear, devotion
and attention, must only have God Almighty for their object; seeing that
neither the devil nor any person, can do us any harm, unless God first do give
them faculty.

Secondly although this verity, pondered attentively, Doroth. doctr. 13 Hill c.
29. de orat. idem dixit Domino. S. Gert. refert Blosius. cap. 11 monil. spiri.
has great force and efficacy for to conform us in all things unto the will of
God; notwithstanding we are not here to make a stay, but we must proceed
forwards, to an other subseque^t point, which the holy Saints do generally
note, and that is; that we ought to persuade ourselves, that al things
proceeding from the hand of God, are also serving to our good and profit. The
torments of the damned are proceeding from the hand of God, but not for their
profit and amendment, but for their punishment: but the pains and afflictions,
which God in this life sends to any one, be he righteous or a sinner, we ought
to have that assurance and belief of his infinite mercy and goodness, that they
are al directed for our greater good, and as the means and helps most proper
and necessary, unto our salvation. And Judith when she saw her people in so
great affliction and distress, besieged and vexed by their enemies, said: ad
emendationem and non perditionem nostram euenisse credamus, Judith* 8.27.
believe assuredly, that these miseries and afflictions are sent unto us by God
for our amendment and not for our perdition, we may well assure our selves, of
so good and loving a will as Gods, who tenders us so dearly, that it inclines
to resolve of nothing concerning us, which is not good, and the best, and most
expedient for us, like as herafter we shall more amply declare. Cap. ^0 and 27.


Thirdly, that this verity may be to our greater pro^it* and be made up to the
compe^ency of ^n efficacious means to help us to a perfect c^nformity with
the will of God, it is not enough that we understand in spec^e only that all
things are proceeding from the hand of God, and that we believe it in gross
and general, because it is taught us by faith, or else perhaps we have read or
heard so much; but it is necessary, that we put this belief in practice, the
better to arrive unto an experimental knowledge of it in such manner, as to
receive all things which happen to us, as if with our own senses and eyes we
did perceive our Savior Christ in this manner speaking to us: Here my son I
send thee this; it is my pleasure that f^r the present, thou should do or
suffer this, or that other thing. For by this means it would be a thing most
e^^^ and pleasant to us, to conform our selves unto the will of God in every
thing, since it is most certain, that should our Savior Christ personally
appear unto us and say; behold my son, see this is that which I desire of
you; I would have you to suffer this pain or sickness at this time for my sake;
it is my pleasure to make use of you, in this or the other office: it is most
certain I say, that we should undertake it most willingly, even our whole
lives long, were it a thing of the greatest difficulty in the world, and esteem
our selves highly honored, and happy men, that God would vouchsaffe, to serve
himself with us, and we should gather only from his commanding it, that it
were the best and conuenientest thing of all others for our salvation, without
doubting in the least kind thereof.

Fourthly we ought to reduce this exercise to practice, both in our prayers and
other exercises, by deluing and sinking deep into this rich mine of so
fatherly and particular a providence as God has of us, to the end that we may
the better know how to make due use of such an inexhaustable treasure, as we
shall go declaring in the following Chapters.

THE X. CHAPTER. Of Gods fatherly and particular providence of us, and of the
filial confidence which we ought to have in him.
AMong other the great riches and and treasures which we enjoy, who are in the
Catholic Church, one of the greatest is Gods fatherly and particular
providence of us; it being most certain that there is nothing can arrive unto
us, which has not first passed and been recorded by the hand of God. And so
the Prophet says. Psalm. 5.13.
Domine vt scuto bonae voluntatis tuae coronasti nos, thou have environed and
defended us, o Lord, with that good will of thine, as with a sheeld of defense,
we are round encompassed with this good will of God, in such manner as nothing
can come unto us which passes not first by it: and therefore there is nothing
which we are to fear; for he willet nothing pass, but that which may be for
our greater good. Psalm. 20. 5
Quoniam abscondit me in tabernaculo suo, in die malorum protexit me, in
abscondito tabernaculi sui. The Prophet David affirms, that God hides and
preserues us, even in the most secret of his Tabernacle, and shelters un under
his wings: and says yet more, Psalm. 30.21.
abscondes eos in abscondi^o faciei tuae, our Lord does hide us in the most
hidden part of all his face, which are the eyes, in whose apples he has lodged
us, and so an other version has, in oculis faciei tuae. God has made us the
very apples of his eyes, to verify that which is said in an other place; Ps.
16.8. Zach. 2.8.
Custodi me vt pupillam oculi. qui tetigerit vos, tangit pupillam oculi mei. We
are warrented under his defense and protection as the apples of his eyes, and
they are the words of God: whosoever touches you, shall touch me in the sight
of mine own eyes. Can thereby imagined a thing more rich, more precious, or
more worthy of all esteem then this?

O that we could but maturely apprehend and penetrat this verity! how defenc't
and fortified should we find our selves? how assured, how comforted should we
be, in all our labors and necessities? If here in this world one have but a
Father rich and mighty and one of the dearest fauourits of a King; what
co^fide^ce what assurance has he in the success of all his businesses,
knowing that the favor, authority and protection of his Father will not be
wanting to him? how much more reason have we to be confident and assured*
whilst we consider that we have him for our Father, in whose hand is all the
dominion of heaven and earth? and that nothing can arrive unto us, which
passes not first by his paternall hands? if a son can repose himself upon
the confidence and assurance of his Fathers favor; how much more confidence
ought we to have in him, who is more our Father then all other Fathers besides,
and in comparison with whom, there is none deserves the tender name of Father:
for there are no bowels of love which may be compared with the love o^ God to
us, which surpasses by infinite degrees all the loves which ever earthly
Fathers were sensible of, we may well assure our selves that whatsoever such
(...) Father sends us, is for our greater vtility and good; seeing that love
which he bears us in his only son, permits him to do^ nothing else then to
procure the good of him, for whose love only he delivered over his son unto
the torments of the cross. Ad Ro^. 8.32.
Qui etiam proprio filio suo non pepercit, s^d pro nobis omnibus tradidit
illum, quomodo non etiam cum illo omnia nobis donauit? says the Apostle S.
Paul. he who has not spared his only son, but has delivered him over (unto
death) for all of us* how can it be, but he has given us with him all other
things? he has given us the most he could, and will he deny us any little
thing? Now if all men ought to have such confidence in God Almighty; h^w much
more Religious men* whom he has received particularly for his own* and given
them both the spirit and heart of sons indeed, inuiting them to abandon and
forsake the Fathers of their flesh and blood, and to make choice of him for
their only true Father? with what heart, what fatherly te^dernes shall God love
such as these? what care, what providence shall he have of them? Psalm. 26.10.
Quoniam pater meus and matter mea dereliquerunt me: Dominus autem assumpsit me,
a happy choice you have made of such a dear Father, in place of those parents,
whom you have departed with you may now with more reason and greater confidence
say. Psalm. 22.1.
Dominus regit me, and nihil mihi deerit, God has taken upon him the charge of
me, the care of me, and all that belongs to me, and I shall want for nothing.
Psalm* 39.18.
Ego autem mendicus sum and pauper, Dominus solicitus est mei, I am (it is true)
a beggar needy and poor, but God is solicitous and careful for me, who would
not be comforted with this? nay who would not even melt away in the love of
such a God? Oh who* are you, o Lord, who have taken upon you the charge of me,
and have so intense a care of me, as if in heaven and earth you had no other
creature to govern but me alone! Oh that we could but delue and make passage
deep enough into this so viscerall, so paternal love, providence and
protection which God Almighty has of us!

From hence is begotten in the faithful servants of Almighty God, a most
familiar and filial confidence in him, which is so excessive in some, that
there is no child in the world who confids so much at all assays in the
protection of his Father, as they in God, seeing they know right well that the
bowels of his affection to them, is more then either of Father or Mother,
which uses to be the renderest of all; and so the Prophet Esaias says. Es^^ 49.15.
Nunquid obliuis^i potes^ mulier infante^ suum, vt non mis^reatur filio vteri
sui? and si illa oblita fuerit, ego tamen non obliuiscar tui. ecce in manibus
meis descripsi te. muri tui coram oculis meis semper: can a mother forget her
own child, so as not to have pity of the son of her womb? and if she
should forget, yet will not I forget thee. for behold I bear you copp^ed out
in my hands, and your walls are always before mine eyes: as much as to say I
do carry you even in the palms of my hands, which do present you always
before mine eyes, for to defend and keep you* and he declares as much by the
same Prophet with an amorous comparison, Esa. 4^ 3.
qui portamini a meo vtero, even as a woman great with child, does carry her
infant in her womb, and is all in all unto it, both lodging, bearer, wall, and
nurtriture; even so says God I bear you in my bowels. And with this
consideration the servants of God do live in such assurance, and esteem
themselves so well provided for, so safe against all chances, that they are
never troubled or disquieted with any variety or accident of this life, and in
tempore si^^itatis non erit sollicitum, Ier. 17.8.
the heart of the just says the Prophet Hieremy is never subject to commotion,
or loss of the rest and quietness for the diverse chau^ces and successes of
things seeing they are assured, that nothing can happen to them without the
will and priuity of their Father; and of his excessive love and goodness they
are most secure; as holding for certain, that whatsoever arriues them is for
their greater good, and all which on the one side he takes away from them, he
will restore on the other with advantage and usury.

From this confidence so familiar and filial, which the just have in God, is
begotten in their souls that so great peace tranquillity and security which
they have, conformable to that of Esaias, Esa. 32.18.
and sedebit populus meus in pulchritudine pacis, and in tabernaculis fiduciae,
and in requie opulenta, and my people shall rest in the beauty of peace, and in
the Tabernacles of confidence, and in a rich repose. Where the Prophet most
^^tly and aptly conioynes peace and confidence together, because the one is
proceeding from the other, for he who has his trust and confidence in God has
nothing to fear or to be troubled at, as having God to warrant and secure him.
And this is that which the royal Prophet sings, Psalm. 4.9.
in pace in ^dipsam dormiam and requi^scam, quontam tu Domine singulariter in
she constituisti me, in pea^e in the self same will sleep and rest because
thou o Lord have singularly settled me in peace, and assured my life under the
hope of thy dear mercy.

Neither does this filial confidence produce peace only, but it accompanies it
with a great joy and gladness, Ad Ro^. 15.13.
Deus autem spei (says the Apostle S. Paul) repleat vos omn^ gaudio, and pace
i^ cred^ndo, vt abundet is in spe and virtute Spiritus Sancti, the God of hope
fill you all with joy, and peace in your belief that you may abound in the
hope and virtue of the holy Ghost. This firm belief of ours that God knows
what he does, and does all for our good, is cause that we feel not those
tumults troubles and those anguishes, which they experience who only look with
eyes of flesh and blood, upon the chance of things; but rather extraordinary
gladness and delight, in extraordinary chances: and the more a man shall have
of confidence, the more abundant shall his spiritual joy and gladness be: for
the more he shall confide and love, the greater shall his assurance be, that
the issue of all things will be to his avail: neither is it possible that he
should otherwise persuade himself, or else hope less from the exceeding
goodness, and infinite love of God.

This renders the Saints so undaunted and assured, in the midst of all their
afflictions, so as they h^^e no dread of men, of devils, beasts, or any thing;
as knowing assuredly that without the permission of the will of God, they
cannot so much as touch them: Athana.
and so S. Athanasius reports of B. S. Anthony that when one time among the
rest, the devils presented themselves in most fearful shapes, and hideous
forms unto him, of wild and cruel beasts, as of Lions, Tigers, Bulls,
Serpents and Scorpions, all compassing him about, and terrifying him with their
claws, teeth, horns, stings, roaring, and fearful hissing, so as it seemed
they would presently devour him: what did the Blessed Saint? but laugh't them
all to scorn: and told them; if you had any valor you would come but on at
once, to fight against a single man as I am; but by reason that you are
cowardly, and that God has deprived you of your might, therefore you come such
a rabble together of you, that your number at least may make me affeard, when
your forces came not. If God has given you any power over me, behold me here,
devour me; but if you have no permission for to do it, why do you make all this
stir for nothing? from whence we may ^^early perceive, that the great peace and
courage, which this holy person sound with in himself, in this occasion, Greg
li. 3. ^^al. c. 16 refert aliud simile exemplu^. Li. 5. vite P. N Ignat. c. 9.
and lib. 2. cap. 5.
was proceeding only from the well considering that they could do nothing
without the will of God, and the conforming himself unto that blessed will. We
have diverse other examples of this kind, in the Ecclesiastical hi^^ory, and we
read the like of our B. Father S. Ignatius, in the fifth book of his life: and
in the second, it is recounted, how once as he sailed toward Rome, there rose
such a fearful tempest, that the Mast being split by the violence of the wind,
and most of the Cables and tacklings, sheard and broke, all the Passengers
being in a mighty fear, and almost dead with the expectation and the dread of
death, only he in so great a fear and danger (as he confessed himself) was
scarcely moved to any thing, besides a tender feeling and sorrow, that he had
not served God, so truly and faithfully as he ought; and for any other thing*
Math. 8.27.
it never touched the confidence of his mind; quia v^nti, and mare obediunt ei,
for he knew that the winds and sea were obedient unto God, and without his will
and permission would not lift up a wave to swallow any one. Let us likewise
study, (the grace of God supposed) to arrive unto this familiar and filial
confidence in God, and to this assurance and tranquillity of mind, by this
exercise of the conformity with the will of God, deluing by the means of
prayer and consideration, and sinking deeply into this most rich mine of Gods
so fatherly providence of us, I am most certain that nothing can happen to me,
and that neither the devils nor men, nor any creature, can do more unto me the^
God gives way to and permits: and in his holy name let that be done, I do not
refuse it, neither desire any thing but purely the will of God.

We read of S. Gertrude that neither dangers, nor tribulation, Blos. c. 11.
mon. spirit.
neither temporal los^e nor any hindera^ces, no not so much as her own
defects and faults could ever obscure that constant and secure confidence which
she had in the most gracious mercy of Almighty God, she believing most
assuredly that all as well prosperity as adversity would by that divine
providence be converted into good, and our Lord once said unto this virgin: The
assured confidence which a man has in me, believing me undoubtedly both to be
able and willing to assist him faithfully in all occasions, does even pierce my
heart, and offer such violence unto my mercy, that I cannot be wanting unto such
a creature, for the increase of his merit, and mine own delight to see him so
entirely dependant on me: neither can I otherwise choose but favor him, for
having so free and cofident recourse to that which I am, and which I am able to
do: and he uses this form of speaking, like to one who were transported and
as it were with fond love. It is recounted of S. Mechtilda, ^ Blosius vbi sup.
that our Savior said unto her. It is most grateful unto me, that men do
confide in my goodness and presume of my favors toward them* for whosoever
does humbly put his trust, and firmly believe in me, I will both in this life
be gracious to him, and after his death reward him above his merits. The more
one belieues and piously presumes of my goodness toward him, the more even to
an infinite proportion shall he obtain of me; seeing it is impossible for a
man not to recei^e of me that, which he has hoped for and holily confided to
obtain: and therefore it is most profitable for a man, to promise the most unto
his hope, and to believe my promises to him. And to the same Mechtilda,
desirous to know what we were chiefly to believe of his unspeakable goodness,
our Lord answered, believe with an assured faith, that I will receive thee
after thou art dead, as a Father would do his best bel^ued child; and that
never any Father did so faithfully divide his inheritance with his only child,
as I will communicate both my self and all I have with thee, whosoever shall
firmly believe this of my goodness, with an humble charity, shall be happy
above all belief.

THE XI. CHAPTER. Of diverse passages and examples of the holy Scripture, which
may help us much to obtain this familiar and filial confidence in God.
IT will be good for us first of all, to put before our eyes the frequent
custom of those ancient Fathers, to attribute unto God, all things which
happened to them, by what means or way soever they arrived. In the two and
fortieth Chapter of Genesis, the holy Scripture recounts, how Joseph's brethren,
whilst they were returning toward their country with that provision of corn
which they had bought in Egypt, in opening their sacks (as they baited at an
Inn to prouander their beasts) did find each one in the mouth of his sack,
the money, which they had disbursed for their corn (which Joseph had commanded
his steward to restore in that manner unknown to them) they percei^ing this
and being much troubled cried one unto an other; Quidnam est hoc quod fecit
nobis Deus? Genesis 42.28.
what is this* which God has done unto us? where we are to observe, that they
did not say, this is some plot laid for us, there is some practice in it or the
steward through his negligence has left the money in our sacks; neither
perhaps he meant to bestow it on us in Al^es; but they ascribed it unto God
saying, what is this which God has done unto us? in it acknowledging that as
the leaf of a tree could not be shaken but by the will of God, so also that
could not happen but by the same providence. And when Jacob removed with all
his family into Egypt, Joseph with all his children went to visit him, who
being demanded by his Father what children those were? answered: Genesis 48.9.
filij mei sunt, quos donauit mihi Deus in hoc loco, they are my children whom
God has bestowed upon me in this place; and the like answer Jacob gave when
meeting with his brother Esau, and he demanding of him what children those
were which he had brought with him, he answered, Genesis 33.5.
paruuli sunt quos donauit mihi Deus, they are little ones who^ God has
bestowed upon me, and presenting him with certain things he said. Suscipe
benedistionem quam attuli tibi, Genesis 33.11.
and quam donauit mihi Deus tribuens omnia, receive this present (which he
calls a benediction of God, whose every gift is a benefit) receive it (said he)
which I have brought for you, and which God has bestowed upon me, who is the
distributer of every thing. Also when David all incens't with rage and passion
was on his way to ruin the house of Nabal, and Abigail meeting him with her
presents and prayers assuaged his fury, David said; Reg. 23.32.
Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel, qui misit hodie te in occursum meum, ne irem
ad sanguinem. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has sent thee to day to
meet me, that I might not go forwards unto blood and to the slaughter of the
house of Nabal. as if he had said, you are not come of your self, hut God has
sent you unto the end that I might not sin, I acknowledge the benefit from
him, unto him be praise and thanks therefore. This was the common style among
those ancient Fathers, which we ought to make ours by imitation.

But to come nearer to the matter; the History of Joseph, ^en. 37.
which we have touched in passing, is no less strange, then serving to our
purpose; whom his brothers out of envy (that he might not come to reign over
them, and be their Lord according to his dream,) sold into bondage unto
certain merchants: and the same means, which they served their turns withal
to provide that he might not come to reign over them, God made use of to
effect that which his divine providence had designed; which was, both to make
him Lord over them, and all the land of Egypt. And so the same Joseph affirmed
unto his brothers, when discovering himself unto them, they were even lost in
the fear and amazement of so wondrous an event, Nolite pauere, nec vobis
durum esse videatnr, Genesis 25.5.
quod vendidistis me in his regionibus: pro salute enim vestra masit me Deus
ante vos in Aegyptum, premisitque me Deus vt reseruemini super terram, and
es^as ad viuendum habere possitis* be not afraid neither let it seem unto you
a hard case, that you did sell me into these countries: for God for your (good
and) safty has sent me hither before you into Egypt; God has sent me before,
that you might be maintained upon the earth, and be provided with victuals to
sustain your lives, together with all the people of Israel. It is God, said
he* Genesis 50.19.
who has sent me, non vestro consilio, sed Dei voluntate hu^ missus sum; It
was not your doing, but the providence of God; Number Dei possumus resistere
voluntati? vos cogitastis de me malum, sed Deus vertit illud in bonum, vt
exaltaret me; sicut in praes^ntiarum cernitis, and saluos faceres populos
multos, who can resist the will of God? you imagined evil against me, but God
converted it all to good, that he might exalt me, like as you see at this
present, and work the safty of many people: And who is there who hereafter
will not confide in God? who shall fear any more the malice of men, or the
worlds adversities? When they shall know that all is foreseen by God, and that
he uses the same means, which they invent to trouble and persecute us, for our
advancement and our greater good? Consilium meum stabit, Esa. 46.10.
and omnis voluntas mea fiet, says God by the Prophet Esaias, go which way you
will, you have your choice, but so, as at the end whither you will or no you
must arrive thither where God would have you go, who makes use of your means
unto that end.

S. Chrysostom considers yet an other particular in this History, Chri. ho^.
63. super Genes. Genesis 40.23.
serving for out present purpose, treating how Pharaos cupbearer, after he was
restored unto his office, for two whole years never had thought of Joseph his
Interpreter, although he had most earnestly commended himself unto his memory,
to beseech Pharao for his delivery. Do you think, sait^ this saint, that this
his forgetfulness was b^ chance? No assure your self, but so reso^ued upon and
decreed by God, inte^ding t^ await the conueniency of time, to deliue^ Joseph
out of prison unto his greater glor^ and advancement, for if the Cupbeare had
been mindful of him, it had been an easy matter for him, considering his
authority, to have work't under hand hi^ delivery so, as none should ever have
see: or hard of him, but God intended not (...) have him so delivered, but in
such manner as might gain him honor and authority; permitting the other to be
forgetful of him for two years together, that the dream of Pharao might
chance in the interim, when at the instance of the King of himself, compelled
by necessity he might be delivered from prison with that glory and Majesty, to
be made ruler over the whole Land of Egypt. God knows well says S.
Chrysostom like a cunning artiza^, how long the gould must be trying in the
fire, and when it is sit time to take it out.

In the first book of Kings we read an other example in which the providence
of God, even in little and particular things is perceived most clearly. God
told the Prophet Samuel that he would show unto him, that man who was to be
King of Israel, unto the end he might a^noint him, and said, hac ipsa hora quae
nunc est, 1. Reg. 9.16.
cras mittam virum ad te de terra Benjamin, and vnges eum Ducem super populum
meu^ Israel, to morrow at this very hour I will send unto thee the man whom
thou art to anoint for King, and this was Saul; whose manner of sending was
this; The a^^es of his Father were gone astray, and his Father sent him for to
seek them out: he took a boy with him, and sought all up and down, but could
hear no news of them; whereupon Saul was in mind to return home again, by
reason it was late, and his Father might be fearful what was become of them;
but the boy was of opinion that they should by no means return, until they
had found them out: there is a man of God here hard by, said he (meaning the
Prophet Samuel) let us have recourse to him, and without doubt he will tell us
news of them. Hereupon they go to find Samuel out, and at their arrival God
said unto him; Ecce vir, quem dixeram tibi; iste dominabitur populo meo, this
is he whom I told you I would send; this is the man you must anoint for King.
O strange and wonderful judgment of God Almighty! his Father sent him to seek
after his strayed beasts, and God sent him to Samuel to be anointed King. What
difference is there betwixt the designs and pretensions of men, and God? How
far was Saul and his Father from any such thought, that he was then going to
be anointed and consecrated King? and so how far are you and your Father and
superior oftentimes, from imagining that which God intends to do. From that
which you think least of* God Almighty draws forth his own ends. No, no, the
beasts were not lost but by the will of God, neither was it by chance that
Saul was sent by his Father to seek the^ out, neither that he could not find
them, nor the counsel of the boy to go to the Prophet Samuel to hear news
of them, but all was so ordained and designed by God, who used those means to
send Saul unto Samuel, that according as he had premonished him, he might
anoint him King. Your Father, when he sends you to study at one of the
Universities, or beyond the seas, intends to bring you up to learning, and
thereby to make you a way unto some dignity whereby you may honorably live
hereafter; and he deceaues himself, for God sends you thither to incorporate
you into his own house, and make you Religious. S. Augustine when he went from
Rome to Millan, and also Symmachus the Governor of the City who sent him
thither, did think the cause of his going was to teach Rhethorick there, but
there was no such matter, for God sent him thither that S. Ambros^ might
convert him and make him Catholic.

Let us consider a little the sundry vocations of men, and the particular and
express ways, and strange passages, by which God leads several men unto
Religion; for doubtless it is a thing deserving all admiration to see, that had
it not been for such a toy or trifling thing, which happened to you, in such a
circumstance, you had never been Religious: and now that thing was expressly
ordained and so ordered by God, to the end to bring you to Religion; which in
passing ought to be reflected on by those, whose minds are oftentimes troubled
and tempted to call in doubt whither their vocations were from God or no, since
they have been brought into Religion, by such intricat ways as we have
mentioned; which is no other then an illusion of the enemy, envious of that
state in which you are, since there is nothing more ordinary to God, then to
serve himself of such unlikely ways, unto that end which he pretends of his
greater glory, and your greater vtility and good; and of this we have many
examples in the lives of Saints. God ordained not your journey to seek out the
beasts. Nunquid de bobus cura est Deo? But he would lead you by that way unto a
kingdom, seruire Deo regnare est. 1. Cor. 9.9.


When the Prophet Samuel afterward was sent from God, to check Saul for his
disobedience in not wholly ruining Amalec as God had commanded him, the
Prophet having sharply reprehended him, and turning his back for to depart,
Saul took him by his garment to stay him, and desire him to pray for him and
reconcile him unto God again; and the text says, that the piece of Samuels
garment which Saul laid hold upon, toar of, and remained in his hand. Who would
not think it a very chance that the garment of the Prophet should be rent and
torn? 1. Reg. 15.27.
either because that Saul held fast and pulck't him hard, or that the Prophets
garment was lightly rent, because it was old and worn: who I say would not
imagine this rather, then that it was so disposed of by the particular
providence of God; to signify that Saul was divided from his kingdom, and
deprived of his crown for his offenses, and yet this was it which Samuel said,
to Saul, when he saw what was happened; scidit Dominus regnum Israel a te
hodie, and tradidit illud proximo tuo meliori te, the Lord (by the division of
my garment) gives thee to understand, that to day the kingdom of Israel is rent
from thee, and delivered unto thy neighbor a better man then thou.

In the same first book of the Kings, 1. Reg. 23.26. 1. Reg. 29.6. and cap. 30.
is recounted how Saul once held David and his people so besieged, in modum
coronae, that David even despaired of escaping his hands: being in this
distress, there arriues in all have a Post in the Camp of Saul, bringing news
that the Philistims had made impression on his Country, ransacking and spoiling
all, whereupon Saul to make head against that danger which did most concern
him, was enforced to break up his siege, and lead his forces against the
Philistims, and so David escaped. This enterprise and invasion of the
Philistims was no ways casual, but a kind of stratagem of Almighty God, by
that means to deliver David from his enemy.

An other time the Princes or Satrapae of the Philistims would needs expel
David out of their Army, and effected so much, as their King Achas commanded
him to his house, although otherwise he stood well affected toward him, and
was delighted in his company. Sed Satrapis non places. this seems to have been
done only to please the Satrapae. and an unlucky chance for him; but it
happened otherwise, and that which they intended unto his mischief, was
directed by the particular providence of God unto an other end: for David being
returned unto his house, found that the Amaleks had set fire of Siceleg a town
of his, and had led away into captivity, all the women and children, a minimo
vsque ad magnum, and among the rest the women of his own household; whereupon
he fallows them upon the spure, ouertakes, defeats them, and recouers all the
pray, and prisoners again, even to a man. Which he could not have done, had
not the Satrapae expelled him their Army: and unto this end did God direct
their counsel, how ever they had disposed of it for an other end. In the
History of Esther this particular providence of God is also clearly to be
seen, even in very small and particular accidents, in that his so miraculous
deliurance of the Jewish Nation, from the cruel sentence of King Assuerus: as
that Vasti should be rejected and Esther chosen for Queen, a Jew by nat^^n, the
better and with more interest thereafter to intercede for them. It seems that
Mardocheus by mere chance came to have notice, and to detect the Eunu^hes
conspiracy against the life of King Assuerus, and that the King on night should
have no list to sleep, and to pass away the tediousnes of the night, should
cause the Chronicles of the time to be fetched and read, and that they should
light just upon that place, where the services of Mardocheus were mentioned:
but nothing of all this did happen by casualty, but all was so disposed by the
profou^d judgment of Almighty God, and his particular providence, which had
chosen those means for the delivery of his people; and so Mardocheus sent word
to Esther when she durst not adventure to speak unto the King, alleging for
her excuse that he had not called for her. Quis nouit vtrum idcirco ad regnum
veneris, Ester. 4 14.
vt in tali tempore parareris? who knows but you have been therefore chosen unto
the dignity of Queen, that you might be ready in such a time as this, to afford
us help and succor.

The holy Scripture and the holy Ecclesiastical Histories are full of the like
accidents, the better to teach us to ascribe all chances unto God, and receive
them as proceeding from his divine hand for our greater commodity and good. In
the book of S. Clements reueus, we read a most remarkable History serving for
our present purpose; Clement l. recognition^
Whilst S. Peter had Simon Magus hotly in pursuit at Rome, Saint Barnaby
converted Saint Clement to the Christian faith, who having recourse unto Saint
Peter, declared unto him the progress of his conversion, and besought him to
add his help, unto the better instructing of him in the Mysteries of his
belief. Saint Peter told him, that he came most oportunely, for (said he) to
morrow is appointed for a public disputation, betwixt Simon the Magitian and
my self, where being present you may both see and be satisfied in that which
you desire: whilst they were yet in speaking, in comes two of Simon Magus
disciples, sent from him unto S. Peter to desire that by reason of some urgent
affairs of his, the disputation might be for some two or three days differd.
S. Peter told them that he was content. They departing. S. Peter perceived S.
Clement sensibly waxing sad, and melancholy; and demanded of him what the
matter was? to whom S. Clement replied; Father I must confess that it is a
cause of much affliction to me, to see this disputation respited, which I so
much desired to have been to morrow. hereupon happened a thing worthy to be
observed in a thing of small importance: for S. Peter took him by the hand,
and discours't at large unto him on this subject, saying amongst many other
things. Behold, my son, when any thing chances among the heathens, otherwise
then they desire, they become straight ways troubled: but it becomes us who
know that God directs and gouernes all, to be in continual quiet and repose:
and understand, son, that this is so happened for your greater good; for if the
disputation had been to morrow, there had passed many things above your
understanding, which now in the mean time I will so inform as you shall
receive both much content and profit, when the day of disputation comes.

I will conclude with a domestical example, Lib. 2. c. 16 vitae P N. Ig. and
in vita P. Francisci Xauerij.
which is recorded in the life of our B. Father; in which appears most
apparently this divine providence whereof we speak: and it is concerning the
departure of S. Xauerius toward the east Indies. The means by which he came
to be designed for that expedition are most worthy of consideration. Our B. F.
S. Ignatius designed for that mission, F. Simon Rodriguez, and F. Nicholas
Bobadilla: F. Simon as that time was much crazed with a Quartane Ague, yet
notwithstanding without delay he embark't himself for Portugal, F. Bobadilla
was advertised by letter that he should leave Calabria and repare presently to
Rome: he came, but so weakened with the Journey and those extreme wants which
he had suffered upon the way, and withal so ill disposed in one of his legs,
that it was necessary he should remain sometime under cure after his arrival
to Rome, and Don Petro Mascaregna's have calling away for Portugal, S.
Ignatius of necessity was to take a new resolution, (the Ambassador still
urging for an other Father) and substitute (by happy adventure) S. Xauerius in
Bobadilla's place; It might seem that by reason F. Bobadilla was named for that
Journey and not S. Xauerius, and that he was only, because of the Ambassadors
necessity of departure, substituted into the others place, that his designement
for that expeditio^ was by mere hazard thought upon, but there was no chance
in it, but only the particular providence of God, which had determined to make
him the glorious Apostle of those Eastern parts; and moreover when they were
arrived in Portugaell, the Portugezi considering the great profit which they
did, entered upon a resolution to detain them both there; neither could they be
so wholly drawn from it, as not to keep the one, whilst the other should be
suffered to go on his voyage to the Indies. Look here how things seem to go
by chance: nevertheless unto God there is nothing casual: in the end, the
expedition to the Indies fell unto S. Xauerius lot, because the will of God had
so disposed of it, as a thing the most conferring to his glory, and the
salvation of so many souls. Let men project and design things as they please,
and take that way to effect them, as they fancy best; but God will make use of
those means which they invent, to put his own ends in execution, and order
all as shall be most expedient, and to his greater glory.

Besides these examples and others the like which the holy scripture affords
us, and which we daily see and experience as well in our selves as others, it is
requisite that we proceed by the way of prayer, and consideration, to confirm
and imprint in our hearts this happy confidence. Neither are we to impose an
end unto this exercise, until we sensibly perceive in our hearts this familiar
and filial confidence in God; And be assured that the greater this your
confidence shall be, whereby you cast your self (as it were) into the arms of
God, the more and greater shall your security be, and on the contrary, you shall
never arrive unto true peace and quietness of mind, until you have attained
this filial confidence, seeing that without it, there is no thing so sligh^
and little, which has not force to dismay and trouble you. Let us therefore
resolve to cast and commit our selves with all speed into the hands of God, and
to place our assurance in him; following that counsel of the Apostle S. Peter.
Omnem solicitudinem vestram proijcientes in eum, 1. Pet^i. 5.7. Psalm. 54.23.
quoniam ipsi eura est de vobis, casting all your solicitude in him, because he
has care of you, and the Prophet says. Iacta super Dommum curam tuam, and ipse
te enutriet, cast all the care of your self upon God and he will nourish you.
O blesled Lord you have tendered me so much as to deliver over your self for my
sake without any reservation, into the hands of those cruel tormenters, for to
do with thee whatsoever their strangly ingenious malice could inue^t, Iesum
vero tradid^ volunta^^ eorum, Lu^^ 23.^^.
what wonder is it then, if I do put and resign my self entirely into those
not cruel, but dear and charitable hand, of thine, for to do with me
whatfoeuer thou shall please, when I am most certain that thou will do nothing
but what may be best, and most convenient for me. Let us become iointpartners
in that contract which our Blessed Savior made with S. Catherine of Siena. Our
Lord at sundry times indeared this Saint unto him with most sweet priuacy,
enriching her noble soul with many high graces and favors, among the rest one
and a most particular one was, that one day appearing unto her he said, filia
cogita tu de me and ego cogitabo continenter de te, my daughter do thou think
of me, and I will have perpetual thought of thee. O blessed accord! o happy
exchange!o rich gain of our souls. This bargain God is ready to make with
every on of us: do but lay aside the thought of your self and the solicitude
of things; and the more you shall forget your self to think and confide in
God, the greater charge and care shall God Almighty have of you. Who is there
who would not with all his soul accept a condition so delicious and auailable,
as the Spouse in the Canticles glories to have made with her beloved. Ca^t. 7.10
Ego dilecto meo (...) ad me conuersio eius. I to my beloved and his regard is
to me.

THE XII. CHAPTER. How great profit and perfection it is, to apply prayer unto
this exercise of the conformity with the will of God, and how we are so long to
descend unto particulars until we arrive unto the third degree of the said
conformity.
John Rusbrock a very learned and spiritual man, Rusbroc in ^^ne operum suorum
writs of a certain Virgin who in rendering an account of her prayer unto her
Ghostly Father a great servant of Almighty God, and a man of high contemplation
with earnest desire to be instructed by him, told him, that her exercise in her
prayer, was on the life and passion of our Savior Christ, and the profit which
she reaped from thence, was the knowledge of her self, and of her passions and
defects, as also a sorrow and compassion for the pain and sufferance of our
Savior Christ, her Confessor told her, that all this was good, but yet on
without much virtue might be lively touched with tenderness and compassion of the
death and passion of our Savior Christ, like as we see the natural love and
affection which one bears an other, does make him have a deep resentment of
his friends misery and adversity. The Virgin then demanded of him, whether the
daily deploring of our sins, were a true devotion or no? he answered it was
good, but not the perfectest, seeing that evil naturally brings with it a
hatred of it, again she asked him, whether it were a true devotion to think
often on the pains of hell, and the glory of the Blessed? he answered it was
likewise good but as far from being the best as the former was, seeing that
nature its self by a certain instinct does commonly abhor and fly from all
pain and torment, and loves and seeks after that which may bring us to
content and glory; as when you see but the picture of some fair and pleasant
City, you desire presently to inhabit it. This did exceedingly grieve the holy
Vigin, and left her much disconsolate and sad in that she knew not which way
she might best apply her exercise of prayers, to be most pleasing to Almighty
God. Not long after there appeared to her an Infant of exquisit beauty, to whom
when she had related the cause of her sadness, adding withal it was so great
that none could comfort her. The Child, did tell her she should forbear to say
so since he himself both could and would comfort her; therefore go (said he)
unto your Ghostly Father and declare unto him, that true and solid devotion
does consist in the abnegation and contemning of ones self, as also in an
entire resignation into the hands of God, as well in adversity as prosperity, in
being straictly united by love to God in every thing. The Virgin with ^oyfull
cheer went presently unto her Ghostly Father, to inform him of all this, who
no sooner heard her but he answered* this this is that indeed, to which you are
to apply your prayer, seeing that herein consists the true charity and love of
God, and consequently our profit and perfection. It is recounted of an other
Virgin, that our Lord tought her to insist long time together upon these words,
Refert Blo^ ca. 11. mon spirit.
O Lord your will be done one earth as it is in heaven, and we read of S.
Gertrude that inspired by God Almighty she repeated without any intermission,
those words of our Savior. Lucae 22 42.
Not my will (o Lord) be done, but thine, three hundred sixty five times
together, and she understood that it was a devotion most gratfull to Almighty
God. Let us then imitate these examples, and directing all our prayers unto
this end* go forward courageously in this exercise. Now that we may the better,
and with greater profit do it, we are to presuppose two things. The first is,
that this exercise is of greatest necessity in time of adversity, and when we
have any difficulty to overcome, unto the conquest whereof is required a
conflict against flesh and blood: for in these occurrances there is greatest
need of virtue, and in such times as those the love which we bear unto God
Almighty does more manifestly appear. Even as a King in time of peace by
obliging his soldiers by his liberality does show the affection which he bears
to them, and they in the time of war in fighting and dying for him, do show
the love and loyal respect which they have to him. So in the time of
spiritual joy and consolation the King of heaven gives us to understand how
dearly (...) tenders us, and we in the time of desolation and adversity, do
more show forth our affection unto his service, then we are able to do whilst
we are in comfort and prosperity. M. Auila to. 2. ep fol. 20.
Master Auila says ex^ellent well, that to render thank to God in time of
consolation is common unto all, but to bless and praise him when we are
oppressed with tribulation and adversity, is only proper to the good and
perfect and a most harmonious music to the ears of God. And he adds that in
the midst of adversity only to say. I render you thanks o Lord, blessed be God
or the like, is of more worth and merit then thousands of thanks and
benedictions in time of prosperity, and in this sense the holy Scripture
compares the just unto the carbuncle; Eccl* 32.7
Gemmula carbuncul^ in ornamento auri, because that this precious stone gives
greater luster by night then in the shining day; so in like manner the
faithful and true servant of God Almighty shines and shows forth more clearly
what he is, in the cloudy night of tribulation, then in the bright sun shine
of prosperity. And therefore the holy Scripture praises holy Toby so much, Tob.
2.14.
for that he although God permitted him to fall into sundry calamities, and
lastly had deprived him of his sight, yet never proceeded in his sadness against
Almighty God, nor remitted any thing of his former fidelity and obedience to
his Divine Majesty, but he remained always immovable rendering equal thanks
to God his whole life long, as well for his blindness as for the faculty of
sight, Job 1.21
as holy Job in his affections had done before. This says S. Augustine is that
which we are to endeavor to imitate, vt in cunctis idem sis, Aug ad fratres in
Here^. ser. 4.
tam in prosperis, quam in aduersis, that as well in prosperity as adversity we
remain always the same. Si^ut manus quae eadem est, and cum in palmam
extenditur, and cum in pugnum constringitur: Like as the hand is always the
same, as well when we span it out as when we clutch our fist; so likewise the
servant of Almighty God ought always to be at quiet in the interior of his
soul, how ever he may seem to the exterior show, to be perplexed and
sorrowful. And if it be true which is reported of Socrates, Socrates refert
Cicero lib. 13. Tuscula. question.
that in the greatest diversity of fortune, he was always one, and that he was
never observed to exceed a moderation in his mirth or sorrow. Nec hilariorem
quisquam nec tristem Socratem vidit, aequalis fuit in tanta inaequalitau
fortunae vsque ad extremum vitae, what extraordinary thing were it in us, who
are both Christians and Religious men, to endeavor to aspire to a perfection
unto which a Heathen had arrived before us.

Secondly we are to know that it is not sufficient to have this conformity with
the will of God in General, seeing it will be no hard matter to attain it so:
for who is there that will not say, he desires that the Divine will be
performed in every thing; and both the good and bad say in there Pater noster,
every day, your will be done on earth as it is in heaven, but it is necessary
that we consider it in preciser manner, and descend unto those particulars
which might cost us most pain and difficulty should they arrive unto us, and
not to rest until we had facilitated every one of them. We are not to remain
(as they say) carrying our lance at ^andome without putting it in our rest;
Trac. ^5. cap. 16.
and always in danger of being cast from our conformity with the will of God,
as soon as any unexpected difficulty comes and bids us battle; but we are to
make head against them of our own accord.

Neither are we to content our selves with this, but we are to enforce our
selves to pass onward still, until we come to find taste and cordial delight,
that the will of God is accomplished in us, although it be in matter of pain
sorrow and disesteem, which is the third degree of this conformity; for this is
like wise divided into sundry degrees; the one more sublime and perfect then
the other: although chiefly they may be reduced to three, in the same manner as
the Saints have distributed the virtue of patience. The first is when a man
does neither accept of, nor desire those things which go aceompanied with
pain, but rather shuns them, yet so as he had rather undergo them, then to
commit any sin to be delivered from them; this is the lowest degree and of
co^mau^dment, in so much as although a man in his mishaps be sensible of pain
grief and discontent, although he sigh and groan whilst he is sick, and cries
out through the vehemence of his grief and bewailes the loss and death of
friends, yet with all these he may still have conformity with the will of God.
The second degree is when a man (although he do not desire that any harm
should chance unto him, neither makes choice of it) notwithstanding when it is
once happened to him, does willingly embrace and suffer it, because it is the
good pleasure and will of God: and this second degree, surpasses the first, in
that a man in some sort has a liking and affection to suffer discommodity and
pain for the love of God, and proceeds so far, as to desire it, because it
is Gods pleasure it should be so. The first degree supports these things with
patience, the second implies besides, the suffering them promptly and with
willingness; The third is when the servant of Almighty God, out of the great
love he bears our B. Lord, does not only accept of, and suffer most willingly
whatsoever pain and affliction which he shall send him, but also is longing
for them, and rejoices in them because he knows them to be the will of God.
And so S. Luke writs of the Apostles. Act. 5.41
I^ant gaudentes a conspectu concily, quoniam digni habiti sunt pro nomine
Jesus, contumeliam pati, aftet they were most ignominiously whipped, they went
rejoicing out of the presence of the council, for having been esteemed worthy
to suffer co^tumely for the name of Christ, and the Apostle S. Paul says. Ad
Co^. 7.4.
Repletus sum consolatione, superabundo gaudio, in omni tribulatione nostra, I
am filled full with consolation, and do abound with joy, in alour tribulation,
chains and adversity. and for this reason he prayseth the Hebrews writing unto
them. Ad H^be 20.34.
Et rapinam bonorum vestrorum cum gaudio suscepistis, cognoscentes vos habere
meliorem and manentem substantiam, you have received joyfully the loss of your
(temporal) goods as knowing your selves to have better and more lasting
riches. Unto this must we endeavor with the grace of God to arrive, to bear
with joy and gladness all tribulations and adversities which may happen to us
as, S. James counsels us in his Canonical Epistle; Omne gaudium existimate
fratres mei, Iaco. 1.1.
cum in tentationes varias incideritis, esteem it dear brothers for the
completest joy of all, when you shall fall into sundry tentations; The will and
contentment of God ought to be unto us a thing so precious and sweet, that it
should be sufficient to conserve and sugar all bitter chances which may happen
to us; all the miseries and disgusts of the world, should become swee^ and
delicious unto us; only because it is the good pleasure, the will of God; Greg.
li. 7. mor. c. 7.
and this is it which S. Gregory says, si men's in Deum forti intention
dirigatur, quidquid tibi in hac vita amarum sit, dulce aestimat* omne quod
affl^git, requiem putat, transire and per mortem apetit, vt obtin^re before
vuam possit, if our mind were once directed to God with a strong intention, it
would esteem all that were bitter in this life, for sweet, all that were
afflicting us it would account for rest, yea it would even long to pass by
death it self, for to obtain a more full and perfect life.

S. Catherine of Siena in a certain Dialogue which she has left written of
the consummat perfection of a Christian, S. Catha. de Sena.
says that among other things which her dear spouse our Blessed Lord had
tought her, one was, that she should build up her self a chamber of repose,
which should be round about vaulted with the will of God, and that there she
should enclose herself and make perpetual abode, never going out, or stiring
foot or hand, or casting a look out from thence, but always remain
recollected in herself, as the be in the hiue, or the pearl in its shell,
and although that in the beginning perhaps this habitation might seem too
narrow and retired, notwithstanding she should soon find it of a wonderful
extent; in so much as without going out of it, she might recreate her self
among the eternal mansions of the Blessed, and make greater profit in a few
days there, then she could do without in a long space of time. Let us
likewise do the same, and make this our continual exercise, Dilectus meus
mihi, and ego illi, my beloved to me, Cant. 1.16.
and I to him, in these two words we have enough to entertain our selves for
our whole lives, and therefore we ought to have them always in our mouths and
hearts.

THE XIII. CHAPTER. Of the indifferency and conformity with the will of God,
which Religious men ought to have, in going and remaining in any part of the
world, where they may be disposed of by Obedience.
TO the end that we may make more profit out of this exercise of the co^formity
with the will of God, and put in practice that which we have said, we will go
declaring in particular some principal points in which we ought to exercise
our selves; and afterward descend to certain other General heads, which
appertain to all. And now we will begin with those particular things which are
contained in our constitutions, since it is most consonant to reason that a
Religious man, should chiefly in their observance show forth the virtue and
Religion which he has, and afterward each on may apply this doctrine unto
other things of the same kind, either in his Religion or his state of life.

In the seventh part of the constitutions our B. Father treating of Missions
which is on of the principal functions of our Institut, 7. p* Co^st. c. 1.. 1.
says that those of the Society are to be indifferent to go, and make their
aboade in any part of the world where soever obedi^ce shall send the^, c. 1.
exa^.. 5. and 5. p. constable. c. 3.. 3. and C and p. 6. c. 2.. ^3. and 1. and p.
7. c. 1.. 3 and E. 7. p. constable. c. 1.. 1. and B.
either among Christians or Infidels, either to the Indies, or among the
Heretics: and concerning this, those who are professed do solemnly make a
fourth vow of particular obedience unto the Popes Holiness, to go readily and
willingly without alleging any excuse, unto any part of the world where His
holiness shall send them, without demanding any temporallities either by
themselves or others, for their charges of their journey on the way, or for
their maintenance when they are arrived there; but that they will go either by
horse or foot, with money, or without it, begging and living on alms as it
shall seem best unto his Holiness. And our B. Father declares in the same place
that the end and intention of making of this vow was to come more nearer to the
will of God, for as much as the first Fathers of the Society being for the most
part of diverse nations and provinces, and not knowing in what part of the world
to employ their labors, so as they might be best pleasing to Almighty God,
whether among the faithful or Infidells, to arrive to a certain knowledge of
the will of God, they made this vow to his Vicar hear on earth, to the end
that he might dispose of them throughout the world, according as he should
judge it to be most requisite for Gods greater glory. But those of the Society,
says he, ought in no wise to intermedle themselves, or procure to besent, and
abide more in one place then an other, but they are to remain wholly
indifferent, leaving the free and entire disposition of themselves in the hands
of their Superiors, who govern them in the place of God, as may be most for
his service and greater glory.

And that we might perceive what an absolute indifferency and readiness to go
unto any country of the world, where holy obedience might dispose of us, our B.
Father requires; Lib. 5. c. 4 vitae P. N. Ignat.
we read in his life, that F. James Laynes once said unto him that he felt a
great desire in himself, to go unto the Indies to procure the salvation of
those blind Infidels, who were lost for want of Euangelical laborers* to whom
our B. Father answered that for his part he had no such desire, and being ask't
the reason, he said, because that we in having made a vow of obedience to his
Holiness, to go unto any part of the world where he shall send us for the
service of Almighty God, ought to be entirely indifferent, and not to have any
inclination more to on place then to an other; and he added more over if I did
perceive my self as you inclined, to go unto the Indies, now, I should bestow
all my endeavors, to bend my inclination to the contrary, that so I might
arrive to that perfect indifferency and equality, which is required to the
obteining the perfection of obedience.

Notwithstanding we do not say that the desires which we may have of going to
the Indies, be either ill, or imperfect, for they are so far from that, as
they are both good and holy, and as such, it is good to propose and present
them to our Superiors whenever our Lord shall please for to inspire them, and
so our B. Father, 7, p. co^st. c. ^. lit. 1.
in the same place says that the Superiors with good reason may be much
comforted when such desires are proposed unto them, by any of their charge,
seeing that they are most commonly the signs, that such are called unto it by
Almighty God, and so they come to be disposed of with greater sweetness and more
gentleness: but we have said it unto the end that we might perceive the readiness
and indifferency which our B. Father requires of us, to go and remain in what
part of the world so ever; seeing that he would not so much as have us affected
more then ordinary unto a mission so laborious and so much importing the
service of Almighty God, as that; and that unto the end that our inclination to
any particular thing, might not set any bar betwixt us and that promptitude
and indifferency which we ought to have to any other thing, or place, besides
unto which Obedience might think fit to send us.

From hence there may be some consequences drawn forth, which may help us
better to comprehend this same. The first is, that if the desire of going for
the Indies, should be occasion to him who does conceive it, of failing in any
point of this redines and indifferency unto any other thing, which obedience
might appoint him, that then it is not good, but an imperfection: if I were
taken with so great desire, and wear so set upon going to the Indies or else
where, that it should disquiet me, and be the occasion that I should remain
with less contentment either here or in any other place where obedience
should dispose of me, and that I did not discharge with that willingness those
present functions in which I were employed, neither performed them with due
application, by reason my eyes and thoughts were fixed upon that other thing;
then it is most apparent, that such desires are neither good, nor proceeding
from God Almighty, since they are impediments unto his will, and God cannot be
contrary to himself: as also because the desires and inspiratio^s of the holy
Ghost, do not use to go accompanied with trouble and disquietnes but with a
profound peace and tranquillity. And this is one of the signs which the masters
of spiritual life do give, to know whether our inspirations and desires be
proceeding from God or no.

Secondly it follows from hence that he who should have an universal
disposition, both prompt and indifferent to transport himself into any part of
the world, or to perform any thing which obedience should prescribe, although
he felt in himself no such particular inclination as others have of going to
the Indies* or any other country remote or near, has no reason to trouble
himself therefore seeing that he is no ways in the worser state, but rather
the better disposed, it being such a disposition as our B. Father requires of
all the Society, to have of our parts no affection or particular desire, more
unto one thing then an other; but he would have us in a disposition answerable
to the tongue, of a balance which inclines no more to on side then an other;
and of this sort are many, or according to my opinion the greater part. Our B.
Father had taken a deliberation once to send F. Natalis in a certain mission,
and to proceed in it with the more sweetness, he desired before to know his
inclination. F. Natalis by letter answered him, that for his part he was
inclined to nothing, but only to this, to have no particular inclination of his
own, and this disposition our B. Father esteemed for the best of all, and the
most perfect* and that with good reason, for that other seems only to be
fastened to one thing alone, but this with his indifferency is embracing all
whatsoever may be commanded him, and is prepared and disposed with an equal
mind unto all alike; and for as much as God regards only the heart and will of
a man, which before him, is as much as the work it self, therefore this ready
will for all, is as acceptable to him as the execution of all would be.

And to declare this more fully, if any one who were tepide, pusillanimous or
unmortified, should have no desire of going to the Indies, by reason of his
want of courage and resolution, to leave those commodities which here he
imagins himself to have, or to be in the way of obteining, or else because he
has no will, to expose himself to those many labors which there he must
undergo, in this man I say such a disposition is self love and imperfection,
but one who forbears not to desire it, out of any faintheartednes, or less
will and courage to undertake those labors, and others yet more painful for
the love of God, and salvation of souls, but only because he is uncertain
whether it be the will of God to dispose of him that way, or in any other
thing, and is in himself both ready and prepared to perform any thing which
he shall know to be the will of God, and would go for the Indies or England or
any other place if he should chance to be sent, with as prompt and good a
will, and perhaps better then if himself had requested and desired it; and
that because then he should have more assurance that he did not his own will
in it, but purely the will of God. There is no doubt, but this man's disposition
were better and more perfect, and such as these the Superiors never doubt, to
dispose of, either to the Indies, or any other place.

But to return to the principallest point of all, our B. Father requires that
we should all remain with an equal indifferency and resignation to remain as
willingly in on place as an other, to go as readily to this country as to that,
and that no respect of corporal health should be sufficient to take us from
this indifferency. It is said in the third part of our Co^stitutions, that it
belongs unto our vocation and Institute, to go and remain in any part of the
world, where the greater service of God and the greater good of souls may be
hoped for; but yet if it should be found by experience that ones health were
much impaired, and that the air and Climat did not agree with him: that then
the Superior might consider whether it were better that such an one, should be
disposed of to an other place, which might be more agreeable to his health, and
where he might with more profit employ himself unto Gods service, and the good
of souls; Nevertheless it is declared expressly, that the diseased person, is in
no wise to demand to be removed, or to show himself to have any inclination
thereunto but to leave all the care of it, to his Superiors. Non tamen erit
ipsius infirmi, hui^smodi mutationem postulare, nec animi propensionem ad eam
oste^dere, sed Superioris curae id relinquitur. It is no little thing, but a
point of high consequence which our B. Father, requires of us; seeing that each
one, is to be resigned and mortified, not only in not demanding to be removed,
but also in not showing themselves to have any inclination thereunto, although
they should continue ill disposed and si^ckly all their lives. So that for as
much as concerns our mission to the Indies, or among the Heretics, each one,
as we have said, may freely propose his inclination and desire, so as it be
with indifferency and resignation: but in this point of health, there is not
permitted any liberty, either to ask our remouall or to show our selves
inclined thereunto, which is much more then the other; only it is permitted,
that if any one find himself sick or ill disposed, he may propose to the
Superior, his sickness and indisposition, with his disability to discharge his
functions, and thus much we are obliged to do by Rule; but having once proposed
it, we are to do nothing more, it belonging only to the Superior to advise, if
supposing he be so ill disposed, it were not fitter to send him to some other
place, where by recovering his health he might be enabled to do more; or
whether it were not to Gods greater glory, that he should still remain in the
same place, although he performed not so much or perhaps nothing at all, for
this concerns him nothing. Every one is to suffer himself to be guided by his
Superior, who in the place of God has the disposing of him, and to esteem
what so ever he shall ordain, to be the best, and most confering to the
service of Almighty God. How many are there who only to get their living do
live here and in other places which are most contrary to their health? how many
are there who pass the seas to the Indies and Turkey for a little gain, and put
not only their health but also their lives in danger? What great matter is it
then if we (who are Religious) do so much for God, and for obedience, as those
of the world do, to gather wealth together? And if it should occur unto your
mind, that you could do somewhat in an other place, or perhaps very much, and
that there where you are your health is impairing, and your labors nothing, do
but remember that for all this, it is better for you to remain there in doing
nothing since it is the will of God, then to have your own will in being
removed to any other place, although you should do never so much; and
conforming your self with the will of God, who for the present requires so
much of you, for causes which he knows best, and which it is not expedient you
should know.

In the Chronicles of the Order of S. Francis we read how S. Francis gave leave
to Brother Giles, to go where he would, and to live in whatsoever Province or
Covent he pleased, leaving him to his own free election as being one whom he
knew of great virtue and sanctity, but the holy man, had not lived four days
in this manner and freedom, but he found the tranquillity and peace of his
soul sensibly diminished, and in lieu thereof a great lisquietnes and
perturbation in his mind; whereupon he went to S. Francis again and desired
him with much earnestnes, that he would appoint him to live in some certain
place and Covent, and not leave him any more unto his own free choice,
assuring him that he could find no rest nor comfort, in such a wild and
unlimited obedience; Good religious men ought to have no peace and contentment
in performing their own wills, and so consequently to have no desire to
remain and dwell in this College or in that, in this or the other Province,
but they are to expect until holy obedience do take them by the hand, and
dispose of them, according as she pleases, as knowing that such is the will of
God, in which they are only to take all pleasure and content.

THE XIV. CHAPTER. Of that indifferency and conformity with the will of God,
which Religious men are to have, concerning those offices and functions in
which obedience shall employ them.
WE ought likewise to have this indifferency and resignation, whereof we have
spoken, in all those functions and offices, in which we may be employed by
obedience: we perceive well how many and diverse those offices and functions are
in a Religious Order, and each one in particular is to go considering of them*
until we have brought ourselves unto an indifferency for all, Our B. Father
says in the constitutions, and we have it likewise in our Rules, that in
exercising abject and humble offices, we are more readily to accept of those,
from which we have the greatest auersion, if it should be enjoined us to
exercise our selves in them, we have most need of resignation an^ indifferency*
in point of these meaner and abject offices, by reason of the natural
repugnan^e which we have against them: and therefore he does more, and shows a
greater virtue and perfection, who offers himself unto God to perform these
offices, then he who should make choice to do more high and honorable ones. If
one wh^ had a great desire to serve some noblema^, should present his service
in such manner unto him, as to remain all his life his drudge or lakie, if he
should think it fit, it is most apparent that he should do more, and declare a
greater will to serve that nobleman, then one who should make offer of
himself, to be hi^ Gentleman of the horse or steward of his house; since this
is rather to demand a benefit, then present his service: and more over, the
others affection to his service would appear the more* if offering himself
unto those humble offices, he had sufficient tallent to perf^rme more
honorable ones. And it is even so in Religion, if you should offer up your
self to God, saying o Lord I desire to serve you in quality of Preacher, or
Divinity Master, the matter were not much, seeing these high and honorable
offices, use for themselves to be sought after and desired, and therefore you
declare in this no great desire of serving God; but when you offer your self
to serve all the days of your life in the house of God, in co^temptible and
base offices, repugnant unto sense, then you do give a testimony indeed of the
great desire you had to serve almighty God, and this desire would be the more
grateful and meritorious, the more sit and able you were for the discharge of
higher functions. And this were enough to stire you up to the desire of humble
and abject offices and to seek after them, especially seeing indeed that in the
house of God there is no office which is vile and abject: for (as they say
commonly) if in the palace of an earthly King there is nothing accounted base,
but his title ennobleth all, and there is great account made of serving him in
the meanest quality, how much more ought we to esteem of all things belonging
to the service of God, to serve whom, is properly to reign?

S. Basile to stire us up unto the affectionate love of humble and abject
offices, sets the example of our Savior before our eyes, who as we read in the
holy scripture, did employ himself in the like offices, as in washing the feet
of his Apostles, and not only in that, but also for a long time together in
serving his most holy Mother and S. Joseph, being subject and obedient unto
them in all whatsoever they commanded him; Et erat subditus illis. From the
twelfth year of his age until he was thirty year old, the holy scripture
makes no other mention of him, but only this, that he was subject unto them;
which the holy Fathers considering do excellent well infer, that in that time
he served and helped them in many lowly and humble offices, as considering
their poverty we may piously imagine. Ne dedignetur facere Christianus quod
fecit Christus, let not a Christian and much less a Religious man, think much
and disdain to do those things which Christ has done: since the son of God
has not refused to employ himself in these contemptible offices for the love
of us, let not us make any difficulty to be exercised in them, for the love of
him although we should continue in them all our lives.

But to come nearer yet unto our purpose, one of the principal reasons, and
powerfulst motives which should incite us to accept with great readiness
whateuer office obedience should impose upon us; is to consider that it is the
will of God, because as we have said heretofore, it ought to be all our comfort
and consolation in all our imploiments, that we perform the will of God in
doing them: this is that alone which ought to suffice and content a soul; it
is the will of God that for the present I should do such a thing: behold now
you know the pleasure of God, and are not to seek after any thing besides,
seeing there is nothing better or more sublime then the will of Almighty God;
Whosoever should go on in this manner, would not esteem it to import any
thing, whether they enjoined him this, or that to do, or employed him in an
eminent or abject office, since there would be no difference unto such an one.

S. Hierome relates an example very fitly serving for this present subject, he
says that visiting those holy Mo^ks who lived in the desert, he saw one whom
the Superior had commanded (both for his own advancement in perfection, as
also to give an example of obedience unto the younger sort of Religious) to
carry twice a day, a mighty stone three miles, unto no other end, and for no
other profit, but to obey and mortify his proper judgment, and this had he
already done for eight whole years together. This says S. Hierom would
appear unto those who do not know the true value of the virtue of obedience,
and have not attained unto this purity and simplicity, but are yet of proud and
hauty minds, but a childish thing, or an idle action* and they would demand of
him, how he could endure to be so employed by obedience, and even I my self
(says this Saint) did question him and desire to know what motions he felt
within his heart, whilst he was performing this; and the blessed man answered
him, I am as content and glad when I have executed this, as if I had done the
most high and important thing as they could have commanded me: and S. Hierom
says that this answer did so lively touch him, that from that time forwards
he began to lead the life of a Religious Monk. This is to be a Religious man
indeed, and to lead an answerable life unto their state, not to regard what the
exterior action is, but to make the will of God our pleasure and delight, which
we perform in doing of that act: and such as they, are those who profit and
go sensibly forwards in virtue and perfection, so as even to make it their
lives sustena^ce to do the will of God, wherewith they are nourished as with
the very fatnes of the corn. Et ^dipe frumenti satiat te.

But some one perhaps will say, for my part I see well enough that it is a
thing of great perfection, to do the will of God in every thing, and that in
every office in which they do employ me, I may perform his holy will, but
nevertheless I would willingly be applied and set to more important things,
and be executing the will of God in such functions as those; and this is to be
wanting even in the first principal, seeing that really it is nothing else, then
to desire that God should do your will, and not to endeavor to accomplish ^is*
I am not to prescribe any law to God, neither to seek to bring him to consent
unto that which seems best to me, and is most to my desire, but I ought to
follow that which God Almighty shall ordain and think the best, and
accommodate my self to that which he desires concerning me. S. Augustine says
excellent well: Optimus minister tuus est, qui non magis intuetur hoc a te
audire quod ipse voluerit, sed potius hoc velle quod a te audurit, he is thy
best servant o Lord, who does not look to have thee command him that which he
desires, but who rather desires that which thou shall command; and the holy
Abbot Nylus said: Non ores vt fiant quae fieri velis, sed potius or a sicut
orare didic^sti, vt f^at voluntas Dei in me, do not pray; that that should be
done which thou desire, but rather desire as our B. Lord has instructed thee
to pray, that the will of God be (alwa^es) performed in thee.

Which point is worthy to be considered, as one very profitable, and
universally serving for all chances and contrary accidents which may happen to
us. We ought no^ to determine and choose in what, and how we will endure and
suffer, but God alone, it belongs not unto us, to make choice of those
tentations, with which we are to be proved, or to say. Oh if it were any other
tentation then this, I would not care, but this is such an one, as I can no
ways endure. If that pain which we have, were that which we did desire, it
would be no pain unto us; If you desire indeed to be pleasing unto Almighty
God, beg of him to conduct you by that way which he best knows and pleases,
and not by that which you yourselfe desire: and when our Lord does send you
that which you have most auersion from, and should be most sorry to undergo,
then if you conform your self unto his will, you imitate most near our
Savior Christ, who said unto his heavenly Father, not my will, but thine be
done and this is to have an entire conformity with the will of God, to make him
an absolute oblation of our selves, that he may do with us whatsoever he shall
please, when, and in such manner as he shall please, without any exception,
contradiction, self judgment, or rese^^ing any thing. Blosius recou^ts h^w the
holy Virgin S. Gertrude did once out of her compassion pray for a certain
person, who (as she heard) did with great impatience complain, that God had
sent her certain afflictions which were less convenient for the good of her
soul, unto whom our Savior answered: tell that party for whom thou prayest,
that seeing there is none can obtain the Kingdom of heaven, without suffering
at least some crosses and afflictions, that she had best choose, and declare
what afflictions she should think most profitable for her, and when God
should send her those, receive them patiently, by which words of our Lord, and
the manner with which they were delivered, S. Gertrud understood that it was a
most dangerous kind of impatience, for one to desire proudly and peruersly to
make choice themselves of that which they would suffer, saying forsooth that
those afflictions which are sent them by God Almighty are less fitting for the
good of their souls, and more then they can sustain; seeing every one is to
assure himself, that whatsoever God does send him or permits to happen to him,
is most convenient for him, and for such he is to welcome it both with patience
and conformity with the will of God. And as you are not to make choice of those
tentations and afflictions which you are to undergo but to receive all which
shall be sent you, as proceeding from the holy hand of God, understanding them
to be the most convenient for you, so likewise are you to be as far from
making your own election of those offices and functions which you are to be
employed in, but are to receive all which obedience shall appoint as coming
from the hand of God, and persuade your self that it is the only thing which
of all others is most expedient for you.

There is added moreover unto this, a very spiritual point, which teaches us
to be so resigned unto the will of God, and to live in such confidence and
assurance of his paternall goodness, as not so much as to desire to know in what
manner God shall please to dispose of us: Just as there are some Noblemen in
the world who trust their stewards so far as not to know themselves what
their own revenues are, or what they have in the house, which is a sign of
their great confidence in them, and so the Patriarch Joseph affirms that his
Master did with him, ecce Dominus meus, omnibus mihi traditis, ignorant quid
habeat in domo sua behold, my Master having delivered over all into my hands,
does not know himself what he has in his own house; in like manner also that
Religious man declares his confidence in God to be great indeed, when he
desires not so much as to know, how God shall be pleased for to dispose of him,
but says, I am in a good hand, and that is enough for me; in manibus tuis
^or^es meae, in that I am most contented and assured, and more then that I have
no need to know.

Concerning those who aspire to higher degrees, places and functions persuading
themselves that they should more profit their neighbors by them and advance
the service of Almighty God, let them assure themselves that they are far
deceived if they think they do it out of zeal of Gods greater service and
the good of souls, for it is far otherwise; they are carried away only with
the zeal and the desire of honor, of their own esteem, and p^iuat
commodities and because such an office or function is most agreeable to their
own desire and inclination, therefore they seek after it with so much
earnestnes, which may clearly be perceived from hence: if you were a secular in
the world, or a single man, it seems it might become you for to say, this is
better then that other, and affords more profit for the good of souls, and
therefore I desire to embrace this and to let that alone, seeing that I suffice
not to the discharge of both, but in Religion there is no leaving one thing for
an other, but it is necessary that both be d^ne, here we are to Catechize as
well as to preach; to teach Grammar as well as Divinity and this is only the
point: if you will keep aloft, and do nothing but the most high and eminent
things, an other of necessity must abase himself and do those meaner ones, and
if you had but the least humility in you, you should rather desire that those
high and glorious fu^ctio^s should be co^ferred upon some other man, and ought
to persuade your self, that he would discharge them better then you could do,
and with m^^e fruit, and less danger of vanity.

For this cause and diverse other. Our B. Father S. Ignatius, has left us an
excelcellent lesson, which he has set for the foundation of elections in those
his three degrees of humility, where the third and the most perfect is, that
when two things do present themselves unto us, both equally making for the
service and glory of God, one should make choice of that, in which he might
have a greater occasion of being contemned and scorned, thereby to imitate more
nearly the life of our Savior Christ, who for our sakes was content to be
despised and had in no account. In which there is yet an other great good to be
considered; which is, that in these humble and abject things, ou^ proper
interest is less by far, and a man has no reason for to seek himself, or
cause to fear his becoming vainly proud, which danger goes always
accompanied with those higher and more resplendant offices; In humble and
abject offices, we can always jointly exercise humility and charity, and they
afford humility its proper nouriture, with those slight acts which are
exercised in them, but in more higher functions, cha^ity without danger of
humility cannot be exercised, which ought alone to be a sufficient reason why
they were not only to be desired, but rather with great fear to be avoided by
us.

THE XV. CHAPTER. Of the conformity which we are to have with the will of God,
touching the distribution of Tallents, and natural gifts.
EVery one is to be well content, with those Tallents which God has
communicated to him, of understanding, wit, sufficiency, and other parts which
God has bestowed upon him, and not to be troubled and afflicted if he have not
so much ability as an other, nor so many good parts, or be not so fit for great
and high employments, it is a thing of which we all stand in need, for let us
grant that one makes greater show, and seems in some certain things to
excel and have the preeminence of others, notwithstanding they have some wants
or other sufficient to abash and humble them, where in they have need of this
conformity. And therefore it is good for to go well prepared, for the Devil
most commonly assaults us in nothing more. In time of your studies when you see
one of your Concurrants grow excellent, that he disputes and argues learnedly
and well, you shall be overtaken perhaps with a certain kind of envy, which
although it arrive not to make you sorrow for your brothers good (for that were
expressly the sin of envy) notwithstanding shall bring you at the last, unto a
certain sadness and melancholy, to see an other get the start of you, with his
fine wit, and your self cast behind, not being able to keep pace with him, or
show your head amongst the formest of them, this I say will make you droope and
converse with them confounded and ashamed, whence you will fall into languor
and weary somnes, and be moved with a tentation to give over your studies, and
perhaps sometimes to take leave of your Religion if you be not well grounded in
humility, as diverse have given a lamentable experience. An other thinks to
become eminent, and to surpass all others of his course and to be famed for
the best scholar throughout all the country: who when he sees all his dreams
and hopes to be come to nothing, becomes so shamed, discouraged and mortified,
as the Devil who is never wanting to so fair occasions perhaps will put him
in the head, that he shall never recover the disgrace, nor be rid of his
mela^choly* as long as he tarryeth in Religion, and this tentation is no new
but a very ancient one.

We read an example of this kind in the Chronicles of the Order of S.
Dominicke, and it is of Albertus Magnus, who was the Master of S. Thomas of
Aquin. The said Albertus when he was a little child, was very devout unto our
B. Lady, and recited certain prayers unto her honor every day, he afterward
by her favor and intercession being but sixtee^ year old, was admitted into
the Order of S. Dominicke, when (as it is said) in those his tender years
being applied to his studies his wit was but reasonable or rather indeed he was
wholly dull and unfit for learning, and being among others who had lively and
excellent wits, he was so discouraged with the small profit which he made, that
this sorrow of his, being closly followed with a strong te^tatio^, did put him
in such danger, as he was upon the point of casting of his habit: he being in
this distress of toughts, was wo^drously helped by a certain vision, for as
he slept one night, he imagined that he had reared a Ladder against the
Monastery walls, and was going out and leaving the order, when climing up he
saw four venerable Matrons standing on the top, of whom one seemed to be
mistrise of the rest, and when he was come closse by the^, one of those Matrons
should him back again and would not permit him to go out of the Monastery;
notwithstanding he aduentred once again, and being even at the top, the second
served him as the first had done, and when the third time, he assayed to get up
again, a third of those Matrons demanded of him, why he had such desire to
leave the Monastery, unto whom he answered, with a face al blushing with shame,
because Lady I see my companions of the same course with me, to profit in the
study of Philosophy whilst I spend my time and labor all in vain, which shame
grieves me so much as it makes me resolve to leave my Religion, unto whom the
Matron said, pointing him unto the fourth of them, behold this is the Mother
of God, and Queen of heaven, upon whom we with reverence do attend, comend
your self to her, and we with our entreaties will second you, that she would
intercede unto her B. Son for you, unto the end that he would bestow upon
you, a wit so docile as might render you fit to go forwards in your studies;
which Albertus hearing was wondrous glad, and being conducted unto our B. Lady
by this Matron, she received him graciously, and demanded of him what he
desired and wished for with so much earnestnes? he answered, some degree of
excellency in Philosophy, which was the study to which he then attended,
although he comprehended nothing of it. Whereupon the Glorious Virgin answered,
be of good cheer and courage, and study well, and I will assure you, you will
become an eminent and learned man in the science of Philosophy, but to the end
that you may know, said she, that it is a donatiue only of my favor, and not
attained by any natural parts, or industry of your own, some time before you
die, you shall come to forget whilst you are in your public lecture, all the
learning which you had before. With this vision was he greatly comforted, and
from that time he profited so greatly in his studies, not only in Philosophy
but also in Divinity and knowledge of the holy Scriptures, as nothing can
better witness then those works which he has left behind: and three years
before his death, as he was actually teaching at Collen, he wholly lost all
memory of every thing which belonged to learning, remaining as ignorant, as if
he had never in his life so much as known the first rudiments of any Science;
and it may be also that it is so befalne him, in punishment of his want of
indifferency, and conformity with the will of God, in point, of that tallent
and sufficiency which he had bestowed upon him. Howeuer, he then remembering the
vision which he had at that time when he was minded to have forsaken his
Religion, did publicly before all his Auditors declare what had passed, and
thereupon taking his leave of all, he retired himself to his covent and there
spent the residue of his time in prayer and contemplation.

Now that we our selves may not fall into this danger, it is necessary that we
go preparing our selves before; and there is no better preparatiue then a deep
humility, for such a difficulty as this proceeds only from the want of it,
when you cannot endure to be accounted the worst and last of all your course.
If one should come afterward and let you understand, that you were to study no
more, and that you were to break of your course, and all those proiects which
you had fancied to your self; and in the mean time you should see your
Companions go on with their Divinity, and become learned and famous preachers:
here now without doubt were need of profound humility, and a great resignation
to the will of God. And this tentation comes to be renewed again after your
studies are done, when you will not want such thoughts as these to be working
upon you again: why am not I so learned, and in as high place as he? why am
not I an excellent Preacher? why have not I such a grace in setting my self
forth, and in discoursing as this or the other has? wherefore am not I employed
in important businesses, and why do they make so little account of me? and the
like is to be said of those who are not scholars, for you shall have them
busied with such thoughts and tentations as these. Oh that I were a scholar?
that I were a Priest and had but learning to be profitably implayed in the
help of souls, and sometimes it may fall out that such a tentation as this
may bring you to such straits as to in danger the loss of your vocation, and
perhaps your salvation too, as the lamentable falls of others do testify.

This is a general doctrine, and every on may apply it to his own state of
life, and therefore it is necessary for every one to conform himself unto the
will of God in being content with that Tallent which he has received from God,
and that state of life which he has placed him in, without desiring to be
more, then what God Almighty has ordained him for to be. S. Augustine upon
these words of the psalm. Inclina ^or meum in testimonia tua and no^ in
auaritiam, incline my heart unto thy testimonies and not to avarice, says that
this was the beginning and root of all our evil since our first Parents in
having a desire to be more then God had made the^, and to have more the^ he had
bestowed upon the^, came thereby to fall from that state in which they were, and
to loose all that which God had imparted to the^. The Devil laid before their
proud desires this bait; Eritis sicut Dij scientes bonum and malum, you shall
be like Gods having knowledge of good and evil* and thereby deceived them, and
wrought their destruction; and this vice we inherit of them by succession,
being egged on with a desire of divinity, and a kind of folly and madness to be
greater then we are; and for as much as the Devil had so good success in
tempting our first parents with it, therefore has he been so busy ever since to
enkindle us with the same, and set our desires on fire, of becoming greater
the^ it is Gods pleasure we should be, without suffering us to be content with
those Tallents which we have, and that condition to which we were borne and
bred. And therefore says S. Augustine does the Prophet desire of God, that he
would give him a heart free from all proper interest and faithfully inclined
unto his will and pleasure, and not to his own profit and commodity: he says
that by avarice is to be understood all sort of particular end, or gain, and
not only the couitiousnes of wealth, and it is this which S. Paul affirms to
be the root of all evil, 1. ad Ti. 6, 10.
radix omnium malorum cupiditas.

Now that we may attain to this indifferency, and disposition of confor^^ing
our selves unto the will of God, and contenting us with those talents which he
has bestowed upon us, as also with that state and degree in which he has
placed us, it is sufficient to know that it is the will of God; Hac autem omnia
operatur vnus atque idem Spiritus diuide^s singulis prout vult. 1. Cor. 12.10.
Says S. Paul unto the Corinthians, all those things are the work of one and
the same spirit, who gives every one his share according as he please^h; The
Apostle does use this Metaphor, which upon an other occasion we have borrowed,
Tract. 4. c. 4.
and it is derived from a human body, he says that even as God has disposed
and apted the members of a body, every on according as he liked best, where the
foot complains not, that it was not made the head, neither the hand, because it
was not made an eye, so is it likewise in the body of the Church, from which
the body of a Religion differs not. God has disposed of every one, in that
place and office which is (...) pleasing to him, neither are they so ordained
only by chance, but by his singular wisdom and providence. If God therefore
be pleased to have you a foot, it is no reason you should seek to be a head;
if God have ordained you only for a hand, you do not well in aspiring to be an
eye. O how deep and high are the judgments of Almighty God! and who is there
who is able to comprehend them? Sap. 9.13.
quis enim hominum poterit s^^re consilium Dei? O Lord all things what so ever
are proceeding from you, and you are to be praised in every thing; you know
what is requisite to bestow on every one, and it belongs not to us to judge, and
be inquisitiue to know the cause why one has less conferred upon him then an
other, how know you what would become of you, if you had a wit, and great
abilities? how know you if you had an excellent talent in preaching, and your
Sermons were followed with a great applause whether it would not be the cause
of your utter overthrow as it has been of diverse others, who thereby have
become proud and exorbitantly vain? Tho^. de Kempis.
the learned (says that holy man) take delight to be seen, and to be esteemed
for such: if you with that pe^ny worth of understanding which you have, and
half pennyworth of learning which you have scraped together, with that
mediocrity or less then mediocrity of yours, can be so vainly glorious to
esteem so highly of your self as to compare and perhaps prefer your self to
others, and to take it heinously that you are not employed in this or the other
thing, and are not promoted above such and such an one: what would you do were
you excellent indeed, and had extraordinary parts above the rest? The ant gets
wings and flies unto its cost, and so perhaps should that honor you desire,
prove to your greater loss; Assuredly had we but eyes to see, and were not
deceived by looking through those false lights, we should render infinite
thanks to God, for having disposed of us in a state so vile and abject, and
not bestowed upon us those excellent parts and great abilities: and we should
say with that holy servant of his: O Lord I esteem it for a singular benefit,
not to have those many qualities, which might make me honored and praised by
men. The Saints were not ignorant of that great danger which goes accompanied
with preeminency and excellency, and therefore they have not only not sought
after them* but also shu^ned and stood in fear of them, by reason of the great
peril there was in them of lifting men up to pride, and throwing them headlong
into ruin and perdition. Ab altitudine dieitimebo, and this rendered them so
acceptable to God, who more dearly affects his servants which are humble, then
the great; O if we could but once thoroughly persuade our selves, and truly
understand that all besides the doing of the will of God, is but deceit and
folly! that we could but place all our contentme^t in pleasing of God Almighty!
If you in having less learning, and perhaps none at all neither capacity for
any, are more pleasing unto God, wherefore are you so desirous to be learned?
why do you wish for more knowledge and better parts? if there were any motive
to make you covet it, it should only be to serve God more faithfully and to
content him in a more absolute manner: now if God can be better served by you,
unlearned, and without this great sufficiency, wanting those tallents and
extraordinary parts, as it is most certain he can, since it is he alone who
has ordained it so, why are you afflicted with it? wherefore desire you to be
that, which God is not pleased to have you, and which is no ways fit or
convenient for you? Those rich and sumptuous sacrifices of Saul were nothing
pleasing to Almighty God, 1. Reg. 13, 10 etc. 15.21.
because they were not conformable to his will and he is as little pleased,
with your haughty and high desires. Our being famous preachers and learned men,
confers nothing to our good, nor helps to our progress in virtue and
perfection, neither our being endowed with rare parts, and having deep
insight in obscure and lofty things; but only in performance of the will of
God, and in the discharging well those things which we have to do, and
profitably employing that tallent which we have received; and therefore we ought
not to aim at any higher thing, since this is that only which God requires of
us.

To explicate this the better, the comparison which they bring of players, is
not impertinent, where a man receaueth not his share according to the dignity
of that part which he does act, but according to the goodness of his action,
whence it is, that if he who played but the drudge have performed it better
then he who acted the part of the Emperor, he shall have more applause of the
spectators, and be thought worthy of a greater share by all equal Judges; Eu^^
so* that which God esteems meriting reward and praise in this mortal life of
ours (which is but as a Comedy quickly past, and would to God it were not a
Tragedy so metimes) is not the part which we play, the one a Preacher, the
other Superior, this Sacristan or Porter; but the well performing of their
parts: and therefore if the lay brother act his part better unto the life, then
the Preacher or Superior, he shall be more esteemed by God, and merit more
applause, honor, and recompense. And as it is ordinary with the players, that
he who acts in Comicke excellent well, as the Esquire errant or Country clown
has no grace, or person for to act a King, and yet notwithstanding he is held
an excellent actor: so you perhaps are no ways fit to make a Superior or a
Preacher of, and should perform with good satisfaction the office of a Ghostly
Father or Coadiutor. God knows well how to fit every actor with his part, and
appoint each one that office which he can do the best. Vnicuique secundum
propriam virtutem, our Lord, says the holy Euangel, distributs his gifts and
tallents respectively to the ability of every one, and therefore one man is not
to desire the part, or tallent of an other man, but all are to endeavor to
perform that part well which is a appointed them, and employ to best advantage
that tallent which they have received, and keep a clear account, and so they
shall come to please God Almighty the best, and be rewarded with greater
recompense.

THE XVI. CHAPTER. Of the conformity which we are to have with the will of God
in time of sickness.
Sickness is as well a gift of God as health, and sent us, by him for our
trial, correction, and amendment, as also for diverse other commodities and
profits which are proceeding from it; as the knowledge of our infirmity, the
discovery of our presumption, our riddance of the love of worldly things, and
of the concupiscences of sensuality, the deading and diminishing in us, the
forces of the flesh our Capital enemy, and giving us to understand that the
place where we live is not our own country, but like an Inn which we have
taken up in manner of passengers and wretched bannish't men, and diverse other
commodities besides; and for this reason the wiseman has said, infirmitas
grauis sobriam facit animam, grievous infirmity makes an understanding soul,
and therefore we are to conform our selves as well unto the will of God in
sickness as in health, and receive it when soever God shall please to send it
us, as proceeding from his holy hand. One of those ancient Fathers said unto
his Disciple who was sick; my son be not grieved at your infirmity, but on
the contrary, render hearty thanks to God Almighty for it; for if you be iron,
this is a fire for to take of your ruste, if you be gould, this is a fire to
try you: to render thanks to God when we are sick, is an act of great virtue,
and worthily beseeming a true Religious soul.

Surius relats in the life of S. Clare, how that for eight and twenty years
together she was afflicted with grievous infirmities, in all which time her
patience was so invincible, as she was never heard, to utter any complaint, or
use any murmuring speeches in those her violent fitts but she continued
alwa^es thanking and praising God: and in her last sickness when she was so
tormented, as for seauenteen days together she could not eat one bit, Friar
Reginald her Ghostly Father, comforting her and exhorting her to patience in so
long and dolorous a martyrdom as she suffered in so much sickness and
infirmity; she answered, never since I have been acquainted with the grace of
my Lord Jesus Christ, through the intercession of S. Francis his humble
servant, has any sickness, seemed hard unto me, any pain grievous, or any
penance sore and troublesome. In this kind also is the life of Saint Liduuine
admirable and of great example, as also giving great courage and comfort unto
those who are sick; who for eight and thirty years together, was oppressed
with most grievous and extraordinary diseases and pains, and for thirty years
could never rise from that poor couch on which she lay, or sustain her self
on her feet, in all which time, our Savior visited her with high and singular
favors.

But for as much as diverse particular reasons, do use to present themselves*
under the color and show of greater good, unto the hinderance of this
indifferency and conformity, it is requisite that we solue and answer them.
And first, some one may say, for my part it is all one to me whether I be sick
or well, only that which troubles me is that I fear I am a burden to those of
the house, and a charge unto the Religion: unto this I answer, that this is
nothing else then to co^d^^ne the Superior and those of the house, of want of
charity and little resignation to the will of God; the Superiors are understood
to be arrived to that perfection, to receive all as coming from the hand of
God, and to conform themselves in all unto his blessed will, and so if God be
pleased that you should be sick, and that one should be employed in nothing
else then in te^ding to the recovery and the care of you; they are likewise well
content, and as you bear that cross which God has sent you, so do they
likewise sustain, that which God would have them bear with great conformity.

But you will reply, I suffici^^tly see in this point, the great charity of the
Society, and nothing troubles me, but to think how much profit I could make in
studying, preaching and hearing confessions, and how I cannot employ my self
in any of these, by reason of my sickness. Unto which S. Augustine answers
excellent well, saying that we know not whether it were better to do that which
we pretend or no, and therefore are to propose nothing unto our selves above our
capacity, and if afterward we can execute that which we designed, we are not
to rejoice because that which we intended and desired is brought to pass, but
because in it, the will of God is done: and if that which we ordained be not
effected, we are not therefore to be troubled and loose our peace of mind, seeing
that aequius est vt nos e^us, quam vt ille nostram s^quatur voluntatem, it is
more reasonable that we should follow Gods will, then he ours. And glorious S.
Augustine co^cluds with an admirable sentence. Nemo melius ordinat quid agat,
nisi qui paratior est, non agere, quod diuina posestate prohibitur, quam
cupidior agere quod humana cogitatione meditatur, there is no man does better
dispose of what he would do, then he who is readier to do nothing that the
divine authority may forbid, then desirous to do that which in his own
thoughts he intends. We are then to determine and dispose of things with such
indifferency, as to be always prepared to conform our selves unto the will of
God, if by any chance our pretensions might be crossed; and so we should never
be grieved or troubled, if through sickness or any other casualty, we could not
bring that to pass which we had purposed, although the thing in it self were
of never so great consequence for the good of souls, Master Auila writing unto
a Priest visited with sickness says wondrous well: do not consider so much
what you could do if you were well, as how pleasing you should be to God, in
being well content for to be sick, and if you seek purely the will of God (as
I suppose you do) what matter is it, whether you be sick or well seeing that
his will alone is all our good?

S. Chrisostom says that holy Job did merit more and did please God more in
this. Job. 1.21
Sicut Domino placuit, ita factum est, sit nomen Domini benedictum, it is so
fallen out, as it has pleased God, be his name (ever) blessed, and in conforming
himself in all his miseries, sufferings and that loathsome Leprosy which God
sent him, unto his holy will, then in all the Alms and good works which he
did whilst he was in health and full prosperity: and so in like manner you
shall please God more by following his will whilst you are sick, then in all
which you could do if you were well. S. Bonauenture says the same; Job 1.21
Bonau. de grad virt. c. 24. and lib. de perfect. Relig. c 37. hoc refert ex
Diuo Gregor.
Perfectius est aduersa tolerare patienter, quam bonis operibus insudare, it is
more perfection to suffer adversity patiently, then to perform good works
never so earnestly, God can well be without both you and me for any profit
which he intends unto his Church, ego dixi Deus meus es tu, quoniam bonorum
meorum non eges, he is pleased for the present to preach unto you, in
sickness, and requires that you should learn patience and humility out of it,
psalm. 15.2.
commit all to God, he knows best what is most expedient for you, and you are
wholly ignorant of it your self, if we were to desire health and corporal
forces for any cause, we ought to desire it the better to employ our selves in
the service of God, and to be more pleasing to him; If then our Lord is pleased
more, and had rather have me exercised with sickness, and in suffering
patiently the pain of my disease, his will be done, it is the best for me, and
most convenient. Act. 2^* 30.
S. Paul the Apostle and Preacher of the Gentiles was by the permission of God
detained two years in prison, in a time when the primitive Church had so much
need of him, it is not much then for you, if God do keep you two months, or
two years, or all your life if so he pleases inthrald unto some sickness, who
are far from being so necessary in the Church of God, as was that glorious
Apostle S. Paul.

Others there are, who when they are disabled by sickness, or long and
continual infirmity, to live according to the community, but are enforced to
accept of particularities are much troubled and disquieted, scarcely esteeming
them selves Religious men, and thinking every one disedified with them, in
seeing their extraordinary fare and manner of life, and especially if their
disease be such as extends not to the exterior show, when their sickness is
only known to God and themselves, and their particularities and exemptions
known to all; to these I answer that it is a good and laudible consideration,
and you have just cause to have resentment of it, but so, as not to cease in
point of your sickness to conform your self unto the will of God, and to
make your benefit of a double merit, by conforming your self on the one side
entirely with the will of God, in all those indispositions and infirmities
which he is pleased to visit you withal, and on the other by a great desire,
as far as shall be possible unto you, to perform and exercise your self* in
all the functions of your Order, in being heartily sorry, that you cannot be
employed in that which others do, and in this manner besides the merit, of
enduring sickness, patiently and willingly, there is place in this second
point of incriting as much as those who are well and lustly, and actually
employed in all those exercises.

S. Augusti^ in his 62, S. Augu.
sermon de tempore, treating of the obligation which each one had under mortal
sin to fast time of lent, coming to speak of those who were infirm, and
unable to fast, says that it is sufficient for such as those, to eat at least
with interior grief and sorrow, sighing and lamenting that whilst others fast,
they are not able to bear the^ company, like as a valiant soldier, who having
been wounded in fight, has more affliction and grief that he cannot go to
field, to do some act worthy the service of his King, then pain and anguish
to be under the Chirurgions lance. Even so it is with good Religious men, when
they are sick, who are more troubled and grieved that they cannot perform the
exercises of the Religion with the rest, then at the torment of their own
disease. But in fine neither that, nor any other thing, is to be a hinderance
to our conformity with the will of God in our infirmities, but we are to
receive them as presents directed unto us from his own hands unto his greater
glory, and for our greater good and benefit, Hieron. in vit. Patrum.


S. Hierom recounts how a certain Monk beseeched holy Abbot Ioannes an
Egyptian by nation, to cure him of a violent fever which much tormented him,
unto whom the blessed Saint answered: rem t^b necessariam cupis abij^ere, vt
en^m corpor^ nitro, vel al^^s huiusmodi line am^ntis abluuntur a sordibus, it a
animae lang oribus alijsque huinsmodi castigationibus purificantur, you desire
to be rid of a thing which is very needful for you, for even as we cleanse the
filth of our bodies, with soap and lie, so by infirmities and the like
chastisements are our souls made clean and purified.

THE XVII. CHAPTER. How we are not to repose our trust in Physicians and
Medecins, but only in Almighty God, and are to conform our selves unto his
will, not only in sickness but also in all other things which do accompany it.
THat which has been said of sickness, is likewise to be understood, in
matter of all other things which during our sickness are accidental to us, S.
Basil touching this matter has left us an excellent document, Basil. in reg.
Fusias disputat. 55
saying that we so ought to make use of Physic and Physicians, as in the
mean time to place no trust in them, as King Asa did, whom the holy scripture
therefore reprehends: 2. p. 16.12.
Nec in infirmitate sua quaesiuit Dominum, sed magis in medi^orum art confisas
est, he has not sought after God so much as in his infirmity, but has rather
trusted to the skill of the Physicians, we are not to attribute to them, either
our recovery or remaining still infirm, but ought to fix our hope only on
God, who sometimes, is pleased to restore us so our health by Physical means
and sometimes suffers us to receive no good by it, and therefore says S. Basil
although we have neither commodity of Physician nor his drogs, yet are we not
to despair of recovering our health, seeing that our Savior Christ as the
holy Scripture testifies, sometimes cured diseases by his only will, as that
Leaper who said unto him, Domine si vis potes me mundare, Lord if you will you
can make me clean, and our Savior answered, volo, mundare; I will, be clean,
at other times he did apply certain things, as when he made clay with his
spittle, and anointed the eyes of the blind with it, commanding him to go wash
himself in the poole Siloe: at other times again he would leave the sick in
their infirmities, and not suffer them to be cured although they even wasted
their whole substance in procuring help at the Physicians hands: so in like
manner God sometimes restores us to our health again, without help of
Physic, by only willing it; at other times he sends it us by the means of
Physicians, and sometimes notwithstanding the consult of Doctors and applying
of many sovereign remedies, God will not recover you, to teach us to confide
our whole trust on him, and to lodge no hope in any human help. As King
Ezechias did not attribute his cure unto that lump^ of figs which Esaias applied
to his impostume, 4. Reg. 20.7.
but only to Almighty God, so must not we acknowledge the recovery of our
health, to any medecin or Physicians, but to God who cures all our
infirmities. S^p. 16.12.
Etenim neque herba, neque malagma sanauit ^os, sed tuus Domine sermo qui
sanauit omnia, for neither herbs nor plasters have healed them, but thy word o
Lord the general cure of all, neither when we are not cured, are we to lay the
fault on the Physicians, but acknowledge God in it, whose will is, to leave us
in our sickness, and afford us no redress: so likewise, when the Physician is
ignorant of your disease, or is mistaken in his judgment of it (which is an
ordinary thing even with those who are best skilled and practiced, and in the
behalf of honorable persons) you are to accept of this mistake of theirs, as
also any negligence or fault of the Infirmarian, as a thing expressly so
ordained by God, and therefore by no means ought to say, your fever is
returned unto you again, through an others fault or want of taking heed, but
you must receive all as sent unto you from the hand of God, and say it has
pleased God that my fever should increase and that such an accident should
happen to me, for it is most certain that how ever in regard of those who are
to tend you and look unto your health a fault may be committed, yet
notwithstanding unto God it is a premeditated thing, unto whom nothing is by
chance or casual. Do you imagine it an accidental thing, that the Swallous
flying over Tobies head, should dunge into his eyes, and deprive him of his
sight? assuredly it was not, but done with deep resolution, and by the
particular will of Almighty God, to give us thereby an example of patience in
him, equal to that of holy Job, and so the sacred Scripture testifies: hanc
autem te^tationem ideo permisit Dominus eue^ire illi, Tob. 2.12.
vt poster is daretur exemplum patientae ^ius sicut and Sancti Job, and the
Angel said unto him afterward. Quia acceptus eras Deo necesse f^^^ vt
te^tatio probaret te, Job. 12.13.
God has permitted this tentation for your proof and trial.

We read in the lives of the Fathers how Abbot Stephen being sick, Abbas
Stephanus refert etia^ Dorot. doctri. 7.
his companion would needs make him a cake, and thinking to bake it with good
oil, he mistoke and made it with lintsead oil, which is exceeding better, and
so gave it him to eat, Stephen having tasted of it, eat a little and put away
the rest, without saying any thing. An other time he baked him an other in the
same fashion, and having brought it him, when he saw he would not eat he took
a piece of it himself, to provoke him unto an appetite, and tasting of it
said, pray Father eat, the cake is very good, but finding the bitterness of it,
and his mistake with great affliction of mind he cried out and said: I am a
butcher and murderer of men, whereupon the good Father answered: son do not
trouble, nor disquiet your self, if God had not been pleased that you should
mistake the one oil for the other, it had never happened. We likewise read of
diverse other Saints, who suffered with great patience and equality of mind, the
cures which others prescribed them for their sicknesses, although they knew
them wholly contrary to the nature of their disease and in this manner are we
to bear the faults and negligences* as well of the Physician as Infirmarian,
and neither complain of the one, nor lay the blame upon the other.

It is a circumstance in which a man's virtue is discovered and seen the best,
and therefore a whole house is edified, by seeing a sick Religious man, take all
that comes with an equal countenance, and with the same cheerfulnes, as
coming all from the blessed hand of God, and suffering himself to be ruled by
his Superiors and the Infirmarian, as if the remembrance and care of his own
self concearned him nothing, S. Basil says, you have trusted your Superior
with your soul, why therefore do you not trust your body to him? you have put
your eternal welfare into his hands, why do you not as well commit unto him
your temporal health, and seeing our rule does exempt us at that time, from the
solicitude of our body and co^maunds it also, why do we not make use and great
account of a privilege so much to our advantage and behofe? On the contrary,
the sick Religious man who is too scrupulous of his health, who is to exact
and precise in every thing which is administered to him, and in the manner of
taking it, and the time, and who if all things be not done as he would have
them, can lightly complain of it, and murmr at it too, disedifies very much
all who converse with him.

Cassian says excellent well that the infirmity of the body, Cassian, li. de
institut* renu^t. c 7.
is no ways hindering the purity of the mind, but much conferring to it, if
men but make their use of it as they ought: but take heed says he, that the
infirmity of the body, does not pass unto the soul, if any one so behave
himself as to make use of the occasion of his sickness, to do what he thinks
best, and is not tractable nor obedient; this man's corporal sickness has
extended it self unto his soul, and the Superior will have more to do, to
provide remedies for this spiritual disease then for his corporal. A man for
being sick, is not to cease and neglect to appear and to be Religious,
neither to imagine, that he is not obliged as then by any rule, and that he is
to make it his only care, to look unto the recovery and cherishing of
himself, without once minding his spiritual progress, or looking after it.
Reg. 50. Su^marij
He who is sick (says our B. Father in the Constitutions) is to endeavor no
less in time of his sickness, to edify others by showing his humility and
patience then whilst he was in health. S. Chrysostom on these words of the
Prophet: Chriso^^. Psa. 5.13.
Domine vt s^uto bo^e volunt at is tuae coronastinos, ^ Lord you have crowned
us as with a sheeld of your good will, discoursing how during the course of
this life, there is a continual fight, says that therefore we are always to
have our weap^ns in hand, as well those who are sick, as those who are in
health. Et aegroti and sani: morbi enim tempore, huius maxim pugnae tempus
est, quando dolores vndique conturbant animam, quando tristiti^^ obsidt, quando
adest diabolus incitans, vt acerbum aliquod verbum dicamus, but this fight
(says he) is hottest in time of sickness, when torments on all sides do
molest the soul, when we are inco^pas't with sadness, and the Devil is ready
at hand, to incite us to utter some impatient word, or to be immoderate in
making of our moan, which Seneca likewise confirms saying, Seneca. epist. 78.
that a valiant and courageous man has as fair an opportunity to exercise his
forces well in bed, in suffering sickness, as in the field in battle against
his enemies; And therefore the wiseman says that a patient man is better then a
strong: melior est patiens viro forti, Prou. 16.32.
and he who has the mastery of himself, then a Conqueror of Cities: and qui
dominatur animo suo, expugnanatore vrbium,

THE XVIII. CHAPTER. Wherein that which has been said is confirmed by some
examples.
WE read of the holy Virgin S. Gertrud, Blo. c. 11 monilis. spir.
how that one day our Savior Christ appeared unto her, bringing in his right
hand, health, and his left sickness, and bid her choose whether of the^ she
would, unto whom she answered, inclining unto neither of his hands) that which
out of my whole heart I desire Lord is, that you would have no regard unto my
will, but that your good pleasure in all may be fulfilled.

It is recounted of a certain person, much devoted to S. Thomas of Canterbury,
how he (being afflicted with a grievous sickness) had recourse unto his Patrons
shrine, where begging with great fervor his holy intercession for the recovery
of his health, the B. Saint heard his petition, and obtained it him, whereupon
he returning, began to consider attentively with himself, whether it were not
more for his souls good, that he should still be sick, and not being able to
resolve himself, he returned again unto the sacred shrine, and there renewing
his prayers again, he beseeched the Saint, to obtain for him of God that
which should be most expedient for his salvation, when presently his sickness
returned unto him again and so he passed the rest of his days, taking great
comfort and content therein, as in a thing the most convenient for him.

Surius in the life of S. Vedastus Bishop, Surius.
does bring an other example of the like nature, of a blind man, who upon the
day of the translation of this holy Prelates body, had a great desire to behold
his holy relics and consequently to recover his sight again: when on the
instant he obtained of God that which he wished with so much earnestnes, and
saw that which he desired so much, and casting his eyes upon himself, he made
it his petition unto God again that if the sight of his eyes might be
prejudicial to the good of his soul, that it might please him, to leave him
blind as he was before, and having made this prayer, his former blindness closed
up his eyes again.

S. Hierom writs now S. Anthony being invited by S. Anastasius Bishop of
Alexandria to confer his help unto the resisting and confuting of the
Heretics, Hier. e^. ad Castr. ccum.
had conference with one Dydimus who came to visit him, an excellent scholar,
but wanting his corporal sight, this Didymus discoursing rarely well of the
holy Scripture in so much as S. Anthony ever praised to admiration the
excellency and sharpnes of his wit, was demanded by the Saint whether he were
not agrieued, that he wanted his corporal eyes, Dydimus was ashamed to answer,
at the first, until being urged by him a second and third time, at last he
brought him to confess ingeniously the sorrow of his mind: when S. Anthony
said unto him. I wonder much that a wise man as you are, should grieve the want
of that which flies pismires and ants enjoy, and not rather rejoice in the
possession of that, which only uses to be imparted to Saints and Apostolical
men. Where out we may learn says S. Hierom that it is far better to see
with the eyes of the soul then of the flesh. Cro. or. Praed. 1. p. li. 1. c.
49.


Friar Ferdinand de Castile in his Chronicle of the Order of S. Dominicke
recounts how S. Dominicke during his abode at Rome went often to visita
certain holy servant of Almighty God, Croni. ord. Pre. 1. p. l. 1. c. 49.
wh^ lived in closed betwixt four walls, in a Tower of S. John Laterans port.
whether she had retired herself, which holy woman was afflicted with a most
horrible infirmity, she was called Bona, and her name was very significant to
express her life, unto who^ God had tought the great perfection in goodness and
sanctity, to take pleasure in adversity, and to find repose even in death it
self; she suffered grievous pain and torment in her breasts, which were
almost eaten up with the Ca^cer and the flesh converted into crawling worms,
and yet this life of hers which would have been to any other the greatest of
all torments, was unto her the occasion of thanking God the more, and
exercising admirable patience; S. Dominicke who usually heard her confession
and administered her the B. Sacrament, seeing her on the one side so afflicted
and infirm, and on the other so eminently virtuous, did bear her singular
affection, and on day after he had confessed and communicated her, he had a great
desire, to see her so horrible and loathsome soar whose only sight was enough
to affright and startle any heart, which not without some difficulty, he
obtained but when she opened her breast, and the Saint saw on the one side
foul matter, the festred canker and the crawling worms, and on the other her
wondrous patience and cheerfulnes, he could not choose but have great
compassion of her, but notwithstanding being more desirous of that soar of
hers, then of all the treasors of the world, he desired her with great instance
to bestow one of those worms upon him, which he might keep as a precious
relike of hers, the holy Saint would not grant him his request, unless he first
promised to restore it back again, for she took such pleasure in seeing
herself in that manner eaten up alive, that if any of those worms cha^ced to
fall from her breast unto the ground, she would take it up, and lay it in its
place again, on this condition she did give him one with a foul black head,
and of a mighty sise, S. Dominicke had scarsly received it in his hand, when it
changed into a rich and orient peale his co^pa^ons wondering at it would have
persuaded the Saint to have kept it still, but the holy soul asked it
earnestly again, and she no sooner had it restored unto her, but it turned
into a worm, as it was before, and she reposed it in her breast again, where
it had been bred, and nourished before; thereupon S. Dominicke praying for her,
and blessing her with the sign of the holy Crosle, left her, and went his
ways, but he was not gone down the stairs of that Tower wherein she lived,
when those cancorous and wormy breasts of hers, fell from her, and sound flesh
by little and little swelling in their place, within short time she was entirely
cured, and remained; declaring unto all that wo^drous miracle, which God had
wrought in her by means of his holy servant S. Dominicke.

In the same Chronicle is likewise recounted, how Friar Reginald whilst he was
suing to S. Dominicke, to take the habit of his order and his entrance into the
Religion was concluded of, was forced to keep his bed, through the violence of
a continual fever, which the Physicians judged to be mortal. S. Dominicke
took his sickness much to heart, and prayed unto God continually for his health,
the sickman likewise no less solicitous for his own health, did with great
feeling and devotion invoke the help of the glorious Queen of heaven:
whilst both of them, were jointly directing all their prayers unto this end,
the B. Virgin entered the chamber of the sick encompassed with a most
resplendent light, accompanied with two blessed Virgins which seemed to be S.
Cecily and S. Catherine Martyas, who attended on the glorious Virgin unto the
bed where the sick Religious lay, whom as a Queen, and sovereign Mother, and
Mother of pity she comforted and said: what do you desire that I should do
for you? I am come on purpose to hear your petition, present it to me, and I
will grant it you. Whereupon Reginald much troubled and abashed, transported
with so divine a vision; was in great perplexity what he should do, or say,
when one of those holy Virgins of her train, to free him from his anxiety said
unto him, commit your self entirely into her hands, for she knows better
what to bestow upon you, then you to ask, the sickman took this counsel,
which was given him with so much prudence and discretion, and answered in this
manner to the B. Virgin; Gloriou^ Lady I require nothing of you, but like as
one who has no other will, then what is yours, do remit my self entirely
unto you and resign me over into your blessed hands. Hereupon the B. Virgin
extending of them forth, and taking from her Virgins an oil which they had
brought for that effect; anointed him with it, in the same manner as they use
to those who are annealed, and the touch of her sacred hands, had such
excellent force, that he was presently delivered from his fever, and restored
to as perfect health, as if he never had been sick* and what is yet more
strange; besides this so great benefit of his corporal forces, he received in
his soul a far more singular one, in that he was never from that hour
forwards in any place, time or occasion touched in his person whilst he lived
on earth, with any sensual or dishonest motion.

We read in the Ecclesiastical History, Hist. Ecc. p. 2. l. 6. c. 2.
how among other men who flourished in that age, one Bentamin was of great
renoune and fame upon whom God had bestowed the gift, of healing all diseases,
with no other medicines, then the bare touch of his hand, or with chaffing them
only with a little oil, and praying over them. This holy man, together with
this great grace and privilege of restoring health to others, was so miserably
vexed with the dropsy himself, as he came to be so mightily swollen, that he
could not go out of his cell, without vnhinging the door to make him larger
passage, and in this manner continued he in his cell for eight months together
until he dyed; sitting on a wide settle, and curing many diseases of other
men, with out so much as once complaining or being troubled, that he could not
apply a remedy to his own, and those who pitied him, he comforted, and said
pray unto God for my soul, and take no thought for my bodies infirmity, which
even when I was well, did serve me to no use.

In, Pra. Spirit* c. 10.
Pratum spirituale there is made mention of a certain Religious Monk, who was
named Barnaby, this having a great splinter of wood, as he went upon the way,
run up into h^^ foot, would not draw it out, nor suffer it to be cured for
many days, that he might have more occasion to suffer for the love of God, and
he said unto those who came to visit him, the more the exterior man suffers and
is mortified, the more the interior man is stre^gthned and enabled.

Surius in the life of S. Pachomius writes of a certain Monk called Zacheus;
Surius in vita S. Pachomij.
who although he had the falling sickness, did notwithstanding never remit any
thing of his accustomed abstinence of feeding only with bread and shall,
neither did he omit any of those ordinary prayers which the others Religious
who were in health did use to make, but was still present and assisting at
mattins and all the other hours. All the time which he had vaca^t from his
prayer he employed in making matts, baskets and cords, and he had so galed his
hands, with drawing bulrushes and the stalks of hemp, that they were always
raw and full of chaps, at night before he gave himself to sleep, he used to
meditate upon some point of the holy Scripture, and afterward making the sign
of the holy Cross, over his whole body, he would repose himself, until the
hour of Mattins, unto which he would rise with the first, and be present at
all the other hours, as has been said, and this was the distribution of time,
and the ordinary exercise of this holy sick Religious man; It chanced that a
certain Monk came once to visit him* and seeing his hands so sore and full of
chaps, he told him that if he anointed them with oil, he should allay the
pain and smart of them, Zacheus was swayed by his counsel and anointed them
with oil, but the pain did not only not assuage, but it increased excessiuely
more, in so much as he was enforced to go to S. Pachomius to declare his grief
unto whom the Saint answered: do you imagine son, that God does not see all
our infirmities and thar he cannot cure us if he please? Wherefore then do you
conceive that God does it not, but suffers us to be afflicted as much as seems
good to him, but only to induce us to leave all care of our selves to him, and
in him to repose all our confidence? besides it makes for the good and profit
of our souls, he augmenting afterward our reward and e^ernall recompense in
an infinite proportion to these short and petty sufferings, which he sends us
here: which Zacheus hearing his soul was stricken with a lively sorrow and he
said Father forgive me, and pray to God for pardon of this sin of mine, of
having so little confidence and conformity with his holy will, and having a
desire so immoderate to be cured: and being departed from S. Pachomius he
entered upon a rigorous course of penance for so light a fault, fasting a whole
year together, without receiving any sustenance, but only every second day,
and that in little quantity, accompanied with many tears. This so remarkable an
example S. Pachomius used afterward to recount to his Religious, to encourage
them unto perseverance in pain and labor, as also to stire them up to
confidence in God, and to correct in themselves the smallest faults.

THE XIX. CHAPTER. Of the conformity which we are to have with the will of God,
as well in death as life.
WE ought moreover to symbolise with the will of God, as well to die, as to live,
although this point of death is of it self the hardest of all, according to
the saying of the Philosopher: Arist. 3. Ethicorum c. 6.
omnium rerum nihil morte terribilius, nihil acerbius, death is the most
terrible and bitterest thing of all: nevertheless unto Religious men this
dissiculty is either for the most part none at all, or much facilitated; they
having already passed over the one half of the way, and almost all, seeing that
one of the first and principal causes which renders seculars so loath to die,
and so appaleth them when that hour does approach, is because they are to
leave their riches, the honors pleasures recreations and delights, which here
they did enjoy, together with their parents, friends wife and children, which
uses not a little to afflict them at that hour, especially when they have not
been well provided for; Now Religious men have long since freed themselves of
all these things, and therefore they cannot be grieved nor troubled for the^.
When a tooth is well cleared and separated from the gummes, you may pluck it
easily out, but if you go about to draw it out, without first loosing it from
the flesh, it will cost you excessive pain; In like manner a Religious man,
who is severed from his friends of flesh and blood, and free from all worldly
things, is not agrieued at the article of death to leave them all, since he had
freely and with merit before given over all part in them, at his first entrance
into Religion; not expecting to depart with them at the hour of death, as
worldlings do, who then must leave them whither they will or no, never without
great sorrow and grief; and oftentimes without all merit: they rather leaving
their possessors, then they who did possess them, leaving the^. And this is
one of the fruits which they do reap who leave the world to enter in to
Religion. And S. Chrisostom excellent well observes, that unto those who live
in the world, and are as it were inchained to the riches, pastimes, delights
and pleasures of this life death is excessive bitter and grievous; conformable
to this sentence of the wiseman: Eccl. 41.1.
O mors quam amara est memoria tua, homini pacem habenti in substantijs suis. O
death how bitter is thy memory, unto a man who has set up his rest in his own
possessions; and if the memory only of death, be so bitter unto them, what will
it be when they come to taste of it? But death is no whit bitter to a Religious
man, who has already acquitted himself of all, but rather on the contrary
pleasant and delightful, as being an end and conclusion of all his pains and
labors, and as a passage only to receive the premium and reward for all that
which here he left and abandoned for God Almighties sake.

An other principal thing, which uses in this article of time, exceedingly to
afflict worldly people, Ambro. de bono mortis c. 8.
and render death terrible and fearful to them, is, says S, Ambrose, an ill
assured conscience and want of disposition, which has, or ought to have no
place in a Religious man, seeing that his whole life is nothing else then a
continual preparation unto death; It is recounted of a holy Religious man that
when the Physician advised him to prepare himself for death, he answered, ever
since I have taken the Religious habit, my whole exercise has been nothing
else; an exercise befitting every Religious man. A Religious state of life does
of it self put us in that disposition which our Savior requires of us against
his coming. Luc. 22.35.
Sint lumbi vestri praecincti and lucernaearde^tes in manibus vestris, let your
loins be girded and your lights burning in your hands. Greg. ho^ 13. in Euang.
S. Gregory say that by the girding of the loins, chastity is denoted, and by
the burning lights which they were to have in their hands, the exercise of good
works, both which do shine forth most particularly and bright in a Religious
state, and therefore he who is a good Religious man has no reason to be afraid
of death.

Where we are to note one thing serving much unto our purpose, which we have
touched in passing once before, Tract. 2. c. 5.
and it is that one of the most certain presumptions which we have of a good
and pure conscience standing right with God, is to be wholly conformable to the
Divine will, in that which concerns the hour of death, expecting it with joy
and cheerfulnes, like one who awaited his spouse for the celebration of his
heavenly nuptials: Luc. 12.15.
Et vos similes hominibus expectantibus Dominum suum quando reuertatur a
nuptys. And on the contrary, it is no good sign when death does bring anxiety
to any; and when in point of it, a man is not well resigned unto the will of
God. They use to bring certain similitudes to declare it the better, to us: do
you not observe with what peace, and how quietly the sheep goes to the
Butchery without bleating, or making any the least resistance; this example the
holy Scripture uses in speaking of our Savior: Tanqua^ ouis ad occisione^
ductus est, Isa. 53.7. and Act. 8.32.
he was led like a sheep unto the slaughter: but unclean beasts do nothing
else but cry, and keep a struggling when they are to be killed. And this is the
difference betwixt the good, who are signified by the sheep, and the bad and
carnal men, represe^ted by those other beasts. The prisoner who is condemned
to die, is stroke to the heart, at every opening of the prison door, as fearing
the officers are then coming to take him from the prison to execu-ion, but he
who is innocent, and expects to be acquitted by the Judge, is glad every time
he hears the turning of the key, as hoping that they come to set him at
liberty. In like manner the wicked when he hears the noise and stirring of the
bolt of death, when sickness oppresses him, when his fits redouble, is in
great dread and fear, seeing he has a cauterized conscience, which makes him
stand in dread that every thing is messenger of death, and comes to carry him
down to the eternal fire of hell; But he who is not pricked with these stings
of conscience, receaueth comfort from it, as knowing his liberty to be intended
by it, and that he is to depart unto eternal rest, and to a pleasure that
never shall have an end. Let us do then as becomes good Religious, and we shall
not only find no difficulty in conforming our selves unto the will of God,
concerning the hour of death, but also rejoice in it, and beseech God with the
Prophet, to deliver us from this prison. Psalm. 141.8.
Educ de custodia animam meam, lead my soul out of this prison, S. Gregory on
these words of holy Job: Et bestias terrae non formidabis, Greg. li. 6. moral.
c. 6.
just is namque initium retribution is est ipsa plerumque in obitu securitas
mentis, says that to have this cheerfulnes, this rest, Job. 5.21
this security of conscience in the hour of death, is a beginning of the
recompense of the Just, and that they begin as then to taste a drop of that
delicious peace, which shall afterward like a mighty river ouerflow their
souls, and thereby already relish their happiness: whereas on the contrary the
wicked in that article begin to have an essay of their hell and torment,
through those pangs and remorses which they feel as then.

So as it is a happy sign to desire death and to rejoice in it. Climac. c. 6.
S. John Climachus and S. Ambrose esteem him worthy of great praise, who every
day expects to die, and him to be no less then blessed and a Saint, who every
hour wishes for death, and so we see that those holy Patriarchs of the old
Testament had the same desire, accompting themselves no other then Pilgrims
and strangers on the earth, and to have here no settled biding place: Ad hbr.
11.14.
Confitientes quia peregrini and hospites sunt super terram, as S. Paul has
has admirably well observed. Qui hac dicunt, significant se patriam inquirere,
and thereby they gave sufficiently to understand, how much they desired to be
free from this banishment* and this was the reason why the Royal Prophet
sighed. Heu mihi quia incolatus meus prolongatus. Psalm. 119.5.
Woe is me that my soiourning is prolonged, and if those ancients Fathers
expressed themselves to be all of this desire, in such a time when the gates of
heaven were shut, and when they could not have present access unto it; how
much more are we to wish for it now heaven is opened, and the soul pure from
sin goes directly to enjoy Almighty God?

THE XX. CHAPTER. Of some reasons and motives which may iuduce us holily to
desire a lawful death.
Unto the end, that we may better and with more perfection conform our selves
unto the will of God, as well in life as death, we will set down some motives
and reasons which may induce us to desire to die, as our better choice: the
first reason which we may have to wish for death, is to decline the labors
which are incident to this life; seeing that the wiseman says. Eccl. 30* 17.
Melior est mors quam vita amara, death is better then a bitter life. We see
worldly people for this cause often to desire to die* and beseech it of God, and
they may do it and not sin in it; seeing that in fine the calamities of this
life are so numerous and great, that to avoid them, it is lawful to desire to
die; One of the reasons which the Saints give why God sends so many afflictions
to man, is because there should not be to straight an affiance betwixt the
world and him; that he might not so passionatly affect this life, but that we
should bestow our whole heart and love upon the other; and sighing after it,
Vbi non erit luctus, Apoc. 21 4.
neque dolor erit vlira, when there shall be no plaints, nor any grief no
more. S. Augustine says that our Lord has pleased out of his infinite goodness
and mercy, Aug. ser. 37. de sa^ctis qui est 1. in festo o^niu^ SS.
that this life should be but short, and quickly at an e^d, since it is so
troublesome; and that the other which we hope for should be eternal, to the end
that the pain should endure but a while, and the joy and contentment for ever
more. S. Ambrose says, tantis malis haec vita repleta est, Ambr. ser super c.
7. Job. 10.2.
vt comparatione eius, mors remedium putetur esse, non paena, this life is
replenished with so many evils, as in regard thereof, death is accounted a
remedy and not a pain, as serving to bring to end, so many miseries and
calamities. It is true notwithstanding that worldly people do often sin
herein through their impatience, with which they do receive aducersities, and
in their manner of demanding of God to die, with plaints and discontents; but
should they require it, peaceably and with due submission saying: O Lord if you
shall please to take one out of these miseries, that time which I have lived
suffices me; I have no desire for to prolonge my days; they should commit no
sin in doing it.

Secondly one may desire to die, and this with more perfection, that he might
not see the troubles and persecutions of the Church, and the continual
offenses which are committed against Almighty God, as we see the Prophet Elias
to have done; who behoulding the persecution of Achab and Iezabel, how they
distroyed the Altars, and murdered all the Prophets of the true God, and for
the same cause were in pursuit of him, enkindled with a zeal of the honor of
God, and considering himself not able any ways to remedy it, he retired
himself into the desert, and sitting down under a tree: Petiuit animae suae,
vt moreretur and ait, 3. Reg. 19.4.
sufficit mihi Domine, toll animam meam, neque enim melior sum quam patres
mei, he desired for his soul to die, and said, it suffices me o Lord, take my
soul, for I am not better then my Fathers (were) I have lived long enough o
Lord, take me out of this life, that I may not see so many evils and offenses,
as are committed against thee. And that valiant Captain of the people of God,
Judas Machabeus said: Melius est nos mori in bel^o, 1. Match. 3.39.
quam videre mala gentis nostrae and Sanctorum, it is better for us to die in
war, then to see the evils of our people and the Saints, and he used this
motive to exhort and encourage them to fight. We read in the life of S,
Augustine, August.
that the Vandals passing out of Spain into Afric, and wasting all, sparing
not man nor woman, Clergy or secular, neither children nor old age, a came at
last to lay down their siege before Hippo where he was Bishop, with a mighty
Army beleagering it about. S. Augustine seeing so great affliction, the Churches
without Clergy, Cities uninhabited private houses destitute, wept bitterly in
that old age of his, and assembling the Clergy he said unto them: I have prayed
unto God to deliver y^^ from these dangers, or to give you patience, or lastly
to take me out of this life, that I may not live to see so many calamities; the
last of these three God has granted me, and presently he fell sick in the
third month of the siege, of that disease whereof afterward he dyed. And we
read in the life of our B. F. S. Ignatius an other example almost like to this.
Lib. 4. c. 16. vit. S. P. Ignatij
This is a perfection proper unto the Saints so to resent the calamities of the
Church, and the sins which are committed against the Majesty of Almighty God,
as rather to desire to die, then endure the sight thereof.

There is yet an other reason, both excellent good, and of great perfection to
desire to die, and beg it at the hands of God, which is that we may be free
and no more subject to offend him, for it is most certain, that so long as we
are in this life, we can have no assurance from falling into mortal sin; as
being not ignorant that others who have received more favors and graces from
God Almighty then we, who were truly Saints, and great Saints, to have come to
fall; and this is one reason which makes the servants of God, both live in
greater fear, and most earnestly desire to die. If it be lawful for one to
wish that he had never been borne, or never had being, on the condition he had
never sinned; how much more reason has one to wish to die, seeing that sin is
a far greater evil, then to have no being, and it is better never to have
been, then to have sinned; Math. 26 14.
Bonum erat ei, si natus non fuisset homo ille, it had been better (says our
Savior, speaking of him who sold him and betrayed him, that he had never been
borne; and S. Ambrose explicating this of Ecclesiastes, Et laudaui, Ambr. s.
18. in ps. 118. Eccl. 4.2. and 3.
magis mortuos quam viuentes, and feliciorem vtroque iudicaui qui necdum natus
est, says. Mortuus praefertur viuenti, quia peccar^ d^finit, mortuo praefertur
qui natus non est, quia peccare nesciuit, he who is dead, is preferred to him
who lives, because he cease to sin any more, and he who was never borne,
is preferred unto the dead, because he never knew what it was to sin,
wherefore it were an excellent exercise to actuate our selves whilst we are in
prayer in this devotion: Domine ne permittas me seperari a te, Lord do not
permit me to be separated from thee, o Lord, if there is no remedy but I must
offend thee, take me away presently, rather then leave me in the occasion of
offending thee, for my part, I desire not life, but only to serve thee with it,
and if I may not use it to thy service, I care not for it; this were an
exercise most pleasing unto God, and most profitable to our selves, since
herein we exercise both an act of grief, an act of detestation of sin, an
act of humility, and of the love of God, and it is a request of the most
gratfull thing which we can require of Almighty God. It is recounted of S.
Lewis King of Frace, S. Ludo, Rex Gal. liae.
that his Mother Blanch would say sometimes unto him, I had rather (my son)
see the dead before mine eyes, then ever in mortal sin, and this her wish
and desire was so acceptable unto God, and so much force had this her blessing
of him, that it is reported of him; how in all his life, he never committed any
mortal sin, and who knows but the same petition and desire should work
and produce the like effect in us.

And which is yet more, we may well wish for death, not only to free ourselves
from mortal sins, but also to eschew venial, which we so abound with in
this miserable life, and that because it becomes a servant of Almighty God,
not only to stand resolved, rather to die, then commit a mortal sin; but even
to loose his life, rather then to tell an untruth which is but a venial sin.
And whosoever should give his life for such a cause as this, S. Tho. 2.2 q. 124
a. 5. ad 2.
should die a Martyr. Now it is most certain, that we cannot live without
committing many venial sins, septies enim cadet Iustus, Prou. 24.16.
the Just does fall seven times, that is to say, very often, and the longer
you live the oftener shall you fall. Neither do the servants of Almighty God,
desire to die to be delivered only from venial sin, but even to see
themselves exempt and free, from their many faults and imperfections, and so
numerous tentations and calamities as they experience daily, wherefore that holy
man said well; (...) de ^pis.
O Lord what do I suffer when being in my prayer thinking on heavenly things, a
wholl band of carnal things present themselves before me? Alas what a kind of
life is this, where tribulations and miseries are never wanting; where all is
set with snares, and compassed with enemies; for when one tribulation or
tentation goes away, another comes; yea and during the first conflict also,
many others come one after an other unlooked for, how can a life be l^^ed that
has so many afflictions, and is subject to so many calamities and miseries?
how is it called a life, that begets so many deaths and plagues? We read of
a great Saint, that she was used to say, that if she might have her choice of
any thing, she should choose nothing but death; because by means of it, her
soul should be freed from fear of ever doing any thing, which might bring
hinderance unto pure love? And in this manner, there seems to be more
perfection to desire to be out of this life, for to decline venial sins,
faults, and imperfections; then to shune the falling into mortal ones, and
that, because one may be moved to desire to be out of the occasion of
committing mortal sin, more for fear of hell, and out of self love and
interest, then for the honor of God, but to be so inflamed with the love of
God, as to wish rather to die then commit a venial sin or fall into faults
and imperfections, supposes a great purity of intention and is a point of high
perfection.

But some one will say, I desire to live unto the end to make satisfaction for
the faults and offenses, which I have committed; unto which I answer, that if
in prolonging our life, we did go still cancelling our passed faults, without
adding to them new; It were a good desire, but you do not only, not discharge
the old, but continue still heaping up new debts as long as you remain in
life, whereby the account which you are to make grows every day more heavy on
your soul, and so your objection has no force at all; S. Bernard says
excellent well: Bernar. c. 2. med.
Cur ergo tantopore vitam istam desideramus, in qua quanto amplius viuimus,
tanto plus peccamus, quanto est vita longior, tanto culpa numerosior. Why do we
desire this life so much in which the longer we live, the more we sin; and
the longer our life is, the more numerous are our faults. And S. Hierom
writes, Hier. ep. ad He. liod.
what is the difference do you think (says he) betwixt him who dies young and
old? no more but only this, that the more aged of them, does bear the burden
of more sins out of the world with him then he who dies young, and has more
to answer and give account to God? Bern. de interiori domo c. 25.
And so S. Bernard in this point does take a better resolution and has a
saying of himself which in him was humility, in us would be but truth: V^uere
erubesco, quia parum proficio, mori timeo, quia non sum paratus; malo tamen
mori, and mis ricordi^ Deime committere and commendare, quia benignus and
misericors est, quam de mala mea conuersatione alicui s^andalum facere, I am
ashamed to live (says he) because I make so little profit; I fear to die,
because I am not prepared, not with standing I had rather die, and commit and
commend my self unto the mercy of God, seeing he is gracious and merciful,
then be the cause of scandalizing others through my evil conversation; and this
is an excellent resolution. M. Auila
Master Auila said that whosoever should find himself but reasonably prepared,
ought more to wish for death, then longer life, by reason of the great danger
in which we live, which wholly cease when we come to die; Quid est mors, nisi
sepultura vitiorum, Ambro. de bono mortis* c. 4.
and virtutum suscitatio? What is death (says S. Ambrose) but a sepulcher of
^ices, and a resurrection of virtues.

All these reasons and motives to wish for death are passing good, but that
which is the most eminent in perfection of all, is that which S. Paul the
Apostle had, to see himself with Christ, whom he loved so te^derly; Ad Philip.
1.23.
Desiderium habens dissolui and esse cum Christo, o blessed Saint what defire
is this of yours? why do you wish so much to be loosed from the bo^ds of flesh
and blood, perhaps to avoid labor? no assuredly, but on the contrary; Ad Ro^.
5.3.
Gloriamur in tribulationibus, your glory consists therein: wherefore then, to
decline sin? neither is this the cause; Certus sum enim quia neque mors, Ad
Ro^. 8.38. and 39.
neque vita poterit nos separare a charitate Dei, he was confirmed already in
grace, and knew he could not loose it, and therefore in that particular he had
no cause to fear; In fine what is it that makes you so much desire to die? that
I may see my self with Jesus Christ, and this purely out of love to him. Quia
amore langueo, Ca^t. 2.5.
he languished with love, he sighed after his beloved, and all delay seemed
long; until he might enjoy his wished presence.

S. Bonauenture of three degrees which he makes of the love of God places this
the last and highest. Bonau. tra. 6. relig. c. 11.11. and 13.
The first is to love God above all other things, and so to love the things of
the world, as not to commit any mortal sin for them, or transgress any of
the Commandments* of God, and this is that which our Savior said to that
young man of the Gospel Si vis ad vitam ingredi, Math. 19 17.
serua manda^ if you desire to enter into eternal life, keep the
Commandments, and this is necessary for all. The second degree of love and
Charity is, not only to content our selves with keeping the Commandments of
God, but to add unto them the counsels, which is proper unto Religious men,
who procure to do not only that which is good, but also that which is better
and of more perfection, conformable to this passage of S. P^^l, vt probetis
quae sit voluntas Dei bona, Ad Ro^* c. 2.
and beneplacens, and perfecta, that you may prove what is the good, and
acceptable, and perfect will of God. The third degree of Charity says S.
Sonauenture is, tan^o affectu ad Deum aestuare: quod sine ipso quasi viuere non
possis, to burn with such an ardent affection and love to God, as in a nanner
not to be able to live without him. And hence it is, that a soul desires so
^uch to be free and loosed from the prison of its body, to be with Jesus
Christ; wishing its banishment at an end, and the wall of its body which
seperats it from the fight of God, to be dis^olued and crumbled into dust. Such
as these, says he had n^ed of patience for to live, life being so distaste full
to them, and death the object of their inflamed desire.

We read in the life of our B. F. S. Ignatius, Lib. 5. c. 1 vit S. P. Ignati^
that he desired most ardently to be delivered from the Iaile and prison of his
body, and that his soul had so great a longing to see Almighty God, as he
never thought of death, but his eyes were overflowed with tears out of pure
gladness and delicious joy; But it was moreover observed that he was not thus
inflamed with the desire of that sovereign good, for his own sake, that he
might go to rest, and the joy of that all beatifying vision, but much more that
he might behold that most blessed glory, of the most sacred humanity of our
Lord, whom he did love so desire and tenderly. Like as men here on earth do
usually rejoice to see some friend whom they deerly esteem and love most
cordially* advanced to some eminent dignity: so did our B. Father desire to see
himself with Jesus Christ, purely for love of him, without once thinking on
his own interest and felicity, which is the highest and the most perfect act
of Charity, which we can exercise.

In this manner the memory of death will not only not be bitter to us, but it
will bring us great content and delight; do but ouerpasse it with your thought,
and consider how within few days you shall be in heaven, enjoying that, which
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor which could ever sink into
the thought of man, and so all shall be converted into joy and gladness. Who
would not rejoice when the term of banishment were out, and all his pain and
labor at an end? who would not rejoice to arrive unto that final end for
which he was created? who would not rejoice in going to take possession of his
inheritance and such an inheritance, and to the fruition of all this happiness
the clew of death does lead us? Psalm. 126.3.
Cum dederit dilectis suis somnum ecee haerediras Domini, we cannot come to the
possession of our eternal good, but through the port of death; and therefore
the wiseman says that the Just man hopes in his death; Prou. 14.32.
Sperat Iustus in morte sua, it being the scale and ladder by which he climes
to heaven; and it is also the comfort of our banishment; Psa. 100.2.
Psallam and intelligam in via immaculata quando venies ad me, Aug. tra. 9
super epist. 10.
which words S. Augustine does thus explicate, my thought and my desire o Lord
is to conserve my self unblemished all my life, and to make this care my song;
of which the burden shall be, Lord when shall this banishment have end, when
shall I be recalled out of this exile into my loved Country, Lord, when will
you come to me? when shall I go to you? Psa* 41.^.
Quando veniam and apparebo ante faciem Dei? O Lord when shall I have my fill
of seeing you? O how that hour lingers? Oh whatioy, what rauishing joy shall
then ouerflow my heart, when they shall tell me, that this hour is come;
Laetatus sum in his quae dista sunt mihi, Psalm. 121.1, and 2.^
in domum Domini ^bimus: Stantes erant pedes nostri in atrij tuis Jerusalem, I
already imagine my self, to be standing among the Quiers of Angels and blessed
souls, enjoying you o Lord for ever more, Amen.

THE XXI. CHAPTER. Wher^n that which has been said is confirmed with some
examples.
SImon Metaphrastes in the life of S. John the Almner* Simon Metaphrastes
Archbishop of Alexandria does recount, how a certain rich man, had a son
whom he loved dearly; who to obtain of God, for to conserve him in life and
health, beseeched this holy Saint to pray for him, and withal gave in a great
sum of gold to bestow in Alms upon the poor for that intention: the Saint
did as he desired, and at the end of thirty days, the son of the rich man
dyed; hereupon the Father afflicted himself above measure, firmly believing
that the prayers of the Saint, and the Alms which he had given, had nothing
auailed him. The holy Patriarch understanding of his grief, prayed for him,
and desired of God, that he would comfort him: God heard his prayer, and one
night sent an Angel in a humane shape unto the said rich man, who told him,
that he must know how Almighty God heard the prayer which was made for his
sons life, and that through the efficacy thereof, his son was now living and
a Saint in heaven, and that it was necessary for his salvation to leave the
world so timely as he did; since if he had lived, he would have proved a wicked
man, and have lost all partage in the joys of heaven; he added moreover, that
he must believe, that there is nothing which happens in this life, which is not
so ordained by the particular providence of God, although the causes of his
judgments are unknown to men, and that therefore men were not to suffer
themselves to be transported with inordinat grief, but receive all that comes,
and is sent unto them by God, with a peaceable heart, and with an equal mind:
with this heavenly instruction, the Father of the diseased youth, remained much
comforted, and encouraged in the service of God.

In the Theban History is recorded a singular favor which S. Maurice Captain
of the Theban band, His. The. bea li. 2. c. 10.
did to a certain Lady much devoted to him. This Lady having but one son,
unto the end that together with his years, he might grow up in good and
virtuous manners, did when his childhood had scarcely resigned to youth,
dedicate his riper years unto the Monastery of S. Maurice, under the care and
discipline of those Religious men, (as it was the custom of those holy times)
the Fathers of S. Maurus, Placidus and other Roman gentlemen, in the age of S.
Benedict having done the like, as also in later times Theodora mother of S.
Thomas of Aquin, and the Counts of Aquin his brothers, disposed in like manner
of him in the Monastery of Mont Cassinus.) This Ladies son was brought up in
the said Monastery, both in learnig, virtue and monastical discipline: In all
which he profited wonderously; and was already well forward in music, in so
much as he sung in the Quire with the other Religious, for sweenes of voice
inferior unto none, when a light fever took him out of this life. The woeful
Mother, at the first news grown but to sadly acquainted with grief came to
the Church, and accompanied her sons funeral to the grave sheding infinite
tears, although they all sufficed not to wash away the sorrow of his loss
which she freshly every day renewed with lamenting over his Tomb, in most
pittious manner, and much more was her grief increased; when in the time of
the divine office she heard the rest of the Religious sing, and misled her
sons voice among them, which used to be the gratefullest of them all. This
Lady perseuering thus in her sad obsequies not only by day in the Church, but
in her own house by night, without admitting or taking any rest at all; once
overcome by wearines fell a sleep when the holy Captain S. Maurice appeared
unto her, and said: woman why do thou weep so incessantly the death of thy
son, admitting no measure in thy tears, no comfort to thy heart. Unto whom
she answered all the days of my life will not suffice unto my boundless
sorrow, and therefore whilst I live I will never cease to lament my only son,
neither shall these eyes of mine* uphold from weeping till death does close
them up, and my desolate soul does leave to dwell in a body so dolorous; the
Saint answered her, woeman I say unto you, do not mourn, nor deplore your
departed son as dead, for dead he is not, but living, and living with us in
heaven, enjoying eternal life; and that thou may know the truth of all I
say, rise presently, and go to Mattins, and there thou shall hear the voice of
thy deceased son, singing the divine office among the other Religious men;
neither shall thou only enjoy the contentment of it this day at Mattins, but at
all other times, when thou shall be present there, at the Divine office; leave
of weeping then, and impose an end unto thy tears, for thou have more cause of
gladness then of grief. The Lady awaking, expected with much longing the hour
of Mattins to be assured of the truth of her vision, which yet but faintly* she
gave credit to: the hour at last being come, and she no sooner entered into the
Church, but she plainly distinguished the most sweet voice of her happy son,
whilst the Antiphon was intoned, and therewith being rendered assured of his
glory in heaven, she banished all sorrow from her, and made no end of giving
thanks to God, for comforting her with hearing every day his Angelical voice,
in the harmonious music, and divine service of those Religious men, and
enriching her, with a favor and grace so extraordinary and great.

A certain Author writes, how a knight once going a hunting, roused a wild
beast, in the pursuit whereof, he was cast behind with only one servant with
him, all the other being eager in following of the chase, notwithstanding he
spurred on a pace, and having lost the cry of the hounds strayed from the rest
so far, as he came (out of all way) unto a certain grove, where he heard the
voice of a man singing wo^drous sweetly: the knight meruailing to hear any
such voice in those desert places, knowing that it could be none of his
followers, and no less certain that it was none of that Country people.
Having a great desire to know whose voice it was, entered in farther into the
thicket, and discovered on the sudden, a leporous person, of a horrible
aspect, whose flesh was so rotten, as it easily droped of, from every limme of
him. The knight much amazed at such a spectacle, confirmed his startled heart
and drew nigh, and being come unto him, in saluting him courtiously he demanded
of him, whether it were he who had sung so sweetly or no, the lazer answered,
sir it was my self, and that voice which seemed so sweet unto you was mine,
how is it possible answered the knight, for you to be so cheerful, in such
horrible torments, the poor men replied, sir you must understand that betwixt
God and me there is no other partition, then this mud-wall of my body which you
see, and this being once away, I shall enjoy the clear vision of his divine
Majesty. Seeing this therefore every day falling so fast away, it makes me
rejoice and sing with a wonderful gladness of heart, awaiting still an entire
disolution of it, until when I cannot depart to enjoy Almighty God, the true
spring and fountain of life; from whence flow forth those streams which never
dry yp nor fail.

S. Cyprian writes of a certain Bishop, S. Cypr. lib. de mortal.
who being in the extremity of his sickness, and much fearing death which he saw
before his eyes, humbly beseeched our Savior to prolong his life, when
presently there appeared unto him an Angel in the shape of a beautiful young
man, of comely feature, excellent personage, a shining aspect, and goodly
stature, who with a voice mixed with gravity and security said unto him: pati
timetis, exire non vultis, quid faciam vobis? you fear tu suffer, you are
loath for to depart, what shall I do with you? giving him to understand that
his repugnance do depart this life was no ways grateful unto God; and S.
Cyprian adds, that the Angel spoke these words unto him unto the end, that he
should recount them again, and teach them unto others, when he should be in
the agony of death.

Simon Metaephrastes relates, Surius to. 1. fol. 237.
and Surius from him, how the holy Abbot Theodosius, knowing how profitable the
memory of death was unto man, and desirous through the consideration thereof to
give his disciples occasion of farther progress in devotion, caused a
sepulcher to be opened* and standing about it with his disciples, he said,
behold the grave open, but who is ^here of you, who will have the honor to be
first buried in it? and have his funeral celebrated by us? One of his
disciples, named ^asilius, a Priest, and a very virtuous man, being well
prepared to die, did readily offer himself, and falling on his knees said with
great cheerfulness: Father give me your benedictio^, for I (if it may please
you) will be the first man for whom you shall sing the office of Requiem: it
was his desire, and the Saint did grant it him. Then the holy Abbot Theodosius
commanded that they should use all the ceremonies which use to be a^ the
funerals of the dead, whilst he was yet alive, the first, the third, and ninth
days office, as also an other service for the Q^arantain, when (behold the
wonder) at the end of these offices and the service of forty days, basilius
being whole and sound, without fever, head ache, or any other pain, as if he
had fallen into a sweet and pleasant sleep, passed out of this life, unto
Almighty God to re^eaue of him the reward of his virtue, and that promptitude
and cheerfulness, with which he had wished to see himself with our Savior
Jesus Christ. And that we might see how gratfull unto God, the readiness and
cheerfulnes was of this religious man, for to depart this life, this his death
was seconded by an other Miracle; For according to Simij Metaphrastes, for the
space of forty days more after his death, the Abbot Theodosius beheld him
coming unto vespera's, and singing in the Quire with the rest of his
disciples, howbeit that none else saw him, or heard him sing, excepting one
Aetius, a man of eminent virtue above the rest, who heard him sing, but could
not see him; This Aetius went to Theodosius and demanded of him whither he did
not hear their brother Basilius sing in the Quire among the rest? yes answered
the Abbot, I both hear and see him, and if you please, will likewise procure
that you may see him too, and so the next day being both together in the Quire
with the other Religious, during the divine office Theodosius saw Basilius as
he used to do in the Quire singing with the rest, and he pointed him out with
his finger, to show him Aetius both making their prayer together, and
beseeching of God to open the others eyes, that he might see him to, and Aetius
having perceived him, and knowing him to be the same, ran with great fervor
to embrace him, but he could not, for the other disappeared, saying as he went,
so as to be heard of every one. Farewell my dear Fathers and brothers farewell,
for hear after you shall see me (in this world) no more. In the Chronicles of
the Order of S. Augustine, Chron. ord S. Aug. ce^. infra 3.
it is related how S. Colomban the Younger, Nephew and disciple of S. Colomban
the Abbot, being afflicted with a violent fever, and drawing toward his end,
desiring out of the assurance of his hope to die; There appeared unto him, a
young man shining with glorious light, who said unto him, understand that the
prayers and tears which thy Abbot sheds for the recovery of thy health, does
hinder thy delivery out of this mortal prison, whereupon the Saint sweetly made
his moan and complaint unto his Abbot saying in woeful manner. Why do you
constrain me to live in such a miserable life as this? and hinder me from
passing to an eternal one? after which time the Abbot forbear to weape, and
prayed no more for him, and so the Religious being assembled all together, the
B. Saint provided of all the requisite Sacraments, after he had tenderly
embraced them all, went sweetly to our Lord.

S. Ambrose says how the Inhabitants of Thrace, Amb. de fide resur.
do use to lament when Children are borne into the world, and make great feast
and joy, when as they die; and they deplore their births and solemnize their
funerals for this reason says S. Ambrose (and it is an excellent one) because
their case deserves to be pittyed and lamented, who come into this miserable
world; so full of woe and camality; and on the contrary, they have good reason
to rejoice for them, when they were freed from this banishment, and delivered
from so many miseries and afflictions. Now if they who were Heathens, and were
iguorant of that glory which we hope for, could do thus much; with how much
more reason ought we to be glad to die; we I say who have the light of faith,
and knowledge of those felicities, which they go to enjoy who die in our Lord?
and therefore the wiseman said with far more reason, that the day of death, is
better then the day of our Nativity, Ecel. 7.1.
Melior est dies mortis, die Natiuitatis.

S. Hierom says that our Savior when he would depart out of this world unto
his heavenly Father, Hier. ep. ad There.
said to his disciples, who were sorrowful for it; Joan. 11.35.
Si diligeritis me, gauderetis vtique, quia vado ad patrem, you know not what
you do, for if you loved me, you would certainly rejoice, because I am going to
my Father, and on the contrary, when he was about to raise Lazarus from death
again, he wept; he wept not, says S. Hierom, because he was dead, seeing he
was presently to be revived again, but he wept, because he was to return
again unto this disasterous life, he wept because one whom he so dearly
loved, was to have his part again, of the woes of this miserable banishment.

THE XXII. CHAPTER. Of the conformity which we are to have with the will of
God, in all afflictions and calamities in general which he sends unto us.
WE are not only to conform our selves with the will of God, in those
afflictions and particular accidents, which do happen unto us, but also in
those general calamities and desolations, which are occasioned by famine,
war, sickness, death, plagues, and other the like which God sends unto his
Church. To comprehe^d this the better, we must suppose that, although on the
one side, we resent the miseries and afflictions, and sorrow for our neighbors
misfortunes, and harms, as it is reasonable we should: nevertheless on the
other side considering them as they are the will of God, and so ordained by his
just judgments, to be the seeds of that good and profit, which he knows
resulting to his greater glory, in these I say, we may conform our selves unto
his holy will, in like manner as we see a Judge condemn a malefactor unto
death, who although on the one side, he is not without feeling and sorrow, that
the man must die, out of that natural compassion which he bears him, or
perhaps because he is acquainted with him: nevertheless he omits not to
pronounce sentence of death against him, and comaunds that it be executed,
because it is so necessary and convenient for the good and welfare of the
Commonwealth; and although it be true that God does not oblige us to conform
our selves in all these things unto his will, in such manner as positiuely to
desire and love them, neither requires any more of us, then to suffer them
with patience, without contradicting or resisting his divine Justice, S. Bona.
sent. d. 48. q. 2. and alij.
or murmuring against the decrees thereof; notwithstanding the divines and holy
Saints do say, that it should be a work of far more merit and perfection,
and a resignation more entire and complete, for a man not only to accept and
endure these things patiently, but also to love and desire them, for as much as
they are effects of the good pleasure, and will of God, so ordained by his
divine Justice, and conferring unto his greater glory; Imitating therein the
blessed Saints in heaven, who conform themselves in all accidents unto the
will of God, as S. Thomas and S. Anselmus declare by this comparison, S. Tho.
2.2. q. 19. ar. 10. ad 1. Ansel. 1. similitu. c. ^3.
learning us that in heaven our will and the will of God, shall in as perfect
manner agree, as the two eyes of a body, one of which cannot look on any
thing, but the other likewise fixes its fight upon it; whence it is, that
although the eyes which see the thing, be two; notwithstanding the thing which
is seen does seem no more then one. Even so the Saints in heaven accommodat
themselves unto the will of God in every thing, as seeing clearly in all things
the decrees of his Justice and the end of his greaterglory to which they are
all directed, so also would it be a great perfection in us, to imitate in this
particular the B. Saints in heaven, by desiring that the will of God be done on
earth, as it is in heaven. To will that which God Almighty wills, for the same
end and reason for which he wills it, cannot choose but be precisely good.

Possidonius reports of S. Augus^.
Augustine in his life, that he during the siege of the City of Bonna where he
made his residence being besieged, seeing so great desolation and slaughter
which the Vandals made, comforted himself, with this sentence of the wiseman:
Non erit magnus magnum putans, quod cadunt ligna and lapides, and moriuntur
mortales, he shall never be great, who accounts it a great wonder, to see wood
and stones fall, and mortals die; Now we with greater reason may comfort our
selves, in considering all these things proceeding from the hand of God, and
how ever the cause, why he sends these miseries and calamities be unknown unto
us, yet it is not possible but they should be just. The Judgments of God are
profound, and a bottomless abisle, as the Prophet says: Psalm. 3.57
iudicia tua abyssus multa, neither are we with our shallow and scanty
understandings to undertake to sound or diue into them, which would be great
presumption in us quis enim cognouit s^nsum Domini? Ad Ro^. 11.34. and Isa.
40.30,
aut quis consiliarius eius fuit? who has known the meaning of God* or who
has been his counsailer? It belongs only to us, to receive them with humility,
and to believe, that nothing either can or does proceed, from a knowledge so
infinite, which is not wisely and holily designed, and so designed, as to have
for its end our greater good and profit. On this foundation we are to ground
our selves surely confiding in that infinite goodness and mercy of God, that he
would send us nothing, neither permit the like calamities and aduersides, unless
they were tending to a greater good. God takes this way for to lead many to
heaven, who otherwise would go astray and vttedy be lost. How many are there
who by means of these afflictions convert themselves with their whole hearts to
God, and dying with true repentance for their sins are saved, who otherwise
had been damned perpetually? and so that which appears a scourge and
punishment, is a singular benefit, and inestimable mercy.

In the second book of the Machabees, the Author after he had recounted that
horrible and cruel persecution, of impious King Antiochus, the abundance of
blood he shed, which both old men and children; Matrons and young Virgins
veins contributed, the pillage and profaning of the Temple, with the
abominations committed there by his commandment, concludes in these words:
Obsecro autem eos qui huc librum lecturi sunt, 2. Match. 22.
ne abhorrescant propter aduersos casus, fed reputent ea quae, acciderunt non
ad interitum, fed ad correptionem esse generis nostri, but I beseech those who
are to read this book, that they abhor not for the adversities but that they
account those things which have happened, not to be for the destruction but for
the chastising of our stock, by the permission and disposure of Almighty God.

S. Gregory says unto this purpose excellent well, Greg. li. 2. mor. c. 32.
the horseleech draws out and sucketh the blood of the sick, and that which
it pretends it to glut it self with it, and if it could, to draw the veins of
the sick person dry; but the intention of the Physician is, to have them suck
out all the corrupted blood, and to restore the sick unto his health again:
the like intention has Almighty God, in sending us adversities and
tribulations, and as he should do indiscreetly, who would not suffer his
corrupted blood, to be drawn out of him, for having more regard, unto that
which the Horsleech pretends, then to the inte^tion of the Physician, so in
what so ever adversity, whether it come unto us by the procurement of men, or
else by means of any other creature, we are not so much to have regard to it, as
unto God our sovereign Physician, seeing they all serve him in the nature of
Horsleeches, to draw out our corrupted blood from us, and to restore us unto
perfect health. And consequently we are to believe and know that he sends them
all unto us, for our greater vtility and good, and although he had no other end
in them, but only as children to correct us in this life, that there might
remain no punishment in the other for us to undergo, it were no small favor
which he should do us in it.

It is reported of S. Katherine of Sienna; In vita S. Catha^. Senen. p. 2. c. 4.
that as she once was much troubled, because an other had given false
testimony against her, in a matter which concerned her honor, our Savior
Christ appeared unto her, houlding in his right hand a golden crown adorned
with precious stones, and in hisleft, a crown of thorns and said: my beloved
daughter, know that thou must be crowned with either of these crowns, at
several times, therefore choose for the present, that which you like the best,
either in this life to be crowned with this thorny crown, and have this other
precious one reserved until the other life for you, which never shall have
end, or now to have this rich and gorgious crown, and have the wreath of
thorns kept for you till you die? Unto whom the holy Virgin answered, dear
Lord I have long time since forsaken mine own will, to embrace yours, and
therefore now it becomes not me to choose, but nevertheless if you would have me
to resolve I am minded as long as I shall remain in life, to conform my self
unto your sacred passion, and will embrace all tribulations, for your dear
love and my consolation, and having said this she took the crown of thorns
with her own hands, out of his, and with all her might crushe^ it upon her
head, so forcibly, that the thorns pierced her in every part thereof, in such
manner, as for a long time after, the violent pain of her head, witnessed the
force with which they were driven in.

THE XXIII. CHAPTER. Of a certain means which will help us much to receive
and support with great resignation, all those adversities which our Lord shall
send us, as well in particular as in general, which is the knowledge and
feeling of our sins.
IT is a common doctrine of the holy Fathers, that God for the most part, does
send us afflictions and chastisements in general, for the sins which we have
committed; and it is the frequent language of the holy scripture: Dan. ^.28.
and sequentib.
Induxistiomnia haec propter peecata nostra, peccauimus enim and inique egimus,
and praecepta tua non audiuimus, omnia ergo quae induxisti super nos, and
vniuersa quae fecisti nobis, in vero iudicio fecisti, thou have brought in all
these things for our sins, for we have sinned and done unjustly, and thy
precepts we have not heard; all things therefore that thou have brought in upon
us, and all things that thou have done to us, thou have done with true
Judgment. And so we see that God punished his people and delivered them over
unto the hands of heir enemies, when they had offended him and delivered them
again, when the* did penance and repented them of their sins, returning
unto him again and for this cause Achior Captain and Prince of the sons of
Amon, Judith. ^.5.
having declared to Holofernes what a particular care God had of the children
of Israel, and how he sheltred them under the wings of his protection, as also
how he chastized them, when they departed from his obedience, counseled him
before he enterprized any thing against them, to inform himself, whither for
the present they had offended God, seeing then he might assure himself of the
victory, else he had better leave of his enterprise, for he could not prevail
against them, nor come of with less then shame and confusion, seeing that God
did fight for his people, whom no man was so mighty to withstand. And the holy
Doctors do particularly gather this same, from those words of our Savior in
the Eua^gell unto him who had lain eight and thirty years by the Probaticke
Poole to be cured of his infirmity; Joan. 5.14.
Ecce sanus factus es, iam noli peccare, ne deterius tibi aliquid contingat;
Behold (said our Savior after he had cured him) thou art made whole, herafter
sin no more, least some worse thing happen unto thee, and in conformity to
this, it will be a good means* and much helping us in all calamities and
afflictions as well general as particular unto the resigning our selves unto
the will of God; as also to support them all with patience, to enter presently
into our selves, and consider our sins, and with all how justly we have
merited this chastisement, because in this manner we shall receive in good
part, and judge it les^e then we deserve in regard of the enormity of our
sins, what affliction so ever shall arrive unto us.

S. Bernard and S. Gregory handle this point excellent well S. Bernard says:
Ber ser. de alti and Bass. cordis.
Culpa vero ipsa si intus s^ntitur perfect, vtique exterior paena, parum aut
nihil sentitur, if the fault it self, be but so felt within as it ought to be,
we shall have but little or no feeling of the pain without; 2 Reg. 16.1.
Sicut Sanctus David non s^nsit miuriam serui conuiciant is, memor fily
p^rsequentis, like as the royal Prophet David, did not feel the injury of his
servant reuiling him, whilst he remembered that his own son was in Arms
against him. 2. Reg. 16.1.
Ecce filius meus qui egressus est de vtero meo quaerit animam meam, quanto
magis nunc filius Iemini? behold my son who came out of my womb seeks my
life, how much more the son of Iemini? if mine own son persecute me, what
wonder is it if a stranger do the like. S. Gregory on these words of Job,
Greg. li. 1. mo 1. c. 8. Job. 11.6
and intelligens quod multo minora exigaris ab eo quam mereretur iniquitas tua,
and thou might understand that thou art exacted much lesser things of him,
then thine iniquity deserves, explicates it with an exquisit comparison, like
as (says he) the sick man who feels his impostume inflamed and swollen and the
flesh about it to be rotten and dead, is glad to put himself into the surgeans
hands, and lets him lance and cut him as he pleases, and the more grievous and
corrupted the sore is, the more courageously he indures the launcing and
searing iron: so when one has a true feeling of the sore and sickness which
sin causes in his soul, he receaues with a good will the brand of
tribulation, of mortification and his own disesteeme which God applies unto
this sore to draw the filthy matter and corruption out of it, dolor quippe
flagelli temperatur, cum culpa cognoscitur, for the pain of the scourge is
allayed, when the fault is acknowledged: and if you receive not willingly that
mortification and adversity which God presents you with, it is a sign that you
are ignorant of the sickness of your faults, you do not feel corruption eating
upon you, and therefore you cannot endure the lance, nor searing iron.

The holy Saints and servants of God Almighty, did not only willingly receive
these chastisements, but they desired them with great instance and begged them
ardently at the hands of God; holy Job said; Quis det vt veniat petitio mea,
and qui coepit, ipse me conterat, soluat mauum suam, and suecidat me, and haec
mihi sit consolatio, vt affligens me dolor non parcat? who shall grant that my
petition may come, and that he who has begun, should consume me, and the same
would loose his hand, and cut me of, and this might be my comfort, that
afflicting me with sorrow he spare not, Psa. 25.2. Psalm. 37.18. Psalm. 118.71.
and the Prophet David. Proba me Domine and tenta me, and quoniam ego in
flagella paratus sum, and bonum mihi quia humiliasti me, prove me o Lord and
tempt me, because I am ready for scourges, it is good for me that thou have
humbled me. The servants of God Almighty (says S. Gregory) did so much desire
that his Divine Majesty should chastise them, Greg. li. 1. mor. c. 7. and 8.
and humble them in this life, as they even proceeded to sadness, when on the
one side they cast their eyes upon their faults; and on the other, they saw
that God did not thoroughly punish them, because they imagined and feared, least
God should defer their punishment until the other life, where with all
rigor it should be executed, and this is that which Job adds, and haec mihi
sit co^solatio vt afflige^s me dolor non parcat, and this is my comfort, that
afflicting me with sorrow he spares not which is as much as to say, God uses
to spare some in this life, that he may punish them for ever in the next; but I
desire not to be spared in this life with them, unto the end that in the next
he may pardon me for ever; Let God chastise me here like a loving Father, that
he may not punish me eternally afterward, like a rigorous Judge, for my part I
will not murmr or complain of the lashes of his whipp, nec contradica^^
sermonibus Sancti, I^b. 6.10
but it shall comfort me the more, this is als^ that which (...) Augustine
says, Augusti.
hic ure hic seca, hic (...) mihi parcas, vt in aeternum parcas, (...) burn
me, here lance me here spare me in nothing, that thou may spare me o Lord
eternally.

It is no other then our blindness and ignorance, which make corporal
afflictions seem so heavy to use and spiritual so light, we ought not to be so
sensible of adversity as of sin: if we did but know or could consider the
grieuousnes^e of our faults, we should esteem all chastisements to little and
say with holy Job: pe^caui, Job. ^3.27.
and vere deliqui, and v^ eraem dignu^ non recepi, words which we ought to
carry imprinted in our hearts, and often to utter with our mouths, I have
sinned o Lord and I have truly done amiss, offending your divine Majesty and
you have not chastised me according to my deserts, all that we can possibly
suffer in this life, is nothing in comparison of that punishment which one
sin deserves. Job. 11.6
Intelligeres quod multo mitiora exigaris ab eo, quam meretur iniquitas tua, he
who should consider that he has offended the Majesty of Almighty God, and
deserved to burn eternally in the flames of hell, what pain would he refuse,
what dishonor, what injury, what contempt should he not willingly undergo?
for recompense and satisfaction of those offenses, which he has committed
against the Majesty of Almighty God. 2. Reg. 16.12.
Si forte respiciat Dominus afflictionem meam, and reddat mihi Dominus bonum
pro maledictione hac hodierna, said David when Semei cursed and reviled him,
hinder him not from cursing me, let him load me with reproaches, and give me my
fill of injuries and scorn, for it may be that God will take it for sufficient
payment, and exact no more punishment of me hereafter for my sins, but have
mercy on me, which is all I can desire, and all my happiness. In the like manner
are we to receive willingly all confusion, shame and adversities whatsoever,
saying. On Gods name let them come, for it may be that God will be so pleased
to accept of them, for payment and satisfaction for our sins, and so they may
turn to our felicity; if we would but employ that time, which we lavish in
co^plaining and bemoaning our afflictions, in entering into our selves, we
should please God more, and find more comfort and redress.

The holy Saints made so profitable use of this remedy in the like occasions,
and were so frequent in it, that (as we read of some of them, as S. Katherin of
Siena and some others) they attributed all the calamities and afflictions which
God sent unto his Church, unto their sins and imperfections, saying, this
war is happened throug my procurement, my sins are the cause of ithis plague
and affliction, which God does send, they beeleeuing verily that their sins
in particular did merit this and more. And we may add in confirmation of this,
that God oftentimes does punish a whole nation for the sin of one particular
person; As when for the sin of David, 2. Reg. 24.25.
he visited the whole people of Israel with pestilence, there dying (according
to the holy Scripture) seaue^ty thousand men in three days space: But you will
say perhaps, he was their King, and that their punishments, do pass on the
people accounts with greate^ ^eason I will instance you an other for the (...)
of Acan who then was but a p^i^^^ man, Ios. 7.45. and 11.
and took but only a trifle for himself out of the anathemade goods of I^rico,
God punished all the people, in such sort as three thousand of the choysest
soldiers in the ca^^pe, not being able to withstand their enemy, were enforced
to save themselves by flight; God does not only punish others for the offenses
of the principal^ amongst them, but even the fault of any private man, is enough
to bring a general plague upon them, and in this sense the Saints explicate
that passage which the holy Scripture does repeat so often that God will punish
the sins of the parents on their children, Exodus 20.5 etc. 34 7. number. 14.18.
unto the third and fourth generation, the fault of the Father (say they)
passes not unto his children, neither has the childrens any reference to him.
Ezec. 18.^0.
Anima quae peccauerit ipsa morietur, filius non portabit iniquitatem patris,
and pater non portabit iniquitatem ^ilij, but for as much as concerns the
punishment, God usually chastizeth the one for the others sins, and so
perhaps for my finnes or yours, God may punish a whole house a whole Religion.

Now let us set before our eyes on the one side this consideration, and on the
other the good pleasure of Almighty God, and in this manner we shall with ease
come to conform our selves unto his will, in all the afflictions, which he
sends to us, and say with Hely the Priest: Dominus est, quod bonum est, in
oculis suis faciat, he is Master, he is Lord, 1. Reg. 3.18.
and supreme governor of every thing, let all be performed and done as he
shall please, and as he shall ordeine. And with the Prophet David: Psalm. 3^.10.
Obmutui and non aperui os meum* quoniam tu fecisti, o Lord I have not
complained, of those misfortunes which you have sent me, but have been silent,
as if I could not speak, and borne all with great patience and conformity,
seeing o Lord they are proceeding from you. This ought to be our consolation in
every thing, God wills it, God does it, God commands it, God sends it, in Gods
name let it come, whatsoever it be. We should need no other reason, to persuade
us to take all things in the best part. On these words of the eight and
twentieth psalm. Psalm. ^8.6.
Et dileclus quemadmodum filius vnicornium, the holy Fathers, observe that God
co^pares himself unto an unicorn, because the unicorn has his horn below
his eyes, and can see to take his aim to stricke, whereas the Bull has his
above his eyes and goares with them at random, moreover the unicorn cures
with the same horn, with which it did the hurt, and so God gives us remedy
with the same thing, by which he gave the wound.

This conformity and humble submission under the rodd of our punishment, is a
thing so gratfull unto God, that oftentimes it does alone suffice, to appease
his anger, and remit our fault without punishment; In the Ecclesiastical
History we read how Attila King of the Hunnes, who wasted so many provinces and
styled himself Metus orbis and stagellum Dei, Naucler. 2. volum.
the terror of the world and scourge of God, drawing nigh to the City of
Troyes in Campania, S. Lupus Bishop of the City, in his Ponti^icall habit
accompanied with all his Clergy, went out to meet with him, and being come into
his presence he said, who art thou, who ruinest and disquietest all the world?
Attila answered I am the scourge of God, then then said the Bishop, you are
most welcome to us, and presently commanded to open the holy gates, and his
soldiers entered the Toure; but our Lord stroke them with such a blindness, that
they passed clean thorough without doing any harm: for although Attila was a
scourge indeed, yet God would not permit him to be such to them, who received
him as his scourge with so much submission.

THE XXIV. CHAPTER. Of the conformity which we are to have with the will of
God, in aridy and desolation in our prayer, and what is understood by the name,
of this aridity and desolation.
WE are not only to conform our selves unto the will of God, in things
exterior, humane and natural, but also in that which seems to many even
sanctity when we desire it with greatest earnestnes, to wit in spiritual and
supernatural graces, such as are divine consolations, virtues themselves, and
the gift of prayer int^^^or quiet and tranquillity of mind, and in fine all
spiritual graces and favors. But some one shall ask me, whither in all these
things there may be so much of our own will, and immoderate love unto our
selves as may need moderation even in point of them. I answer yes, and that
from hence the malice of self love may be perceived the better, since even
with things so good and holy as these, it forbeares not to mingle the poison of
its infection. Spiritual joy and consolation is very good, because by help of
them, the soul does easily ridd it self, and come to detest all feeling and
delight in worldly things, which is the bait and nutriment of vices, and takes
heart and breath, to go on cheerfully, in the service of God, according to that
saying of the Prophet, Psalm 118.31.
viam mandatorum tuorum cucurricum dilatasti cor meum, I have run in the way
of thy comandements then when thou have dilated my heart, the heart dilateth
and extends it self, with spiritual joy and consolation, and on the contrary,
becomes narrow and straight, with sadness and desolation. The same Prophet
likewise says, that when God sent him consolations, they were as wings unto
him, which made him run and fly in the ways of virtue and the commandments
of God; Spiritual consolations do moreover help very much, to the breaking of
our own will, to the ouercoming our sensual appetites, to the mortifying of
the flesh, and to bear our cross and all adversities which may arrive with
greater constancy; And therefore God usually does first send these spiritual
joys and consolations unto those, whom he intends afterward to visit with
afflictions and desolation, the better to prepare and dispose them by the one,
to make their good and profit of the other.

As we see, our Savior would comfort his disciples with his glorious
transfiguration on the mountain, that they might afterward be less troubled
and dejected to see him suffer and die upon the cross. We see likewise that God
most commonly bestows his co^solations upon new beginners, that they may
thoroughly forsake the delights of the world for heavenly comforts, and
afterward when he has surely obliged them unto him in the bonds of love, and
he sees them well rooted and confirmed in virtue, then he exercises them with
aridity, that they may the better attain the virtues of patience and humility,
and merit a more abundant increase of grace and glory, by serving God purely,
without the help of consolation. This is the cause why some in the beginning
when they are newly entered into Religion, or perhaps before their entrance,
when they have but conceived the desire, do feel greater consolation and
spiritual delight, then ever after, for God then deals with them accordig to
their age, giving them the milk of Infants, to train them out of the world,
and bring all temporal things into contempt and hatred with them, but
afterward when they are well grown and fit for harder meats, he gives them
such food as does become their years. For these and other the like ends, God
ordinarily does send his consolations and spiritual gusts. And therefore the
Saints commonly do counsel us, in time of consolation, to provide against the
coming tentations; like as in time of peace, they use to make the preparation
for war: for the day of consotions is commonly no other, then the Eve and
vigill of tentation.

Spiritual comforts are therefore very good and profitable, if we know how to
use them, as we ought to do, wherefore when soever God bestows them on us, we
are to receive them, with humble thankfulness, but if any one should wholly
depend upon them, and desire them only for his own contentment, because of the
gust and delectation which the soul receaueth in them, it were imperfection in
him, and disordinate love unto himself. For as in things necessary to sustain
our life, as eating, drinking, sleeping and the like, if a man should make the
pleasure of them his end, it were a defect in him, so if one should pretend no
other end in prayer, but these sensible feelings and consolations, it were a
spiritual gluttony in him; Those are things which are not to be accepted of,
or desired, for any proper feeling or particular delight, but only as means
helping us to arrive unto those ends which we have mentioned. Like as one who
is sick and can endure no meat that is good for him, is glad when he come to
find some taste and relish in it, not because it is pleasant to his pallat, but
because it prouokes his appetite to eat, and conserues his life, so also a
servant of God is not to seek spiritual consolation, as to insist upon it,
but because with the heavenly refreshment thereof, his soul is strenghtned and
encouraged to sustain the pain and labor of the way of virtue, and to go on
with constancy. And in this manner, comforts are not desired for comforts sake,
but only for the greater glory of God, and so far forth as they redound unto
his honor and glory.

But I say yet more, that one may desire these spiritual consolations in such
manner, and for those ends which we have said which are good and holy, and yet
for all this there may be excess in it, and disordinate and self love may
have shuffled in it self among those desires; as when we desire the^ too
importunatly, with too great solicitude, and greedines, so as to be less
content if we obtain them not, and less pliable to the will of God; but to
remain troubled, grudging, and in a painful disquietnes. This is no other
then a disordinate affection, and spiritual covetousness; for we are not so
to depend on these sensible feelings; and to seek after spiritual
co^solations with so great auidity, as to hinder our peace and quietness of
mind, and make us less conformable with the will of God, if he should please
not to bestow them on us: seeing the will of God alone, is better and more worth
then all these things together, and it is more expedient for us, to content our
selves therewith.

And that which I say of these feelings and spiritual consolations, is to be
extended likewise to the gift of prayer, and the fervor and facility which we
desire therein, as also of the internal peace and quietness of our mind,
together with all other favors, graces, and spiritual prerogatives; seeing
that we may be transported with an affection too disordinate, in the desire of
every one of these, as when we covet them with such impatience and anxiety, as
(if we obtain them not) to become troubled, malecontent, and less conformable
to the will of God. Also by these feelings and spiritual consolations, we
understand here not only devotion, sensible feelings, and spiritual
sweetnesses, but also the substance it self and gift of prayer, and the
facility of applying our selves unto it, and perseuering at in it, with that
tranquillity and repose as we desire, yea it is this of which for the present we
principally do treat, indeauouring to declare how we are to conform our selves
unto the will of God therein, and not to seek it with to great anxiety and
earnestnes; for concerning consolations, feelings and sensible devotions, there
are none who would not endure the want of the^, so they might have the
substance of prayer, and obtain the fruit thereof: for they know that prayer
consists not in these feelings, denotions, and in tenderness of mind, and
therefore without any great virtue they may be had, but for one to go to prayer,
and remain there as if he were a stone with so great aridity and dryness, as
if to pray were the least of his business for which he came, it seeming to him
that God has wholly withdrawn himself from him, barring him from all access
unto him, and that that curse is fallen upon his head, which God long since did
threaten to his people. Leui. 26.19. and Deuteronomy. 28.^5.
Dabo queque vobis caelum desuper si^ut ferrum, and terram aeneam, here there
is need of great virtue and fortitude indeed, when even the heaven seems to
them to be made of Iron, and the earth of brass, seeing that not a dropp of
water raineth down on them, to soften these hearts, and produce that fruit
which should maintain their spiritual lives, but they remain in a perpetual
sterility and drouth: neither is it this aridity which only tormenteth them,
but there rusheth upon them sometimes such variety of thoughts and wild
distractions, and they perhaps so filthy and vilanous, as they seem to have
come unto prayer unto no other end, then to be troubled vexed and assaulted with
all sorts of tentations; If you tell them, there best way is then, to have
their thoughts on death, or on our Savior crucifie^, which is an excellent
remedy indeed, they answer you, that they have tried it, but found no fruit
in it: for could they do that? what should they desire for more? Sometimes one
shall be so ill disposed and dry in his prayer, that he cannot so much as
think upon it, or if with much force and difficulty he hale his thoughts unto
it, it is in such a manner, as he is never moved with it, nor rendered any whit
the more recollected or attent, but they pass it over without leaving any
impression in the soul, and this is that which we call properly spiritual
desolation, aridity or drines, and defection of mind; and herein it is
necessary that we conform our selves unto the will of God.

This is a point of greatest consequence it being on of the commonest
complaints, and wherewith they are most contristated, who give themselves to the
exercise of prayer, for they sigh and weep when they find themselves in this
manner, whilst on the one side they hear so much said in the praise of prayer,
and of the good thereof, and how according as that passes, so the days and
lives of spiritual men do pass, whilst they likewise understand, that it is
one of the principalst means as we have, as well for our own particular
profit, as that of our neighbor; and on the other side see themselves so far
(in their opinion) from making any good prayer: this, this grieueth, this
afflicts them much, this maks the^ think that God has forsaken the^, and
thinks no more upon the^, this maks the^ fear they have wholly lost his
favor, and are fallen into his displeasure and disgrace, seeing it seems to
them, that he cuts them of from all refuge, all recourse unto him. And this
tentation is farther augmented when they see the great progress which others
make in prayer, in a few days exercise almost without any pain at all; whilst
they although they labor more then their force can bear, are nothing
profitted. From whence are begotten other tentations, yet worse then these, as
to make their complaint sometimes of our Lord himself, for dealing with them
in such a rigorous manner, and they begin to think of leaving of their
exercise of prayer, imagining it a thing unfit for them, seeing it succeeds in
no better manner with them. And all this is made far more and worse, by the
devils vexing them with that unquiet thought, that themselves alone are in the
cause of all, and that for their own fault God deals so harshly with them,
and therefore some do live in great discomfort, coming out of their prayer as
from some rack or torment, sade melancholy, and both intolerable to
themselves and to all those with whom they do converse, Wherefore we will now by
the assistance of the grace of God, both answer and satisfy this tentation and
complaint.

THE XXV. CHAPTER. An answer unto the complaint of those who are troubled with
aridity and desolation in prayer.
FIrst I do not say, that we are not to rejoice when we are visited and
comforted by God, for it is manifest, that there is none so stupid, but would
be glad and delighted with the presence of his beloved; neither do I say, that
we are to have no recentment of his absence from us, when he punishes us with
aridity and tentations, for I see it is impossible to do otherwise. Our Savior
Christ had feeling himself to be abandoned by his heavenly Father, when
hanging on the cross he uttered these mournful words, Math. 27 46.
Deus meus, Deus meus, vt quid dereliquisti me? my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? but that which is intended and desired is, that we should know how
to make our profit of this distress and experiment, by which God commonly does
try his elect, and with a vigor of mind put our selves under the protection of
the will of God, in saying: Math. 26 39.
Veruntamen non sicut ego volo, sed sicut tu, o Lord be it not as I will, but
as thou will, seeing especially that sanctity and perfection consists not in
consolations, neither in having of high and excellent manner of prayer, and
that our profit and perfection is not measured thereby, but by a perfect love of
God, which is not comprised in any of these things, but in a conformity and
entire union with the divine will as well in bitterness, as in deliciousnes,
as well in adversity, as prosperity, and therefore we ought with the same
equality of mind to receive from the hand of God, as well the cross and to be
spiritually forsaken, as any joy or consolation: giving him thanks for the
one, and the other alike.

If you will have me in darkness be you blessed, if you will have me in light be
you also blessed, if you will comfort me be you blessed, if you will afflict me
be you likewise blessed. And so S. Paul does counsel us: In omnibus gratias
agite, Thomas a Ke^pis.
hae^ est enim voluntas Dei in Christo Jesus in omnibus vobis, render thanks for
every thing, 1. ad These. 5.17.
for such is the will of God in Christ Jesus in all of you. If then this be the
will of God what can we desire more? my life is given me to no other end, then
to please God with it if then he please to direct the whole course of it, by
these dark, troublesome, and uneasy ways, why should I seek and wish for
paths more lightsome and pleasant? God would have such an one, go forwards in
that way which he sees, which he receaues gust in and loves, and leads me
through this gloomy wilderness. I will not change my barrennes, for his
fertility, neither my frights, for his security, this is the language of those
who have their eyes open to see the truth, and with this they maintain
themselves in comfort. M Auila audi filia c. 26.
Master Auila says excellent well. If God would but vnuaile our eyes, we
should behold more clearly the^ the day, that all things in earth and heaven,
are to little and base, to be desired or possessed by us, if you but seperat
them from the will of God; and that there is nothing, how little or bitter so
ever it be, which would not be of great value, being once conjoined with the
will of God. It is far better without comparison to live in afflictions,
discomforts, aridities, and tentations, if he shall please to have it so, then
in all the delights, comforts and contemplations which can possibly be, if you
but take from them the will of God.

But some one shall say, if I knew that the will of God were such, and that he
were more pleased and delighted with it, I should soon conform my self, and
remain well contented, although it were to pass my whole life over so, for I
see sufficiently my obligation, to desire nothing so much, as the good pleasure
of God, and that my life is ordained unto no other end: but it seems to me
that God would be far better pleased, could I make my prayers better, and had
more attention and internal recollection, and came with better preparation;
and moreover that which not a little troubles me, is that it is by reason of
my fault and negligence, that I cannot entertain my self in prayer: if I knew
for certain, that I had performed my duty, and that it happened unto me through
no fault of mine, it would not grieve nor trouble me half so much. This
complaint is well set down and there can be nothing added more unto it seeing
therein is comprised and inuolued, all the objections of those who make the like
complaints. And so if we can but well clear this difficulty, much of our work
is done, since it is the ground of an ordinary and vniuers^ll grief, there
being no person, how holy and perfect so ever he be, who has not his share
sometimes, in this aridity and spiritual desolation. We read of S. Francis and
S. Katharine of Siena, th^se great darlings and favorites of God, that they
have not been exempted from it, and S. Anthony the Abbot although otherwise he
was arrived to so transcendent a degree of contemplation, that whole nights
seemed to pass away with him as a blast of wind; and when the morning came, he
would complain the sun did rise to early this man notwithstanding (I say)
was sometimes so haunted with the importunity of wicked thoughts, as he would
cry out with a loud voice to God, my God I would feign be good, and my thoughts
will not permit me, Ber. ser. 54. super cantica.
and S. bernard has the same complaint. Exaruit cor meum, coagulatum est sieut
lac, factum sicut terra sine aqua, nec compungi ad lachrymas queo, tanta est
duritia cordis, non sapit psalmus, non legere libet, non or are delectat,
meditationes solitas non inuenio. Vbi^lla inebriatio Spiritus? vbi mentis
serenitas? and pax and gaudium in Spiritu Sancto? O Lord my heart is dried up,
and coagulated like milk, it is become like earth without water, and cannot be
compunct to tears, the hardness of my heart is so great, I take no pleasure in
singing, I have no will to read, I receive no delight in prayer, neither do I
find my wonted meditations, where is that inebriation of soul? where that
serenity of mind? and peace and joy in the holy Ghost? and therefore this
doctrine is necessary for all, and I do hope by Gods assistance likewise to
satisfy every one.

Let us begin then from hence. I grant you that your faults are cause of your
distraction, and aridity in prayer, and that you cannot settle yourself unto
it, and therefore it is expedient that you know so much, and say, it is for your
passed sins, and present negligences and defects for which God Almighty does
punish you, with the subtraction of all feruours, and all feeling in prayer,
leaving you without all recollection, attention, and rest, because you are not
worthy or rather wholly unworthy of it. Notwithstanding it follows not from
hence, that you should complain of it, but on the contrary, you ought entirely
therein to conform your self unto the will of God. Shall I demonstrate this
unto you most clearly? Luc. 19.22.
de ore tuo te iudico? I will condemn you, by the words of your own mouth do
you not acknowledge and also confess your self, that because of your sins
past, and present negligences and defects, you deserve to be grievously
chastized by God? I do assuredly, I have often merited hell and therefore no
punishment can be to great for me, but all whatsoever besides, will be Gods
mercy and my felicity, if it be compared with what I have deserved, and I
should esteem it for a singular benefit, if God would send me some punishment
in this life, because I should receive it as a pledge and assurance, that he
has pardoned my sins, and reserues me not to be punished in the other life,
since here he chastises me. This is enough, there is required no more, I am
satisfied, and provided that they be not words only spoken in the air, let us
come unto the issue and effect: behold the punishment which God for the
present sends you for your sins, are these desolations, these distractions,
and aridities, this spiritual dereliction, therefore are the beauens become
like iron unto you, and the earth like brass, therefore has God retired and
shut up himself from you, so as you can find nothing to entertain your self
in prayer, God will for the present chastise you with this, and so remit, and
expiat your sin: do you not think that your passed sins, and present
imperfections, tepidities and negligences do well deserve this punishment? yes
undoubtedly, and I profess that weighed with my sins they are but light, and
that they are full of Justice and mercy; of Justice, because I having so often
shut the gate of my heart against almighty God, and given no care unto him when
he knocked without with his holy inspirations, but have sent them co^te^ptibly
away; wherefore I do justly merit that he should stop his ears, and affoard me
no answer now, when I call upon him, and that he should not open, his gate of
favor to me, but shut me out: this is a most just punishment, but bears no
proportion to my offenses, and the frore is full of mercy, because I merit
infinitely more. Conform your self then with the will of God, in this your
punishment, and receive it with gratfull thanks, seeing he is so merciful in
chastising you, and does not punish you according to your deserts. Do you not
say that you have merited hell? How are you so audacious then to require of
God, his favors and consolatio^s in prayer? and to have access and
familiarity with him by their address enjoying that peace and tranquillity of
mind which he is not accustomed to bestow on any but his children, whom he
dearly loves and tendreth? or how dare you complain when you find the
contrary? do you not perceive how great this presu^ption is? how intolerable
this pride? hold your self content that God vouchsafes to keep you in his
house, and suffers you in his presence; and acknowledge and esteem it for a
high favor, and singular benefit. If we had any humility in our hearts, we
should never have complaints in our mouths in what manner soever God did deal
with us, and so this te^^ation would casely cease.

THE XXVI. CHAPTER. How we may convert aridity and desolation, into a good and
profitable prayer.
WE are not only to suppress in our selves this complaint, but to endeavor to
make our profit of this aridity and desolation, and convert it into an
excellent prayer, unto which first those things will confer much help of which
we have spoken in our treatise of prayer, Tract. 5. c. 19.
to wit, to say, when we find our selves in this manner, o Lord, in so much as
this same is happened through my fault, I am most sorry, and heartily grieved for
the sin and offense which I commit therein; but in that it is your will, and a
pain and punishment which I (through my sins) have justly merited, I accept
it o Lord, and that with all willingness, and not only for the present or for a
little time, but for all the days of my life, were they never so numerous I
freely offer my self to bear this cross, and am ready pressed to bow under the
weight thereof, and this with all due acknowledgment and thankfulness; This
patience and humility, this resignation with the will of God, in this
affliction, is more acceptable to God, then my many complaints and great
anxiety that I cannot entertain my self in prayer, and am so troubled with
various thoughts and distractions whilst I am making it; If this be not so, do
but resolve me, in your opinion, whither of these two children should please
their Father more, he who is content with every thing his Father bestows upon
him, or he who is with nothing satisfied, but goes always grudging and
repining, thinking nothing sufficient which he has, always craving more, and
better things then are assigned for him? without all doubt you will say the
first of them; and it is the like betwixt God Almighty and us, that patient and
quietnatured child of his, who is well content, and conformeth himself in
every thing unto the will of his celestial Father, which he shall please to
send him, although it be never so hard and troublesome, although it were only a
hard and naked bone, does more content and please Almighty God, then on who is
still repi^ing, and ever complaining and moaning with himself, that he has
nothing, and that nothing is bestowed upon him. Moreover I pray you resolve me,
who takes the better way and more moves the compassions of men to give alms,
and him to pity his necessity, that beggar who complains if they do not
satisfy him presently, and draw their purses, at the first request; or he who
lies expecting at the rich man's gate with silence and patience, without
complaining that he waits to long, but having begged once, and implored his
pity, after he knows his mind is understood, waits there in the rain and
biting cold, without crying out, or using importunity, there is no doubt but
the rich man by this man's patience and humility, will be moved to give him a
large and liberal alms whilst the other rascals pride and sturdines, shall
stir him to nothing but anger and offense; and so it is with God Almighty and
us.

And unto the end that you may the better perceive the value and fruit of this
kind of prayer, and how gratfull it is to God, I would feign know of you, what
better prayer there is and what greater fruit expected from any prayer, then
the obteining an invincible patience in adversities, and a great conformity
with the will of God, with an excellent love of his divine Majesty? Wherefore
do we pray at all, but to arrive to these? when God shall send you then these
aridities and tentations in your prayer, do but conform your self in this
affliction, and spiritual desolation to his holy will, and you shall exercise
an act of patience and the love of God, so high and eminent, as a more perfect
cannot be imagined. It is said and with good reason, that love declares it
self best, in suffering labor and affliction for it beloueds sake, and that
the greater the afflictions are, the more great shall that love declare it
self to be; Now the liueliest torments, and the heauiest cross and
mortification which God Almighties scruants can have laid upon them and which
go nearest the heart of any spiritual man, are these desolations, in regard
of which all corporal afflictions, in point of riches, health, and temporal
goods, are not in way of comparison to be accounted of. And therefore every one
is entirely to conform himself unto the will of God, in this barrenness of
comfort, in imitation of our Savior Christ spiritually abandoned hanging upon
the cross; accepting of this spiritual mortification for term of his whole
life, if God shall please for to dispose it so, with a pure intention, only to
content Almighty God therewith. This is an act of great patience and love of
God, and a most high and profitable prayer; yea and such an on, as there do
not want those who esteem them for glorious Martyrs, Lud. Blo in spec. spir c.
6.
who are exercised therein.

Moreover I demand of you, wherefore you apply your self to prayer, unless by
means of it, to obtain humility and the knowledge of your self, how often
have you desired of God, to give you a perfect knowledge of what you are, and
now behold God has heard your petition, and by this means does give you to
understand it. Some are of opinion that they have well discharged their duty in
this point of seeking into the knowledge of themselves when they are stricken
with lively sorrow for their sins, and spend many tears in defaceing the^
out of their souls; but they deceive themselves, for it is the knowledge of
God and not of themselves, which then they do acquire: but to remain dry,
cold, and hard as any stone, this you have of your self, and if God do not
stricke this stone, neither honey nor water will issue out of it, and this is
that knowledge of your self, from whence flows forth a thousand benedictions
unto you, and of this you have abundance, when your prayer in this manner
succeeds with you and if you make your: profit of it so, your prayer will be of
wondrous fruit unto you.

THE XXVII. CHAPTER. Of diverse other reasons which may comfort us, and bring us
to conformity with the will of God, in aridity and desolation of prayer.
ALthough it is very profitable and good, to think for our greater confusion
and humility that this affliction, is procured by our own offenses,
nevertheless it is also necessary for us to know that this chastisement, is not
always afflicted upon us for our faults, but sometimes so disposed of, out of
the most profound providence of our Lord, who distributeth his gifts according
as he pleases best, and as it is no ways convenient that a whole body be
composed, only of eyes, of feet, of hands, or heads, but that there should be
different members in his Church so is it as much unfitting, that this
particular and excellent manner of prayer, which we have mentioned in a
trea^ise thereof apart, Tr^ct. 5. c. 4. and 5.
should be communicated to every on, and it is as little necessary, seeing they
merit it not, or supposing that they do, yet may they merit more in other
things, in the granting of which unto them. God may oblige them with a greater
favor, then in bestowing upon them this prerogative. There has been diverse
great and holy Saints, unto whom we do not know whither our Lord has in this
kind been so favorable; or if this grace were added to the abundance of the
rest, they have said with S. Paul that they took no glory in it, nor had it in
any singular esteem, but all their glory was to bear the cross of Christ: Ad
Gala. 6.14.
Mihi autem absit gloriari, nisi in cruce Domini nostri Jesus Christi.

M* Auila treating of this has a saying of great consolation, M. Auila to 2*
epis. fol. 22.
God (says he) leaves some in desolation for many years, and oftentimes for
their whole lives, and for my part I believe that the lot and portion of these
persons is best of all, if they have but so much faith, as not to censure evil
of it, and withal patience and courage to suffer so strange an accident and
long a banishment. If one could but persuade himself that this condition is
the best for him, he would easily conform his own will to that which God
desires. The holy Saints, Tract. 5. c. 20.
and Masters of spiritual life, do bring many reasons to the declaring and
proving that this part or portion is the better for them. Among the rest we
will content our selves with one of the most important of them, confirmed by
the authorities of S. Augustine, S. Hierom, and S. Gregory, as also of most of
those who have handled this argument, which is that all have not sufficient
ability to conserve themselves in their humility, in such a height of
contemplation, seeing we can scarcely wring out a tear or two, but we presently
persuade our selves we are become spiritual men and high contemplatiues;
whence we proceed to compare and perhaps prefer our selves to other men. And
even the Apostle S. Paul himself did seem to stand in need, Aug. lib. de
ora^d^ Deu^ qu^ est epist. 121. Hier. su. illud Thre^. (...) sed and cu^
clamauero and rogauero exclusit ora tionem meam. Greg. li. ^0. mor. c. 21. and
24. 2. Cor. 12.7.
of some such counterpoise, least otherwise he should have been swaied to
vanity: Etne magnitudo reuelationu^ extollat me, datus est mihi stimulus
carnis, angelus satanae qui me colaphizet, to the end that his being rapt to
the third heaven, and the high intelligences which he had there received, might
not stire him up to pride, God permitted him to be still haunted with a
tentation which might be sufficient to humble him, and make him know his own
infirmity. Therefore although this way do seem more eminent and high, yet the
other is more secure, and so God who is most wise, and who conducts us unto one
end, which is himself, does lead each one that way which is most convenient
for him. Perhaps if you enjoyed that great familiarity with Almighty God, in
prayer, in place of becoming humble and making your profit of it, you would
become more proud and arrogant, whereas now you are conserved in humility and
confusion, and therefore this way is most proper for you, and most secure,
howeuer you may be ignorant of it. Math. 20 22.
Nesciti^ quid petatis, you know not what you ask.

S. Gregory to this purpose does teach us an excellent doctrine on this verse
of Job: Greg. li. 9. mor. c. 7.
Si venerit ad me, non videbo eum; si abierit, Job. 9.11
non i^^eiligam, if he come unto me, I will not see him, and if he depart from
me, I will take no notice of it. Man, says he is become so blind through
sin, that he does not know, when he draws nigh to God, or when he departs
from him, yea oftentimes that which he conceaus to be a great favor of God,
and whereby he imagines himself to approach nigh unto him, is that whereby he
incurreth the offense of God, and is the occasion of his farther separation
from him, and on the contrary, that which he esteems to be the anger of God,
and whereby he gesses that God forsakes him, and casts him utterly into
forgetfulness, is Gods grace unto him, and the only thing which does withhold
him from departing from him. And so who is there that does not think* when he
finds himself plunged, in high praver and contemplation, and on the receiving
hand, of many graces and favors from Almighty God, that he is well advanced on
the way of a straicter union with his divine Majesty, and so oftentimes he
comes to wax proud of these priuacies and graces, and too secure, and to
confide in himself too much; and the devil by that way does bring him to
overthrow and ruin, which he imagined to lead directly to a greater eminence,
and to approach nigher to Almighty God. On the other side oftentimes one shall
find himself afflicted and desolate, assaulted with grievous and fierce
tentatio^s, vexed with dishonest thoughts, with horrid blasphemies and doubts
of faith, and think that God is mightily offended with him, and that he
utterly forsakes and leaves him, and then he is nigher unto him, then ever he
was before, seeing by this means, he is rendered more humble, and more
intelligent of his own infirmity, and so wholly diffiding in himself, he has
recourse to God with more lively vigor and resolution, in placing all his
confidence in him, and making it all his care that he depart not from him. So
as that is not the best, which seems so to you, but it is convenient you
know, that the way which God does lead you, is the best and most expedient for
you.

Moreover, this very bitterness, this grief and trouble which you resent so
much, because you make not your prayers (in your own judgment) so well as you
ought to do, may be a new cause of consolation to you, seeing it is a particular
grace and favor of God, and an infalible sign of your love to him; for there
is no grief, where there is no love: we cannot be sorrowful that we serve not
God enough without some will and purpose to serve him well; and therefore this
pain and grief is begotten from the love of God and the desire of better
serving him, if you had no care how well or ill you served him, how your
prayers did go, and how your works were done, it were an evil sign, but to be
sorry and afflicted because it seems to you, you do nothing as you ought,
has a good signification; but this feeling will be asswadged, and sorrow made
sweet vntovs, when on the one side considering them to be pain and affliction,
on the other we do consider them the will of God: conform your felfe then unto
it, and ren^er thanks to his high Majesty, that he has left you, so eager an
apperit to do your best to please him, how ener you conceive the worst as may
be of your ^^tions, negligence and languor in performing them.

Moreover, although you should do nothing else in prayer, but only make your
personal appearance there, before that divine and sovereign Majesty yet were
it not a little service which you should do to God, like as we see that it
gives a glorious lusture, to the greatness and Majesty of an earthly Monarche,
that the Princes and Nobles give every day attendance at his court, and are
personally present there at all assaies. Prou. 8.34.
Beatus homo qui auidit me, and qui vigilat ad fores meas quotidie, and
obseruat ad posts osty mei. It befits the glory of the divine Majesty in
regard of our slight condition, and the greatness of the affair whereof we
treat, that we should be still waiting at the doors of his celestial palace,
ready with thanks when he shall give us entry, and humbling our selves, when he
shall shut us out, acknowledging our selves no ways to merit it, and in this
manner our prayer will be always good and profitable; With these helps and
other the like we are to serve our selves, in conforming us unto the will of
God in this desolation, and spiritual defection, receiving it with gratfull
thanks and saying: (...) Barth. de Matt. Archiep. Bracharensis in suo co^pe^,
c. 26.
Salve amaritudo amarissima omnis plena gratiae: hail most bitter bitterness,
full of all grace and good.

THE XXVIII. CHAPTER. That it is a great deceit and grievous tentation, to
leave of our prayer, because we find our selves in the said manner in it.
IT follows from that which we have said, that it is a great deceit and
grievous tentation, for one when he feels himself so dry, and desolate in
prayer, to give it over, or not to persevere in it, as thinking that he gets
no profit by it, but only for his pains has loss of time. This is a
tentation, wherewith the malign spirit, has made not only diverse seculars, but
also many Religious, leave of the exercise of prayer, or (failing of so much)
at least to go more rarely to it, and not to employ in it, so much time as
otherwise they could conveniently. Diverse begin to apply themselves to prayer,
and as long as they find sensible comfort and devotion in it, do pr^secute it
with great care and fervor, but when they chance to fall into distraction and
aridity they presently imagine, that it is no prayer which they make, but
rather a new sin, to be there in the presence of God with so much
distraction, and so little reverence. And so by little and little they come to
neglect their prayer, in presuming that they should do God better service, in
employing themselves in some other exercise and occupation, then in such manner
to remain in prayer. And as soon as the devil has any inkling of this their
faint heartednes, he presently takes hold of the occasion, and is so diligent,
to help them with these distractions in their prayer, and to see they have no
want of tentations to second them: he casts into their thoughts, that all the
time they spend in prayer is as good as lost, and so by degrees brings them
to leave it of, with loss of their virtue, and oftentimes with yet a wors
effect. This we know has been the beginning of the ruins of many; Est amicus
socius mensae, Eccles. 6.10.
and non permanebit in die necessitatis, says the wiseman, to be delighted
with God, there is none but has desire, but to endure and suffer for him, is
an infalible sign of a true love to him, when you sind comfort and devotion in
prayer it is no wonder if you persevere in it, and entertain your felfe with
it for diverse hours, for you may be moved to it, only by the gust and
contentment which you find in it, as it is a sign you are, when you continue
it no longer then whilst you have such a bait as this to entice you on. When
God does visit one, with desolation distraction and aridity, then comes the
trial of true friends indeed, and those faithful servants of his then manifest
themselves, and show that they seek, no interest of their own, but purely the
good will and pleasure of Almighty God; and therefore particularly in such
occasions we are to persevere with all patience and humility* the wholl time
allotted for our prayer, B Ignat. lib. exer. spirit. a^not. 13.
and rather longer; as our B. Father counsels us, the better to overcome the
tentation, and show our force and valor against the enemy.

Palladius recounteth of himself, Palad. in hist. Lausiaca.
how that o^ce being shut into his cell, to bestow himself with more quietness
on the consideration of celestial things, he was grievously assaulted with the
tentation of aridity, and wondrously disquieted in his thoughts, in so much as
he began to think of leaving of his exercise begun, as a thing for which he
was wholly then unfit, herupon he had recourse to S. Macharius of Alexandria,
and declaring to him his whole tentation, he desired of him counsel and
remedy. The Saint answered him, when those thoughts are suggested to you
again, that you should be gone, and actuat your self in those pious
considerations no more; Dic ipsis cogitationibus tuis* propter Christum
parietes cellae istius custodio, say to those thoughts of yours, for Christ's
sake I keep the walls of this cell of mine, as much as to say unto him, that
he should persevere, and content himself to perform that holy action purely
for the love of Christ, although for his own part, this were all the fruit
which he should reap from it; and this is an excellent answer, to put of such
tentations as these, for as much as the principal end, which we are to pretend
in his holy exercise, and the intention with which we ought to apply our selves
unto it, and to be exercised in it, is not to have our own particular taste and
comfort in it; but to perform a good and holy action, which may be pleasing
and grateful unto God, and withal to satisfy and defray, according to our
small ability, the interest, of that great and principal debt, which we owe
him for his being what he is, and for those innumerable benefits which we have
received from his omnipotent hand. And in fine seeing that he wills and
pleases that I should be for the present so emplo^ed, although it seem to me
that I do nothing at all, yet I ought to be most content therewith. We read of
S. Katharin of Sienna, Blos. c. 4. monil. spirit.
that she was for the space of many days, destitute of all spiritual
consolation, and had no feeling left of the fervor of her wonted devotion,
being moreover vexed with most wicked and filthy thoughts, from which by no
means she could deliver herself, and yet notwithstanding she never omitted
her prayer, but perseuered in it, as well as she could, and with as much
circumspection and care as was possible, speaking unto her self in this
manner. O thou most vile and wreched sinner, thou do deserve no consolation;
for what? ought it not to suffice thee although thou were to suffer these
afflictions and spiritual nights, thy whole life long if finally thou might
not be damned as thou deseruest: assuredly thou made choice to serve God, on
no such condition as to receive consolations from him here, but that thou might
enjoy him in heaven for all eternity. Arise therefore, and prosecute thy wonted
exercises, and continue faithful to so good a Lord.

Let us then imitate these examples, and conform our comfort unto this saying
of that holy man. Tho. de Kempis.
O my Lord I esteem this my consolation, to be well content to want all
huma^ne comfort, and if comfort from thee do frail me, thy will and righteous
probation of me, shall serve me for the best of all contentments. If we be but
once arrived to this height of perfection to esteem the good will and pleasure
of God, to be all our joy and delight, so as even to take pleasure to be
deprived of all comfort, in considering it to be his blessed will and pleasure,
then we shall be in possession of true content indeed, and such as nothing in
the world can bereave us of,

THE XXIX. CHAPTER. Wherein that which has been said is confirmed by some
examples.
IT is recounted in the Chronicles of the Order of S. Domini^^^, B. Francis. de
Castillo. 1. p. lib. 1. c. 6. hist. Ord. Pr^.
how on of the Principal Religious of that Order, lived many years in that
holy Order a singular pattern of exemplar life, and of an excellent purity of
mind, without ever enjoying any consolation, or finding any taste or delight, in
the performance of his Religious exercises, neither in meditating* prayer or
spiritual reading. This Religious man* hearing on the otherside frequent
mention made, of those great favors high graces and spiritual feelings which
God did usually communicate to others, became half desperate, and one night in
a deep discontent he burst out in his prayer before a Crucifix into these much
unadvised words which were accompanied with many a bitter ^care. O Lord, I
hear it commonly reported of you, that in goodness and sweetness you surpass
all your creatures: behold me here who have served you many years, and
suffered for your sake, much tribulation, having made a willing sacrifice of my
self, to your only service; had I served any Tyra^t but a quarter of this time
without doubt he would have long since some ways declared, himself well
pleased with me, either by a good word had I desired so much, or a grateful
look, or some pleasant smile or other, but you o God, you have not done me the
least good, or favor, or showed me any of those graces which you do to others,
but you, you who are sweetness it self, have handled me more cruelly then a
hundred tyrants, oh God what is the meaning of this? miserable as I am, why do
you ordeine it so? he had no sooner vttred these fearful words, but he heard
so mighty and horrible a crack, as if the whole Church had been shattering
down, and on the roufe was such a hideous noise, as if a thousand ravenous
hounds had been tearing up the planchers with their teeth, whereupon being
astonished and all trembling through fear, he cast up his head for to search
out the cause; he perceived over his shouldiers standing the most horrible and
ugly sight as ever man had seen, a devil weldeing a huge bar of yro^, with
which he gave him so mighty a blow upon the body as he stroke him flat to
ground, without being able to lift up himself again; nevertheless he enforced
himself so much as to crawle to the protection of an Altar not far from him,
where he found himself so pitifully bruzed, that he could not stire a limb,
all his body remaining as if it had been broken and disioynted with the force
of blows; In the morning when the Religious came into the Church to Prime,
they found him all streched at length, lying upon the ground without any
motion, as if he had been dead, and without being able to guess the cause of
such a sudden and doleful accident they carried him into the infirmary, where
he remained for three weeks together in most miserable torment, breathing from
him a stench so filthy and horrible, that the Religious could not approach unto
him, to bring him any remedy or relief, without first stopping their noses,
and preparing themselves before with certain preservatives at the end of this
time he began a little to recover strength, and as soon as he perceived
himself able to go upon his legs, he (to cure his foolish presumption and
pride, and seek remedy at that place where through his fault he had received
his wound) went into the Church, and with a profound humility seasoned in many
tears, he made a prayer far different from the former, confessing his fault,
and acknowledging himself unworthy of any spiritual favor, but on the
contrary, meriting the greatest punishments. Whereupon our Lord did comfort him
with a voice from heaven, saying unto him, if thou desire to enjoy spiritual
gust and consolation; thou must be humble, and acknowledge thine own baseness
and vility, knowing thy self to be more contemptible then dirt, and of less
value then the very worms, which thou do crush to earth under thy feet: and
herwith he took so fair a warning that thereupon he became a perfect Religious
man.

We read an other example far different from this of our B. F. S. Ignatius,
Lib. 5. c. 1. vitae S. P. Ignat.
who (as it is recorded in his life) reflecting upon his faults, and deeply
sorrowing for them, was wont to say, that he desired in punishment of them that
our Lord would sometimes deprive him of the deliciousness of his consolations,
unto the e^d that feeling the curb thereof; he might be put in mind; to carry
himself with more care and circumspection, in God Almighties service. But the
mercy of out good God was so great toward him, and the multitude of his
sweetness, and suauity of his grace so abounda^tly great that the oftener he
fell, and the more earnestly he desired to feel the punishment in some such
rigourous manner, the more gracious our Lord did show himself unto him, and in
the greater abundance did he shower down upon him the treasures of his
infinite liberality. And so he used to say, that he did verily believe, there
was not a man in the world, in whom was to be found, two things so passing
opposite as was in him, first to fall so often into imperfections, and continue
so ingratfull to Almighty God; and on the other side to receive so great and
continual favors from his Almighty hand.

Blosius writes of a certain great servant of God Almighty, Blos* c. 10. mon.
spirit.
upon whom our blessed Lord had bestowed many graces and favors, giving him
great illustrations, and communicating to him in prayer high and admirable
things, this holy soul out of his profound humility, did beg of God, if so
it might stand with his better will and pleasure, to take from him that his
abou^dant grace, and our Lord at his petition, for five years together left
him without all consolation, in grievous tentations, in great anxieties and
afflictions, and when once, whilst he bitterly wept, two Angels presented
themselves to comfort him, he told them, that he requested no consolation of
them, but he should be abundantly satisfied, if the most acceptable will of
God might be effected in him.

The same Blosius relates how our Savior once said unto S. Brigit why my
dear daughter are thou so troubled and solicitous; unto whom she answered,
Ibid. c. 4.
because I am afflicted with diverse vain and evil cogitations, of which I can
by no means rid my self, and the fear of thy Judgment does much disturb my
soul: this is exact justice answered our blessed Lord, that as thou have been
formerly delighted on the vanities of the world against my will, so now against
thy will thou should be troubled with as many various and wicked thoughts
thereof; Nevertheless fear my judgment with moderation and discretion, firmly
ever confiding in me who am thy God, for thou art to hold it for most certain
true; that such evil cogitations, which the mind strives against and does
abhor, both purify and crown the afflicted soul: if thou can not avoid
them, bear them patie^tly and keep thy will, resoluedly bent against them.
And although thou do not consent unto them* notwithstanding fear least thou
become proud thereof, and so come to fall, for whosoever stands, is supported
with the only force of God.

Taulerus says and Blosius recou^teth it in his Consolation of the
Pusilanimous that there are diverse who when they are vexed with any tribulation
do use to say unto me, Tauler*
Father I am much afflicted, all goes very ill with me, for I am greatly
pestered and perturbed with many afflictions and much grief and sorrow; and I
tell them that it goe^^ well with them: then they will reply, o Sir but my
fault is only the cause of it, to who^ I answer again whither your fault be
cause of it, or no, believe nevertheless that it is a cross of affliction
imposed by God upon you and rendering thanks unto him, suffer it patiently, and
resign your self unto him. Then will they tell me, oh but I even internally
pine away, with that great aridity, and spiritual obscurity in which I live;
unto whom I finally reply, bear it patiently my dear child, and it will be
more for your souls good, then if you were in never so much and great sensible
feeling of devotion.

We read of a great servant of God Almighty who said, it is forty years since
first I served our Lord, and have been conversant in prayer, and yet I have
never known what sensible feeling or consolation was, but only this I have
found; that day when I have duly made my prayer, I am much stre^gthned, and
enabled to go thorough with the exercises of virtue, whereas if I ever omit it
or perform it tepidly, I am so infeebled, that I cannot raise my self on wing
to do any thing which is good and virtuous.

THE XXX. CHAPTER. Of the conformity which we are to have with the will of God,
for as much as concerns the distribution of others, virtues, and
supernatural gifts.
LIke as we conform our selves unto the will of God, in what manner so ever he
shall dispose of us in prayer, so also are we to do, in all other virtues and
gifts of God, and in all spiritual favors and prerogatives, it is good to
have all virtues in desire, to aspire unto them, and endeavor to attain them;
but we are in such manner to desire to become better, and to go forwards and
increase in virtue, as not to be disquieted if we obtain not that which we
desire, and to conform our selves unto the will of God, and place our whole
contentment and delight therein. If God be not pleased to bestow upon you an
Angelical purity, but would have you suffer in that kind violent tentations,
it is far better for you to have patience in it, and to accommodate your
self unto the will of God, in this tentation and extremity, then to disquiet
and trouble your self, with bootlesly lamenting of your case that you cannot
attain unto that purity and candor of the blessed souls, in heaven, if God
be not pleased to bestow upon you so profound a humility as S. Francis had,
neither a mildnes, answerable to that of Moses or of David, nor in fine so
great a patience as that of holy Job, but lets you experience the contrary
motions and appetits, your best course were to humble your self and to embrace
the shame, which may give you occasion of having your self in a more vile
esteem; which will not be effected if you remain troubled with it, and spend
your self in silly complaints and lamentations, because God has not endowed
you, with an equal patience unto holy Job, or such a humility as S. Francis
had. We must conform our selves unto the will of God even in such things as
these, or else we shall never enjoy true quietness. M. Auila says excellent
well: Auila c. 23. Audi filia.
I do not believe (says he) that there has ever been Saint in the world, who
desired not to become better then he was, but that notwithstanding did not
hinder quiet of mind since they desired it, not out of any cupidity of their
own (for that is insatiable and never cries enough) but only for God, with
whose distribution they should have been content, although he had given them
lesser then they had, esteeming it the part of on who loves loially and truly
indeed, to content himself with that which is given him, rather then to desire
more, how ever self love may pretend that it is to be able to serve Almighty
God the better.

But some will say, that our speech seems to tend to this, that we should not
be very forwards and fervent in desiring to be more perfect and virtuous then
we are, but that we ought to remit ourselves wholly unto God as well in matter
of soul, as of our body, and from thence they may imagine that we may give
occasion to some, of becoming more tepide and negligent, and never to strive to
become perfect, or make progress in virtue. This point is well to be heeded,
seeing it is not of little importance; this objection and reply, is so forcible
that there is nothing more in this treatise to be feared. There is no doctrine,
how sound or good so ever it be, which may not be abused by those who know not
how to apply it as they ought, and of this number are as well those things
which appertain to prayer, as those which concern all other virtues, and
spiritual gifts, and therefore it is needful that this be well declared and
understood. I do not say that we are not to desire every day to be better and
holyer then other, and to be always imitating those who are more perfect, with
the greatest diligence and fervor as we can, for we are come into Religion,
only unto this end, and if we do not this we are no good Religious men: but
that which I say is, that we are to carry our selves in this point, as we do in
exterior things, where a man must be diligent to procure them, but not
anxious, nor too covetous, as the holy Doctors say, and our Savior prohibiteth
it in the Euangell; Dico vobis ne soliciti sit is animae vestrae, quid
manducetis, Math. 6.25.
nec corpori vestro quod induamini, where that which he reprehends is a care
and anxiety too inordinate, and an appetit of those things too immoderate: but
he forbideth not a moderat care, and requisite diligence, but rather comaunds
it, and has by way of penance imposed it on us: Genesis 3.19.
In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane tuo. It is requisite that men should use
labor and diligence to live, or else it were a tempting of Almighty God. In
this manner we are to behave our selves in spiritual things, and in the
obteining of virtues and the gifts of God, wherein we have need to be very
diligent and vigilant, yet so, as not to bereave our selves of our minds peace,
and conformity with the will of God; You are to do all which possibly you can,
and if with all you do, you cannot arrive unto that high perfection to which
you do ptetend, you are not to be transported with impatience* for that were
worse then the faults which hinder you, yea although it should seem to you,
that it were occasioned through your own lukewarmnes (which ^s a thing that
usually afflicts many (...) to procure to use all diligence (...) to the
compassing of it, when (...) your self defective, and sal^e into any faults
you are not to be distraited, or to loose courage, for it is (...) common (...)
us all, you are a man and not an (...) and not yet (...) of ou^ misery and
infirmity, Psalm. 102.14.
quontam ipse cognouit figmentum nostrum, and would not have us discouraged
therefore, 2. p. tra. 6. c. 3.
but that we should repent and humble our selves, and presently rise again and
beg new forces of him, indeauouring both in the interior and exterior, to
live more contentedly, for it is far better that you should presently with
cheerfulnes enterprise a new, which would redouble your courage to serve God
better for the time to come, then in tormenting your self for you? offenses,
which whilst you think to do for the love of God, you displease the same God
in your ill serving him, with a tepid heart, and a dejected mind and other the
like branches of imperfection, which use to sprout from such a corrupted root.
There is nothing else to be feared here then the danger whereof we have formerly
spoken, which is least our tepidity do increase, and we omit of our parts to do
what lies in us under the pretext of saying it is God who is to bestow this on
me, all is to proceed from his hand, for my part I can do nothing more: and we
are likewise to take the same heed in that which we have said in matter o^
prayer, c. 26 and seq.
and least sloth also deceive us there under the same pretense. Having then
stopped and made good this breach, and done truly on our parts that which we
ought to do, God will be more pleased with our patience and humility in these
weaknesses of ours, and spiritual wants, then with the melancholy and
excessive discontent of those, who think their progress in virtue and
perfection no ways answerable to their desire, and their prayer not to succeed
so well, as otherwise it might if they were not in fault. For this art of
prayer, and perfecting our selves, is not required, by being sad or less
satisfied with our selves, or by violence or force of arms, but it is God who
does instruct us in it, and does bestow it upon whom he pleases, and also when
he pleases; and it is most certain that even among those who are to be blessed
in heaven, there is inequality of glory, and therefore we are not to be
discouraged if we are not of the best, yea perhaps not of the middle sort, but
we are in every thing to conform ourselves unto the will of God, and render
infinite thanks unto our gracious Lord that he has given us hope by his great
mercy to be saved at last, and if so be that we cannot hold our selves from
falling into faults in this mortal life of ours; let us thank God at least
for this, that he has given us the knowledge of those faults of ours. And if
we cannot obtain heaven; by the sublimity of our virtues as some others do,
let us be content, to make our selves a way thither, by the knowledge and
sorrow of our sins, as do the greater part. Hier. in prolog galeat.
S. Hierom says that others offer in the Temple of God according to their
ability, one gold, an other silver, and precious stones, others silk, purple,
scarlat and cloth of gold, for me it suffices to make my offering in his holy
Temple with goats hair and the skines of beasts: and so, let others present
their virtues to God, their excellent and heroicke actions, their high and
elevated contemplations; it is enough for me to suit my offering to my base
condition, and to acknowledge and confess my self before the face of God a
sinner and imperfect, and present my self before his omnipotent Majesty as a
poor and needy wretch. And even in this I am to rejoice, and to thank and
praise Almighty God that he has not deprived us of those gifts whatsoever they
be which he has bestowed upon us considering our offenses and vile ingratitude.

S. Bonauenture, Bonau opuse de profectu Relig li. 1. c 33 Gert, tra de mo^te
conte^pl F. Barth de mart. Archiep Brachar. in suo co^pend p. 2. c. 15.
Gerson and diuer others do add unto this an other point, by which that which
we have said is better confirmed, which is, that diverse persons do serve God
better without this great virtue and recollection* (so that on their parts
their desire and industry be not wanting) then if it were granted them, seeing
that by this means they are preserved in humility, and they proc^^^ with care
and diligence, procuring withal earnestnes their farther progress in spirit
h^uing for that end frequent recourse to God: whereas if they should once
become familiar with virtue perhaps they would be proud and negligent and go
slowly forwards in the service of God, imagining that they had already attained
that height of perfection which was necessary for them, and would never put
themselves to the pains of endeavoring to become more perfect the^ they were.
All this which we have said ought to be an incitement unto us to do on our
parts precisely all we can, and to proceed always with all care and diligence
to the purchasing of virtue and perfection, and then to hold our selves
content with whatsoever our Lord shall please to bestow upon us, and not to be
dejected nor disquieted for that, unto which we cannot attain and which is
above our reach, Auila to. 2 epist. fol. 32.
for this (as M. Auila very well observes) were no other then to afflict our
selves because we have not wings to fly in the air.

THE XXXI. CHAPTER. Of the conformity which we are to have with the will of God
in that which concerns felicity and glory.
WE are not to conform ourselves only unto the will of God, in those things
which concern grace, but also in point of heavenly glory, in which a true
servant of Almighty God ought to be so far estranged from all interest of his
own, as he is no farther to rejoice in it then that he sees the holy will of
God accomplished, and not for any commodity (...) own. It is a high perfection
(says devout Thomas a Kempis) not to seek our own ends neither in little nor
much, neither in things temporal nor eternal, and gives the reason of it, in
these words because your will o Lord and the love of your honor ought to be
transcendent unto all, and it becomes us to be more content and comforted
therewith, then with all the benefits which either we have or may possibly
receive.

This is the content and joy of the Blessed in heaven, Tract. 3. c. 14.
where the Saints esteem their happiness greater in the accomplishment of the
will of God, then in the excessiveness of their own glory, they being so
straictly united to his will, that they desire not so much the glory which they
possess, neither the beatitude which they enjoy, for any profit resulting to
the^ from thence, neither for the content which they receive therein, but only
because God is well pleased therewith, and it is his will for to bestow it on
them. And hence it proceeds that every one is so well content with that
degree of beatitude which he has, as he affects no other, neither is
displeased that any one is advanced above himself; because whosoever enjoys
the vision of Almighty God, becomes so transformed into him, that he wholly
leaves of all proper will, and begins expressly to have the same will with
God, and he takes all his co^te^tment and delight therein, in considering that
it is the will and pleasure of God that it should be so. And we see how
illustrous this virtue has been in diverse great Saints, as in Moses and S.
Paul who for the salvation of souls, and the greater glory of God, seemed so
wholly to have forgot themselves, as they were not so much as mindful of their
own glory. Exodus 32 32.
Aut demitte eis hanc noxam, aut si non facis, dele me de libro tuo quem
scripsisti, either o Lord forgive these people (said Moses) this fault of
theirs, or if thou will not blott my name out of thy book of life, and S.
Paul, Ad Ro^. 9.3.
obtabam ego ipse anathema esse a Christo pro fratribus meis, I my self wished
to be excommunicated from Christ for my brothers sakes. And S. Martin who
together with many other Saints, did follow the doctrine of so excellent
Masters, said in the article of dying: Si adhu^ sum necessarius populo tuo, non
recuso laborem. O my God if yet it be needful for thy people that I live, I do
not refuse the labor. They neglected willingly their own repose, and
unfeignedly renounced all right which they had to glory, when they were even
upon the point of enjoying it, offering themselves afresh to more pain and
labor for Gods greater service. This is truly to do the will of God in earth,
as it is in heaven, to cast wholly into forgetfulness our own commodity, and
repose all our content in the accomplishing of the will of God, esteeming the
contentment of his divine M^iestie more, then all our own profit or the
possession both of heaven and earth.

And from hence may be clearly perc^aued how great perfection is requisite to
the exercise of our conformity to the will of God: for if we must have no
regard of any interest of our own, of any spiritual good, no not eternal,
nor what is more, of blessedness its self, to k^^pe our sight more obseruant of
Gods good will and pleasure, how much less are we to care for humane, respects
and all these temporal things? Whence also we may perceive how far short they
come of this perfection who find repugnance to conform themselves unto the
will of God, in such things as we have treated of in the beginning, as in
residing here or there, in living in this College or in that, in being
employed in one or the other office, in enjoying perfect health or being
infirm, in being much or little esteemed by others, for as we now affirm, we
are more to esteem the good pleasure and will of God then all the prerogatives
which we may redound unto us, either from our spiritual or eternal good,
whereas you are still insisting on these things which in ^^parison of the other
are but dross and b^senes itself, he who had but such atardent desire to
please God, and to accomplish his holy will, as to disdain willingly his own
glory, and to be contented with the meanest place, not out of any ^esse desire,
of doing heroical acts to commend his services and labor to the highest
place, but only because he has in chiefest esteemation the pleasure of
Almighty God; he, I say shall find no difficulty in any other thing, seeing he
has renounced for the love of God the highest degree of excellency to which he
could arrive, and this is the chiefest thing which we can depart with, and
leave for to conform our selves unto the will of God. If it be Gods pleasure
that I should die insta^tly. and have less glory, I had rather do so, then
live twenty or thirty years more, although I were to merit a higher degree of
glory, and on the contrary, although I were assured of the glory of heaven, if
I died at this present, yet if God should please to retain me yet longer for
diverse years, in this prison and banishment of mine in suffering many labors
and miseries, I should rather do it then go presently to heaven, seeing the good
pleasure of God, and the fulfilling of his holy will, is my only content and
glory, Psalm. 3.4.
tu es gloria mea, and exaltans caput meum.

There is recounted of our B. F. S. Ignatius, Lib. 3. c. 2. vitae S. P. Ignat.
a rare and remarkable example in this kind, he being on day with F. Laynes and
others, upon the occasion of a discourse they had, said to F. Laynes: what
would you do, in case our Lord should propose to your choice in this manner. If
you will die presently, I will release you from the prison of your body, and
bestow upon you my eternal glory, but if you will live longer, I give you no
certainty of what may happen to you, but upon your peril be it, so as if you
live and persevere in virtue I will reward you for it eternally: If you cease to
be good, I will Judge you according to your works. If, I say, our Savior
should say thus unto you, and you in remaining longer in life, could do some
great and notable service to his divine Majesty what do you think should you
choose, what would you answer him? unto whom F. Laynes replied. I confess
ingeniously to your Reverence, that I should choose to go instantly to enjoy
Almighty God, and put my salvation in security, leaving nothing to danger in a
thing of so high consequence. Then said our B. Father to him, for my part I do
assure you I should not do so, but if I imagined that with longer living I
could do God any particular service, I should humbly beseech him, to give me
life so long until I had discharged it and should have no regard unto my
self, but all to him, without careing either for mine own danger or
security. And in this doing he was not of opinion that he should put his
salvation in ieopardy or danger, but rather that he should the more secure it,
seeing that out of confidence in God, he had chosen for his greater service, to
remain here exposed still to dangers; For what King, or Prince is there in
the world, said he, who after he had offered his servant some extraordinary
recompense for his service, and the servant had respited the acceptance of it,
the better to do some important thing for him, who would not hold himself in a
manner obliged, not only to reserve it for him, but to give it him afterward
with addition, seeing that he had deprived himself of the present possession of
it only out of love to him, and his affection to do him greater service. Now if
men who are so forgetful of benefits and ingratfull, will do so much, how much
more are we to hope for, from such a Lord, who with his grace has so prevented
us, and obliged us with so many special favors? how can we fear, that he
will abandon us and let us fall, when we have differd our beatitude, and
forborne the fruition of it for his sake alone? We cannot believe not fear so
much, of such a Lord as he.

THE XXXII. CHAPTER. Of conformity, union, and perfect love of God, and how we
are to apply this exercise to practice.
THat we may the better perceive the perfection and excellency which is
comprised in this exercise, as also how far we may arrive by means of it, we
will (for end and conclusion to this treatise) speak somewhat of that sublime
exercise of the love of God, as it is tought by the Saints and Masters of
spiritual life; and it seems to come fitly for our purpose, seeing that one
of the principal effects of love (according to S. Denis the Areopagit) is to
make the will of the beloved its own, S. Dion. cap* 4. de divine. nomin.
so as to will and not will the same in every thing: whence the more one has
of conformity with God Almighties will, the more he has of the love of God;
and the more love he has, the more straightly is he united and conformed unto
his will. To declare this the better it is necessary that we ascend into heaven
with our consideration, and behold in what manner the blessed there are loving
and conforming themselves unto the likeing and the will of God, in having one
will with him, since the nigher we shall conform our selves to that, the more
perfect shall be our exercise. The glorious Apostle and Evangelist S. John
says that the vision of God, does beget in the blessed a similitude unto him;
Quoniam cum apparuerit, similes ei erimus, quoniam videbimus eum sicuti est,
and that because in seeing God they are in such manner united with him, ^oan.
3.2.
and transformed into him, that they have in common but one will and liking;
Now let us see what is this will, liking, and love of God, that we may withal
arrive to know what the desire and will of the blessed is, and gather from
thence what our will and perfect love ought to be. The will of God and his most
sovereign and perfect love, is his own glory, and his being so supremly
perfect and glorious as he is; and this is the same love which possesses the
blessed in heaven; so that the love of the Saints and blessed is, a love and
desire, by which with all their forces they love and desire that God should be
what he is, and of himself so good, so glorious, so worthy of ^ll honor, and
so mighty as he is, and seeing they behold in God all which they do desire;
therefore is it that they rejoice in full fruition of that fruit of the holy
Ghost, of which the Apostle speaks, Ad Gala. 5.22.
fructus autem spiritus est gaudium, to wit, an unspeakable joy to behold him
whom they so dearly love, so rich in himself with every better thing. From
that which we see ordinarily to happen in this world we may give an imperfect
guess at the Divine Joy which the blessed in heaven receive in this particular.
Do but mark how great the joy and contentment is of a child here on earth, to
see his Father whom he tenderly respects, beloved, honored, and gratfull
unto all; or wise, rich, mighty and gracious with his King? assuredly there are
children of so toward nature, and choice education, as will not stick to say,
that there is no joy in the world to be compared, to that which they receive
from seeing their Fathers in so prosperous state. Now if this joy here can be
so great, where love is so cold, and the things which occasion their joy so
slight and poor, what may the contentment of the blessed be, to see their
rightful lord, and Creator, and their celestial Father, into whom they are so
transformed through love, so good, so holy, so excellently fair, so infinitely
powerful and great; how all created things have their being and beauty from
his will alone, without which not a single leaf can shake upon a tree: which
says the Apostle S. Paul is a joy so great, 1. Cor. 2.9.
as neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor any heart has
comprehended it. This is that deep and mighty river which S. John saw in his
revelations, Apoc 22.1. and Psalm. 45.5.
flowing forth from the Throne of God and from the Lamb, rejoicing the City
of Almighty God; of whose waters the blessed in heaven do drink, and being
incbriat with this holy love* chaunt out perpetually that Alleluia of which S.
John does speak, together blessing and glorifying God. Apo. 19.6. and 7.
Alleluia, quoniam regnauit Dominus Deus noster omnipotens, gaudeamus and
exultemus and demus gloriane^, there they rejoice and are delighted with the
greatness of God Almighties glory, congratulating with him, and rendering him a
thousand benedictions for the same with an incredible joy and iubilation* Apoc.
7.^^.
Bened^c^io, and claritas, and sapientia, and gratiarum actio, honor and virtus
and fortitudo Deo nostro in saecula saecul^rum, Amen.

This is the love which the Saints do bear to Almighty God in heaven, this is
their unity and conformity with his blessed will, speaking in proportion to our
mean capacity, and this is that which according to our small ability, we are
to endeavor to imitate on earth, that the will of God may be done on earth; as
it is in heaven. Exodus 25.40.
Inspice and fac secundum exemplar, quod tibi in monte monstratum est, mark
well, and do according to that pattern which has been showed you in the
mount, said our Lord unto Moses, when he commanded him to erect him a
Tabernacle: M. Au^a to. 1. cp. P. Fran. Arias p. 2. profect spir. tra. 5. c. 3.
and 4. P Lud. de Pue^t. 2. to. mc. dit. p. 6.
and so ought we to do all things here, conformable to that model and sampler
which is proposed unto us to work after, on that high mountain of glory, and
so are we to love and desire that which the blessed in heaven love and desire,
as also that which God himself both wills and likes, which is his glory,
and his being soueraignly perfect and glorious.

Now unto the end that each one may the better bestow himself upon this holy
exercise, we will in brief declare the practice of it. When you are in prayer,
consider with your understanding the infinite being of God, his eternity, his
omnipotence, his infinite wisdom, beauty, glory, and blessedness; and then
exercise the affections of joy and pleasure with your will, making it your only
delight and comfort that God is what he is, that he is God, that he has his
being and endless goodness only depe^dant on himself, without standing in need
of any one; whereas all besides do stand in need of him, in that he is
omnipotent supreamly good exceeding glorious, and all with in himself. In the
like manner are we to consider, all the other perfections and infinite good
which is in Almighty God. ^. Tho. 2^. q. 28. art. 5 ad 3. and ar. 1
This as S. Thomas says and with him the diuins in general, is the greatest
and perfectest act of the love of God, and so likewise is it the most supreme
and excellent exercise of conformity with the will of God, seeing there is no
greater nor perfecter love of God, the^ that which God does bear unto
himself, which is the love of his own glory and being, towit souerainly
perfect and glorious, neither can any one have a better will then this.
Therefore the more excellent and perfect your love shall be, the greater
resemblance it shall have unto the love which God does bear himself, and the
more great and perfect likewise shall be our union and conformity with his
omnipotent will. Moreover the Philosophers do teach, Aristo^. Rhet. l^. 2. c. 4.
that amare est velle alicui bonum cius causa^, and non sui ipsius, to love is
to wish good unto an other, not for his own sake, but his only whom he loves,
whence it follows that the more good we wish an other, the more love we bear
him. Now the greatest good which we can wish Almighty God, is that which he
has already, as his infinite being, his goodness, wisdom, omnipotence, and
endless glory* When we bear affection to any creature, we are not only
delighted with the good which he is owner of, but have also scope to wish him
some good, beyond that which he has already, seeing the goodness of all
creatures may receive addition: but we cannot wish any good to God which
already he is not possessed of, seeing he (...) every way infinite, and so can
have no more power, no more glory, no more wisdom, nor more goodness then he
has. And for this cause the greatest good which we can wish to him, and
consequently the greatest love which we can bear him, is to be glad and
rejoice, and to take all our pleasure and contentment that God has so much
good as he has, that he is so good as he is, so rich, so powerful, so infinite
and glorious.

Hence it is that, as the Saints which are in heaven, and the most sacred
humanity of Christ our Savior, together with his glorious virgin Mother and
all the Quires of Angels, do rejoice to see God so beautiful and superabounding
with every good: which joy and delight of theirs cannot contain it self from
bursting forth into loud praises of such an excellent Lord; neither can they be
satisfied with blessing and praising of him without end. And as the holy
Prophet sings. Psalm. 83.5.
Beati qui habitant in domo tua Domine, in saecula saeculorum laudabunt te,
even so ought we to unite our hearts, and raise our voices to that high pitch
of theirs, as we are taught by our holy Mother the Church, cum quibus, and
nostras voces, vt admitti iubeas deprecamur supplici co^fessione dicentes,
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus Dominus Deus Sabbath plenis^nt caeli and terra
gloriatua. We ought perpetually (or with the greatest frequency as we can) to
praise and glorify God, in rejoicing and delighting our selves with that glory
and soueranity which he has; blessing him, and congratulating with him for the
same: whereby we shall resemble in our imperfect manner the blessed in heaven,
and Almighty God himself; exercising tho highest act of love, and the most
perfect conformity with the will of God, as can possibly be imagined.

THE XXXIII. CHAPTER. How much this exercise is commended unto us and
inculcated in holy scripture.
WE may yet better comprehend the value and excellency of this exercise and
conceive how acceptable it is to God, in that it is so much recommended and
often iterated in the holy scripture; whence also we may lay hold on the
occasion to exercise it more, and insist upon it longer. The Royal Prophet
David in his Psalms does almost in every verse inuit us to this holy
exercise. Psalm. 31.21. Psalm. 32.1. Psalm. 36.4.
Laetamini in Domino and exultate iusti, and gloriamini omnes recti cord.
Exultate iusti in Domino. Delectare in Domino and dabit tibi petitiones cordis
tui. Rejoice in our Lord, and exult o yea just, and glory all you of a right
heart. Yea righteous exult in our Lord. Re^oyce in him (and in his infinite
goodness) and he will grant you the petitions of your own heart, or rather,
all which you shall desire and stand in necessity of. For this is a prayer, by
which without, setting your self to pray, you pray, and God hears the
desires of your heart, to show how much he is delighted with this prayer of
yours. And the Apostle S. Paul writing to the Philippians says, Ad Phil. 4.4.
rejoice always in our Lord: Gaudete in Domino semper, and thinking it not
sufficient to have said it once, he adds, iterum dico gau^ete, I say again to
you, rejoice. And this was the joy which informed the sacred Virgins purest
heart, when in her Canticle she said, (...) 1.^^.
Et exultauit spi^itus meus in Deo salutari meo, and my soul has exulted in
God my salvation. And with this joy likewise was our B. Savior Christ
replenished when (as the sacred Euangell testifies of him) exultauit Spiritu
Sansto: he rejoiced in the holy Ghost. Luc. 10.21.
And the roy all Prophet said, that the joy and contentment was so passing
great which his soul received, from the consideration of the great felicity
and glory of God, and so becoming it was for every one, to rejoice in that
infinite goodness which is in him, as even the souls joy out of its abundance
had influence into his body, and set his flesh on fire with the same love of
God; Psalm. 83.3.
Cor meum and caro mea exultauerum in Deum viuum, my heart and flesh have
exulted in the living God, and in an other place: Psalm. 34.9.
Anima mea exultabit in Domino, and delectabitur super salutari tuo; omnia ossa
mea dicent, Domine quis similis tibi? my soul shall rejoice in God, and be
delighted with the Author of it salvation, and all my bones shall say, o my
Lord who is like to thee? And because this love is a thing so celestial and
divine, our Mother the Church directed by the Holy Ghost, in the beginning of
her Canonical hours, inuiteth us by this Inuitatorium, to love out Lord in
this manner, to rejoice, to triu^ph in his endless perfection and it is the
beginning of the 94. Psalm: Psalm. 94.1. and 2.
Venite exultemus Domino, iubilemus Deo salutarinostro, praeoccupemus faciem
^ius in confessione, and in Psalmis iubilemus ei, come all and rejoice in our
Lord* and sing canticles of iubilation to his eternal praise, who is our
salvation* seeing he is God and a mighty Lord and King above all Gods veing the
sea is his and he made it, and his hands have founded the dry Land: Quoniam
Deus magnus Dominus and Rex magnus super omn^s Deos etc. Quoniam ipsius est
mare, and ips^fecit illud and aridam fundauerunt manus eius, for this reason
and the same end the holy Church concludes all it Psalms with this versicle.
Gloria Patri, and silio, and Spiritui Sancto. Sicut erat in principio and nunc
and semper, and in saecula saeculorum, Amen, and this is that entrance into the
joy of our Lord which our Savior spoke of in the Gospel. Mat. 25.21.
Intra in gaudium Domini tui, where we are made partakers of the insinitioy of
God* by rejoicing and delighting our selves with him for his glory, beauty, and
riches, all infinite.

Now to the end that we may take pleasure in this exercise, and endeavor to
proceed always therein with this cheerfulnes and joy, it will much help us to
consider how good God is, how fair, how glorious: in all which he is so
passing infinite, that his only vision does render those who do enjoy it
blessed; in so much as should but the damned in hell, once have a glimps of
him, all their pain and torments would be turned to joy, and Hell would be
changed to a Paradyse; Joan. 17.3.
H^e est autem vita aeterna, us cognoscunt te solum Deum verum, says our
Savior Christ in the Euangell of Saint John. This is eternal life, that they
know thee the only true God; this is that which makes them blessed, and that
not only for a day, or year, but for eternity; in such manner as never to be
satiat with seeing God, but the delight thereof shall be always new unto them,
according to that of the Apocalypse: Apo. 14.3.
Et cantabunt quasi canticum nouum, they shall always sing as if their song
were new. This seems to me suffici^tly to declare the infinite goodness beauty
and perfection of God, but notwithstanding there is always somewhat to add,
yea infinitely more. God is so fair, 3. Th. 1. p. q. 26. ar. 2.
so glorious; that even in seeing himself he is made happy: so as the glory and
felicity of God, is to see and love himself. Imagine therefore, what reason we
have to be glad and to rejoice, in a goodness, beauty and glory, so infinitely
great, as to fill with delicious content the whole City of God, rendering all
the Citsens blessed who inhabit it, and even God himself happy in knowing and
loving of himself.

THE XXXIV. CHAPTER. How we may ye^ farther extend this holy exercise.
WE may yet farther dilate and enlarge our selves upon this subject* in
descending to the consideration of the most facred humanity of Christ our Lord,
from the contemplation of his divinity; observing the great dignity and
perfection thereof, and from thence receiving particular pleasure and delight,
in that the sacred humanity of Christ is so highly exalted, and straightly united
to his divinity, that it is enriched with all abou^dance of grace and glory,
that it is the instrument of the divinity, to exploit those highest mysteries
of the sanctification and glorification of all the elect, and impart those
supernatural gifts and graces which God distributeth and bestows on men. And
finally we are to rejoice and receive exceediog pleasure from every particular
of the perfection and glory of the most blessed soul, and sacred body of our
Redeemer Jesus Christ; insisting thereupon with a truly viscerall love and
delectation; In such manner as the Saints do contemplate him, and the sacred
virgin beheld him on the day of his glorious resurrection, rising from death so
bright and triumphantly; in fine with such affection as the holy Patriarch
Jacob did declare, Genesis 4^.38.
when (as the scripture says) hearing that his soon was yet living, and Lord
of all Egypt, he was surprised with so excessive ^oy that his decayed spirits
being revived thereby, he said, it is sufficient if my son Joseph lives, I
desire no more, then only to go and see him, and then I shall be content to die.

And we may extend this exercise unto the glory of the immaculate virgin and
all the other Saints, and it would be a good and laudable devotion, upon their
particular feasts, to spend some part of our prayer in this exercise, seeing it
is the most especial service and honor which we can exhibit to them, as
declaring the greatest love that we can bear them, which is, to wish them all
the good which they can possibly have, and rejoice and congratulat their great
and excellent glory. Which exercise the holy Church proposes to our devotions
on the feast of the ever glorious Virgin. Hodie Maria virgo caelos ascendit,
gaudete, quia cum Christo regnat in aeternu^, to day the virgin Mary ascends
up to heaven, rejoice therefore because she reigns eternally with God. And
the office of the holy Mass, both in this solemnity and diverse others, does
inuit us to this holy exercise, and incite us by the example of Angels in
this office employed. Gaudeamus omnes in Domino diem festum celebrantes, sub
honor beatae Mariae Virginis, de cuius Assumptioue gaudent Augeli, and
collauda^t filium Dei, let us every on rejoice in our Lord, in celebrating this
feast day, in honor of the B. Virgin Mary, for whose Assumption the Angels
rejoice, and praise the son of God. There is moreover an other great good and
profit resulting from this devotion unto the Saints, and particularly unto the
sacred humanity of Christ our Lord; which is, that from hence we come by little
and little to raise our selves, unto a higher light of the divinity, Joan.
10.7. and Ioa^. 14.6.
seeing as Christ our Savior says this is the way, and gate which leads us
unto the eternal Father,

This exercise of considering God so far-forth as he is God, has likewise its
degrees; and we may render it more familiar unto us by descending unto the
consideration of worldly things; for although it is most certain, that God in
himself can receive no increase, seeing he is every ways infinite, and therefore
there is no good falling within the compass of our wish which he has not
already: nevertheless he may accidentally in his creatures become greater and
increase, when he is better known, more loved and served by them; and therefore
there is place for us to employ our selves in this act of love, in wishing to
God the addition of this exterior good. And so the devout soul by considering
in prayer, how most worthy God Almighty is, to be loved, honored and served of
his creatures, is to wish and earnestly desire that all the souls which are,
or ever shall be, may know him, love him, praise him, and glorify him in every
thing (and out of the depth of its dear affection say) o Lord who shall
convert all the Infidells and sinners of the world, so as there may not be left
any to offend you more, but that all may be obedient to you, and employ
themselves wholly unto your service, both now, and for ever more: Marc. 6.9.
Psalm. 65.4.
Sanctificetur nomen tuum. Omnis terra adoret te and psallat tibi, psalmum
dicat nomini tuo. And here we may insist and imagine with our selves a thousand
ways whereby creatures may come to serve Almighty God, and wish them all
particularly put in practice.

From hence is each on to descend unto a desire of performing the will of God,
and procuring his greater glory in every thing which belongs to them to do;
ever endeavoring to do whatsoever we may know to be the will of God and
redounding to his greater glory. Conformable to that which our Savior says
of himself in the Euangell, Joan. ^.29.
quia ego quae placita sunt ei, facio semper, I do always that which is
pleasing to my Father. For as S. John the Evangelist says, Joan. 2.4.
qui dicit se nosse Deum and mandata cius non custodit, mendax esi, and in hoc
veritas non est, he who affirms that he knows God, and does not keep his
commandments, is a liar, and there is no truth in him; Qui autem seruat
verbum eius vere in hoc charitas Dei perfecta est, but he who observes his
word has the charity of God perfectly indeed within him.

So that to love God, and to have an entire conformity with his will, it is not
sufficient that a man conceaueth a great joy and delectation, for the felicity
which God enjoys, or desires that all creatures may love and glorify him,
but it is requisite that he resign himself wholly to the accomplishme^t of the
will of God: for how can one say with any color of truth that he desires the
greater glory of God, when even in those things which lie in him to do, he
procures it not? And this is that love which a soul actuateth, when in prayer
it conceiueth good purposes and true desires of performing the will of God, in
this or that, or any particular thing which may present its self; with which
exercise we commonly entertain our selves in praver.

Thus have we laid open a large field, to exercise our selves for long time
together in prayer, and declared the great profit, and rare perfection which is
comprehended in this exercise: wherefore there only remains that we set our
hand to work, and begin be times on earth to take essay, of that which we are
ever after to practice in so excellent a manner in heaven. Isai. 31.9.
Cuius ignis est in Sion, and caminus eius, in Jerusalem, here we are to
enkindle in our selves that fire of love, but the flame thereof must shine and
spread it self, and its height and sublime perfection appear in the
celestial Jerusalem, which is our lasting glory.

THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE I. CHAPTER. IN which there are laid two principal foundations. page 1.
Chap. 2. Wherein the second foundation is more amply declared. page 11. Chap.
3. Of the great good and prosit, which is included in this Conformity with the
will of God. page 20. Chap. 4. That this perfect conformity with the will of
God, is a blessedness and a kind of heaven in earth. page 29. Chap. 5. That
contentment is only in God, and whosoever seeks it in any thing else, shall
never find it. page 38. Chap. 6. Wherein is in an other manner declared, how the
only way to arrive to true contentment, is to conform our selves with the will
of God. page 49. Chap. 7. Of diverse other felicities and profits which are to
be found in this conformity with the will of God. page 60. Chap. 8. Wherein is
confirmed by some examples, how grateful unto God, this exercise is, of the
conformity of our wills with his, and of the great perfection which is
contained in it. p. 68. Chap. 9. Of some other considerations, which may render
this exercise of conformity with the will of God, both easy and pleasant to us.
page 74. Chap. 10. Of Gods fatherly and particular providence of us, and of the
filial confidence which we ought to have in him. page 82. Chap. 11. Of diverse
passages and examples of the holy Scripture, which may help us much to obtain
this familiar and filial confidence in God. page 95. Chap. 12. How great
profit and perfection it is, to apply prayer unto this exercise of the
conformity with the will of God, and how we are so long to descend unto
particulars until we arrive unto the third degree of the said cijformity. p.
116 Chap. 13. Of the indifferency and conformity with the will of God, which
Religious men ought to have, in going and remaining in any part of the world,
where they may be disposed of by Obedience. page 128. Chap. 14. Of that
indifferency and conformity with the will of God, which Religious men are to
have, concerning those offices and functions in which obedience shall employ
them. page 141. Chap. 15. Of the conformity which we are to have with the will
of God, touching the distribution of Tallents, and natural gifts. page 155.
Chap. 16. Of the conformity which we are to have with the will of God in time of
sickness. p. 170 Chap. 17. How we are not to repose our trust in Physicians and
Medecins, but only in Almighty God, and are to conform our selves unto his
will, not only in sickness but also in all other things which do accompany
it. page 180. Chap. 18. Wherein that which has been said is confirmed by some
examples. page 189. Chapter 19. Of the co^formity which we are to have with the will
of God, as well in death as life. p. 201 Chapter 20. Of some reasons and motives
which may induce us holily to desire a lawful death. p. 208. Chap. 21. Wherein
that which has been said is confirmed with some examples. page, 224. Chap. 22.
Of the conformity which we are to have with the will of God in all afflictions
and calamities in general which he sds unto us. p. 237 Chap. 23. Of a certain
means which will help us much to receive and support with great resignation,
all those adversities which our Lord shall send us, as well in particular as in
general, which is the knowledge and feeling of our sins. page 245. Chap. 24.
Of the conformity which we are to have with the will of God, in aridity and
desolation in our prayer, and what is understood by the name of this aridity
and desolation. page 257. Chap. 25. In answer unto the complaint of those who
are troubled with aridity and desolation in prayer. page 268. Chap. 26. How we
may convert aridity and desolation, into a good and profitable prayer. p. 277
Chapter 27. Of diverse other reasons which may comfort us, and bring us to
conformity with the will of God, in aridity and desolation of prayer. p. 282.
Chapter 28. That it is a great deceit and grievous tentation, to leave of our
prayer, because we find our selves in the said manner in it. page 290. Chap.
29. Wherein that which has been said is confirmed by some examples. page 296.
Chap. 30. Of the conformity which we are to have with the will of God, for as
much as concerns the distribution of others, virtues, and supernatural
gifts. page 304. Chap. 31. Of the conformity which we are to hauewith the will
of God, in that which concerns felicity and glory. page 313. Chap. 32. Of
conformity, union, and perfect love of God, and how we are to apply this
exercise to practice. page 321. Chap. 33. How much this exercise is commended
unto us and inculcated in holy scripture. page 329. Chap. 34. How we may yet
farther extend this holy exercise. page 334.
FINIS.

