THE ANATOMY of a distressed Soul: Wherein, The faults of the elect, are
discerned from the sins of the wicked, spiritual defections cured, confused
consciences resolved, all means of presumption and desperation removed, the
sickness, dullness, and deadness of the spirit relieved, crosses and
temptations inward, and afflictions outward remedied, for the benefit of all
that groan under the burden of sin, and feeling of Gods anger, thirsting
for the sense of reconciliation in the blood of the Lamb.

ROMANS 8. 38. 39. I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come.

Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love, etc.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for Daniel Speed; and are to be sold at his
Shop under S. Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir Robert Nanton, Knight, one of his Majesty's
principal Secretaries, and of his Royal Privy Council, grace and peace in
Jesus Christ.
GOd leaves his own children often to themselves, to drive them from the weak
hold of their own strength, to rely on Psa. 30. 6. 7
himself* yet does he heal their backeslidings, and loves Cant. 3. 4
them freely, notwithstanding their reuolting and treacherous dealing against
him. There is Satan Hos. 14* 4
also sifting them, and fleshly lusts warring against their souls. Hos. 5. 2. 7
They may fall in their faith, by doubtting of Gods favor, Luke 22. 13
and assurance of their salvation, err in some 1. Pet. 2. 11
maine points of religion, yea dwell in Psalm. 22. and 51. and 77
that ignorance for a season, and maintain the same. They may fall also in
their life, in some gross sins, Act. 1. 6
yea sleep in them until they be roused Call. 2
up, and then fall into them again: and so 2. Sam. 11
commit rebellion against God, and yet remain in the state of grace. For they
are 1. Tim. 4. 3
not senseless, nor do continue in their falls, having their conscience seared
with a hot iron, without resistance, fear, or grief* nor becomes in the end
a very Psalm. 19.
beast, as does the hypocrite, who falls as the Dromedary that Psalm. 44.
cannot rise again, but their corruption and temptation ouerruling Psa. 49. 12
them, does Psa. 7. 3
mislead them, and coming to themselves, condemns themselves for it, and
cleares the Ephesians. 2. 3. 7
Lord, iustifies him in his judgments, and magnifies the riches of his mercy,
Job. 42. 6
who never forsakes his children, but will with the tentation also make a way
to escape, that they may Romans 3. 5
be able to bear it.

Of the which both inward and outward temptations and afflictions, 1. Cor. 10
for keeping of the conscience tender, and sensible of the least sin, and
Heb. 13. 18
wilful fechting again the light thereof: of the checkes, fears,
distractions, anguishes, horrible terrors, and swoundings, with remedies to
the same, according to the measure of the Lords grace bestowed upon me. I have
written here (I say) which I most humbly dedicate, to be sheltered under the
protection of your Worshippes favor.

And I beseech the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, to
establish your heart in his holy fear, rectify your judgment, sanctify your
conscience, and give unto you the spirit of wisdom, and revelation, in the
knowledge of him: Ephesians. 1. 17 18. 19
the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that you may know what is
the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in
the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward, who
believe according to the working of his mighty power* To whose everlasting
blessing I leave you: and rests,

Yours Worships in all Christian duties, Barthol. Robertson.

To the Christian Reader.
SInce it has pleased God of his mercy to give so good a passage unto my
former travails, I have made bold in confidence of thy favor, to let this
also see the light: I have been moved thereunto by sundry of my friends, and
truly I detest and abhor idleness with all my heart, yet a brother who was
in great confusion of conscience, to whom I resorted daily, looking if God
would put his mind at greater liberty, from the thraldom and pangs of
conscience, his case (I say) spurred me to undertake this task: In the method
I have not been curious, for the answer is paralelled to the interrogation so
proportionably, as I could: to the which, I have added prayers for every day of
the week, to season thy reading, which strike most upon the the cord of thy
conscience: and because the two extreamities, presumption, and despair, do
most of all misleade men, I have seasonably subioyned a short meditation of the
infinite mercy and justice of God, that to the perfecting of thy salvation, thou
may sail with an even and plain course, swaying neither to the left nor
right hand, and I beseech God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
sanctify these to thy use, and thee to his glory.

Amen.
Thine, B. R.

The Anatomy of a distressed conscience: Containing the discovery of spiritual
assaults with the particular remedies thereof, in Dialogue-wise betwixt the
Lord and the Soul.
Lord. WHy art thou angry; and thy countenance cast down, if thou Genesis 4. 6 7
do well, shall thou not be accepted, and if thou do Iam. 5. 9
evil sin lies at the door, and the Judge stands before the door.


Soul. I have been like a Horse or like a Mule (alas) which Psa. 32 9
understands not, and am made like unto beasts that perish. I have wallowed
in my own vomit, in the vanity of my mind have I ever Ier. 38. 26
walked, having my cogitations darkened, being a stranger from the life of God*
through the ignorance that Ephesians. 4. 17
is in me, because of the hardness of my heart: yet sometime Tit. 1. 16
I do profess, I did know God, but by my works I deny him, and am Ier. 28.
12
abnominable and disobedient, and unto every good work a reprobate: I have
walked after my own imaginations, and after the stubbornness of my wicked
heart, I have despised the To. 2. 4. 5
riches of thy bountifulnsse and patience and long suffering, not knowing that
thy bountifulness leads me to repentance, but after my hardness of heart
that cannot repent, have heaped up unto my self wrath against the day of
wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God, thus have I lived
in pleasure on the earth and in wantonness, and have nourished Iam. 5. 5
my heart as in a day of slaughter, and what shall now become of me.


Lord. Thou have cause poor soul to bemoane thy self, Job 11. 20
for the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and their refuge shall perish, and
their hope shall be sorrow of mind, his own counsel shall cast Job 18. 7
him down, his rejoicing is but short and the joy of an hypocrite is but a
moment, Job 20. 5
for the wickeds light shall be taken away, they are snared in the work of
their own hands, thus I will try the righteous, but the wicked Job 38. 15
and him that loves iniquity, does my soul hate, Psa. 9. 16
for I the righteous Lord love righteousness, and my countenance beholds the
just man, many sorrows Ps. 11. 5. 7
shall come to the wicked, but thou (wretched soul) call unto me and I will
answer, Psa. 32. 10
and show thee great and mighty things which thou know not, I will instruct
thee and teach thee Ier. 33 3
in the way that thou shall go, and I will guide thee with my eye.


Soul. Can the black Moore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, then
may I also do good that is accustomed Ier. 13. 23
to do evil, I did say alas it was not yet time that the Lords house should
Hag. 1. 2
be builded in me, but did put far away the evil day, and approached to the
seat of iniquity, as the smoke Iam. 6. 3
vanishes so driuest thou sinners away, as wax melts Psa. 68. 2
before the fire so shall the wicked perish at the presence of God, how should I
then lift up my horn on high, or speak with a stifnecke, for thou art judge,
and in thy hand is a cup and the wine is red, it is full of fury mixed, and
thou pourest out of the same, Psa. 15. 8
surely all the wicked of the earth shall wring out and drink the dregs
thereof: thus the way of the wicked is as the darkness, they know not wherein
they Pro. 4. 19
shall fall, their own iniquities shall take the wicked themselves, and they
shall be holden with the cords Pro. 5. 22
of their own sin, woe be unto the ungodly therefore, which have forsaken
the law of the most high, for Eccl. 4. 1 8. 9. 10
though they increase yet shall they perish, if they be borne, they shall be
borne to cursing, and if they die the curse shall be their portion; so shall
they go from the curse to destruction, for the soul that sins it shall die
the death.


Lord. I will not give the soul Ezekiel. 18
of my turtle dove unto the beast, what is thy sin written Psa. 14 19
with a pen of iron and with the point of a Diamond, and so graven upon the
table of thy heart, wilt Ier. 17. 1
thou not give thy mind to turn unto me thy God, is the spirit of
fornication in Hos. 5. 4
the middle of thee, and will thou not know me thy Ier. 13. 27
Lord? will thou not poor soul be made clean? when shall it once be? I will
answer Zach. 13.
thee with good words and comfortable words, arise my love, my fair one and
come thy way, for behold the winter is past, the rain is over and gone, the
flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is com, and the
noise of the turtle is heard in our land; arise my love my fair Can. 2. 10 11.
12
one and come away, withdraw not thy heart from me, let me be thy hope in the
day of adversity, I create Ier. 18. 5
the fruit of thy lips to be peace as well to him that is far off, as to him
that is near. As I live I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live, turn thee Ier. 33. 11
turn from thy evil ways, why will thou die (silly soul) I am patient
toward thee, and would that all men should be saved and 2. Pet 3. 9.
none perish, but would all men should come to repentance, and to the knowledge
of the truth, yea and more abundantly to show the stablenesse of my counsel,
I have thus bound my self by an oath, that by two immutable things, wherein it
is impossible that I should lie, thou might have a strong consolation* who
have fled for refuge to lay Heb. 6. 17 18.
hold upon the hope set before ihee.


Soul. I am empty, and void, and waste, and the heart melts, and the knees
smite together, and sorrow is in my loins, and my face gathers Na. 2. 10
blackness, for that which is crooked can none make straight, and that which
is wanting cannot be numbered, Eccl. 1. 15
woe unto me miserable soul, for I have rewarded evil unto my self. It is
the vengeance of the Lord, thou will take vengeance Esaias 3. 9
upon me, as I have done, thou will do unto me, Ier. 50. 15
thou art a consuming fire and a jealous God, can my heart Deuteronomy. 4. 24
endure, or can my hands be strong in the day that thou shall have to do with
me, thy tempest goes forth in thy wrath, and a violent Ier. 23. 19 20
whirlwind shall fall down upon the head of the wicked, thy anger shall not
reaurne until thou have exeted and until thou have performed the thought of
thy heart, in the latter days I will understand it plainly, I am but as foame
upon the water, I have plowed wickedness and reaped iniquity, Hos* 10. 7 15.
and eaten the fruits of lies, I have trusted in mine own ways, in serving
sin and living according to the flesh, and must die for I cannot Ioh. 8. 34
please thee. Romans 8 13



Lord. Blessed is he whose wickedness Psa. 32. 1. 2
is forgiven, and whose sin is covered: Blessed is the man unto whom I impute
no iniquity and in whose spirit there is no guile, If any man say he 1. John. 18
has no sin, he deceives himself and there is no truth in him, If thou
acknowledge thy sins, I am just and faithful to forgive thee thy sins, and
cleanse thee from all unrighteousness, Genesis 3
If thou say thou have no sin, thou make me a liar, thou may see Adams
Genesis 9
fall and feel it in thee, Noah's drunkenness, Lots incest, Genesis 12
Abraham's double denial Genesis 20
of his wife, Rebecca her Genesis 27
lie and deceit, Jacobs lie, Simeon Genesis 34
Genesis 37
and Leuie's murder, Exodus 2
Rachels theft, the whole Patriarchs bloody devise against Number. 20
their brother, Moses slaughter, Moses and Aarons 2. Sam. 11
murmuring, David's murder and adultery, Salomons 1. Kin. 11
idolatry, and finally, Matthew a publican, all the Mat. 20
Apostles ambitious, Magdalen a notorious sinner, Luke 19
Zacheus an oppressor and extortioner, the Thief on the Cross a notorious
malefactor, Peter a denier, Thomas Ioh. 18 Act. 9
a doubter, Paul a persecuter of Christ. But to this purpose appeared the Son
of God, that he might loose the works of the devil: Ioh. 3. 8
for surely there is none just in the earth that does good and sins not, for
who can say, I have made my heart clear, I am clean from my sin, all like
sheep Eccl. 7. 22
have gone astray, every one has turned to his own way, yet I have laid upon
my Son the iniquity of you all: For the trangression Pro. 29
of my people was he plagued, though he had done no wickedness, neither was
any deceit in his Esa. 53. 7. 8. 9
mouth, he was counted with the trespassers, and he bare the sin of many and
prayed for the trangressors: there is none good but I, when thou have done all
is Mark. 10
commanded thee, yet art thou an unprofitable servant, thou have but done Luke
17. xo
that which was thy duty to do: now then there is no difference betwixt thee
and others, for all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory Romans 3. 23 24
of God: and are justified freely by grace, thorough the redemption, that is,
in Christ Jesus my Son, whom I have set forth to be a reconciliation through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of thy
sins, that are passed through the patience of God; have thou laid up these
things in thy poor soul.


Soul. The heaven (alas) does declare my wickedness and the earth does rise
up against Job. 20. 27
me, great is thy goodness which thou have Psa. 31. 19
laid up for them that fear thee, and done to them that trust in thee; but
sinners are Esa. 33. 12 13.
afraid, a fear does come upon hypocrites, who can dwell with the devouring
fire? Who shall dwell with everlasting burningss? we conceive chafe, and
bring forth stubble, our breath as fire shall devour us, and we shall be as
the burnings of lime, as thorns cut up Eecl. 8. 8
shall they be burnt in the fire, for wickedness shall Wis. 5. 17 20.
not deliver the possessor thereof; thou armest thy creatures to be revenged of
thy enemies, and the world shall fight with thee against the unjust, which have
kindled a fire in thy wrath Ier. 37. 4
which shall burn for ever, thou art wise in heart O Lord, and mighty in
strength, Job. 9. 4
who has been fierce against thee and prospered? who shall stand in thy sight
Psa. 76. 7
when thou art angry? alas, my silthinesse shall be discovered, and my shame
shall be seen.


Lord. I will go and return to my place till thou acknowledge thy offenses,
and seek Hos. 5. 15
my face in thy affliction, if thou will seek me early, fear not, thou
shall not be ashamed, neither shall thou be confounded, for thy maker is thy
husband, the Esa. 54.
Lord of hoasts is his name, and thy Redeemer the holy 5
one of Israel: the God of the whole earth am I called, 6
for I have called thee being as a woman forsaken and 7
grieved in spirit, and a wife 8
of youth when thou wast refused, says thy God, for 9
a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great 10
mercies will I gather thee: In a little wrath, I hid my face from thee for a
moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the
Lord, thy Redeemer: For this is as the waters of Noah unto me, for as I have
sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more go over the earth, so have I
sworn that I would not be wroth with thee nor rebuke thee, for the mountains
shall depart and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from
thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that
has mercy upon thee, this is the heritage of ver. 17.
my servants, and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord, now then
incline thine ears and come unto me, hear and thy soul shall live, and I
will make an everlasting covenant with thee, even the sure mercies of David,
behold I have given him for a witness to the people, and for a leader and
commander to them, therefore go thou out with Esa. 55. 3
joy, and be lead forth with 12
peace, the mountains and hills shall break forth before 13
thee in singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands, it
shall be to me for a name, and for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut
off.


Soul. I confess thy salvation shall be for ever, and thy righteounesse
shall not be Esa. 51. 6
abolished, though I said in my haste, I am cast out of thy sight, yet thou
heardest Psa. 31. 22
the noise of my prayer when I cried unto thee, and am fully assured that thou
which have promised, art also Romans 4. 21
able to do it.


Lord. Thou do well (beloved soul) to acknowledge thy sin, to deal with
them as thou have done, and as a judge does with malefactors, to apprehend,
reign, and condemn them, for he that hides his sins shall not prosper, but
he that Pro. 28. 13
confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy, for as thou have declamed
against thy sins, so have the Saints before thee, for they acknowledged their
Psa. 32. 5
sin unto me, neither did Psa. 51
hide their iniquity: for they thought they would confess against themselves
their sins unto me, and I forgave the punishment of their sins, and so
also my Neh. 9. 33 34.
servant said unto me, surely thou art just in all that is come upon us, for
thou have dealt truly, but we have dealt wickedly. So did another protest
against himself Dan. 9. 5.
and his people, we sinned and have committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly, yea have rebelled and have departed from thy precepts and from thy
judgments: Uncover thou thy sin and I will cover it, declare thou it and I
will hear thee, in the world confession is confusion, but with me it is
far otherwise, for if thou acknowledge thy sins, I am faithful and just to
forgive thee all thy finnes, and to cleanse thee from all unrighteousness, and
truly dear soul, it is of my grace begun in thee, that thou breakest out in
confession of them, willingly opening them and stripping them naked before my
Majesty, for he that is penitent before me and my Angels (with whom there is
greater joy in heaven Luke 15
for one that repents, then for ninty and nine that need not repentance) I
will not stick to confess before the face of men: It is not of nature, for
Adam whilst Genesis 3
I pushed his conscience, covered himself with fig leaves, I send a noise
and voice, he betook him to the thick wood, and last I urged him with
questions, yet he shifted off his sin to Euah, and this confession that the
sight of misery and fear of punishment have taken out of thee, is a heavenly
preparatiue to a greater measure of my grace to be wrought in thee.


Soul. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge it, but if a
man sin 2. Sa. 2. 25
against thee O Lord, who will plead for him? yea he must be swallowed up with
2. Cor. 2. 7
heaviness: If we say we have a covenant with death or with hell and are at
agreement, though a scourge run over and pass through, it shall not come at
us; for we have made falshoode our refuge, and under vanity are we hid: O but
how innumerable have been punished for their trespasses, even here in this
world: Adam cast out of paradise, Exodus 32
the world destroyed by water, Sodom and Gomorrah by fire, Pharaoh by the Sea,
Amaleck rooted out, 3 thousand killed for the worship of the golden Calfe,
Nadab Number. 10
and Abihu burnt with fire, Myriam stricken with leaprosie, for incredulity
three hundred thousand beside Number. 12
young ones and servants that came out of Egypt (except Ioshuah and Caleb) fell
in the wilderness, Corath Number. 16
and Dathan swallowed quick into the earth, Moses and Number. 20
Aaron excluded the Land Number. 25.
for murmuring, the Princes of the people hanged, Achan stoned, the tribe of
Iud. 19. 20
Beniamim overthrown for the Levites wife, Eli for not 1. Sam. 15
correcting his children, Saul for sacrificing, and after him 2. Kin. 11
all his house punished. What shall I say of those that died of the pestilence
in David's days, the disobedient 2. Sam. 24 1. Kin. 13
Prophet rent by the Lion, the forty children by the bores, for mocking
Elizeus, 1. King. 2
of Geetze, or Hosiah the King, willing to burn incense, 2. Chro. 26
with many more, as Ananias and Saphyra, Elimas the sorcerer, Judas and Theudas
and some of them for very mean sins to the judgment of men, yea and the
Galileans, whose sacrifice Pilate mixed with their blood, and the builders of
the Tower of Shiloh which fell upon them, which were not the greatest sinners,
and unless I repent I shall also be punished; Save me O Lord, and take the
glory thereof to thy self, for, for not giving it thee, Herod Act. 12
was consumed of worms, thus thou do lay the wickeds way upon their own
Ezekiel. 11. 21
heads.


Lord. The cause of all terrors and troubles in thy mind, are thy sins: I see
and thou know it, for they do infect thy mind and conscience with their
guilt, from which guiltiness proceeds a fearful expectation of these
punishments thou have spoken of, to the which thou perceiuest thou art justly
liable, neither can thou be freed from this guiltiness and fearful pangs,
until thou (thy sins being done away) be reconciled to me: for then, and
not before, shall thou have peace of conscience, boldness and confidence, when
thou art assured that I love thee, and thou me, and so can rest on my
promises and providence, for there is no fear in love, but perfect Ioh. 4. 8
love casts out fear, for fear has painfulness, and he that fears is
not perfect in love: the wicked fly when none pursues, Pro. 28. 1
but the righteous are bold as a Lion, and thouh thou should walk through
Psa. 32. 4
the valley of the shadow of death, thou would fear no evil, because I am
with thee, and with my rod and staff comfort thee: So being justified, and
assured once of my love, thou may be fully persuaded, that nothing is able to
separate Romans 8. 39
thee from my love, which is in Christ Jesus; where innocence is, there is
security, Rom 5. 1
for where justification and assurance of remission of sins is, there is
peace with me, with the creatures, and joy in the holy Ghost. Use the means
for obtaining of faith, as hearing, receipt of the Sacraments, prayer,
meditation, conference; if thou be not wanting to thy self, I will not be
wanting unto thee, and next approve thy faith by repentance, for I have bound
my self by promise, that all that turn from their sins, shall in my Son be
reconciled unto me: for I crave* no more, but that thou believe only, and
bring forth fruits of a new life; for this is thy part in the covenant with
me, for sins repented of, are forgiven in my estimate, as though they had
never been committed, and because thou by these means art received unto the
protection of my providence; thou may be undoubtedly assured, that all things
whatsoever (yea in thy judgment, the worst also) shall make together for thy
good, Be strong and of a good courage, it is I that am with thee, who can be
against thee?


Soul. Is not thy word even like a fire O Lord? does not my heart burn
within me, while thou talkest with me, Ier. 23. 29
and openest to me the Scriptures, and manifests the word, which is like a
hammer Luke 24 32
that breaks the stone, thou only can quicken the dead in sin, and call
Romans 4. 17
those things which be not, as though they were, but (alas) how slow am I to
believe, Luke 24. 25
and how hard is my heart.


Lord. The occasion of thy evil may be outward, but the cause is inward, else
never should Satan, flesh, or the world prevail, my Son was assaulted, but
Satan found nothing in him, neither was there guile in his lips, Satan does
offer, thou do yield to tentations, if thou can be adversary to thy
corruption, Satan shall be but as a Chyrurgion, which launceth thy
impostumation to preserve life, howsoever he purposes to have wounded to thy
heart: Joseph by grace restrained his corruption, concerning Putifars wife,
David's eyes opened the veil to his corrupted heart, so sin in him with
Bethsheba grew to age, in what measure thou withstandeth thy corruption, in
that measure thou art regenerate, and assured to prevail against strongest
tentations, thou may easily espy thy corruption best, by thy afflictions or
by affections, for such is a man as he is in tentation; the heart of man
carries commonly all the other senses, for by it they are moderated and ruled,
and therefore thou should diligently keep it: again, it marres or makes
all thy actions, for if it be pure, thy affections are pure, yea though some
defects be mixed therewith, whatsoever comes from a sound and sincere heart,
in my eyes is accepted, and in my Christ accounded righteousness unto thee: if
for sins sake thou leave sin, though the lees thereof remain in thee, though
thou do not all the good thou love, but in love desires to do it, though
thou leave not all the sins thou hate, but in hatred of them I accept the
good thou do, the evil thou desire to leave Genesis 6
shall not be imputed: thus strive to have thy heart Mic. 2
right within thee, with a purpose to approve thy self Ier 17. 9
to me, laboring to kill sin, though the whole body Pro. 4 15 16
of sin be not slain in thee. There is a wickedness in thy heart cannot
easily be espied, the subtilty thereof is unsearchable, which should bring thee
out of love with thy self, and watch diligently over it, it is like a mill
ever grinding, thou must circumcise it, and make it to bleed to empty it, for
there is so much superfluous matter in it.


Soul. Wash me thoroughly Psa. 51. 3. 5
from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin O Lord, behold I was shapen
in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, create in me a clean
heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me, I feel alas in my corrupt
heart such a world of sins, and in every one of them a fault against thee my
God, a guilt binding my conscience to the punishment of of eternal death, and
a stain or blot imprinted in me, as the fruit thereof, which is my
inclination, evil disposition, prouenesse and aptness of heart to offend,
which causes me delight and live in sin, which lying in sin (and woe is me
therefore) is a greater cause of damnation then the sin it self.


Lord. Thou must beware of thy thoughts, which are the feet and wings, the
soul walks and flies by, yea the wagon and boat it is carried and failed in;
for an evil thought if it long tarry in the mind, it will hardly be restrained
before it come to the outward act, and such monsters of the mind should make
thee afraid, and suspect thy falling in the action of sin, by the affection
of it; thou must therefore search thy heart, which is a bottomless pit of
corruption, and it is a special grace to gage it to the deep, for he that
makes conscience of his thoughts, will make conscience of his deeds; for if
thy heart be found in my my statutes, thou shall not be ashamed; Keep thee
Ps. 119. 80
from thoughts iniected, as was Judas, his, cast in his heart by Satan, and of
Ioh. 13
thoughts arising out of it, beware of staying in them, by taking pleasure in
these immaginations, and delight in the sent of them; for consent of will, with
me is a full action, Judas thought but to do evil, and it is said, that thou
do, do quickly; after comes devise to bring to pass the act that
follows, whence arises a benumbed conscience, after diverse actions, then
defense or excuse, then boasting of it, and this is the wickeds chair, and
steps to hell: then be ashamed to think that thou art ashamed to speak, for I
see Pro. 14
thy heart and thoughts, and know what thou art, strive against them, and if
they yet remain, have indignation of them, fear and cry to me that thou art
troubled with them, and I will ease thee; for justly do I challenge thy heart,
who gave my Sons heart to be 2. Kin. 20 18
pierced for thee: thus thou must obey against thine inclination, and natural
reason, Ier. 42. 6
For what is faith but a contrariety to reason? and hope to experience? and lay
not down thine own conclusions: I am well pleased with thy intents which
prepare thy heart to seek me, the seeds of all sins are in every man's
heart, which would appear if I suppressed them not, the tongue is a world of
wickedness, what is the heart then, out of whose abundance the mouth speaks?


Soul. I know that in me, that is, in this flesh, there dwells no
goodness; but every good and perfect gift is from above, from thee the father
of lights, open my eyes I beseech thee, that I may see the marvelous things in
thy law, I cannot leave (alas) my sin, I have used it so often and so long,
it is so pliable to my nature, that I would rather lose my life, having long
accustomed it, then now cease from it, and yet I am now and then tormented with
the memory of it; my conscience is a snare to me, yea an assize, a bench, a
judge, a iaylour, yea a hangman it self to me, and whither shall I fly poor
wretch?


Lord. It is good to learn thy inward corruptions by thy outward senses, thy
sense leads thee to sin, because thy heart leads thy sense, and thy
corruption has stolen away thy heart; for outward senses bewray thy inward
affections, and therefore Christ will never be sweet, until thou see, yea and
feel in experience, thy natural corruption, for none can hunger for
righteousness except he feel himself empty and wanting thereof, and where
there is an exceeding hunger, there must be an exceeding feeling, as a feeble
and small hunger had the like feeling: comfort then thy self, in that thou
feel the impurenesse of thy heart, and want of uprightness and deadness to
all goodness, for the feeling of their wants is quickness and living, and
this quickness and life is by my spirit in thee, and where my spirit is, there
is life everliving, which is regeneration or life everlasting; and the more
thou do feel the one, the more deeply do thou weigh the feeling of thy
confused estate, by which thou find comfort in sorrow, and great light in
darkness: and in this, that thou both sighest and groanest for the hardness of
thy heart, it is a testimony that thy heart is not altogether hardened, for if
thou feel this in thy self, that thou desire to love me, and to be
better, being wearied and toyled with sin; and comfort thy self, for it is
in earnest of regeneration, for difference betwixt a motion to evil, and
consent to it; for the body of sin, wicked motions, and affecons, shall never
be out of thee while thou live, thou must not only strive to press out the
breath of sin, and close up the eyes of it at the death of it, but to follow it
to the grave, and cover Revel. 3. 15 12 22
it that it never rise, for this is to overcome and receive the crown, not
that the life of sin can be here destroyed, but may well be weakened, as the
mangled part of a Serpent cut in pieces, have not that power to hurt as when it
was whole so corruption has not siercenesse to prevail against thee,
how-soeuer the relics thereof remain but like a mighty Prince, which is
become a poor prisoner.


Soul. I by reason of my old custom in sin, do often yield to
tentations, I do not abound more and more in wisdom and goodness, but rather
persevere in sin and rebellion, Lord thou know, and I fear (unless thy
mercy be the greater) the sentence of my conscience which is thy register, and
my remembrancer, the wicked may be secure, but never in safety,


Lord. Custom is worse a hundred Ger. 42. 14 15
fold then nature, and does greatly prevail with my dearest children: Joseph
a good man, being among profane men, had some smell of their words and lied:
The Sodomites by their unjust conversation, vexed Lots righteous soul, yet he
could have found in his heart to live still amongst them, therefore there is
nothing more fit, then to avoid all occasions of sin, and and to procure
honest things both in the sight of God and man, and then in all actions to
avoid evil, thou must learn to keep that which is good, and abstain from
all appearance of evil, be sure it be good thou do, but if it have but a
show of evil avoid it, and if it be an ill favored thing to see to, fly it.
If thou hear threatenings and tremble, hear promises and believe, pray in
wants, be thankful for mercies, and with reverence receive Sacraments, they
keep thee from falling, and recover thee when thou art fallen, it goes well
with thee; to prosper and thrive in sin, is a sign of my wrath, as the
child that Heb. 12. 6
the father hates is given over to be ruled by his own pleasure, but I
chastise my children whom I love, that 1. Cor. 11 32
they should not be condemned with the world: again, thou will never leave
sin, until thou know sin to be sin, and be truly sorrowful for it:
press to resist the first motions of sin, for one breeds many, and it is
hard to get out of the claws of the devil, thou can without great danger
touch the young thorn, dally with the young bore, and carry a young Serpent,
but if these be old thou know the danger, cut the thorn in the root,
mussle the boar, bruise the head of the Serpent, yea destroy it in the very
egg before it be hatched; by the fall of others in sin, thou may be taught
to stand, and rise if thou be fallen, and as concerning the accusation of thy
conscience thou speak of, thou shall never labor to leave sin so long as
thou art quiet in mind, until thou be stricken with fear, or cast down with
judgments, then if thou look to my highest majesty offended by sin, the
benefits which bound thee to do my will, how near thy sins pierce me, the
purpose and end thou tendest to in sin, the time and place of transgression,
and last if thou see the loathsomenesse and deformity of sin: for that a
stinching carrion is more tolerable to the sent, then a sinful soul unto me,
if thou narrowly consider how huge and detestable thy sins will seem, for by
them thou art made like unto the devil himself, I have imprinted naturally in
all a condemnation of sin, that even committing it, thou should condemn
it in thy self, and be ashamed of it before others, woe unto them that are
deprived of this natural remorse, and to them that account that virtue, which
I condemn for a crime, though it seem little to thee in committing sin, it
was very great in my Son in suffering for it, if sins were not so usual,
they would seem more palpeable and prodigious, and therefore the senses which
are oceasions of sin, ought to be well ordered, to make a covenant with thy
eyes, with thy mouth and ears, that thy heart walk not after them, that thy
step turn not out of the way, and any blot Job. 31. 1. 7
cleave to thy hands, he that sees his corruptions truly will be afraid of
the least show of evil, the oftener sin is, to have the more grief, Ps 42. 11.
9
is a note of my children, search then the bottom of thy thoughts, feel thy
grief where it lies, find out the cause, seek for remedy, least it prove
incurable, if thou take it not in time, it will fester more and more, and
infect all.


Soul. O how truly is my body called a body of death, thou should take up
and have to thy glory all my cogitations, but idle thoughts, imaginations and
discourses come in my ninde, to the which alas I yield my affection, and do
not strike at my conscience in the Iam. 1. 13
first motion, while reason is on my side, and wound it before it receive a
perfect shape, O that I might cherish and intertaine good motions and change
them into prayer, not to smother them by other rouing 2. Pet. 3
cogitations, making them either die presently, or quikly fall away, and thus
Pro. 14. 9
(alas) I make a mock of sin, yea I make a God of Romans 2. 4. 5
sin, and serve it in thy steed, neglecting thy bountifulness, which leads
me to repentance, if thou should Lord suffer my conscience check me, and
Satan burden me, with the least sin, it would be so heavy and grievous,
that a thousand worlds could not abide it, how could I then endure the
greatest? Adam for eating of an apple was thrown out of Paradise, Moses for
speaking of an angry word died in the wilderness, and was not suffered to go
into Canaan, Ezekiah did but show his treasures, and for that he and all were
carried to Babell, Josiah did war against thine and his enemies, yet because
he asked not counsel of thee was slain in battle: these (for what sins are
less) have thou punished in thy dear children, O what shall become of me in
my great sins, if the just shall scarcely be saved, where shall the wicked
appear? if this shall be done unto the green tree, what shall be done to
the dry? the least offense comes not alone, but brings a legion of
transgressions with it, yea the least made thy Son smart and accursed, and to
say, my God, my God, ctc. and O that no sin could escape me without true and
godly sorrow, for the less I favor sin, the nearer I am to* thy favor,
small means do provoke me to it, but great means cannot revoke me from it,
the spirit is quickly quenched, the tender conscience is soon bruised, old
sins do retire, Pro. 15. 15
new sins easily assault, and do deprive me of the company of a good
conscience.


Lord. Thou must (dear soul) beware of all sin generally, and must look
narrowly unto some special sins, whereunto thy nature is most inclinable and
subject: for one dead slye will corrupt a whole box of ointment. Oftentimes
meditate of thy secret sins, which are hidden as it were in the dark corners
of thy heart, which I can reveal when I will, in making my creatures bring
unto light, thy friends to open them, thy own mouth to testify them, thy
dreams to make them known, in sickness to rave on them, or in frenzy to
vomit them out, the sharp torment of conscience make thee confess one privy
sin unrepented, for if the Israelites made the Iud. 17
Beniaminites, fewer in number, and maintaining an evil cause twice to
prevail. It is not light that is heavier then all the world, I esteem Mat. 51
one jot of my law, more then heaven and earth, secret corruptions be light,
as Baltasar was in Daniels interpretation, Dan. 5. 27
which is the loss not of an earthly kingdom such as his was, but of the
kingdom of heaven; the maladies of the soul are contrary to those of the
body, for these the greater they be, the more we seele them, the other the
less, while thy sin is as a more, and may be as it were blown out, make
thee free of it; when it shall be a beam, it shall scarce be haled out with
horses, it should be thy early and morning work to cast out sins, Psa. 101. 8
tarry not while thy sin be great, but pray with feeling of wants and sorrow
for sin, else sin will deceive thee, and deceiving thee will harm thee,
make fat thy heart thou shall not perceive it, and blind thy mind thou
shall not see it, for when wickedness is at the ripest, then destruction is
nearest at hand, wherefore while sin is yet in the sprout, and having but a
little course, is unable to make any great breach, keep it under and stay it,
is is hard to get unto the way of goodness, harder to continue in it, but
hardest of all when thou art out of the way to come in again, when sin
breaks out without controulement, and bears the sway with delight, to the
breaking of the peace with the conscience, it is very dangerous, thou ought
of ten to say, direct my steps in thy word, and let no iniquity have dominion
over me, keep me from Ps 119. 133
presumtuous sins, let them not reign over me, tarry not I say until the
dead Psa. 19 13
blow comes, but resist the first strokes of sin, for then thou may be
easily hardened thorough the deceitfulness of sin, to day if thou hear my
voice, Heb. 3
harden not thy heart; the violence of sin is so impetuous that thou may
soon slip, but hardly rise: blessed therefore is the man Psa. 95. 8
that fears always, but he that hardens his heart shall fall into evil;
without sin thou shall not be, but pray it may be forgiven, neither void of
tentations (for of all tentations not to be tempted is the greatest) but that
thou be not overcome of them.


Soul. I perceive (sweet Lord) there is difference betwixt slumbering and dead
sleeping, between slippes and falls, betwixt infirmities and running headlong
to ungodliness, betwixt error with grief and desire to be freed from it, and
ignorance wherein the wicked lie still gladly, and have no care to be rid of
it: I will with my whole mind leave my sins from hence forth, and suspect the
corruptions and motions of my heart.


Lord. It is not sufficient (poor soul) for thee to learn thy sin, for thou
may fall into it again, and into worse if it be possible, but thou must
weep and mourn until thou com to some grief, and such as is answerable to the
measure of thy sins, as it is said, cleanse your Iam. 4. 8. 9
hands you sinners, and pufie your hearts you double minded, be afflicted and
mourn and weep, let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy into
heaviness: grievous sins must be repented of with great grief, a sore disease
must be cured with sharp medicines, for men must mourn for their sins as one
mourns for his only son, and and be sorrowful for them, as one is
sorrowful for the death of his first born, there must be in them a great
mourning, as the mourning of Hadradimmon, in the valley of Megiddan, for the
death of the good King Josiah, even so must thou mourn, because thou have
pierced my Son thorough with thy sins, and wounded him with thy bypast
abominations, and thus thou must rent thy heart; for a sa man that looks upon
the Sun, if he turn his face away, remains turned until he turn
himself again, so he that turns himself away by sin, makes himself a
sinner, and so remains until he turn himself again by hearty repentance,
and therefore thou must diligently examine thy sins, not only in
acknowledging of them, but also in sense and feeling of them, for that will
make thee, not to change one sin for another, but forsake all; not as Herod,
who was contented to relinquish some, Mar. 10. 24
but not to separate from his incestuous whore; and the young man would rather
depart from me (albeit that I loved him) then from his riches. So did Ananias
and Act. 5
Saphyra, it must then be a total not partial forsaking, for whosoever shall
keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all; for the
keeping of sin in part is the losing Iam. 2. 10.
of grace in whole, ye must not forsake sin for a moment, or short time, but
for ever, and not return with the dog to the vomit, and with the sow to the
wallowing in the mire, least having escaped the filthiness of this world, thou
be yet again entangled in the same* for sins not truly repented of, are
means to fall unto them again, thou must not harbor secret sins in thy
heart and breast, but rather desire to be religious then to seem to be; for be
assured there is nothing so secret but shall be revealed, whether it be good or
bad, thou must not then begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, and not only
art thou thus to deal with thy gross sins, but also with the inward
corruption of thy nature, and the fruits thereof, which although thou can not
altogether blot out, yet beat it down, and keep it short, for while the tree
remains in the earth, there will always spring forth some buds; rest never
from emptying this fountain, from which these mudde springs are derived.


Soul. By reason of my inward corruption (good God) I am impoysoned, for I see
another law in my members rebelling against the law af my mind, and bringing
Romans 7. 23
me unto captivity, the law of sin which is in my members; oh wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death: for if Satan (who
never cease) should do nothing to me, yet this would pull and draw me from
thee, unless it be suppressed, oh that bondage of sin to be at the
commandment of every vile wretched lust! oh the master, the service and reward
of sinful persons, Satan that God of this world, and Prince that rules in the
children of disobedience, Ephe. 2. 2
he puts his vassailes to carry heavier burdens, and to toil themselves
in baser works then the cruel taske-masters of Egypt imposed on the poor
Israelites, impenitent sinners are enthraled to every brutish lust, they must
defile their bodies, corrupt their souls and consciences, and pollute all
their works and ways, when and in what manner soever the devil will have
them, run up and down like dregs to follow every vain delight, never
peaceable by day, nor quiet by night, evermore laboring to work Pro. 4. 16
out their own overthrow, possessed with a spiritual frenzy, and led by the
suggestion of Satan, and then the wages of sin it death, to endure endless
torments in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death: now Lord free me from this slavery of sin, that being translated
from glory 2. Cor. 3. 18
to glory, and having thy image renewed in me daily 1. Ioh. 3. 3
more and more, I may purify my self even as thou art pure: oh that I might
be fenced and armed against all enticements, it is a blessed thing to work no
iniquity; what should it profit a man to win the whole Luke 9. 21
world and lose his own soul, it is better to suffer affliction with thy
people, then to enjoy the pleasures Heb. 11. 25
of sin for a season; it is a joy to live a holy life, even the life of thee
the Lord God, the life of Christ, the life of Angels, to be zealous of good
works, to feel spiritual joys in the inward man, to look for a crown of
glory after I have died the death of the righteous.


Lord. And so it is true, therefore I say, search thy corruptions, whether thou
grow in grace, or art consumed in some, I give grace in measure, sometime more,
and Romans 6. 2
some time less; but they that live in ignorance and sin, are dead for they
sit Luke 1
in darkness and in the shadow of death, for the life of sin is the death of
the man, when they sin with pleasure and delight: the best flesh is most
tender, and where it is most corrupt, there it is most hard, and where the
flesh is nearest to healing, there it will more speedily and more freshly
bleed, the more near thou art to me, the more fearful thou will be, the
more precious thy conscience is, the more tender it is, for it is a quickening
grace of my spirit when thou feel peace in conscience, Romans 5. 5
and joy in the holy spirit, when thou have access unto me, and reioycest
under the hope of my glory, for blessed is that people which can rejoice in
me, they shall walk in the peace of my countenance; unto this peace of mind
Psa. 89. 13
sincerity must be linked, for blessed is the man to whom I impute no
iniquity, Psa. 32
and in whose heart there is no guile, yea blessed are Psa. 119. 1
those that are upright in the way; thou must make known thy faith by fruits,
and feeling by sweet effects; for love is careful to please me, and fearful
to displease, and blessed is that man that fears me and walks in my ways;
this fear will breed a care of obedience of the word, and therefore blessed is
he that hears the word of God, and keeps that thy heart may stand in awe
of me: Ps. 119. 161
let me be thy fear and dread, where my fear is Es. 8. 12
wanting, there is no tentation nor sin so great, but thou will fall in it, but
remember I behold all thy ways, and tell all thy steps, Job 31
he that fears not me shall fear the least of my creacreatures, live in
fear, and fear in love, for tasting how gracious I am in all my Saints fear,
least thou lose so good a Lord, this fear will make thee search thy own
corruption, the godly fear before affliction comes, and then it cease, but
the wicked fear not until it come, and then they fear too much, for piety
trembles in prosperity, and triumphs in adversity, I am always God, and am
to be feared of thee, for thou art a creature, and also sinful, an iron rod
can easily break an earthen pot: if the commandment only, keep thee in
obedience, thou have not received my spirit, for my fear causes obedience,
and the law was not given to the just, but to the unjust, and therefore learn
to say with thy heart, I am a man that fear God, thou can not rejoice in me
always, faith is often faint, love and little joy is dead, feeling is fallen
asleep, yet if thou continue in my fear, thou will be zealous of thy self,
least thou displease me, and mourn until these graces shine in thee again,
the godly, fear sin more then exernall crosses; they that fear least, when
my judgments are threatened, do fear most when they are executed, a good
conscience breeds true boldness, sin breeds a spirit of fear in the
wicked, of evils to come, the godly say, my flesh tre^bleth Ps. 119. 120
for fear of thee, I am affraide of thy judgments, for where fear is not
there is security, security breeds hardness of Pro. 28. 14
heart, hardness of heart brings Gods wrath.


Soul. We must have fear to prepare us to grace, and love to continue us in
that grace; this fear (not that servile and excessive) brings us unto thee,
helps our prayers, causes us wait and continue on our duties, I must Heb.
11. 7
not be without fear, neither trust in my self; for Hab. 3. 16
when my assistance is weakest, sin and Satan is strongest; neither yet must
I have a cowardly fear. and fainting of heart to yield to te^tations, but
have a moderate, and not a scrupulous fear; alawies being strong in thee, the
Lord, my strength; the joy of the Saints may be temporally interrupted, but
not finally and eternaly absent, they have a just and royal right in thy Son
Christ; and must maintain it against all the stains and falls that they fear
of the adversary, thus Satan would wear to a dullness the edge of our prayers,
and draw to tedidiousnesse the fruit of our faith, and therefore they Pro. 3.
5. 6
trust in the Lord with all their heart, and lean not unto their own
wisdom, in all their ways acknowledge To. 12. 16
him, and he does direct their ways, they are not wise in their own eyes,
but fear thee and depart from evil, so health shall be unto their navel,
and marow unto their bones, they rejoice in his holy name, the hearts of them
that feel thee, O Lord, rejoices, they seek the Lord Ps. 105. 3. 4
and his strength, they seek his face continually, for surely their heart
shall rejoice Psa. 33. 21
in him, because they have trusted in his holy name: they I say, do serve Psa.
2. 11
the Lord in fear, and reloyce in trembling, oh thy loving kindness O Lord,
Psa. 33. 6
is better then life, truly life is sown for the righteous, and joy for the
upright Ps. 9711
in heart, but (alas good Lord) I do ever feel within me such procliuity and
bentnesse to sin, it is as thou said of my corruption, whose remnants will
follow me to the grave: I am ouer-mastered and ouerruled at all times by my
actual impieties against thee, and my neighbors, offensive and scandalous to
all, without any Christian consideration, or holy remorse.


Lord. The cause thereof, besides those I have spoken, are, first, because thou
find not after thy sin a present controulement of sin, thou think
thou have not offended: I often suffer the spirit of slumber to overtake
trangressors, that I may by my spirit more perfectly waken my Saints: then do
the wicked take courage and transgress, and do wickedly, but I will Hab. 1 11
search them with light, and visit them that are frosen in their dregs, and
say in Zeph. 1. 12
their hearts, they Lord will neither do good nor evil; so because the wicked
are not taken in their sin, they stretch out their hand to Job. 21. 9
more wickedness, their houses are safe from fear, neither is my rod upon
them, they say unto me depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways; but they shall Ier. 12. 2. 3
be as stubble before the wind, and as chafe which the storm carries
suddenly away: I shall lay up his iniquity for his children, does the way of
the wicked prosper? yet are they prepared for the day of slaughter, and the
world counts the proud blessed, Mal. 3. 15
and they that tempt me, are delivered, but I have a book of remembrance, of
them that fear me, and the arms of the wicked shall be broken, but the Lord
Psa. 31. 17
vpholdeth the just man. The second cause is, because thou rests in my
universal promises, which although they be true and comfortable, yet they can
minister no true consolation to thee, except thou make a particular application
of them to thy self; by the word thou see thy sins pardonable, yet it is
another thing to have sins remissible, and another to assure thy self that
they are already remitted, for then thou would search thy self more
narrowly, and purge thy self from inward sin, as from outward, and be
wholly transformed unto a new holy and righteous life, therefore the love of
righteousness departs from thee, and thou retirest to thy old sins again,
which will breed much sorrow of heart, to remember thy former sins, to see
the greatness of them, to apply my judgments to them, and to provoke thy
self to sorrow for them. The third cause, is thy slacknes, in not espying thy
mother, special and predominant sin in thee, by marking the most checks of
thy conscience, and the reproaches of thy enemies, whereof thou may easily
be shortly conqueror, if thou labor for the contrary virtue, for a man of
understanding knows when Eccl. 21. 7
he slippeth, yea all the days of the afflicted are evil; but he that is of
a merry heart has a continual feast, yea and a scorner loves not one that
reproves Pro. 15. 15
him, neither will he go unto the wise: then learn to acknowledge thy
special, secret, and several sins, for the greatest hypocrite will
generally complain of sin, but being dealt with in particular points, and
application of them to their conscience, they are not able to distinguish one
sin from another: for thus indistinct knowledge cannot avail in any
terrestrial matter, much less in the business of the soul.


Soul. And I poor wretch in any perplexity of mind, cannot separate the
blind and confused cause thereof, from the distinct and known, neither can
eschew confusion of mind, by bringing my soul to some certain object, and
matter of my troubled heart, good God whence comes this, and how shall it be
amended in me.


Lord. The righteous heart Pro. 14 10
knows the bitterness of his soul, and the stranger shall not meddle with
thy joy, for a sound heart is the life of the flesh, and by Pro. 15. 3
the sorrow of the heart the mind is heavy, give not over they mind to
heaviness, and vex not thy self in thy own counsel, leave Eccl. 30. 21
off from sin, and order thy hands aright: a stubborn heart shall fare evil
at the last, and he that loves danger shall perish therein. Eccl. 3. 27
Now this disordered discerning of sin, comes of ignorance of my law, and
self-love, whereby thou art ashamed to manifest sin, and rip it up to the
quick, seek to a faithful and sound friend, or Pastor, to whom thou may
offer thy heart to be searched deeply by the law, be continually with a
godly man, whom thou know to keep the commandments of the Lord, whose
mind is according Eccl. 37. 12
to thy mind, and will sorrow with thee, if thou shall miscarry, and let the
counsel of thy own heart stand, for there is no man more faithful unto thee
then it, for a man's mind is wont sometimes to tell him more then seven
watchmen, which set above in an high Tower, and above all thus pray to the most
high, that he would direct thy way in truth.


Soul. What shall I do, if my grief arise of any certain or known sin.


Lord. Then understand, if thou have done that sin already, or else not yet
committed it, but whereunto thou art tempted, for old sins are represented
often to sinners, as not truly repented of, that they may the more mislike them,
and that their particular sins may bring them to their gross, greater, and
general sins, that there may be a sense of both, least their grief should
pass away without any fruit, and reason thus with thy self, if I be so angry
for this or that sin (whereof thou art troubled, thy bowels swell, thy heart
turns within thee, and thou full of heaviness) how vexed may thou be; the
wickeds Lam. 1. 20
bones are full of the sins of his youth, and it shall lie down with him
Job. 20. 11 11. 12
in the dust, though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it
under his tongue, though he spare it, and forsake it not but keep it still
within his mouth, yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of
aspes within him; I would therefore have thee know (poor soul) that I 2. Pet.
3. 9
would have no man to perish, but all men to come to repentance.


Soul. How shall I then eschew sin, and how shall I be acquitted from that
sin which has passed me?


Lord. I have often admonished thee of thy corruption, to make account to
suppress it, labor to espy thy secret sins, with truth, and not in show; so
hard a matter it is to search thy heart to the bottom, for there is not a more
wicked head Eccl. 25. 13
then the head of the Serpent, and give any plague but the plague of the heart,
and therefore in respect of sins past, sins present, privy pride, hidden
wants, secret corruptions, ever accuse thy self of some lurking hyprosie: for
the godly tremble at the least motion of sin, and say, I will run the way
of the Ps. 119. 23
commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart, bind not two sins together,
for in one sin thou shall not be unpunished, and because Eccl. 7. 8
thy sin is forgiven, be not without fear, or heap sin upon sin, and
say not the mercy of God is great, he will forgive my Eccl. 5. 5. 6
manifold sins, for mercy and wrath comes from him, and his indignation
comes down upon sinners: the two fountains and grounds of sins, are the
inward motions of the heart, and the outward occasions of the senses,
especially the eyes, for whenever a man hears the word of the kingdom, and
understands it not, the evil one comes and catches Mar. 13. 19
away that which was sown in his hear; neither must thou draw near to me
with thy mouth, and thy heart far off from me, and the things which proceed
out of thy mouth, come Mat. 15. 8
from thy heart, and they defile the man, keep thy heart therefore to lay up
Luke 1. 66
good and precious things therein, as in a storehouse, Pro. 4. 23
keep it I say diligently, for thereout comes life again, virtue and vice
dwell Pro. 2. 8
very near together, learn to be holily scrupelous, fearful, and
suspicious, for preventing of sin to come, the heart of the wise shall know the
time and judgment, thirdly keep thy self Eccl. 8. 5
from foolish venturing upon the occasions which are the borders of sin, when
thou may behold many of my children better fenced Mat. 26
with grace then thou art, to have been snared: for the foolish will believe
every Genesis 3. 6
thing, but the prudent will consider his steps: let thy heart be therefore in
Pro. 14 15
fear of God continually, set no wicked thing before thy eyes, hate the work
of them that fall away, let it Pro. 33. 17
not cleave unto thee.


Soul. Alas good and merciful father, I do ever find in me so many
allurements and intisements to sin, which often I would eschew but cannot,
which offer themselves to me at every minute, neither can I retire me self
from them, albeit I do sometime protest against them, and abhor them, either
before, or soon after the sin is committed, with a very perfect hatred and
loathsomnes.


Lord. Thou must seriously observe, first of the company to discern good from
evil, for good company hate Ephe. 5. 11
the unfruitful works of darkness, and in their eyes an evil person is
contemned, but honors them that fear the Lord: with Psa. 15. 4
sound judgment labor to holiness and sincerity of life, in all things have
a sight of thy corruptions, and mourn for them, do good to the household of
faith, Gal. 6. 10
which continue in one spirit, and in one mind, fighting together thorough
the Phil. 1. 27
faith of the gospel, longs for the appearance of Jesus Christ, but these
are evil, 2. Pet. 2. 1
that deny the Lord that bought them, and bring Ephe. 5. 6
upon themselves swift damnation, by whom the wayof truth is evil spoken of,
2. Tim. 3
and are of a profane life, and hate to be reproved, but rather grow worse
and worse, which persecute the Saints of God, and make Ioh. 16. 1
choice of the pleasures of sin for a season, who are affraide of death, and
set Luke 12. 10
up their heaven and rest in this life, which put far away Am. 6. 3
the evil day, and approach to the sight of iniquity, to these thou must fay
with David, away from me ye wicked, for I will Psa. 101. 6
keep the commandments of my God, my eyes shall be upon the faithful of the
land, that they may dwell with me, and therefore thou must (beloved soul) be
rather weary of them, because they run the broad way, following first
examples: secondly, multitudes: thirdly, time: fourthly, custom: fifthly,
opinion.


Soul. I hate vain inventions, but thy law do I love, thou art my refuge and
my shield, and I trust in thy word, teach me (good Lord) these things
particularly, that I may ingraft them in my heart.


Lord. Follow the godly, but so Heb. 10
far as they follow me, their guide in the word, and Jesus Christ the
author and finisher of their faith, which Heb. 13. 7
through faith and patience have inherited the promises: for it is a sign thou
art in the wrong way, if thou do nothing but that Pro. 21. 2
the greatest part of the world do, for how evil soever the way be, and
whersoeuer it lies, every man's way is right in his own eyes, and will defend,
or excuse whatsoever they do. But I the searcher of the hearts, do say, your
ways Ese. 55. 8
are not my ways, nor your thoughts my thoughts, because they are wrong ways:
let every man turn from 1. Pet. 2. 11
his own ways, their thoughts are the Diuelles soldiers, which war against
the soul, they follow their Captain, and thou followest them, thou may
easily know whither thou go; the heart of man is to me as clay to the
Potter, clay I say to me, but wax to the devil; for it will have much
tempering and great ado to bring it to me, but very pliable to any work that
Satan shall put it to: for albeit thou shall see never any evil example, nor
be tempted by multitude, neither outwardly assaulted at all, yet thine own
heart will teach thee wickedness abundantly, what avails it thee to forsake
companies, and retain thine old heart still. For it is I that can restrain
the issue of thy corruptions, Eccl. 13
conform therefore thy will to mine, he that touches pitch will be defiled by
it, he is blessed that does not walk in the counsel of the wicked, nor stand
in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful, for the wicked
are strangers from the womb, they go Psa. 1. 1
astray as soon as they be borne; they are put out of Ps. 58. 3
the book of life, blessed is he whom I choose; and cause come to me; but
salvation Psa. 69. 28
is far from the wicked, because they seek not my Statutes, hate them
therefore, that give themselves Psa. 65. 4
to do wilful vanities; for they shall be consumed Ps. 119 155
like the fat of lambs, even with the smoke shall they consume away: Thou must
not then imitate them, but hate them with a perfect hatred, that hate me; Psa.
31. 6
and be companion to all such as fear me. There is no path, wherein there is
Psa. 37. 20
not a snake, either to sting or impoyson, thou can see thy self sooner
infected, they spy how thou art infected: it is my mercy to be good with the
communion of Saints, so it is my just judgment to pour vengeance on the
company of the ungodly, have no fellowship with them in their sin, neither
draw in their Ier. 15. 19
yoke with them, take forth the precious from the toil, let them return to
thee, but return not thou unto them, rouse up thy heart, and rejoice in the
fellowshippe which is above, for because of uncleanness, inordinate affection,
and evil Col. 1. 6
concupiscence, my wrath comes on the children of disobedience.


Soul. Now do I begin to feel the heavy burden of sin more and more,
with the which I am truly grieved, but I have not duly (alas) repented me of
them, I resolve to suppress them Psa. 17. 3
with all my endeavor, but I fear my secret corruptions will break forth, so
abundant is that root of bitterness in me, remember not against me my
former iniquities, but make haste, and let thy tender mercies prevent me, for
I Psa. 79. 8
am in great misery, help me O God of my salvation, for the glory of thy
name; and deliver me, and be merciful to my sins, for thy names sake; I
will acknowledge my sin unto Psa. 32. 5
thee, neither will I hide mine iniquity, for I thought I would confess
against my self, my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgave the punishment
of my sin: O that I might take heed unto my self, and keep my soul
diligently, Deuteronomy. 4. 9
and thy servant from evil, that the peace of thee O Lord, that passes all
understanding, may preserve my heart and mind in Phi. 4. 7
Christ Jesus, and now O Lord, who can understand his faults, keep me, thy
servant, also from presumtuous Psa. 19. 12
sins, let them not reign over me, so shall I be upright, and made clean
from much wickedness.


Lord. First of all beware (beloved soul) of Satan's flieghts, and condemning
thee by presumption, say not the mercy of God is great, he will forgive my
manifold sin, for mercy and wrath come from me, and my indignation comes
down upon sinners, an obstinate heart shall Eccl. 3 29
be laden with sorrows, and the wicked man shall heap sin upon sin, make
thou no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day, for
suddenly shall the wrath of the^ Lord break forth, and in thy security thou
shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in the time of vengeance, bind not
two sins together, for in one thou shall not be unpunished, Psa. 143. 2
neither justify thy self before the Lord, for he knows thy heart, thou
Eccl. 7. 8
must not learn of Satan's temptations, to be bold upon sin, neither use
pretenses Job. 9. 2
for it, as to say I am not an Angel, that my nature is corrupt etc. The
preacher is but a man as an other etc. and on the other part, beware of
desperation, in mocking the ouerfearefull and superstitious; for Satan will
make of a Fly an Elephant, but sail with an even course, and labor for
measure, to be sought in the word of God, which will teach not to decline,
neither to the right Mat. 11. 19
nor left hand, but to keep the narrow way, for wisdom will be iustifled of
her children.


Soul. Remember O Lord thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindness, for they
have been for ever, remember not the sins of my youth, nor my rebellions, but
according to thy kindness Psa. 25. 6. 7
remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord, gracious and righteous art
thou, therefore thou will teach sinners in Psa. 71. 17
the way, O God, thou have taught me even from my youth until now, and
therefore will I declare thy wondrous works, make me 2. Tim. 2
fly from the lusts of youth, and sollow after righteousness, faith, love, and
peace, with them that call on thee with Job. 13. 26
pure hearts, neither write thou bitter things against me, and make me
possess the iniquities of my youth.


Lord. There are sins in youth, middle, and old age, negligence, in making
conscience of sins done long ago, makes falling in great terror of mind;
when violent remembrance of 1. Cor. 11
them surchargeth the mind, therefore betimes learn to accuse them, that
Satan henceforth have no place to do it; for if thou judge thy self, thou
shall not be judged: humble thy self 1. Pet. 5. 6
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt thee in due time,
cast down thy self before the Lord, and he will lift the up: I will surely
gather him that humbles, and I will gather him that is cast Mich. 4. 6
out, and him that I have afflicted.


Soul. Willingly desire I Lord, to make that fruit of my Ephesians. 5. 16
falls, but (alas) when I look back to my misspent time, which is
unrecoverable, and which I cannot redeem, then great fear and torment
assaults me, and pinches so hard, that I am at my wits end.


Lord. Comfort thy self (poor soul) for in my best children, there is, first
youthful looseness, and vnstayednesse of affections, the way to lewdness, so
David, O God, thou know my foolishness, and my faults Psa. 69. 5
are not hid from thee, see thou not what young men did in Sampsons days in
their feasting, and how he reuealeth to the woman, Judge. 14. 9
which he had concealed from father and mother, and Boas commendation of Ruth,
that she had not followed young men: whether Eccl 11. 10
they were poor or rich, for childe-hood and youth are vanity: and secondly
there is in them weakness, the way to strong vanities, and so David, as for
me says he, my Psa. 73. 2.
feet were almost gone, my steps had well-neere slipped. Thus Abraham made his
his wife say, she was his sister; so the godly have spent the time past of
their 2. Pet. 43
life, in the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in lasciousnesse, lusts,
reuellings, etc. And thirdly, even my Saints have walked in wantonness, in the
door to open wickedness, as gluttony, drunkenness, and abominable
idolatries, which though they break not forth at all times, yet make them
less careful to glorify me, for Genesis 20. 6
I keep them that they shall not sin against me, and do not suffer them to
end their designements: other men's harms may teach the blessed wisdom;
labor not only to leave sin, which one may do for profit, fear, praise, or
wearisomenesse, but also to repent of it for conscience sake.


Soul. The grieuousnesse of my sins fills me with fear of judgment, and
this fear (I hope) will cause the power of sin abate in me, thou Lord can
give me victory over sin, and make it as loathsome unto me, as ever it has
been pleasant; to rejoice in the Lord, to use the means of my salvation
diligently, and to seal up the pardon of my sins in my heart, O God when
shall it be? If thou would have destroyed me for my bypast sins, thou
would never have given me unfeigned hatred of the^: I consider thy mercy
that strives with me, to bring me to repentance, and thy justice, that will
confound such as resist: thy mercy has given me the means which thou have
denied to others; thou afflictest me lightly, but confoundest others; thou
gave mercy, when thou might justly have punished, wherein thou do as it
were hire me from sins: and shall I provoke thee, and add rebellion to sin,
O my God, I know there is a secret curse upon every sinner, which will consume
him, if he do not repent; it has gone out of thy mouth, thy word cannot
change, because thou art unchangeable.


Lord. I have told thee, that youth the flower of thy age is of great
consideration, all this have I done, says the Luke 16
young man in the gospel, the prodigal makes his four stations, he has his
portion, his fathers ouer-fight, evil company, but youth worse the^ all: for
youth has a bundle of folly bound close in his heart, which best men have had,
neither could flee: for as a young man sets his way, he will not depart from
it when he is old, unless by my spirit he is restrained; him that God will
have, his roabe must be a branch of the Almond, that is the tree that first
blossoms, the first fruits was Abels sacrifice, so much acceptable to me.


Soul. O God, I am like the possessed, that was found after sitting in a good
mind, that sweet wind has come to me, that happened to Elisha, I have felt
that gentle calm, after the stormy tempest of my heart; now may I hear the
golden trumpets sounding that joyful retrait, blessed are the meek in spirit,
Lord teach me thy commandments, and I will run them, I shall have increase of
strength, until I come to the mount of God: while I was in my element of
sin, I felt not the weight of it, as nothing is heavy in his own element:
but now I by thy grace will lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so
easily beset me, and run with patience to the race that is set before me:
Heb. 11. 1
I find my self within the fadome of thy mercy, and compass of things
recouerable: the first work of thy spirit at his coming, is to convince the
world of sin, that is, to make men know, that without thy son Christ
there is nothing but sin, and then to rebuke the world of righteousness, to
make man see that Christ died not for his own (for the prince of this world
found nothing in him) but for our sins, that so we may see him in the law,
with the wages thereof, and the sum in the gospel discharged: but good Lord,
how shall I be assured that I am not under the curse, but under grace? for yet
I find such hardness in my heart, unquietness and troubles in my spirit, my
sins rebounded Psa. 51. 3
upon me with terrible fights, and fearful visions which ever amazeth my
unsettled and wavering mind


Lord. The examination of thy sins, is that which first thou must begin with,
and partly, those thou have committed before thy calling, and partly, those
that were done after thy calling; for these sins of knowledge, of all bite
sorest, for sin is most sinful, when thou art intelligenced with my grace in
the truth, sin after knowledge, works either hardness of heart, or a troubled
spirit, and therefore understand that commonly, men before knowledge take the
trouble of mind very heavily, and standing as if never any one had it before
but they, and after knowledge, Satan is ready to accuse them of sin against
the holy Ghost, as if every sin of knowledge was a sin of presumption: but
learn thou that when tentation arises, to try whether thou have done that
sin, or such like already; for these tentations, are either corrections for
some Job 20. 11
sins past, or punishment for sin present, or as warning of sins to come:
as thou may be tempted to adultery, and not do it, yet it comes to thee
again, because thou repentest not for this same, or the like in thy youth
committed: again, when man will not be admonished by public or private
mean, there falls tentation to sin, differing from that wherein thou
do, and presently my justice punishing one sin with another, as the not
repenting covetous, to fall into adultery, theft, or blood: and last there may
tentation come upon, that neither he before, nor presently, does like of, to
advertise, he may fall, therein hereafter: Ier. 13. 11
and to signify that man's standing is not of himself, and none stands but
by my grace: Fo as the girdle cleaves unto the loins of man, so have I tied
my children to me.


Soul. Beside these inward trouarising in my heart, which afflicts me most,
the fruit of my corruption: I am pinched with sundry and diverse outward
afflictions, which agrauates and augments my sorrow, Lord thou know them
well, I cannot find the cause of them, for I live as honest and quiet as any,
and injurious (to my knowledge) to no man in my calling.


Lord. Under any cross, endeavor to have a clean conscience, to comfort thee
with, that there is no spiritual cause of these afflictions in thee, but that
thy sufferings, are either for the trial of thy faith, being assured that
thou have a good conscience in all Heb. 13. 18
things, blessed art thou that suffer for righteousness sake: then fear
not the wickeds fear, neither be troubled but count it exceeding 1. Pet. 3. 14
joy, when thou fall into diverse temptations, that the trial of thy faith
brings forth patience, and let patience have her perfect work, that thou may
be perfect and entire, wanting nothing, that thou may say, O Lord, thou
know, remember me, and visit me, revenge me of my Ier. 15. 15
persecutors, take me not away in the continuance of thine anger, for thy sake
I have suffered rebuke, to such belongs the kingdom of heaven: for it is
better Mat. 5. 10
if it be the will of God, that thou suffer for well doing, then for ill doing.
Thou 1. Pet. 3. 17
may know and discern hereof, by the sickness of thy heart, arising of the
guiltiness of sin, which makes thee suspect all thy ways: for the wicked
man Job 15. 20.
is continually as one that trauelleth with child, and the number of years is
hid from the tyrant, a sound of fear is in his ears, and in his prosperity
the destroyer shall come upon him; for thus the wicked may say, the thing that
I feared is come upon me, and the thing that I was afraid of is come unto
me, I have no peace, neither had I quietness, neithr had I rest, Job. 3. 25
yet trouble is come; thus the sinners fear comes like sudden desolation,
and their destruction like a whirlewinde, for ease slays the foolish, and the
prosperity of fools destroieth them, impatient they are in adversity, and
proud in prosperity; yet that they have is as a bird in captivity, which
being let loose will return to her own liberty again: the righteous are
escaped out of trouble, and the wicked shall Job. 11. 18
come in his steed: yea the godly account that the afflictions of this present
time, are not worthy of the Romans 8. 18
glory which shall be showed, when as the wicked man dies, his hopes
perishes, all afflictions end Job. 11. 1
in death, and can pursue the Saints no further, but I will bring an
everlasting reproach Ier. 23. 40
upon the wicked, and a perpetual shame which shall never be forgotten; for
sin not being cured in this world, ends not in death; for what was in hope
recurable, finite, measurable here, becomes in hell incurable, infinite,
unmeasurable; which makes the godly say, how excellent is thy mercy O God,
therefore the children of men trust under the shadow of thy Psa. 36. 7. 8
wings, they shall be satisfied with the fullness of thy house, and thou shall
give them drink out of the river of thy pleasures, for with thee it is the
well of life, and in my sight shall they see light, and yet nevertheless, for
their manisolde good, and because I love them, I chastise them: but the wicked
are not in trouble as other men are, neither are they plagued as other men, and
when they are raised up, I will despise their image; but the godly are always
with me, I will hold them by my right hand, I will guide them by Psa. 73. 20
my counsel, and and afterward receive them to glory.


Soul. Now I clearly perceive Lord, my misery, from that corrupt fountain in
me, O what a blessed estate have I fallen from, what a woeful and miserable
condition has the transgression of Adam brought upon me, a general infection
and corruption, of all the powers and faculties of my soul and body, my soul
(alas) spiritually (...), my mind through ignorance vain in all the
discourses and imaginations thereof, the understanding blind, not sauouring
the things of God, my conscience wounded, and never soundly peaceable, my
memory fit to reckon evil, and forget good, my will altogether gaine-standing
either to choose or do good, and my affection led by it, my conversation
loathsome to God and man, my thoughts both infinite and insatiable to evil, my
members weapons of unrighteousness, my best actions the greatest abominations
that mind can think, or tongue express. All the mischances of that
hereditary pollution and actual transgression which I am so propense and
naturally willing unto, as is the foul to fly, or the stone to go
downewarde, thou art I know a just and righteous God, who will not justify
sinners.


Lord. Be of good comfort, sin is transgression of the law, I have decreed a
remedy from all eternity, promised immediately after the fall, and exhibited in
the fullness of time, my Son Jesus Gal. 4. 4
Christ to perform a full redemption for thee, and all the elect; which he
performed in obedience to me the Father, in coming to redeem and take thy
nature upon him, made obedient to the law in fulfilling it perfectly, which
thou had broken, and in Esa. 53
undergoing the punishment due unto thee, in obedience I say, in humility at
his nativity To. 5 19
and whole life, suffering all the miseries that sin had drawn upon thee, in
his body, hunger, cold, poverty, etc. in soul ignorance, Mat. 11. 13
temptation, faintnes, and then his death, the pains we had deserved, but
specially in his soul, grief for the sins of the world, when he pleads
himself before my judgment seat as guilty, for thee, who had need of his
Luke 22. 44
own creatures, the Angels to comfort him, withdrawing of the Diety for the
present, my curse upon him for sin, the power of Satan prevailing for a Gal.
3. 10
time, the horror of being overwhelmed with my heavy Mat. 27. 46
wrath for thee, his detaining under the power and Heb. 5. 7
sorrows of death, these, and much more done in his human nature,
accompanied Romans 6. 6
with the merit and efficacy of the divine nature, made them meritorious for
thy salvation, believe in him, and thou shall pass from death to life.


Soul. O well is me, that the curse of the law is derived from me unto
Christ, that my nature being crusifyed with him, corruption in it may be
abolished, not to serve sin hereafter, that hand writing of my sin is
cancelled, and shall not come to remembrance before thee, the spots of my soul
purged by his blood, by the which, the eternal Heb. 14. 15
testimony of grace is ratefied unto me, now sin, and Heb. 9
death, and the devil, that has the rule of death, is destroyed: thou have
dear To. 6. 20
Jesus not only not been holden by the sorrows of death, but also has
obtained a glorious conquest by thy resurrection, over all thy enemies, Satan,
power of hell and sin, in taking 1. Co. 15. 5
away his sting and guiltiness, thereof, the rage and fury of the same in
weakening To. 7. 24
the force, and eating out the corruption thereof, death it self also, and the
To. 6. 21
dominion thereof by the same means are subdued, To. 5. 14
and in the place of these there is recovered unto us 2. Cor. 5
the favor of our GOD whose children we are become in Jesus Christ, who Col.
1. 20
gives faith, peace of conscience, and joy in the holy 1. Ioh. 3. 1
Ghost, unto them whereby they become fruitful to all To. 5. 1
good works, and in the end ceasing from all sin, by him do attain eternal
glory in the heavens,


Lord. Yea and in heaven thou shall be delivered from all sorrow, have perfect
knowledge To. 7. 17
with me, perfect righteousness and holiness never to be changed, fullness of
joy, immediate fruition Psa. 16
of, and conjunction with me, perfect love, triumph 1. Cor. 13.
over all enemies, where I shall be all in all, crowning 1. Cor. 15
thee and all the elect with eternal happiness and bliss 1. Pet. 1. 4
for enermore,


Soul. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil 2. Tim. 4 18
work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom, to whom be glory for
ever and ever,


Amen.
A HEAVENLY, AND comfortable Mould of Prayers:

Full of feeling, tending to the calming of the conscience, for sin; and all
other incidents in this wretched life, for the benefit of all estates, and
degrees of people, whether by Land or Sea.

IAM. 3. If any man be afflicted let him pray. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas
Oaks: for Daniell Speed, and are to be sold at his Shop under S. Mildreds
Church in the Poultry. 1618

A Prayer for Monday at Morning.
The household being assembled, the Master thereof, or he that shall be made the
mouth to Godward, shall with all holy behavior say,

Come let us worship, and fall Psa. 95. 6
down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

The household being assembled, shall pray as follows.

O LORD our God, true, just and merciful, Psa. 19. 12
who can understand his faults? we come confessing and mourning in the sense
of Psa. 38. 9
them, pouring out our whole desire before thee with plenty of tears, and
bitter lamentations, and our sighing is not hid from thee; for we were borne
in iniquity Psa. 51. 5
and in sin have our mothers conceived us: how corrupt are our faults? our
thoughts vain? our words idle? and actions profane? O what good have we
omitted? and what evil have we committed? how foolish and ignorant are we?
Psa. 73. 22
yea beasts before thee; and while we know thy will, we prepared not our selves,
Luke 12. 47
neither did according unto unto it: O Lord how many sins and punishments
have we been heretofore subject too? how grievous and heavy are they we
presently groan under? Oh keep us dear Fathe from presumtpuous sins, let
them Psa 19. 13
not reign over us: we and our fathers behaved our selves proudely, and
hardened our necks, but thou, O God of mercies, gracious and full of compassion,
Neh. 9. 16
of long suffering, and of great mercy, yet forsookest the^ not: our Kings,
Princes and people have sinned against thee, yet compassion and forgiveness is
in thee, O Lord our God, albeit we have rebelled against Dan. 9. 8 9
thee: and now our God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken thy
commandments, therefore abhor we our selves, and Esd. 9. 10
acknowledge us worthy to be cut off for ever: we Job. 17 6
yield our selves to thy chastisement, for our iniquities are gone over our
heads, Psa. 38. 4
and as a weighty burden they are too heavy: for us, we are pricked in our
hearts therefore, and what shall we do? O Lord our God, most dear Father, our
only refuge is to fly unto thee in Christ, hungring and thirsting after the
least drop of mercy, which we do prefer before all earthly comforts in the
world; entreating thee boldly and constantly in faith, to grant it, wating
diligently and patiently, until thou answer us, and raise some measure of
sense and feeling thereof in our hearts and senses, we call thy mercies of
old to memory, how often grace has been showed us from thee our God, when
thou did lighten our eyes, and give us a reviving from our sins; wherefore
most holy father, we beg most earnestly thou would give us now also
strength in Christ to forsake sin in time to come, for in heart we thoroughly
purpose never to commit the like sins again, bnt thorough thy grace to be
changed by the renewing of our minds; to be fearful of all occasions of
sin, and wisely Romans 12. 2
hereafter to decline from sin, and to bend all our strength specially
against our beloved sins, O we heavily complain of our weakness,
dullness, deadness, and inability to any Christian virtue, yet will we by thy
power be strengthened to love, out of a pure heart, of a good conscience, 1.
Tim. 1. 5
and of faith unfeigned, and constantly endeauoure to be found in thy Phil. 3. 9
Son Jesus Christ, and to feel the power of his death and resurrection, in
sub duing of all our sins and wickedness, that the life Christ our Savior
may appear in our mortal bodies, Gal. 2. 19
and that not we, but Christ may live wholly in us, that we may live by faith
in thy Son, who has loved us, and given himself for us: for his sake, grant O
dear Father, that we may practisc these Christian virtues, to the which we
find our selves most adverse and contrary, that by thy grace we may obtain
such victory and conquest over our most grievous temptations and perturbations,
and violence of sin, as that we never fall into them again, and that albeit
we find in our selves pronenesse, and aptness to fall into some of these
transgressio^s yet work in us a godly resolution, and holy strife against them,
groaning and panting under the loathsome burden of vicious corruptions, for
this cause O heavenly Father, inspire in us humble and submissiue minds, to
the power of thy word, that we may out of it have our hereditary pollution
discovered, and our corruptions more and more purged thereby, ever sighing for
the day of our dissolution, and looking for the day of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to our immortality, to whom with the Father and holy Ghost, we render glory,
praise, and dominion now and evermore.

On Monday Evening Prayer.
O Lord God, dear Father in Jesus Christ, repentance is thy proper and
peculiar gift, which thou give to all them that ask Iam. 1. 5. 6
it of thee in faith, for as by nature we have it not, and therefore do
renounce our selves, seeing every good gift is from above, from thee the father
of lights, so the time of repentance is in this life, and here while we may it
must be obtained with all speedy diligence, for (alas) the longer we delay and
defer, the harder it is to be got, and more doubtful it does prove to be
had: the fittest time O Lord, is immediately after the sin is committed, and
while it is called to day, least we be hardened thorough Heb. 3. 12
the deceitfulness of sin: our time here is as a thought, it is cut off, and
Psa. 90. 9
quickly do we fly away, wherefore dear father, we confess the greatness
of our sins committed by us this day, how infinite in number, how dangerous
and and deadly to our souls, how offensive to them that are without, and to
them also that are in Jesus Christ; we acknowledge them, thou art faithful
and just Ioh. 1. 9
to forgive us them, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, we submit
our selves O Lord our God, willingly to thy rebukes and chastisements, which
justly Iam. 4. 9. 10
thou may lay upon us, for the taming and subduing of our sins, we sorrow
and weep for them, our laughter is turned into mourning, and our joy into
heaviness, we cast down Job 33. 26.
our selves before thee O God, that thou may lift us up, and open our ears
by our corrections: that our vncircumsied hearts may be Leu. 26. 41
humbled, and we willingly be are the punishments of our iniquity, O when we
co^template the inco^prehensible, infinite, and glorious Majesty of thee our
God, Genesis 39. 9
whom we have so heavily offendee, in doing so many, so great, and heinous
wickedness, in sinning against thee, against thee only have Psa. 51. 4
we sinned, and done evil in thy sight; O the vileness and abiectnesse of man,
that durst thus commit such wickedness against thee, O God, how fearful by
reason of our manifold iniquities, is our condition under Satan, for of
whomsoever Romans 6. 6
a man is overcome, even to the same he is in bondage, besides the dangers we
Ioh. 8. 34
have incurred by our sins, even all the plagues and 2. Pet. 2. 19
curses temporal and eternal, that are written in thy Deuteronomy. 29
book: wherefore O most heavenly Father we most heartily entreat thee, to
remember the riches of thy mercy, in providing so excellent a remedy against
sin, as the precious blood of thy only and dearly beloved Son: as of a lamb
1. Pet. 1. 8
undefiled, and without spot, when nothing else in the world was available
thereto, whose sacrifice is daily and hourly effectual unto us, timously
preventing sin, carefully furthering, and diligently sanctifying our
conversation from impiety, his blood cleanses us from all sin, he is the
head of his 1. Ioh. 1. 7
Church, and savor of his body, leading us by the guidance of his spirit to
Ephesians. 5. 23
perfection, O how excellent is the estate of them that are in thy Son? how
many benefits and privileges have they? he died for our sins, and rose
again for our righteousness, he ascended on high, and led captivity
captive, and if we Ephesians. 4. 8
now sin (as we cannot else do, and woe is us therefore) we have an advocate
with thee O Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous: O how unthankfully offend
we against the blood 1. Ioh. 1. 8
of this thine anointed, in not walking worthy of the Ephesians. 4. 1
same, but treading under foot thy Son, and counting Heb. 10. 29
the blood of the coueuenant (so much as in us lies) as an unholy thing, Ephesians.
4. 30
wherewith we were sanctified, do spite and grieve the spirit of grace,
dulling, yea oftentimes quenching thy spirit in us: thus living in sin, we
dishonor thee, but maruailous, yea wondrous is thy patience, it is thy mercyes
that we are not 1. These. 5
consumed, because thy co^passions fail not; and therefore when we consider
deer To. 1. 4
father, how small the number of those is, which shall be saved, and that many
Lam. 3. 12
shall strive to enter in, but shall not be able; and do meditate upon thy
judgments, Luke 13. 23
from time to time and still continually inflicted upon the world for sin,
and that if the righteous scarcely shall be saved, where 1. Pet. 4. 8
shall the ungodly and sinners appear? whither shall we slye from thee? O we
have recourse unto thy mercy, O forgive us therefore all our sins and
offenses, for his sake who was crucified Act. 2. 36
and did hang on the tree for us, O give us thy grace, that we may grow more
and more therein, that we think often of our end, and of the fearful day of
judgment, that sin may have little rest in us, but that we may rest in
thee, this night, and evermore, through Jesus Christ thy Son our Lod, to
whom, with thee, and the holy Ghost, we give all glory, praise, and
thanksgiving, now and evermore,

Amen.
A Prayer for Tuseday at Morning.
O Lord God, eternal and everlasting Father, with heuay grief, and loathsome
detestation of our sins, we confess them all unto thee, O searcher Romans 7.
15
of the heart and raines, there is not any creature, Heb 4. 13
which is nor manifest you thy sight, but all things are naked and open to thy
eyes, we acknowled them (although our knowledge herein be too short) and do
yield our unsearchable Psa. 32. 5
hearts unto thee, O God, blaming that corrupt fountain of our hearts against
our selves, unto thee, who art ready and able to forgive. Dan 9 7
O Lord unto us appertains open shame, but righteousness belongs unto thee,
we are not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, we detest our ways, and
cover our faces, yea groan under the body of sin, and desire to be rid of
it, and more carefully To. 7. 11
hereafter to please thee, we have felt thy punishments, and displeasure,
often before for sin, and therefore now we cannot cease crying out against
our corruptions, and rebellions, O Lord we cannot mourn enough at our privy
motions and prouocations to sin, we bear the traitor in our bosom, which
gives way unto the temptation, which we cannot Iam. 1. 14
of our selves subdue and captiuate, and O Lord, we have no certainty of our
life, if to day, yea even this hour thou will call us, neither yet the
assurance of the renewing and return of thy mercy, which often we have refused,
disdained and contemned: Oh that we soon, yea now, heartily repent, and
earnestly convert, Pro. 1. 24
the surer would be our acceptance, and the more comfortable our after
conversation, but O thou Son of David have mercy upon us, O thou pitiful
Samaritain, take us up, not half, but altogether dead in sins and
trespasses; make us live the life of grace, that we may Phil. 3. 20
have our conversation in heaven, from whence we look for thee the Savior,
that we may walk worthy of the Lord, and please Col. 1. 11
him in all things, being fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the
knowledge of our God, in dying to sin, and living to righteousness, that we
may find favor, grace, peace, and contentment both with God and man, casting
away every thing that presses Heb. 12. 1
down, and renouncing our especial sins, which hang so fast upon us, for
this cause O Lord, make us surrender our hearts unto thee, and let our eyes
delight in thy ways, for if Pro. 23. 26
there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that we have, and not
according to that we have not, keep our souls therefore, that they be not
covered with the spirit of slumber, and sleeping in sin, but that we may
stand up Esa. 29. 10
from the dead, and thou will give us light: take from stupidity, and
senselessness, spiritual blindness, and hardness of heart, that Ephesians. 5. 14
we may walk circumspectly, redeeming the time which we have lost, and
always be watchful over our selves, that we may avoid presumption, by
meditation of thy justice, and despair, by quickness and liveliness out of
thy word; for apprehending thy comfortable promises, make us hide them in our
hearts, that we may not sin against Ps. 119. 12
thee, keep us that we may do all things as in thy presence, and never yield
to the inward rebellions and deceitfulness of the heart, but wrestle by thy
grace against the backewardnesse thereof, that we may daily offer it up as a
sacrifice of obedience unto thy Majesty, regarding and accounting all things
but loss and judging them to be dung, that we may win thy love and favor,
and so live in the time of our perigrination here, that we may continually
fear our selves, and have a holy jealousy of all our best actions, that when
the chief shepherd shall appear, we may receive 1. Pet. 5. 4
an incorruptible crown of glory, which is promised them that grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our 2. Pet. 3. 14
Lord and Savior Iesur Christ, to him be glory, both now and for evermore,

Amen.
A Prayer for Tuseday at Evening.
O Most loving and merciful Father, if the beauty and flower of all our best
actions, which is prayer, be so sinfully stained with our natural corruption,
(alas) how odious and abominable are the rest of our sinful works? thou
find no steadfastness even Job. 4 18
in thy servants, and layest folly upon thy Angels: how much more on them that
dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust: thou have no need
that Ioh. 2. 25
any should testify of us, for thou know what is in man, thou lightenest
things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsel of their 1. Co. 4. 5
hearts manifest; our hearts are deceitful and wicked above all things, who
can Ier. 17 9
know it? and if our hearts condemn us, thou art greater then our hearts, and
know all things: O what boldness might we have 1. Ioh. 3. 20
toward thee, if our hearts condemned us not, O what Romans 7
treachery is in this our flesh, O the continual readiness that is in Satan,
that goes 1. Pet. 5. 8
about like a roaring Lion, seeking to devour us; and thou O Lord look down
from heaven, and beholdest all the children of men, from the habitation of thy
dwelling place thou beholdest us all that dwell in the earth: thou fashionest
the hearts Psa. 33. 13
of every one, and understand our works: O Lord above all things, give us an
earnest striving against our corruptions, a tenderness of conscience in all
our actions, a lowliness and humility in all our carriage, making conscience
of the least sins, keeping our selves from the occasions, and all appearances
thereof; and 1. These. 5
because O Lord, thou have not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation,
by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, which died for us, that whether we
wake, or sleep we should live together with him: grant we beseech thee, that we
may entertain 2. Tim. 1. 6
and stir up thy gifts which is in us, and the good motions thereof, let not
thy spirit lie a sleep in us, keep us from terrors in conscience, from
loathing, coldness, and deadness in Christian duties, and exercises,
coffeehouse and blindness of mind, aptness to fall into those sins
again, which we either abhor, or by thy spirit have heretofore conquered,
that we may rouse up thy spirit, and labor more and more to be quickened in the
inward man, ever making war against some chief lust of the heart, to get the
maistery over it, that by experimental conquest of our own, we may learn in
time to conquer all the rest, and because our heart lies open to all
temptations, grant we beseech thee O dear Father, that casting down the
imaginations, 2. Co. 10. 5
and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of thee our God,
and bringing in captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, that we may
follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, and meckenesse,
1. Tim. 5. 11
that fighting the good fight of faith, we may lay hold Psa. 27. 1
on eternal life, and now O Lord, thou art in this darkness, of night our
salvation Psa. 17. 15
and light, we will behold thy face in righteousness, and when we awake,
we shall be satisfied with thy image, wherefore our heart is glad, and our
tongue rejoices, and our flesh also Psa. 16 9
does rest in hope, and now the Lord deliver us from every evil work this
night, and ever, and preserve us unto his heavenly kingdom, 2. Tim. 4
through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, to whom be praise for ever and
ever,

Amen.
A Prayer for Wednesday at Morning.
WE confess O Lord God, most merciful Father, that in us, To. 7. 18
that is in this our flesh, there is no godnes, in such bondage are we unto
sin, that while we are about any good (as very seldom alas we are) evil
is present with us, and we are led captive thereto, yet Lord by thy grace,
we strive against To. 7. 25
that slavery in very great weakness, and we thank our God througe Jesus
Christ our Lord, that we in our mind, in some small measure do serve thy
law, but in our flesh the law of sin; for it is thou O God, which workest in
us both the will and the deed, even of thy own Phil. 2. 13
good pleasure: we have had our conversation in times past (so miserable was
our case) in the lusts of our own flesh, in fulfilling of the flesh, and of
the mind; and we are by nature the children of wrath, walking Ep. 2. 3 4. 5
after the course of this world, and after the Prince that reigns in the
air, even the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience; but
thou O God, who art rich in mercy, through thy great love whereby thou louedst
us, even when we were dead by sins, hah quickened us together in Christ thy
dear Son our Lord: grant good God unto us a rectified judgment, proceeding
from an enlightened and sanctified understanding, wrought by a lively faith
thorough Ephesians. 4 13
thy word, that we may meet together unto a perfect man, and to the measure
of the age of the fullness of Christ, vouchsafe gracious Father, according to
the riches of thy glory, that we may be strenthened by thy spirit, and
comforted in all the faculties of our souls, that we may know and prove the
love of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, that we may be filled with Ephesians. 3. 16
all the fullness of thee our God: give unto us a sanctified conscience,
keeping it sensible of the least evil, desiring to live honestly, with a
continull cheerfulness of well doing, and holy Heb. 13. 18
ordering and disposing of our affections, that we may set them on things that
are above, and not on things which are under the earth: for crucifying of the
flesh, and native corruption thereof, and in building more and Ephesians. 4. 25
more forward the new man, that we may wake a most gracious conquest over our
most unruly thoughts, in fitting and conforming our To. 12. 13
outward actions, to thy most holy, acceptable, and perfect will, and serve
thee Deuteronomy. 27.
the Lord our God with ioyfulnesse, and with a good heart, for all thy
blessings bestowed upon us both spiritual and temporal, that as we have
received Jesus Christ our Lord, so we may walk rooted and built in him, and
stab lisht in the faith, abounding therein Col. 2. 6. 6
with thanksgiving, to prevent security: and give thy grace always O dear
Father, that we may join with this our faith virtue, 2. Pet. 1. 5
and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, 6
and with temperance patience, and with patience 7
godliness, and with godliness brotherly kindness, 11
and with brotherly kindness love, that we be 14
not idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; that as
this same very day we begin here with thee, directing our prayers as
incense before thee, so by these means an entry may be ministered unto us
abundantly, unto the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: that when we shall lay down these our tabernacles, we may receive the
end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls; now the very God of peace
sanctify us throughout, and we beseech God, that our whole spirit, soul, and
body, may be kept blameless both this day, and unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Spirit, three persons in one
Godhead, we ascribe all honor, majesty, dominion, and power, for ever and ever,

Amen.
A Prayer for Wednesday Evening.
LOrd God, heavenly Father, we are come Psa. 95. 6
here to worship, and fall down, and kneel before thee our Maker, do here
acknowledge with quaking and trembling souls, our wickedness to be very
great, and all the imaginatio^s of the thoughts 1. Ioh. 3. 4
of our hearts are not only evil continually, but also we do commit sin in
transgressing thy holy law, yea the least sin breaks the whole law, and
makes Iam. 2. 12
us guilty of the wages thereof, which is eternal death, and endless
condemnation: O how filthy and loath some is sin in the greatest pleasure,
and most joyful actions Job. 14. 4
thereof; by birth, we are altogether tainted, defiled, and polluted with
corruption, and uncleanness, and who can bring a clean thing out of
filthiness, we Ephesians. 4. 29
are prone, and desperately set to commit sin with greediness, we rejoice
in doing evil (alas) we delight and repose our chief contentment therein,
although Pro. 2. 14
all the day long, thou O dear Lord, stretchest forth thy hand unto us,
disobedient Esa. 65. 2
and gaine-saying people, who hate to be reformed and plucked out of sin, yea
our best actions are but beautiful sins, we are all unclean things, and
all our righteousness is as filthy clouts, and we all do fade Esa. 64. 6
as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have carried us away: and we
know good Lord, that he that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil
sinned 1. Ioh. 3. 8
from the beginning, but for this purpose appeared thy Son, O God, that he
might loose the works of the Devil, who was to that effect decreed from all
eternity, promised immediately after our fall in Adam, but when the fullness of
time was come, thou O most merciful father, sent Gal 4. 4. 5
forth thy Son made of a woman, and made under the law, that he might
redeem us that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of thy
sons, who for us has obtained a glorious and meritorious conquest (his
human nature being accompanied with the efficacy of that his divine) over the
To. 5. 14
curse, dominion and rigor of the law, chaining up Satan, and destroying
for ever the power of hell, sin, Gal. 3. 10
death, and condemnation: O Lord our God, what can we render unto thee for so
1. Co. 15
great graces and benefits, we will take the cup of thanksgiving, and call
upon To. 7. 24
thy name, O Lord for thy mercies sake, grant us a full assurance of our
acceptance into thy favor through Jesus Christ, a constant desire of the
promised happiness, that we may hunger and thirst after righteousness; a
cheerful expectation, Mat. 5. 6
and waiting for all these joys and spiritual blessings thou have blessed us
with in heavenly places, that we Ephesians. 1. 2
may willingly resign our selves unto thy holy obedience, embracing those
means which thou have offered Psa. 37. 3. 9
for our salvation, that we may trust in the, and do good, commit our way
unto thee, and cast our selves upon thee when all means shall fail, and rest
Pro. 14. 32
in thee, yea, even hope in death, reverently depend upon the truth of thy
promises, although we cannot see them as yet accomplished, Psa. 99. 4
albeit they seem against all sense and reason, and that this following night
we may not only meditate of the true life of God, and day of resurrection,
and our arising to judgment to render account for the works done in our
flesh, whether they be good or bad, but also may rest in the sweet Phil. 1. 23
bosom of thy portection, desiring at all times to be loosed, and to be with
Christ; ever thinking the time of our departure to be at hand, and therefore to
fight a good fight, to finish our course, and keep the faith, that henceforth
there may be laid up for us the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteuos 2. Tim. 6. 7
judge shall give us at that day, and not unto us only, but to all them also
that love his appearing: which shall be clothed in white array, and whose
names are written in the book of life, purchased by the blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who treads for us the vine press alone, to whom with thee and
the holy Spirit our comforter, be all praise, power, honor and glory,

Amen.
A Prayer for Thursday Morning.
O Eternal God, and everlasting Father, we from the bottom of our hearts do
thank thee for thy blessings spiritual and temperall, common and particular,
that thou have predestined us before the world began, elected us to be in thy
Christ adopted sons, called us by thy spirit to this light of thy Gospel, and
given us assurance in faith, of thy unchangeable favor, renewing in some
measure this corrupt nature, and framing thy image in true righteousness, and
holiness in our inward man, not making us not only capable of grace, in the
soul of wisdom, and spiritual knowledge; but also making some conformity in
us to thy will, in life and conversation, these blessings we have received of
thee freely, beside thy continual providence, and ouer-sight over us this
night bypast and all the days of our life, Lord enlighten our minds that we
may know all things in thee, and nothing any otherwise then as it comes from
thee, and as it has relation to thee: for thou art all things in all, and all
things do exist in thee, and therefore every thing may be known in thee, and
thou most merciful father known yea seen and felt in every thing, even in the
least and basest creature: grant therefore, that we do never rest in any thing
till we come to thee, and now behold we approach to renew that soundnes,
wherewith we laid down, that no root of bitterness break out at the first
of this day, and to provide for holy and settled courses in our callings all the
day after, and so begin anew to live the daily life of grace, that thy
kindness and mercy may follow us all the days of our life, and Psa. 23* 6
now have we laid our selves down in peace, which was thy gift, and do awake
with the comfort there of, thy mercies are renewed every Lam. 3. 33
morning, if we should count them, they are more then the sand, when we awake
we are still with thee, good Lord assist us that we may Ps. 139. 18
daily weaken the old man in us, with the vicious lusts and sinful
concupiscences thereof, give us comfortable experience of this our corruption,
that we may be the more and more humbled in our selves, ever hungring and
thirsting for that righteousness which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord and
Savior, weane us from the love of this world, and distrustful cares for
temporal things, co^firm our faith steadfastly in the providence of thee our
God, for outward benefits; give us confidence and boldness, even to sue to
thy presence, that we may find our life and powers quickened in holy duties,
especially in prayer, zeal of thy glory, humility, patience, fear, and love,
that having lively experience of the power of Christ reigning in our mortal
bodies we may have strength to persevere unto the end: for this cause quicken
our desires and purposes, for well-doing, that we may be humbled for our
outward faylings and sins, and inward unreasonable lusts, laboring more
and more to discern the deceitfulness of the heart, and vnsearchablenes
thereof, that we may be ever enflamed to redress the same: grant O heavenly
Father, that in our calling this day, above all we may desire to glorify
thee, aim only at thy love, that we may be stirred up cheerfully to
prosecute heavenly things, and ever renew our estate in Christ, by constant
repentance, that believing thy promises, and applying the^ to our selves, we
may follow hard after the accomplishment of them, by our obedience to thy
commandments, root out of us incredulity, and covetousness; that setting bonds
to these earthly desires, by true contentation, we may have our eyes fixed
continually upon heavenly; purge out of us hypocrisy and spiritual pride,
keep us from the reigning sins of this our time, that we may follow
constantly after the mark, for the high price of our calling in Jesus Psa. 86.
11
Christ, knit our hearts unto thee, that we may fear thy name, give us a hatred
of all evil, and love of righteousness, prevent in us presumption, that we
may Genesis 17. 1
work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, that henceforth we do
not live to our selves, but to him that died for us, and rose again, and
therefore resigning our selves, bodies, and souls, into thy hands O God,
waiting for thy blessings upon us, in all humility and lowliness, not Hab. 3
sacrificing to our selves, but giving all glory to thee our Genesis 32. 10
God, for we are not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and all the truth
which thou have showed Hos. 13. 9
unto us thy servants, upon thee is our fruit found, who is like unto thee that
takes away iniquities, and pasby Mich. 7. 18
the transgression of thy heritage, thou retaynest not thy wrath for ever,
because mercy pleases thee, thou will turn again, and have compassion upon
us, thou will subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins in the bottom of
the Sea, and that only for the merits of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus
Christ, on whom thou have laid the chastisements Psa. 52.
of our peace, and do give thy self in him, who is thy love, and in whom
thou art well pleased; to whom, with thee, and the holy Spirit, Zeph. 3. 17
one very God immortal, invisible, infinite, and merciful, we render praise
and glory both now and for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for Thursday Evening.
O Eternal God, and everliving Father, we here abase our selves before thee,
in regard of our vileness, and also of the unworthiness 1. Cor. 10.
of the service we do perform, for we have not subdued every imagination in
us, that exalts it self against thee, neither cut off the power Ioh. 6
and cords of sin, our zeal is full of ignorance and selfloue, our religion
replenished with hypocrisy, our profession with vainglory, our well-doing
accompanied with weariesomnes, our faith with carnalnesse, and our afflictions
with impatiency, how sluggish and remiss are we in our callings? how have we
been withdrawn in our vntamable lusts, we have not brought our thoughts in
captivity to thy obedience, we receive thy blessings with unthankful hearts,
never returning unto thee praise; how have we wasted and neglected this so
gracious a time of visitation, wherein we might have builded up our selves in
thee, and practiced good unto others: how carelessly have we kept our hearts,
giving occasion to Satan Tit. 2. 13
thereby against us; how much license have we yielded to the tyrany of the
flesh, in not living soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present
world: how weakly and feebly have we wrastled against Ephesians. 4. 19
our corruptions, and which is most miserable, custom has made us so
senseless and past feeling, that we cannot be moved to believe that thy anger
is so great, or our iniquities so heinous, or condition so wretched, as truly
it is: and therefore we are not afraid of thy Majesty, who is a consuming
Heb. 12. 29
fire, we do not tremble at thy justice, who will reward every man according
to his works, for Romans 2. 6
tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil,
neither do we weigh and regard thy plentiful mercies, in knowing that thy
bountifulness leads us to repentance, wherefore we humbly beseech thee, to
create a clean heart in us, and to Psa. 51. 10
renew a right spirit within us; that we may more sensibly apprehend, how
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked we are; and now good
God, according to the measure of that spiritual feeling, we have obtained of
thee, we most entirely entreat thee, for Jesus Christ thy Sons sake, to
forgive all our sins whatsoever, whenever, and wheresoever committed
against thee, for by faith in his obedience are we made righteous, who is the
end of the To. 5. 19
law for righteousness unto every one that believes, Lord we believe, help
our unbelief: he suffered for us such miseries as sin had Romans 10. 4
drawn upon us, that he might sanctify them unto us, both in the humility of
his nativity, his whole life, and his ignominious and cursed death: O what
grief Heb. 4. 17
was it to him that he came to his own and his own received him not, but was
betrayed by them, and placed before thy judgment seat, O dear Father, as one
guilty for us: let our Luke 22
old man O dear Father, be crucified with thy Son, that the body of sin
may be destroyed, that henceforth we do not serve sin any more; abolish for
his Romans 6. 6
sake that handwriting that was against us, that our sins may never come to
remembrance before thee, who by his death has ratefied Heb. 9
the eternal testament of his grace unto us, for he was delivered to death for
us, and is risen again for our justification; for thine own anointed sake O
Lord, let the joyful light of thy favor and countenance shine upon us, and be
reconciled unto us, grant To. 4. 25
us true faith in thy Son, that being justified thereby before thee, we may
have peace of conscience with thee and our neighbors thereby, that we rejoice
with joy unspeakable, and glory in the 1. Pet. 1. 18
holy Ghost, and become fruitful in all good works, and so by thee (our God)
be made meet to be partakers of thee inheritance of the Saints in light, who
has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us to the
kingdom of thy dear Son, in whom we have redemption thorough his blood, even
the forgiveness of sins, now the same Jesus Christ our Lord, and our God,
even the father which loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and
good hope through grace, comfort our hearts this night and evermore: and
stablish us in every word and good work, in whose name we call upon thee as
he has taught us, saying: Our Father etc.

A Prayer for Friday Morning.
NOt trusting in our own worthiness, for there is none, but in thy great
mercies do we present our selves before thee this morning, O Lord, in great
weakness, to show our thankfulness for thy unspeakable goodness, so
plentifully bestowed upon us, most undeservedly: for Job. 25. 6
what are we but worms, and what is man that thou art mindful of him, or
the son of man, that thou visitest him, wonderfully have thon made him in his
mothers womb, he is the Psalm. 8. 4
image and glory of thee O God, thou might have equalled him him with the
vgliest and basest creatures, it has pleased thee to 1. Cor. 11. 7
spread forth the shadow of the wings of thy protection over us this night, we
meditate in the dead of sleep to have our souls taken away in thy anger for
the offenses committed the day before, and all the days of our life, and
suddenly to have been arrainged at thy tribunal seat, yet thou will not the
death *of a sinner, but rather that he convert and turn unto thee, and now
thou have spared us unto this day, grant O gracious Father, that we may ever
meditate of the true life of thee our God, of the day of the resurrection of
these our bodies, when corruption shall put on incorruption, and of our rising
to that solemn and dreadful judgment: O Lord as thou have banished this
nights dardnesse away (wherein we had a sweet repose and sound rest) that
compassed us: so grant we humbly beseech thee, that inward light in mind by
the rising unto us of that Sun of righteousness, thy Son, the Lord Jesus
Christ, that we may mourn for the ignorance and blindness that yet rests
in us, To. 1^. 12 13. 14
and others also; the night is past, and the day is at hand, vouchsafe we may
cast away the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light: that we may
walk honestly as in the day, not in gluttory, or drunkenness, nor in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying, but that we may put on
the Lord Jesus Christ: praising his mercy and patience, that yet we live to
praise him, and are continued in life to make our election more sure: such is
the constancy of thy love toward us, O Lord God, Father everlasting, for whom
thou love to the Ioh. 13. 1
end, day unto day utters the same, and night unto night teaches knowledge:
thou have O Lord sealed us to theday of redemption, and have given Psa. 19. 2
us earnest of the spirit of promise in our hearts, by the which spirit also,
we Ephesians. 4. 3
behold as in a mirror thy glory, O Lord, with open 2 Co. 1. 22
face, and are changed unto the same image from glory Ephesians. 1 13
to glory, O when shall we fully enjoy the same in that 2. Cor. 3. 18
life to come? when shall we cease from all sin, and have perfect knowledge
of thee, perfect righteousness, and holiness, never to be changed, fullness of
joy, immediate fruition and conjunction with thee our God, when thou shall be
Psa. 16
all in all, and triumph over all thine and our enemies; in that inheritance
immortal and undefiled, and that 1. Cor. 15
fades not, reserved in heaven for us: O Lord give us the grace, that we may
keep our selves in a holy 1. Pet. 1. 4
temper, and peace of mind, by a constant course in all occurrents; and so
prepare our selves unto that crown of glory, loking steadfastly unto Jesus the
author and finisher of our faith, to breed constant affiance Heb. 12. 2
thereof; for this cause O Lord, let the glorious light of thy great Majesty
never depart from the inward eyes of our souls, that we may be seriously
affected with the sense of our wants, benefits purchased by thy Son our
Savior, and perpetually assisted by thy spirit; to consider the great and
manifold blessings which we have received from thee, to provoke us to
thankfulness, without which, all our prayers are ineffectual, grant good
Lord, we may seriously bewail our neglect of prayer, and condemn our selves
for our lip-labor, and customarie devotions, our wearisomensse in well-doing,
and our contentment with small and little feelings, and finally we may rest
upon the continual mediation of our blessed advocate Jesus Christ, who
continually makes intercession for us, and is now both praying for us, and
ready to present our prayers to the throne of grace, and to cover all the
infirmities and faylings of them, with the mantle of his everlasting mercies,
innocence, and holiness; to him therefore with the Father, and the holy Ghost,
we render all glory, praise, dominion, and thanksgiving, now and evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for Friday Evening.
O Lord God, dear Father in Jesus Christ, thy beloved Son our only Savior,
we thee from our very hearts, for the least of all thy blessings (which are
infinitely greater then we can deserve) as well as for the greatest, and do as
readily praise thee for thy mercies received, as we were earnest to sue for
the obtaining of them: and now we offer vnyo thee sacrifice Psa. 116 17
of praise, for the preservation of us in our callings, which are thy
ordinances Heb. 13. 18
imposed on every Christian: Lord forgive us for strayning our conscience in
the least evil this day, give us thy merciful assistance, 1. Co. 7. 21
that we may cleave to, and rejoice in the good testimony thereof; that in
simplicity and godly pureness, with singleness and contentment, by thy grace
we have had our conversation in the world; conuincing the hollownesse and
hypocrisy of the same, which is the moath of well-doing: keehe us good Lord,
from uncertainty and dullness in good things, preserve us from corruption in
judgment, and Apostasy in life. Enable us to hold to the end, and so obtain
the crown: for this cause O Lord give us an inclination and resolution of the
heart to all goodness, that we may justify and beautify 2. Pet. 1. 10
thereby our profession, giving diligence to make our calling and election sure,
that in doing these things we may never fall, and so be delivered from many
inward pangs, and outward troubles: dear Father, grant we may may ever have
righteousness in most precious account, prosecuting it with all zeal and
courage, and rest with delight and contentation in it, and practice the same,
not only as our knowledge informs, but even desire beyond our knowledge
perfection therein; Lord make us renounce Nature, and hold on thy Son Jesus
Christ by a lively faith, and bring forth the fruits of true righteousness in
him; give us good God a holy and settled purpose to serve thee, a plain and
sound dealing in our callings, daily repentance and coueuenanting with thee,
for recovery of our decaies, make our hearts daily to be informed out of thy
word, that we may work continually as in thy presence, with a full and strong
persuasion of thy love, and plentiful 2. Co. 1 10
experience of the same; and prefer it above all things whatsoever, and more
Psa. 4. 6
and more be assured of our acceptance into thy favor, that no trouble, or
dismay ouerwhelme us with the weight thereof; but if it shall be thy good
pleasure we be assaulted on every side, yet we be not in distress, if in
poverty, yet not overcome with poverty, if persecuted, yet not forsaken; if
cast down, yet perish not; that every where we may bear about in our body 2
Cor. 4 8
the dying of our Lord Jesus Christ, that the life of Christ may also be made
manifest in us: vouchsafe unto us O Lord, the shield of true faith, whereby we
may beat back all the fiery darts of the Devil, as carnal confidence,
presumption, security, infidelity, distrust, and incredulity: give us a
constant desire of the promised happiness, purging and preparing our selves to
it, perfect thy work, in mortifying our sins, preserve thy graces in us,
with increase of new obedience; sustain our hearts against the deferring of
thy promises, and in contrary tentations, make us have refuge unto thee; to
hold fast the hope which is set before us, which we have as an anchor of our
souls, both sure and steadfast: Heb. 6. 9
confirm therefore our faith against infidelity, and coffeehouse; our hope
Iam. 1. 18
against despair, our truth against error; with the which, of thine own will
thou did begette us, that we should be as the first fruits of thy
creatures: confound Satan's kingdom, the worlds deceitfulness, and our hearts
doubtfulnesse; inlighten our understanding with this saving knowledge of thee O
God, confirm and stablish our judgments therein, quiet our conscinces, sub
due our wills and affections to thee, and grant us thy merciful concurrence,
that we may finish our course with joy: now Lord we make our prayers to thee
this night in Psa. 69. 13
an acceptable time, even in the multitude of thy mercies, O God hear us, in
the truth of thy salvation we will therefore lie us down, and also sleep in
peace, for Psa. 4 8
thou Lord only, makes us dwell in safety: to God the Father our Creator, to
God the Son our Redeemer, to the holy Ghost our sanctifier and comforter, we
ascribe all honor, power, and glory now and evermore,

Amen.
A Prayer for Saturday Morning.
PRaised be thou O Ood, which have not put back Psa. 67. 20
our prayers, nor thy mercies form us, our life (alas) is subject to many
fearful breaches, and distractions, with many false shadows, and appearances
of good; for not only do we not shine Mat. 5. 16
as lights before others, but also in respect of our evil example, we are
stumblingblocks to them, we do little alas, or rather nothing to edification,
but to offense; 1. Cor. 14
Lord, we heartily mourn for all our sins, whereunto we have yielded our
selves this night, and all our life time before, and do this morning renew our
repentance and vows unto thee, more effectually then before; intending our
callings more carefully and conscionably then we have done, laboring both to
avoid the outward act of sin, and to have our hearts purged from the evil
thoughts thereof: that we give no way to our corruptions, but be masters of
them, and so be free from the rage amd slavery of the same, which is the
greatest happiness in this world: for if we say we have fellowship with
thee and walk 1. Ioh. 1. 6
in darkness, we lie, and do not truly; wherefore O Lord, grant that we may
possess contrite and broken hearts for all our sins, with remembrance of thee
in our greatest security, awake and rowse us up from the dead sleep of sin,
make us desire evermore carefully to serve thee, looking for and hasting unto
the coming of that great day of thee our God; by which the heaaens being on
fire, shall be disolued, and the elements shall melt with 2. Pet. 3. 12
heat: O sweet Father, make us diligent now, that we may be found then in
thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior, in peace, without spot,
and blameless, having by thee increase of his grace in us, experience of his
reigning in our mortal bodies, by whom we shall have strength and assurance
to persevere and continue to the end: for this purpose dear father, daily
quicken our estate in Christ thy Son, by constant and serious repentance, that
from thee our holy purpose being renewed, we likewise also receive strength to
practice accordingly, make us overcome the world by thy power, which hinders
our groth in grace, pressing us down, even with our own weight: Enlarge our
hearts, consciences, wills, and affections, that all the members of our bodies
may be enliued; restrain and bridle our corruptions, that we may daily weaken
them, heartily loath them, and groan under them, keep us from despair, and
ourwarde reproach, let not the time, multitude, and example of sin, draw us
away which do commit sin most greedily, and hide it most dangerously, let our
hearts still cleave unto thee, and to thy word; that by it daily sent out of
our selves, we may obtain new strength in thy Son Jesus Christ, to go
forward in well-doing, that discerning our inability thereto, we may interest
our selves in his precious merits, that growing in grace, we may be perfected
in glory; for the increase of glory, shall answer to the increase of grace:
Lord thou know, we shall have this day, as we have had heretofore, more
tentations and oppositions of the world, humble us, and make us patient, that
we may by thy spirit prevailing in us, be even joyful in all our crosses,
adversities, and troubles whatsoever; charitable in judging others, zealouse
over our selves, holy and upright in our duties and callings, that we may more
and more fear thee, O great and glorious God, more and more humbled in thy
greatest mercy, more and more thankful for the least of thy blessings,
whereunto we have obtained a right only in Christ Jesus, who accepted of us
above the worth of our obedience, grant us we may be cast down by serious
meditation of thy majesty, power, and goodness, as also of our own
unworthiness; O how many are thy deliverances from evil, preseruations, and
goodness, acceptances of imperfect service, renewing and increasing of
spiritual and temporal blessings, preuentions of wickedness, which we
acknowledge to be thy great mercies in us, confessing therewith our Psa. 67. 6
manifold wants, desiring humbly, faithfully, continually, and constantly,
suppliment Ps. 62. 11
of them, receiving in the mean time every present blessing, as steps and
pledges in our right to heaven; power, and mercy belongs Psa. 111. 9
to thee, O Lord, holy and fearful is thy name, how gracious and merciful
art thou? slow to anger, and of great kindness, Psa. 145 9
thou art good to all, and thy mercies are over all thy works: teach us to do
thy will this day; for thou art our God, let thy good Psa. 143. 10
spirit lead us unto the land of righteousness, to thee therefore, with the
Frther, and the holy Spirit, be glory, praise, and honor, world without end.

Amen.
A Prayer for Saturday Evening.
LOrd there is risen unto Ps. 118. 27
us, and we have apprehended light in darkness, we have waited the Psa.
112. 4
accomplishment of thy promises, in thy light we shall see light, and now
heavenly Father, we renew this Psa. 64. 10
night the memory of the bypast days blessings, bestowed upon us most
unprofitable Luke 17. 10
servants, begging, yea more and more recounting that we have received,
beseeching thee to give us grace, that we do not doat or rest upon temporary
things, but rather forget them in regard of the the things of the life to come:
Lord grant us true wisdom, to think not so much what thou can give us, but
what is fit for us to receive; neither so much on what we want, as what we
have above many of thy most dear children, neither yet what we have, but how we
have used it, and yet not so much what we have, as what we may have if we do
believe, be thankful and obedient unto thee: how dear therefore Ps. 139. 17
are thy thoughts unto us O Lord? how great is the sum of them? if we should
count them, they are more then the sand, when we awake, we are still with
the; for when we called, then thou heardest us, and have increased strength in
our souls; thou art our God, hear O lord the noise of our prayers, O Psa.
138. 3
Lord God, the strength of our salvation, thou art our hope, and our portion in
Ps. 140. 6. 7
the land of the living, let us hear therefore thy loving Psa. 142. 5
kindness in the morning, for in thee is our trust: show us the way that we
should Psa. 143. 8
walk in, for we lift up our souls unto thee, deliver us O Lord, from all
danger of body and soul, this night and evermore: for we hide us with thee,
and blessed is he that has thee the God Psa. 146. 5
of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God, who is near unto
all that call upon, yea unto all that Psa. 145. 18
call upon him in truth; thou will fulfill the desire of them that fear thee,
thou will also hear their cry, and thou will save them; thou preseruest all
them that love thee, all flesh shall bless thy holy name for ever and ever:
what a prerogative is this thou grantest unto us, O heavenly Father, to attain
unto by thanksgiving, in that thou O God art the receiver, and we the giuers
unto thee: and how much better it is to give then to receive and how small a
tributerequirest thou for all thy benefits; teach us remember Psa. 116. 12
what we have received and heard, to hold it fast and repent, least thou come
on us as a thief in the night, and Phil. 4* 24
it may be this same night, for we do not know what hour thou will come, but
Lord faithful art thou, which have called us to the fellowship of Jesus Christ
our Lord, who will also do it, for thy gifts are without repentance: yea, and
we have thy Christ interceding for us at this time, that our 1. Cor. 19
faith fail not; and thy holy Spirit whereby we do call Abba dear Father,
does abide Luke 22. 25
with us, and shall continue unto the worlds end: dear father, whom thou once
love thou love to Ioh. 16. 14
the end, and we are married vnno thee in holiness and righteousness,
because it is thy pleasure and will, we are united unto thy Son our head, and
given to him Ioh. 13
of thee, and therefore we are sure none shall take us Hos. 2
out of his hands, grant us therefore everlasting Father Col. 2
according to the riches of thy glory, that we may be Ioh. 17* 17
strengthened by thy spirit in the inward man, that thy Ephesians. 3. 10
Son Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith, and we being rooted and
grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all thy*Saints what is the
breadth, and length, and depth and height, and to know the love of thy dear
Son Jesus Christ, which passes knowledge, that we may be filled with all
fullness of thee our God, unto thee therefore that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that ask or think, according to thy power which works
in us, be praise in the Church of Jesus Christ thoroughout all generations, for
ever

Amen.
A Prayer for Sunday Morning.
O Lord our God, we this day return unto Hos. 14. 4
thee, who have fallen by our own iniquity, now again do we take hold of
Cant. 3. 4
thee, and will not leave thee: we feel in this our recovery, the undoubted
grace of thee our God, in the experience of these sensible Luke 11. 22
combats within us, of the flesh and the spirit, which are constant
testimonies, and sure sealings, of our begun regeneration: now are we
merciful Father ashamed of our faults, and do here this day promise to be
more fearful of our selves, and not so venturous upon the occasions which are
the borders of sin, which have also lessened thy grace oftentimes Mat. 26. 75
in us; but O Lord our God, hide thy face from our sins, and put away all our
iniquiries, cast us not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit
from us, restore us to the joy of Psa. 51. 9
thy salvation, and stablish us with thy free spirit, who^ we have (alas) so
often grieved, especially on the solemn day of thy Sabbath, we have polluted
and profaned Ephesians* 4
the same, making up thereby our transgression of the whole law, we Esa. 56. 2
have hypocritically professed, without any benefit heard thy word, so that
justly thou may deny us the good occasion of this days rest, for the which
we have deserved to be henceforth secluded from so seasonable opportunity and
visitation, thou have offered unto us, that by hearing we should hear and not
understand, and by seeing we should see and not perceive, yea Mat. 13 14
our hearts do wax fat, and our ears dull of hearing, least we should
understand with our hearts, and return that thou may heal us, give us
therefore thy grace to rightly esteem of this so great a mercy, and strengthen
us this day to sanctify and appropriate it to the right end, to a special
manner of hearing thee according to thy law, that we shake off all
impediments whatsoever, which Esa. 56. 4
may with hold from the public and private duties of unfeigned godliness, in
keeping our hands from doing evil, and choosing the thing that pleases thee,
and taking hold of thy covenant, that thou may make us joyful in the house
of prayer, and accept of our sacrifices of prayer and thankfulness, upon that
thy holy altar, even Jesus Christ our Savior, that we may turn away our feet
from doing Esa. 58. 13
our will on thy holy day, and call thy Sabbath a delight to consecrate it as
glorious to thee, O Lord; honoring thee, not doing our own wills, nor speaking
a vain Esa. 66. 23
word: and albeit we shall be assaulted O heavenly father, with many lets and
incumberances, to perform this obedience, yet give us thy holy spirit, that we
may prefer it to whatsouer motions sin, Satan, the flesh, or the world
shall suggest to the contrary, ever directing our mind to the contemplation of
that everlasting Sabbath, when from month to month, and Sabbath to Sabbath,
al flesh shall come to worship before Ier. 17. 21
thee: give us therefore O heavenly Father, thy grace to sequester our selves
from all kind of servile actions, and outward employments, with all froward
affections and lusts, that we may study to enter into that rest with thy
people, and cease from our own works, as thou O Lord did unto thine: blessed
God, strike Heb 4 10
in our hearts in time of prayer, a reverent esteemation of thy glorious
Majesty, a feeling of our defects, and give constant faith in thy sweet
promises, faithful remembrance of thy received blessings, loving and
charitable affections toward our neighbors, and grant unto us merciful
Father, while we hear, a wide and open heart to receive, and holy ludgement
to discern, lowliness in mind, feeling in the inward man, and stability in
the memory, and evermore in thy service bestow on us an humble soul, an
hungring and thirsting heart, that the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ which
thorough the Heb. 9. 14.
eternal spirit offered himself without spot to thee our God, may purge our
consciences from dead works to serve thee the Lord: vouchsafe on us an unfeigned
love to thy word, that we may lay it up and hide it in our souls, and ever
sanctify our thoughts, that our whole meditations may be thereon, and practice
the same in life and conversation, that all men seeing our good works may
glorify thee our heavenly Father, to thee therefore, with the Son, and the
holy Ghost, we render all glory, praise and dominion, both now and for evermore,

Amen.
A Prayer for Sunday Evening.
GLory, praise, and honor, be unto thee most merciful and heavenly Father,
who have appointed this special day and ministry of thy word, for our
instruction: O Lord, grant we may feel our knowledge increased, our faith
strengthened, our souls, minds, and consciences, abundantly thereby
refreshed, good God thou have promised that if any lack wisdom thou will
give it him, yea and all other things in and with thy Christ; we beseech thee
therefore make thy holy word a power of life unto life unto us, yea a power of
salvation unto us that believe in part, yea Lord we believe, we pray thee
help our unbelief: for we are fraught with blindesse and error, our
affections froward, perverse, and disordered, and reprobate to any good work
by nature, make us good Lord new creatures, that as newborn babes we may
desire the sincere milk of thy word that we may grow thereby: annoint our eyes
with the eye-salue of thy holy spirit, Lord join to thy word that penetratiue
virtue to pierce and find out our so pregnant corruptions: for it is lively
and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two-edged sword, and enters
through, even unto the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of
the joints and marow, and is a discerner of the thoughts Heb. 4 12
and intents of the heart, which we beseech thee by thy word to discover, rip
up and ransacke to the bottom, give us a lowly heart to make a lowly use of
reprehensions out of thy word, and apply them earnestly to our selves, that
the righteous may smite us, which is a benefit, and reprove us which is as
precious oil that shall not break our heads, that by Psa. 141. 5
them we may be reclaimed from our froward and backwarde wills: and because
good Lord our remembrance of good things is very short and faileable, and does
reserve very few good things against the hour of temptation, and day of death:
make us good Lord careful ever to hear, meditate, pray, and confer, giving
always thanks with a pliable obedience to thy laws, that in spiritual
discretion, and heavenly wisdom, we may consummate our perigrination here, and
work out our salvation with fear and trembling: by thy grace establish our
hearts in thy truth, that we be not carried about with every light wind of
doctrine, but that we may lay hold on the good, laboring daily to be led on
to perfection: and most gracious Father, make us not only to see and feel our
own defects, but give us a heart to lament them, Lord freely and finally
pardon them, for Jesus Christ thy dear Son sake, moisten and water our hard
and dry hearts, with the dew of thy heavenly blessings, shoure them down upon
us, for lightning of our minds, settling of our judgments, co^forting of our
souls, and reformation of our mis-behauiours, grant we may yield a full assent
to the truth of thy word, not measuring it after the crooked rule of our
mis-leading affections, that we be not of those which make a show of religion
but deny the power thereof, and we beseech thee for thy tender mercies sake,
this night to subdue the flesh, which lusts against the spirit, confound
Satan, adversary to our salvation, and keep us against the example of the
world, which is set in evil; that we may never be weary to begin where we
left off in welldoing, neither yet break off where thou requirest continuance
of obedience, but go from faith to faith, like the way of the righteous, which
as the light shines Pro. 4. 18
more and more unto perfect day, so shall we glorify thy name and our own
souls be strengtheded, the weak ones by our example be confirmed and Phil.
5. 14
edified, the unruly admonished, the feeble-minded comforted, and be patient
toward all men, and shall dissolve from hence in thy favor, whilst now we live
in thy fear, having in our mouths a new song of thanksgiving occasioned by
thy new blessings day by day, and heavenly graces bebestowed upon us in Jesus
Christ our Lord and only Savior, to whom with thee and the holy spirit, be
praise, and glory, for evermore

Amen.
A MEDITATION of the Mercy and Justice of God: Against declining either to the
left or right hand, in presumption or despair that we may lead an even
course in Christianity.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for Daniel Speed; and are to be sold at his
Shop under S. Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1618.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir William Alexander, Knight, Secretary, and one
of his Majesty's most honerable privy Council in Scotland.
MEn to make themselves as it were eternal, they write their names on their
houses; Absolon reared a pillar, is not this (said one) Niniuie which I builded
for my glory, and Ninus to immortalise his father Belus, made for him an Idol,
in whose dominions while Terrah Abraham's father did dwell, he became with the
rest an Idolater, these would have their fame and time ending together, but
they have shot short, of the seven wonders of the world, nothing but naked
names remain: all these are mutilate inventions, to the Jew departed, his
brother or nearest kinsman must raise seed to continue his name in Israel, but
children being the Lords gift, could not be had when and as they would:
books, with time that eats all, does often smoother, may successively by
concatenation of ages in the Press as a new Phoenix revive, but all these to
perpetuity are set apart as faulty. For as they all, monuments, children and
books, are of this below, so shall with the same although never so old be
dissolved, the godly man only and his name does ever endure, who has it, and
himself also written in heaven, and registered in the book of life, for all
consuming oblusion has no place, your virtues and graces make you live longer
then any of these post-running records: but your goodness for ever, with the
Ancient of days, to who^ I heartily pray that after your period shall be
faithfully finished here, you may be partaker of glory: thus I rest ever your
Worships,

In all Christian duty to be commanded, Barthol. Robinson.

A. Meditation of the infinite Mercy, and Justice of God, against declining
either to the left or right hand, in presumption, or despair that we may lead
an even course in Christianity.
II is certain, Caine Genesis 4. 13
his offense in his speech in extenuating the Lords mercy, was greater then
that trespass done by his hand, in shedding his brothers innocent blood, for
he might have obtained pardon for the same if he had been capable of it, for
although man's heart be deceitful above all things, and that all Ier. 17. 9
the immaginations of his thoughts be evil continually, and desperately
wicked, so that none can know it, so deep it is: yet infinitely more deep,
yea insearchable Ephesians. 3. 8
are the riches of the mercies of Christ, for what proportion is there betwixt
a spark of fire, and the great vast gulf of the Ocean to quench it, he will
Mic. 7. 18
turn again says the Prophet, he will have compassion upon thee, he will
subdue thy iniquity, and cast all thy fins into the depth of the Sea, for he
retains not his anger for ever, because he belighteth in mercy, yea there is
no Sea so large but the Lord has set a bound that it may not pass over, but
as the heaven Ps. 104. 9
is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him, as
far us the East is from Psa. 103. 11
the West, so far has he remoouer our transgressions from us: this then so
ample a depth of his mercy, easily does swallow up the shallow profundity of
sin, how deep soever it be; for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is great
redemption, behold, he does not abhor Psa. 103. 7
the confessing thief, the weeping sinner, the humble Cananite, the lately
taken adultresse, the wrongful customer, the contrite Publican, neither yet
his disciple that denied him, nor that bloody persecutor of the disciples, yea
not the^ that crucified him but prayed for them: how great then is thy goodness
O Lord Psa. 31. 19
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee? and done to them that
trust Psa. 33. 5
in thee, even before the sons of men; for the earth is full of the goodness
of the Psa. 34. 8
Lord, taste then and see how gracious the Lord is, his loving kindness is
better Psa. 63. 3
then life, his mercy is above all his works, as oil swimmeth above water:
wherefore the Lord takes this 1. Co. 1. 3
style in commendation specially to himself, that he will be called the
Father of mercy and God of consolation, for it does lie as* it were in his
bosom, and is unto him as his daughter, even the bowels of compassion, he
accounts his riches 2. Sa. 12. 3
not to consist in kingdoms, heavens, or Angels, all which, although he
possess, yet he can create better if it were his pleasure; but he is rich in
mercy, for Ephesians. 2. 4
there is nothing better, nothing greater, for his mercy is not only above all
his works, but also it rejoices against judgment, and gloriously triumphs
over it: The mercy seat which was a type of Christ, Iam. 2. 13
in whom God is well pleased, was without the Arc but the testimony of the
Tables of the law were within, the same* mercy compassing and shutting up
justice within it: Indeed the Cherubins with a fiery Exo. 25. 17
sword debarred Adam from access to the garden again, but in this mercy-seate
the Cherubins stretch out their wings on high, and couers the mercy-seate with
their wings, so Christ stretches out his hands all the day long unto us,
gathering us To. 10. 21
as the hen does her chickens, yea and the law it self which is a
proclamation Mat. 23. 37
of Gods justice, in the second commandment does visit iniquity, unto the
third and fourth generation, but extends mercy Exodus 20.
unto the thousand of them that love him, herein therefore does mercy glory,
and as is were boast it self, for where mercy is mentioned, there is no speech
made of justice, but when judgment is denounced, there is every place left for
mercy which is promised to the penitent, so the Lord is gracious and full of
compassino, what can he deny us that has given his own Son for us, and he
that has given his life for us, cannot refuse to give us his mercy, so may
thou say, unto thee O my strength will I sing, for God is my Psa. 69. 17
defense, and the God of my mercies, for thou Lord have not failed them that
seek thee, for as thy Majesty is, Psa. 9. 10
so is thy mercy, yea and to the sinful he does say, Eccl. 2. 18
thou have ravished my heart my sister my spouse, thou Can. 4. 9
have ravished my heart, turn away thine eyes from Can. 6. 4
me for thou have overcome me; yes truly, that true and living Sampson for
the love he did bear to thee was crucified of the Jews, as that other
Sampson was put to death by the Philistims.

And what can more lively portrait out his mercy, then when he says, I am
pressed under, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaues, yea Lord great is
thy pity in delaying and prolongging thy wrath, thy mercy and moderation in
inflicting it, great is thy goodness in removing thy anger and judgments
procured thereby.

David after he had slept as long as women usually 2. Mac. 7.
go with child, or there about, when he had travailed with iniquity, and had
conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood, for 2 Sa. 24. 8
when lust was conceived, it brought forth sin, and sin when it was finished
brought Iam. 1. 15
forth death: yet the Lord (such is ever his clemency) desired him to make
choice of punishment, although David had provoked him to wrath, against the
law of arms, wherein the weapons should be in the election of him that is
offended, and not in his that prouokes; O that we were wise and understood
this, Deu. 32. 29
that we would consider our later end, and so, albeit we grieve his spirit
often and diverse times, yet so manifold are his tender mercies, Ephesians. 4. 30
that as about the time of forty years God suffered the Israelites manners in
the Act. 13. 18
wilderness, so has he even to this day sparred us, what could he have done
any more to his vineyard that he has not done to it: Esa. 5. 4
let us now at the last search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord,
let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto our God in the heouens, whom we
have Lam. 3. 41
pressed with our sins as with a talent of lead, for Zach. 5. 7
he is not slack concerning his promise, (as some men count slacknesse) but
is patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but 2. Pet. 3. 9
would all men to come to repentance.

The wicked still say, because he delays his coming, either by continuation
of present punishment, or prorogation of their life, where is the promise of
his coming, for since the Fathers 2. Pet. 3. 4
died, all things continue alike from the beginning of the creation, and Psalm.
73. 11
does God know it, say they, Is there knowledge in the Job. 22. 13
most high? can he judge through the dark clouds? the clouds hide him that
he cannot see, and he walks in the circle of heaven, and so do they think
in their heart, God has forgotten, he hides away his face, and will never
see: Psa. 10. 11
the vision that is seen is for many days to come, and does prophecy of the
times Ier. 12. 27
that are far off: but woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of
vanity, and sin as with cart-ropes, which say, let them make speed, let them
hasten his work, that we may see, and let the counsel of the holy one draw
near, and Es. 5. 18. 19
come that we may know it. And when the servant does say in his heart, my
master does defer his coming, and shall begin to smite the servants, and
maidens, and to eat and drink, and be drunken, the master of that servant
will come in a day when he thinks not, and at an hour that he is not aware
Luke 12. 45
of, and will cut him off, and give him his portion with unbelievers.

Therefore beloved sin not because grace has abounded, for the grace of God
which brings salvation unto all men has appeared, teaching us that we should
deny ungodliness and wordly lusts, and that we should live soberly and Tit.
2. 11
righteously, and godly in this present world: despise not therefore the riches
of his bountifulness, and patience, and long sufferance, knowing that the
bountifulnes of God leads thee to repentance, least thou after thy hardness,
and heart that cannot repent, heap up to thy self wrath against Romans 24. 5
the day of wrath: and truly his long suffering is salvation, and repentance
the way to bring us thereto, that we may find 2 Pet. 3. 15
mercy with the Lord at that day: thus the heart of the penitent is like wax,
it is molten in the midst of their bowels, but the wickeds Psa. 22. 14
is as strong as a stone, and as hard as the nether mil-stone: thus they sow
Eze. 13. 18
pillowes under their armeholes, and make vailes upon the head of every one
that stands up to win souls, lying in sin, and presumptuously reposing
upon vain persuasion of the mercy of God, which they ever abuse, truly his
mercy Cant. 1. 16
is that green-bed wherein his true members do lie, howsoever the wicked make
his mercy cloakes of shame, for as the Apostle says, they have these liberty
2. Cor. 4. 2
for a cloak of malitiousnesse, saying as the Jews Ier. 7. 4
did, this is the temple of the Lord, rrusting in lying words that cannot
profit, but be thou not deceived, God is not mocked; let no man deceive thee
with vain Gal. 6. 7
words, for, for these things the wrath of God comes upon the children of
misbeliefe, Ephesians. 5. 6
who rest in their own peace and security, when as he that walks uprightly,
walks only boldly and in the fear of the Lord, is an assured strength:
wherefore well Eccl. 5. 4. 5
does the wiseman advise us, say not Gods mercy is great, he will be
pacified 6
for the multitude of my sins, for mercy and wrath come from him, and his
indignation 7
rests upon sinners, make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off
from day to day, for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in
thy security thou shall be destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance: and
again say not, I have sinned and what harm has happened unto me? for the
Lord is long-suffering, he will in nowise let thee go: and concerning
propitiation be not without fear to add sin to sin.

Is not the mercy of God great? and nothing can be greater, and larger, as is
said, Esa. 6
the Archangels and Angels in heaven, Prophets, Apopostles, Martyrs, and
Confessors on earth, and all Psa. 136
things that live, or yet are created, commend the same, and in one Psalm,
every verse (even twenty six times) ends with this, for his mercy endures
for ever.

O but beware hereof, this is Satan's old subtilty, whereby he makes man
bold on sin, as he did Euah, you shall not die at all said he, he
covers and hides the Lords justice from men's eyes, and remoueth the evil
day a far off; thus he lies in wait secretly, even as a Lion in his den, he
lies in wait to spoil the poor, when he draws him into his net, therefore
heap of poor do fall by his might, but he Psa. 10 9
greatly enlarges the Lords bountifulnes, and patience; for as it is true the
Lord is merciful, so is this true that he visits the iniquity of the
fathers to the third and fourth generation, and therefore thou must consider
that which David did sing, I will sing mercy and judgment Psa. 109. 1
says he, unto thee O Lord will I sing. And herein is God and his ministers,
distinguished from Satan and his; for God ever conioyneth mercy and justice
together, but Satan harpes continually on one of them only, as he says,
peace, Ier. 6. 14
peace, when there is no peace, thus these monsters draw out their breast, and
give suck to their young Lam. 4. 3
ones, thus the wicked is made to boast of his own hearts desire, he blesses
himself and contemns the Lord; the deceiving Psa. 10. 3
teachers words, are softer then butter, yet is there war in the heart of
him they are spoken to, their words I say are more gentle then oil, yet are
they Psa. 55. 21
swords, but if thou will be cured, beloved, there must be put into thy sores
both wine and oil, that thou may suffer the wholesome and sound doctrine,
and not resemble those, whose itching ears turn away from hearing the truth,
on whom 2. Tim. 4. 3
while they dream on peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes as
sorrow upon a woman with 1. These. 5. 3
child, and they shall not escape any wise.

Whenas a child has a bird tied by the foot, tosseth it to and fro until he
kill it; so these false teachers, and men seducing themselves, while they abuse
the Lords tender mercies, as if they were bound to all their youthful sins,
and ancient follies, want only and insolently bragging of the^, and grieuing
the holy spirit of Israel: they turn his mercies (I say) thus disdained by
them, unto the bitterness of his wrath, fools and children they may be
called concerning understanding, 1. Co. r 14
albeit they be of a ripe age.

And like as an old man being to pass over a narrow and small bridge,
puts on his spectacles, in which the bridge appears a great deal bigger
then of it self it is, where he falls to the hazard of his life in the
ditch, so they that wander from this mortality to immortality by the mercies of
God, not rightly esteeming the same, but walks in the broad way that leads
to destruction, they may I say, cry out, great is his mercy, which yet is not
so great that it will favor them which delay from time to time to turn to the
Savior of mankind, which have made a covenant with death, and with hell are
at agreement, though a scourge run over, and pass thorough, it shall Esa. 28.
15
not come say they, at us, for we have made falsehood our refuge, and under
vanity are we hid, but what follows hereon? -hey falling from the bridge of
their vain hope, and Satan that deceived them, shall be cast into a lake of
fire and brimstone, then shall they Reu. 2. 10
with great grief say to the mountains and rocks, fall upon us, and hide us
from the presence of him that sits upon the throne, and Reu 6. 16
from the wrath of the lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who
can stand? yes truly, they will wish any thing fall rather upon them, then
that they should fall into that lake.

O but can a Lamb wax angry, yea the more patient and slow the Lord is to
punish sin, the more irefull Esa. 65. 3
he is when in spite he is provoked to his face, which the very Saints of God
have wisely foreseen; O Lord rebuke me not in Psa. 6. 9
thine anger, says he, neither chastise me in thy wrath: and the Prophet,
Ier. 10. 14
Lord correct me but with judgment not in thy anger, least thou bring me to
nothing, and no marvel, for even the Angels in that vision had the face of a
man Ezekiel. 1. 10
and of a lion, even as they were taught of the Lord: he had the face of a
lamb to take away the sins of the world, yea and the face of a lion to
punish the sins of the world, for this is the day of grace and acceptable time,
wherein mercy is offered to the penitent, which being neglected and contemned,
in his day, the day I say of the Lord, he will utter cruelty, wherefore the
Prophet says, woe Am. 5. 18
be unto them that desire the day of the Lord, what have you to do with the
day of the Lord? it is darkness, and not light: but the godly contrarily
desire the time to be at hand, and therefore do earnestly crave the
appearance of the Lord Jesus, Ren 22. 10
saying, even so come Lord Jesus, come and tarry not: which the wicked do
tauntingly and scornefully utter, but as Sampson was Judge. 16. 30
revenged on the Philistims who iested at him, so behold here is a stronger
one then Sampson, for now by mercy he is a man, that is sometime to be a lion,
and the man is that lamb that takes away the sins of the repentant: but
then the lion shall be to the wilful and stubborn sinner, a boar to tear
them in pieces.

And thus God suffers with long patience, the vessels of wrath prepared to
destruction, and to declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy,
which Romans 11
he had prepared unto mercy: Cast not away therefore beloved, thy confidence
which has great recompense of reward, for thou have need of patience, that
after thou have done the will of God, thou may receive Heb. 10. 35
the crown, and be not one of them which with-drawe themselves to perdition,
but be of faith to the salvation of thy soul, if thou cast thy self down
humbly at his feet, water thy couch in thy earnest repentance with tears, if
thou shall with all thy soul ask mercy and forgiveness, God cannot deny
himself, he is faithful, and will forgive, even for his own Sons blood,
as of a lamb without ipot and blemish, and let all them 1. Pet. 1. 19
which are redeemed, thus refuse all things in regard thereof, and cast down
their crowns before his feet, confessing them to have been, and now are Reu.
4. 10
most unprofitable servants, and he will put away their transgressions as a
cloud and like a mist: O turn us unto thee O Lord, for thou Esa. 44, 20
art our Savior, waken us that we may strengthen the Revel. 3, 2
things which remain that are ready to die, before our wickedness be full, and
time of recovery past, so shall Genesis 15. 16
thou redeem our life from the grave, and crown us Psa. 103. 4
with mercy and compassions, and thereafter bestow 2. Tim. 4. 8
on us the crown of righteousness laid up for us, which the Lord the
righteous 1. Pet. 5. 4
judge shall give us at that day, and not to us only, but unto all them also
that love his appearance; we shall even receive I say that Tit. 3. 5
incorruptible crown of glory at the appearance of of our chief shepherd,
not Romans 11. 6
for the works of righteousness which we have done (for our best are but
glistering Gal. 5. 16
sins) but for his own bountifulness, (and love of his mere mercy, favor,
and grace, to us which walk in the spirit, and do not fulfill Gal. 6, 8
the lusts of the flesh: for he that sows in the flesh, shall of the flesh
reap corruption, but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap
life everlasting: let us then be renewed in Ephesians. 4. 23
the spirit of our mind, and put on the new man, which Gal. 6. 14
after God is created in righteousness and holiness, have the world crucified
to us, Gal. 2, 20
and us to the world, yea and that we may live unto God, be crucified with
Christ, and may in all soundness of mind say, I live yet, not I now but
Christ lives in me, and in that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in
the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me: O that once
(to conclude) we might think all things but loss for the excellent knowledge
sake of Christ Jesus our Lord, and judge Phil. 3. 8
them but dung, that we may win Christ, setting always our affections on
things that are above, and not on things which are on the earth, that being
dead to sin, our life may be hid with God in Christ, Col. 3. 2. 3
that when he that is our life shall appear, we may also appear with him in
glory, to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, we render all glory,
praise, majesty, and dominion, both now and euer-more,

Amen.
A Heavenly and Christian caveat, whenever, or wheresoever the Devil by
suggestions, the flesh by the corruption thereof, or the world by wicked
example, would allure or entice thee to sin, then seriously bethink thee,
and guard thee with these few Articles.
1 Weigh diligently the eternity both of life which is a reward of well-doing,
as also of death and pain, for yielding to the contrary, which both are such
as the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither yet can enter into
the heart of man, and shall rather by sense be felt. then by judgment be
understood.

2 Remember the nobility, worth, and dignity, of the nature of man, how
gracious it is in the sight of God, while it stands in grace; how abject and
vile it is subject under sin.

3 Consider the value of the rest, tranquillity, and peace of a good mind, both
with God, thy self, and thy neighbor, for while thou sinnest God is against
thee, to punish thee; in doing well Satan is against thee, to assault thee.

4 Make every day a recital of the Lords blessings upon thee, in thy
predestination and election, before thou wast created, his gifts before thou
came to knowledge, and his preservation of thee until now, from deserved
plagues of of pestilence, sword, famine, fire, and water, in place whereof,
he prolongeth thy life, gives thee food, raiment, and health of body, gives
his presence in his word and Sacraments for thy soul, his spirit to thy
effectual calling to grace, benefits public and private, general and
particular, which are so infinitely and undeservedly poured on thee, while thou
refusest thy loyalty to thy sovereign, reuolts, and confederates with his
greatest enemies.

5 Meditate the pains of Christ in his whole life, what he was before his
incarnation, and what he became after, look unto his cross, passion, and
bitter death, and for whom he did undergo the same, and how we reward him
with despighfull unthankfulness, distrusting his goodness altogether, or else
too much presumptuously re-lying thereon, in continuation of our sins, and
postponing of repentance.

6 Consider, that without hearty and zealous remorse, never any shall attain
to life everlasting, and that it is not a gift may be had at all times, yea it
is often refused, because the precious time of visitation was neglected, than
it is seldom true and lively when it is to late, that very often impenitency
is tied to sin, with the wages thereof.

7. That death is a faithful doore-keeper, which will not suffer thee to have
more with thee out of this world of the goods thereof, but so much as thou
bring in with thee, which is nakedness, crying, and grief: the goods of
faith, hope, repentance, and charity, shall only accompany and follow the
conscience after death, which shall never be severed from the soul, either in
well or evil doing, but supplies in wickedness all the offices of a Court,
cites, arrests, presents, judges, bears witness, condemns or justifies,
executes and tormenteth eternally, for it is that worm that dies not.

8 Death as our shadow attends us in every place, which as it is most
certain, so the day and hour is most uncertain to us, for who knows the
time, hour, or place thereof.

9 Look that the longest liver has been gathered to his fathers, and has
gone the way of all flesh, our life being but a sleep, or shadow of longer or
shorter continuance.

10 Pause upon the inesteemable good we lose by sinning, hardly recoueraable:
the infinite and unspeakable evil we incur thereby, how short pleasure is
requited with unmeasurable torment.

11 Remember the companions which ever attend upon sin, Gods high
displeasure, the loss of the right which we have to his creatures, the
grieuing of his spirit, and the banishing of his good Angels from us,
confusion, storm and torture of mind, a fearful expectation of Gods
insupportable wrath, the sparks whereof do begin but to be kindled here,
beside the loath somenesse, wearisomenesse, and anxiety we have in the
sweetest fits of sin.

12 Consider the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all the godly,
how wisely they have daunted and bridled their vicious wills and affections,
and courageously ouer-throwne the strong hold of sin within them, for the
crown of glory that was set before them, died in Gods favor, and lived all
their time in his fear, left testimony and commendation behind them, to the
end of the world, of their strong and invincible faith, but the memory of the
wicked does rot, and his posterity is plagued.

FINIS.

