CERTAIN Selected Histories for christian Recreations with their several
Moralizations.

Brought into English verse, and are to be song with several notes: Composed
by Richard Robinson Citizen of London.

Tempestiue, Intempestiue.
Vigilate, Orate and Laudate Dominu^.
Quia solus ille salus hominum.
Recordare, and Read. Simplicitate, and Sinceritate. Imprinted at London for
Henry Kirkha^, and are to be sold at the little North door of S, Paul's, at
the sign of the black Boy.

To the worshipful master Simon Roo, now Master of the worshipful Company
of Lethersellers in London, and to the Wardens and whole fellowship of the
same, Richard Robinson Citizen and Freeman of the same Company, wishes the
abundance of Gods everlasting Grace.
REcognisyng my self in sonderie wise a debtor (right worshipful) amongst
other considerations, J am moved to remember my duty to wards the good
expectations of your worthiness, which I have long time wished that God
would enable me any manner of way, to testify my good will toward you.
Albeeit vvantyng hitherto that which might best behoue me to bring for your
better contentation. I have thought it good as time now serves, to present
you with such simple travel, as my barren industry could yield in lieu of
learned and large lucubrations, an^ unlearned and little piece of labor* for
the accomplisshyng of part of my duty, being a small pa^phlet, which J
have entitled Certain select Histories, for Christian Recreation, no^ only
seruyng for the usual feast o^ Christmas, beeit at this time celebrated, but
also necessary to be used for decent Recreation at all other tyme^ convenient.
Every history being composed into several verse, with the gloss or
Moralization thereof aptly applied, and their apt tunes for their use to be
song, with the argument of every History prefixed, which as I confess,
is but of small value, to responde with your expectations, yet herein as I am
to crave pardon for my boldness, in dedicating the same unto you, I have good
hope that you vvil not all together reiecte my good will, with the
simpleness of the work: But deem the best of me, As one that would be
glad, in any greater matter to satisfy your vvorthie good vvilles at all
times. And thus besethyng your vvorshippes, to bear with this my poor
beginning, J surcease to trouble you any further. Restyng you in the tuitio^
and governance of the almighty. From my Chamber on the Southvvest side of the
Cathedral Church of S. Paul in London, This xxi. day of December. M.D.lxxvi.

Your worships poor brother and faithful orator in Christ Richard Robinson,

Certain selected Histories for Christian Recreation.
The argument.
Christ being borne, the Angels reueile the same with glad tidinges unto the
poor shepherdes. The star seen in the East. The Sages repare with their
presents, to do homage unto the Savior of the world.

To the tune of La bonetta.
IF Angels voice, did first rejoice
In spiritus concordia:
To shepherdes poor, singing evermore
Deo in excelsis gloria.
Christ God and man, each christian
Of due, much more this day,
Ought dedicate, in blisfull state,
Thy birthe with glory aie.
If wisemen three, brought presents free
Their true love also to declare:
The first brought gold, the second was bold,
With Mirrhe him to prepare.
The third Insence, with full pretense,
They mekely offered thus all three,
Christ God and man, to worship than,
In Bethleem borne truly.
The Moralization.
OF these gifts thus, we may discuss,
As skillful writers duly scan:
Gold first of all, Treasure to call,
Of wisdom in Christ tokenyng than.
Mirrhe does include, a heart indude,
With true repentance aye.
Insence eke tells, devotion dwelles,
In mind with steadfast stay.
In token true, of honor due,
Their Savior Christ chief King unto,
These gifts gave they, whereby we may,
Our Christian duty show.
This solemn feast, let every geast,
Biden in Christ's faith and fear:
To Christ's birth, new men forthwith,
In love and life appear.
Gold, Mirrhe, Insence, from conscience,
Of sin and vice, bare and deuoyde,
To Christ our King, thus for to bring,
Let our care always be employde.
Let faith steadfast, man which thou haste*
Received by Baptism,
In promise made, never to fade,
As gold give this to him.
Let hope of heal, in us prevail,
By Christ which him in name profess*
That he may have, our souls to save,
This Mirrhe give more and less.
Let love likewise, our due comprise,
Both toward God, and also man:
To Christ Jesus, we rightly thus,
Do bring our Insence than.
Bis.
With one clear voice, thus to teioyce,
In Christ's birthe then do all we,
That bear Christ's name, practice the same,
Henceforthe perpetually.
And let us pray, in faith alwaie,
That Christ our Savior,
His Church our Queen, and realm from tene
Preserve may evermore.
Finis.
The argument.
Man's prayer is a melody to God, which although it baue some good success
in the world, yet there is now and then a whistelyng charmer stirred up to
bereue and spoil us of this enjoyed felicity.

To the tune of La band la shaft.
Ehouah vouche thy joyful spirit,
Each Christian heart to joy this day,
As by a Star thou did vizite,
Kings in the East them to displaie,
The birthe of Christ at Bethleem,
A Savior unto mortal men.
Minerua and you Muses nine,
Assist me with your sacred aid:
Some solemn song to frame with time,
From joyful heart to be conuaide,
With thankful voice to celebrate,
Christ's birthe now to commemorate.
Tiberius Emperor once did reign,
In Music much delighted he:
Who huntyng on a time certain,
Did hear a noise of melody.
A Harper it was hard by did play,
Whereat this prince amasde did stay.
And tournes his horse unto that place,
Approchyng nere a river long:
He did discrie where then there was,
The Musician plaiyng his Harp upon,
The tenor of whose song was this,
Man's prayer to God a melody is.
The Emperor joyful this to hear,
Demanded the Musician tho,
Why he so pleasantly played there,
My Lord says he that will I show,
These thirty years and upwards I,
Have used here this harmony.
Such grace and virtue in my noise,
The Gods by fate have granted me:
That fishes from this river rejoice,
To come to hand and taken be,
So that relieve I did with all,
My self, my wife, and children small.
But out alack this Harper says,
Good sir it has chaunste contrary:
Unto my mind within few days,
A charmer came which cheerfully,
On the further bancke did whistle so,
That he has fecht the fish me fro.
And therefore gracious Lord says he,
As you are potent Emperor,
And sole prince of this Imperie,
I humbly crave your good succor,
For to expel and banishe hence,
The charmer and his evil pretense.
Tiberius courteous answer gave,
Friend by no means but one I may:
Thy case redress, a hook I have,
Of gold within this Casket gaie,
^olde here of me the same do take,
And to this rod with bait fast make.
Then use the slight that longs thereto,
On warblyng Harp to play adrest,
The fishes friskyng to and fro,
Upon the bait them selves will rest.
And when thou feel them feed on fast,
Draw up the fish on land them cast.
So shall thou hereby frustrate quite,
This subtle charmer of his pray,
If thou demainest thee thus a right,
Confused he shall walk his way,
The Harper did this hest fulfill,
And fecht up fish even at his will,
A meaning hereof Moral wise,
My muse in modest manner show,
Who this Tiberus Emperor is,
The River and Harper also.
With Fish and Charmer who they be,
Discribed in ancient history.
The Moralization.
Christ to Tiberius is comparde,
Which loves to hear the melod^^*
Of prayer unto him prefarde,
And does delight huntyng to be.
To save the soul by Satan sought,
His spoil to make and bring to naught:
This River with the Fish therein,
Resembled are the World unto,
And people fraught with odious sin,
The poor man plaiyng there also,
^che Preacher is with sacred lore,
That draws up fish to heavenly shore.
But then a Charmer steppeth there,
The Preachers harp which does disturb^
In triple trade does he appear,
To cast the souls in sleep absurd,
And whom to sleep he can not win,
As Ianglers vain he hems them in.
And if he make no Ianglers vain,
Envy in him yet vigor has,
To lure these souls for to abstain,
And quite forsake the perfect path,
That either they become abiecte,
Or never the wiser in effect.
Wherefore needs must the golden hook,
Be had of every Preacher here,
^or Gods divine grace must they look,
That they may fish in faith and fear,
^uche comfortable noise to make,
Both Charmer and the fish to take.
Where since in faith we Christ profess,
God grant we thereof fruits may give,
With prayer to him and never cease,
Elizabeth our Queen long live,
Us to protecte by grace divine,
And gain celestial joys in fine.
Finis.
The Argument.
Amongst the children of this world, all are not of one seed and generation,
and therefore puttyng apart the bondwoman and her children, from the freewoman
and her issue, they are to be reputed accordyngly.

To the tune of Sondaie Morning.
APollo with thy sacred lore,
My sclender skill and pen direct,
The birthe of Christ still to adore:
With solemn sacred song select,
Dame Pallas with thy Nymphs be priest,
To further this my third request.
A noble king sometimes did reign,
With wit and wealth, endued was he:
A Queen he had, with whom certain,
He liude a time, though vicious she.
Three sons by strange seed procreate,
Digressyng had, base borne by kind,
On her the fourth son he begat,
More greater comfort to his mind.
It chanced that when Atrapos,
Of fatal life bereft this King:
The Queen with her sons did dispose,
The funeralles accomplishyng.
In earth with pomp the corpse to lay,
With stately tomb enshrinde for aye.
Which done behold within short space,
These sons among them did contend:
Who should succeed in fathers place,
In fine yet did they condiscende.
Unto an ancient knight to go,
Which Secretary was of late:
To the dead King, and him they do,
Commit their case to arbitrate.
The knight when he with patience heard,
Them and their case considered well:
To them he thus his mind declared,
My Lords do yield to my council.
Your purpose then shall well proceed,
This said they, hereunto agreed.
My sentence so assign you shall,
The buried corpse again up take:
and that you gree emongst you all,
Your bows and shaftes prepared do make
To shoot thereat incontinent,
And who so pearceth deepest in,
The same I deem by mine assent,
Both regal croune and realm shall win.
All four sons hereto did agree,
The buried corpse and take from ground,
They bind it fast unto a tree:
Each one to give his deepest wound.
The first the kings right hand did hitte,
Wherefore it was awarded fit.
That he as only heir and Lord,
Of Fathers land proclaimed should be,
The secondes shafte with flesh begorde,
Through fathers mouth did perce truly*
Wherefore to have the sovereign swaie,
And cheef rule of his Fathers land,
More certainly he ought they say,
Of twain the firmer lot to stand.
The third his heart did penitrate,
By reason whereof thought it was,
That he without strife or debate:
Should chiefly rule in Fathers place,
But when the fourth son should prepare,
To shoot he shrikte with woeful care.
Criyng alack, this lucklesse day,
I do lament, hear thus to see,
Thy corpse oh Father can he say,
Of thy sons wounded now to be.
The Gods defend that live or dead,
My Fathers corpse, I perish should:
This said, him in his Fathers stead,
To reign as King the nobles would.
The other three sons were dismissed,
From all and every rule or swaie,
My muse no longer now desist,
The Moral hereof to displaie.
^his King wise noble and wealthy,
To Jesus Christ compared may be: Moraliztion.

^hiche did mankind his spouse ordain,
But she in time did violate:
^he sacred bed with whoredoms stain,
After strange Gods a miscreate.
^onceiued and brought forth sons three,
Pagants, Iues and Papiste sect:
^hereof the first did wound truly.
The Kings right hand with shaft infecte.
^he^ they (Christ's doctrine which does sit,
At right hand of his Father dear:)
^^d quite forsake his servant smite,
With sondrie wounds upon earth hear.
As persecutyng Pagans fell,
Enemies to Christ and his Gospel.
The second son eke putatiue,
The King of Kings more deeply perst,
When as the Jews to him did give,
Vinegar and Gall to quench his thirst.
The third most wicked son of three,
With poisoned shafte did nothing spare:
To wound Christ's heart the King most hie,
The Papists do this son declare.
While they do strive with might and maine,
Christ's faithful flock on earth to quell:
Which should one corpse and soul contain
In fruits, in fruits of the Gospel.
How have they whet their arrows sharp,
To pearce Christ's and his members heart.
The fourth son now define I thus,
That wailde and would not shoot at all:
Because he saw so mischeuous,
Pretense of sons unnatural.
Each Christian true the fourth son is,
Which fears God and would none ill:
If he do ill, to sacrifise,
In righteousness he has good will.
Such a one my song does signify,
In sacred throne celestial:
Shall reign with Christ in Majesty,
At the last day Judicial.
For which in faith and fear letts pray,
That Christ from ill preserve us may.
And as we subjects all are bound,
For our noble Queen Elizabeth:
Our prayers to God with joyful sound,
Let us direct, in health and wealth.
That it would please the King of Kings,
Christ our anchor, mark, and stay:
Her to preserve in all good things,
And prosper us her subjects aye*
Finis.
The Argument.
The life present procures either favor, and grace at the hands of God, if
we return in time, either else neglectyng time, purchases us his heavy
indingnation, both now and in the world to come.

To the tune of Beckinghams Galliarde.
YE sacred Nymphs of Hellicon,
By Jove's almight decree:
Vouchesafe once more to look upon,
This fourth solempnitie.
Caliope with thy crystal voice my Music adiuuate,
From joyful heart with
Tha^kfull mouth, Christ's birth to celebrate
In time to watch, in time to wake,
While candle lasts to come,
Upon this theme, I here do make,
This admonition,
Time let us spend, well till the end,
Of hour glass be out run.
Live here must we in full pretense,
To give no liberty:
To sin by will or negligence,
Our light to dampnifie.
As Alexander sometime king of
Macedonia land:
Decreed in Court a Candle should
Be light and burning stand.
And sent his Heralds to each place,
And coaste where he bare swaie:
With trumpetts blast, his will to blase,
To subjects all. That they
Which had ta^nsgrest, should come in pressed
To Court without delaie,
If any subject had transgrest,
Against Alexander king,
Let him appear, his case redrest,
Should be in each such thing.
So that before the king he came,
Whiles candle light did cast:
And if he tarried paste that time,
His labor was but waste.
And who soever had done offense,
And came not in due time,
To him plain death for negligence,
The kings will did assign,
Of better and wourse, some had recourse,
Toth court guilty of crime.
The story tells a number great,
Appearde before the king:
The Candle castyng light and heat,
Had pardon for each thing.
A number great there were also,
To come at all refused,
On those the king the penalty,
Without redemption used.
And some that while the Candle burnde,
In coming stayed so long:
The Candle out, that they retournde,
With woe and wailyng song,
We Christians here, how to appear,
Each one may learn among.
The Moraliziation.
Christ is this Alexander King,
That swaies the sacred sword:
We subjects his here all living,
If we do fear this Lord.
As he is favorable, and with
Mercy full repleate:
So merciful does he appear,
To sinners small and great.
Not limityng a time only,
Of life to mortal men,
But lends us sacred lore, whereby
He may our hearts lighten,
With Candle light of divine might,
Let us take due time then.
And let us come when Christ, does call
While Candle light does last,
Then pardon we procure us shall,
Before the time be past.
So shall we blessed light enjoy,
And Christ's pardon aye:
And fear no worldly foes annoye,
That would seek our decaie.
With humble faithful English heart,
To Christ pray we each one,
Our royal Queen for to imparte:
His blessed light upon:
And us to stand with lamps in hand,
By him in joyful throne.
Finis.
The Argument.
Man's life is likened to a continual warfare, and conflicte with Satan. The
Serpente and the Tode fightyng together, the Serpente being reserved by help
of man, shows example of gratitude. The Tode that sought the Serpents
destruction, has in fine his due guardon.

To the tune of Flearyng fancy, syngyng the iiii. and v. line of every verse
alike.
TO increase in Christ our comfort still,
Reuailed us by sondrie means,
Though scripture fraught with sacred skill,
Do far surmount all humane dreams
amongst a sort of pithie theames,
This profane story merits praise,
Christ's co^bate and conquest which bewraies.
Caesar Augustus living than,
A noble knight his subject was:
^ valiant worthy gentleman,
Who ridyng once as he did pass,
A Forest through, by hap alas,
A Tode with Serpent fightyng saw,
Each others blood deadly to draw.
With tried force a time fought they,
The Tode having the masterie,
This gentle knight did straight assaie,
In Serpents quarrel hap to try.
Wounded the same Tode greuouslie,
But not without a mortal wound,
Him self escaped and fled the ground.
The Serpent also thence did flee,
And when in place this worthy knight,
Alone thought best his wound to see,
From stately steed alack did light.
His inwurde parts with poison dight,
He found where did increase his greef,
And homewards rides to have releef.
Where long time languishyng in pain,
So that his will and Testament:
For to be made, he did ordain,
Prepared to dye incontinent,
Yet when as by the fire fervent,
For comfort further laid he was,
And that despair in him had place.
Even then behold the Serpent late,
In whose defense this greef he cought,
Was entered in at this knights gate,
And seen by servants, straight they sought
To show their master thinkyng naught,
Of such a hap then did he will,
The Serpent should be brought him till,
The knight when he the Serpent saw,
The same it was did well agnise,
In whose defense through ouerthrawe,
Him self to feight did enterprise,
Against the Tode though ieoperdies,
Of death thereby his life pursewed,
Yet as he was with wit endewed.
Commanded all his servant there,
That they should not the Serpent noye,
Saying, danger none I fear,
He will me do but rather joy.
The Serpent then did him employe,
In open presence them among,
To suck the poison with his tongue,
Whereof taking sacietie,
Out of the house forthwith he ran,
And purged his stomach presently,
Of poison in him taken than,
And to the wound a fresh he came,
Six times by course till he did void,
The poison sucked, the knight emploide.
Him self Milk to administrate,
Unto the Serpent, then behold,
The Tode entered the knights gate,
Which late with poison dead and cold,
Did wound this courteous knight so bold
In purpose came aduenged to be,
Of knight and Serpent presently.
The knight when as he hereof heard,
Unto his servant all did say,
Sirs naught dismaie be not afearde,
This is the Tode without all naie,
Whom I did wound this other day,
In defense of this Serpent hear,
For whose sake eke my wound I bear.
So that I will if this Serpent,
By any means my health restore,
He shall escape incontinent,
And if you love my life therefore,
This Tode destroy withouten more,
The servant hearing what he said,
With swords and staves on Tode then laid.
By means whereof the Tode they kilde,
The Serpent hereat joyful was,
And thankfully his due fulfilde,
As grateful, and touching the case,
Turned about his feet apace,
Where thus departing this Serpent,
The knight was healed incontinent.
The Moralization.
THe moral hereof to define,
First the Emperor here comparde,
To our heavenly Father we assign,
The same of duty best referde,
The Knight olso whereof you heard,
Our Savior Jesus Christ does mean,
The Tode declares Satan certain.
The Serpent man is termed well,
First for the poison of his sin,
Next for the medicen to expel,
Poison received him self within,
As for Christ's Image eke in him,
For man against the Devil ought feight,
To vanquishe him by divine slight.
Because there is none other wight,
But thou oh Christ our Savior,
Which in defense of man does fight,
Against Satan the Tode therefore,
When mankind was through sin forlore,
Christ sought for us against Satan,
And in our right him overcame.
Albeit not in one place only,
He wounded was but sondrie greef,
As well in him self feel did he.
As in his members great mischieef,
He suffered done for their relieefe,
Man if thou be thankful therefore,
Have Serpents help for him in store.
That is to say, thou ought vizite,
Christ in his members grieved here,
In poverty or other plight,
Miserable if it appear,
Them to relieve as needs require:
And what thou so do unto them,
Take it for well rendered again.
But if the Tode return do make,
After first sight harm to renew,
In Christ to thee then courage take,
And seek the means him to subdewe,
Then certainly each firm virtue,
In Baptism first received by thee,
Observed shall bring full remedy.
So shall thou Satan vanquishe quite,
And purchase peace perpetual,
Of body and soul with Angels bright,
In perren joys celestial,
Which to enjoy God grant us all,
That after our combat yearthly here,
Conquerours with Christ we may appear.
Finis.
The argument.
Man's life is a waifaryng or trauillyng. To find forth three felicities,
but in stead of gropyng for the sweet, here we taste of the sower, neither
attain we our desired port of rest in this life, but in the world to come.

To the tune of the Sturdie rock, syngyng the iiii. and v. line of every verse
alike.
Resign now Muses all your moan,
To me amassed silly wight,
Which wanderyng long, and far have gone,
Void of releef, rest and delight,
Do comfort mine enfebled spirit,
Forced in verse to verify,
No joy on earth of certainty.
I read Ganterus so by name,
Did wish a place of endless joy,
When on a day to pass it came,
Early to walk he did emploie,
And so far went without anoie,
Till he entered a land into,
Whose king deceast but lately tho.
It chanced there after short time,
The Nobles had intelligence,
Of his manhood, and do incline,
Their counsels all with diligence,
Him as their Prince of excellence.
To choose in royal seat to reign,
Whereat Ganterus ioyed certain.
The night come on his servant weight,
With due attendaunce in degree,
And brought him to a chamber straight,
Where stood a bed bedect richely,
At the head whereof he then did see,
A Lion laid, and at the foot,
A Dragon dreadfully which looked.
Upon the right side of that bed,
An ugly Bear was couched low,
And on the left side, down were laid,
Serpents and Todes in loathsome show,
Hereat Ganterus masde, would know,
Of those his servant then present,
What by these strange beasts here was me^t.
Saying, is this bed ordained me,
Yea sovereign Lord they aunswerde so,
For tofore this our kings truly,
Here lodged and died long ago,
Devoured by these beasts here lo,
Hereat Ganterus grudgyng said,
This I mislike all ill apaied.
Your king will I not be therefore,
And so departed from that place,
Ariuyng to an other shore,
Where eke to rule he chosen was,
The night aprochte, then in like case,
He was conducte to take his rest,
Where was a bed with sharp swords dressed.
Whereat he castyng up his eyes.
Demanded if he should lie there,
Yea Lord, each servant certefies,
Our kings in this bed lodged were*
Bereft and are of life so dear,
Says he all save this likes me well,
Your king to be I list naught mell.
Yet tariyng in those coasts that night,
No sooner was Aurora seen,
But he preparde in pensive plight,
To leave that land and Lordship cleene,
And languishyng three days in teene,
At length it was his luck to spy,
An old man in the way to lie.
This old man had in his right hand,
A staff, and seeing Ganterus come,
Required of him to understand,
Whence, and whither he would in sum
And who he was to give reason,
I come from countrees far says he,
My name Ganterus hight truly.
And whether says the old man tho,
Do thou intend to take thy way,
Ganterus said, I must now go,
Three things to find, which I ne may,
What three be those? tholde man can say,
Ganterus answered his request,
Thus as to him it seemed best.
The first abundaunce without want,
The second joy without distress,
The third is light not anoyant,
With ircksome and loathsome darkness,
The old man heard him thus express,
And said my friend, this staff do take,
By this way straight thy journey make.
Then shall thou see before thy face,
A hill both tedious, huge and high,
Toth top whereof is a foot pace,
Which does contain vii. steps only,
Upon the same thy travel try,
And when toth top thou do attain,
Thou shall behold, and see there plain.
A Palace princely edified,
There rest, and ere thou further try,
With staff at gate three times aplied,
Do knock. The Porter by and by,
Will answer thee, and then pardie,
Show him this staff, and say to him.
That I do crave thine enteraunce in,
And if he then grant thee ingresse,
There shall thou find thy hearts desire,
Then Ganterus did so doubtless,
As he was willed of this old sier,
And to the Porter coming nier,
His staff once seen, received he was,
Where he found all things brought to pas.
The Moralization.
EXplane now must the meaning here,
Who this Ganterus called may be,
Each Christian good may well appear,
Like to Ganterus, which simply,
Despises worldly vanity,
And is from time to time enclinde,
These three things to seek for and find;
The first abundance as is said,
Withouten want or penury,
The second, joy nothing delaied,
The third light from all darkness free,
And these obtained can not be,
But in the life of lastyng joy,
Our toil thereto we must imploye.
O man therefore like journey make,
With Ganterus for three days space,
By Prayer first do undertake,
By Fasting next, this pilgremes race.
Thirdly, by Almose in any case,
These three days travel till thou come,
Unto the first supposed Kingdom.
Some mundaine joys there shall thou find
And people thee to intertaine,
There worldly pleasures are enclinde,
To choose thee, as a prince to reign,
Puffyng thy heart with pride annoyde,
But look about thy chamber well,
There stands a bed, its death to tell.
This bed man's life is likened to,
Where in a short time he does lie,
Near to which lurcks a Lion lo,
Satan, against us his force to try,
A Dragon eke we shall espy.
And by him coucht an ugly Bear,
Which wait (as death) on us echewhere.
Todes and Serpents there also are,
The One shows, man's guilty conscience,
The other does his sins declare,
To accuse and condemn negligence,
Of these having intelligence,
We may do well quick speed to make,
This world our Kingdom to forsake.
Then come we to the second land.
Where carnal pleasures bear the swaie,
(To whom consentyng) out of hand,
Sons of perdition us make they,
Then to our chamber taking our way,
Letts look toth bed, rhere shall we see,
The same even hell it self to be.
The sharp swords there do represent,
(For careless gluttons carle) preparde,
Who tastes in hell endless torment,
To late repentyng afterward,
The handlyng of poor Christ so hard,
If we well way this lodgyng place,
Haste us from carnal Kingdom apace.
Then if we will further to try,
These three things we desire to find,
Letts walk on till tholde man we epsy,
Even Jesus Christ guide of mankind,
With staff of faith for us assignde,
To give us that repentance pure,
Which had) shall our desires procure.
The foot pace then we may ascend,
Which leads us to life sincere,
Seven stepps it has, if we pretend,
To find those three we sought well ear,
Go we up these stepps (which appear,
The works of mercy seven to be,
Our desires then obtain shall we.
These shall conducte us to that place,
Which we look for. But coming than
Toth gate where is all this sollace,
We must knock thrice with staff in hand
That is, thus much to understand,
Contrition, Confession and satissisance,
Must then help us in thenteraunce.
The Porter then to us will stepp,
Gods divine goodness does he mean,
Who after this our travel great,
Thus furnished will not us disdain,
But gladly us will entertain,
In wealth withouten want, in joy,
And light, that last void of all noye.
For which the Lord in mercy guide,
Our goyngs and doyngs to direct,
That from his fear we never slide,
But that to our steps we so respect,
That his gracious gates we may amplecte,
And with Christ entertained be,
To rest in endless felicity.
Finis.
The constaunte course in spiritual combat and turneiment of each faithful
Christian, against Antechrist our malignant adversary obtains in fine
condign reward of tranquile felicie in this world, and in the world to
come, perpetual felicities inspeakeable.

To the tune of Iocundarie.
March now my muse with martial might,
In spiritual combat conqueryng:
Condign reward does ever light,
On verteous worthy trauellyng.
Declare of Adonias king,
That pretty History,
In wealth who sometime florishyng:
Delighted much to see,
His knights at tourney practisyng,
The feats of cheualrie.
It happened that upon a day,
By Proclamation made there:
His knights in armor should araie,
Them selves each with shield and spear.
Then by decree he did ordain,
What knight so ever could,
Him self with prowes best demaine,
Have worthy hier he should:
This known of knights a noble train,
Came tourney for to hold.
The day of their appearaunce come,
And their assembly made so:
The king did will of those knights some,
In one part should aside go.
The other half of them theare,
He made them selves divide,
The first part chosen straight to bear,
Their armor did provide:
To lait in place of purpose wheare,
The tourney should be tried.
Then gave the king commandment,
Who on the part contrary:
With spear to do his best was bent,
To touch, away take, and carry.
The armor so that down was laid,
The owner thereof presently,
Out of the troop should be conuaied:
To tourney with his enemy,
And for the purpose was a maied,
Ordained to arm him redily.
that done encounter should her knight,
Against him that touched the armor late,
Whom if he foilde or put to flight,
That day he should be decorate.
With royal croune and placed be,
At table with the king,
A certain knight with valiancie:
Conditions these hearing,
With diligence about lookte he,
Every shield beholding.
Emongst them all he marked one,
With apples three gilt garnisht:
In great desire that shield alone,
His greedy mind had ravished.
And that same shield he touched with spear,
Straight way the other knight,
Who ought it, of the maid there:
Did make him self be dight,
And enters listes withouten fear,
Against the other wight.
In tourney which lo he that ought,
The armor touched by prowess,
Behaded him that so had sought,
To carry away his harness.
And as the king commanded it,
Of late, the conqueror,

