THE EXAMINAtion, confession, and condemnation of Henry Robson Fisherman of
Rye, who poisoned his wife in the strangest manner that ever hitherto has bin
heard of.

printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Printed by Felix Kingston for R. VV. and are to be sold in
Paternoster row at the sign of the Talbot. 1598.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GEntle Readers, amongst all the cruel Stratagems, poysonings and homicides, I
have here described one, which in my judgment passes all that ever were
invented; together with Gods providence in bringing it to light. And the sooner
have I penned it, that others may beware of being deceived by Satan to do the
like, in hope it shall be concealed.

L. B.

The examination, confession, and condemnation of Henry Robson Fisherman of
Rye, who poisoned his wife in the strangest manner that ever hitherto has been
heard of.
AT Rye in Sussex there dwelled a man whose name was Henry Robson, by trade he
used fishing, and lived long time in very good estimation amongst his
neighbors, till such time as through his lavish spending, he came greatly in
debt, to his utter ruin. For when Lucifer had found a means how to accomplish
his will, he never left him til by his diuillish practices he had brought him
to the gallows. For having lived there, and being happened into the danger of
the law, his Creditors began to put him in suite: whom when he could no ways
satisfy, he was cast into prison, where he long time remained languishing in
woe. This Robson had a wife, who for her honest dealing and good neighborhood,
was greatly beloved both of young and old. And although she could no ways
redeem him, yet did she relieve him in such sort by her diligent labor. that
each one wondered at her endeavor: yet nevertheless, he little weighed neither
her kindness nor the laws of God, as hereafter shall manifestly appear: but
devised continually how he might make her away: who being dead, he determined
to sell all that ever he could make, and being redeemed out of prison, to have
conuaied himself over into the Low Countries, and there to have lived.

Whilst these mischievous thoughts harbored in his mind, the devil stirred
up the mind of one Glasier, being then in prison, to be an instrument to put
this his villainy in practice: who one day finding a fit opportunity, he thus
began. Faith Harry I am sorry to see thee live thus in prison, and have been so
well beloved in this town. Tush Glasier (said this Robson) it is too late now to
be sorry, when there is no remedy: for so long as my wife lives, it is
impossible that ever I should come out. Faith then said Glasier) sure if my
wifes death could procure my liberty. I would never be in bondage, or
imprisoned. No (said Robson) why my wishes can never the sooner procure her
death. I but (said the other) your endeavor may, without being once suspected:
and if you will take my counsel and be secret, I will warrant you she shall not
long live. Which words, when Robson heard, greatly rejoicing at this good hap,
he not only vowed to be secret, but also to put this in speedy execution, and
during life to remain Glasiers friend, if it sorted to good effect. In short
time after Glasier was delivered: at which instant Robson put him in mind of
his promise, which he promised presently to accomplish. And hasting down to
one Fishers a Mercer in the town, bought a peniworth of Ratsbane; and coming
to the prison again, in secret he delivered it to Robson, willing him to
temper it with glass small beaten, and wrapped in the skin of a shoulder of
mutton, to the quantity of a hasle nut, or less, and in the night when his
wife should next come to lie with him, he should convey it into her privy
parts, which he would warrant without danger to him should kill her: and so he
departed. O heinous crime and wicked counsel, the like whereof since Cain
murdered the righteous Abel, has not been heard of. But now mark the event:
some seven days after his wife (according to her accustomed order) came to
the prison, and finding her well-beloved husband, she saluted him ioying of his
welfare. But he who minded naught else but murder, saluted her with a
dissembling show of friendship: and at night when she would have departed, he
constrained her to stay all night, which was the dearest nights pleasure that
ever woman had: for in the night he put in practice his former imaginations:
which how it worked shall hereafter be declared. In the morning without
suspect, the poor silly woman departing home, little thinking her death should
so soon approach, falling close to her work, she found her self grieved, and
her body began to swell more and more. For now it began to run and eat into
her veins, so that with the extreme pain she was constrained to go to bed,
where she lay languishing some five days. Her neighbors resorting still to
comfort her, and many Physicians were sent for, all which agreed that she was
poisoned. And therefore gave her many purgations, and using many other means,
but all could not serve: for in their lives they had never seen nor heard of
so strange an accident. When they had used all the means they could, her days
of life being now finished, she took her last adieu^ of the world, and so
dyed. So soon as she was dead, according to the manner, they would have
prepared for her burial: but the Physicians hindered their purpose, and having
obtained license of the officers, they caused her to be ripped, where they
found in every vain both glass and Ratsbane, and yet could not devise how or
by what means it should come thither: for that it could not be, it should
there happen by any conueiance in meat or drink: and therefore they
determined to find out by some means who was the doer of this villainy. And
incontiuently, sending to every shop in the town to know who lately bought any
Ratsbane; at the said Fishers (aforesaid) they heard that one Glasier two
weeks before had there bought a peniworth. Whereupon they made search for the
said Glasier: but he having heard of this news, and knowing himself guilty
of the crime, was fled away. Then they bethought how Glasier was then lately
returned out of prison where Robson was, whose wife it was that was poisoned.
And inquiring further when Robsons wife was with him in prison, they learned
that she lay with him in the prison house not full a week before. This all
being put together, they began to conjecture of the matter: and the Mayor,
Iurats and Recorder being assembled, they sent for Robson, who incontinent was
brought before them: and being come, the Recorder (one master Boulton) began
thus.

Neighbor Robson (said he) we understand by one Glasier, that you had certain
poison of him which you caused him to buy; now we have sent for you to know to
what intent you bought it: for that you are suspected of the death of your
wife, and by some manifestly accused. Which he hearing, began to use many
protestations, that he was as ignorant both of any such poison, or of the
deed, as the child newly borne. Nay (said the Recorder) if you be so
obstinate, we will bring Glasier forth, who to your shame shall testify it, and
then you are not only guilty of the poison, but also of the act doing: and
therefore confess the truth and shame the devil. Well (said Robson) I had
indeed Ratsbane: but what of that? Why did thou deny it then (said the
Recorder?) it shows a guilty conscience. But what did thou with it, and to
what intent did thou buy it? Why (said he) the Courthouse is full of Rats,
and I bought it to kill them. That is not so (said the Recorder) but the devil
is the father of liars, and I fear thou art his son: confess the truth
what thou did with it. Well (said Robson) if you will needs know, I will
truly resolve you. I have been long in prison, and I have often heard that
poison will break open any iron lock, and therefore I bought it, thinking
thereby to get my liberty. Now I have told the truth I hope you will pardon
me. No (said the Recorder) thou have not told ye truth: for with it and glass
mingled together thou did poison thy wife: and therefore as thou look for
any favor at our hands, confess how, and in what manner thou did it, and who
was thy connseller in it. Well, then I perceive (said Robson) you glut after my
blood, and if it will pleasure you you shall have it. For they having told him
truth, he could no longer deny it: and therefore imagining that Glasier was
taken and had confessed al, he openly declared the whole manner aforesaid, how and
in what manner he had done it, and for what cause, and who was his counselor:
which they hearing greatly marueiled. And so for that time he was committed to
prison, where he remained til the Sessions day, where he was arraigned and
condemned, and according to the law he was there adjudged to be hanged, which
was performed.

The Lord of his insinit grace grant every one better to withstand Satan's
temptations, and esehew his subtilties, that they be not led by his
allurements, nor intrapped in his snares, who seeks by all means to bring
every one to confusion.

FINIS.

