THE CHRISTIAN MAN'S GVIDE.

WHEREIN Are contained two Treatises.

THE ONE Showing us the perfection of our ordinary Works.

THE OTHER The purity of Intention we ought to have in all our Actions.

Both composed in Spanish by the R. F. ALFONSVS RODRIGVEZ of the Society of
JESUS.

Translated into English.

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXX.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
GENTLE Reader, I present thee here with two excell^nt Treatises, writt^^ by
the R. F. Alfonsus Rodriguez of the Society of Jesus, that is to say, his
second and third Treatise of his first part of Christian Perfection. The one
teaches us, how by performing our Ordinary Actions with due diligence, we may
become perfect in a short time. The other, how we ought to have our Intention
Right and Pure in all our Actions, and how necessary and profitable this care
is. Both Treatises will sufficiently commend themselves if they be read with
attention, and an earnest desire to profit in the way of virtue. My mind was to
have added hereunto the first Treatise of the same Author: but because it is
not yet ready, I differ it till a longer day, and in the mean time I present
this to thy use and benefit.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED In these two Treatises.
Of our ordinary Actions.
Chap. 1. HOw all our spiritual profit and perfection consists in the well
doing of our works. page 1. Chap. 2. How it ought greatly to encourage us, to
the attaining of perfection, that God has constituted it in the performance of
easy things. page 10. Chap. 3. Wherein the goodness and perfection of our
works consists: and some means to perform them well. page 15. Chap. 4. Of an
other means to do our Actions well, which is so to perform them, as if we had
nothing else besides to do. page 25. Chap. 5. An other means to do our Actions
well, which is so to perform each one, as if it were the last thing we were to
do. page 31. Chap. 6. Of an other means to do our Actions well, which is to
take care only for the present. page 44. Chap. 7. Of another means which is to
accustom our selves to do our Actions well. page 51. Chap. 8. Of how great
importance it is, that Religious men do not grow remiss and slack in the way
of virtue. page 59. Chap. 9. How much it imports Nouices to bestow the time of
their Nouiciate well, and to accustom themselves then to do their Actions
well. page 66.
Of the right and pure Intention.
Chap. 1. THat we ought principally to shune all vain glory in our Actions.
page 75. Chap. 2. Wherein the hurt and mischief of vain Glory does consist.
page 81. Chap. 3. Of the hurt and damage which vain Glory brings a long with
it. page 85. Chap. 4. That the tentation of vain Glory does not only assault
those who are new beginners, but also such who make progress in Virtue. page
93. Chap. 5. Of the particular care which they ought to have of vain glory,
who are to employ themselves to assist and help their Neighbor. page 99.
Chap. 6. Of certain other remedies against Vain Glory. page 105. Chap. 7. Of
the good end and intention, which we ought to have in all our Actions. page
117. Chap. 8. How we may do our actions with great rectitude and purity of
Intention. page 121. Chap. 9. How we are not so much to lay the fault of those
distractions and spiritual hindrances which we find in our selves sometimes,
on our exterior occupations, as on our not performing them as we ought. page
125. Chap. 10. How good and profitable it is, to do our Actions in the
foresaid manner. page 131. Chap. 11. A more express declaration of the
vprightnes, and purity of intention with which we are to do our Actions. page
139. Chap. 12. Of some signs by which we may know, whether we do our actions
purely for the love of God, or seek our selves in them. page 150. Chap. 13.
How we are to increase and go forwards, in vprightnes and purity of intention.
page 158. Chap. 14. Three degrees of perfection, by which we may ascend and
arrive unto great purity of intention, and to a high and perfect love of God.
page 171.
A TREATISE OF THE PERFECTION of our ordinary Actions.
How all our spiritual profit and perfections consists in the well doing of
our works. CHAP. 1.
IVSTE quod iustum est persequeris, Deuter. 16.10.
says our Lord unto his people, Do that well and justly which is good and just.
Our profit and perfection consists not in the simple doing of the things, but
in the well doing them: like as it is nothing to be a Religious man, but to be
a good one indeed is that to which we must all aspire. S. Hierome writing to
Paulinus says: Non Hierosalymis fuisse, sed Hierosolymis been vixisse
lauda^dum est. Paulinus had a great opinion of S. Hierome, because he resided
in those holy places, where our Savior had wroght the mysteries of our
redemption; and S. Hierome that he might pay no esteemation to the place, which
was not due unto the person, said: Not to live in Jerusalem, but to live well
in Jerusalem, is worthy to be praised, which Apophthegma is ordinarily brought
to admonish Religious, that it is not enough for them to live only in Religion;
seeing, as it is not the habit which makes a Religious man, so is it not the
place, but a good and holy life. In such manner as the difficulty consists not
in being Religious, but in being a good Religious, nor in doing the exercises
of Religion, but in doing them well, and according as we ought. When that which
was said of our Savior in the Gospel: Been omnia fecit, He has done all
things well, Marc. 7.37.
does come to be verifyed in us, then we may truly be said to be Religious
men. It is most certain that all our good and ill consists in the well or ill
doing of our works, for such as our works are, such shall we likewise be;
they speak and declare what each one is: the Tree is known by its fruit. S.
Augustine says; That man is the tree, and his works the fruit he bears, and
consequently by the fruit of the works we do arrive to knowledge of the man.
And therefore our Savior speaking of the Hypocrites and false Prophets said:
Matthew. 7.16.
A fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos. And on the contrary, speaking of himself:
The works, which I do in the name of my Father, Joan. 10.15.
do bear witness of me; and if you will not believe me, believe my works,
which witness what I am. Neither do the works in this life only, declare what
each one is, but also what in the other life is to become of them: for such
shall we be for ever in the other life as our works have been in this; seeing
our Savior will reward each one, according to their works, as the holy
Scripture testifyes so often, in both the old and new Testament. Quia tu reddes
vnicuique iuxta opera sua. Psalm. 61.13.
And the Apostle Paul says, that which a man has sowed in this life, he shall
reap in the other. Romans 2.6.
Quae seminauerit homo, haec and metet.

But let us now descend further unto particulars, and see what works they are,
in which does consist all our good, our progress, and perfection: which are no
other then those which we do ordinarily every day, to wit, to make our daily
prayer well, our Examen of conscience, to hear Mass, and celebrate it with
all decency, to say our hours and prayers with reverence and attention, to be
in perpetual exercise of penance and mortification, to perform our office
well, and that charge which obedience does impose upon us: in these consists
our profit and perfection, if we do these actions with perfection; we shall be
likewise perfect, and if imperfectly imperfect. And this is all, and only that
which makes such mighty difference, betwixt a good and perfect Religious man,
and on who is imperfect and negligent. For the difference does not consist in
that the one does more, or else such things, which the other does not do; but
that the one does those things, which they are to do, better and with more
perfection, then the other: and hence it is, that this is a good Religious man
because he does his ordinary actions well; the other on the contrary an
imperfect one, because he does them with tepidity and negligence. And in
conformity to this which has been said, the more perfectly or imperfectly one
does do his works, the more perfect or imperfect he is.

In the Parable of the Sower, who went out to sow his seeds, the sacred text
of the Ghospel says, Math. 13.8.
That even the good seed it self, and that which was sown in good ground, did
in some places bring forth a hundred fold, in others sixty, and but thirty in
others. In which place, the holy Doctors say, are disciphred three sorts of
people, who serve God Almighty. The Beginners, the Proficie^t, and the Perfect;
all of us of the same Religious institute sow but on kind of seed; since that
the works we do are all the same, and the rule the same which we observe: we
have all one time of prayer and examen; and the same holy obedience from
morning unto night does employ us all, and yet for all this Homini homo quid
prestat? How much, how far does one man excel an other? What difference is
there bewixt one Religious man and an other? The Actions which the one sowes
every day, bringes forth an hundred fold, because they do their Actions with
spirit and perfection, and these are the perfect: others grow up likewise with
increase, though not so great, as bringing only sixty fold; and these are the
Proficient: in an other quarter, the seed which is sown brings forth only
thirty fold; and these are they who yet are but beginning to serve God
Almighty. And now let every one of us consider with himself, of which of these
three sorts he is, and whether he be not only of those, who barely bring forth
thirty fold, and God grant that there be none such among us, as the Apostle
speak of, 1. Cor. 3.12
who on the foundation of their faith do raise up buildinges of wood, hay,
and stubble, to serve for fuel in that general day; look that you do not
your Actions out of vain glory, for human respects and to please and delight
men and to be esteemed by them: since, this is no other then to build with
wood, and hay, and stubble, to make the fire at least in Purgatory, but
endeavor to perform all your Actions with perfection, which is to build with
gold, silver, and precious stones.

That all our profit and perfection does consist herein, may be understood by
this reason: all our profit and perfection consists in two things; to do that
which God would have us do; and to do it in such manner as he would have us do
it: and more then this I do not see what can be expected from us. Now touching
the first, which is to do that which God would have us do, we have by the grace
of God performed it already, who live in Religion, and do that which is
assigned us by our institute, which is one of the greatest goods and perfectest
consolations, which we have who live under obedience; to wit, that we are
assured that al which we do, and in which we employ our selves, by order from
obedience, is that only which God would have us do: and this is in a manner the
first principal in Religion, drawn forth of the Gospel, and the doctrine of
the Holy Father, as we will prove when we come to treat of Obedience, Qui vos
audit me audit, Luc. 10.16.
in obeying our Superiors, we obey God, and accomplish his divine will, which
is no other then that we should do these things, in which we are then employed.

We read in the Chronicles of the Cistercians, that as the Religious were one
morning at Mattins, S. Bernard with his Monks saw diverse Angels noting and
writing down the actions, of the Religious in the qui^e, and their manner of
behavior there; and they observed that they writ down the co^portments of
some in golden letters, of others in silver, of some with ink, and others only
with watter, conformable to the spirit, attention and devotion, with which each
one of them did pray and sing and of others they writ down nothing at all,
they being such, as although they were personally present, were yet in heart
far from thence, tra^sported by distraction and extrauagant thoughts. And in
particular whilst Te Deum was sung, they observed the Angels with great
deligence going up and down among them, to incite them be sing it with
devotion: in so much as from the mouths of these who began to sing, their
devout words came out of their inkindled breasts like flames of fire. Let us
consider with our selves whether in like manner whilst we pray, our hearts do
se^d up such fiery words unto our mouths, or rather whether we do not languish
in devotion, and yawne again through lazines and tepidity. Mark whether you
be there in body only whilst in spirit you are in your studyes, in your
offices, in deep consideration of your affayrs, or with your thoughts bestowed
one any such impertinent thing.

How it ought greatly to encourage us, to the attaining of perfection, that God
has constituted it in the performance of easy things. CHAP. II.
R. F. Hierome Natalis a man of happy memory in our Society for his eminent
virtue and learning, in his visit of the Provinces of Spain, did in a most
particular manner, among many other things commend, and often inculcate this
verity, that all their profit and perfection did consist in the well doing of
those particular and ordinary employments, in which they were daily exercised;
seeing that our spiritual progress, and amendment of life does nor consist in
the addition of other extraordinary actions unto those we do, not in
performance of more high and specious things; but in the doing with perfection
those ordinary things which we have to do, and those offices, in the discharge
of which obedience does employ us, although they be of themselves the vilest
and most abject in the world, seeing they are those which God does require of
us, and to the performance of which we must confere all our regard and care, if
we would be pleasing to his Divine Majesty and attain unto perfection; which
being so let us seriously consider with how little expense and cost we may be
perfect if we will our selves, since it requires no more, then the bare
performance of those ordinary things, in the which every one is exercised and
employed.

This ought to be of great consolation to us, and a great incourageme^t to the
attaining of perfection. For if unto the end you might be perfect there were
exacted of you any unwonted, extraordinary things, as rapts, ecstasies, or
profound and high meditation, you might have some pretention and excuse by
saying you neither could, nor durst ventur so high a flight; or if there were
proposed unto you the making disciplines every day to blood, to fast with bread
and water, to go barefoot, and wear and rough hair cloth continually; you
might answer, that you doubted whether you had forces enough for to sustain
so much; but this is neither required of you, neither does perfection consist
in this, but only in the doing those ordinary things you do (provided that you
do them well) with only doing these you may be perfect, the reckoning is
already paid, you need be at no more charges, there are required no other
works to be added to them. This being so, who will not take heart and courage
to be perfect: when the perfection is in our own powers, so easy and facile,
so co^uersant and so familiar with us? God Almighty said to his people to
encourage them, to serve him and fulfill his law: Deuteronomy. 30.11.
The commandment which I prescribe unto you to day is not above your reach,
nor far off from you, neither placed in heaven, in so much as you might say,
who is there of us, who can clime up to heaven, for to fetch it down unto us,
that we may hear it, and put it in execution; neither is it put beyond the
Seas, whereby you might excuse your selves and say, who is there of us, that
can swime over the sea, and bring it hither unto us, that we may hear it and
do that which is commanded? but that which I say is hard-by you, and very
conversant in your mouth and your heart, that you may fulfill it, and the like
may we say of that perfection whereof we speak.

S. Anthony made use of this motive to incite and stir up his disciples to
perfection. Graeci studia transmarina sectantur, regnum autem coelorum intra
vos est. The Grecians (said he) do cross the Seas in quest of learning and
knowledge, they do penetrate strange lands, endure much wearynes, and expose
themselves to sundry dangers; but we to attain to perfection which is the
truest wisdom, have neither need to expose our selves to dangers, nor
undertake long iourneys, neither so much as stir out of our own Cells for
it, seeing we may find it in our Oratories; nay (what is more) even within our
selves, Regnum Dei intra vos est, perfection consists in those daily and
ordinary works which you are to do.

It is ordinarily demanded in spiritual conferences, when any great feast
draws nigh, as Lent, Aduent, Easter, Whitsontid, or at renouation of our
vows, what is the best devotion to prepare our selves unto this renouation, or
that fasting, to receive the Holy Ghost, or the infant Jesus newly borne, and
there uses to be assigned many both good and laudable, but the most principal
one, and that upon which we ought chiefly to insist, is this whereof we speak,
to wit, to perfect our selves in doing of our ordinary and daily actions; free
your selves of those faults and imperfections, which you commit in doing your
ordinary works, and endeavor every day to do them better, and with less
imperfection; and this will be an excellent preparation, if not the best, for
to obtain your wishes and desires, have an eye principally unto this; here
fix al your thoughts; unto this direct al your consideration, and make all
your spiritual exercises, means to arrive unto this end, so important, and
with all so easy and familiar.

Wherein the goodness and perfection of our works consists: and some means to
perform them well. CHAP. III.
LET us now see wherein consists the well doing of our Actions, that we may have
recours unto those means, which may serve us to the well performance of them.
This (for to be brief) consists in two things; the first and chiefest is to do
them purly for God Almighty, S. Ambrose demands the reason, why God in the
Creation of the world, when he created the corporal things said that they were
good: when he had created the plants and trees, it presently, added, Et vidit
Deus, Genes. 1.
quod esset bonum, and God save that it was good: he had no sooner created the
beasts of the earth, the birds of the air and fishes of the sea but straight
ways it is added, and God saw that it was good, he created the heavens, that
stars, the Sun and Moon, and instantly is added, and God saw that it was
good: he praised and commended all things as soon as he had created them; only
coming to creat man he seems to pass him over in silence without praising
him, or adjoining thus unto the making of him, and vidit Deus quod esset bonum
as he had done, to all the other created things besides. what is the mystery of
this says he? Wherein the difference? because the beauty and excellency of all
other creaturs, and created things, consists only in the exterior, and the
outward show; they have no other perfection the^ that which appears without
and is discovered by the eye, and therefore they were praised as soon as made:
but the goodness and perfection of man consists not in the exterior nor the
outward show, but in the interior, out of all reach of eyes, Omnis gloria eius
filiae regis ab intus all the glory of man who is the son of God, Psalm. 44.14.
is coming from the interior, as also all that which is in him pleasing to
the eyes of God, Man sees that which appears without (says God to Samuel)
but God beholds the heart, 1. Reg. 16
the end, and the intention with which each or does do his works: and therefore
he did not praise man presently after he had created him, as he did al other
Creaturs; The intention is the root and foundation of all the good and
perfection which is in our Actions. We cannot see those great massy stones,
which are thrown into the earth to raise great buildings on; but
notwithstanding they are the stay and founda^ion of all the edifice, and such
unto us is our intention.

The second thing which is required to the perfection of our works, is to
confer all our care and diligence unto the doing of them well and perfectly:
for it is not inoughe only to have a good intention, nor to say you do the^ all
for God Almighties sake; but it is requisite that you perform your actions with
all possible diligence, to render them more acceptable to God. Let this then be
the first means of doing our actions well, to do them purely for the love of
God; whereby we shall arrive to do them perfectly, and with our utmost endeavor
(as doing the^ for God Almighty) although neither our Superior nor any one else
do look on and take account of our performance of them. Our B. F. Ignatius
asked a certain brother once, who was a little negligent in his office,
wherefore he did those things? the brother answered for the love of God:
whereupon our B. Father told him, that if he did his things so negligently
again, he would give him a good penance for his payns. For said he, if you did
them for any men, the fault would not be so great to perform them with so much
neglect and carlesnes; but to do them in such a manner, for so great a master,
is a negligence not to be borne with all.

The second means, which the Holy Saints do commend unto us, and which indeed
is the most effications of al is continually to walk in the presence of God
Almighty. Seneca although Heathen was wont to say that a man who was desirous
to become virtuous, and to do all his Actions well and laudably, could arrive
unto it by no speedyer way, then to imagine himself when he did or said any
thing, in the presence of some grave honorable person, unto whom he bare
respect and reverence, Sic viue tanquam subalicuius boni viri, ac semper
presentis oculis. Now if the bare imagining ones self in presence of another
man, has power sufficient to make him do his Actions well, what a more
efficatious means ought it to be, to consider our selves always in the sight
of God, to frame an imagination of him ever present, to persuade our selves
that he sees all whatsoever we do; especially seeing it is no faynd imaginary
thing, like that other of Seneca's, but really true as the Holy Scripture often
testifyes The eyes of the Lord are clearer the^ the sun ouerseeing all the
ways of men, Eccl. 13.18.
and the deepest of the Abisse and beholding the hearts of men, in the most
secret parts and corners of them.

But of this exercise of walking in the presence of God Almighty we shall treat
more amply and particularly here after, and declare how excellent and
profitable it is, and with all how much praised and reco^mended by the Holy
Saints, and therefore for the present we will only (for as much as concerns our
present Argument) declare in passing how much it conferres, unto the well
performing of our ordinary Actions, which is of such consequence, that (as we
shall in its place declare) we are not only to insist upon that verity, that we
are in the presence of God, but we are to serve our selves of it to do our
works the better and perfecter; in such sort notwithstanding, as should we
reflecting on the presence of God, remain doing our actions imperfectly and
negligently, it would not be a good devotion, but rather an illusion and
deceyt. And some ad yet further and say that that presence of God Almighty
which we should procure to have, and which the holy Scripture and Blessed
Saints so much recommend unto us, is this well and perfect performance of our
works, in such manner, as they may wortihly appear before the face of God, and
have nothing in them to displease his holy eyes: in brief that they may be
such as may become us to do in the presence of so high a Majesty. And it seems
that S. John in his Apocalypse would have us understand so much from the
description, Apoc. 4.8.
which he makes of the proprieties of those holy Spirits, which he saw standing
before the Throne of God, readily awayting what he should command them; of
whom he says, that they were full of eyes, without, within, and round about
them, having eyes in their feet, hands, ears, and lips, and in their eyes
themselves; to represent unto us that those who desire to serve God perfectly,
and to appear worthy of his presence, must have especial regard in, and about
every thing, that they do nothing which may not beseem so divine a presence.
They are to be full of eyes both within, and without, to be watchful over every
action, to see how they go, to consider how they speak, to mark how they
hear, to look how they see, and how they think, how they will and desire any
thing, unto the end that among all their works, there may not be found one,
which may be offensive to the eyes of God, in whose sacred presence we are
continually.

This is an excellent manner of walking in the presence of God Almighty, and so
Ecclesiastes, Genesis 5.24. Eccl. 44.16. Heb. 11.^.
and S. Paul the Apostle in place of that which is said of Enoch in Genesis:
And he has walked with God (which is the same as) before God, and he has not
appeared, because God has taken him away; do say, Enoch pleased God and was
translated into Paradise, declaring expressly unto us, that to walk with God,
before God, and to please God, are but three forms of speech of one
signification, by their explicating the one by the other. And S. Augustine and
Origin after this manner expound that place of Exodus, where it is said, that
when Iethro came to see his kinsman Moses, Aaron and the Elders assembled
themselves to eat with him before God, Exodus 18.12.
vt comederent panem cum eo coram Deo, saying that it is not meant that they
were assembled to eat before the Tabernacle or the Arc, for as then there was
none; but that they met to feast, to eat and drink, and rejoice with him, with
so much sanctity, piety, and so religiously composed, as if they had been to
eat before God, being exceeding wary not to do any thing in his divine
presence, which might beget offense. In this manner do just and perfect men
walk before the eyes of God, in the performance of all their actions, even in
those which are indifferent and necessary for the sustaining of their lives, as
eating, drinking, sleeping, and the like: Let the just feast (says the Prophet
David) and exult in the sight of God, Psalm. 67.4.
and be delighted in joy and gladness; but all this in the sight of God, and so
as his holy eyes may without offense look on and nothing may be less
beseeming his divine presence.

The Holy Fathers say, that in this manner we fulfill that which our Savior
in the Gospel does counsel us, Luc. 15.1 1. Thessal. 5.17.
We ought to pray always without ceasing. And S. Paul to the Thessalonians:
Pray without intermission, and many of them are of opinion that he prays
always, who does always well, as S. Augustine on these words of the Psalm:
Tota die laudem tuam. Would you know, says he, how to praise God al day? Do
that which you are about well, and you have praised God. S. Hilarion also says
the same: For by this (says he) we come to pray without intermission, when by
works pleasing to God, and always performed unto his glory, the whole life of
a Saint-like man, is no other then a prayer, and so by living both day and
night according to the law, our whole life shall be a nightly and daily
meditation: and S. Hierome on this verse of the Psalm; Praise him ye Sun
and Moon, praise him all the Stars and light, demands how the Sun and
Moon the stars and light can praise God; and answers, that in so much as
they cease not to do their office and perform that service for the which they
are created, the service which they do, is that which prayseth God. And so in
like manner, he who does those ordinary and daily exercises of his Order well,
is always praising God, and in a continual act of prayer: which may be yet
further confirmed by this sentence of the Holy Ghost in Ecclesiastes. Eccles.
35.^
He who keeps the law, does multiply oblation: it is a saving sacrifice, to
attend to the commandments, and depart from all iniquity. And from hence may
we understand, what great perfection it is to do our ordinary Actions well,
since it is a multiplication of oblation, and prayer, a continual meditation,
a perpetual remaining in the presence of God and lastly a Holocaust of
salvation, and of al things the most pleasing unto God Almighty.

Of an other means to do our Actions well, which is so to perform them, as if
we had nothing else besides to do. CHAP. IIII.
THE third means which may help us to do our actions well is to perform each
thing, as if we had nothing else besides to do; so to make our prayer; so to
celebrat holy Mass; so to recite our office, and say our beads; and lastly so
to do all our other things, as if we were wholly to be employed therein: for
what calls us away? What makes us so hasty to dispatch these things? We can
assign no reason, and therefore are to procure to do al things without
confusion, and so, as on thing may not be hinderance or disturbance to an
other, but that we be always at^ent unto that which exactes of us for the
present. Whilst you are in prayer, think neither upon your study, nor your
office, nor affairs; for it serves to no other end, then to hinder your
prayer, and to the occasion that you shall neither do that one, nor the other
well. You have all the rest of the day to attend freely unto your other
employments, and to bestow upon your studys Omnia tempus habent all things
have their time, Eccl. 3.1.
and every day has enough to do, Matthew. 6.34.
with its own malice, It is but a small thing which is required of you, and
so conformable to reason, that even the heathens themselves, who wanted the
light of faith, did yet require thus much in the sacrifices of their God,
whence it became a Proverb among them; aderaturi sedeant let those sit who are
to adore the Gods: that is; let them do it with great quiet and attention, and
not rashly and only for fashion sake. Plutarch treating of that great reverence
and respect with which their Flamins approached unto the Altars of their Gods,
says that all the time that the Priest sacrificed there was a Crier, whose
office it was to admonish him aloud continually in these words, Hoc age, hoc
age, Attend to that which you do, be present to your self and your actions,
and let no distraction carry your thoughts away. And in this manner must we
endeavor to bestow our selves wholly upon that which we have in hand, and do it
with that maturity and reflection, as if we had nothing else to do besides. Hoc
age do that which you do, bend all the forces of your mind, and use all your
diligence to perform that well, cast away all thought of other things, and so
you shall arrive for to do all things well, Quod nunc instat agamus. A
certain Philosopher, to prove that we ought only to be atte^t unto that which
we have in hand, without occupying our thoughts with care or solicitude of any
other thing, does give this reason, that only the present is that which is in
our power, and neither the time to come, nor yet the passed, seeing the one is
already gone, and so consequently we can dispose nothing of it; and for the
future we are not certain, whether we shall ever live to see it or no. Oh how
happy were he, who could but win that mastery of himself, to keep his
thoughts and imaginations in such awe, as they should never dare to bestow
themselves otherwise, then on the present thing, in which we are employed! But
on the one side the instability of our heart is so great, and on the other the
craft and malice of the enemy, that the Devil makes his use of it, by casting
into it, thoughts of what we are afterward to do, to hinder us in that which
we ought to be doing for the present. This is an ordinary te^tation of the
enemy, and a most hurtful and pernicious one to us, since the Devils end is
hereby to hinder us from ever doing any thing perfectly and well, and therefore
in time of prayer, he will be suggesting unto us, the thought of of our
affairs, studdies, and offices, and how we may do this or that thing best,
that he may hinder us from making that prayer well, which we are then in hand
withal, and therefore he is not wanting to put you in the head with a thousand
ways to compass and bring about such or such a business, since he knows it
the thing, which then you are not to attend unto, whereas when you come
opportunly to employ your self in that other businese, which at another time
he was so busy to inform you of, he will find so many tricks and devices to
divert you, that you shall do it as imperfectly and with as little profit as
the former. And so he continues haunting of us still, to the end he may bring
us to do nothing well: Non eius ignoramus cogitationes eius, 2. Cor. ^ 1^.
we are not ignorant of his way of proceeding.

Let us therefore lay all care of future thing aside, and trouble not our
selves with thought of them; for how ever the actions truly done be good, yet
the unseasonable thought of them is always bad. And when this te^tation under
the color, that you shall not remember that so well afterward, which is then
presented unto you, shall set upon you, even from thence may you perceive that
they are not thoughts proceeding from God, but from the enemy: seeing that God
is no friend of disorder and confusion, but of peace, quietness, and order, and
therefore consequently all such thoughts, as bereave you of your quiet, and
peace, and put you in disorder, come not from God Almighty, but from the Devil
who is author of such disquietnes and confusion. Chase therefore all such
tentations from your thoughts, and have a firm hope and confidence on God
Almighty, that he (so long as you behave your self as you ought) will not be
wanting in due time and place, to lend you all necessary aid (and that with
advantage) to the performance of your other affairs; and how ever there may
present themselves unto you, at such time, some circumstance or other, with
never so fair pretensions, some forcible argument, some witty answer, yet
cast all quietly out of your mind, and assure your self you shall rather
gain, then loose any thing thereby, Scientia quae pro virtute despicitur, per
virtutem postmodum melius inuenitur, says Saint Bonauenture, Knowledge which
for virtue is neglected, is aftewardes by virtue better obtained And M. Auila
says, when the care of any business does come into your mind at any
unreasonable time, you are to say unto it, My Lord has given me no commission
to treat, or think of this matter for the present, and therefore you must
excuse me; when he shall be pleased that I shall deal about it, there shall
want no diligence of mine.

An other means to do our Actions well, which it so to perform each on, as if
it were the last thing we were to do. CHAP. V.
THE fourth means, which the Holy Fathers teach us, to do our Actions well is,
so do every particular thing, as if it were to be the last Action that ever we
should do in this life S. Bernard prescribing unto Religious men, in what
manner they are to do their Actions, says Let him demand of himself in every
work he does: if you were presently to die; would you do this or no? And S.
Basil says: Have always the last day of your life before your eyes: when you
rise in the morning, doubt whether you shall live till the evening, or no: and
when you do compose your self at night to rest, do not confide to see the
suns light any more: and this to the end that you may the better refrain
your self from falling into sin. And with how much reason may we always
awayt for death our selves, whom we see always so conversant with our
neighbors. This dies with sickness; an other is drowned at sea; one is killed
by thieves upon the way; an other by murderers in the City; many by Pirates
are made away: in all places, at all times, and of all ages, and condition:
death spars no man, what a thing is this (says an other holy man) what a thing
is this? men see nothing more frequently then death, and yet there is nothing
which they less remember. Seeing therefore death lays wayt for us at every
time, we ought likewise in all places, at al times, and in all occasions to be
ready for it: and this would be an efficatious means to make us perform all
our Actions well, and is that of which S. Anthony made particular use, to
stir up his Disciples unto the study of virtue and perfection. What shall we
say of that Heathen, whose sentence this is You will not be able to spend this
day well unless you imagine it to be the last of your life? and that of the Poet
Horace.

Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum. Think every day thou see to be
thy last? If we did but inform all our actions with this same thought of
death, we should do them which more fervor and perfection then now we do. With
what devotion should I say Mass now, if I knew for certain, it were the last
Mass which I should ever say, and that I should have no time beyond this to
do any thing or merit more? With how much fervor and attension should I pray,
if I knew it were the last prayer I should make, and that I should never have
that commodity again to beg pardon of God Almighty for my sins, and implore
his saving Mercy? Therefore it is become a Proverb; If you would learn to
pray, go to sea: when we have death before our eyes we pray with otherguese
fervor, then now we do. We read of a certain Religious man, a great servant
of God Almighty, that he was accustomed to confess himself every day, before
he went to celebrat Holy Mass; this holy man once falling sick, his Superior
perceauing his sickness to be mortal, told him in order to his duty, how the
case stood with him, and therefore wished him to prepare himself by a good
confession, unto whom the Blessed man (lifting up his hands toward heaven and
blessing and praying God Almighty) answered; for these thirty years and more I
have confessed my self every day, as if I were presently afterward to die
which is the cause that for the present I have only need to reconcile my self,
as if I were only to go to Mass; It was most wisely done of him, and an
example worthy all imitation, so ought we to go to holy confession and
communion as if we were presently to die: and doing all our Actions in
conformity to this, we shall come to make our confession at the hour of death;
not with the anxiety of men now in dying, but with that sweetness and comfort
of men now going to the holy Communion: this pace if we always kept, death
should neither over take us before we were aware, nor take us untimely out of
this mortal life. And this is the best prayer, the exquisitest devotion, to
prouid our selves so, that death may never come vntimly to us. Math. 2 ^ 46.
Blessed is that servant (says our Savior Christ) whom his master when he
comes shall find so doing, so watchful, so prepared for to die. Job. 14.14.
This was the life of holy Job. Every day of this warfar of mine (says he) I
do expect when the change of me will come. I make account that every day, is the
last of my life, do thou call me, and I will answer the, O Blessed Lord call
me away when you please; behold me here prepared and ready for to answer and
appear before you, at all times, at all hours when you shall summon.

One of the best signs which one has to know, whether al stand right or no
betwixt God and himself, is if he be always prepared and ready, to answer
in all times and occasions when God shall call him. I speak not of any
infallible assurance, since there is non such in this life without some
extraordinary revelation, but of probable and moral conjectures and such as
ordinarily we have; among the which there is non more assured then this, when
we are resigned and content, that death, if Gods blessed will were such, should
seize upon us in this time, this Article, this work we are a doing. Consider
whether you be ready or prepared or no to answer, if God should call you at
this instant like unto holy Job: put your self often to this proof; examine
your self frequently upon this interrogation: Would you be content if you
were presently to die? and if upon this examination and trial you find your
self well content to be taken by death from that Action you do, and that
moment in which you make this reflection on it, you have good reason to think
that all goes right and well with you, and to be much comforted therewith; but
if one the contrary, you do not find your self resigned immediately to die,
neither to answer to the voice of God, if he should call you away, in those
circumstances, those actions and that time, but that you could willingly
require a further day, to end some business which you have yet in design and
does import you much; it is no good sign but rather a manifest proof, that
you proceed with great negligence, and not with that care of your spiritual
profit which becomes a good Religious man. Seeing (as that holy man says) if you
had a good conscience you would have no fear of death: and consequently
fearing it so much as you do, it is a sign that the reckoning of your
conscience goes not well, and that it will be troubled to make a good account.
We should rather fear sin then death. That Steward who has his accountes
ready, and faithfully made, desires and wishes for to give the^ up; whereas he
who has them perplexed, and intricat, fears nothing more, then the time when
he is to render them up, and seeks all possible excuses to differ and put it
of.

B. Father Borgia was wont to say that it was a good exercise for a Religious,
to dispose himself to dye well, one at least every four and twenty hours,
and that so he should come to have good success in all his actions, when he
should say unto himself every day, quotidie morior, I dye every day, Let us in
like manner enter every day into our selves, and often exact an accoumpt of our
selves according to this reckoning when if we find our selves nithat present
moment and circumstance not well disposed to die, let us begin then at least for
to prepare our selves against its coming, and that article of time upon which
a whole eternity depends; and imagine that God Almighty upon our humble petition
has granted us unto this end a longer term of life, which we are therefore
carefully to spend and in such manner as if with every Action we were to
conclude our life, Oh how happy is he who so lives as he would be content to be
found, when he comes to dye!

It is on of the profitablest things, which we can commend in our sermons unto
secular people, that they should live in such manner, as they desire to be
found at the hour of their death and that they should not differ their
conversion and doing penance, Thom. de Kempts. Greg. ho^. 12. ^ Euangel^^.
seeing to morrow is uncertain, and who knows whether he shall live unto it or
no? He who has promited pardon to the penitent has not promised to morrow to
them, when they sin says S. Gregory upon the occasion of that Example of
Chrysaorius which he recounts, who surprised by death which he had dallyed
with, and forsaken by the Angels whom he had contemned, encompassed with
Devils whom he had followed and humoured and rolling his eyes fearfully
about, cried out with a horrible voice, inducias vsque mane; inducias vsque
mane, have truce with me but till to morrow; have truce which me but til to
morrow: but al in vain, for before the next days light was he hurryed from the
night of this world unto that more terrible darkness of Hell, and from this
life wherein he had so much time for to do penance, unto an eternity of
torments worse then death it self, there to bewail for ever that precious
time which he had so vainly spent. It is a common saying that there is nothing
more certain then death, and nothing more uncertain then the hour of it,
Luc. 12.14.
and our Savior says yet more in the Euangell, Be ready and prepared, since
the son of man shall come in an hour when you look not for him: where
although he speak of the day of Judgment, we may notwithstanding understand
him as speaking of the hour of death, since that presently upon that, all
shall receive their particular judgment, which sentence is the same as shall be
confirmed by the General one, without any mitigation or alteration at all.
Moreover our Savior does not only say that this hour is uncertain, and that
we know not when it shall arrive, but also that it shall come when we least
think on it, and perhaps likewise when we are least prepared, which is that
which S. Paul says: 1. ad Tit. 5.2. Apoc. 3.13.
It shall come like a thief in the night. And S. John in his Apocalypse: I will
come to thee like a thief, and thou know not the hour when I shall come to
thee. When a thief intendes to go to rob any place, he watches his time,
until there is no suspicion of any such matters, when they are all otherwise
busyed or a sleep: and so our Savior Christ does teach us by this similitude
with what watchfullnes we ought always to attend the hour of death, unto the
end it find us not unproven when it comes. For be sure of this (says he) that
if the Master of the house knew what houer the thief would come: he would
certaintly watch and not suffer him to break into his house; but because he
does not know what hour he will come, whether at evening, at midnight, or
before day break, or else in the morning, therefore he stands always upon his
guard that his house may not be broken open, August. in Psalm. 144. super illa
verba, Misericors and miserator Dominus.
and his goods stolen away and so ought we to be always ready, since death
comes when we least think of it.

The Holy Doctors do consider from hence the great Mercy of God Almighty
toward us, in keeping us still in suspense and uncertain expectation of the
hour of death, to the end, Greg. h^ 13. super Eu. and lib. 12. moral cap. 20.
that we may put our selves always in a redynes against its coming: for
otherwise if men knew for certain how long they were to live, it would be the
occasion of the great negligence and grievous offense of many. Bonau. de
profect. religios. lib. 1. cap. 17.
For they who can live thus negligently, and carles of their souls good, when
they are not certain of one hours life, what would they do if they were
assured for to live some years? S. Bonauenture says that God has left us the
hour of our death uncertain, that we may learn to contemn all these
temporal things and not count them worthy of our care, which in every moment we
are in danger to loose. As our Savior said to that rich Miser in the Ghospel
of S. Luke: fool this night they will demand they soul of thee, and then
whose shall all that wealth be, which those have gathered together? Let us
therefore provide our selves of such riches as can never be taken from us.

We ought with good reason to do that our selves which we preach and commend to
others, according to that of S. Paul thou therefore who teach others do
not teach thy self, Romans 8.21.
it is one of the frequentest tentations, which the Devil uses, in deceiving
man, to deprive them of their eye sight in such manner as not to see this
verity and truth, by bringing them into a dead forgetfulness, and making them
believe that they have time enough for to do this or that, and that afterward
they may have opportunity enough, for to amend their lives and to prepare for
death. And this tentation even extendes unto Religious men, making them
differ their advancement in virtue and spiritual profit, with cold purposes
that after they have ended their studys, or are discharged of this office or
have acquitted them of that affayre, that then they will begin to live better
and more holily, and to fall in good earnest to penance and mortyfiyng
themselves. Miserable as you are, if you should chance to die before you have
ended your study, unto what end would all your learning serve you, (for the
attayning of which you have neglected your profit in virtues) then to make
fuel, and as the Apostle says, hay and stuble to burn you in the other world
withal. 1. Cor. 3.12. Lut. 4.23
Let us then make our profit of that which we preach to others; Medice cura
teipsum, and cure our selves (seeing our need is so great) with the same
remedys which we apply to others.

Of another means to do our Actions well, which is to take care only for the
present. CHAP. VI.
THE fifth means which will help and encourage us much to do our Actions well,
and with perfection, is only to take thought for the present. And although the
practice of this seems to be all one with the former, yet there is not a little
difference betwixt the^, as we shall declare in that which we are now to say.
One of the things which does fright very many, and maks the^ go on but fayntly
in the way of virtue, and which indeed is a tentatio^ of which the Devil makes
gaynfull use, is; to propose unto them, that it is impossible they should
continue their whole lives in such warynes, and recolection. What? shall it say,
is it possible that you should live so many years, with so much reservation
and circumspection? With such prudence and exactnes in every thing? do you
think that you shall always keep the ruls and discipline of the house, wherein
you live always? be mortifiyng your self and never do any thing as you desire?
These are commonly the apprehensions, in which the Devil appears unto us in
such fearful manner, making all things seem more terrible then they are, and
religious life a kind of Matyrdome and perpetual dying. And so we read that
when our B. F. S. Ignatius retired himself to Mauresa for to do penna^ce, Lib.
1. cap 6. vitae P. Ignati^.
one of the tentations with which the Devil assaulted him was this, saying unto
him: how is it possible that you should lead such an austere life, for
threescore years together, as you have now begune? Now this remedy whereof we
speak does answer in diamiter unto this same tentation, which is neither to
make account of diverse years, nor days, but only to have a care to pass the
present well. This means has good proportion to our human fraylty; it will
not suffer us to attempt any great matter; and there is non who only for a day,
at least would not strain himself for his own good and spiritual profit to
live well; this is the same which our B. Father prescribes unto us in the
particular examine, where he counsels us from on half day to an other, to
renew our good desirs and purposes of being modest, keeping silence, or bearing
all things patiently and the like: and in this manner, that which perhaps would
seem intolerable and even imposible, if it were enterprised and apprehended in
gross and altogether, Tract. 7. cap. 7.
as; I will never speak out of the appointed time, nor never go but modestly
and composed; becomes to be easy and familiar to us.

In vita Patruum.
This was the remedy, which that good Religious man, applied unto the curing of
himself, who (as we read in the lives of the Father) was so fiercely tempted,
as his appetit, which was up every morning as soon as he, did make him
believe, that it was impossible for him to do any thing, unless that should be
first satisfied; the holy man not to break the ordinary fast of the Religious,
which was to eat nothing until the third hour for any importunity of his
hunger, did find this stratageme out for to delude it, In the morning he would
reason with his appetit in this manner; Although your hunger be neuen so great,
yet you may fast well until the third hour, and then you may freely eat: and
when the third hour was come he would say again, nay certainly I must needs
overcome my self so far as to abstain until the sixth hour now; and I see
no reason but I may do it as well, as I have abstayned hitherto: and so he
would entertayne himself with some other thing the while: and when the sixth
hour or noon was come, then would he steep his bread in water and say, we must
needs tarry now until the bread be soakt; for since we have had patience
hitherto without doubt we will not break the order of the other Religious to
eat before the ninth hour now: and so at last when the ninth hour was come,
after he had said the accustomed prayers, he took his refection. In this
manner he continued for some days together ouercoming himself; when once
about the time of refectio^ lifting up the lid of the basket where he kept his
bread, he saw black smoke arising from thence which vanished out of the
window of his cell, which (as the effect showed) was no other then that spirit
of Gluttony which had tempted him, for after that time he was never more
troubled with those pangs of hunger, and cou^terfetted languishings, with which
he was formerly vexed and molested, in so much as from thence forwards he could
without any difficulty, abstain two days together from taking any food, our
Savior rewarding him with this particular grace, for that combat which he had
so courageously sustained in ouercoming his gluttonous appetit.

We said (and not without good reason) that this means is the most
proportionable to our weakness, since it goes by little and little sustayning
and encouraging us to the attempt of that, by little and little, which all at
once we should not dare to undertake, how ever if we were but fervent and
courageous indeed and truly inflamed with the love of God, there would be no
need to entice us on by such bayted ways as these, where all the laubour and
difficulty is hid. For a true servant indeed of God Almighty, neither thinks
upon the length of time, or number of years, but rather all time seems too
short unto him, to serve God in, all labor little, and all difficulty
delightful, and therefore there would be no fear to let such an one know unto
the full, the utmost difficulty of every thing he did, which S. Bernard
excellent well declares. Bernar. ep. 253. ad Gar.
He does not (says he) give himself unto the service of God, for a year, or
for a certain time, like a Mercenary, but for eternity without any prefixed
end, or reservation, with an inflamed will and affection. Hear the voice of
the Just, saying: Psalm. 118.93. v. 112
I will never forget your iustifications, seeing you have animated me with them,
I have inclined my heart to do your Iustificatio^s for all eternity, to do your
will, to fulfill your counsels and commaundments: and so for having taken a
resolution and offered himself to serve God, in an absolut manner without any
limit or restriction, and prefixe no certain time unto it, nor entered on the
account of any years, therefore shall his reward likewise know no bounds, but
be extended unto eternity, that eternal hunger of the just, is deserving an
eternal refection. Bern. vbi supra. Sap. 4.15
In which sense S. Bernard explicats that of the Wiseman, consumatus in breui
expleuit te^pora multa, a good and just man, lives in the short space of time,
or a few days, the life of many years, since his desire is so great out of
the ardour of his love of God to serve him, that should he live a hundred, or
if it were possible a thousand years, he should never be weaary of serving
him, nor ever think his service great enough. And so by force of this desire,
he comes to the merits of so many years, since God rewards each one acording to
his good desire. These are men indeed, these have truly masculine spirits,
these may well be compared to Jacob, who for the great love he bare to Rachel,
thought it a thing of nothing to serve seven years for her, and afterward
seven more, Videbantur illi pauci dies, Genesis 29.20.
pre amoris magnitudine.

Of another means, which is to accustom our selves to do our Actions well.
CHAP. VII.
THAT ancient and great Philosopher Pythagoras, Pythagoras.
counseled his friends and disciples (unto the end that they might both become
virtuous. and that virtue might be delightful to the^) to make choice of some
good course of life, and go forward with it without staying at any apprehensio^
of difficulty or labor, which might present it self in the beginning for to
discourage them, seeing with a little use and exercise the difficulty would
pass away, and the practice of virtue become easy and pleasant to them. This
means is of much importance, and ought to be put in practice by us, not so
much because it is commended by this Philosopher, as because indeed it is
derived from the holy Scripture (as we shall presently declare,) and also very
efficatious for that which we pretend. We have made choice already of a perfect
manner of life; or rather, God of his great goodness has elected us unto it,
Non vos me elegistis, Joan. 15.16.
sed ego elegi vos: for the which grace and favor he is to be blessed for all
eternity. But in this state of life, unto which our Lord has called us, we may
have more or less of perfection, and be perfect or imperfect Religious men,
according as we shall do our actions, perfectly or imperfectly. Therefore if
you mean to make any profit in Religion, and to arrive unto perfection, you
must accustom your self to do all the Actions, and exercises of that Religion
with perfection: accustom your self to make your meditation well, and all the
rest of your spiritual exercises, to be exact in point of obedience, to observe
your rules precisely, and to make esteem of every little thing. Accustom your
self to recollection, and mortification, to penance modesty, silence and the
like; and be not any whit dismayed, if in the beginning you find difficulty,
seeing with a little continuance and use, that difficulty will not only pass
away, but there will succeed to it, a great conte^tment and satisfaction, and
you will not know how to make an end of rendering thanks to God, for giving you
perseverance so far as to arrive to so much contentment and felicity. The
holy Ghost has taught us this doctrine in diverse passages of the holy
Scripture, as in the Proverbs, Proverb. 4 11.
Viam sapientiae demonstrabo tibi. I will show you the way of wisdom, and
learn you to find gust and savor in the knowledge of God. For Sapientia or
wisdom, says S. Bernard, is quasi sapida scientia a sauorous and delightful
knowledge of God Almighty, and he professes to teach us the way, to come unto
the taste the knowledge and the love of God: I will lead thee (says he) by the
paths of equity, into which when thou shall once be e^tred thy ways shall not
be straightned, and when thou runest thou shall have no hindrance. Now the
reason why this way of virtue is called a path, is because, at the first
entrance of it, (by reason of our ill inclinations) it seems narrow and not to
be passed without much difficulty, but being but once a little entered, we find
it so delightfully enlarged as we go on cheerfully, and run securely without
any fear of let or hinderance. And by this Metaphor the holy Ghost with divine
elegance has taught us, how upon the apperance of any difficulty in the
entrance of the way of virtue and perfection, we are no ways to loose courage
and be dishartened, but to go on with this assurance, that we shall be shorthly
past all that is hard and difficile, and arrive to all happiness and delight,
because I have labored a little, and I have found for my self much rest,
Eccl. 5.35
which is again reiterated in the 61. Eccl. 6.20
Chapter of Ecclesiasticus, there is a little labor in the work, and
presently thou shall eat of its fruit, Heb. 12.21.
and the Apostle S. Paul does likewise teach us the same: Al discipline (says
he) for the present seems not to be pleasant but (rather) irksom and tedious,
but afterward it renders by the exercise of it a most peaceable fruit of the
accomplished Justice, neither will it become only facile and easy, but also
pleasant and delightful to us. The same we find by experience in all other
Arts and Sciences: for what is there more difficill in the beginning then
learning and study? with what force and constraint are children brought unto
it? in so much as it is become a Proverb that knowledge comes with blood and
violence: and yet after a little practice, when they come to make some profit,
and have some understanding and taste of what they learn, they have no greater
recreation then to be always at their books, and it is the like with those, who
go in the way of virtue and perfection.

S. Bernard explicats this excellent well, upon those words of Job. Bern. l. 1.
de consid. ad Hu. Job. 6.7.
That which a little before my soul would not touch is now through necessity
become my food, would you know (says he) how much custom and exercise can do,
and how far in time it winnes upon us? first a thing shall seem intolerable
to you; in process of time, if you accustom your self unto it, you will not
imagine it so hard; a little after you will even feel it light; shortly after
not so much as feel it at all; and after that be even delighted with it: in so
much as you may well say with holy Job, that which at first my soul could not
look upon without horror and detestation, is now become the sauouryest food
and nourishment I have, and when soever you find any difficulty, to observe
your Additions, and those Instructions which are given you for the well making
of our prayers and examins, be assured that it is only for want of use and
practice, as also when you have so much a do to recollect your thoughts over
night, in such manner as to have them in your power when you wake, to make
offer of the^ unto Almighty God in prayer. For the reason of this difficulty
is, because at other times you take little or no care of the custody of your
thoughts, and of keeping them only attent unto that Mystery which you are to
meditat. Hence also is it, that silence and recollection seems such a tedious
melancholy thing unto you, since you never in earnest apply your self unto it,
Your cell (says Tho. a Kempis) becomes sweet unto you, if you continue in it,
and begets tediousnes if you seldom tarry in it, frequent your chamber often
and but accustom your self to keep with in, and you will come to be delighted
with its solitude. This is the reason why secular persons find so much
difficulty in fasting and meditation, for they have never used themselves unto
it. 1. Reg. 17 38.
King Saul armed David with his own Arms, when he was to fight against the
Philistim, but David because he had been never used unto them, was forced to put
them of again; notwithstanding we see how afterward with use, he came to
pass over whole months in arms, and proved a famous soldier. And that which
we say of good and virtue, is likewise to be understood of vice and all
defects, unto which if we give but any way in the beginning, or incur any ill
habit through our own negligence, it will continue daily strengthening it
self, and winning so much upon us, as afterward it will be very difficile, to
find out remedies forcible enough to free us from it, but we shall incur the
danger of always being subject to the ill habits of it: Vnlueri venusto and
neglecto callus obducitur, and eo insanabile quo insensibile fit, old ranckled
wounds do, if we neglect them, close upon the out sid, and so become the more
incurable, the less sencible we are of them, If you had but accustomed your
self from the beginning, to have don every particular action well, what a rich
treasure of merit should you have gotten together by this time? and what
contentment should you have found by experie^cing the facility and sweetness,
which is in every virtuous action? do but see what a pleasant life he leads,
who having had once a custom of swearing, has habituated himself again it,
and overcome it; with how much facility and delight does he avoid the comitting
of so many mortal sins? Let us therefore from this time forewards begin (for
it is better late then never) to accustom our selves to do all our ordinary
works and daily actions well, since they are of so much consequence, applying
unto that end (if need should be) our particular Examine, which should be one
of the best and profitablest examines, which we could make; and so we should
arrive unto that happiness to do al things well with great facility.

Of how great importance it is that Religious men do not grow remiss and
slack in the way of virtue. CHAP. VIII.
FROM that which we have said it may be easily gathered how much it imports a
Religious man, to conserve himself in fervor and devotion, and to make
perpetual progress in the well doing of his Actions, and how wary he is to be
not to do them negligently and with tepidity, least he should get such an ill
habit, as he should scarcely or never be freed of afterward. God can effect so
much as to bring you after a great negligence unto the fervent exercise of a
holy and perfect life, Bernard. epist. 96.
but this would be a wonder and miracle. S. Bernard handles this point
excellently well writing unto one Richard Abbot of Fontaines and his Religious,
where God had wrought a miracle of this kind, diverse of the Religious having
lived long time in great neglect of religious discipline, being afterward
drawn to a life more fervent and devout: at which the holy Saint much
astonished, and yet more rejoicing, congratulating their happiness says: This
is the finger of God, who shall effect so much that I may like another Moses,
go and see this great vision? seeing it is not less wo^drous then that which
Moses saw in the bush which burned, and yet was not consumed: It is a rare
thing upon earth, to see any one in Religion, get never so little higher (in
perfection) then that degree, to which he arrived first; and you shall with
more ease find diverse secular persons who do wholly convert themselves to good,
then any one among Religious men, pass forwards to a better state of life;
and the reason is, because secular people have not those many helps, nor
continual means to advance themselves in virtue as Religious have, and
therefore when they hear an excellent sermon, when they behold the sudden and
disastrous death of any acquaintance or friend of theirs, the nouelty of it
startels and amazeth them, and excits the^ to alter and amend their lives; but
if a Religious, who has all these helps in such abundant manner, who
frequents the holy Sacraments so often, who hears so many spiritual
exhortations, who meditates so often, who speaks so frequently of death, of
judgment, hell, and the beatitude of heaven; If he I say, notwithstanding all
this, pass his days in negligence and tepidity, what hope of any remedy to
make him amend himself? Since their ears are so accustomed to the hearing of
these things discoursed of, as that which commonly suffices, and is enough to
move and incite others to better life, passes only lightly by their ears, and
makes no motion or impression at all.

And this is the right understanding of that so celebrated sentence of S.
Augustine, where he says: Aug. Epis. ad plebem Hiponens^
From that time in which I begun to serve God Almighty, as I have rarely found
any better men the^ those who have gone forwards in monastical discipline, so
have I never met with worse then those who have falen and decayed in
Monasteries. S. Bernard does also testify, that rarely any of those Religious
men, who decay in spirit, and fall from their first fervor, do ever get up
again and recover that degree, from whence they fell; but that rather they are
still falling from worse to worse: which is that (says S. Bernard) which the
Prophet Hieremy deplores, Bern. ser. 3. infesto Apo. Pet. and Pauli.
How is the gold obscured? How is that best of colors changed? How is this
prime beauty decayed, and withered? They who were nourished in scarlat (who were
graced by God Almighty with all the favors he could even bestow upon them in
prayer, Hierem. 4 1. v. 5.
and all the blessings he could send them down from heaven) have embraced
filth and taken delight in all shameful foulnes and misery.

And therefore commonly speaking, there is but little hope of those, who begin
to decay and loose spirit in Religion, which is a thing we ought to have a
lively feeling, and a great horror of: and the reason of it is that, which we
have touched upon before, because they grow worsewith frequent use of the
remedies, and become more sick when those medicines are applied unto them,
which ordinarily bring health to other folks; and what remedy can there be
found out for such as these? They hold with good reason his health for
desperate, who grows not better, but rather worse, with the medicines which
should cure him: and this is the reason which makes us have such an
apprehension and horror of the fall of a Religious man, whereas we are not
much moved, with the impayring of seculars. When a Physician sees a sick man
very faint and languishing, or finds him by his pulse brought low and weak, it
seems no extraordinary thing unto him; but when he observes the same
symptoms, or ill dispositions in a man that is strong and lusty, he holds it
for a very dangerous sign, since such an effect cannot proceed from any thing
else, then from some peccant humor predominating in the body, which is the
forerunner of some great sickness, or inevitable death. And so is it in this,
for if a secular man chance to fall into any sin, it is no new thing, nor
strange for one who passes his life in so great negligence, confessing but
once a year, and living among such frequent occasions of falling into sin:
but if a Religious man, who is sustained with so much frequency of Sacraments,
so many prayers, and such a number of holy exercises, if he I say come once to
fall, it is a sign of a decayed virtue, of a long rooted weakness, and of
approaching ruin, and therefore with good reason is it to be feared so much.

Bernard. vhi supra.
But I say not this (says S. Bernard) to discourage you; especially if, being
fallen, you desire presently to arise again, knowing that the longer you
differ your amendment, you render it to effect the more hard and difficille,
but only to refrain you from sinning, from falling, and from decaying in
spirit. Notwithstanding if any one should through frailty chance to fall or
stumble, we have a good Advocate, our Savior Christ to plead our cause with
his eternal Father, who can do that, which to us is impossible. Dear children
(says S. John) I write this unto you, Joan. 2.1.
to the end you may not sin, but if any one shall chance to sin: we have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, and therefore no man is to despair,
seeing that if he heartily con^^^t himself to God, there is no doubt of his
obtaining mercy. If the Apostle S. Peter after so long a discipline in the
school of Christ, and so many graces and favors received of him, did
notwithstanding come to fall so grossly and from so low a fall, as the denying
of his Lord and Master come again to rise unto so high and excellent estate;
who shall despair hereafter, being once fallen, for to get up again? Have you
sinned Whilst you were in the world? (says S. Bernard) could your sin be
more grievous then S. Paul's? Have you sinned since your coming to Religion?
Can it be more enormious then Saint Peter's? Seeing then these holy Saints by
hearty sorrow and penance have not only obtained pardon of their sins, but
merited to arrive unto so high and eminent perfection as we know; do you but
imitate their sorrow and their penance, and you shall not only recover that
state in which you were, but also proceed unto a higher and more excellent
perfection.

How much it imports Nouices to bestow the time of their Nouiciat well, and to
accustom themselves then to do their Actions well. CHAP. IX.
WE may gather from that which has been said, how much it importes Nouices to
make good use of their time of Nouiciate, and to accustom themselves from that
their beginning to do all the exercises of Religion exactly, and with great
diligence. The first rule of the Master of the Nouices in the Society declars
this clearly unto us, and in a brief manner; which is not directed only unto
us, but also to all other Religious persons in general. Re. 1. Magistra
Nouitiorum.
He shall understand (says the Rule) that there is a thing of great moment
committed unto him. For the proving of which, two weighty reasons are alleged
to make the Master of the Nouices more vigilant over his charge, and more
sensible of the importance of the thing committed to his care; the first is;
because on the first institution of the Nouices, for the most part dependes
their (ensuing) profit; and the other, Because the hope of the Society in our
Lord does likewise consist therein. And to declare these two reasons more in
particular, I say first of all, that on this first education and habit of
virtue, which the Nouices first put on, depends morally speaking all their
advancement or detriment in spirit, all their fervor or remissness, as we have
said in the precedent chapter. For of one who passes over his Nouiciat tepidly
and with negligence, there is scarcely any reason we ca^ have to hope that he
will become more fervent or obseruant hereafter, but on the contrary there are
many presumptions and pregnant reasons to doubt the contrary.

But to explicat more clearly this verity, let us enter into more particular
discourse with the Nouice and well weighing the reasons, convince him by force
of them. Now whilst you are in your Nouiciat you have as much time and
leisure, as you can desire, to attend unto your interior and your progress in
spirit: unto which end you have all requisite helps and commodities, since your
Superiors employ you in nothing else besides, neither require of you any other
thing: this is their end and ought likewise to be yours. You have for the
present the frequent examples of your fellow Nouices, who aspire unto nothing
else, but to perfection; which is a motive which ought much to animate you, and
to stire you up, when you converse with no others but such as those: neither do
I see how you can remain negligent and remiss among so many who make such
great profit in virtue. You are now free from al solicitude and cares, and have
your heart freely left to the pursuit of virtue: there is no impediment which
may divert you from it, and the examples of many do inuit you to it. If
therefore now, when you have nothing else to attend unto, and every thing to
further you, you make no profit, nor provide you of no stock of virtue for the
future; what will become of you, when your heart shall be divided, and you
employed among a thousand businesses? If at this present with so many aids, so
precious and forcible, you make not your Prayer well, you do not your duty in
your Examens, you are negligent in your Additions, and have no care to perform
your other spiritual exercises well; how will you do, when you shall have your
studies to exact your attention; and when afterward you come to be employed
in hearing confessions, teaching, preaching and the like? If now with so many
conferences and spiritual exhortations, with so many examples, solicitations,
and even, in a sweet manner, addition of violence, you make no spiritual
profit; what will you do when you shall be as it were besieged round with
occasions of lets and hindrances, to divert you from it? If now in the
beginning of your conversion, when even the nouelty of the things were
sufficient to stir you up to fervor and devotion to them, you go forwards
with so much languor and tepidity; what will become of you, when your ears
shall be frequently accustomed to hear those things, which may divert and
carry you away? And what is yet more, if for the present when your passions do
but begin yet to sprout forth, and your inclinations are but (as it were) in
their infancy, and wanting force, you have not force, nor resolution to resist
them, for fear of labor and difficulty; how will you make head against them
and overcome them hereafter, when they shall have taken deep root, and be
grown so strong, and natural to you by length of time and custom, as the
departing from them would be a divorce unto you, not much less violent then
that of your soul and body?

S. Dorotheus declares this by an example borrowed of one of those ancient
Fathers, Doroth. doctr. 11.
who sitting once with his disciples in a grove of Cypres trees, where some
were great, others grafts and others of middle grouth, the Father commanded one
of his Disciples to pluck one of them up by the roots, which he did presently,
it being but a graft; afterward he pointed unto one which was of a bigger
sort, and bid him likewise pluck up that which he did, though not without much
violence and applying both his hands unto it; then he set him unto another
which was yet greater, which he could not pluck up, without an others help;
and lastly appointing one of the best rooted of them to be plucked up, all the
Religious together could not once stir it from the place: where upon the grave
Father took occasion to discourse in this manner unto them. Behold (said he)
it is just so with the passions of our mind: it is easy for us in the beginning
when they have not yet taken root, to overcome them with the least diligence,
but after you have suffered the^ to take root a while, they will gather so much
strength from your indulgence to the^, as it will cost you pain enough and
require a strong resolution for to root them out; if notwithstanding you can
effect it with all your industry.

From hence may we see the greatness of that tentation and deceit by which we
are won to differ our amendment and spiritual profit from day to day, and
to make account afterward to mortify and overcome our selves, which for the
present we dare not take in hand, because of the difficulty and tediousnes
thereof. If you cannot overcome the difficulty when it is not much; how will
you be able to resist it when this grown strong and mighty? if now when your
passions are (as it were but whelps) you trembled for fear of them; how will
you dare to with stand them, when they shall grow to be Lions in strength and
fury? therefore assure your self, that if you do your actions now with so much
coldness, negligence and imperfection, you will be far more tepid and
negligent hereafter. If now you are no good Nouice, hereafter you will be no
good Religious man, nor Operarius: if now you are negligent in observing your
rules, you will be much more negligent hearafter. Lastly if now you have but
little care to do your exercises devoutly, and with perfection, all that you
shall do hereafter will be nothing worth. All the difficulty in the batch is to
lay the leven well, Bonau. in spec. discip.
and S. Bonauenture says that the impressio^ or mould which one receaus in the
beginning, he hardly leaves of afterward, and he who neglects discipline in the
beginning of his new conversion, shall with much difficulty be afterward
brought unto it; and man shall hardly apply himself unto that in his age,
which he neglected when he was a youth. It is a proverb, Prou. 22.6.
and a proverb of the holy Ghost a youth according to his own way, will
hardly depart from it even when he grows old, Clymac. de inanis vitae fuga
gradu 1. Threnor. 3.27.
and therefore S. John Clymachus says that it is a dangerous and fearful
thing to begin tepidly: since (says he) it is the manifest sign of an ensuing
fall, and therefore is it of so much importance to accustom our selves from
the beginning unto virtue and to do our ordinary exercises well. The holy Ghost
by the Prophet Hieremy admonishes us of this, where he says, it is good for a
man, Eccl. 25.5.
when he bears the yoke from his youth: for such as then he shall have been,
such shall he remain always thereafter, and those virtues and good habits by
use and exercise will become light unto him, which otherwise would have seemed
intolerable, that which you have not gathered together in your youth, how shall
you find it when you come to be old?

From this first reason proceeds the second, seeing if the progress of the
Religious consists in their first beginings and education, the good of the
Religion does likewise depend thereon. For it is not the walls of the cloister,
or college which makes the Religion: but the persons who are co^gregated in
the^; and those who are now in the Nouiciat, are they who are afterward to be
the body of the Religion, and for this reason the Society thinks it not enough
to erect Seminaries and Colleges where youth should be educated in virtue and
learning together, but it also designs peculiar houses for virtue only, where
the Nouices attend unto nothing else then to the abnegation and mortification of
themselves, and to the exercise of true and solid virtue as a foundation of far
more importance and necessity, then that of any learning or liberal science.
Unto this end the Nouiciats are erected, Pater Borgia. in ep. ad Societ.
which are (as B. F. Borgia says) like Bethleems for the Nouices, which is
interpreted the house of bread, here they provide them of Biscuit and provision
for so long a voyage, and so many dangers which do threaten them. This is our
harvest, and our fruitful season; this those plentiful years, during the
which we must lay up store, with Joseph for those years of famine and
sterility to come. If the Inhabitants of Egypt, could but have appehended the
necessity, of making best use of that same plentious time, they would not have
so lightly exhausted their granaries, of that provision, Genes. 41 48.
which Joseph did so carefully buy up. If you could but imagine how much it
imports you to go out of the Nouiciat well furnished and stored with spiritual
provision without doubt you would be far from being joyful when you were to
go from thence, but rather you would be sad and much afflicted, at the
necessity of sending you away, when you considered what small provision of
virtue and mortification you went away with all. And so B. F. Borgia was wont to
say, that those who desired or were glade to have made an end of their
Nouiciat, did well show that they had little understanding of spiritual things,
and did not know the necessity which they had, considering the danger and
difficulty of their voyage to go out well furnished with provision for it: of
how rich, and well provided of all virtue did our B. Father imagine that we
should depart out of the Nouiciat, 4. P. consti. cap. 4.2.
as he declares in the Co^stitutions? he ordayns two years of probation and
experiment, where the Nouices are to look upon no other book, nor attend to
other study, then that of their greater abnegatio^, mortification and progress
in all virtue and perfection, from whence he supposes they will come out so
fervent and spiritual, such great friends of mortification and recolectio^, so
addicted to prayer, and to spiritual things, that there would be more need of
the bridle the^ the spur: therefore he exhorts them when they come to
Colleges, to moderat their fervor during the time of their studyes, and in no
wise to follow its dictamen for as much as concerns prayer and mortification,
as thinking that they are come out of the Nouiciat with such interior light
and illustration, with such a knowledge of God and spiritual things joined
with the contempt and hatred of the world, with such a tenderness of devotion,
and such exterior and interior composition that ti was need to go by way of
prevention, to meet with that fervor which they were to bring from the
Nouiciat with them, the fruit of two complet years of probation. Let us the^
procure to depart from the Nouiciat with an answerable fervor to this
expectation of us; let us make due use of that so precious time, seeing so long
as we live, we shall never have the like time again to make our profit of, and
to gain and store our selves with spiritual treasure; let us be wonderful wary
of mispending it, and letting the least moment of it be lost, Eccl. 14 14.
Non defrauderis a die bono, and particula boni doni non te pretereat.

One of the greatest graces and favors which our Savior does to those who^ he
calls in their youth unto Religion, and for which they are to render him infinite
thanks, is; that it is very easy for them then to apply themselves to virtue
and Religious discipline. The tree, whilst it is yet in its first growth and
but a limber plant, may be bowed which way you please, and fashioned and
disposed to an excellent growth, but after you have suffered it once to grow
knotted and awry, it will be easyer to break it, then to straighte^ it, but it
will remain always as it is, Adeo a teneris assuscere multum est it imports so
much to be accustomed from the beginning. And this which is said of plants, is
likewise found by experience in men, who when they are young may easily be
framed and fashioned to good, and they come to have a great facility in that,
unto which they are trained and brought up from their tender age, and
consequently lightly to persevere in it. as the woole which being dyed, before
it be wrought, does never come there after to loose its color. Who shall
restore the wool which is once dyed scarlet, to its native whiteness again
says S. Hierome? and the Poet Horace.

S. Hier.
Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odore^. Testa diu -- old vessels will
taste of that liquor, which they first did fill into them, when they were new.

2. Paras. 1 34.3.
King Josias is praised the holy Scripture, for beginning from his youth to serve
God, Cum adhuc esset puer, coepit quarere Deum patris sui David.

Humbertus a right venerable person, and Master General in his life time of
the Order of S. Dominicke, does recou^t how that one of the Religious being
dead, appeared some night after unto an other Religious man of the same Order,
in great brightness and glory, and leading him out of his cell, he showed him a
vision of diverse persons in white and resplendent habits, who carrying fair
crosses on their shoulders, did in that manner march in procession toward
heaven; presently after he saw an other company, but far more delightful and
shining with greater light then the former, who bare each on a fair rich
cross in their hands, and not one their shoulders, as the other procession had
done, who went before; shortly after he perceived an other band of them,
shining with more admirable light without comparison then those who went
before, whose crosses were likewise far more rich and resplendent then any of
the other, which crosses they did not bear on their shoulders, nor in their
hands, as the two other companies had done, but each one of their crosses, was
borne by a several Angel, who lead them on, whilst they in joyful manner
followed after them. At which vision the Religious man much wondering, and
desiring to be instructed in the mystery; that blessed soul deceast told him,
that the first who^ he had seen, bearing their crosses upon their shoulders
were such as entered Religion, when they were well in years; the second sort,
who bare them in their hands, were such as came into Religion in the flower of
their youth; and the last who went so cheerfully and so lightly on, whilst
their crosses were borne in the hands of Angels, were such as had entered
Religion in their tender years, and had sooner forsaken and left the world,
the^ known it.

FINIS. Ad maiorem Dei gloriam.
THE THIRD TREATISE OF THE RIGHT AND PVRE INTENTION, WITH WHICH we ought to do
our Actions.

Composed in Spanish by the R. F. ALFONSVS RODRIGVEZ of the Society of JESUS.

Translated into English.

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXX.

THE THIRD TREATISE OF THE RIGHT AND PVRE INTENTION, With which we ought to do
our Actions.
That we ought principally to shune all vain glory in our Actions. CHAP. I.
THERE is nothing in our Rules, and Constitutions, so often repeated, or more
recommended to us, then that we should endeavor to have a right Intention in
all our actions, and therefore almost in every leaf and rule, are these words
repeated: To the greater glory of God. Or these other (in effect the same)
having always regard unto Gods greater service. Our Blessed Father Saint
Ignatius, had this desire of the greater honor and glory of God, so deeply
rooted in his heart, and was so accustomed to direct all his actions unto this
end; that he repeated these words (for out of the abundance of the heart, the
mouth speaks) most frequently on all occasions. Math. 12.34. and Luc 6.45.
This has been ever as the Device, the soul and life of all his actions, as
is amply declared in the History of his life, and therefore with good reason
are these words, Lib. 1. c. 3. vita P. Ignatij.
Ad maiorem Dei gloriam subscribed unto his picture. This is his Arms, this
his Device, and Motto; in this short sentence is his whole life and all his
actions in such manner comprehended, as we cannot entitle him to more praise
and honor, then these few words make him inheritour of. This must likewise be
our Scutchion, Motto, and Device, to the end that like dutiful and legitimate
children, we may be in all things like unto our Father. Neither is it without
cause, that he commends this so much unto us, Tract. 2. cap. 1.
seeing that all our progress and perfection co^sists in those works which we
are to do; for according as they shall be good and perfect, so likewise shall
we be better and perfecter, and the more right and pure our intentions are, the
more sublime and perfect shall be their end; for this is that which gives soul
and being to our aactions, according to that of our Savior in the Gospel:
Math. 6.22. and 23.
The lamp of your body is your eye, if that your eye be pure and simple, your
whole body shall be enlightened, but if your eye be naught, your whole body
shall be obscure. Greg. l. 38 Moral. c. 3
The Holy Doctors commonly understand in this place by the eye, the intentton,
as that which before hand, marks and considers what it is to do, and by the
Body, the operation, which presently follows the intention, as the whole body
follows the direction of the eyes. Moreover Christ our Lord says, that our
works and operations, receive all their light and luster from the intention
which we have in doing them, and that the work is good or bad, according as
the intention is good or bad, with which we do it, and so likewise sublime and
perfect, as the end shall be sublime and perfect for which it is done. Which
the Apostle S. Paul gives to understand, where he says: Romans 11.16.
Si radix sancta and rami. The tree and its fruit take well or ill, according
to the root; for what else can we expect from a tree which has an ill root,
but wormeaten and unpleasant fruit? Whereas on the contrary if its root be good
and sound, both the tree shall be good, and the fruit proceeding from it. S.
Gregory writing on these words of Job, Job. 38.6. Greg. l. 18. Moral. c. 28.
Super quo bases illius solidatae sunt, says, that like as the edifice of some
substantial building, uses to be sustained by rewes of Pillars, and that
those pillars are supported by their basses and foundations, so also our
spiritual life is sustained by virtues, and these virtues depend upon a right
and good intention.

But that we may proceed herein with order, we will first treat of that
vicious end, which we are to avoid, and fly from in our actions, that they may
not be done out of vain glory or any other humane respect; and after proceed
to set down that good and perfect end and intention, with which we ought to
do, and to perform them; for first we must fly evil, and then do good,
according to that of the Prophet Diuerte a malo and fac bonum. Psalm. 33.15.
All the holy Doctors do principally advise us to take heed of vain glory;
for that it is (according to their saying) a sly and crafty thief, which sets
upon us at unawares, and spoils (or to speak more properly) robbs us of our
good works and penetrates so secretly and insensibly into our souls, that it
oftentimes has ransackt and bereaved us of all, before we took any heed or
notice of it. Saint Gregory says, Greg. cap. vlt. mora. and l. 9. c. 13.
that it is like a thief disguised, who puts its self into our company as we
travail, making show as if it went the same way with us, until at length when
we are least aware of it, it sets upon us and bereaues us both of life and
goods together. I confess (says that holy Pope) that it seemed to me, when
I first examined my intention, in the writing of this work, that I had no
other in the undertaking of it, but only to please Almighty God, and
nevertheless in the process of it, I have discovered a certain desire of
delighting men, and a kind of vain complacence so subtlely crept in, that
although I know not how, nor in what manner it got entrance yet this I find,
that the further I go in it, the less free it is from the dross of vanity: he
says moreover that it happens with this, as it does with eating; for we
begin most commonly to eat, out of pure hunger and necessity, but afterward
there creepes in Gluttony and complacence so subtly withal, that we proceed
to do that out of mere delight and gust, which we begun out of necessity to
satisfy our nature and sustain our life. Even in this manner we begin well
oftentimes our spiritual functions of preaching, and the like, with intention
only to apply them to the help of souls, but by little and little afterward
it turns to vanity, and we fall to seek, to please and comply with others,
and be esteemed our selves; and when we find any of this wanting to our
expectations, presently we begin to do our functions after a languishing
manner, and more out of necessity, then any will or application to them.

Wherein the hurt and mischief of vain Glory does consist. CHAP. II.
THE hurt which proceeds from this vice, is principally this, that it makes a
man vain gloriously seek to exalt himself with that honor and glory which
only appertains to God: 1. Tim. 17
Deo soli sit honor and gloria, and that which he reserveth only to himself,
Isa. 42.8. etc. 48.11
and will have given to no created thing (Gloria^ meam alteri non dabo)
wherefore S. Augustine in his Solitoquiums directs his speech in this manner
unto God Almighty: Whosoever, Augu c. 5 Solioq.
Lord from thy good ^^ckes glory (...) himself, and not to thee, is (...)
thief and a robbery; and like unto the Devil who went above to steal thy
glory from thee. In all Gods works, two things are to be considered; first
their profit and vtility; next the glory and honor which proceeds from them,
and ought to redound unto their Author and Original, the fruit and vtility of
his actions, God does freely bestow in this life upon men, but the glory he
does wholly reserve unto himself. Prou. 16.^. D^ut. 16.19.
God has made all for himself and the Lord has created all people to his
praise, name, and glory. Whence it is that all his creatures do preach, and
teach unto us his wisdom, Psalm. 18.2.
goodness, and his providence; hence also it is that heaven and earth are said
to be full of his glory. Isa. 6.3.
Whosoever then in those good works which he does, shall seek the praise and
the esteems of men, does wholly pervert Gods ordination in them, and is
app^rently injurious unto his divine Majesty, by seeking that men (who ought
wholly to be occupied in glorifying God, should neglect and turn themselves
from God, to have regard to his esteem and praise; and also desiring, that
their hearts which God has created to the end they should be vessels of his
honor and glory, should be filled with their honor and esteemation. What is
this is this but to steal the hearts of men from God Almighty, and turn him
out (as we may say) of his own house and habitation? Can there be greater
malice and wickedness, then to seek, to rob God of his glory, and the hearts
of men? Or to ^^y with their mouths, that God Almighty is only to be our
object, whilst in their hearts they desire to derive the eyes of men, from God
unto themselves? He who is truly humble desires not to dwell in the heart of any
creature but in God alone, neither that any should be mindful of him, but that
they should convert all their thoughts to God, neither lastly to be so much as
spoken of by men, but that God alone should be in the mouths of every one,
that they should have him only in their hearts, and there conserve him to
eternity.

We may the better perceive the soulnes and enormity of this vice, by
considering what injury that woman should do unto her husband, who should
trim up, and adorn her self, more to please another eyes then his, for
even so does he, who does his good works (which are our souls peculiar
ornaments) more to please men, the^ God Almighty, who is the spouse and
Bridgrome of our souls. Think likewise how unworthily it would show in any
Nobleman, to boast some slight service he had done his Prince, who for him had
formerly exposed himself to some great danger and ignominy, without regard
either of life or fame, especially if he should seek to commend himself by
those his small services, (which yet he had not done, without the assistance of
his Prince) unto the dishonouring of his Prince, who without any help of his,
had done for him a thousand times as much; it were a disloyalty to be detested
by every grateful mind, and yet these is none of us, but may well apply ^ll
this unto our selves, and have just cause to be ashamed, as well for that we
proudly esteem our selves to have done any thing, as chiefly for that we boast
our selves, and glory unto others when we do any thing, whereas we might have
just cause to be so confounded for having done so little, if we would but
compare that which we are obliged for Gods sake to do, with that which God only
for our sakes has done.

The evil of this vice does yet more clearly appear, in that the Divines and
holy men do reckon it among the seven deadly Sines, Clim. de vana^ gloria,
which are called the heads and originalls of al other sines, and some there
are who reckon eight, and say that the first is Pride, the second vain Glory,
but the common opinion of the holy Fathers, which is received and followed by
the holy Church, D. Thom. 2.2. quest. 132. art. 4
is that there are seven capital Sins, under which S. Thomas says Vain
glory is the first, but that Pride is the fountain, original, and root of all
the seven, Eccl. 10.15.
following this sentence of Ecclesiastes, the beginning of all sin is Pride.

Of the hurt and damage which vain Glory bringes along with it. CHAP. III.
OUR Savior in the Gospel does apparently declare, what detriment this sin
of vain Glory does bring along with it, where he says: book that you do not
your actions before (...) for to be seen of them, Matthew. 6.
otherwise you shall have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. Do not
imitate the Hipocriticall Pharisees, who did all their works with design to be
seen, esteemed, and praised for them by men; for so shall you loose all the
fruit of them: Amen I say unto you, they have received their reward. Math. 6.5
Your desire was to be esteemed of men, and out of this desire, you have done
all your actions, and therefore you have your reward already, Quia ventum
seminabunt, and turbinem metent. And miserable as you are, have nothing least,
you may pretend in the other life. Holy Job says: The hope of an Hipocrite
shall vanish, Job. 8.13.
to wit, of such a one, Greg lib. Moral cap ^ ^.
who does all his actions to be esteemed and praised; which S. Gregory
excellently declares, where he says, that all the praise, and the esteem of
men, for which they sought and labored, with the breath of life vanishes away,
and then, Non ei place bit record^^ sua, his folly and madness will be
displeasing to him. O how much (says this Saint) shall you find your selves
abused, when (having the eyes of your understanding opened) you shall see, that
with those works by which you might have purchased Heaven, you have gained no
more then the vain praise of men, and the empty words of, O how well has he
said this! How excelle^tly done that! He who desires the favors of men for
those good works he does, sets a vile price upon a precious thing, and asks
only the base come of transitory words, for that with which he might have
purchased Heaven. What greater folly or madness can be imagined, then that a man
should do diverse good works with much sweat and labor, and deprive himself
of all recompense in the end? Which is that which the Prophet Aggeus says: Put
your hearts upon your ways: Agg. 1.5. and 6.
you have sowed much, and reaped but little: you have eaten and are not
satiate: drunken and are not inebriat: you have clothed your selves, and are
not warm, and he who gathered up his byre and wages, has put it into a sack
full of holes, or (according to another translation) into a pierced or leaking
Vessel, into which to (...) any liquid matter, is no other then to spill it.
In the like manner to do our works with vain glory, is but utterly to loose
them, for the loss accompanyeth inseparably the gain. Wherefore (then)
appenditis argentum non in panibus, Isa. 55.2.
and laborem vestrum non in saturitate? As you do many things, toil much, and
labor much, perform them all in such manner, as they may profit you, and not
to loose your labor and recompense.

S. Basil observes three losses and detriments which vain Glory brings us.
Basil. constable Monast. c. 11.
The first is, that it makes us labor and weary out our selves in exercise of
works which in themselves are good. The second, that it depriues us of them as
soon as we have done them, by bereauing us of al their recompense; this
mischievous vice (says this Saint) does not bring us not to work at all (for
that were not altogether so grievous, to have no reward, when we had not
labored for it) but it lies in wayt until we have labored and wearied out
our selves, with doing many good works, and then it dispoiles us of them by
bereauing us of their reward. Chrysostom. ho. 3. in verb. Isaiae. Vidi Dominum
It may properly be compared (says he) unto a Pirate, who lies a loofe upon
the Sea, until he sees a ship well fraught come out of the Haven, and the^ he
makes to it, and lays it aboard. The Pirates use not to set upon ships when
they put first to sea empty of loading, but lay for it, when it has made its
voyage and comes home richly fraught; in like manner, this thief of our vain
glory, waits until we are full laden with good works, and then it surpriseth
us, and forcibly depriues us of them, and what is yet more, it does not only
deprive us of their reward, but (which is the third loss and most material)
it makes us worthy of punishment, by changing our good into ill, and virtue
into vice, through that vicious and corrupt end for which we did our actions.
And so we come to reap ill fruit from good seed, and to deserve punishment and
torment for that which might have purchased us the joys of heaven, and all this
it does with such sleights and allurments, that men do not only receue a loss
so important as that of all the good works which they have done, but even they
take pleasure and are delighted with it: In so much that although you clearly
demonstrate unto them, and they acknowledge it, that they do merit nothing by
all the works they do, notwitstanding they are so set on fire, with this
desire of the esteem of men, that they seem to be bewicht with it, and to
have no thought or care of any thing besides.

In Constable. Monast. c. 11.
Wherefore S. Basil calls Vain glory, A sweet thief of spiritual treasure,
and a delightful enemy of the souls of men, it is a fawning traitor, a
sugared enemy and a sweet impouerishing, whence it is, says he, that so many
are enticed by this dangerous vice, into its nets and snares. The glory of this
world, says he, seems sweet unto the ignorant, and with its outward
appearance coosens and deceaues them. And S. Bernard says: Bern. sermon 6. super
Psalm. Qui habitat.
Take heed of the arrow, it flies lightly, and enters lightly in: but I say
unto you, it makes no light wound, but bringes death presently, and this arrow
is vain glory. It is but a poor and little grain of Sand, but it flies high.
Surius in vita S. Pachomij
Surius recou^ts how that whilst S. Pachomius was once sitting with some other
grave Fathers in a certain place of the Monastery, one of his Monks came,
bringing with him two mattes, and laid them by his Cell, just against the
place where S. Pachomius sat, hoping that he would take notice of them, and
praise his diligence for having platted those two mats that day, whereas the
other Religious according to their rules, had only made their one a piece: But
the holy man perceauing his vanity, sighing and turning him unto the other
Fathers with great sorrow and feeling, said: Behold this Brother here who has
been laboring from morning unto night, to offer up all his works unto the
Devil, and has had more respect unto the praise of men, then to Gods glory.
Whereupon calling the Monk unto him, after a sharp reprehension he gave him
for penance, to go with the mats upon his shoulders, as the Brothers should be
assembled to prayer, and there to cry out with a loud voice, Dear Fathers and
Brothers, I beseech you pray unto God for me poor sinner, that he would have
mercy on me, who have made more account of these two matts, then of the
kingdom of heaven. Moreover the Holy Abbot commanded that whilst the rest of
the Religious took their refection, he in like manner with the matts on his
shoulders should sit in the middle of the Refectory; neither yet did this
penance seem enough unto him, but he caused him to be locked up into a Cell,
where none should have access unto him, and there to remain for five months
together without any other sustenance then only dry bread, salt, and water,
with a task imposed upon him, to plat every day two matts. there in secret
before he eat. Whence unto our profit we may gather how great pennances those
ancient Fathers did impose upon ordinary faults, and with how great humility
and patience their Religious received them, making their profit of them.

That the tentation of vain Glory does not only assault those who are new
beginners, but also such who make progress in Virtue. CHAP. IIII.
S. CYPRIAN treating of the tentation with which the Devil assaulted our
Savior the second time, (when having carried him up unto the Pinnacle of the
Temple, he said: Math. 4.6
If you be the son of God cast your self down) falls into this exclamation,
O detestable malice of the enemy, the malign spirit, made account to overcome
him. with vain glory, whom with Gluttony he could not win! And therefore he
indeauoured to persuade him, to make himself by flying in the air, the
spectacle and wonder of the people. The Devil thought he should find the like
success with te^pting our Savior, as he had with others, and knew by
experience, confirmed by often trial, that even those whom by no other
tentations he could overcome, he had often by vain glory and Pride. wone and
subjected to him. Wherefore after he had tempted them with Glutony, he sets
upon him with this, as the more forcible and difficile to resist. For it is no
small matter (says the Saint) for one not to be delighted with the praise of
men, and as there are not many to whom it is grateful to hear themselves ill
spoken of by others: so are there as few, who are not well pleased when others
speak in co^mendations of them. From whence we may perceive that this of vain
glory is not only a tentation of Nouices, and new beginners, but even of those
of longest experience and practice in Religion, yea rather it is more properly
the tentation of such who go forwards in perfection.

The holy Abbot Nilus (who was disciple of S. John Chrysostom) relates how the
old experie^ced Fathers, Nilus de inte, emp. Patruum qui erant in Sina, adfert
Surius 14. Ianuar.
did instruct and bring up the Nouices, after another, and far different
manner then they did those who had been long in Religion: they tought the
Nouices always to have a care of abstinence and temperance, since those who
suffered themselves to be overcome with the vice of Gluttony, would easily (they
said) be subdued by the concupiscence of the flesh (for how shall he be able to
overcome a mighty enemy, who cannot resist a weak and feeble one? But they
admonished those who had made a longer progress in Religion, to have an eye
chiefly to the resisting of vain Glory and Pride (like as those who sail by
sea, are then most careful to take heed of shelues and rocks, when they are
not far from the Haven; for as there are many who having made a prosperous
voyage by sea, do perish and suffer shipwreck near the Haven? So likewise are
there diverse, who have happily passed over almost the whole course of their
lives, ouercoming all tentations on their way, who in the end, when they were
even in entrance of the port, by trusting too much to their passed victories,
and growing proud and negligent with the conceit that they were out of danger,
have made a most lamentable wrack of all. And like a ship which with many
voyages to sea was never hurt, comes las^ly to perish in the Haven, so far is
it with vain glory, and therefore many holy men call this vice, A tempest in
the Haven. Others compare it by a Merchant, who having his ship richly loade^
with all commodities, does spring leaks in it himself, and drown it, yea the
ancient Philosophers destitute of the light of Faith, yet have arrived to the
knowledge of this verity, as namely Plato, where he says, that this vain
Glory is the last garment which our soul puts off, meaning that it is easier
to leave off all other imperfections then this one.

The reason why those ancient Fathers did not exhort their Nouices to take heed
of this vice of vain Glory* was, because they knew there was no great fear of
vain glory in those, who having newly left the world, had yet the wounds of
their sins open and freshly bleeding, from whence they should find matter
enough of humility and shame, and therefore it was more need for them to be
exercised in abstinence, penance, and mortifying themselves, but those more
ancient in Religion, who had already washed away their sins with their
repentant tears who had undergone hard penance, and were well entered on the way
of virtue, had need of these admonitions, for the other who were yet full of
passions, empty of sollid virtue, who had not yet made an end of weeping for
their sins, and the forgetfulness of God Almighty into which they were so
deeply plunged, had no cause at all, to grow vayn-glorious, but much, to give
way unto their shame and their just cause of grief.

Wherefore they ought to be greatly confounded, who having diverse motives for
to humble themselves pass them blindly over, and become proud by looking only
upon something more then ordinary, which they seem unto themselves to have
done. In which they are most shamefully abused, for any the least ill which may
be found in us, ought to be sufficient for to humble us, seeing to the end a
thing be good, it is required that there be nothing defective in it; whereas
any on circumstance is enough to make it bad. But we on the contrary side,
cannot humble our selves with all our faults and imperfections, whereas if
there be any one thing in us which seems but good, we presently grow proud of
it, and desire to be esteemed and respected for it. In which we may clearly
perceive the malicious craft of this vice of vain glory, since it spares none
of any condition, and setts upon all without any ground or reason, S. Bernard
says likewise of it, Bernard. de o^dinibus vitae and morum institutib. Aug. in
Psalm. 115.
that it is the first in the sin and the last in the combat, the first which
setts upon us to overthrow us, and the last which we must fight against to
overcome. Therefore dear Brothers says S. Austin, let us all arm our selves
and prepare us to fight against this vice, in such manner as we read of the
Prophet David, where he says. Psalm. 148.37.
Auert mine eyes that they may not look upon vanity, O how happy are those who
in the hour of death can say that which S. Catherine of Sienna answered the
Devil suggesting vain glory unto her when she was a dying: get hence said she
I never gave any way unto it, but have done all my actions unto the glory of my
God.

Of the particular care which they ought to have of vain glory, who are to
employ themselves to assist and help their Neighbor. CHAP. V.
ALTHOUGH (as we have said) all men in general ought to take heed of this vice
of vain glory, nevertheless we (who according to our institute are to attend
unto the salvation of souls) have particular need, to proceed herein with
great warynes and circumspection, seeing that our functions are very sublime,
and perspicuous, as being exposed unto public sight, and therefore the more
spiritual and eminent they are, the greater danger is there in them, and the
fouler should our faults be, if we should seek our selves in doing them, and
desire the praise and the esteem of men. For this should be to glorify our
selves, Ber. sermon. 45. super cantica.
in that which God makes most account of, which is his graces and his
spiritual gifts. Whereupon S. Bernard says. VVoe be to them to whom it has
bin given to think and speak well of God Almighty if they esteem gain,
piety, if they convert that to vain glory, which they have received to lay out
for to gain souls to God, if feeding and tasting of high things, they have
not well relisht but neglected the humble, Woe I say unto them unto whom it is
given to apprehend and speak feelingly of spiritual things, to understand the
Holy Scriptures, and preach with great applause unto the people, if they once
should wholly employ those talents in seeking of themselves and human praise,
which God bestowed upon them, for to win souls to him, and spread abroad his
honor and his glory, let such fear and tremble at those words of God spoken
by the Prophet Oseus I have given them silver, Ezeae. 28.
I ^aue multiplied their gould, with which they have made (their Idol) Baal,
they have made use of my gifts, to build unto themselves an Idol of glory.

Greg. lib. 22. mor. cap. 17. 2. Cor. 2.17.
S. Gregory brings unto this purpose that saying of the Apostle Paul to the
Corinthians. We are not like unto many, adulterating the word of God, but out
of sincerity, but like as from God we speak before God in Christ, on which
place he makes two expositions, saying, that the word of God may be adulterated
in two kinds. The first is when one understands and expounds the holy
Scripture, contrary to its litterall sense, making out of their own fancyes new
coments on it, contrary to the legitimate sense which the holy Ghost, the
author of it, has delivered unto his spouse the Catholic Church, by the
holy Doctors and interpretors of it. The second sort of corrupting and
falsifying the word of God is that which makes more immediately to our purpose.
For there is this difference betwixt the lawful husband and an Adulteror that
the ones end is to beget children from the lawful bed, the others only to
satisfy his lustful appetit. In like manner, he who by the word of God and his
spiritual functions, seeks not to beget spiritual children to God Almighty,
which is proposed unto him, according to that of S. Paul. Per Euangelium ego
vos genui, 1. Cor. 4.15.
but seeks his own satisfaction, and the praise of others, is an Adulteror of
the word of God. And for this reason the holy Doctors call vain glory a
spiritual Adultery, since the pleasure thereof is as much greater then that of
the other, as the soul surpasses the body. Let us not therefore like
Adulterors corrupt the word of God nor seek any thing in our functions,
besides the honor and glory of his divine majesty, conformable to that saying
of our Savior Christ, Ego autem no^ quaero gloriam meam, I search nor mine own
honor and glory but the glory of my Father which is in heaven. Joan. 8.50.
Origin well compared our good works, which are the works of God, to the male
children of the Hebrews in the land of Egypt, and says that we should be as
careful not to show them for ostentation, as they were not to have their
children seen by the Egyptians, least it happen to us, as it did to Moses,
who being perceived when he was an infant, and taken up, was throne into the
river of Nylus. If you would appear to be any thing, let it be in the eyes of
God Almighty.

The Holy Scripture relats an exploit of Ioab the General of David's Army, most
worthy of our imitation, to wit, that he with his Army besieging Rabat, the
capital City of the Amonits, where the King was, with diverse of his chief
Nobility, 2. Reg. 12.29.
and had so weakened it, that he doubted not to take it by the next assault,
dispatched a Post to David presently, to let him know upon what terms it
stood, and withal to beseech him to come unto the Army and be present in
person at the taking it, giving him this reason, that when he destroyed the
City, 1. Reg. 12.19.
the victory might not be ascribed to him, This his fidelity ought we to
imitate toward God in all our Actions with desire that the fruit and
conversion of souls with the good and prosperous success of our affairs, be
attributed to God, and not to us. Non nobit Domine non nobis, Psalm. 113.9.
sed nomini tuo da gloriam. All honor belonges unto God who is in heaven, as
the song of the Angels does teach us, Gloria in altissimis Deo.

We read of S. Thomas of Aquin in the History of his life, Luc. 2.14.
that in his whole life he never had so much vain glory, as might arrive unto
a venial sin, never the more delighted with himself, for his great
knowledge and Angelical wit, nor those great gifts and graces which God had
bestowed upon him. We read also of our B. F. S. Ignatius, L. 5. c. 3. vitae B.
P. lgn.
that for diverse years before his death, he was so entirely freed, from this
te^tation of vain glory, (he being arrived to such knowledge and contempt of
himself by the illustration of heavenly light) that he was used to say he
feared no vice less. Behold here the pattern after which we ought to frame
our selves, and which may make us heartily ashamed, to let our selves be carried
so away with the breath of vain glory, for every slight and paltry thing we
do. What should we do, if we were eminent in learning, famous for preaching, if
we made great profit in the gain of souls, and were for these things esteemed
by Princes, Prelates, and by all the world? It behoues us even in little things
to accustom our selves to neglect the praises of men, and seek the honor and
glory of God Almighty, to the end that we may do the like, when occasion of
greater shall present it self.

Of certain other remedies against Vain Glory. CHAP. VII.
S. Bernard upon these words of the Psalmist, Bern. in b. 14 super ps^ Qui
habitat. psalm. 90.11.
You shall walk upon the Aspe and Basiliske and tread the Lion and Dragon
under your feet, says, that of these beasts some there are who wound with
their teeth, others infect with behoulding, others with their claws, and
others with their hissing do affright: so the Devil in as many kinds does
inuisibly endommage men, and goes on applying the propertyes of these beasts,
to diverse sorts of sins and tentations, with which the Devil makes war
upon us, until coming to the Basiliske, he tells of a monstrous thing which
is reported of it, to wit, that with its only sight, it poisons men to death.
Which the Saint applies unto vain Glory, according to those words of our
Savior in the Euangell: Mat. 6.1.
See that you do not your Justice before men for to be seen by the^, as if he
would say, take heed of the Basilisks eyes. But we are also to consider, that
as some say, the Basiliske only does poison those whom it sees first, whereas
if you first look upon the Basiliske you are not only not hurt by it your
self, but also are the death of it: so says he, vain glory hurts none but
the negligent and blind, who set themselves forth for to be seen of it, and
never mark before, what a vain, abject, and ugly thing it is, whereas if you
would but prevent it, by looking on it first, it could not hurt you, but you on
the contrary, would be the death and ruin of it, by converting al its threats
and flames into contempt and smoke.

This is the^ the first remedy against vain glory, to wit, that we endeavor
to prevent this Basiliske by looking on it first, attentively examining and
considering, that the opinion and the esteem, of men, is but a little wind and
vanity, by which we neither win or loose, the praises and opinions of men
making us not better, neither their slanders nor persecutions worse; which
Saint Chrysostom excellently declares upon these words of the fiftenth Psalm.
Psalm. 5.13.
For thou shall bless the Just, saying, that these words of the Psalm are of
great comfort unto righteous men when they are persecuted and injured,
encouraging them to the neglect of it, for you (says he) you o Lord are he who
blesses the just; which being so, what harm can all the contempt and scorn of
men do him, who has the King of Angels for to bless and praise him? And on
the other side, if God reject him and do cast him off, all the esteem and
praise of men, will nothing help him. Which he confirms with the example of
holy Job, who whilst he sat on the dunghill full of loathsome soars and
ulcers, crawling with worms, afflicted and reviled by his foes and friends,
and (what is yet more grievous) by his own wife, was yet more happy then them
all, because that God did bless him, Job. 2.3.
and howsoever men did iniure him, yet God was well pleased with him, which he
confirmed by this great testimony of him, that he was simple, and upright, one
fearing God, declining evil, and yet remaining in his innocence, and this was
it which made him a great man indeed: the scorn of men, and the worlds
disesteeme, making him in nothing lesser then before, And from hence this Holy
Saint concludes, that we ought only to bend all our endeavors to render our
selves grateful and pleasing unto God alone, seeing the praises and esteem of
men can neither hinder us, nor further us: Cor. 4.3.
and therefore is to be neglected. To me it is a thing of least account to be
judged of you, or of man's day, that is, by men, I do not study to please men
but God, who is the Judge of me, qui autem iudicat me Dominus est.

Bonauen. opusc. de in format. nouicioru^.
S. Bonauenture adds heereunto an other point, saying: be not offended with
those who speak evil of you, seeing that which they say, is either true or
false: if it be true, it is no marvel they do dare to say that which you have
dared to do: If false, it cannot hurt you. And although you should be moved to
some impatience by it, yet sustain it courageously, like those who endure the
cautering Iron, and as that red hot Iron cures the wound, so shall you be
delivered by this calumny, from some secret pride, which perhaps lay in your
heart, you never knew of.

The second means which will help us much herein, Basil. ser. de exercit.
monast.
is that which is so much reco^mended to us, by the Saints, Basil, Gregory,
Bernard, and generally all; which is to abstain from uttering any word, which
may tend unto our own comendations and esteem. Bern. in formul. honesta vitae.
Never speak any thing of your self (says S. Bernard) which may import your
praise, how ever familiar he may be with whom you speak. Yea be more careful
to conceal your virtues then your vices, It is reported of Mr. Auila, that he
was very careful and circumspect in this, in so much, that when upon any
occasion for the profit and edification of others, he thought fit to speak of
any spiritual thing, which he himself had experienced, he would by speaking
in the third person, so hide his own praises, Ferdina^d, Epis. 4.
that none could perceive it was himself he sp^ke of. And a certain Prelate
in Spain who had formerly known our B. Father at Paris, was wont to recount
unto us, that he once was discoursing of prayer, and teaching the use of it.
Being demanded how his prayer succeeded with him, answered, they should pardon
him, for he would not tell them that, but as much concerning prayer, as should
be necessary for them to know, Charity and the needs of others obliging him to
this last, whereas to speak of the other were but vanity. We read also that
Saint Francis was so reserved in this, that he was not only afraid to make
known to others those great favors and graces which God was pleased to bestow
upon him, but also when he rose from prayer, he carried himself, so covertly
and with so much moderation, in his words and his exterior, that none could
guess by his outward comportement at any thing which passed in his heart.

Thirdly we are not to think it sufficient, not to say any thing which may
tend unto our praise, but we must pass yet further, and procure as much as may
be, to keep those good works secret which we do. According to this admonition
of our B. Savior in the Euangell, Mat. 6.6.
when you pray enter into your chamber, and shutting the door, pray unto your
Father in secret, and your Father who in secret sees you, will reward you; And
as you give alms, do it so, as your left hand may not know, of that your right
hand does; which is as much as to say, that if it were possible your self
should not know thereof. And when you fast, Math. 6.17.
anoint your head, and wash your face, that you may not seem to men to fast.
That is, carry your self as if it were a time of feasting, for in the province
of Palestine (where our Savior was when he spoke these words) it was the
manner (as S. Hierome writs) to anoint and perfume their heads on Festival
days: and because the subtilty of this vice is so great therefore has our
Savior Christ given us the greater charge for to take heed of it, and fly it,
by doing our good works in secret, that we may not loose them, and that this
thief vain glory may not steal them from us. For so says S. Gregory, do
trauaillers hide their money, least if they should let it be seen, it would
entice thieves to take it from the^. And on this occasion he tells what
happened to King Ezechias, who by showing the treasure of his palace to the
Ambassadors, 4. Reg. 20.17.
of the King of Babylon, was the cause that it was all taken from him and
transported to Babylon. They bring likewise that common example of the hen,
who loses its egg, by kakleing when it lays it, to show that it is just so
with those, who desire that others should see their good works when they do
them, and perhaps rather then fail do tell of them themselves.

Greg. lib. 22. mor c, 9.
But a faithful servant of God Almighty says Saint Gregory, is so far from
this, that he is not content to tarry there and do nothing else, but that which
may come for to be seen of others, for so he esteems himself in a manner to
have received reward for them, but he labors further, to ad an overplus of
such other Heroical acts, as may never come unto the knowledge of men. S.
Hierome writes of S. Hilarion, that he seeing such a world of people following
him, and all men honoring him for the multitude and greatness of his miracles,
was very sad, and did nothing else but weep, and when his Disciples demanded of
him the reason of his tears, and that unwonted sadness? he answered, it seems
to me (Dear brothers) that God is rewarding in this life, those slender
services, which I have done him, since he permits me so to be honored of men,
and this is another reason, and a very fit one which we may make use of against
vain glory. Look that you have no desire to be esteemed of men, for fear
least God pay you in this money for your good works, if perhaps you have done
any; and after this life answer you with the rich Glutton. Remember son how
you have received good in your life time. Luc. 16.25.
This is one of the reasons why the Saints counsel us to shun al extremes
and singularities, since those actions which are above the ordinary strain use
to be observed, weighed, and spoken of by others, Qui facit quod nemo mirantur
omnes, Gerson. and Guiel. Paris^ens.
and commonly serve unto no other end, then to beget in us a spirit of Pride
and vain Glory, from whence proceeds our contempt of others.

But seeing that it is not always in our powers to hide our good works, whose
vocation it is, to help our neighbors by them, the fifth remedy is, to rectify
our intentions, eleuating our hearts to God, and offering and directing unto him
all our thoughts, our words, and actions as we shall presently declare, and
then if perchance vain Glory shall seek for entrance, Magister Auila tom 2.
epist. f. 59.
we may say with Master Auila: You come too late, I have offered up all my
works already to God Almighty, or answer it very profitably, In vita S Bern.
as S. Bernard did, who when his thoughts once suggested to him (as he
preached) Oh, how well you say, answered. I neither begun for your sake,
neither for your sake, will I make an end. We ought also to be very wary, that
we leave not off our works begun, out of fear of vain glory, for that were
too too palpable a folly; but we must stop our ears, and pass over the
praises of men as if we heard the^ not. In which (S. Chrysostom) says, Chrysostom.
l. 5. de Sacerd.
that we are to carry our selves with the world, as Fathers to their little
children, who if the child praise him does not much esteem it, if he disprayse
him, does but laugh at him, since he considers him as a child, that knows no
reason for the one or the other. And so must we be have us with the world, and
consider it both when it speaks the best, or worst of us, but as a child
which knows not what it says. P. Xauer. lib. 6. cap. 15.
S. Francis Xauerius that great Apostle of the East Indyes, says yet more:
that if we would but seriously consider our sins and imperfections, and what
we are truly in the eyes of God, we should believe that men in praising us, did
no other then deride and mock us, and take their commendations for our
iniuryes.

The last means (with which we will conclude this chapter) is the knowledge of
our selves, which is the only counterpoise, to all vain Glory: for should we
but thoroughly search and diue into that which in truth we are, we should
understand what small foundation we have for to build Pride upon, and how much
cause to humble our selves, and be ashamed of so many sins and imperfections.
And that not only by considering that which is ill in us, but even by
attentively marking those works of ours which seem to us the best and
perfectest, wherein we should find so much amiss, as it were sufficient for to
humble us: which S. Gregory says and repeates often. Lpeg. lib. 9. moral. cap.
11.
All humayne Justice (says he) if it be strictly weighed is convinced to be
injustice, and if setting aside Gods goodness, we should be examined, we should
find those works of ours worthy of punishment, for which we awayted to reyceaue
reward. And S. Job testifies that he therefore feared in all the works he did,
knowing the multitude of those defects which use to mix themselves with their
actions who have not a wary eye upon themselves, Job. 9.28.
verebar omnia opera mea. Which being so, what cause or reason have we to be
proud? When if we examine our selves but with attention, and call but to count
at night the Actions of the day, we shall find nothing but a multitude of
miseryes, sins, and imperfections crept into all our thoughts, and words, and
deeds; we shall perceive nothing but many good works omitted, and lastly (if
with Gods assistance we have don any good) we shall commonly see it, so
deformed with pride, vain glory, negligence, and many other defects which we
do know, and far more which we may presume are unknown unto us, that we may
have just cause to be ashamed of it, let us therefore enter into our selves,
and have recourse unto the knowledge of our being nothing, let us I say look
upon our feet, which is the fowlnes and deformity of our works, and it will
presently make us let fall the feathers of that vanity, pride, which was lifted
up within our hearts.

Of the good end and intention, which we ought to have in all our Actions.
CHAP. VII.
WE have hitherto showed how we are to fly vain glory, and humayne respects
in doing of our works, and now will we treat of the end and intention, which
we ought to have in them. which is Gods greater honor and glory. S. Ambrose to
this purpose brings that example of the Eagle, who for to try, Ambr. l. 5.
Hexam cap. 18 and lib. de Salom. cap. 2
whither her young ones, are truly bread or no, bears them in her Talents up
into the air, and there exposing them to the full shine of the sun, if she
perceaues that they wink, and are not able to abide its beams, she lets them
fall and houlds them for none of hers, but if with their eyes fixed, they can
abide its brightness, she bears them back unto the eyery again and cherishes
them with all tenderness. In the like manner, shall it appear whither we be true
children of God or no, if we do look steadfastly on God the true son of
Justice, by so directing all that we do to him, that the only But and End of al
our works, may be only to please his sacred Majesty, and accomplish in them,
his holy will and pleasure; which agrees well with that which Christ our
Savior has said in the Euangel. Math. 2.15.
Whosoever, shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, he is my brother,
sister, and my mother.

One of those antie^t Ermits was wo^t always before he begu^ any work to
stand still a while, In vitis Patrum.
and being demanded why he did so, answered: these works are worth nothing of
themselves, unless they be accompanied with a good Intention and End, and
therefore as a good Archer, takes his aim at leisure before he shutes, that he
may hit the white the better, so I before I begin any work do use to direct my
intention to God, who is the mark at which I aim at in all my actions; and
that is the reason why I stand still at the beginning of every work. Behold
that which we must imitate. Cant. 8.6
Pone me vt signaculum super cortuum, and as good men mark, (that they may the
better recollect their sight,) do use to shut their left eye, and take their
aim only with the right, so ought we to shut up the left eye of humayne
respects, and only keep open the right eye of a pure and good intention, and so
shall we come infallibly to hit the mark, Caat. 49.
and penetrate the heart of God. Thou have wounded my heart with one of thyn
eyes.

But to speak more clearly, and to desce^d unto particulars, I say we must
endeavor to direct all our works actually to God Almighty, which may be done
in diverse manners. And first in the morning when we rise, we ought to offer up
to God, all our thoughts words and works, of the following day, humbly craving
of him, that they may be all directed to his honor and glory, unto the end
that if vain glory should afterward present it self to have any part in the^,
we may truly answer, you come too late, they are al bestowed already. Moreover
we are not to think it sufficient to have offered up in this manner, to God
Almighty every morning al which we shall do that day, but we must procure to
accustom our selves to begin no action, without first having offered it up
unto Gods greater glory. And like as Masons use to do, who go forwards with
their building, so by rule and level, that they lay not one stone, but they
measure it with their plu^met whether it be right or no, so must we measure all
our actions, by that rule of the good pleasure, and the glory of God. And as
the workman is not content only to make use of his rule and line in the
beginning of his work, but applies almost to every particular stone, so we
ought not only in the beginning of every action, to offer it up to God
Almighty, but also in the progress of it, we are to make an often tender of it
unto him by saying, O Lord it is for your sake I do this, because it is your
command, because it is your good pleasure.

How we may do our actions with great rectitude and purity of Intention CHAP.
VIII.
THE masters of spiritual life, for to declare how we are to do our actions
with greater perfection, do use an excellent comparison, saying: That as
Mathematicia^s abstracting from the matter, only regard the quantity, and
figure of the thing, not caring whether it be good silver or any other mettle,
as a thing nothing appertayning to them, so the true servant of God Almighty,
ought in the doing of his works, only to have regard unto the will of God: and
abstracting from the matter of the^, not to care whether they be gould or clay,
that is, to be indifferent, to be employed either in honorable, or base and
painful things, since our gain and perfection consists not in the quality
of our employments, but in acco^plishing the will of God, and in seeking his
greater glory in all we do. Basil. de ingluuie and ebriet. ora. 16.
The which the glorious S. Basil does excellently teach us, according to the
doctrine of S. Paul, where he says: The life of a Christian man, ought to
propose unto its self this only But and End, 1. Cor. 3.
to wit, the glory of God: so that whether we eat or drink, or do ought else
besides we are to do all unto the glory of God says S. Paul preaching in the
Lord.

Our Savior Christ (weary and tired with his long journey) talking with the
Samaritan Woman, whilst his disciples went unto the adjoining village to buy
them food, it being after dinner, and they returned offering him to eat, Joan.
4.31
saying: Rabbi manduca. Answered, I have food to eat which you know not of.
Whereupon they said among themselves: Has any one brought him any thing to
eat? To whom he answered: My food is to do the will of him who sent me. This
must likewise be our food in all we do, whilst we study, hear confessions, or
teach, or preach, our food ought not to be the delight and satisfaction which
we take in teaching, Preaching, studying, or the like (for this wear to
change gould into Clay). but all our food, delight and satisfaction, ought to
be in doing the will of God, which is, that you should be then employed in
those works, you ought likewise to have no other food in doing the ordinary
offices of the house, so that being or Porter, or Infirmation, you ear and
fare a like, with him who is Preacher or Divinity Master, and consequently you
are to be as well pleased with your office, as he with his, as having the same
cause of true contentement, common with you and them, which is, the
accomplishing of the will of God. For like a good spiritual Mathematician you
are not to reflect upon the material work, but on the will of God, which you
perform in doing it, And therefore must we always have these words both in
our hearts and mouth. O Lord it is for you that I do this, it is to your glory,
and to fulfill your pleasure; neither are we ever to intermit this exercise,
until we do arrive unto that perfection, Ephesians. 6 7
to do our actions as serving God and not men, as S. Paul says, and to
perform them in such manner that they may be, as so many continued acts of
the love of God, and that it may be our only felicity, to do Gods will, in the
execution of them, so that coming to do any work or action, we may rather
appear to love then work.

Reverend M. Auila declares this by a familiar and good similitude, saying:
That when a Mother washes the feet of her husband or her son, coming from
abroad, it is in her a mixed action, of service and of love: she loving the
service she does them, and serving them for love. Oh that we could but do our
actions in this manner, that we could but find the hidden mine of this treasure
in the field; one the one side so apparent and manifest, Tract. 6. cap. 4. and
tract. 8.14
on the other so hidden and concealed! Oh how rich should we be in spirit and
recollection! Behold here, the true Alchimy which changes brass and Iron
into gould, for howsoever ignominious the work be in its self, yet by this it
is made honorable and of great esteem, let us therefore hereafter enforce our
selves so to do al our actions, as they may become pure gould by our
performance of them, this is in our power to do, and easily. 3 Reg. 6.19.22.
In the Sancta Sanctorum and Salomons Temple, all was pure gould, or conuered
over with gould, so likewise all that we do, ought to be the love of God, or
for the Love of God performed and done.

How we are not so much to lay the fault of those distractions and spiritual
hindrances which we find in our selves sometimes, on our exterior occupations,
as on our not performing them as we ought. CHAP. IX.
ONe may well conceive from that which we have now said, that the cause of that
small progress, and troublesome distractio^, which we so^times find in our
selves, when we are busyed about external things, ought not to be attributed,
unto those occupatio^s, but unto our selves, who know not how to make our
profit of them, neither to perform the^ as we ought, and therefore no man is
to lay the fault on his affairs, but on his own want of knowledge to make his
benefit of them. Crack the nut, it is not the shell, but the kernel which
must be eaten. If you only insist upon the exterior action, and this same
outward rind and shell of things, you shall but break your forces, and loose
spirit, the nut and inward kernel that it with which is no other then the will
of God. must be that which we must feed upon, crack therefore with the teeth
of your consideration, this outward shell, and without regarding it pass
forwards to the kernel and the pith, like Ezechiels great Egle, Ezech. 17 3.
which Flew. to Laba^us, and took away the inward pith of the Cedar, without
tarying at the outward barck, Holocausta medullata offera^ tibi, Psalm. 62.15.
this is that upon which you must insist, this is that which you must present
to God, and so your devotion will increase and profit you. Martha and Mary are
sisters, the one is not to be hinderance to the other, but to maintain mutual
assistance, prayer, helps to perform our actions well, and our good works do
maynly assist our prayers, and if at any time you find your self troubled and
disquiteed in your actions, it is because that Mary (which is contemplation)
helps you not Martha, Luc. 10.40.41.
Martha, solicita es, and turbaris erga plurima, Martha was disquieted, because
she was not accompanied with her sister Mary, Dic ergo illi vt me adiuuet, Do
but procure that Mary may assist you and you shall presently see all this
trouble will be appeased. Those Holy and mistical beasts which Ezechiel writes
of, held their hand under their wings, Ezech. 1.8.
to signify, that spiritual persons apply their hands to work, but under the
wings of contemplation, not separating the one from the other, but whilst they
work they contemplate, and co^templating they work.

And this is that which Cassian recounts of his Monks in Egypt, who although
they labored with their hands, yet seized they not withal to meditate, and
whilst their hands were doing Marthaes offices, their hearts were busyed in
Maryes exercises, which S. Bernard excellently in these words declares, Those
who make profession of spiritual exercises, Bern. sermon ad solit.
must have a special care that they so employ themselves in exterior things,
as they do not extinguish the spirit of devotion, and so although externally
through the exercises of good works, they are wearyed in their bodies
internally, nevertheless in their souls they are recreated and refreshed Whence
it comes that the external occupatio^s do so little hinder the internal
devotion and recollection, that they rather further it, for they no ways
hinder the understanding, but leave it at liberty and free to think on God
Almighty. Wherefore Father Hierome Natalis, one of our first Fathers, and a
very spiritual man was wont to say, that he enuyed two sorts of people in
Religion, the one was Nouices who studied nothing else but their spiritual
progress in virtue; the other, the lay Brothers, who had always their
understandings free, and left unto themselves, to entertayne them al day in
prayer and devotion.

S. John Clymachus tells of a certain Cook in the Monastery where he was, Clym.
cap. 44.
who having much busynes, by reason the number of Religious was very great
(amounting o two hundred and thirty, besides the strangers and ghests which
daily came) was notwithstanding in the middle of so many affairs, highly
recollected within himself and united with Almighty God, having moreover the
plentious gift of tears, at which S. John Clymachus being much astonished,
was very importune with him to know how he came to obtain so high perfection,
among so great and continual a press of businesses. The Brother in the end
overcome with his importunity, answered him. I never imagined that I served
men, but God. I have always thought my self unworthy of any rest or quiet,
and the sight of this material fire makes me weep through a lively
apprehe^sion of the intolerable pains of the eternal fire. It is also
related of S. Catherine of Sienna in her life, In vita S. Catharinae Senens.
that her parents did greatly persecute her, and exceedingly importun her to
mary, yea they proceeded so far as to forbid her all priuacy, and the comodity
of any place where she might retire her self to pray, and not content with
this, they employed her in the drudgeries of the house, taking a servant which
they had from the Kitchen that she might supply her place, to the end that by
this means they might leave her no commodity nor time to pray, or attend unto
her other spiritual exercises. But she (as the History of her life says)
instructed by the holy Ghost did build unto her self in her dear heart a
spiritual and most retired Cell, with intention never to go out of it, which
she performed afterward in such manner, that (whereas she was enforced
sometimes in her other retirements for to come abroad) out of this spiritual
Cell of hers, she never went, her parents could deprive her of the first, but
she was so surely possessed of this other, that no living creature could drive
her out of it. And by imagining with her self, that her Father was Jesus
Christ, her mother our B. Lady, and her Brothers and the rest of the family,
the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord, she came to do her works with
exceeding diligence and cheerefulnes, having her thoughts in the midst of all
the drudgeries of the Kitchen, only upon Jesus Christ her spouse, Hier. super
illud Isaiae cap. 38.10 Ego dixi in annidio.
inioying his presence always, and being continually in his company within
that holy of Holyes in her soul. And so would she freque^tly afterward when
her Ghostly Father had any journey in hand, or were otherwise much pressed with
business, Greg. l. 35 mor. c. 35. super illud Job. 42. Mortuus est Senex and
plenus dierum.
give him the like counsel, saying: Father build a cell within your self,
and never go out of it. Let us also do the like, and we shall not find our
selves distracted with exterior functions, but they will rather help us to be
ever in prayer and Meditation.

How good and profitable it is, to do our Actions in the foresaid manner.
CHAP. X.
SVCH works (as we have spoken of) are called full and perfect works, and
those who live in such manner (according to S. Hierome, and S Gregory) are said
by the Holy Scripture to be full of days, although they have lived but a little
time, and die in their young years; Sap. 4.13.
following this sentence of the Wisema^: Having finished in a short space, he
has fulfilled a long time. But how can a man in a short space live many
years? Would you know how? By doing full and complete works, and living
whole days: Et dies pieni inuenientur in eis. Psalm. 24.17.
This second place does explicate the first, and a good Religious man, and
faithful servant of God Almighty, from morning until night, and from the
evening to the next morning, lives a complete day of four and twenty hours,
since that he imployes all that time in the fullfilling of the will of God; and
he even passes upon the account of God Almighty, his times of eating,
recreation, and taking his natural rest, since he does them not, but only as
they are the will of God, and directs them all unto his greater glory. He does
not eat for any gust or pleasure which he takes in it, as the beasts do,
neither seeks he his own satisfaction and content, in those other things, but
would willingly be without them if it were Gods blessed will. O Lord, that men
could but live without eating, drinking, and passing sometime in decent
recreation? That they might always love thee, without need of having recourse
unto these miseries of the body? De necessitatibus meis erue me. Psalm. ibid.
O Lord deliver me from these necessities and miseryes, that I may be wholly
employed in loving thee, that I may bestow my self upon thee alone.

But I see well, that this is not to be hoped for in this life, and that the
just man, ought to bear patiently, though with grief the condition of this
calamitous state of ours. Let us demand of some such holy persons, as Job, and
David were, how they did carry themselves in like occasions, and then one will
answer us: I sighed before I eat, Job. 3 24.
and mingled my drink with tears. The other: I will wash my bed every night,
Psalm. 100.10. Psalm. 6.7.
and will water my couch with tears. And in this manner must we weep when we
go to rest, and say: O dear Lord, must I be here so long without being
mindful of thee? Heu mihi quia incolatus meus prolongatus est. Alas that my
captivity is yet prolonged. When will you recall me from this banishment?
Psalm. 119.5.
When will you set me free from this Captivity. Erue de custodia aenimam meam.
Psalm. 141.
O my God, when will you lead me out of the prison of this body, that I may
wholly bestow my self upon you? Oh when shall this be? Alas, why does this hour
differ to come? Greg. l. 35 moral. c. 15
Behold here those full days, and complete works we spoke of; in this manner
a just man in a little time lives long, and makes of a few days of life, many
years of merit. Whereas he who has lived ill, and misspent the days of his
life, dies void and empty of days, although otherwise he were aged, Job. 7.3.
and had lived long time. Habui menses vacuos, and this because he had spent
unprofitably his years and days; Genesis 47.9
and therefore may say with good reason: The days of my years are few, and
nothing worth. S. Hierome upon these words of King Ezechias (when he was
delivered from his sickness by the Prophet Isaias, Isa 38.10
) I have said in the midst of my days. I will go to the gates of hell,
observes, that the Saints and holy men always accomplish their days as
Abraham, Genesis 25.8
of whom the holy Scripture says, That he dyed in a good old age, and full of
days, but that the wicked dye always in the midest of their days, yea they
do not arrive so far, Psalm. 54.24.
according to that saying of the Prophet. Bloody and deceitful men shall not
live the one half of their days, because they have passed over their years
unprofitably. And so the holy Scripture calls a sinner of a hundred years:
Puer centum annorum, Isa. 65.20
a child of a hundred years, and adds that such an one shall be accursed:
Because a child of a hundred years shall die, and a sinner of a hundred years
shall be accursed. Since he has not lived like a man, but as a child. Whence it
comes, that death always cuts off the wicked, vntimly, as it were before they
are ripe, and so, such at the arrival of death, do ordinarily say: Oh that I
had at least but one year more to live, for to do penance in, and so
likewise it happens with tepide and negligent Religious men, who although it be
many years since they have worn the habit, have yet but lived a few days in
Religion. 3. part. l. 8 cap. 27. Hist. Min. de F. Gerardo.


We read in the Chronicles of S. Francis Order, of one of those holy Religious
who being demanded of another, how long he had been Religious, answered not
one minute, and the other being much amazed to hear it, not understanding what
he meant by it, he told him, I know that I have worn the habit of a
Miny-brother this threescore and five years, but for as much as concerns the
works of one, I do not know whether I have been a minute. God grant that
but too too many of us may not say with truth, what this good holy man said out
of humility. We must not make account of our long being in religion, but our
well living in it: Diverse (says Thomas of Kempis) count the years of their
conversion, but often times there is but little amendment, a few days of a
good life are more worth, then many years of an ill and negligent. For before
God there is no reconing made of the years of our life, but of the goodness of
it, neither of the long time, which we have bin in Religion, but of that which
we have spent well in Religion, of which the Holy Scripture affords us a
remarkable example. It is said in the first book of Kings that Saul reigned two
years over Israel, 1. Reg. 13.2.
Saul was a child of one year, old when he began to reign, and reigned two
years over Israel, where as it is certain that he was King forty years, for
so Saint Paul says in the Acts of the Apostles: Act. 13.21
Afterward they demanded a King, and God gave unto them Saul the son of
Cis, a man of the Tribe of Benjamin for forty years. How comes it then, that
in the Chronicles of the Kings he is said to have reigned but two years? the
reason is, because in the Annals and records of God Almighty, there is no
reckoning made, but of only those years which we have lived well, and so he is
said only to have reigned two years, because only in those he governed as a
good and righteous Prince, and we read in the Euangell, Matt. 20.8.
that those who came to work in the vinyard at the eleue^th hour, were for
one hours work, preferred to those who had labored all the day, since in that
one hour they had done as much of true labor, as those who had wrought from
morning unto night. Let us then cast up our accounts according to this
reckoning, and see by our good works how long we have bin in Religion.

This is excellently declared by Eusebius Emissenus, Eusech. ho. 9. ad Mo^.
who from a Senator, was afterward Bishop of Lions. We use to count (says he)
Our years, and the space of time which we do live, be not deceived (who soever
thou art (with the number of those days which you have passed over since in
body you have left the world, make account that you have only lived that day,
in the which you have denied your own will, in which you have resisted your
ill affections, and which you have passed over, without any transgression or
breach of your rule, make account that you have lived that day which has b^n
enlightened with the bea^es of purity, and holy meditation with such days as
these make up (if you can) your computation of years, and by those measure the
time of your being Religious, and fear otherwise least that should be said
unto you, which was reproached to the Bishop of the Church of Sardis in the
Apocalips. Angelo Ecclesiae Sardis scribe, Apoc. 3.1.
scio opera tua, quia nomen habes quod viuas, and mortuus es, esto vigilans,
non enim inuenio opera tua plena coram Deo meo, I know thy works (says God)
although they are unknown to men, Apoc. 5.2.
you have the name to live and you are dead, you bear the name of a Christian,
the habit of a Religious man, but your works fit neither of them, for they are
not full before my God: but empty, empty of God, and of your self, too full,
for you do no other then seek your self in them your own commodity, your
honor and esteem. Let us therefore be watchful and make it all our labor,
to do full works, and live full days to the end that in a little time, we may
live long, and merit much in the sight of God Almighty.

A MORE EXPRESS DECLARATION of the vprightnes, and purity of intention with
which we are to do our Actions. CHAP. XI.
THEY give commonly a good advise to those who co^uerse with their neighbors,
touching the manner of their carriage, in those functions which they exercise
and actions which they perform, by the which it may be gathered how pure our
intention ought to be, how free and desingaged our selves, and how sincerely we
are to seek God in all occasions. And it is the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers
and Doctors of the Church, S. Hierome, S. Gregory, and S. Chrysostom as we
shall see afterward; They say that when we undertake any action to the end our
neighbor from thence may reap any general or particular profit, we are not to
reflect upon the fruit and good success of it, but only to fulfill the will of
God in doing it, in such manner that when we hear confessions, or when we
preach or teach, we ought not much to regard whither those you co^uerse with
all be converted, amended, or profited, but only one our parts to do the will
of God, and please him, in doing the b^st we can, and for the success of our
actions, as whither such an one be converted, or profits by our sermons, or
becomes learned by hearing of our lessons, that belongs not unto us, 1. Cor. 3.6
but only unto God, Ego plantaui, Apollo rigauit, sed Deus incrementum dedit,
for us (says the Apostle,) all that which we can do, is but to plant, and
water, like as that Iardiner does, but for to make the plants grow, and the
trees bring forth fruit, belongs not to the Gardener but to God the fruit of
souls, which is, that they depart from their sins, that they convert
themselves to God, and that they go forward in virtue and perfection, does only
appertain to God, and the value and perfection of our Actions, does not depend
upon it. This then is that purity of intention which we are to endeavor to
have in all our Actions, that by this means we may attain unto a great purity
in our intentions, and enjoy a delitghful peace of mind, for those who do their
Actions in this manner, are never troubled, when the success of their affairs
comes by any chance to be thwarted, or fayles of execution, or produces, not
the fruits, they hoped for; for they proposed not this end unto themselves
neither have they placed their co^tentme^t in it, but only for to do the will
of God and perform al to please him, unto their utmost Power, for if when you
preach, hear confessions, or do any other function for to help your
neighbor, you propose unto your self beforehand to make great profit of it,
and let this be your principal end in the performance of the^ when any chance
crosses your design in this, you become troubled and disquieted. And not only
loose your peace of mind, but even sometimes all patience, if you proceed not
further.

Our B. Father S. Ignatius, declares this with an excellent example or
similitude, Lib. 5. c. 2 vitae B. P. Ignat.
do you know said he, how we are to carry our selves, in those our functions,
wherein we employ our selves unto the help of our neighbor? Just so as the
Angel Guardians do with those, who are committed unto their charge by God
Almighty, who never cease with all possible care to counsel, defend, and
govern the^, to illuminate, excite, and help them in all good, but if through
misuse of that freewill they have, they obey not to their good inspirations,
the Holy Angels are never troubled at it, nor disquieted, not so much as to
leese the least particle of their felicity, which they possess in enjoying the
sight of God, but they say and repeat that, which is written in the Prophet
Hieremy We have salued Babylon and it is not cured, let us go and leave it;
Hiere. 51.9.
In the like manner, we ought to use all possible remedys, so well to free and
retire our neighbor from sin, as to advance him in the way of virtue, but if
notwithstanding all our endeavors, he remaynes still in his infirmity, and
will not suffer himself for to be cured by us, we ought not therefore to
afflict our selves, but are to remain with great quiet and tranquillity of mind.

As the Disciples of our Lord returned from preaching, with much joy, for
having done Miracles, and cast out Devils from possessed persons, our Savior
said unto them, Luc. 10.20.
Do not rejoice therefore, but because your names are registered in heaven, our
joy ought not to depend upon the event of things, although it might be as happy
as that of theirs, but we are only to have care to do those works, by the
which we may merit to have our names enroled in heaven. Let us look that we in
our duties in our offices and charge, and place our joy and felicityes therein,
but for the happy success of them, for strange conuersions, and such like
wondrous things, we are not so much as to make reckoning of them. And the
reward and glory, which we shall have, shall not be proportioned to these, but
answearable unto our pain and labor, whether any have been converted by us
or no, which may be more clearly perceived by the contrary. For should you
reap such abundant fruit, by your sermons, writings, and conversation as to
convert a world, and in the mean time should neglect your self, all which you
had done, would nothing profit you, according as our Savior says in the
Gospel, and on the contrary, Matthew. 16 26.
if after having done your duty, not so much as one person be converted by you,
your recompense shall be never a whit the less. The glorious Apostle S. James
had certainly had but a poor reward, if the recompense of his labor had
depended on the event, and if he had been to have placed his contentment and
felicity therein, who (as it is written of him) converted in all Spain, no
more then six or seven: but his merit therefore was never a whit the less,
neither his labor less acceptable to God Almighty, then that of the other
Apostles.

Moreover we have in this a great cause of consolation, for from hence it
follows, that God does not only not exact an account of us of the great fruit
and profit we have done, but also he will not so much as question us, whither
we have made fine sermons, or learned lessons or no. God does not command us
that, and consequently our merit dependes not on it. That which God would have
and requires of us, is for my part, to perform as much as we can, according
to the talent we have received, if little, little, if much, much. A gain and
this being done God requires no more of us: Luc. 12.48.
Much is required of him to whom much has been given, and but a little of
him who has received but a little. Chrys^hom 41. super Genes.
Which S. Chrysostom explicates rarely well, where treating of the parable of
that Talent: he demaundes, why that servant who had gained but two Talents was
equally honored with him who had gained five? When the Lord came to take an
account of the Talents which he had distributed among his servants, the sacred
Scripture says, that he came who had received five, and said: Lord you gave me
five talents, and here I have gained other five unto them, unto whom his Lord
said: It is well done thou good and faithful servant, Matthew. 25 21.
because thou have been faithful over a little, I will constitute thee over
much, enter into the joy of thy Lord. Afterward he presented himself, who
had received two Talents, and said: Lord you have given me two Talents, behold
other two which I have gained to them, and his Lord answered him with the same
words and promised him the same reward as he had done to the other who had
gained five. What is the reason of this, says this holy Doctor? It is most
just, says he; for the ones negligence, or the others diligence was not it,
which made the ones gain greater the^ the others, but the quantity of the
talents committed to their charge; for in their diligence they were both
equal, and so their rewards and dignityes were both ^lik. This is a point of
great profit and singular consolation, seeing it may be applied to all offices
and employments; for if one be as careful and diligent to perform those
offices, which he has in charge, as another is in the discharge of his, he may
without doubt merit as much as he, although his work be nothing near so much.
For example, if I take as much pains as you for to prepare my self to preach,
although I should preach with never so ill a grace, whereas you one the
contrary should carry away your audience with excellent iesture, choice matter,
good delivery, it may happen nevertheless, that I may merit as much, if not more
then you. It is the like in matter of study, where although one be but a simple
scholar, and you on the contrary have an excellent wit, he knows but little,
and you are deeply learned, notwithstanding he may merit more with that little
which he has, then you with all your knowledge and your learning. So also in
point of office and imployme^t, although my office be more abject then yours,
and that my forces and talents reach not to the discharge of those high
functions, yet I may merit more in the same little abject thing I do, then you
by all your great and high imployme^ts. And this may greatly help on the one
side fot to resist vain glory; and on the other, to give heart and courage; to
be the ones spur, and to others a briddle. S. Hierome on the same parable
teaches the like doctrine, saying: The Lord received into the same degree of
joy and honor, as well that servant who had made four talents of two, as that
other, who made up his five Talents ten, as not regarding the greatness of the
gain, but the affection of the will, and the charity and diligence with which
their works were done. Saluianus says: Saluian. l. 1. ad Ecclesiast. Cathol.
to. 3. Bibl. SS. Patrum.
Oblata Deo non pretio, sed affectu placent. which is the same with that of S.
Gregory: God does not regard how much, but out of how much; it is the heart
more then the gift and present he esteems. And so one may please God more
with doing a little, then another who performs far more then he, if he
perform that little with more love then the other. Wherein the greatness of God
Almighty does more clearly and manifestly appear, before whom no services of
ours (howeuer great) do appear so, unless that love be great with which they
are done, he being one who has no need of any good of ours, and whose riches,
and all things else, are so abundant, as they can never be made greater: If
thou do (well and) justly (says Job) what shall thou give him? Job. 35.7.
Or what shall he receive from thy hands? That which he desires and esteems,
is to be beloved, and that we on our parts do as much as we are able, which may
appear by those two Mites, which the poor Widow in the Ghospel offered,
Marc. 12.43. ^^ Luc. 21.34.
our Savior sat hard by the Box in the Temple, where the Jews used to cast in
their alms, and saw the Pharisees, and the richer sort some casting in silver,
others gold perhapes, among the rest came a poor Widow and offered two mites
only, when our Savior turning to his Disciples said: Amen I say unto you, this
poor Widow has put in more then all the rest; for the rest have given out
of their abundance, Chrysostom. bo^. 3. ad Cor.
but this out of her need has given all that she had, all her sustenance. On
which place S. Chrysostom says: Quod in Vidua fecit, idem in docentibus
operabitur. God will deal the like with those who preach, study, labor, and
do all other functions, and ministeries, not so much regarding what they do,
as the will, love, and diligence with which their works are done.

Of some signs by which we may know, whether we do our actions purely for the
love of God, or seek our selves in them. CHAP. XII.
S. Gregory teaches us a way to make a right conjecture, Greg. l. 22 mor. c.
24.
whether in those functio^s which regard our neighbor, we seek purely the
glory of God, or else our selves. Observe, says he when another preaches well,
is greatly followed, and reapes much fruit from the good of souls, whether you
are as greatly rejoiced at it, as if your self had done it, since if it be not
so grateful to you, but you do feel out some certain grudging, envying and
repining at it, it is an evident sign you do not seek Gods glory purely, and
as you ought. And to this purpose he cyteth this passage of S. James: Jacob.
3.14 and 15.
If you have zeal of souls, and have contentions in your heart, it is not a
wisdom descending from above, but an earthly, brutish, and devilish one. It
is no zeal of the glory and honor of God, but a zeal of your own self, a
zeal to be honored, and a desire to be as much honored and cheriched as that
other is; for if you sought only the glory of God and not your own, you would
be glad that God had store of such servants, and rejoice that others could
perform that in which you are defective, and wanting. Like as the Holy
Scripture witnesses of Moses, who when Iosue opposed himself unto some who
prophesyed, answered in an offended manner: Number. 11.29.
Why are you e^mulous for me? Who shall do so much that all the people may
prophesy, and that God may bestow upon all of them his spirit? And so a true
servant of God Almighty ought to say, I would to God that every one were an
excellent preacher, and that God would bestow his spirit plentifully upon them,
that by this means the honor and glory of God may be the more dilated and
spread abroad, that he may be the better known, and his holy name sanctified
through every place and province of the world.

We have a remarkable example of this in Doctor Auila, who (as it is reported
of him) when he saw that God by the means of our B. Father Saint Ignatius,
Lib. vitae S. Ignat. cap. 27.
had begun this least Society of Jesus, and had heard relation of his
institute, said it was that very thing, which for so many years together, he
had been laboring to effect with so much solicitude, and could never bring to
pass, adding that it was fortuned to him, as to a little child, who being at
the foot of some great mountain, desirous to roll some heavy burden up unto
the top, finds it above its forces to effect; when a strong and mighty Giant
coming, takes up that burden which the child could not lift, and with ease
carries it there where the child desires to have it. Understanding by this
comparison, himself the child, and esteeming S. Ignatius a Giant unto him. But
that which makes to our purpose, is that he was as glad and well contented in
himself when he heard of it, as if our Society had been instituted by him,
because he had no other end in the desiring such a thing should be, but only
Gods glory, and the salvation of souls. Such as these are God Almightyes good
and faithful servants, Ad Phil. 2.2.
who as S. Paul says) seek not after any thing of their own, but that which
is of Jesus Christ. A true servant of God Almighty ought in such manner, to
desire the glory of God, and the salvation and profit of others souls, as when
God is pleased to serve himself therein, by means of any other, he is to be
as glad and well content, as if God had used him for his instrument. And
therefore it were a good manner of proceeding which we find practiced by diverse
great servants or God Almighty, who when they perceive themselves urged
strongly on with the desire and zeal of gayning souls, humbly beg it of God
by saying: O Lord that such or such a soul might but once come to know you,
that such a person might be acquired to you, that his fruit may be done, that
profit, this perfectioned, and all this by such means as you shall please, for
me I pretend not to any part of it. Such as these walk rightly, and in great
purity, and like unto these are we sincerely to carry our selves in the service
of God, as not to seek any proper honor and esteem but only the greater
honor and glory of God.

We may say the like also, as well in that which concerns our own spiritual
progress, of our brethren, for he who is discomfited when he sees his brother
make progress in virtue, whilst himself remains behind does not seek purly
the greater glory of God; for although it be true that a good servant of God,
ought to have a great resentment and feeling, for that he serves not God so
perfectly as he ought, nevertheless it follows not that he should therefore be
troubled and disquieted, when he sees another perfecter then he, but on the
contrary he is to be glad of it, and to give this comfort to his grieved soul,
for serving God Almighty with so great negligence that how ever he through his
slouthfulnes be wanting in his duty, yet there do not want those who do supply
in effect, yielding in giving praise and glory unto God, what he in wishes only
proposes to himself. That sadness and repining which some are troubled with,
proceeds from no other cause, then from a certain envy and secret pride: for
should one but desire truly and in good earnest the greater glory of God, it is
most certain, he should have a great joy and contentment to see that others
did increase in virtue and perfection, howsoeur on the other side he were sorry
and ashamed for not serving God so fervently himself.

The second sign is, when a Religious man does his office and those things
which are commanded him, in such manner, as not to care more whether he be
employed in this, or that, whether he have that office, or else be put to this,
and is in one, and to the other content alike; for it is a most evident sign,
that we do our things only for the love of God, and therefore do we carry our
selves with such equality of mind and indifference unto all, seeking nothing
but to fulfill the will of God in every thing, and never troubling our selves
with the exterior of the thing we do: whereas if we do not undertake those
offices which are humble and laborious with as good a will, as the easy and
honorable, it is a sign that we do not perform the^ purely for God
Almighty, but that we seek our selves, our gust and proper commodities in
them. Wherefore that holy man says well: Thomas a Kempis.
If God were the occasion of your desire, you would be glad, in what manner
soever he should dispose of things.

Thirdly it is a sign that we do not things purely for love of God, but out
of humane respects, when we desire to approve unto our superior all we do, and
that he should take notice of our pains, and publicly commend us, or at
least by some exterior signs express himself well pleased and satisfied
with us, in so fare as to become disheartened and troubled when we are not so
dealt withal. If you did your Actions purly for love of God, you would never
regard such triffles nor seek after them, but one the contrary would blush and
be ashamed, when the Superior should express himself in any such manner
toward you, as knowing it done because of your weakness and imperfection, and
bewayling your own infirmity would say. Alas how wreched and miserable am I,
to be so weak and wanting in all virtue as to stand in need to be animated and
incited one with such poor things as these?

Abbot Ioannes the younger, In prato spirit.
Disciple of Abbot Amon served twelve years together, one of those ancient
Fathers in his sickness, which said Father although he saw him with all
faithfulness and deligence laboring for so long time together did never yet
afford him any good or friendly word but used him always with great harshnes
and severity, this Father at last drawing toward his end diverse holy Hermits
came to visit him, when he before them all, calling his humble and patie^t
Disciple to him, took him by the hand and said thrice unto him, Farewell,
farewell, farewell, afterward commending him unto those other holy Hermits, and
delivering him over unto their fatherly care, he said: Behold here an Angel
and not a man, since having served me in my sickness for twelve years
together, and never receiving one comfortable word of me, he has
nothwithstanding for so long time served me both readily and cheerfully.

HOW WE ARE TO INCREASE AND go forwards, in vprightnes and purity of
intention. CHAP. XIII.
OUR B. Father S. Ignatius declares unto us in a particular manner, how we
ought to go perfecting our selves, In Constit. con. 17.
in this rectitude and purity of intention. Let every one (says he) endeavor
to have a right intention, 26. Reg. 17.
not only in that which concerns the state of their lives, but also in all
particular things, seeking in them always to serve and please the divine
goodness, for it self and for the charity and singular benefits wherewith it
has prevented us, rather then for fear of pain or hope of reward, though
they ought also to help themselves with these. There are many ways of seeking
and serving God, for to serve God for fear of punishment, is to seek God, and
is good and laudible; for servile fear is good, and a gift of God and so the
Prophet did desire it of God, when he said: Psalm 118.120.
Confige timore tuo carnes meas. But if any one should have this mind and
thought within his heart, if there were no hell, and that I stood not in fear
of punishment, I would not care to offend God Almighty. The Divines say, that
it were nothing worth, and absolut sin, since it declare the malice of his
mind: but to make use of the fear of torments, of the apprehension of death,
and the horror of Judgment, to serve God the better, and make us more
fearful of offending him, is right and good, and so the holy scripture does
often put these things before our eyes, and threaten us with them, the better
to keep us from falling in sin.

Secondly to serve God for recompense, for the reward we hope for, and the
glory we awayt, is also to seek God, and is laudibly good, and better then the
former. It is better to do our actions out of hope of reward and glory, then
for fear of hell, and punishment, and this motive Moses had as S. Paul
affirms, saying: Moses grown great in faith, denied himself to be the son
of Pharaoe, choosing rather to be afflicted with the people of God, then to
have the pleasure and delight of temporal sin, esteeming the ignominy of
Christ greater riches the^ the treasure of Egypt, Ad Heb. 12.24.
for he had regard unto his recompense, Psalm. 118.112.
and the Royal Prophet David says of himself I have inclined my heart to do
thy iustifications eternally, because of the reward which thou have promised me.

All these ways of seeking God are good, and we must likewise make our use of
them. But our B. Father will have us proceed yet further, and lift up our
hearts higher, seeking things more elevated and sublime Aemulat and seek after
the best gifts that are, 1. Cor. 12.3.
and I show you yet a way more excellent, he is not content that we should
serve God, in what manner soever, but he shows us yet a way more excellent and
high, and would have us seek and serve God only for God alone, purly for the
love of him, and for his infinite goodness, and because that God is, what he is;
which is the highest and sublimest of all his titles.

The glorious Fathers of the church, Basil in reg fusius disputatis in praemio.
Chrys^hom 2 s^ per epist. ad Roman Greg. l. 8. mora. c. 30
S Basile, S. Chrysostom, and S. Gregory treat of this matter excellently
well, and compare those who serve God, out of hope of recompense to Simon
Cyreneeus who was hired at a set price to bear the Cross of Christ, for so do
those who would not follow our Savior, nor bear his cross, unless there were
the reward of heaven proposed, and they add, that we are not to be solicitous
for our recompense, nor always thinking upon what we gain: Like unto
ungrateful servants who (exact their wages and) keep a strict account which is
more the part of a hyrling then a grateful servant: we ought not to serve God
in such unworthy manner, but as children purely out of love; there is great
difference (say they) betwixt the services of a slave, a household, and a child;
the slave serves his Lord for fear of stripes and punishment; the servant for
his wages, and if his diligence be more then ordinary, it is but to comend hi^
services unto his Lord, out of greater hope of profit and advancement: but the
child, serves his father, only for love and tenderness, and is most careful of
offending him, not so much for fear of chastisement (for he is liable unto
none, supposing he is past his infancy) neither for hope of his inheritance,
but only out of love and dear affection. And so a wise, good and virtuous
child does serve, respect, and honor his parent out of that only motive that
he is his Father, although otherwise he be poor and able to leave him nothing:
so say these holy Saints, we ought to serve God, neither for fear of
chastisement like slaves, neither as servants with our eyes and affection
fastened upon our gain and interest, but like true children, since God has
been so good and gra^^^s to us to make us such: Joan. c. 3.
Behold (says S. John the Evangelist) what love the Father has bestowed upon
us for to be styled and (really) to be the sons of God. We are not only
called the sons of God, but are such truly and really, and withal right call
God our Father, and the son of God our Brother. If we be therefore sons of
God, let us love and serve him like true children; let us honor him as a
Father, and as so great a father, with truly loving him as well because he is
delighted with it, as that he is worthy of it, in being what he is, and for his
infinite goodness, which merits an infinity of hearts and bodies, continually to
be employed in loving and serving him.

S. Chrysostom says admirably well: If by the grace of God you should be made
worthy to please his divine Majesty and should desire any other reward beyond
this of being mad worthy for to please him, Chrsost. l. 2. de compunct.
you were certainly ignorant how great a good it were for to please God, and if
you could once but apprehend it, you would never desire other extrin secall
reward or benefit. And truly what greater good can we pretend or wish for, then
to content and please Almighty God? Ephesians. 5.1.2.
Be imitators of God (faith S. Paul) like to his dearest children, and walk in
love and dilection, as Christ has loved us. Bonau. to. 2. opusc in fascic c. 8.
And S. Bonauenture says: Consider that God your benefactour has so bestowed
his benefits upon you, as to ask none of them back again, who has ^o need
of you, or any other creature. Yea he does not only receive no profit from us,
nor commodity for all those favors he bestows upon us, but he affoardes them
us, at so great expense and charges of his own, as is his own dear life and
blood, which he laid down and shed for our redemption. In this manner purely
and without all mixture of proper interest, are we to serve and love almighty
God neither (which is more) are we so much as to desire any vertus and
supernatural gifts for our own pleasure and comodity, but only for God, and
for his greater glory, and to the end to store our selves with somewhat, that
may be pleasing to his divine Majesty, yea and in this manner we are to desire
glory, in so much as when we set before the eyes of our soul (to give it heart
and courage to perform its actions well) the greatness of the reward which is
annexed to every good it does, it ought in no ways to have this its aim and
end, in undertaking any thing, but only the pure desire, of further pleasing
and glorifying God, in that the more glory we shall have, the more shall God be
honored and glorified.

This is the true love of charity, the true and perfect love of God, and this
is purely to seek God, and his greater glory, and all besides is but to seek
and love our selves; which will the better appear if we consider the
difference which Philosophers and Divines do make betwixt that perfect love
which they call the love of amity, and the love of concupiscence. The first
loves his friend, for his friends good, and out of virtue, without regarding
his own interest or gain: but the love of concupiscence, is when one loves
another not so much for himself as for the profit and comodity which he hopes
for from him, as when one serves and loves a rich man, because he hopes for
adua^cement and assistance from him. We see apparently, that this is no perfect
love, but wholly compounded of self love and interest, since you love not your
friend so much, as your own self and proper comodity. So we say, that we love
bread and wine with the love of concupiscence, because we love neither the one
nor the other for its self, but only for our selves and particular ends. And
in this manner do they love God, who serve him out of fear of punishment, or
hope of recompense, it being no other then to love God with a love compounded
and wholly consisting of self love, and private ends, not seeking of him
purely, nor with a liberal mind, which our Savior has given us to understand
by S. John, who after he had wrought that great miraracle of feeding five
thousand men, besides women and children, with five loaves and two fishes,
being followed (says the Evangelist) by a world of people, Joan. 6.26.27.
said unto them: You seek me not, because you have seen wonders, but because
you have eaten of the loaves and are satiated. Not because you believe me to be
God, but because you seek your own commodities. Work (and seek) not that
food which perishes, but which remains in eternal life, which is Christ,
and to do purely the will of God. That holy servant of God Almighty showed a
right, M. Gerso
pure intention in his answer, who living a wondrous, and austere life, and
giving himself wholly unto prayer, the Devil envying so great a virtue, and
seeking to withdraw him from his virtuous course of life, by bringing him into
doubt of his predestination, told him that he labored and wearyed out
himself in vain, for he should never be saved, nor come to enjoy the
beatitude of heaven, to whom the holy man answered: I serve not God Almighty
for his glory, but only because he is that which he is, whereupon the Devil
departed confounded, and ashamed. S. Bernard requires yet more of us, Bern.
ser. sup. Cant. 63.
and would that we should be so far from seeking our own comodityes and ends
in those good works we do, as he is not content that we should serve God only
with a filial love, but would bring us yet to higher perfection: Children
(says he) love, but they do think on their inheritance withal, which whilst
they stand in a kind of fear for to loose, or hope to have improued, they
reverence him more, and love him less, from whom they expect it; I hold that
love suspected, which seems to have dependence upon any hope of gain, it is
but weak, since if its hope do fail, it is either wholly extinguished or made
less it is no pure one, since it has a secondary end; pure love is not
mercenary, pure love borrowes no forces from any hope, neither is it diminished
with distrust, that is, whosoever purly loves indeed, needs no incitment of any
rich hope, to make him serve, labor, and suffer for God Almighty, yea should
he know for certain that for all his pains he should have no reward, yet it
would not make him to diminish in the least thing, the greatest labor he had
undertaken, as having not begun it out of any hope of his comodity, but for
pure love of God. But what love may this be so high and perfect as may exceed
the love of children? Spo^sae hic Amor est, says the holy Saint, It is the
love of a Spouse unto her Bridgrome, for true and perfect love has its content
within its self, has its reward and proemium, which is no other then that
which it does love; to love the beloved here is al his recompense, the Brides
love is such that it has noe other pretention then to love, and such is the
Bridgroms as he desires nothing but to be beloved: Nec is aliud quaerit, nec
illa aliud habet. He seeks nothing else, and she has nothing else. And in this
manner (says S. Bernard) ought we to love God the Bridgrome of our souls,
this is the love to which we should arrive, loving him, because he is what he
is, and placing all our felicity therein; This love is of it self sufficient,
in its self delightful, and for its self is to its self both merit and
reward, it seeks no other cause besides its self, no other fruit, the fruit is
the act of loving. I love because I love, I love to be beloved.

On this occasion S. Chrysostom adds that we are not to conceive, Chrysostom. hom
5. super epist. ad Romans circae finem.
that our reward shall be the less, because we look for none, but that the
less we do expect, the more we do obtain, as being most certain that the
less the work shall have of proper intrest, the more it shall have of purity
and perfection (it being free from all mixture of self love) and consequently
shall be more meritorious: Atque tibi mayor merces est, si modo citra mercedis
spem feceris. Your reward (for your works) says this Saint, shall be greater,
if now you do them without hope of any, the further you are from the spirit and
condition of a hyrling, the greater shall be your recompense. Since then God
will not pay you as a hired servant; but reward you as a son with the
inheritance of his Fathers riches: If we be sons and heirs we are heirs of
God, Romans 8.17
and coheyres with Christ. We shall enter with him into possession of our
heritage, succeeding and inioying the treasures of our heavenly Father. Exodus
28.9.
Pharaos daughter hired Moses mother, for to nourish and bring up her own
child, but she did not nurse him for the hyre, but only out of love and
tenderness.

Three degrees of perfection, by which we may ascend and arrive unto great
purity of intention, and to a high and perfect love of God. CHAP. XIIII.
OVT of the doctrine of the holy Fathers, and of the glorious S. Bernard in
particular, we may gather three degree of perfection, by which we may ascend
unto a high degree of purity of intention, and to a great and excellent love of
God. The first is to seek only the glory of God, in such manner as in the
performance of every thing, we may have no contentment but in God, and in the
fulfilling of his holy will, casting into forgetfulness all other wordly
businesses. Bern. trac. de interiori demo c. 69
S. Bernard sais if you would know whether your love of God be great, and you
go perfecting of it or no, consider with your self whether there be any thing
besides God, which might comfort and delight you, and from thence you shall come
to know how much you are profited and advanced in the love of God. For truly
(says he) as long as I can receive any pleasure and consolation from any thing
besides, I dare not say, that our beloved does possess the inwardest boss^me
of my most ardent love which expresses that other sentence of S. Augustine.
Aug. l. 10 Confess. c. 29.
He loves thee imperfectly who loves any thing together with thee which he love
not for thy sake, such a love would come far short of the love of that holy
Queen, who in the midst of all the pomps and vanities of the court could say, O
Lord thou know that thy Handmayd has never rejoiced in any thing since she
has bin transferred hither, Esth. 14.18.
until this very day, but only in thee Lord God of Abraham. You know O Lord
said she that I take no pleasure in the Royal crown, nor in the Majesty nor
glittering show of things. I am not delighted with the luxurius ba^quets of
King Assuerus, neither in any fading thing besid but only in you my God and
Lord behold here a love perfect and excellents.

Greg. l. 4. moral. cap. 28.
S. Gregory upon this passage of holy Io^. Who build solitudes unto
themselves, sais, that he builds himself a solitude and Hermitage, who so wholly
casts of and as it were strips himself, of all creatures, and the love and
affection of all earthly things, as to remain in a manner solitary, although
he were in the midest of all the sports and pleasures of the world by taking no
pleasure, nor contentment in them. Such an one builds a solitude unto himself,
by having placed all his felicity in God, whence it proceeds that no company is
grateful, no pleasure delightful unto him, out of his holy love. Wihch we see
by experience, of one who has some friend in whom he has placed al his
affection, who although he be in the company of many other persons worthy of
esteem, yet seems to be in a solitary desert, as long as that friend he loves
so dearly is not in his sight. Just so he who has bestowed his heart one God,
and banished from him all affection of creaturs, although he should be
incompast with the world, and in the middle of all its pleasures and delights,
would yet still continue in an inward quiet and solitude, as taking no pleasure
in any of those things, nor so much as regarding them, having his heart
ravished and drowned in contemplation of his beloved; They, says S. Gregory,
who are arrived to this, do enjoy a great repose and tra^quility in their
souls nothing being forcible enough to molest or disquiet them, no adversity
can make their quiet less, nor any prosperity their joy greater; vain glory,
no humane excellence can bring them acquainted with: but as they are
affectioned unto no earthly thing, so are they not troubled nor entangled with
the succese of any, but reckon them as thing which do concern the^ nothing.
Would you know (says this Saints) who has arrived to this perfection, and
built himself this Hermitage and solitude? The holy Prophet David, where he
sais. Psalm. 26.4
I have demanded one thing of our Lord, this I shall beseech, that I may
inhabit in the house of our Lord all the days of my life. There is nothing else
in heaven, and earth that I desire besides your self, O God. And now what is
my expectation, Psalm. 38.8
is it not our Lord? The Blessed Abbot Siluanus was arrived to this, to whom
when he came from prayer, all the world seemed such a wretched thing, as
lifting up his hands through admiration, and shutting his holy eyes, he would
say with great disdain: Close up your selves mine eyes, close up your selves,
and do not vouchsafe to look abroad upon the creatures, and those wordly
things, since in all the world, there is nothing worthy the behoulding. Lib.
1. c. 2 vitae S. Ignat.
We read also of our B. F. S. Ignatius, that when he elevated his mind to God,
and his eyes to heaven, he used to say: Oh how foul and ugly the earth does
seem to me, when I do but look on Heaven.

The second degree may be that, Bern. trac. de dilig. Deo cap. 6 and 7.
which S. Bernard proposes in his treatise of the love of God, which is, when
we do not only wholly forget all exterior things, but also our selves, loving
our selves no otherwise, then in God, by God, and for God: and we ought so
wholly to be plunged in this forgetfullnes of our selves, to be so free from al
particular interest of our own, and to love God with a love so pure and
perfect, that we are to rejoice, and be no otherwise taken with those graces
which we receive from his all giving hand, neither with that heavenly glory
which we hope for, then so far as his will and pleasure appears in them,
without regarding our own profit in them. In this manner the Blessed in heaven
rejoice in their felicity, not because they are exalted to such height of
glory, but because it is Gods pleasure that they should be so; and they seek
God with a love so refined and pure, and are so straictly united and
transformed into his blessed will that they desire not so much the glory which
they possess, nor their felicity, for their own joy and happiness, nor for the
wondrous content which they do take therein, as because it is the pleasure, and
the will of God. We ought says S. Bernard so to love God, as that holy Prophet
did, who said: Let us confess unto our Lord because he is good, he said not
because he is good to me, but only, because he is good. He did not praise, nor
love God only because he was good to him, Psalm. 117.1.
as this other did of whom it is written: He will confess to thee when thou
shall have done well unto him, but he loves and glorifyes God, because he is
good in himself, because he is what he is, because his goodness is infinite.

S. Bernard says, that the third and the last degree of the perfection of the
love of God, is, When one now does come to do his actions, not so much to
please God, as because God delights him, or because that which he does is
pleasing and acceptable unto God. Whereby a man becomes to have no other
solicitude or thought, but only how to delight and please Almighty God, without
thinking any more upon himself, then if there were not, or ever had been such
a creature in the world, and this is a most pure and perfect love of God. This
love (says the Saint) is a mountain, and a high mountain of God, a rich and
fertile mountain full of all exquisite perfection. By a mountain of God, is
signified nothing else then a height and abstract of all greatness and
excellence: Who shall ascend into the mountain of God; who shall give me
wings like a Dove, Psalm. 231.3. Psalm. 54.7.
and I will fly away, and go to rest? Ah miserable as I am (says this glorious
Saint) that I cannot wholly forget my self during this banishment! Romans 7.24
Oh me unhappy man, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! Isa. 38.14
Oh Lord I suffer violence answer for me, Blessed Lord, when shall I wholly die
unto my self, and only live to thee! Oh, woe is me for that my pilgrimage is
prolonged, Psalm. 119.5. and 41.3
when shall I come and appear before the face of God! Oh when shall I be
delivered from this woeful banishment? When shall I be wholly united, and
through love transformed into you O Lord? When shall I be entirely free and quit
of all remembrance of my self, by being made one spirit, one thing with you?
So as I may not hereafter love any thing in me, from me, or for me, but that
all which may have any part of my affection, may be in you, by you, and for you
only to loose thy self in a certain manner, Bern. de diligendo Deum. c. 7
as if thou were not at all, to have no sense, no feeling of thy self, so
wholly to depart from all thou art, as for to leave no memory that thou ever
weart, this would have more of heavenly conversation, then any humayne
affection. Such perfection is rather heavenly then of earth, and savors more
of our own country then of this dungion of our banishment. Psalm. 70.10.
The Prophet likewise says, I will enter into the mightines, of my Lord, O Lord
I will remember only thy Justice. When the good and faithful servant shall be
so ravished and drowned in the joy of his Lord, and inebriated with the
abundance of his love, then he shall be so absorpt and transformed into God,
to have no remembrance of himself. When he appears we shall be like unto him,
Joan. 3.2.
because we shall see him as he is: we shall be the^ like unto God, and the
Creature shall have a kind of proportion with his Creator, for (as the holy
Scripture says) even as God has created al things for himself and to his
glory, so we shall the^ love God withal purity, not loving our selves, nor any
thing else, but only in him. He shall truly rejoice, Matthew. 25 21.
not so much for being above all necessity, nor for inioying all felicity, as
for to see his holy will in us, and of us fullfilled, all our joy shall not
consist in our joy, but in the joy of God, and his delight: Intra in gaudium
Domini tui. This is to enter into the joy of God.

Bern. de dilig. Deu^. cap. 7.
S. Bernard breaks forth into an excellent exclamation, saying: O holy, o chaste
love, o sweet o sugared affection, of pure, o refined intention of the will, the
more pure and refined, the less mixture it has of ought that is its own, the
more sweet, more sugared, the more it partakes of that which is al divine: Sic
affici, deificari est. It is a deifying to be so affected, like as S. John
says, then we shall be like to God. S. Bernard to explicate the manner of this
deification and transformation into God, brings three similitudes. Like as
(says he) a drop of water, let fall into a whole tun of Wine, presently
loses all its qualityes and properties, and becomes perfect wine both in
color and in taste; like as the Iron when it is through hot and glowing in the
forge, appears not to be Iron, but al fire; and as the Air when it is fully
enlightened with the rays of the Sun, is so transformed into brightness, that
it seems to be but one light with the Sun, so says he, in that eternal
felicity, we loose all humane faculties, and become deifyed and transformed in
God. All that we shall love there, will be only for God, and that is only God,
for otherwise how shall he be all to all, 1. Cor. 15.28.
if any thing shall remain in man of man There shall be nothing there which is
our own, since all our delight and glory shall be no other, the^ the pleasure
and glory of God: Psalm. 3.4.
Thou art my glory and the lif^er up of my head. then we shall not care to
repose, nor sustain our selves with our own happiness, since all our felicity
and rest shall be in God. But although whilst we are in this valley here, we
cannot arrive unto the sight of this, yet are we at least to bend our eyes that
ways, since the nearer we shall come to the sight of it, the more perfect and
united shall we be with God. Bern. l. 2. de amore Dei cap. 4.
And so this blessed Saint concludes: This is (o heavenly Father) the will of
thy Blessed Son in us, this is his prayer for us to thee his Father and God,
I will that like as I and you are one, so that they should be one in us; and we
with him through the union of perfect love, to wit, that they may love thee for
thy self, and not themselves but only in thee, this is the end, this is the
consummation, this the perfection, this the peace, this the joy of our Lord,
this is the joy in the Holy Ghost, this is the silence which is in heaven. This
is the utmost aim of all our thoughts, the end of our Pilgrimage, and the last
degree of perfection to which we may attain,

FINIS.

