A True Relation of a most worthy and notable Fight, performed the nineteenth
day of June now last past, by two small Ships of the City of London: the
Vineyard of a hundred and twenty Tons; and the Unicorn of a hundred and
forty Tons, against Six great Galleys of Tunes, having in them a thousand
and eight hundred men, of the I Will of Way-yorcke in the Straights: Our Ships
having in all Mariners. Merchants, and Passengers* fifty six men.

Written by H. R



Imprinted at London for I. White, and are to be sold by, T. Langley.

To my esteemed good Friend Mr. GYLBERT ROBARTES, all well wishes of true love
and contiuall happiness.
YOur remote living from this famous City, old acquantance, and many loving
friends, cannot choose but increase a longing desire to hear such News as may
beguile some time with contemplating on them; but the uncertainty of report
for homebred occasions are such, as makes me silent; yet to give you some
cause of admiration, and a good liking of men worthy, and most skillful in
their profession, I have made bold to commend unto you, the hardy and most
dangerous Adventure of two worthy Ships of London, and their Companies in
their last Voyage for the Straights, made this passed Summer, against Six great
Galleys of the Turks: wherein they showed true volour, and gallant resolution,
gayning fame to themselves, been a terror to the enemy, and given a most
worthy example for all of their coats: A pattorne worth recording for others
to follow, a comfort to Owners, and Marchantes, that commit their Ships and
goods to such men's government, and a joy to all those that hear their deserved
comendations; to the further view whereof I leave you, and pray God never to
give worse success then they have had, nor worseminds, then they have showed
to be in them, but ever increase, for our Countries honor the number of such,
and keep you and all others your good friends, for euer-more under his holy
protection.

London this 2. of February 1616. Your loving friend ever yours, Hen. Robarts

A True Relation of a most worthy Fight made the 23. of June 1615 by two
Ships of London, the Vineyard, and the Unicorn: near the I Will of May-yorcke
within the Straights, having but 56. Men and Boys aboard, against six Galleys
of the Turks, being of Tunes, in Barbery, and had in them of Soldiers,
Saylors, and Slaves, 1800. men.
Loving Countrymen, that we should give honor to them that does truly deserve
it, is no more then Christian charity does ensite us unto; and the holy
Scriptures in many examples does prove unto us: as David that kingly Prophet
and man of God, was met and entertained of the people with dancing and
singing his worthy Victories, obtained against the enemies of GOD, and his
King. Iephat that worthy Captain, and sundry others which I omit, were
honored for their Victories with triumphs by the people, as holy Writ does
testefie.

The Romans so honored their Nation, and held honor in such heigh esteem,
that were his birth never so mean, or reputation so bace; yet if he deserved
any honor in their Wars, they duly gave it him, with all the honors they
could devise.

The Greatians, and sundry other nations had the like, so that thereby they
gave such encouragement to all such as followed them in their long Wars, that
every man enforced both Courage and strength in hope of Fame.

Whole volumes are filled with the Honors of these nationes, as we which now
live, by true records can testefie, the sundry Famous victoryes by them
atchiued, and their excellent admired prowes. These were the times of true love
and honor. This made the Coward hardy, and the faint-hearted Swain, to
advance themselves, in hope to gain, unto their posterities everlasting fame.
Oh that our Nation would immitate these true tipes of honor, to norish such as
adventure their lives and estates, for welfare of their Country: then there is
no doubt, but in time of troubles, when valor should be shown, we should
find many worthy persons, under simple habites, that would purchase to their
country honor, and fame to themselves. But our Countries charity is too too
cold, to give Virtue her due in such people, the more it is to be pittyed, that
such men as merit either by valor, or other industorous means, should not be*
fost^red and well rewarded. But such is the hardness of heart* in most, now a
days, that Let a man adventure their lives and liberty, in never so hardy an
actions for saueguard does of Ship and good, when they look for cheerful
countenance at their return, and some reward for their pains, they hardly get
either good word, or good deed, (nay scarcely) their wages which God knows
was never so hardly gotten, but with some Braules, and discontent: these
doings, is often the cause of much loss to owners and Merchants, where if they
nourished the true Laboring by e^ling with some small reward, (yea) but
sometimes with a good word, it would give encouragement to men, rather to lose
their lives, then part with that is committed to their charge, in my slight
manner. Judge you that read and know what you read, how many Ships and men of
our Nation, has been taken by these Pirates, those homecides that lurk about
the South Cape, Barbery, and the Straights, to surprise such as trade in honest
Merchants affairs, the Owners and Merchants to their cost, can best tell: of
which no doubt, some have been cowardly surprised, and others ouer-matched;
whereby the Companies falling into their hands, are imprisoned, and often times
made slaves to those Heathen nations that triumph over them, to the utter ruin
of them and their for ever.

These are things to be pittyed, and truly of all Christians to be lamented:
and I could wish that such men that adventure to the seaes, may with true
compassion consider of such as do deserve well; so shall they be sure to have
their service truly performed, and their Goods in better security then often
times they have. But leaving that to God, who guides men's hearts, let me
recoune unto you a most worthy and valiant exployt performed not long since by
two small Ships of the City of London, aganist six Gallyes of Tunes in
Barbery, near unto the I Will of May-yorcke within the Straights; to the great
commendations of the Masters and Company of them, as you shall further
understand.

IN the beginning of this last Summer, a Voyage by sundry Merchaunts of London
was pretended to certain Ports within the Straights of Ieboraltarre; who for
the Voyage had appointed two small Ships, the one called the Vineyard, of the
burden of a hundred and twenty Tons, or there-abouts, whose Master for the
voyage, was Master Richard Harrice of Lee in Essex; a very honest and
religious man, and as valiant and full of courage, as otherwise of good
government: The other, the Unicorn of London, of the burden of a hundred and
forty Tons, or there-aboutes; whose Master for the Voyage, was Master
Gardner of Wapping near London; a man endowed with honesty, religion, and
valor.

These two good Ships, being victualed for the vi^age, and manned both Ships
with fifty six men and boys, Merchantes, and Passengers, in all, haueing
taken in their Lading, and all sitting for their use in the Voyage, after their
solemn farewell taken of the Owners and Adventurers, as the Merchantes
accustom to do, set Sail from London, and arrived at Lee, where they made
some small stay exspecting a fair Wind to proceed, whose hopes it pleased
God to further, and on the twenty three day of May now last past, to send them
their wished desires; which they neglected not, but taking opportunity, set
Sail the same twenty three of May* And was so favored of him that rules by
his Power both Winds, and Seas, that they were ever in the way of the Wind,
until they came to the South Cape, where they had sight of three tall Ships,
men of War, which were of Algeers, in Barbary* full of Ordinance and men.

These Ships gave us chase, which did in some small manner dismay us; yet
putting our trust in God, whose pleasure is to lay our fears and care upon
him, we resolved, if they were Friends, to bid them welcome; if Enemies, to
defend our selves.

These Ships wyning upon us, one of them came up and hayled us, bidding us
amayne: To whom ou^ Master said; Do you your worst, we fear you not. Then
demanded they of whence we were? Our Master Harrice, M. of the Vineyard
answered, of London, and bound for Turkey; and asked of whence they were? Of
Argeor^, said they.

While they had this shorr parlie with us, they took good notice of our
Ships, and saw the readiness we were in to defend our selves: and imagining
by our Masters rough answer, that we cared little for them, they made no
longer stay, but sprung their looffe, and bore room again into the Sea.

Their departure so suddenly, gave us some comfort, although we feared them
not: yet considering we come for Traffic and not for Wars, we rather
desired Peace, (if it pleased God) then Broils; from which at that time, it
pleased him to deliver us: Unto whom for his preservation, we acknowledged such
hearty thanks and praises, as became us.

This Danger (by Gods permission) being ouerpast, as Wind served for us, we
put into the Straights. keeping our course for Leagehorne, which was the first
Port of our discharge.

When coming near unto May-yorcke, an Island in the Sea, we had sight of six
great Gallpes men of War, all of Tunes, and one other Port under* the Turk.
These companions came with us, applying their best strength of Oars and
Sails, to come to us, we seeing the speed they made, began to conjecture we
should have more to do with them, then we willingly would: whereupon our
Master M. Harrice, caused the Vineyards Boat to be hoysted out, the Unicorn
being far from us, and the Seas being calm and no Wind stirring, so we
cowed our Ship to the Unicorn, and furlde our maine Sail, providing our
selves as well as we could: which done, we went to prayer, humbly entreating
his divine aid, that never leaves his people, to help us, and to be our
comfort in this distress.

By this time, the Gallyes were all in fair sight, so that we might well
desery their numbers of men. Then five of them left to row, and the sixth Gally
came toward us; and hayling our Ships after the manner of the Sea, asked of
whence we were? Our Master answered, of London, and bound for Turkey. Then
cried the Turks, All friends, all friends. Then did they enquire what Men of
War we had met withal, or seen without the Straights, or lately? Whom we
simply told of the three Ships we spoke with: so away they went from us,
making speed to their five conforts, that stayed for them.

The sudden and friendly parting with this Galley, gave us hope we should
have no further trouble with them, nor his fellows; yet durst not trust them,
but made ready to defend our selves, as suddenly as we could, getting as
near unto the Unicorn our consort, as we might, that being near, we might
fight with more advantage to our selves, and do our enemies the more harm, if
it should so happen.

This time the Gallyes held counsel together what they should do: At
length, having concluded our final overthrow as it* seemed, they all came upon
us with all the violent force they could: and coming up first with the
Unicorn, they powered into her their small Shot, as Hayle in comparison. They
lying so close aboard, the Vineyard made their Shot so hot upon them, that
four of them came aboarde her, and left the Unicorn but two.

In this conflict, we poor men were not idle, but so applied our Ordinance,
which we laded with Crosse-barres, Case-Shoote, and Round Byllets, as greatly
annoyed them.

In the first encounter, we had our Boatson slain and one other man, and
three hurt* And the Unicorn two men slain, and two hurt.

The Gallyes lying still by us, maintained the fight very hotly, and plied
their Shot upon us, that our turn Sides, and battered Stearne can yet
witness it: besides our Sails so shot, that forty pounds cannot make good
that harm only.

Deadly and full of resolution on both parties two full bowers by the Glass,
continued this fight; in which all our Companies, were feign to prove Gunners,
not only the Master and his Mates, but all the rest: Amongst which, I may not
forget the pains and industry of one of Master Harrices Mates, M. Wotton;
whose skill and readiness was such, in applying the most part of our Ordinance
in our quarter, which lay to do the Enemy most spoil, that he did them
great harm, and made them have small hope of our conquest, which they expected.

Blessed be the all powerful God, who after two hours of very dangerous
fight, one shot from the Vineyard did them such spoil, as with a great and
most dreadful shrieke they fell all from us, and went their ways. And in good
time for them; for I think if they had stayed longer, they had some of them
sunk by our sides; as should seem by their sudden bringing four of them
upon the Careere to stop their leakes.

Thus by the mercy and power of our God, were we freed from this great and
dangerous peril wherein we had like to have falled, past hope of man, only
his Mercy that gives victory at his will, preserved us: To whose blessed
name, all praise and honor be rendered, who not only set us free from our
Foes, but at that instant, sent us a fair leading gale of Wind: so we cut
our Main sail, and kept our course for Leaghorne, which was the first Port of
our discharge; giving GOD most humble thanks for our deliverance.

While we made stay at Leaghorne, the Duke of Florences Gallyes, who are most
times abroad in service, came into the Road: in one of them was a Jew, who
spoke with the Captain of the Admiral Gally, and was with them when they set
their mayned and hurt men a shore.

This Captain reported to the Jew being of his acquaintance, that there* were
in these six Galleys one thousand eight hundred men of all sorts: and in the
fight with us, had slain a hundred and fifty, and three hundred more hurt and
mayned very dangerously.

GOD have the praise for our happy delivery, and make us mindful of his great
mercy showed unto his poor servants, that while we have any being in this
world, we may with all due praises, acknowledge his mercy toward us.

Thus have you heard (to the glory of God, and the deserved commendations, of
those valerous and vndaunced sprights) The most resolute and worthy Conquest of
the six Gallyes; who being not a handful in regard of their multitudes,
which were near Tenn for one, and so well appointed with Men and Munition,
that they thought themselves sufficient, to encounter greater forces.

But we have ever heard and known, that victory consists not in strength of
Horse or Man, though they ve never so mighty: but in the all Powerful hand of
God, who in the midst of greatest dangers, comfort them, that with
faithful hearts call upon him.

And most truly, by those worthy men Master Harrice, and Master Gardner, and
there companies it appears, who doubtless are gracious men in the presence
of God; such is their government, their zeal to God and his true Religion:
such does God in all distresses comfort, for so is his promise, that never
fails his servants: It is his holy hand, that has done this for them against
all expectation of men. For which his blessed name be ever praised.

And I wish most heartily, that such Owners and Merchantes, which have such
faithful people to deal for them, would not shut their Purses from reward,
but open their hands with Bounty unto them, that others may be encouraged to
do them the like service: If such men would use this charity, no doubt but
their bounty and good countenances to men aduenturing for them would make their
service to be better performed, And this Kingdom be more better replenished
with able and sufficient men to fight in their defense, if occasion should be.

You have heard the true discourse of this dangerous voyage, their happy
deliverance, and dilygent cares in performing the same; Who making four Ports,
viz. Maliga* Leagehorne, Naples, and Zant, as by Chartie-Partie they were
bound, taking their Lading at Zant, was by the mercy of God, with Winds so
favored, that in good saffetie the Ship and goods arrived the twelf^ day of
December, in the Road of Limehouse in the River of Thames.

To the eternal glory of God, the joyce of our hearts, and comfort of all our
friends, where we were by those worthy, Merchants our Owners of the Vinyarde
Master Freeman, and Master Dunkcombe, with their Partners, leuingly welcomed,
as well as by our adventures and M^rch^nts, which were these: Master Freeman,
Master Fishborne, and Master Barlymarke* God have the honor, and let all our
prayers us, that never English men, have worse success in their affairs, then
we have had.

GOD of his mercy grant us all true, loving, and faithful hearts, that God
may have his true ^ond^^, and our King* and Country faithful service: to whose
divine, and all Powerful name be all true praises ^^^^^ed for ^^er, and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

