Fames Trumpet soundinge.

OR Commemorations of the famous lives and deaths, of the two right honorable
Knights of England: the right honorable Sir Walter Mildmay, and Sir Martin
Calthrop, Lord Mayor of this honorable City of London, who deceased this year
1589. Not only necessary to be seen, but also to be followed of every worthy
personage in their callings. Written by Henry Robarts.

Lo here a Mildmay mild, a Counselor most grave,
A worthy man in all his deeds, as one could wish or have:
A Phoenix in this life, to God and Prince most just,
In Commons cause and publicks weal, a man of perfect trust.
AT LONDON, Printed by I. C. for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at his shop
in Lumberd street, under the sign of the Popes head. Anno. Domini. 1589.

To the right worshipful, and most virtuous minded Gentleman, Ma, Anthony
Mildmay Esquire, Henry Robarts your worships in heart most affected, wysheth the
continual increase of all worldly promotions, and after death the life
eternal.
RIght worshipful, amongst the famous Romans, Grecians, and others of most
fame in ancient times, their custom was when any dyed of worth, to frame
eloque^t Oracions in the deceaseds just commendation: which was uttered by some
of great skill. (Accordingly) this little I Will does hold the like zeal to their
favored. The consideration of which, (right worshipful) made me long expect
some thing of your honorable deceassed Father, to be by some of learning
published, in commemoration of him, and his zeal to Arms, Justice, and
learning. But seeing none so forward as my self, I have at last thus boldly
adventured, in naked bare truth, wanting eloquent phrases, to beautify his
deeds of love to his Country, and zeal to his posterity, written these
lines, and humbly offer them unto your worship, hoping your courteous nature
will accept this Mite at the hands of a rusticke welwyller, as if Alexander had
offered a whole Talent.

Your worships ever at command. Henry Robarts.

The honorable life and death of the most famous and noble Counselor, Sir
Walter Mildmay knight, one of her highness most honorable privy Counsel, and
Chaunceller of the Court of the Exchequer, who departed this life, at his house
in great S. Bartholmewes, the 30. of May last passed.
WHat shrikes, and plaints, what heavy mourning cries
Do pearce mine ears, and fill my heart with moan?
With wringing hands what means this woeful noise,
Those direful tunes from hearts deep spent with groan.
Why walk you thus like men with grief forlorn,
What woeful chance has you behapt of late,
What causes thus so heavy mourning state.
Why greeues the Phoenix of this Western I Will?
Why mournes her Peers and Nobles of her land?
What cause have they all mirth for to exile,
And Commons elie in such sad dumps to stand,
At pleasure theirs, which may so much command.
No loss of treasure nor Jewels of what store,
Could cause you thus with tears for to deplore.
Tell then dear friends, the cause of your annoy,
Explain the grief that does your hearts offend,
Tell tell the cause you cease your wonted joy
And wholly now to sorrows yoke thus bend,
Yielding such sighs as to the heavens ascend.
Such tears, such grief, such heavy morning moan,
Among Commons all, full sildome has been known.
When Common wealth does lose a noble friend,
A staff of comfort to the Commons all,
A Justice good, which poor men's cause will tend,
And lend his ear to harken to their call,
Such loss, such lack, the Commons hearts does gall.
Lo such an one has late resignd his breath,
By cursed hand of ^ierce and cruel death.
Mildmay, grave Knight of Counsel to our Queen,
Of The Exchequer Court the Chauncellor that was,
In honors place that oftentimes was seen, He was one of the prime Counsel to
her Majesty and Chau^celour of the Exchequer.

And highly stood in favor of her grace,
By cruel death is reft from noble place,
Entombed in earth his corpse do now remain,
The loss of whom does cause us thus complain.
Mildmay by name, was mild in all his deeds,
Pure was his thoughts, like gold his virtues shine,
His upright justice few or none exceedes,
To poor nor rich he never would incline
But right with right, as Laws did him assign.
To every man he justice did impart,
As cause requird, and equity of heart.
For Princes cause, as his allegiance bound
And ductie of that honorable place,
He careful was, his actions also sound,
With conscience pure he wayed every case.
As well for Commons, as profit to her grace.
That Prince nor Subjects had just cause to say,
Mildmay has wronged us any kind of way.
When poor complaind he ready was to hear,
To ease their grief was thief of his delight,
When poor oppressed was forced to appear,
In Exchequer Court, where he their cause might right.
He was their help, he freed their enemies spite,
Yea, Mildmay ever was the man they sought,
Who many a cause to happy end has brought.
As Solon grave his counsel was full sweet
When he was set among Nobles of the land, He never gave any advise that was
against the benefit of the pore.

For Commons good his counsel was most meet,
And for their wealth, as for his Prince would stand,
With reverent care of what he had in hand.
To glory of God, to Commons wealth and good,
Through grace of him that bought us with his blood.
Thus as at home, so in affairs abroad,
When Prince did please his service to command,
Ambassador to King of France he yode He was Ambassador in France.

From gracious Queen to give him understand,
What was his charge under her highness hand.
Which place of trust he did discharge so well,
As France reports his wisdom did excel.
His gravity and bounty great withal,
The French admire, and him a Caesar name,
Cato for wisdom, for prowess Haniball,
His courage such as gained endless fame,
Amongst French Nobles which beheld the same.
Where Mildmay lives, though death his life has fane,
And still shall live, eternized by fame.
His valor shown in person brave and stout, In Queen Mary's time he served
against Wyat with 150. men on horseback at his proper costs.

I Will not omit when Prince his aid did need.
Seven score odd men on horseback in a route
All furnished well to do some noble deed,
At his own cost, they forward did proceed.
Against Sir Wyat to defend her right,
For which desert she dubt him then a Knight.
There did he show his noble valiant heart,
In cheifest prease did Mildmay venture forth,
Where like himself he showed his conquering heart,
And with his sword made proof of mickle worth.
Showing thereby his loyalty and truth,
To Prince to God, and to his Country both,
As subject good according to his oath.
When Spaniards proud disturbt our quiet land,
And noble Lords did show their warlike trains,
For Countries good all states employed their hand,
To fight for Prince, and put our foes to pains,
Then Mildmay showed without regard of gains,
A band of men, with horse appointed well,
Lead by his Son, whose valor did excel.
Who like a branche from Mildmaies loins esprong,
Most Lion like young Anthony did attend
On enemies backs, with branding blade to ha'rung
Such valiant strokes, as Spanyardes lives should end.
Most resolute in what he did pretend.
Showing hereby a noble Mildmayes heart,
Foe to all such as sought his Countries smart.
Thus as in Court to counsel he was fit,
So in the field like service he has done,
His Counsel sage, his prudent ready wit
By golden trompe throughout the world does run,
Whose fame shall live so long as shines the sun.
For virtuous life, for counsel grave and wise,
Mildmay our Knight was held in worthy prise.
A book in print now extant to be seen,
Did Mildmay write unto his lasting praise, A note to know a good man.

Of counsel good all states that may be seen,
To frame their lives, both God and world to please
As well in house as other kind of ways.
By which is seen of Commonwealth his care,
Such godly mind his living does declare.
His zeal to learning, and maintain the same He founded Emanuell College in
Cambridge at his own proper costs.

The world does know if I forget to tell,
In Cambridge Town he late a house did frame,
A College fair, which hight Emanuell.
Placing a many of poor scholars there to dwell.
For whose maintenance as by record appear,
He gives for ever four hundredth pound a year.
And like a Patron which did learning love,
With grave foresight he poor men first there plast,
Prescribing rules from which they may not move,
So long as Manuell monument does last,
Aworthy note for Nobles that are plast
In high estate to imitate his ways,
Which virtue sought unto his ending days.
A number more most charitable deeds,
Sweet Mildmay did, which merits to be told,
His rule in house, releeuing pooremens needs,
Deserves by fame to be engraven in Gold.
That as in glass they able, may behold
What famous works our Mildmay wise has done,
Whose worth shall live so long as shines the sun.
Yet life must end, nature her due will have,
This wretched life a pilgrimage unsure,
We needs must leave when death the some does crave,
No mortal flesh his stroke that may endure,
No gold or fe*e his fre*endship can procure.
The old the young, the Prince, the Lord or Knight,
To earth must pay what so is hers by right.
This man of God, our noble Mildmay Knight,
This Lamp of honor, this Jewel of our land,
To Death has yielded what was his by right,
For what is he that death cannot command,
Yea all estates obeyes his direful hand.
And death in spite has done our Country wrong,
By striking him that might have lived long.
But as he lived so like wise did he die,
A constant servant of our Savior Christ,
On him alone with faith did he rely,
Hoping to rest with him that is the hiest,
All popish rites with heart he did detest.
Calling on God that with his blood us bought,
And by his death our free redemption wrought.
Mildmay farewell, thy loss we all lament,
Our cheifest staff, thou Commons only trust,
The poor and rich thy frindship often shall want,
For whom thy care was loving, kind and just,
Firm unto all which did thy favor trust.
Thy loss, thy lack, we pooremen may complain,
When Prince and Peers, to tears thy death constrain.
Thy childrens tears might move a heart of flint,
To see them wail their aged Sires decease,
From sighs and sobs that day nor night does stint,
Thy servants sorrows likewise does increase
Crying out on death which so disturbs their peace.
Reauing from hence their Master (virtuous Knight,)
That gemme of worth, our Lamp of English light.
Cease worthy Gentiles, cease Mildmaies children cease,
Leave to lament, leave shedding bootlesse tears,
Your aged Knight with Christ does rest in peace,
In heavenly seat as one of his coheares,
A chosen place for those his name that fears,
Where you with him in glory once shall meet,
And see him shine by Christ like Angel sweet.
Sweet natures buds of Mildmaies famous tree,
Surcease those plaints, leave fathers death to moan,
And let his life and godly ending be,
A Mirror good for you to gaze upon.
Yea let him rest intombed under stone.
But see your deeds, your actions, and your ways
Do gain you fame, and father endless praise.
The fruit that springs does show the virtuous tree,
Such do you seem as noble Sire has been,
Your virtuous lives the world does hope to see,
Gain Commons love and favor of the Queen,
In honors place like Mildmay dead to shine.
Such love, such favor ever do I pray,
Pleased God to grant sweet Anthony Mildmay.
Finis.
H. R.

Londons Lamentation for the loss of their worthy and famous Lord Mayor, Sir
Martin Calthrop Knight. Who departed this life in April last passed. 1589.
IN Lacedemon, Lycurgus once did dwell,
Renowned far for prudent sage advise,
His counsel grave few living did excel,
In Lacedemon held he was of prise,
As with his years, so did his credit rise.
His godly life, his justice used with law,
From grievous sins his people often did draw.
Cato in Rome, for wisdom might compare,
With any one that lived in those days,
Unto his charge he had a fathers care,
To train them up as God the best might please,
He to the just was friend at all assaies.
And justice used according unto right,
Without regard of poor, or men of might.
Lycurgus dead, Lacedemon mournd amain,
And wayld with tears his loss whom they did love,
Whose wisdom known, their honors did maintain,
Yea oftentimes his counsel many prove,
Whose conscience clear like to the Turtle dove,
Did show his care to maintain their renown,
That liu'de with him in this most happy Town.
For Catoes life whom death has likewise reft,
Romes Consuls mourn in weeds of woeful black,
In Rome say they his peer there is not left,
Which for his charge both day and night would carke.
Unto the Senate he may be a mark.
To aim aright, and justice so to use
As their estates by wrongs they nill abuse.
Amongst the rest that mourn their Consuls want,
Let famous London press in place to show,
In weeds of woe with tears for to lament,
The loss of him for whom they sorrow so,
Ye London Citizens, now explain your woe.
For Calthrop grave, who late resignd his breath
And natures due, has yielded unto death.
Our Cato wise, our Calthrop peerless Knight,
Lord Mayor of London, blessed in her name,
To earth has yielded what was hers by right,
Ye in that year he to his honor came,
By Death was forced to resign the same,
To Londons loss, and Commons sorrow great,
For Calthrops death then chief in Justice seat.
Calthrop Lord Mayor the Commons all thus cry,
Which late did live in tipe of hie renown,
Beloved of Prince, beloved of Commontie,
Beloved of all in lovely London Town,
From high estate lo death has taken down,
To rest with him entombed in the earth,
Until Christ come, that bought us with his death.
A worshipful of Drapers Company,
Was Calthrop grave, when he with us did live.
Of birth a Gentleman of Norfolk County,
As well was seen by ancient cotes he geeue,
For whose decease his kin and friends may grieve.
Threescore odd years by number of record,
He lived in fame, and died at last a Lord.
In Iunos right, with Matron wife he linckt,
From out whose lines branches most sweet did spring,
By whom he lives, though death has causde him shrink,
Yet of his worth my Muse a while shall sing,
And cheeflie touch one honorable thing
Calthrop performd not long before his death,
His entertainment of Queen Elizabeth.
When royal Prince of her most gracious love,
To famous London did pretend to come,
Then Calthrop grave her Citizens to prove
Did notice give, and warned all and some
Each man should ready be in his appointed room,
To give her grace the welcome that was meet,
For loving Subjects to a Queen so sweet.
Which by his doom most bravely was performde,
In royal order sparing for no cost,
By Calthrops counsel, whose honor yet consernde
In such brave sort as Citizens may boast,
Their pains and charges nere a whit was lost.
For graciously each thing she did esteem,
And gave them thanks most like a royal Queen.
But Calthrop chief with grace she did reward,
Through whose foresight her welcome was the more,
To Aldermen she had a like regard,
And courteously as she had done of yore,
Unto lord Mayor her princely Mace that bore,
With hearty thanks their zeal she did requite,
Which with such pomp had pleased her princely sight.
Thus of our Queen did Calthrop merit fame,
And favor such as sildome has been shown,
For which deserts honor extols his name,
And fame with trompe shall make him better known
In London City, where he did sit in throne
Of Justice, ministering his Princes laws,
As right requirde and equity of cause.
Whose care to rule in honorable state,
Was such as London might full well beseem,
He justice used with such an upright rate
As Solomon for wisdom he had been,
Pleasing to God and to our gracious Queen.
Religion pure be did so much regard,
As zealous preachers daily he preferred.
Pity had place within his tender heart,
As many in distressed state can tell,
Whose hand was ready always to impart
To such as in behavior used them well,
As many in this City walls can tell.
To fatherless, the widow and the Maid,
His greatest favor never was denayd.
The poor with weeping wayle and wring their hands,
And sighing say, gone is our chiefest trust,
The prisoner poor which lies in sorrows hands,
Defy the Fates that closde thee in the dust,
Who in thy actions was merciful and just,
And with thy purse was ready still to give,
Their needy state, thy bounty did relieve.
When they recount thy charitable deeds,
And think how death has now bereft their joy,
Sad heavy looks and tears from eyes proceeds,
Cursing fell death the cause of their anoy,
Which in his fury our comfort did destroy.
Reauing his life which might have lived long,
Of envious mind to do the Commons wrong.
If cruel thou had wayde our Common good,
Thou would have spard to shred his vital thread,
And not have sought so soon his peerless blood,
That all the poor within those gates should need.
But Sisters three with thee had so decreed.
That die he must, and death thou have thy right,
The lively truncke of Calthrop worthy Knight.
Whom tears ne plaints, nor shriking woeful cries.
Can call again unto his former life.
His childrens mones nor servants sorrowing noise,
Nor yet the plaints of his most loving wife,
Whose tears like floods from eyes has been as rise.
But all in vain, entombde he must abide,
Until Christ come his chosen to divide.
Calthrop farewell, thou peer of Common weal,
Thou light to men to guide their ways aright,
Thy virtuous worth I cannot halse reveal,
Nor zealous life as thou deseruest resite,
Of thee my quill unable is to write.
But whilst I live grave Calthrop I will praise,
Whose justice shind like Phoebus in her rays.
Blessed art thou whom God has pleased to call,
Unto his throne to rest with him on hie,
Plast next his seat in glory eternal,
Where faithful souls does live and never die,
That on the blood of Christ unfeigned does rely.
Amongst which sort, O Lord for Jesus sake,
Accept us all, and to thy favor take.
To famous London, sweet Christ incline thine care,
Maintain their honor, her Lord Mayor do bless,
To Aldermen have thou a Fathers care,
Whose pains are great thy Gospel to increase.
Most zealously thy name which does profess.
Advancing daily thy religion,
Of zeal to thee, and truth to English Crown.
Whose redines for Prince and Countries good,
Is daily seen when she in need does stand,
Their purse their men, all bent to venture blood,
Whether to sea, or service on the land,
Yea all alike be pressed at her command.
God and S. George our London hearts still says,
For Countries cause, and Queen Elizabeth.
Finis.
H. R.


