THE Art of Pronuntiation, Digested into two parts. Vox audienda, and Vox
videnda.

In the first of which are set forth the Elements and several parts of the
voice: In the second are described diverse Characters, by which every part of
the voice may be aptly known and severally distinguished.

Very necessary as well thereby to know the natural structure of the voice, as
speedily to learn the Exact touch of pronuntiation of any foreign language
whatsoever.

Newly invented by ROBERT ROBINSON Londoner.

Organa naturae tribuit Deus, are docet vsus. London printed by Nicholas Oaks.
1617.

To his Book.
If that thou chance to come to Zoilus view,
Fear not my book, though thy inuention's new:
Tell them, whose want of skill shall thee deride,
To judge things they not know, it is foolish pride:
But if men skild in thee a fault epsy,
Crave their best help, bear not thy self too high.
A Preface declaring the great benefit of Speech and writing, and the order of
this Treatise.
GOD (who has so well disposed and ordered the course of nature in all his
creatures,) as he has made man his chiefest and set him over all the rest of
his creaturs of the earth, having endued him with many graces above the rest,
as wisdom, knowledge, reason, understanding, and the like; even as so many
springs and rivers issuing from the Ocean of his infinite wisdom: So also that
nothing might be wanting, nothing superfluous in such a worthy creature, has
given him diverse outward means and senses so excellent, meet and convenient,
not only for the nourishment and preservation of his own body (as they are
likewise to other creatures) but also as well for the maintenance and increase
of those inward graces wherewith he is so adorned, as for the employment of
them and showing and setting them forth to other men to whom he has not given
the same measure; whereby he may be glorified of all men as their gracious and
glorious Creator, all men may be glorified in him as his chiefest creatures:
And to that end as he has given man a reasonable soul to judge and discern,
so also that all his knowledge, all his graces might not lie hid and smothered
in his own breast, he has given him a voice composed with more rareness then
in any other of his creatures, whereby he may express the thoughts of his
heart, may praise and pray to his God, may teach and instruct others in that
which he knows above other men, may ask advise and council of others in
that he knows not, and generally all may communicate and confer together, as
well touching spiritual matters fit for the soul, as concerning all other
things necessary in our worldly affairs: yet although the voice of man be of
such needful use, that without it man's mind were but as in a dungeon, and in
perpetual thraldom of the body for the time of its being in this earthly
habitation, if there were no other help then tht voice to express the mind:
man could not be the better for any thing that should be taught or spoken of
no longer then the very words were speaking, or at the longest, but whilst our
weak memories could retain the very matter spoken of, and so it might easily
be foreseen how soon all the labors of us and our forefathers would perish,
how quickly the wise counsels, witty and grave sayings of the learned would be
forgotten. The Princes in every age (though in one and the same kingdom) would
have a different kind of ruling, the subjects a different course of living,
both the Princes and people a different and new course of religion. All our
doings, all our sayings, all our customs, and all our manners would be buried
in oblivion.

Then how uncertain our estates would be, how uncomfortable our selves, how
dangerous and pernicious it would be for the state of every commonwealth, all
men may easily judge, yet God to prevent these inconveniences, for the further
benefit of mankind, as he has given us a voice to express the mind unto the
ear, so he has given us hands to frame letters or marks for the voice to
express the mind unto the eyes. So that the eyes and ears are as it were the
receivers of message sent unto the heart, the hands and voice as deliuerers of
message sent from the heart: And though the voice be a more lively kind of
speech, yet in respect it is but only a slight accident made of so light a
substance as the air, it is no sooner uttered but it is dissolved, every
simple sound does expel and extinguish the sound going before it, so that the
ear can have but one touch of the air beating upon it to declare the speech
unto the mind: but the hand though it give a dumb and a more dull kind of
speech, yet it gives a more durable. A letter is a grosser substance, and
therefore is of more continuance then a sound: what is once written still
continues though the hand cease. If the eyes have not satisfied the mind at
one view, they may look on it again, yea till they have satisfied it is
desire: And by this means of noting and charactring of the voice, all things
worthy of memory are defended from the injury of forgetfulness; whereby is
left unto us from most ancient times of our forefathers the most holy will of
God, besides many necessary doctrines of godly and religious men, many
excellent sayings both divine and morrall, many humane policies, counsels, and
instructions, written by wise and learned men, together with diverse behoofefull
arts and worthy sciences, which are hereby as in a sure treasury preserved,
maintained and daily increased to the glory of almighty God, and continual
benefit and comfort of us and our posterity. Of these two excellent benefits
the first being natural, is by nature of every man with a little use easily
pronounced, the other being artificial cannot be perfectly framed until the
true reason, order, and distinct parts of the former be first found out and
known; the want of knowledge whereof, has caused both in speech and writing,
many imperfections and errors, as sometimes taking one simple sound of man's
voice to be two, at other times taking two, three, or four simple sounds to be
but one, and according to that mistaken order fitting letters for them, whereby
writing is thereby in some part made defective, besides by many other errors
used therein, as by misplacing of letters, contrary to the order wherein they
are pronounced, inserting of superfluous letters, where there is no need, nor
any sound at all expressed for them, making one letter serve for two different
sounds, sometimes for one and sometimes for another; and contrariwise, using
for one and the same sound at sometimes one letter, at other times another
letter, not proper thereunto, but to some other different sound in man's voice:
by which confused order the speech is so darkely set down, that our words in
speaking seem as a different kind of language to the same in writing. So that
though by a common use and beaten practice every particular nation can explain
themselves and pronounce their own proper speech by their own manner of
writing, yet it is so intricate to a stranger of another country, that he can
neither pronounce their speech by their writing, nor write their speech
according to their manner by hearing of it spoken, whereby no perfect
Dictionary or Grammar has hitherto been made, that the true order of
pronunciation might be taught, either to such as are desirous of the skill of
languages, or to children, or such as are altogether ignorant in reading and
writing of their own mother tongue. Besides a great inconvenience which by
some I have understood (and doubtless it is likely) to have happened in the
ancient learned tongues, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which though they are
written and imprinted in all parts, wherein they are in use, by one and the
same order of letters, yet in utterance of them in speech, they are so diversely
pronounced, that men of different nations (though therein very learned) cannot
one suddenly understand the other in any argument, or conference had between
them in any of those languages, every one of them inclining to the manner of
pronunciation of their own country speech. Hence also it has come to pass,
that notwithstanding all nations of the earth came from one root, our first
father Adam, and that God had given them all the same form of body, the like
senses, and for their voice all instruments alike: (howsoever he had dispersed
them into sever all parts and habitations) yet the people of one kingdom in
their learning of the language of any other nation have not in many years, yea
some in the whole course of their life have not attained to such exact and
perfect pronuntiation therein, nor so framed their mouths in speaking but that
they might easily be discerned and discovered to be strangers of another
Country: Now therefore seeing in other sciences less useful, the professors
of them have set them down in exact propositions; I cannot see (especially
considering how necessary a thing true pronuntiation is both for the grace of
the speech, as for the commodity and advantage it may beget to the
commonwealth as well at home, as in commerce and traffic had in foreign
parts with other nations by conferring with them in their own languages) how in
this it can be accounted unnecessary to seek a means whereby to remedy these
manifold abuses and imperfections in speech and writing, which are the grounds
by which all other knowledges are taught and maintained, That by some ruled
art the true pronuntiation of languages might be learned, which hitherto is
taught either by roat, or written in such a confused manner as cannot but seem
unreasonable to any man's understanding, howsoever allowed of and approved by
continuance of custom. But here perchance I may be charged with presumption
both in respect of my self, and in respect of my years, in that I profess to
be a teacher of a science to others, having as it were but newly learned my
letters my self: Whereunto I answer, that I learned not this my art out of
the books and works of learned men, neither would my small means afford me to
be acquainted with their great volumes, only out of a volume of Gods own gift
and making did I take this small Manuscript, even to all men has he given one
of the same impression, whereby the truth hereof may be examined: yet certainly
the vnripenesse of my years, and want of other learning, had wholly withheld
me from the publishing thereof, so that it might have died with my self and
have benefited no man, had I not considered that every one of what estate,
degree, or condition soever, is bound in ducty to reveal whatsoever may be
beneficial to his country; assuring my-selfe that God does not give either
knowledge or riches to any private person merely for his own particular use,
but imploieth those on whom he bestows such gifts, as Cisternes and conduits
to convey and impart them likewise to others. Yet he therein so provides that
themselves also be never empty. This consideration therefore caused me to
think it were far better, though with boldness to set forth that portion of
knowledge which God had given me, then with a distard-like fear for the causes
before remembered to conceal the benefit; Having therefore labored to find out
the true ground of the speech, that the manifold errors therein might be made
manifest, and so avoided. To the intent I might in such sort as God had enabled
me, do somewhat for the common good of my Country, and add something to my
profession, I have framed this small treatise of pronuntiation, and digested it
into two parts. In the first by certain propositions applying my self to set
forth the elements and parts of the voice: In the second part appointing for
every simple sound in man's voice sundry letters and characters, that the voice
being thereunto once committed may by any (who shall know the use of them)
without any other expositor or instructor be aptly and truly pronounced upon
view of the writing, how strange soever the language be: yet seeing my intent
and purpose herein is not, that I would any ways go about, or desire to alter
the order of letters, which of so long time has been used and allowed of,
wherein so many worthy works have been imprinted, knowing that could not be
brought to pass without much difficulty, and greater prejudice then my simple
judgment can discern. I would not therefore that any man should so much look
into or respect the characters which I herein use, or the manner of the new
placing, disposing, or naming of them, as the mateer and scope whereto I intend
them, which is, that I might with the easiest way and meetest order, so paint
out every part of man's voice, that every one might be severally discerned from
other, and that the pronunciation of every different language which hitherto is
chiefly taught by word of mouth, might in a more certain manner be dedeciphered
with the pen, whereby any that are desirous that way, may not only the sooner
learn the experience of any foreign language, but may also with more ease,
and in a shorter time attain to the true pronuntiation thereof. For albeit any
man in teaching of his own country language, does by his own speech give the
very true and absolute touch of pronuntiation, yet by reason of the swiftness
of the voice, unwonted composition of the parts thereof and dull apprehension
of the ears, the same is not easily and read ly perceived to a stranger: but
the simple and distinct parts, and members of the whole voice (which are the
grounds of all languages) being once certainly known, and cast into visible
letters, (howsoever the order of an unknown language does diversely disperse and
mix them together) the eye by it is quick and sharp sight does suddenly
apprehend them, and thereby teach the mouth of one altogether ignorant, and
unacquainted with such language as aptly and truly to pronounce it, as any one
to whom the same is naturally the speech, wherein he has been always trained
and instructed, from the very time of his infancy, (this only excepted, that
the unaccustomed mixture of the sounds of the voice may at first cause a more
slow utterance.) And, for that cause having gathered together diverse letters
and characters of sundry sorts and forms, I found none so meet (in respect of
the accents which are necessarily to be placed over them) as those which were
shortest, and of an equal length, and so having my self framed some few, I
took the rest to make up my number, and as the best for my purpose out of the
Roman and Secretary letters, but have not so used, and placed them in the same
sense and order as they were formerly in their own Alphabets; but have
diversely disposed of them accordingly as seemed fittest for my use, and the
order of the work did best require; And touching such places wherein I have
bin compelled in respect of the order of the work to speak of matters incident
to music, for that they are not much pertinent to this art of pronuntiation, I
have therefore but lightly and briefly touched them, referring such matters to
the teachers and professors of that science.

And thus having showed the occasion order, and intent of this my treatise,
being the fruit of wearied times between other labors, I commit it to the view
and practice of those, that shall think it meet for their use or experience,
leaving these few verses to plead my excuse, if any errors have happened by
reason of my great want of learning.

ROBERT ROBINSON.

Candide des veniam, placidu^ nec contra^e frontem,
Inficiat chartas, si qua litura meas:
Nec mihi sollucem, nec praebuit aura calore^
Me tenebris cinctum frigida zona premit:
Sin redeat mihi fausta dies, si denique Phoebus
Lumine, percutiat lumina nostra, suo:
Tum nitar meliora sequi, tu^ menda vicissim
Tot mihi lux a biget, quot mihi lux aperit.
Vox Audienda, Or THE ELEMENTS OF MAN'S Voice.
What the Voice is.
THE Voice is a composition of diverse simple sounds intermixed together.

What a simple sound is?
A simple sound is the least part or member of the voice, framed in one only
place, and by one only manner proper to it self.

What a sound is, and of the efficient thereof.
A sound is an accident effected by the opposition of these two contraries,
namely motion and restraint: motion of the air out of the inward parts of the
body, and restraint of it in its motion.

Of the efficient causes of this motion and restraint.
The causes of this motion and restraint are primary and secondary: the primary
is spiritual, the secondary is isntrumental, the spiritual cause is alike to
both: the isntrumental causes are different, some proper to motion, and others
proper to restraint.

Of the primary and spiritual cause of this motion and restraint.
The spiritual cause is the mind, which God having made it most like to his
glorious image, has placed in this Microcosmos of man's body, as a principal
ruler thereof under him, giving it such power over all the parts of the body,
that as God himself is the first mouer of the whole universal world, who only
by his infinite power appoints both an orderly course and limitation in the
motion of all his works, so himself has granted and ordained: that the mind
of man should be the first moouer of this little world of the body, wherein it
is enclosed, and of every member and particle of it made fit for motion, and
has given it a liberty, to be accounted for to order, restrain, and limit
those motions as it self lists.

Of the isntrumental causes of this motion.
They are the lungs and hollow parts of the body, wherein the air is
contained, which being drawn together by the motion, or rather the will of the
mind, do thereby expel the air, and cause it to be moved through diverse
passages, as the throat, mouth, and nostrils.

Of the isntrumental causes of the restraint of this motion.
They are the breast, throat, pallat, gums, tongue, lips and nostrils, stopping
or hindering the free passage of the air in it is motion.

How the diversity of sounds used in man's voice happen.
They happen upon these three occasions.

First by the diversity of the instruments of restraint. Secondly, by reason of
the diverse places of restraint. And thirdly in respect of the different manner
of restraint, both by the several instruments, and in the several places.
Of the general parts of the sounds in man's voice so occasioned.
There are two general parts, some different only in quantity, and are most
pertine^t to Music, others only in quality, which are most necessary for
speech.

Of the number of sounds of different quantity.
They are in number uncertain, to wit, in some men more, and in some men less.

Of two several orders wherein these sounds are different in quantity.
The sounds of different quantity are twofold: first, in respect of their
different height of sound, secondly by reason of their different measure of
time, wherein they are sounded.

Of the place of framing of the sounds, different in quantity, and the cause of
their different heights.
They are caused by the instrument of the throat, which according to the
greater or lesser restraining of the air, passing through in one and the same
place, does cause sometimes a more shrill and loud noise, sometimes a more base
and deep sound, but never differs the quality more or less.

Of the reason of their different measure of time.
It is because they are sounded by a different continuance of the motion of the
breath, sometimes being finished in a shorter time, and sometimes continued to
a longer.

Of the number of sounds of different quality whereof the speech is framed.
They are in number certain, to wit five and twenty, and by their several
instruments and places are diversely framed in such sort as afterward shall be
spoken of.

Of the framing of the speech by the said sounds of different quality.
Of the simple sounds aforesaid, of different quality are framed sillables, of
sillables, words, and of words the whole order of speech.

What a syllable is.
A syllable is the pronouncing of one of the simple sounds of different quality
by it self alone, or of two or more of them orderly framed and knit together,
without any intermission of time put between them.

What a word is.
A word is either one syllable alone, or else two or mo sillables having a very
small intermission of time and stay of the breath between every of them, by
which any one thing conceived in the mind, or perceived through the senses is
distinctly named and known from others.

What the speech is.
The speech is an orderly knitting together of diverse words, whereby any thing
forethought of in the mind is sensibly expressed to the ear.

Of the general division of the simple sounds of different quality.
They are of three general kinds, which for distinction sake I have named by
several names, one of which in respect of its office I call a vital sound,
the others in respect of their several natures, some vowels, and some
consonants, as they have been anciently termed: of which in order shall be
spoken.

Of the nature, place and office of the vital sound.
The vital sound is that which was spoken of before, whereof all the sounds of
different quantity do arise, and it is framed in the passage of the throat,
and it is to be noted, that this sound is only used in composition, with the
others of different qualities to express them more lively to the ears of the
auditors: for without the help of this vital sound all the other parts of the
voice would be but as a soft whispering, and as this sound is so helpful to
the others of different quality, so are they of different quality also no less
excellent and helpful to the sounds of different quantities, which are so
framed of that vital sound bredde in the throat, so that by the composition of
both sorts together, the one is made a lively helper to the other, whereby that
part of the voice appertaining to speech is made most apt for the same, and the
other appertaining to melody is made most pleasing, and thereby it comes to
pass, that the voice of man is worthily accounted more excellent, then any
artificial music hitherto invented.

Of vowels, what they are and of their nature.
The vowells in respect of the restraint of the motion of the air, are the
least extreme of all the other sounds, they having a more freer passage of the
air then the rest, so that in them the breath is most lightly hindered, and
their nature is such that they cannot be joined in a syllable with themselves,
but with consonants they may, so that if two or mo vowells come together, they
of necessity are all different sillables, except only certain sillables
arising of them, which are called dipthongs, and are caused by a continuance of
the breath from any of the former, until it finish it motion in the place of
the last long vowel, and not otherwise.

Of the number of vowells.
They are in number ten, and are every one of different quality, both in
respect of their different manner of framing, and of their diverse places
wherein they are so framed.

Of their different manner of framing.
They are framed in two sorts, which are distinguished by short and long
vowels, both in respect of the difference of the time wherein they are uttered,
as also because of the different organes through which they pass, being in
some shorter and in some longer.

Of the general framing of the short vowells.
The short vowels have their passage through certain short organes, framed by
the placing of the tongue in sundry parts of the roof of the mouth.

Of the general framing of the long vowells.
They are framed by the breath passing through somewhat longer organes, made
also by the help of the tongue, by placing of it in several parts of the roof
of the mouth.

Of the number of places wherein the vowells are framed.
They are five: the first taking its beginning in the innermost part of the
roof or pallat, and so the rest continuing forward, each one orderly in his
degree to the last place, being more near to the outmost part of the roof,
and in every one of these five places are framed, one short and one long
vowell, the particular order of framing of which vowells in their distinct
places hereafter ensues.

Of the framing of the first short vowell.
It is framed in the innermost part of the roof of the mouth by the help of
the tongue, making of small organe for the passage of the air.

Of the framing of the first long vowell.
It is framed in the same place by the help of the tongue, extending and
lengthning of the organe through which the breath passes almost to the place
of the next short vowell.

Of the framing of the second short vowell.
It is framed somewhat forwarder in the roof by the help of the tongue making
also a small organe for the passage of the air.

Of the second long vowell.
It is framed in the place of the short, but passes through a longer organe
almost extended to the place of the next short vowell.

Of the third short vowell.
It is framed somewhat forwarder in the roof by the help of a small organe
framed by the tongue.

Of the third long vowell.
It is framed in the place of 'its short, but by the help of a longer organe
extended almost to the place of the next short vowell.

Of the fourth short vowell.
It is framed also somewhat forwarder and nearer to the outmost part of the
roof passing through a short or small organe framed by the tongue.

Of the fourth long vowell.
It is framed also in the place of it is short, but by the help oa longer
organe framed by the tongue, and extended almost to the place of the next short
vowell.

Of the fifth short vowell.
It is framed in a small organe made by the help of the tongue in a place also
somewhat nearer to the outmost part of the roof.

Of the fifth long vowell.
It is framed in a longer organe, made in the same place by the help of the
tongue, almost extended to the inward place of the consonants, which are framed
in the mouth.

Of Consonants. What are Consonants.
The breath in them is more strictly hindered, and they be such as may be
joined two or more in one syllable, either by themselves, or with a vowell or
dip-thong.

Of the number of Consonants.
They are in number fourteen, and every of them of different quality, in
respect of their different manner of framing, and of their different places,
wherein they are so framed; thirteen of which consonants are framed in the
mouth, and one only in the breast. And first of those in the mouth.

Of the several orders of framing of the consonants in the mouth.
They are framed in five sorts, which I have named by several names, as mutes,
seminutes, greater obstricts, lesser obstricts and a peculiar.

Of the particular number of each sort.
Of mutes there are three, of seminutes three: of the greater obstricts three;
of the lesser obstricts three, and one only peculiar.

Of the number of places wherein these thirteen consonants in the mouth are
framed.
They are framed in three places or regions which may be called the outward,
middle, and inward regions, and in every of these places are severally framed
one mute, one semmiute, one greater obstrict and one lesser obstrict, and in
the middle region the peculiar also is partly framed.

Of the first place.
The first or outmost region is the outmost part of the mouth, namely the lips,
wherein are framed four consonants, to wit, one mute, one semimute, one
greater obstrict, and one lesser obstrict.

Of the second place.
The second or middle region is the upper gummes or outmost part of the roof
of the mouth, enclosed by the help of the tippe and edges of the tongue,
wherein are framed five consonants; namely one mute, one semimute, one greater
obstrict, one lesser obstrict, and the peculiar.

Of the third place.
The third or inward region is a more inward part of the mouth enclosed with
the flat of the tongue, very near unto the last place of vowels, wherein are
likewise framed four consonants: that is, one mute, one seminute, one greater
obstrict, and one lesser obstrict.

What are mutes? of the order of their framing, and of their property.
The mutes, in respect of the restraint of the motion of the air, are the
greatest extreme of all the other sounds, the air in them being more strictly
hindered, then in the rest: and they are framed by the quite stopping and
cutting off of the breath from 'its motion, which causes a kind of dumb sound
to be uttered, and they are made three differents, in respect of the three
different places wherein they are stopped. And these dumb sounds cannot well
be uttered, unless they be joined with some other sounds to express themselves
by.

Of the semimutes.
The semimutes are: caused by the quite stopping of the breath from the passage
of it through the mouth, so that in their own proper places of restraint they
give no sound at all, but by a contrary course, having a restrictiue passage
through the nostrils, they thereby admit of a sound, And they are made three
differents also, by the three places of their stopping.

Of the greater obstricts.
They are framed by the stopping of the breath not with a full restraint, but
leaving some small passage for it, whereby it may be breathed out at the
mouth, And they being not so much restrained as the mutes, nor having so free a
passage as the lesser obstricts, are as a mean to those two extremes, and
they are also three differents, by reason of their three several places of
construction.

Of the lesser obstricts.
They are framed after the same manner as the greater, only differ in this,
that somewhat greater and freer passage is admitted to them; yet they have not
so free a passage as the vowells, but are as a mean between the vowells and
greater obstricts, and they are also three differents, in respect of their
three several places of construction.

Of the peculiar.
It is framed by a special manner only proper to it self, by the stopping of
the breath with the tip of the tongue in the outermost part of the roof or
middle region of consona^ts, yet leaving it two several passages between the
edges of the inward gums, and both the edges and sides of the tongue, through
which the breath passing, and beating against the cheeks, from thence issues
out at the mouth.

Of the manner of framing, and of the nature of the consonant in the breast.
This sound in respect of the order of framing of it, differs not from a
mute, but to distinguish it from the other mutes framed in the mouth, I have
named it (as heretofore it has been called) an aspirate, and it is caused by a
restraint and sudden stay of the motion of the breath in the breast, before it
comes to the passage of the throat, which gives so small a noise, as it can
scarce sensibly be discerned. And it being used before or after any of the
other consonants scarce shows forth it self, but causes those with whom it
is joined, to seem different sounds from their true quality, yet with some
kind of resemblance thereunto.

Finis de voce audienda.
Vox Videnda. Which is writing, or the Characters of Man's voice.
What is writing.
VVRiting is an artificial framing of certain marks and Characters different
in form and shape for every several sound in man's voice, whereby each simple
sound having a proper mark appointed to it self, may by the same be as
apparently seen to the eye, as the sound it self is sensibly discerned by the
ears.

Of the general distinction and naming of the Characters of the voice.
They are generally distinct, and named by cliffes, notes, and letters. The
cliffes and notes for the sounds of different quantity pertinent to music,
that is, the cliffes to express their several heights, the notes to express
their different measures of time, and the letters for the expressing of the
sounds of different quality pertinent to speech.

Of the particular naming and distinction of cliffes.
They are particularly named accordingly as is set down in the scale of
music, as gamut, are, and the rest.

Of the particular naming and distinction of notes.
They are called of musitions by several names, as crotchets, quauers, minoms,
semi-briefes, and such like, according to the different measure of time,
wherein their sounds are continued.

Of the particular naming and distinction of letters.
All Letters are in some sort distinctly named by their own simple sounds,
except only those appointed for the aspirate and mutes, which cannot well be
uttered unless they be joined in a composed syllable with some other sound; yet
for the better expressing of them, in respect that the short vowells by reason
of their slender and unsteady organe give but a wavering and uncertain sound,
and of the consonants, the aspirate and mutes of themselves, by reason of the
quite stopping of the breath in them, give scarce any sound at all, and the
rest by reason of the straight passage of the breath but a dull and muttering
kind of sound. It will therefore be requisite in the naming of them to join
the short Vowells in a syllable ending with some settled consonant, and the
consonants in a syllable beginning or ending with some of the vowells, having a
more clerer passage, that by the co^trarieties of each sort being joined and
placed together, both may be made the more perspicuous and sensible to the
ear, even as contrary colors laid together seem more apparent, and are
better discerned to the eye; that therefore every letter might have a certain
and perfect name, I have disposed and ordered them as follows: The short
vowells, to express the names of their several letters, to be severally
joined with the aspirate and to enjoy the first part of the syllable, the long
vowells being very perfect sounds, to be themselves the names of their own
letters. Of consonants, the aspirat to be set before, and joined to the first
long vowell. The mutes to be joined in this order, that in the inward region
to the second long vowell, that in the middle region, to the third long vowell;
and that in the outward region to the fourth long vowell. In which composed
sillables the mutes to be first pronounced, and according to this order both
the greater and lesser obstricts to be also joined to the same three last
mentioned long vowells. But the semimutes to be put after, and joined to
certain short vowells, that in the inward region to the second short vowell,
that in the middle region to the third short vowell, and that in the outward
region to the fourth short vowell: And lastly, the peculiar to be joined in the
latter part of a syllable composed of it self, and the third short vowell to
express also the names of their several letters, which are hereafter formed.

Of the order and several forms of the characters for the parts of man's voice.
For the sound in the throat, seeing it is necessarily in continual
composition with the rest, to use any letter or mark for it, would but make
writing extraordinary tedious, and work little or no effect, and for that
cause I have appointed it no character at all. But for the sounds of different
quantity arising of the same, they have excellently of long time been observed
of Musicians, by placing higher or lower (as the case does require) of sundry
formed cliffes, as * * * signifying thereby the faut, C: solfavt, and G solrevt
cliffes, that are chiefly in use, upon certain parralell lines drawn one
above another to expres the height or depth of their sounds, in such and the
like sort, as is set down in the three first sections of the ensuing dyagram,
and by sundry notes thus figured, * * * * with diverse others, framed for the
quauers, Crotchets, Mynoms, Semibriefes, and the like, to express the length
or shortness of the time, wherein their sounds are to be continued, which
after the placing of any of the cliffes to guide the taking of their true
heights, they also set higher or lower, and severally disperse upon and between
the same lines, accordingly as the air of the music does require, in such
and other like manner, as in the fourth and last section of the same diagram
they are hereafter placed.

Of the forms of the letters wherewith I have noted the vowels according to
the order of their places.
In the first place.
The short vowell I have figured thus. -- ^ The long vowell. -- ^
In the second place.
The short vowell. -- ^ The long vowell. -- ^
In the third place.
The short vowell. -- ^ The long vowell. -- ^
In the fourth place.
The short vowell. -- ^ The long vowell. -- ^
In the fifth place.
The short vowell. -- ^ The long vowell. -- ^
For the more manifest demonstration of the construction of the vowells, I have
here devised and placed this ensuing figure.

The scale of vowells.


By the archlyne A B, is represented the roof of the mouth, by the point C,
from whence the five several lines are drawn, is supposed the root of the
tongue, by every of those lines the tongue it self, and by the several angles
of the same lines under ^ are supposed certain eleuations and bendings of the
tongue, which cause the five several sounds called short vowells, for which
the same characters ^ are framed, and by the several points under ^ are
supposed also several eleuations of the tongue from any one of the said angles
or places of the short vowells, to the said several points, whereby are made
certain longer organes, in which are framed the five several sounds called
long vowells, for which the said characters ^ are appointed, and by the circle
in which O is inscribed, is to be understood the pipe or passage in the throat,
through which the breath passes, before it comes to be fashioned by any of
the organes of the tongue, placed in the roof of the mouth, which in the said
figure are before described.

Of the forms of the letters which I have observed for the consonants in the
mouth, according to the order of their places.
In the first or outward region.
For the mute I have put this character. -- ^ For the semimute this. -- ^ For
the greater obstrict. -- ^ For the lesser obstrict. -- ^
In the middle region.
For the mute this. -- ^ For the semi-mute. -- ^ For the greater obstrict. -- ^
For the lesser obstrict. -- ^ For the peculiar. -- ^
In the inward region.
For the mute this. -- ^ For the semi-mute. -- ^ For the greater obstrict. -- ^
For the lesser obstrict. -- ^
Of the form of the letter for the aspirate.
The aspirate I have noted by this small oblique stroke. -- ^

The pronuntiation of these three letters in this order as they here are
placed xox by reason of the vicini ty of the places of construction is so
speedily performed, as that it seems to be but one simple consonant sound, nor
indeed can it be discerned to be otherwise, unless by a very diligent
observation; and because the same is very frequent in speech, to write it so
often at length would be troublesome: Therefore for breuity sake in writing, I
have contracted those three letters falling out in that order into one
Character thus. xx

Of the distinguishing of sillables.
That every syllable might be aptly and severally distinguished, it is here
meet to devise some certain accent or mark to be placed over the first
letter of the syllable, to signify where it takes beginning. For that accent
therefore I have appointed only a little point thus (.) where there is no note
of aspiration in any part of the syllable, otherwise I have expressed it with a
small stroke parralell to the heads of the letters thus (-) where the syllable
has an aspired note.

Of the manner of placing of the aspirate.
The aspirate note being for the least of all the simple sounds, is as it were
too small to be accounted or placed amongst the other letters, yet too big to
be termed an accent. Nevertheless for that it is of so frequent use amongst
the other letters, to avoid tediousnes in writing, and for ease of work, I
have appointed it (as aforesaid) this small Character (^) to be fixed to either
or both ends of the long accent, as the case shall require in this order, to
wit, if a syllable begin with an aspirat, and end not with it (which I call
former aspired) then to fix it at the hither end of the accent toward the left
hand thus (^) if a syllable begin without an aspirate, and end aspired (which I
call latter aspired) the^ to fix at it the further end of the accent next unto
the right hand thus (^) and if both beginning and ending of a syllable be
aspired, which I call double aspired, then to fix it at both ends of the accent
thus. (^)

Of Tones.
There is yet one thing more, very necessary to be known and carefully to be
observed in pronuntiation, to wit, the elevation and depression of the voice
used in speech, being in manner different from the rising and falling of the
voice in the sounds of different quantity spoken of before, and this kind of
lifting up and depressing of the voice is caused by a contraction of the lungs
and hollow parts of the body, wherein the air is enclosed, sometimes being
more speedy sending forth the air through 'its passages with a swift motion,
whereby the sound of the speech is made more forceable to be heard, and
sometimes being more slow, and more weakly pressing forth the air, whereby the
sound of the speech is somewhat lessened, and by this different motion and
expulsion of the air, three kinds of vtterances usual in the pronuntiation of
words do arise all differing in proportion, which Grammarians generally do
call toni, and particularly distinguish them, Acutus being the highest, Grauis
being the lowest, Circumflexus being the mean.


Kinds of utterance of each syllable.
And in the continued course of the speech two sillables following together
are never pronounced both in one tone, but each syllable is always uttered
either higher or lower then the last preceding in the word or sentence.

Of the figuring of the tones.
They are thus figured by Grammarians, namely the acute or highest tone by an
oblique stroke ascending toward the right hand in this manner, () the lowest
tone by an oblike stroke descending toward the right hand thus (`) and the
circumflex being the mean between the other two by both the strokes joined
together with the points downward thus, (^) which tones it is most convenient
to place so near as may be at the beginning of each syllable; but this
circumflex note I wholly omit, and for ease of work only use the other two,
so that any syllable having no tone marked over it may be taken for the
circumflex or mean between the highest and lowest. And if either of these two
tones happen to fall out in a syllable wholly vnaspired, then that so happening
being placed over the first letter of the syllable may serve to show the
beginning of the syllable, in stead of this little point of distinction (.)
which before I thought meet to observe, and in such case that point is to be
omittde.

Breue de voce poema Latinum in nouo ordine literarum ante edocto, iuxta
Anglicanam nostram pronuntiationem conscriptum.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Idem poema in ordine literarum modo vsitato.
PArua licet, tenuisque licet, mihi magna potestas:
Per terram victrix per mare sum domina,
Quem calor and frigus cingant, mihi subiacet ^er,
Aeque vt participem, sic Deus instituit.
Non mihi magna cohors, mea si quadrata caterua,
Quinque tibi solum praestat vbique latus,
Quos si dux sapiens nectat simul ordine recto.
Sunt facilesque boni, sunt rigidique boni:
Hos ducit si quando expers ratione, remissi.
Barbari, and insulsi terribilesque forent:
Qualis ego, tantae cui vires? nomina cunctis
Imposui, nomen VOX quoque fingo mihi;
Mentis ego interpres, artis cunctaeque Magistra,
Expositrix velox discriminis varij.
Doctrinae radix caelos and tartara ram^i.
Tangunt and fructus mors modo, vita modo;
Me famam Latiumque sagax, me Graecia docta,
Me tenuit primum, sancta Iudaea decus.
Et (Jove propitio) me magna Britannia Romam
Concussit tetram, pandit and inscitiam:
Hoc tantum reliquis, liceat mihi dicere missis:
Non mihi sit rector, qui sibi non dominus.
Epilogus.
VImina non vltravolucris, nec vincta catenam
It canis, and fraenum triste reducit equum.
Men's infausta nimis triplici quae carcere clausa est.
Quid videt vt discat, quid videt vt doceat
En ego protulerim subiecta haec, proxima menti.
Ah, me plus miserum discere vincla vetunt
FINIS.

