A TREATISE OF HVMILITIE COMPOSED BY THE REVEREND Father F. ALFONSO RODRIGVEZ
of the Society of JESUS.

Translated into English.

PRINTED AT ROVEN. 1631.

THE PREFACE OF the Treatise of Humility.
THe fathers of the Primitive Church, are frequent in observing upon the
ancientes both of Greece and Rome, that many of them did excel in most of the
moral virtues, for which they were much rewarded with temporal blessings by
the open hand of almighty God; but that the virtue of humility, was so far
from being possessed and practiced by any of them, as that they had not so
much as any apprehention, nor did they frame any conceit at all thereof, and
therefore has not this virtue, any name at all in either of those ancient, and
learned tongues.

That which the fathers said of those Gentiles, we their Children may in some
sort affirm of these Protestants, for as much as may concern the virtue of
humility. For how soever they are acquainted with the name, yea and with the
nature of it too, by speculation of what is said by us, touching that subject
yet in order to practice and life, the two Poles are not more distant from one
another, then they are from this virtue. For noe man either ever had, or can
ever have humility of will, till first he have humility of the understanding,
and no creature can ever divide himself from the Communion of the holy
Catholic Church, upon presumption that he knows more of God almighties mind
then it, but that this man must be hugely proud. So that the very intrinsique
form of heresy, is directly pride, as on the other side, a man cannot possibly
be a Catholic, but with all, he must infallibly be humble, for as much, at
least, as may concern the understanding part of his mind. Because the very
condition of being a Catholic, implies thus much, that whatsoever natural
repugnances he may chance to find, in believing this or that, he yet gives
himself wholly into the hands of the Church, and is ready rather to loose a
thousand lives, then to credit his own reason, against her rules.

But yet Good Catholics stay not here, as if they were content to do God
homage by their understanding alone; but they seek also to range and reduce
their will to the love and practice of this virtue. And especially this is
endeavored, by such amongst us, as enjoy both the name, and nature of
Religious men. Who as they have received the great honor of being drawn
nearer to his divine Majesty then the rest, so God forbid but they should make
it their business, to correspond with that infinite Goodness and greatenes, which
can never be better done, then by acknowledging their own baseness and weakness.

Of this I present you here with a most lively example. For this Treatise of
humility, is not so properly a book, composed upon that virtue, as the
Meditations, and aspirations, and instructions of a Religious man, who was
breaking and breeding the Nouices committed to his charge, toward the contempt
of the world and the mortification of them selves, by the imitation of our lord
Jesus in that divine virtue, which him self in person came to plant. Now this
you shall find, not to have been done after a kind of Protestant cut; who
(when they take upon them to speak to men of God, and good things) consume
their hours in generallities; scratching only such ears as itch, and not
passing (as a man may say,) beyond the very first skin of the soul. And if
any man esteem me to do them wrong heerin let them affront me by showing
such a Protestant book as this. I mean not that they should show me such a
book of humility, for ought I ever heard, they have never written book of
that virtue; but let them show me any such book of any virtue, where the
difinitio^ of the thing in question, is so clear, where the division is so
exact, where the degrees are so distinct, where the authorities are so
choice, where the examples are so proper, where the considerations and motives
are so conuincing, and, above all, where the address and exercise, and
practice, and examination, and reflection, is so particular, so sweet, and so
strong, and where the way is made so easy, and smooth, for the arriving to
the most laborious iourneys end for flesh and blood, which is to be found in
the whole world.

It is highly glorious to Almighty God, and it helps more and more to
Canonise the holy Catholic Church, when men see that she has Children, who
are so serious, so studious, and so vigorous, as that when they are shutt up
hand to hand with God, and without any other witnesses, then bare walls, they
are acquiring the highest humane perfection for themselves, and imparting it
also to one another, upon the price of whatsoever flesh and blood holds
dear. And for my part I shall be of the Duke of Arcos mind, who wondering (in
those first beginnings of the Society) how it was able to produce such rare
men (whilst yet he used to meet them without those exterior mortifications
and austerities either of habit or diet, wherein other holy orders excel,)
grew able afterward to make a good answer to his own question, when he once
came to see and weigh both these works of F. Alfonso Rodriguez, and many
others, and by means thereof, to consider how they are wont to breed
themselves within doors, and by the use of continual prayer, and the solid
and sincere practice of the most heroical virtues, to make themselves, by the
favor of heaven, to become as so many vnshake^ towers or rocks, against the
proud waves of the whole world, whenever there grows to be question, of the
greatest glory of God, and the Good of man.

And this is most true, but yet it is not all that truth which we must fetch
from thence. But it imports us also to consider, that as Religious men are
most obliged to procure Christian perfection in the highest degree, and
particularly this virtue of humility, in regard of their express vocation,
and of the extraordinary helps and means which they have beyond secular
people, yet noe man who calls himself Christian must hold himself exempt from
the necessity of attending to that virtue, which Christ our lord himself came
to teach, and the possession whereof will carry and conduct men up to heaven,
as the want thereof, did precipitate those rebellious Angels down to hell;
But there is a world of other motives besides this of punishments and rewards
which the discourse ensueing will declare.

A TREATISE OF THE VERTVE OF humility.
Of the excellency of the virtue of Humility, and of the need we have
thereof. CHAPTER I.
DIscite a me quia mitis sum, and humilis cord, and inuenietis requiem
animabus vestris. Learn of me, says Jesus Christ our Savior for I am mild
and humble of heart, and you shall find rest for your souls. Totae vita
Christi in terris per hominem, quem suscipere dignatus est, disciplina morum
fuit, sed praecipue humilitatem suam imitandam proposuit, dicens. Matt. 11.
Discite a me, quia mitis sum and humilis cord. The whole life of Christ our
Lord on earth, was ledd for our instruction, and he was the Master and teacher
of all the virtues, but especially of this of humility, which he desired
cheifely, that we should learn. And this consideration alone, may well serve
to make us understand, both the great excellency of this virtue, and the
great need also which we have thereof; since the son of God himself came
down from heaven to earth, to teach us the practice, and to make himself our
instructour therein; and that, not only by word of mouth, but much more
particularly, by his actions. For indeed his whole life, was an example, and
lively pattern of Humility.

The glorious S. Basil, goes discoursing through the whole life of Christ our
Lord, even from his birth, and he observes and shows, how all his actions
served to teach us this virtue, in most particular manner. He would needs
(says the saint,) be borne of a mother who was poor, in a poor open stable,
and be laid in a manger, and be wrapped in miserable clo^ts; he would needs
be Circumcised like a sinner, and fly into Egypt like a poor weak creature,
and be baptized amongst Publicans and sinners, like one of them. And afterward
in the course of his life, when they had a mind to do him honor, and take him
up for their king, he hidd himself; but when they put dishonor and afronts
upon him, he then presented himself to them. When he was celebrated and
admired by men, yea and even by persons who were possessed with the devil,
he commanded them to hold their peace; but when they thought fit to
reproach and scorn him, he held his peace. And near the end of his life,
that he might leave us this virtue by his last will and Testament, he
confirmed it by that so admirable example of washing his disciples feet, as
also by vndergoeing that so ignominious death of the Cross. S. Bernard
says, Exinaniuit semetipsum, vt prius praestaret exemplo, quod erat docturus
verbo. The son of God abused and diminished himself, by taking our nature
upon him, and he would have his whole life be a pattern of humility so to
teach us by actions, that which he would also teach us by words; A strange
manner of instruction. But why Lord must so high a majesty be abased so Low?
Vt non apponat vltra, magnificare se homo super terram. To the end that from
henceforth, there may not so much as one man be found, who shall once
adventure to be proud and to exalt himself upon the earth. Intollerabilis enim
impudentia est, vt vbi sese exinaniuit maiestas, vermiculus infletur, and
intumescat. It was ever astrainge bouldnes, or rather a kind of madness, for a
man to be proud; but now (says the saint) when the majesty of God has
humbled and abased it self, it is an intolerable shame and an unspeakable
kind of absurdity, that this little wretched worm of man, should have a
mind to be honored and esteemed; That the son of God who is equal to the
father should take the form of a servant upon him, and vouchsafe to be
dishonored and abased, and that I who am but dust and ashes, should procure to
be valued and admired.

With much reason, did the Savior of the world, declare that he is the
master of this virtue of Humility, and that we were to learn it of him, for
neither Plato, nor Socrates, nor Aristotle did ever teach men this virtue. For
when those heathen Philosophers, were treating of those other virtues of
Fortitude, of Temporance, and of Justice, they vere so far of, the while,
from being humble therein, that they pretended even by those very works, and
by all their virtuous actions, to be esteemed, and recommended to posterity. It
is true, that there was a Diogenes and some others like him, who professed to
contemn the world, and to despise themselves, by using mean clothes, and
certain other pouerties and abstinencies; but even in this, they were
extremely proud, and procured even by that means, to be observed and
esteemed, whilst others were despised by them; as was wisely noted by Plato in
Diogenes. For one day, when Plato had invited certain Philosophers, and
amongst them Diogenes to his house, he had his rooms well furnished, and his
carpetts laid, and such other preparations made, as might be fit for such
gests. But as soon as Diogenes entered in, he began to foul those fair
carpetts with his durtie feet, which Plato obseruinge, asked him, what he meant.
Calco Platonis fastum, says Diogenes; I am trampling, says he, upon Platoes
pride. But Plato made him then this good answer, Calcas sed alio fastu
insinuating thereby, that the pride wherewith he trod upon Platos carpetts,
was greater then Platos pride in possessing them.

The Philosophers did never reach to that contempt of themselves, wherein
Christian Humility consists, nay they did not so much as know Humility,
even by name, for this is that virtue which was properly, and only taught by
Christ our Lord. And S. Augustine observes, how that divine sermon made by our
Savior in the Mount, began with this virtue, Beati pauperes spiritu quoniam
ipsorum est regnum caelorum. Blessed are the poor of Spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven. For both S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Gregory, and
other Saints affirm, that by poor in spirit, such as be humble, are
understood. So that the redeemer of the world, beginns his preaching with
this, he continues it with this, and he ends it with this. This was he
teaching us all his life, and this does he desire that we should learn of him;
Discite a me, non mu^dum fabricare, non cuncta visibilia, and inuisibilia
creare, non in ipso mundo mirabilia facere, and mortuos suscitare, sed quonia^
mius sum, and humitis cord. He said not (as S. Augustine observes) Learn of
me not to create heaven and earth, learn of me not to do wonderful things,
and to work miracles, to cure the sick, to cast out devils, and to revive
the dead; but learn of me, to be meek and humble of heart. Potentior est enim
and tutior solidissima humilitas, quam ventosissima celsitudo. Better is the
humble man who serves God, then he who works miracles. That other way is
plain and safe, but this is full of stumbling blocks and dangers.

The necessity which we have of this virtue of Humility is so great, that
without it, a man cannot make one stepp in spiritual life. The glorious S.
Augustine says, Nisi humilitas omnia, quacunque been facimus and praecesserit,
and comi^etur, and consecuta fuerit: iam nobis de aliquo bono facta
gaudentibus, totum extorquet de manu superbia. It is necessary that all our
actions be very well accompanied, and senced by humility, both in the
beginning, in the middle and in the end thereof; for if we be negligent never
so little and suffer vain complacence to enter in, the wind of pride carries
all away. And it will help us little, that the work in it self be very good,
nay rather in good works we have most cause to fear the vice of vaineglorie
and pride. Vitia quippe caesera in peccaus, superbia vera etiam in vecte factis
timenda est, ne ilia quae laudabiliter facta sunt, ipsius laudis cupiditate
amittantur. For other vices have relation to sins, and wicked objects, as
Envy, Luxuriousnes, and Wrath, which carry a kind of ill superscription upon
them, to the end that we may take heed thereof; whereas pride is ever
treading as it were, upon the heels of good works, that so it may destroy
them. Superbia bonis operibus insidiatur, vt pereant. A man went prosperously
sailing with his heart raised up toward heaven, because at the beginning of the
action, he had addressed it to the glory of God, and behold, when suddenly
there comes a wind of vanity and casts him upon a rock, by procuringe to
make him desire to please men, and to be celebrated and esteemed by them,
taking some vain contentment therein, and therewith the whole business sincks.
And so both S. Gregory and S. Bernard say very well. Qui sine humilitate
vertutes congregat, quasi in ventum puluerem portat. He who assembles any
other virtues without humility, is like a man who carries a little dust or
ashes against the wind, in which case the same wind, will be sure to scatter,
and carry it all away.

That Humility is the foundation of all virtue. CHAPTER II.
Saint Cyprian says, Humilitas est sanctitatis fundamentum. S. Hierome, Prima
virtus Christianorum est humilitas; S. Bernard, Humilitas est fundamentum
custosque virtutum. They all say, that humility is the foundation of
sanctity, and of all virtue. And S. Gregory in one place, calls it the mistress
and mother of all virtue; and he says also in another place, that it is the
Root and very of spring of virtue. This metaphor and comparison of the Root,
is very proper, and does very well declare the properties and conditions of
humility. For first S. Gregory says, that as the root sustaines and supports
the flower, and when the Root is plucked up, the flower does instantly dry and
wither, so every virtue whatsoever is instantly lost if it persevere not in the
Root of Humility. But as the Root which lies under ground, and is trampled
and trodden upon, has noe beauty or odor in it, and yet the tree receives
life from thence, just so the humble man is buried, and disesteemed, and
disgraced, and seems to carry noe luster nor brightness in himself, but is
cast a side into a corner, and forgotten, and yet this very thing is that,
which conserues him, and makes him thrive. But with all, as to the end that the
tree may be able to grow and continue, and bear much fruit, it is necessary
that the root lie deep, and how much the more deep it is, and more covered
with earth, so much more fruit will the tree yield, and so much the longer
will it contineue, according to that of the Prophet Esaias, Mi^e^ radicem
deorsum, and faciet fructum sursum, it shall send the root downward, and make
the fruit grow upward; so the fructifying of a soul in all virtue, and the
conseruing it self therein, consists in laying a low root of Humility. How
much the more humble you are, so much the more will you profitt and grow in
virtue and perfection. To conclude, as pride is the beginning and root of all
sin, according to that of the wise man, Initium omnis peccati est superbia;
so the Saints declare, that Humility is the foundation and root of all
virtue.

But some man will say perhaps, how ca^ you affirm, that Humility is the
foundation of all virtue, and of all spiritual building, when commonly we are
taught by spiritual men, that faith is the foundation, according to that of S.
Paul, Fundamentum enim aliud nemo potest ponere, praeter id quod positum est,
Christus Jesus. To this S. Thomas answears very well. Two things are necessary
for the well founding of a house, first it is necessary to open the ground
vell, and cast out all that which is loose, till at length you arrive to that
vhich is firm, that so you may builld afterwand upon it, and vhe^ this is
done, you begin to lay the first stone, which with the rest, then laid is the
principal foundation of the building. After this manner says S. Thomas, do
Humility and faith behave them selves one toward another, in the spiritual
building of virtue Humility is that which opens the soil, and the office
thereof is, to dig deep into the earth, to cast out all that which is loose,
which signifies the weakness of man's force. So that you must not lay your
foundation upon your own strength; for all this is noe better then said; all
this is to be cast out; distrusting your selves; and still you must be digging
on, till you come to the firm stone, and the living rock, which is Christ
our Lord. Petra autem erat Christus. This indeed is the principal foundation;
but yet not with standing, because for the settling of this foundation, there is
need also of that other, humility is also called a foundation; And so he,
who by means of humility, will open the soil well, and dig deep into the
knowledge of himself, and cast out all the saind of his own esteemation, and
confidence in himself; will arrive to that true foundation, which is Christ
our Lord; and this man will raise a good building, which will not be driven
down, though; the winds blow, and the waters beat; because it is founded
upon the firm rock. But on the other side, if he build without humility,
the buildinge will instantly sincke down because it is founded upon saind.

They are not true virtues; but apparent only and false, which are not founded
upon Humility. And so S. Augustine says, that in those Romans, and ancient
Philosophers, there was noe true virtue; not only because they wanted
Charity, (which is the form and gives life and being to all virtue, and
without which there is noe true and perfect virtue) but besides, because they
wanted also the foundation of humility; and in their Fortitude, Temperance,
and Justice, they desired to be esteemed, and to be talked of when they were
dead; and so their virtues were but certain empty things, and without
substance; and indeed they were but shadows, or shows of virtue. And so, as
they were not perfect and true, but only apparent, the Saint says, that God
rewarded the Romans for them with temporal blessings of this life, which are
also blessings but of appearance. If therefore you mean to build up true
virtue in your souls, procure first to lay a deep foundation of ^umilitie
therein. Magnus esse vis, a minimo incipe; cogitas magnam fabricam construere
celsitudinis; de fundame^to prius cogita humilitatis. If you desire, says S.
Augustine, to be truly great, and to erect a high building of virtue in your
hearts, you must open the ground very low; Et quantum quisque vult, and disponit
super imponere molem edificij, qua^to erat maius aedificium, tanto altius fodit
fundamentum. As much more high as a man means to raise his building so much
the lower must he lay his foundation. For there is no high without low; and
after the proportion or rate, that you will dig deep, and lay the foundation
of Humility low; so much the higher will you be able to raise the Tower of
evangelical perfection, which you have begun. S. Thomas of Aquine, amongst
other grave sentences which are remembered to have been his, said thus of
Humility. He who goes on with desire to be honored, he who flies from being
contemned, and if he, is troubled, at it, is far from perfection, though he,
should work wonders: for in fine his virtue, has no foundation.

Wherein it is declared more perticularly, how humility is the foundation of
all the virtues; and this is done by discoursing of the chief of them. CHAPTER
III.
TO the end that it may the better be seen, how true this sentence of the
Saints is, That humility is the foundation of all the virtues, and how
necessary this foundation is for them all, we will bresfely go discoursing
upon the chief of them. And to begin with the Theological virtues, humility
is necessary toward faith.

I omit here to say any thing of Infants, into whom faith is infused in
Baptism, without any proper act of their own; but I will only speak of them
who are already endued with the use of reason. Faith therefore supposes a
submisse and humble understanding; In captiuitatem redigentes omnem
intellectum, in obsequium Christi; subdunig, (as the Apostle S. Paul says)
our understanding, to the obedience of the Faith of Christ our Lord. And so a
proud understanding, gives difficulty and impediment, against the receiving of
the faith; and Christ our redeemer declared as much to the Pharisees in this
manner, Quomodo potestis credere, qui gloriam ab inuicem accipitis, and gloriam
quae a solo Deo est, non quaeritis? How will you be able to believe, who
receive glory from one another, and seek not for that glory, which is of God
alone. And not only is humility necessary for the first receiving of Faith,
but for the preservation also thereof. And it is generally the doctrine of the
Doctors, and Saints, that pride is the beginning of all herises, when a man
esteems his opinion and judgment so much, that he preferes it before the
common voice of the aints, and of the Church; and so he comes to fall upon
heresies. And so the Apostle says, Hoc autem scitote, uuiq do Snouissimis
diebus, instabunt tempora periculosa, and erunt homines seipsos amantes,
cupido, elati, superbi. I give you to understand, that in the latter days,
there will be dangerous times, for men will be great lovers of themselves,
covetous, puffed up, and proud, and he imputes heresies to puffing up and
pride, as S. Augustine declares very well.

The virtue also of hope, is conserved and mainteyned by humility; because the
humble man, finds and feels his necessity, and knows that of himself, he
can do nothing, and so he resorts to God more earnestly, and places all his
hope in him.

Charity also and the love of God, is quickened and kindled by humility;
because the humble man knows, that what soever he has, comes to him from the
hand of God, and that himself is very far from deserving it; and by this
consideration he is much inflamed toward the love of God. Quis est homo quia
magnificas eu^, aut quid apponis erga eum cor tuum? What is man (said the holy
Job) that thou should remember him, and set thy heart upon him, and vouchsafe
him so many benefitts and favors? I to be so wicked toward thee, and thou to
be so good toward me? I to be so earnest in offending thee day by day, and
thou in doing, me favors every hour. This is one of the most principal
motives, whereof Ss. have ever been wout to serve themselves, that so they
might be much inflamed with the love of God. For when they most considered
their own indignity, and misery, they found themselves most obliged to love
God, who was pleased to place his eyes upon so great baseness. Magnificat anima
mea Dominum (said the most sacred Queen of the Angels) quia respexit
humilitatem ancillae suae. My soul does magnify our Lord, because he
vouchsafed to look upon the baseness of his, slave. As for the Charity of men
toward their neighbors, it is easily to be seen, how necessary Humility
is. For one of those things which is most wout to cool, and lessen our love to
our neighbourgs, is to judge of their faults, and to hold them to be full of
imperfectio^s and defects. But the humble man is very far from this, for his
eyes are ever cast in upon his own errors, and he never co^siders any thing
in others but their virtues; and so he houlds al other men to be good, and
himself only to be imperfect, and faulty, and unworthy to live amongst his
brethren. And from hence is wout to grow a great estimation, respect, and
love to them all. Besides, the humble man is not troubled, that all men should
be preferred before him, and that much account is made of them, and to,
himself a love is forgotten; or that things of greater moment, are recommended
to the care of others, and the least and meanest to him. No envy has any place
amonght humble men, for envy springs from pride; and therefore if there be
humility, there will be no envy or contention, or any thing which may weaken a
man's love to his neighbors.

From Humility also groves Patience, which is so necessary to all men in this
life. For the humble man acknowledges his faults and sines and considers
himself to be whorthy of any punishment; and no affliction comes tho him,
which he esteems not to be less, then it should have been, in respect of his
faults; and so he houlds his peace, and knows not how to complain, but
rather says with the Prophet Michaeas, Iram domini portabo, quoniam peccuui I
will suffer willingly that punishment which God shall send me because, I have
sined against him. And so, as the proud man is ever complaining, and still
thinks that men do him wrong, though they do him right, and that they treat
him not as he deserves, so the man who is humble, though indeed you do him
wrong, perceiues it not and judges it to not be such nor does he immagine that
you ever give him any offense, nay rather it seems to him, that you let him
live at great ease and how soever you proceed with him, he is very well
satisfied that you treat him better then he deserves.

Humility is also a mighty means toward Patience. And therefore the
wiseman, aduising him who means to serve Almighty God, to prepare himself to
suffer temptations and disgusts, and to arm himself with Patience, assigns
him for the means thereof, that he should be humble. De prime cor tuum and
sustine. Carry thy heart abased, and then suffer. Omne quod tibi applicitu^
fuerit, accipe, and in dolor sustine. Receive all that in good part which
comes upon thee, though it be very contrary to thy gust, and to thy se^ce; and
endure it though it put thee to pain. But how shall this be done? What kind of
armor is that; which you mean to put upon me, to the end that I may not feel
affliction; or if I feel it, that I may be able to support it? In humilitate
tua patientiam habe. Possess Humility; and so you shall have Patience.

From Humility does also spring, that kind of peace, which is so much
desired by all; and which is so necessary for such as are Religious. So says
Christ our Savior. Discite a me, quia mitis sum and humilis cord, and
inuenietis requiem animabus vestris. Be humble and you shall possess great
peace, both with in your selves, and with your brethren. And as amongst the
proud, there are ever contentions, and disputes and brawles, Inter superbos
(says the wise man) semper iurgia sunt, so amongst such as are humble, there
can be no conte^tion or strife, except only that holy strife and contention,
who may be the inferior and may give all kind of advantage to his fellow;
which was that blessed contention which occurred between S. Paul the Hermit,
and S. Anthony, about, who should first break the bread; one of them
importuning the other to do it, because he was his ghest, and the other him
because he was his elder; and each of them procuring to honor, and prefer his
fellow Theife are good contentions and strifes; which as they grow from true
Humility, and fraternall Charity, so do they also strengthen and conserve the
same.

Let us now pass on to those three virtues, which are proper, and essential
to a Religious man, to which we oblige our selves, by the three vows of
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience. Poverty has so great conjunction and is
so near of kin to Humility, that they seem to be sisters. And so some holy
writers, by that poverty of Spirit, which Christ our Lord put for the first
of the Beatitudes, understand Humility, and others voluntary poverty, which
is the fame that Religious men profess. And it is necessary, that Poverty be
ever accompanied by Humility, for the one without the others is dangerous. A
spirit of vaineglory, and pride is easily derived from base clothing, and
from pride uses to grow a contempt of others. And for this reason, S. Augustine
declined the use of such apparel, as was extraordinary lyneane, or base; and
took care that his Religious should wear decent and civil Clothes, the
better to fly from that inconvenience. Humility is also necessary for us, to
the end that we may not desire to be too well accommodated, and that we may
not be too careful to want nothing; but rather that we may content our
selves, with what soever they give us, yea and with the very worst, since we
are poor, and profess Poverty.

That Humility is necessary for the preserving of Chastity, we have many
examples, in the histories of the fathers of the Desert, of ugly and
abominable falls of men, who had already spent many of their years, in a
solitary and penetentiall life, all which proceeded from want of Humility,
and from confiding and presuming on them selves; which God is wont to punish,
by permitting men to fall into those other sins. Humility is also, so
great an ornament to Chastity, and poverty, that S. Bernard says, sine
Humilitate, audeo dicere, nec virginitas Mariae, deo placuisset. I dare
adue^turi to say, that even the virginity it selte, of our B. Lady, would not
have been pleasing to God, without Humility.

Let us now come to the virtue of Obedience wherein our H. Father requires as
of the Society to excel. A clear truth it is, that both he cannot be truly
obedient, who is not humble, and that he who is humble, must meedes be
obedient. The humble man, may be commanded to do any thing; but so may not
he, who is not humble. The humble man frames no contrary judgments, but
co^formes himself in all things to his Superior; and not only in the work,
but even ni the will, and understanding also; nor makes he any contradiction,
or resistance.

If now we will comme to speak of Prayer upon which the very life of a
Religious and spiritual man relyes, if it be not accompanined with Humility,
it is of no worth; Whereas Prayer with Humility pierces heaven. Oration
humilianus se nubes penetrabit, and donec propinquet, non consolabitur, and non
discedet, donec altissimus aspiciat. The Prayer of him who humbles himself,
does penetrate heaven, says the wise man; and he will not give over till he
obtain all that which he desires, at the hands of God. That holy and humble
Judith, being shutt up in her Oratory, cladd with Sackcloath, and covered with
ashes and prostrate upon the earth, cries out in these wores, Humilium, and
mansuetorum, semper tibi placuit deprecatio. The Prayer of the humble, and
meek of heart was ever pleasing to thee O Lord. Respexit in orationem humilium,
and non spreuit precem eorum. God beheld the prayer of the humble, and
desprised not their petitions. Ne auertatur humilis factus confusus. Never
think that the humble man shall be driven a way or that he shall depart out
of countenance; he shall obtain what he asks, God will here his prayer. Do
but consider, how highly that humble prayer of the Publican of the Gospel
pleased God; he who presumed not so much, as to list up his eyes to heaven, or
to approach the Altar; but disposing himself far of, into a corner of the
Temple, and knockinge his breast with humble acknowledgment of himself; he
said, O Lord have mercy upon me for I am a greiuous sinner. Dico vobis,
descendit hic iustificatus in domum suam ab illo. I tell you of a truth (says
Christ our Redeemer) that this man went justified out of the Temple, and that
proud Pharisie, who held himself for a Saint, went condemned. In this very
manner, might we go discoursing of the rest of the virtues; and therefore if
you desire to go the next way, for the hettinge of them all, and to learn a
short and compendious document, for the speedy obteyning of perfection, this is
it. Be humble.

Of the particular necessity which they have of this virtue, who profess to
procure the salvation of their neighbors sowles. CHAPTER IIII.
QVanto maiores humilia te in omnibus; and coram Deo inuenies gratiam. How much
thou art greater, so thou humble thy self (says the wise man) so much the
more, and thou shall find grace in the sight of God. We who make profession,
to gain sowles to God, have the office of Grandes. For we may say (for our
confusion) that God has called us to a very high state; sinc our institute is
to sewe the holy Church, in certain ministeries which are very eminent and
high, to which God chose the Apostles; namely the preaching of the Gospel,
the administration of the Sacraments, and the dispensation of his most precious
blood so that we may say vith Saint Paul, dedit nobis ministerium
reconciliationis. He calls the preaching of the Gospel, the dispensation of
the Sacraments, by which, grace is communicated, the ministry of
Reconciliation. Et posuit in nobis verbum reconciliationis; pro Christo ergo
Legatione fungimur; God has made us his servants, his Ambassadors, as his
Apostles were Legates of that chief Bishop Jesus Christ: tongues and
instruments of the holy Ghost. Tanquam Deo exhortante per nos. Our Lord is
pleased to speak to souls by our tongues by these tongues of flesh will our
lord move the hearts of men for this, have we there fore more need then others,
of the virtue of Humility: and that upon twoe reasons first, because by how
much the more high our institute and vocation is, so much more hazard shall we
run, and so much greater will be the combatte of vanity and pride. The highest
hills (as S. Jerome says) are assaulted by the stiffest winds We are
employed in very high ministeries, and for this are we respected and esteemed
over the world. We are held to be Saints, and even for other Apostles upon
earth, and that all our conversation is sanctity, and that our study is to make
them also Saints. Whith whom we co^uerse: Here is need of a great
foundation of Humility, that so high a building as this, may not be driven
down to the ground. We had need have great strength of virtue, that we
may be able to bear the weight of honor, whith all the circumstances thereof.
A hard task it is, to walk in the midst of honors, and that yet noe part
thereof should fasten it self to the heart. It is not every bodies case, to
have a head that can be safe, so high. O how many have grown giddy and fallne
down from that high state, wherein they were, for want of the foundation of
Humility? how many who seemed Zagles, sowringe up in the exercise of several
virtues, have through pride, become as blind as batts. That Moncke wrought
Miracles, of whom it is written in the life of S. Pachomius, and Palemon, that
he walked upon burning coals, without hurting himself; but he grow proud
upon that very occasion, and he though a contemptuoustly of others; and said
(meaning of himself) that he was a Saint, who could walk upon coals, without
burning himself which of you said he can do so much? Saint Palemon reproved
him for this, perceiving that it grew in him from pride; and at length he came
to fall miserably, and to end ill. The holy Scripture and the histories of
Saints lives, are full of such examples as this.

For this do we therefore stand in particular need to be very well grounded
in this virtue; for if we be not, we shall run great hazard of being giddy,
and of falling into the sin of pride; yea and that the greatest of all others
which is spiritual pride. S. Bonauenture declaring this, says, That there are
towe kinds of pride; one which concerns temporal things, and this is called
carnal pride; and another which concerns things spiritual, and this is
called spiritual pride; and he says that this second, is a greater pride, and
a greater sin then the former. The reason hereof is clear. For, as S.
Bonauenture says the proud man is a thief, and committs robbery; for he runs
away with the goods of another, against the will of the owner; by having stolen
the honor and glory which is proper to God, and which he will not give away but
reserve to himself. Gloria meam alteri non dabo, says he by the Prophet Esaias;
and this, as I was saying, Does the proud man steal from God, and he runs away
with it, and applies it to himself. Now when a man grows proud of any
natural advantage, as of nobility, of agilitie, and strength of body, of
quicknes of understanding, of learning, or the like, this man is a robber, but
yet the thest is not so great. For though it be true, that all these
blessings are of God, they are yet but as the chaff of his house; but he who
shall grow proud of his spiritual gifts, as namely of sa^ctity, or of the
fruit which is gathered by gayni^g souls, this is a great thief, a famous
thief, a robber of the honor of God, and who steals those jewels which he
esteems the most rith, and of the greatest price and value, and which indeed
were set at so high a rate, that he thought his own blood and life, well
employed upon the purchose thereof. For this reason, the B. S. Francis was full
of care and fear least he should fall into pride, and he was wont to say thus
to God. O Lord if thou give me any thing, keep it for me who dare not trust
my self with it, for I am noe better then a thief, and am still running away
with thy goods. And now let us also, walk on with the same fear, since we
have much more reason to be afraid, and are fare from being so humble as S.
Fracis was. Let us not fall into his so dangerous pride; let us not run
away with those goods of God, which he has put with so much confidence into
our hands. Let noe part thereof stick to us, let us attribute nothing to
our selves, but return the whole, back to God.

It was not without great mystery, that Christ our Savior when he appeared to
his Disciples, upon the day of his glorious Ascension, reproou'd them first for
their incredulity, and hardness of heart, and commanded them afterward, to go
and preach the Gospel, we the whole world, and gave them power to work many
and mighty miracles. For he gives us hereby to understand, that he who is to
be exalted, to the doenig of great things, has need to be humbled first, and
to be abased in himself, and to have a true knowledge of his own frailties
and miseries, that so, though afterward he come to fly above the heavens, and
to woke miracles, he may yet remain still intyre, in the knowledge of
himself, and stick fast to the understanding of his own baseness, without
attributing any other thing to him self, then unworthiness. Theodoret, to his
purpose, notes that God resolving to choose Moses, for the Kaptaine, and
conductour of his people, and to work, by his means, such wondrous and
prodigious things, as he resolved to let the world so, thought fit, for the
cause aforesaid, that first that very hand, wherewith he was to deride the read
sea, and effect of other things so very strange, being first put into his
bosom, should be then drawn forth, and seen by himself, to be full of
Leprosy.

A second reason, for which we stand in more particular necessity of
Humility, is to the and that we may gather fruit, in those very ministeries
wtherein we are employed. So that Humility is necessary for us, not only in
regard of our own improuement least otherwise we should grow vain and proud,
and so cast away our selves; but besides, for the gayning of our neighbors,
and the bringing forth fruit in their souls. One of the most principal
means toward thi^ end, is Humility, and that we distrust our selves, and
that we vely no^ upon our own industry, or prudence, or other parts, but that
we place all our confidence in God, and ascribe and refer all to him,
according to that of the wiseman; Habe fid^ciam in Domino, ex toto cord tuo,
and ne inuitaris prudentiae tuae. Put your confidence in God with your whole
heart and rely not upon your own prudence. And the reason here of is (as afterw
and I shall declare more at large) because, when, through distrust of our
selves, we place all our confidence in God, we ascribe it all to him, and put
the whole business to his account; whereby we oblige him much, to take care
thereof. O Lord dispatch thine own business, the conversion of soul is thine,
and not ours; alas what pouer can we have to save souls? But non when we are
confident in the means we use, and in the discourses which we are able to
make, we bring our selves to be parties to the business, and attribut much to
our selves, and all that do we take from Almighty God. They are like twoe
balances: for look how much the one rises and so much, the other will be suer
to fall; as much as we attribut to our selves, so much we take from God, and
run away with the glory and honor which is only his; and thus he comes to
permit, that noe effect is wrought. And I pray God, that this be not some
times the cause, why we do our neighbors noe more good.

We read in the life of our B. Father Ignatius, that by certain discourses of
the Christian Doctrine which he made some times in Rome, with plain, and rude,
and improper words, (for he was them nothing skillful in the Italian tongue) he
yet wrough so great fruit in souls, that upon the end of his speech, his
auditors would have their hearts al^ wounded, and came with such sighs, and
sobbes, and tears, to the feet of a Ghostly Father, that through excess of
greiuing and weeping they could hardly speak. And this grew, because he put
noe trust in his own words, but only in that Spirit by which he spoke. Non
in persuasibilibus humanae sapientiae verbis, sed i^ ostentione spiritus, and
virtutis. Not in the persuading words of humanae wisdom, but in the
manifestation of Spirit and truth; as S. Paul says. He was distrustful of
himself, and placed all his co^fidente in God and so God gave strength and
spirit to those inproper and rude words of his which seemed even to dart
burning flames, into the hearts of his hearers. And now I know not, whether the
reason why we produce not at this day, so great fruit, be not because we
stick much closer to the opinion of our own prudence; and because we rest,
and rely much upon our own means of perswation, and our learning, and
discourse, and our polite and elegant manner of declaring our minds, and we go
gustinge and delighting our selves much with our selves. O vell then, says
God, when you conceive that you have said the best things, and delivered the
most conuincing reasons, and remain content and jolly, with conceit that you
have done great matters, you shall then effect least of all. And that shall be
fulfilled in you, which the Prophet O^e said, Da eis Domine; quid dabis eis? Da
eis vuluam sine liberis, and vbera arentia. I will take order, that thou shall
be a barren mother, and that thou shall have noe more thereof but the name. You
shall be such, or such a Father, and such a Preacher you shall be called; but
you shall remain, as I said, with the only name, and you shall have noe
spiritual Children. I will give you dry breasts, such as noe Child shall hang
upon; nor shall any thing stick by the^ which thou say; for this does he
deserve, who will needs usurp the good of God, and attribute that to
himself, which is proper and only due, to his divine Majesty.

I say not, but that what soever men shall preach, must be very well studied
and considered; but yet this is not all; for it must also be very well wept
upon, and very well recommended to God; an^ when you shall have made your hea^
ache with studying, it, and ruminating upon it, you must say, Serui inutiles
sumu^ quod debuimus facere, secimus. We have b^ done what we ought, and we are
vnprofitab^^ servants, what am I able to effect? I hau^ made a little noise of
words, like a peec^ which shotes powder without a bulett, but if the heart be
wounded, it i^ thou, O Lord, who must do it. Cor reg^ in manu Domini,
quocunque voluerit inclin^ uit illud. The kings heart is in Gods hand, and he
inclines it to what soever he will. It is tho^ o Lord who art to move and wound
the heart, Alas, what are we able to do t^ them? What proportion can our word^
and all our human means carry, to a^ end so high, and so supernatural, as
it is to convert souls? No such matter. But how comes it then to pass, that
we are so vain, and so very well pleased with our selves, when we think some
good is done, and that our business succeedes well; as if we were the men who
had done the deed? Nunquid gloriabitur sicuris, contra eum qui secat in ea,
aut exaltabitur serra contra eum a quo trahitur? Shall peradventure (says the
Prophet Esaias to God) the hatchet or the saw, bragg against him who uses it, and
works with it, and say, I am he who have cut, and who have sawed that word?
Quomodo si etenetur virga contra eleuantem se, and exaltetur baculus, qui
vtique lignum est. This were, as if a Cudgel should look bigg and admire it
self, because a man lifts it up, whereas the thing in it self is but wood,
which can not once stir if men stir it not. Now we are just thus, in respect
of any spiritual and supernatural end of the conversion of souls. We are
like so many wands, who cannot once stir, if God stir us not. And therefore
we must ascribe all to him, as having nothing to bragg of, in our selves.

God does so much esteem that we rely not upon our own strength, or human
diligence, and that we should take nothing to our selves, but ascribe all to
him, and give him the glory of all, that S. Paul says, that for this reason,
Christ our Lord, would not make choice, of eloquent and learned men, for the
conversion of the world, by the preaching of the Gospel, but of poor
fishermen, who were ignorant, and rude. Quae stult^ sunt mundi, elegit Deus vt
confundat sapientes, and infirma mundi elegit Deus, and ea qu^ non sunt, vt ea
quae sunt, destrueret. God mad^ choice of ignorant, and gross people, to
confound the wise of the world; he chose the poor^ and weak, to confound the
mighty and strong, he chose the mean and base, who seemed to be nothing in
the eyes of flesh and blood, to subdue kings and Emperors, and all the Grandes
of the earth. But know you why says S. Paul? Vt non glorietur omnis caro in
co^spectu eius, sed que^ admodum scriptu^ est, qui gloriatur in Domino
glorietur. To the end tha^ man may not go bragging in the sight of God nor
take occasion of ascribing any thing to himself; but give all the glory of all
to God. If the Preachers of the Gospel, were ver^ rich and powerful, and
went with great troops, and strong hand to preach Gods word over the world,
they might perhaps impute men's conversion to the fooce of their arms. If God
had chosen the great learned men, and the most excellent Orators of the world,
who by their learning and eloquence, might convince the Philosophers, a man
might have attributed the conversion of man kind to curiosity of speech, and
subtlety of arguments, in diminution of the Credit and reputation of the
virtue and power of Christ our Lord. But it must not be after this manner,
says S. Paul, vt non euacuetur Crux Christi. God was not pleased, that this
great business should be carried by eloquence of speech, or human wisdom,
least the estimation of the power, and efficacy of the Cross, and passion of
Christ our Lord, should suffer prejudice thereby. S. Augustine says, Dominus
noster Jesus Christus, volens superborum frangere ceruices, non quasiuit per
oratorem, piscatorem; sed per piscatorem, lucratus est Imperatorem. Our Lord
Jesus Christ, resolving to humble the necks of the proud, did not, by means of
Orators, gain fishermen; but by means of fishermen gained both Orators and
Emperors. Magnus Cyprianus Orator, sed prius Petrus piscator, per quem postea
crederet, non solum Orator, sed and Imperator. Cyprian was a great Orator, but
S. Peter the fisherman was before him; by means of whom, was converted, not
only the Orator but even the Emperor.

The holy Scripture is full of examples, to show that God is wont to choose
weak means and instruments, for the doing of mighty things; to teach us
this truth, and to the end that it might remanie deeply fixed in our hearts,
that we have nothing, whereof to glory, or to ascribe to our selves; but
absolutely all, to God. This are we also taught, by that illustrious victory
of Judith which she being a weak woeman obtained against an army of above a
hundred and forty thousand men. This are we also taught, by that of the poor
little Sheapheard David, who being but a boy, and with no other weapon but his
sling, bett down that Giant Golias and triumphed over the Philistians. Vt
sciat omnis terra quia est Deus in Israel, and nouerit vniuersa Ecclesia haec,
quia non in gladio, nec in hasta saluat Dominus; ipsius enim est bellum. To the
end that the whole world (says he) may know that there is a God in Israel,
and that all men may understand, that God has noe need either of sword, or
lance, for the obteyning of victory (for battles in fine are his, and victory
is his) and that men may, be sure of this, he gives it, when he will, without
arms.

This was also the mystery of Gedeon, who had drawn twoe and thirty
thousand men together against the Madianits, who were more then a hundred and
thirty thousand men and God said thus to him. Multus tecum est populus, nec
tradetur Madian in manus eius. Gedeon thou have great store of people with
thee, but Madian shall not be delivered up into thy hands. Consider what a
strange discourse of God this is. Thou shall not overcome, because thou have
much people with thee. If he had said thou caust not overcome them, because
they are so many, and thou have so few; it seems that the discourse had been
rational. But you are deceived, and understand not the business. This had
been a good reason for men to allege, but that other was proper to God alone.
You cannot overcome, says God, because you are many. But why so? Ne glorietur
contra me Israel, and dicat meis vtribus liberatus sum. To the end that
Israel may not glorify it self against me, and so steal the victory from
me, and become vain and proud as conceiving that it was conquered by the
strength thereof. God carried the matter so, as that there only remained
three hundred me^ with Gedeon, and commanded that he should then present
battle to the enemy; and with them he gave Gedeon the victory. Yea and they
had not so much as need to put themselves in arms, or to take their swords
into their hands; but with the only sound of the trumpetts which they carried
in one of their hands, and with the noise of breaking certain potts, and with
the brightness of the flaming torches which they carried in the other, God
struck the enemy with such a terror, and amazement, that they over whelmed
and killed one another, and the rest put themselves to flight, as thinking that
the whole world was cominge upon them. Then, the others could not say, that
they had overcome by their own strength; and this was that which God desired.
Namely that they might be forced to acknowledge.

If then, even in temporal and humanie things, wherein our own diligences and
means, carry some kind of proportion toward the end, as our arms and forces
do, toward the obteyning of victory; God will not yet permit, that we
attribute any thing to our selves, but that we must ascribe the victory of a
battle, and indeed the good success of all affairs to him; If even in
natural things, neither he who plants, nor he who waters is any thing; and it
is not the gardner who can make any plant grow, nor make any tree give fruit,
but only God, what shall we say of spiritual and supernatural things, of the
Conversion of sowles, of a man's own profitt and increase in virtue, wherein
our means, endeavors and diligences, remain so short, and so far
behind, as that they carry no proportion at all, with so high an end? The
Apostle S. Paul says itaque, neque qui plantat aliquid, neque quirigat, sed
qui incrementum dat Deus. God only is he who can give increase, and
spiritual fruit. God only is he, who can strike the hearts of men with
amazement, and mighty fear. God only is he, who can make men abhor
sin, and forsake wickedness of life. And as for us, we can only make a little
noise with the trumpett of the Gospel, and if we shall break these earthen
potts of our bodies with mortification, and if men may be able to see the light
of a very exemplar life shine in us, we shall indeed have done our parts, but
yet still it is only God, who must give us the victory.

Let us gather, and draw two things from hence, that so we may exercise our
functions with much comfort, and with the profitt both of our selves, and our
neighbors. The first, is that, whereof we have already spoken, to distrust our
selves, to place all our confidence in God, and to attribute the whole fruit,
and good success of all things to him. S. Chrysostom says. Nolimus igitur
extolle, sed and nos dicamus inutiles, vt vtiles efficiamur. Let us nos wax
proud, but let us confess our selves to be unprofitable that so we may grow
to be profitable and useful. And S. Ambrose says, If you will produce much
fruit amongst your neighbors, observe the rule which we are taught by the
Apostle S Peter. Si quis loquitur, quasi sermones Dei, si quis ministrat
tanquam ex virtute quam administrat Deus vt in omnibus honorificetur Deus, per
Iesum Christum, cui est gloria, and mperium, in secula seculorum, Amen. He
who speaks, let him make account, that God put those words into his mouth,
he who works, let him make account that it is God who w rks by him, and let
him give the honor and glory of it all to him. Let us not ascribe any thing to
our selves nor run away with strange conceit, nor take any vain contentment
in the act.

The second thing which we are to fetch from hence, is that we be not
difaminated or dejected, when we consider our own wretchedness, and misery. Of
this we have also great need. For who, observing himself to be called to
so high an institute, and to so supernatural an end, as it is to convert
souls; to draw them out of sin, out of heresies, out of infidelity; who I
say considering this, will not fainte under the thought, and say Jesus how a
great disproportion is this? Such an employment, fitts not well with me, who
am the most needy and miserable creature of all others? But yet in this, you
are deceived, for even for this very reason, this enterprise is fit for you.
Moses could not believe, that he was ever to perform so great a work, as to
draw the people of Israel out of the Captivity of Egypt, and he excused
himself thus to God who was desirous to send him. Quis sum ego, vt vadam ad
Pharaonem, and educam filios Israel de Aegipto? What am I, that I should go
treat with the king and procure him to let the people of Israel depart out
of Egypt? Obsecio Domine, mittequem inissurus es. Send him o Lord, whom you
are to send; for as for me I am a stammerer, and unfit for the employment.
This is tha^ (says God) which serves my turn. Ego ero in ore tuo; docebo te
quid loquaris. It is not thou who shall do it. I will be with thee, and I w ll
teach thee what thou art to say. The same happened also to the Prophet Jeremy,
whom God sent to preach to the world; but he began to excuse himself thus. A.
A. A. Domine Deus, ecce nescio loqui, quia puer ego sum. A. A. A. Do you not
see O Lord that I can hardly pronounce my words but am a very Child; and how
then w^ll you have me undertake so great an enterprise as this? Even for this
very reason, he will use thee; and thou art just the man he seeks. And perhaps
if thou were endued with many parts, God would not have chosen thee to this
end; but now thou shall have noe color, to steal the praise, and attribute
any thing to thy self; and by such weak instruments, is he desirous to do
great things.

The holy Evangelists recounte, that the Apostles cominge from preaching; and
Christ our Lord observing the fruit which they had gathered, and the
wonderful things which they had wrought, did highly rejoice in the holy Ghost,
and gave great thanks and glorified his eternal father. In illa hora exaltauit
Spiritu sancto, and dixit, Confiteor tibi Pater, Domine caeli and terrae, quod
abscondisti haec a sapientibus, and prudentibus, and reuelasti ea paruulis; ita
pater, quoniam sic fuit placitum ante te. I give thee thanks, o eternal
father, lord of heaven and earth for that thou have hidden these things, from
the wise and prudent of the world, and have revealed, and communicated them to
thy little ones; and by their means do work so great wonders. Blessed,
and praised be thou O Lord, for ever because thou have bin pleased to do thus.
O happy little ones, happy humble souls, for these are they whom God exalts,
and by whom he works wonders, and whom he takes for his instruments, in
doenig great things, in working great conuersions, and gathering great fruit
of souls. Therefore let noe man be discouraged or dismayed. Nolite timere
pusillis grex, quia complacuit patri vestro, dare verbis regnum. Be not afraid
little flock, be not di^aminated, or put out of heart, O thou little Society of
Jesus, because thou see thy self very little, and the least of all others;
for it has been pleasing to your heavenly father, to give you power over the
hearts and sowles of men. I will be with you (said Christ our Savior) to our
father Ignatius, when he appeared to him, as he was grenig to Room. Ego vobis
Romae propitius ero. I will assist you, I will be with you. And by occation of
this miracle, and admirable apparition, the Title and name of Society of
Jesus, was given to, our Order. To the end we may understand, that we are not
called to the Society and Order of Ignatius but to the Society of Jesus; and
that we may hold for certain, that Jesus will ever be in our succor, as
himself promised to our father, and that we shall ever have him for our
conductour and Captain, and therefore let us not grow weary, or be discouraged
in this so great affair of helping sowles, to which God has called us.

Of the first degree of humility, which is for a man to think meanly of
himself. CHAPTER V.
SAint Laurentius Iustinianus says, that noe man knows well, what Humility
is, but he who has received the gift of being humble, from God. It is really
a very hard thing to be known. A man, says this Saint, deceiues himself in
nothing more, then in thinking that he knows what true Humility is. Do you
think it consists in saynig, I am a miserable sinful creature, I am proud?
etc. If it consisted in this, the thing were easy enough, and we should all be
humble, for we all go saynig of our selves, that we are this, and w^e are
that; and I pray God that we may all speak as we think, and that we may not
say it with the mouth alone, and by way of complement. Do you think that
Humility consists, in wearing poor and mean clothes, or in employing our
selves about abject and contemptible things? It consists not in this, for
herein may be much pride, and a man may desire to be much esteemed, and
valewed even for this, and to hold himself to be better, and more humble then
others, which is the heigtht of pride. True it is, that these exterior things
do help toward true Humility if they be used as they ought, (whereof I
shall say more afterward) but yet in fine, Humility does not consist in this
S. Jerome says, Multi humilitatis vmbram, veritatem pauci sectantur. Many
follow the appearance, and shadow of Humility, An easy thing it is, to carry the
head bowed down, the eyes low, the speech submisse and soft, to sigh often,
and at every word to be calling themselves miserable, and sinful creatures;
but yet, if you touch these very men with any little word, though it be but
very lightly, you shall instantly be able to see how far they are from true
Humility. Auferantur omnia figmenta verborum, cessent simulati gestus, verum
humilem patientia ostendit. Let all feigned words be laid a side; away with
hypocrisies, and exterior shows, for the true humble man (says S. Jerome) is
showed by his sufferance, and Patience; This is that touchstone, whereby true
Humility is discerned.

S. Bernard descends more particularly to declare, wherein this virtue consists,
and gives us this definition thereof. Humilitas est virtus, qua homo, verissoma
sui agnitione, sibi ipsi vilescit. Humility is a virtue, whereby a man, most
truly discerning and observing his own defects, and miseries, houlds himself
in small account. Humility consists not in exterior things, or words, but in
the very root of the heart, in a man's thinking most basely of himself, and
both in holding himself, and in desiring to be held by others, in very mean
accounte; and so, as that this must rise, out of a most profound knowledge of
himself.

To declare, and as it were anatomise this truth, the Saints set down many
degrees of Humility. The B. S. Bennet, whom S. Thomas, and other Saints
follow, assign twelve degrees of this virtue. S. Anselme speaks of seven; S.
Bonauenture reduces them to three; and we will now follow this last, both for
breuities sake, and to the end that restrayning this doctrine to fewer points,
we may the more easily keep them before our eyes, and so procure to put them
in execution. The first degree therefore of Humility (says S. Bonauenture)
is, that a man think meanly of himself, and have himself in small,
account, and the necessary and only means to this, is the knowledge of a man's
self. These two things be they, which the difinition of Humility assigned by
S. Bernard comprehends, and so it only reaches to the first degree. Namely
that Humility, is a virtue, whereby a man houlds himself in mean accounte.

This is then the first, and this says S. Bernard is wrought in man, by his
having a true knowledge of himself, and of his miseries and defects. For this
cause, some are wont to put the knowledge of a man's self, for the first degree
of Humility, and they do it with great reason. But yet, for as much as we
reduce all the degrees to three, with S. Bonauenture, we put for the first
degree, the houlding of a man's self in small accounte, and we put the
knowledge of a man's self, for the necessary means, whereby to attain this
degree of Humility, but yet in substance, all is one. We all agree in this,
that the knowledge of a man's self, is the beginning, and foundation whereby
Humility, is to be obtained, and the thinking of our selves as we deserve. For
how can we think of a man as he deserves, if we know him not. This cannot be.
It is therefore necessary, first that we know what any man is, and then we may
esteem or honor him more or less, according to what we know of him. So that
still you must first know what you are, and afterward according to what you
are, you may esteem your selves; and you shall have good leave to do so, for
if you esteem your selves for what you are, you will be very humble; for you
will esteem your selves very little; but if you esteem your selves more then
you deserve, that will be pride. S. Isidore says Superbus dictus est, quia
super vult videre quam est. Therefore is a man called proud, because he houlds
himself, and desires to be held by others, for more then he is. And this is
one of the reasons, which some assign, why God loves Humility so much,
because he is a great lover of truth, and Humility is truth; and pride, is a
deceit and a lie, for you are not that which you think of your selves, and
which you desire that others should think you to be. If therefore you resolve
to walk in truth, and in Humility, esteem your selves for what you are. Me
thinks I ask noe great matter of you, in desiring that you will esteem your
selves for what you are, and not for what you are not. For it is a very
unreasonable thing for any man to esteem himself for more then he is. And it
would not only be a great deceit, but a great danger with all, for any man
to be deceived in himself, esteeming himself for other, then indeed he is.

Of the knowledge of a man's self, which is the root, and the necessary and
only means, for the obteyninge of Humility. CHAPTER VI.
LEt us begin to sound, and digg deep into our selves, and into the knowledge
of our weakness and misery, that so we may discover this most rich treasure.
Dragma perijs (says S. Jerome) and tamen inuenitur in stercore. In the very
dunge of your baseness, and of your infirmities, and sins, you shall find that
precious pearl of Humility. Let us begin with our corporal being, and let
that, be the first pressing of the spade, as S. Bernard says. Ista tria semper
in mente habeas, quid fuisti, quid es, quid eris. Set these things ever before
thine eyes, what thou were, what thou art and what thou art to be. Quid fuisti,
quid sperna foetidum? quid es, quia vas stercorun? quid eris, quia esca
veruium? Have ever before thine eyes, what then wast before thou were
ingendered which was, a certain thing so stinking, and so filthy, as that we
may not give it the true name. What art thou now? Thou art a vessel full of
dunge. What art thou to be shortly, but the food of worms? We have here,
matter enough to meditate upon, and to digg into. Pope Innocentius says very
well. O vitis conditionis humanae indignitas; O indigna vilitatis humanae
conditio. Herbas and arbores inuestiga; illae de se producunt flores, and
f^ondes, and fructus; and tu de te, lendes, and pediculos, and lumbricos. O
base and vile condition of humane nature. Look upon the trees, and plants, and
thou shall find that they produce beautiful leaves and flowers, and fruits,
but man produces out of himself nitts, lice, and worms. Illae de se effundunt
olium, vinum, and balsamum; and in de te, sputum, vrniam and stercus. Illae de
se spirant suauitatis odorem, and tu de te, reddis abominationem faetoris. The
plants and trees yield out of themselves, oil, Balsamum, and wine, and odours
also of much sweetenes; and man vtters a thousand vncleanesses, of so
abominable savor, as makes ones stomach turn to think of it, and much more
to name it. But in fine, Quali arbor talis fructus, non enim potest arbor mala,
bonos fructus facere. Such as the tree is such is the fruit like to be; for an
ill tree can bear noe good fruit.

Verily, the Saints do with much reason, and with great propriety, compare
the body of man, to a dunghill, over cast with snow; which on the out side
appears beautiful and fair, but with in, is full of vglynes and uncleanness.
The Blessed S. Bernard said, si diligenter consideres, quid per os, and nares,
caeterosque corporis meatus egrediatur, vilius sterquilinium, nunquam vidisti.
If you put your selves to consider what you went by your eyes, your ears, your
mouth, your nostrills, and the other sincks of the body, there is not in the
whole world, any other so filthy dunghill, nor which vtters such abomination
as this. O how well said the holy Job? What is man but rottenness it self,
and a very fountain of worms Putredini dixi, pater meus es matter inea, and si
ror mea vermibus. I have said to rottenness thou art my father, and to the
worms I hau^ said, you are my mother, and my bretherin^ Such a thing as this
is man, a very running stream of rottenness, and a wid^ sack, full of
worms. Well then, of wha^ shall we now be proud? Quid superb^ terra and
cinis? Of what will dust and ashe^ take occation to bragg? At least from hence
we shall be able to discover, no color for being proud; but enough, for
being humble, and to despise our selves. And therefore S. Gregory says, Custos
humilitatis est recordatio propriae faedi atis. It will help us to conserve
Humility, it we renember our own deformity. It will be kept, very safe under
these ashes.

Let us pass yet a little further on, and digg yet deeper, and press the
spade yet lower into the ground. Consider what you were, before God created
you, and you shall find that you were just nothing, and that you could never
have been delivered out of that dark Abisse of being nothing, if God, through
his great mercy, and goodness, had not taken you out from thence, and placed you
amongst his creatures, giving you that real, and true being which you now
enjoy. So that, for as much as is on our parts, we are nothing, and for our
parts we are to hold our selves but equal to those things which are not, and
we must ascribe to God, that wauntage which now we have above them. This is
that which S. Paul says. Si quis existimat se aliquid esse, cum nihil sit,
ipse se seducit. If any man think, that he is any thing, he is deceived; for
of himself he is nothing. We have here discovered a great deep mine,
whereby to enrich, our selves with Humility.

Yea and there is yet more in this; For even now after we are created, and have
received our being, it is not we, who hold it, and who can conteyne it in our
selves. It is not, as when the architect, has built a house, which sustaines
it self when he has left it, without needing him any more, who made it. It
is not so in our case; but now after we are created, we have still as great
need o^ God, in every moment of our lives, to the end that we may not loose
the being which we have already, as we had whilst we were nothing, that we
might grow to be. He is ever susteyning o^ holding us up, whith his hand of
power that so we may not again fall down into that profound pit of being
nothing; out of which he took us before* And so says David Tu formasti me,
and posuisti super me manum tuam. Thou o Lord did frame me, and thou did
place thy hand upon me; and this hand of thine o Lord, holds me sti^^ fast on
foot, and conserues me, that so I man not again return to my former
nothing. W^ are ever so depending, and so hanging upon this hand fast ost God,
that if once this should fail us, and that he should take of that hand, but
for any one moment of our lives, in the same very moment we were dispatched and
we should loose our being and so return to our nothing, as when the sun is
once hidden the earth is dark.

For this reason says the holy Scripture, Omnes gentes quasi non sint sic sunt
coram eo, and quasi nihilum, and inane reputati sunt ei. All Nations in the
sight of God, are as if they were not, and as nothing; and they are mere
emptiness it self before him. This is that which we all are saying every
minute, namely that we are nothing, but yet I doubt that we say it only with
our mouths, for I know not whether we understand what we say. O that we
understood and felt it, as the Prophet understood, and felt it, when he said
thus to, God; Et substantia mea, tanquam nihilum ante te. I, O Lord, am as
nothing, in thy sight. Really, for my part, I am nothing, for I had noe being,
and the being which now I have, was not had by me of my self; but thou O lord
did give it me; and to thee must I ascribe it all; and I have nothing whereof
to brag or glory in my self, for I had nothing at all to do therein. And
thou O lord, art ever conseruing me in being, and houlding me still fast on
foot, and thou art still giving me strength, wherewith to work All being, all
strength, all power to work comes to us from thy hand; for, on our part, we
can do nothing, and we are worth nothing, and in fine, are nothing. So that
now of what shall we be able to wax proud? Will it be perhaps, of the nothing
which we see, we have? We said a while a go; of what do thou grow proud,
thou who art but dust, and ashes? but now we may say, of what do thou grow
proud, O thou who art nothing, which, is less then dust and ashes? What
occasion, or even color, can a thing of nothing take, for lookeing big, and
growing proud, and houlding it self in some account? Infallibly none at all.

Of a most principal means, for a man's knowing himself, and obteyning
humility, which is the consideration of his Sins. CHAPTER VII.
LEt us yet go farther on, and digg and sound deeper, into the knowledge of
our selves. Let us use the spade once again. But what; Is there anything yet
deeper? does anything lie lower then Nothing? yes; there does, and much lower.
What? the sin which you have added to it. O what a deep pit is this? It is
much deeper then Nothing; for sinning is much worse then not being, and it
were better for a man not to be, then to have sinned; and so said Christ our
lord of Judas, who meant to sell him. Bonum erat ei, si natus non fuisset homo
ille. It had been better for him, that he had not been borne. There is not a
place so low, so distant, and so despised in the eyes of God, amongst all
those things which either are or are not; as thath man who is in mortal
sin; disinherited of heaven, the enemy of God, and sentenced, for all
eternity, to hell fire. And though now, through the goodness of our lord, your
consciences are not charged with any mortal sin; yet, as for the knowledge
of our nothing, vee called to mind that time, wherein we had noe being; so
for the knowing of our baseness and misery, we are now to call that time to
mind, wehen we were in sin. Consider, in how wretched estate you were, when,
in the sight of God, you were ungracious, ugly, his enemies, the Children of
wrath obnoxious to eternal torments, and then despise your selves thoroughly,
and abase your selves into the lowest, and profoundest place that possibly you
can for you may safely believe, that how much soever you humble and despise
your selves, you will never be able to arrive, to that abisse of contempt,
which he deserves, who has offended that infinite goodness, which is God. This
business has noe botome at all: it is a most profound and infinite abisse; for
till we shall be able to see in heaven, how good God is, we shall never be
able to know perfectly, how great an ill sin is, which is committed against
God, and how great a punishment he deserves who commits it.

O that we would continue in this ponderation and dig on, and still sound
deeper into this mine of our sins, and miseries, how humble would we then be;
in how small account would we hold our selves; and how easily would we admit
to be disesteemed and contemned by all. He who has been a traitor to God,
what contempt will he not endure for his love? He who gave God away for a
fancy or toy, or for some pleasure of an instant: he who offended his Creator;
ad his lord, and deserved to remain for ever in Hell; what dishonours, what
affronts, or injuries will not he be glad to receive, in satisfaction for those
offenses, which he has committed against the Majesty of God; Prius quam
humilia^er, ego deliqui, propterea eloquium tuum custodiui; said the Prophet
David. Before that scourge came wherewith God humbled and afflicted me, I had
given him cause to inflict it; I had already sinned, and therefore now I am
silent, nor dare I complanie, for all is much less then my sins deserved.
Thou have not punished me O Lord, according to my offenses, for what soever we
are possibly able to suffer in this life, is merely nothing in comparison of
that which any one of all our sins, has deserved. Will you perhaps conceive,
that he deserves not to be dishonored, and despised, who has dishonored, and
despised God? Do you not think it to be reason, that he be lightly esteemed,
who set light by God? Will you not confess, that that will, which durst
offend the Creator of the world, should, never from thence forward, do any
one thing which it pretends, or desires, in punishment of so vast a
presumption?

And there is yet more in it, for though we may well hope, that through the
mercy of God, he has pardonned us our sins, yet, in fine we have noe
certainety thereof. Nescit homo vtrum amore, an odio dignus sit. A man knows
not, says the wise man, whether he be beloved, or abhorred by God. And S.
Paul said, Nihil mihi conscius sum, sed non in hoc, iustificatus sum. I feel
not now, any remorce of conscience concerning any sin; but yet I know not,
for all this, whether I be justified or not. And woe be to me, if I be not, for
though I be a Religious man, and though I convert others, all that, will do me
little good. Si linguis hominum loquar, and Angeloru^, Charitate^ aute^ non
habeam, nihil sum* though I speak says S. Paul, with the tongue of Angels,
though I have the gift of Prophecy, and the knowledge of all sciences; though
I give all my goods to the poor, nay though I should convert the whole world,
yet if with all, I have not Charity, all this will do me noe good. Woe be to
you if you have not Charity, and the grace of God, for else you are nothing,
yea and worse then nothing. It is a great means to make a man very humble, and
ever to think meanly of himself, and to hold himself in low account, that
he knows not whether he be in state of grace, or else of sin. I am sure
enough that I have offended God; but I am not sure, whether I be forgiven or
no. And who then, with this will, once presume to hold up his head: who will
not be confounded and humbled, as low as the earth, and even below the earth?
For this reason, says S. Gregory, did God hide the knowledge of his grace from
us: Vt vnam gratiam certam habeamus scilicet humilitatem, that so we might the
more certainly, have the grace of Humility. And though this uncertainty and
fear wherein God has left us, may seem to be painful, namely that we know
not with any express certainety, whether we be in his favor or no: yet
indeed even this proceeds from favor, and mercy in him, toward us; because
this uncertainty is full of profitt to us, for the obteyning of Humility, for
the conseruing it, and for the making us not despise any other, how many
sins soever he may have committed. For that other may perhaps be already
pardoned for whatsoever sins he may have committed, ad perhaps he may be more
in Gods favor; and for my part, I know not whether I be so or no.

It serves also for a spur toward good works, and to keep a man from
being negligent; and to make him walk on with fear and Humility, in the
sight of God; begging pardon and mercy of him, as we are advised to do by the
wiseman, Beatus homo qui semper est pauidus. De propitiato peccato, noli esse
sine metu. Blessed is that man, who always fears. And be not with out fear,
even concerning those sins, for which you have done penance. This
consideration of our sins, is a very efficatious means, to make us put
little value upon our selves, and to be ever humble, and to live, as it were,
even under ground; for there is much to be gotten and dug up from thence.

If besides we would stay, and consider the defects and wounds, which original
sin has caused in us, how copious would that matter be which we might find
therein, for our humiliation? How is our nature perverted and corrupted by
sin. For as a stone is inclined by the natural weight thereof, to fall
downward; just so, by the corruption of original sin, we have a most
active inclination to love honor, and profitt, and satisfaction of our sense;
and we are extremely awake toward all those temporal things, which concern
us; but stark dead, toward those others, which are spiritual and divine.
That, commands in us, which in all reason, were to obey; and that obeyes,
which should command. And to conclude, under the out side, and posture of men
the appetites of beasts lie concealed, and we have hearts which grow groueling
toward the ground, Pranum est cor hominum, and inscrutabile, quis cognoscit
illud? The heart of man is wicked, and inscrutable and who can arrive to the
malice thereof? The deeper you digg into this wall, the greater abominations
will you discover therein, as was showed in that figure to EZechiell.

And if now we will apply our selves, to consider our present defects, we shall
find our selves very full of them; for these grow ever out of our own store.
How slippery are our tongues, and how ill guarded are our hearts? How inconstant
are we in our good purposes, and how earnest for our own interest and gust?
How desirous are we to fulfill our appetites? How full are we of self love?
How strong in the abetting of our own judgment and will? How lively do we
still find our passions? how entire our bad inclinations,? and how easily do
we permit our selves to be transported by them. S. Gregory says very well,
upon those words of Job. Contra folium quod vento rapitur, ostendis potentiam
tuam, that a man is, with much reason, compared to the leaf of a tree. For as
a leaf is turned, and tossed with every wind, so is man by the wind both of
his passions and temptations. Somtymes he is troubled with anger: sometimes he
is disolued with vain mirth; some times he is tra^sported by the appetite of
avarice some times of ambition and some times of lust, some times he is hoysed
up by pride, and some times cast down by inordinate fear. And so said the
Prophett Psay: Cetidimus quasi folium vniuersi, and iniquitates nostrae quasi
ventus abstulerunt no^. As the leaves of trees are shaken, and carried away by
the wind, so are we assaultet and subdued by temptations. We have noe
ability, or strength in virtue, nor in executing our good purposes, but
indeed we have enough, for which we may humble and confound our selves, and
that, not only by the consideration of our miseries, and sins, but by the
weighing also of those works, which seem in our eyes to be very good. For if
we will consider, and examine them well, we shall find occasion and matter
enough, for which to humble our selves, by reason of the fault and
imperfections, which commonly we mingle with them; according to that of the
same Prophet; Facti sumus vt immundus omnes nos, and quasi pannus menstruatae
vniuersae iustititiae nostrae. We are become as one vnccleane, and all our
justice is like some filthy and polluted ragg. But of this we have spoken else
where, and so there will be no need to enlarge our selves now, herein.

How we are to exercise our selves in the knowledge of what we are, that so we
may not be dejected or dismayed. CHAPTER VIII.
Our misery is so great, and we have so much reason to humble our selves, and
we have so howerly experience thereof: that we seem to stand in more need of
being animated and encouraged, to the end that we be not dejected and dismayed,
considering our selves to be so full of imperfections and faults, then to be
exhorted to the consideration thereof. And this is so very true, that holy
writers, and instructours of men in the way of Spirit, teach us, that we must
digg and sound into the knowledge of our miseries and frailties, in such sort,
as in we stop not there, for fear least the soul should sincke down by
distrust into despair, in reguard we see so great misery in our selves, and
so great inconstancy in our good purposes; but that we must the^ pass on,
toward the knowledge of the goodness of God, and place our whole confidence in
him: That so the sorrow for having sinned, may not, as S. Paul says, be so
great, as to cause deiection and despair. Ne sort abundantiori tristitia
absorbeatur qui eiusmodi est. But it is to be a well tempered sorrow, and
mingled with the hope of pardon, casting our eyes upon the mercy of God, and
not fixing them wholly, upon the only consideration of our sins, and the
deformity and greiueousnesse thereof. And so they say, that we must not
dwell upon the consideration of our own poverty and weakness, least so we be
dismayed, but only that we may thereby, find reason to distrust our selves,
observing that on our part, we have noe leaninge-place on which to rest, and
then instantly to look up to God, and trust in him. And thus we shall not
only not remain discouraged, but we shall rather be animated and revived
thereby, because that which serves to make us distrust, when we be^ould our
selves, Will serve to strengthen our hope when we look up to God: and the
more we know our own weakness; and the more we be distrust full of our selves,
by looking up to God, and relying on him, and by placing all our confidence in
him, we shall find our selves the more strong and full of courage in all
things.

But the Saints do here advertise us, of apointe which imports very much,
namely that as we must not dwell upon the knowledge of our infirmities and
miseries, least we fall upon distrust and despair, but pass on to the
knowledge of the goodness, the mercy, and liberality of God, and place our
whole confidence in him: so also must we dwell as little here, but turn our
eyes quickly in again upon our selves, and upon our own miseries and
frailties. For if we stick upon the knowledge of the goodness the mercy, and
liberality of God, and forgett what we are in our selves, we shall run much
hazard of presumption and pride, and we shall grow to be too secure of our
selves, and to be over bold, and not so doubtful, and careful, as were
sit, which is a dangerous course, and has been the fundation and root of of
many fearful and great ruins, O how many men, who were very spiritual, and
who seemed to be sublimed, as high as heaven in the exercise of prayer and
contemplation, have cast them selves down headlonge by this precipice? O how
many, who really were Saints, and great Saints, have come by this means, to
have most wretched falls? Because they forgott them selves; because they made
them selves too sure, through the favors which they had received from God?
They grew to be full of confidence, as if there had already been noe more
danger for them, and so they came miserably to destruction.

We have books which are full of such accidents. S. Basil says, that the
cause of that miserable fall of king David, both into adultery, and Murder,
Was the presumption which once he had when he was visited by the hand of God,
with abondance of consolation; so far, as that he presumed to say, Ego dixi
in abundantia mea, non mouebor in aeternum. I shall never be altered from this
state. Well, stay a while, God will a little take of his hand: those
extraordinary favors, and ^egalos shall cease, and you shall see what will
happen. Auertisti faciem tuam a me, and factus sum conturbatus. God leaves you
in your poverty, and then you will be like your sell e; and you shall know to
your cost, when you are once fallen, that which you would not know whilst you
were visited and sauoured by Almighty God. And S. Basil also says, that the
cause o^ the fall, and denial of the Apostle S. Peeter, was the confiding and
presuming vaynly in himself. Etiam si oportuerit me mori tecum, non te negabo,
and si omnes scandalizati fuerint in te, ego nunquam scandalizabor. Because he
said with arrogance and presumption, that thouhg all men should be scandalized,
yet would not he be scandalized, but would rather dye with Christ; For this did
God permit, that he should fall; that so he might be humbled, and know
himself. We must never give way that our eyes may wa^der from our selves, nor
ever be secure in this life: but considering what we are, we must go ever on,
with great care of our selves, and with great doubt, and sear, least the
enemy, whom we carry still about us, put some trick upon us, and provide some
snare, into which he may procure us to fall.

So that as we must not stay upon the knowledge of our own miserye and
weakness, but pass instantly on to the knowledge of the goodness of God, so
neither must we stay upon the knowledge of God, and his mercies and favors,
but return with speed again, to cast our eyes down upon our selves. This is
that Jacobs ladder, whereof one end is fastened to the earth, in our knowledge
of our selves, and the other reaches up to the very hight of heaven. By this
ladder must you ascend and descend, as the Angels ascended and descended, by
that other. Rise up by the knowledge of the goodness of God, but stay not there,
least you grow into presumption but descend to the knowledge of your selves:
yet stay not also there, least you fall into despair: but still return again
to the knowledge of God, that so you may have confidence in him. In fine, the
business consists, in that you be still ascending, and descending by this
ladder.

Thus did S. Katherine of Siena use this exercise, to free her self from
several temptations which the devil brought against her, as she herself
relates in her Dialogues, when the devil would tempt her by way of confusion,
desiring to make her believe that her whole life was nothing but error, and
abuse, For then she would raise her self up, but yet still with humility, by
the consideration of the mercies of God: and she would be saying to this
effect, I confess o my Creator, that my whole life has been led in darkness,
but yet I will hide my self in the wounds of Christ Jesus Crucified, and I
will bath my self in his blood: and so my wickedness shall be consumed, and I
will rejoice in my Creator, and my lord. Lauabis me, and super niuem dealbabor.
And so also, when the Devil would offer to putt her up to pride by tentations
of a contrary kind seekeing to make her think that she was perfect, and
pleasing to God, and that there was noe cause why she should any longer afflict
her self, and lament her sins: then would she humble her self, and make the
devil this answer. O wretched creature that I am S. John Baptist never
committed sin, and was sanctified in his mothers womb, and yet
notwithstanding all that was contynually doing penance: And I have committed
for many defects, and have never lamented them, no nor even considered them a^
they deserved. With this the devil, not likeing to endure so great humility
or the one side, nor so great confidence on the other, said thus to her. Be
thou accursed and he also vhoe has taught thee this, for I know not how to
make entrance here, since if I abase thee by co^fusio^, thou raisest thy self
up as high as heaven, by the consideration of the mercy of God: and if I raise
thee up toward presomption, thou abasest thy self by the consideration of thy
sins as low as hell by way of humility: yea and thou persecutest me, even in
hell it self.

Now after this very manner, are we to use this exercise, and so shall we, on
the one side, be full of circumspection and fear, and on the other, full of
courage and joy. Fearful in reguard of our selves, and joyful through our
hope in God. These are those two lessons, which (as we are taught, by that
other Saint) God gives daily to his elect, the one to make them see their
defects, and the other to make them see the goodness of God, who takes them from
us with so much love.

Of the great benefitt and profitt, which grows by this exercise, of a man's
knowing himself. CHAPTER IX.
TO the end that we may yet be more animated to this exercise of the knowledge
of our selves, we will go on declaring some great benefitts, and advantages
which are contained therein. One of the chief thereof, has been showed
already, namely, that this is the foundation and root of Humility, and the
necessary means both for the purchase, and preservation thereof. One of those
ancient Fathers being asked how a man might do to obtain true Humility, made
this answer: Si sua tantummodo and non alterius mala consideret. If he
consider only his own sins, sounding and digging deep into the knowledge
of himself, this man shall obtain true Humility. This alone were sufficient
to make us attend much to this exercise since it imports us so very much,
toward the obteyning of this virtue. But yet the Saints pass further on, and
say, that the humble knowledge of our selves, is a more certain way toward
the knowledge of God, then the profound study of all sciences. And the reason
which S. Bernard gives is, that this is the most high science of all others,
and of the greatest benefitt, For from hence, a man comes to the knowledge of
God, which is given us to be understood, as S. Bonauentu^e says, by that
mystery of the holy Gospel, which Christ our savior wrought, upon the person
of that man who was borne blind. For by laying dust upon his eyes, he gave
him both corporal sight, wherewith to see himself, and spiritual sight also,
weherewith to know and adore God. Sic Dominus nos caecos natos, per nostri and
Dei ignora^tiam, illuminat lutum vnde nati sumus, liniendo super oculos
nostros, vt primum incipiamus nos ipsos cognoscere, deinde ipsum illuminatorem
nostrum credendo proni adorare. He says that to us, who are borne blind,
through the ignorance both of God, and of our selves, god gives, sight by
laying dirt upon our eyes whereof we were made, to the end that considering our
^elues who are but as a little dirt, we may ^eceiue that sight, wehereby first
we may see and know our selves, and from thence may arrive to know God.

And this very thing does our holy mother the church inte^d tot teach us, by
that holy ceremony which it uses in the beginning of Lent, when it lays dust or
ashes over our eyes, and then says this. Memento homo quia puluis es, and in
puluerem reuerteris. Remember o man that thou art dust and that to dust thou
shall return, That so knowing him self he may also come to know God, and be
troubled for having offended him, and do penance for his sins. So that a
man's seeing and knowing him self, and considering his baseness, and his dirt,
is a means to come to the knowledge of God. And the more any man knows his
own baseness, he shall the more discern the greatness, and Majesty of God. For
opposita iuxta se posita magis elucescunt. One contrary and one extreme put by
the other will make that other appear the more. White laid upon black
appears the more fresh and clear. And so since man is the most extreme
baseness and God the most sublime altitude, they are two contrary extremes, and
from hence it is that the more a man knows him self, in whom he finds that
there is noe goodness at all, but only Nothing and sin, the more he finds
the goodness, and mercy, and liberality of God, who vouchsafes to love us, and
as it were to converse, with so great a baseness as ours is.

From hence grows the soul to be greatly kindled and inflamed toward the
love of God, for it never gives over maruailing, and giving thanks to God, for
that man, being so miserable and so wicked, God indures him upon the earth,
and daily also does him many favors. For it happens often, that we cannot so
much as endure our selves, and that yet the goodness and mercy of God toward us
is such, as that not only he indures us, but he is pleased to say of us,
Deliciae meae esse cum filijs bo^inum. My delight is to be with the sons of
men. What did thou find O lord, in the sons of men that thou should say
my delights are to converse with them.

For this did the Saints so much frequent the exercise of the know^egde of
them selves, that so they might acquire a greater knowledge of God, and a
greater ^oue to his divine Majesty. This was that exercise and prayer, which
S. Augustine used. Deus semper ide^, nouerim me, nouerim (...), O my God, which
art ever the sane, and never changest; let me know my self, and let me know
thee. And this other was the prayer, wherein the humble S. Francis spent the
whole days and nights; who art thou O Lord, and who am I. By this way, came
the Saints to a very high knowledge of God, and this is a very plain and
certain way: and the more you digg down into the knowledge of your selves,
the higher shall you rise, and the more shall you grow in the knowledge of
God, and of his infinite mercy and goodness. As also on the other side, the
higher you rise, and the more you grow in the knowledge of God, the lower you
will descend, and the more you will profitt in the knowledge of your selves.
For the light which comes to you from heaven, will show yo^ such slutish
corners in your sowles, as will make you ashamed of that which, in the eyes of
the world, will seem very fayt^ and Good. S. Bonauenture says, that a when the
sun beams enter into any room every moate of the air will show it self;
Si and cor radiis gratiae illustratum, etiam minim videt. So the soul being
illustrated by the knowledge of God, and by the beams o^ that true son of
Justice, the very least little things will instantly be seen; and so the
soul comes to hold that for fautly, which he who inioyes not so great
light, will esteem to be good.

This is the reason why Saints are so humble, and hold them selves in so
small account, and the greater Saints they are, they are the more humble, and
the accounte wherein they hold them selves is so much the less. For still,
as they have more light, and greater knowledge of God, they know them selves
better, and see that of their own stock, they cannot bragg, but only of
Nothing, and of Sin. And how much soever they know them selves, and how
many faults soever they see in their own souls they still believe, that there
are many more which they see not and conceive that the least part thereof, is
that which they can come to know, and after this rate do they esteem them
selves. For as they believe that God is more good then they are able to
comprehend, so also do they believe, that themselves are more wicked then
they can understand. And ^s, how much soever we conceive or know of God, we
cannot perfectly comprehend him, but still there will be more and much more to
be conceived, and known; so how much soever we know our selves, and how much
soever we humble, and despise our selves, We shall never be able to descend so
low as to arrive to the profounditie of our misery And this is noe
exaggeration, but a clear truth. For since man has nothing of his own store,
but Nothing, and Sin, who will ever be able to humble and abase himself so
much, as those two Titles deserve.

We read of a Saint who desired light of God to know her self, and she
discerned so much deformity, and misery in her condition, that she was not
able to endure it and then she prayed thus to God. O lord not so much, for I
shall fainte under the burden. And father Auila, says that he knew a certain
person, who begged of God many times, that he would make him see and know
himself. God opened his eyes a little, and it had like to have cost him dear.
For he saw himself so ugly, and so abominable, that he uttered loud cries
and said, O Lord I beseech thee even for thy mercies sake, take this spectacle
from before mine eyes, for I can look noe longer upon this figure.

From hence grows also, that holy kind of hate and detestation of them
selves, in the servants of God, whereof I spoke before. For how much more they
know the immense goodness of God, and love him more, so much the more do they
abhor them selves, as having been opposites and enemies of God, according to
that of Job. Quare posuisti me contrarium tibi and factus sum mihi
metipsigrauis. They see that in themselves, they have the root of all
mischeife which is the wicked and perverse inclination of our flesh; and upon
this knowledge, they raise them selves up against them selves, and abhor them
selves. Do you not think it reason to abhor him, who made you forsake and
sell so great a good as God is, for a little contentment or gust? Do you not
think it reason for you to hate him, who made you loose eternal glory, and
deserve Hell for ever; him who wrought you so much hurt, and still persistts
in doing it, Do you not think that you have cause to detest? Well now, this
person is your self, an opposite and enemy of God, an opposite and enemy of
your own salvation.

That the knowledge of ones self, does not cause dismay, but rather gives
courage and strength. CHAPTER X.
THere is another great benefitt, which grows from the exercise of knowinge a
man's self; that not only it causes no dismay, or base fear, as perhaps some
might doubt, but rather a great heart and courage, toward all those things
which are good. And the reason of this is, that when a man knows him self,
he sees that here is noe color, why he should rely upon him self, but that
distrusting himself, he must put all his confidence in God, in whom he
finds himself strong, and able for all things. Hence it is, that these are
the men who are apt to attempt, and undertake great things, and these are they,
who go through with them. For in reguard they ascribe all to God, and nothing
to them selves, God takes the business in hand and makes it his, and holds it
upon his ownes accounte; and then he is wont to do mighty things, and even
wonders, by the means of weak instruments. Vt ostenderet diuitias gloriae
suae in vasis misericordiae, quae preparauit in gloriam. To show the riches and
treasures of his mercies. God will do wonderful things, by instruments who
are miserable and weak. He uses to put the treasures of his mercy into the
poorest vessels, for thus does his glory shine most. This is that which God
said to Saint Paul, when being even tired with temptations, he cried out and
begged, that he might be delivered from them; and God made him this answer:
Sufficit tibi gratia mea, nam virtus in infirmitate perficitur. My grace shall
be sufficient for thee, how great soever thy temptations and miseries may be,
and then does the power of God prove it self to be more strong, and perfect,
when the weakness and infirmity is more apparent. For as the Physician gains
more honor when the sickness which he cures is more dangerous, so when there
is more weakes in us, our delivery brings more glory to Gods arm and power;
and so does Saint Augustine and Saint Ambrose expound this place. So that when
a man knows and distrusts himself, and puts all his confidence in God, then
does his Majesty come and help; and when on the other side a man putts
confidence in himself, and in his own diligences and means, he is forsaken
by Almighty God. This says Saint Basile, is the cause why when we desire to
make our Prayers best and to have most devotion in certain principal
festiuities, it falls out many times, that we have less; because we put our
confidence in our own means, and in our own diligences, and preparations.
And at other times, we are prevented with great benedictions, and sweetenes,
when; we look for them least, to the end that we may know, that this is an
effect of the grace and mercy of our lord, and of no diligence or meritt of
ours. So that a man's knowing his misery and frailty; causes noe cowardice or
dismay, but rather gives courage and strength, in regard that it makes him
distrust him self, and place all his confidence in God. And this is also that
which the Apostle says. Cum infirmor tunc potens sum; and again, Cum humilior
tunc exaltor. For thus do both Saint Augustine and Saint Ambrose declare it.
When I humble and a base my self and know that I am good for nothing, then am
I exalted and raised up. Whilst I know and see my infirmity and misery
fastening my self upon God, I find my self more strong and more full of
courage, for he is all my confidence and strength. Et erat Dominus fiducia
eius.

Hereby you may understand, that it is not Humility nor any thing which
springs from thence, when there come to us some times, certain dismaies, and
deiections, concerning our little progress in Spirit, and when we fear that
we shall never obtain such or such a virtue, and never overcome such an ill
condition or inclination; or that we shall not be fit for this or that office,
and ministry, in which we are or may be employed, by Obedience, as when we
question, whether we shall be fit to take Confessions, or to be sent to or fro
in Missions or the like. This may seem to be Humility, but many times it is
not so, but rather springs from pride. For such a one, cast, his eyes upon
himself, as if by his own strength, and diligences, he were to go through
with that business; whereas he ought to cast them upon God, in whom we are to
be full of confidence and courage. Dominus illuminatio mea, and salu^ mea quem
timebo; Dominus protector vitae meae a quo trepidabo. Si consistant aduersum me
castra, non ti^ebit cor meum. Si exurgat aduersum me praelium, in hoc ego
sperabo; and si ambulauero in medio vmbrae mortis non timebo mala, quoniam tu
mecum es. If whole armies shall rise against me, my heart shall not be affraide.
If they shall bidd me battaille yet will I hope in God. Though I walk in the
midst of the very shandow of death, and arrive even at the very gates of hell,
yet my heart shall not fear, because thou O Lord art with me. With what
variety of words, does the holy Prophett express the self same thing, and
indeed we, have the Psalms full of this, to signify the abundance of pious
affections, and of the confidence which he had, and which we ought to have in
God. In Deo meo transgrediar murum. In my God, I will pass over a wall, how
high soever it may be. Nothing shall be able to put it self between me, and
home. God can conquer giants, by grassehoppers. In my God, I will tread lions
and dragons under my feet. By the grace and favor of our lord, we shall be
strong. Qui docet manus meas ad praelium, and posuit vt arcum aereum brachia
mea.

Of other great benefits and advantages, which grow, by the exercise of a man's
knowledge of himself. CHAPTER. XI.
ONe of the principal means, which, for our parts, we are able to employ, to
the end that our lord may show us favor, and communicate great graces and
gifts to us is, that we humble our selves, and know our own frailty and
misery. And see said the Apostle S. Paul libenier igitur gloriabor in
infirmitatibus meis, vt inhabitet in me virtus Christi. I will gladly glory in
my infirmities, and weakness, that so the power of Christ may dwell in me.
And Saint Ambrose upon those words, Placeo mihi in infirmitatibus. I am
pleased in my infirmities, says, Si gloriandum est Christiano, in humilitate
gloriandum est, de qua crescitur apud Deum. If a Christian be to glory, it is
to be in his own poverty, and misery; whereby he may increase and prosper,
in the sight of God. Saint Augustine (...) that of the Prophett, to this
purpose. Pluuiam voluntariam segregabit Deus, haereditati tuae, and infirmata
est, tu vero perfecisti eam. When think you, that God will give the voluntary
and sweet rain of his gifts, and graces to his inheritance, which is the
soul of man? Et infirmata est. When the same soul shall understand her own
infirmity, and misery, then will he perfect it, and the voluntary and sweet
shower of his gifts and graces, shall fall down upon it. And as here amongst
us, the more our poor beggars discover their wretchedness, and their soars, to
rich and charitable men, the more they move them to pity, and the more alms
they receive at their hands, so the more a man knows and humbles himself,
and co^fesses his misery, the more does he inuit, and incline the mercy of
God, to take pity, and compassion on him, and to communicate the gifts of his
grace with the more abundance. Qui dat lasso virtute^, and his qui non sunt,
fortitudinem, and robur multiplicat. For he gives strength to the weak, and to
them who are, as if they were not, he multiplyes courage and strength.

To declare in few words, the great benefitts and advantages of this exercise,
I say that the true knowledge of a man's self, is the universal remedy of al
inconveniences. And so in the questions which we use to ask in spiritual
conferences, whence such or such a thing uses to grow, and what may be the
remedy thereof, we may in effect answer in them all, that they proceed from
want of a man's knowing himself, and that the remedy thereof would be, to know
and humble himself as he ought. For if you ask whence it grows, that I judge
of my brethren, I say from the want of knowing my self. For if I would go
watching with in my self, I should find so much for me to see and so many
miseries to bewail, that I would not mark the faults of others. If you ask
from whence it comes, that some times I speak sharp, and unmortified words to
my brethren; that also grows from the want of knowing my self. For if I knew
my self well, and held myself for the worst of the company, and looked upon
every other man as if he were my superior, I should not be so bold, as to
hold such language to them. If you ask from whence grow those excuses, and
those complaints and those murmurings, as why they do not give me this or
that, or why they treat me in such a fashion; it is clear that it rises from
the same root. If you ask from whence it comes, that a man is so much
troubled and dejected, when he finds himself molested, by variety of
temptations; or grows melancholy, and is discouraged, when he falls often into
any defect; this also grows from want of a man's knowinge himself. For if you
were truly humble, and considered well the malice of your hearts, you would not
be troubled or dismayed at this, but you would rather be in wounder, that you
committ noe worse things how you came not to have more dangerous faults; and
you would be giving great thanks, and praise to God, for houldeing you so fast
in his hand, that so you fall not into those things, into which infallibly you
would have fallne, if he had not held you up, For, from a very source, and
sincke of vice, what sin is that which would not flow? From such a filthy
dunghill what should we expect, but an odious and abominable stincke, and from
such a tree, such fruit. Wpon those words of the Prophet, Recordatus est
quoniam puluis summus; He remembers that we are but dust, S. Anselme says,
what wonder is it, if dust be blown away by wind. If also you desire a
means whereby you may come to show much Charity toward your brethren, and
that you may be obedient, and patient, and very penitent, you may here find
the remedy of all.

We read of our Father Franciscus de Borgia, that being once in journey, he
was met by a great lord of these kingdoms, who was a friend of his, and when
he observed him to be so full of poverty and incommodity, he was heartily
sorry to see it, and besought him to be more careful of his person, and to
cherish himself. The Father, with a cheerful countinance, and much quietness,
said thus to him; I beseech your Lordship not to be troubled concerning me, and
think not that I go so ill provided as you have conceived. For you shall
wnderstand, that I always send a harbinger before me, who makes my lodging
ready, and takes care that I be regaled to the full. That lord asked then, who
that harbinger was, to which he answered thus. The knowledge of my self, and
the consideration of what I deserve for my sins, which is no less then hell
fire. And when with this knowledge, I arrive at my lodging, how unprovided and
incomodious soever it may be, me thinks it is ever better then I deserve.

In the Cronicles of the Order of the Dominicans it is recounted of B. Saint
Margaret of the same Order, that a certain religious man, a great servant of
God, and very spiritual person, speaking one day with her, told her, amongst
other things, that he had often begged of God in his prayer, that he would show
him the way, which those ancient fathers had held, whereby they pleased him
so much, and had received so many favors from his hand; and that, one night,
Whilst he was taking his rest, a book was laid open before him, whereof the
letters were written in Gould, and instantly a voice awaked him which said
thus; Rise up, and read. And then he rose, and read these few but heavenly
words, This was the perfection of those ancient Fathers to love God, to
despise them selves, not to contemn or judge any other: And then instantly the
book vanished a way.

How much it concerns us to be exercised, in the knowledge of our selves.
CHAPTER XII.
IT will appear by what is said, how much it concerns us to be exercised in
the knowledge of our selves. Thales Milesius, one of the seaue^ wise men of
Greece, being asked which, of all natural things, was the hardest to be
known, made this answer, A man's self. Because the love which a man bears
himself, is so great, that it distracts, and hinders this knowledge; and from
hence grew that saying, which was so much celebrated amongst the auntie^ts,
Nosce te ipsu^, know thy self. And an other said, Tecum habita; Dwell with thy
self. But let us leave these strangers and come home to others of our own
communion, who are better Masters of this science. The B. Saint Augustine and
Saint Bernard say, that the science of a man's knowing himself, is the most
profitable and most high that ever was invented or found. Men, says Saint
Augustine, are wont to esteem much the knowledge of the heavens, and of the
earth by Astrology, and Cosmographie, and to know the motions of the sky,
and the course of the planetts. With their proprieties, and influences; but yet
the knowledge of a man's self, is the most high, and profitable science of them
all. Other sciences blow a man and puff him up, as Saint Paul says; but we
are humbled and edified by this. And so the Saints, and all Masters of
spirit, do greatly charge us, to employ our selves in prayer, upon this
exercise: and they reprove the error of some, who pass too lightly over the
consideration of their own defects, and detain themselves in thinking upon
other devout things, because they find gust in them; but none, in the
consideration of their defects and faults; because they take noe pleasure in
looking into them selves; and in this they are like such as are deformed, who
because they are so, dare not look upon themselves in a glass.

The glorious Saint Bernard speaking to man, in the person of God, says thus:
O homo si te videres, tibi displiceres, and mihi placeres: sed quia te non
vides, tibi places, and mihi displices. O man, if thou did see, and know thy
self, thou would be displeasing to thy self, and thou would be pleasing
to me: but now because thou do not see, and know thy self, thou art
pleasing to thy self, and art displeasing to me. Veniet tempus cum nec mihi
nec tibi placebis, mihi quia peccasti, tibi quia in aeternum ardebis. Take
heed that there come not once a time when thou shall neither be pleasing to
God, nor to thy self, not to God, because thou have sinned, nor to thy self,
because thou art damned by thy self, through thine own fault.

Saint Gregory treating of this, says, there are some who as soon as they
begin to serve God, and to take virtue a little into their consideration,
think presently, that they are holy and good; and do so place their eyes
upon the good they do, that they forgett their miseries and sins past, yea
and sometimes their present sins too; for they are so very busy about gazing
upon the good they do, that they attend not, nay and see not, the ill which
sometimes they committ. But such as indeed are good, and the elect of God,
proceed after a very different manner. For where as indeed they are full of
virtue and good works they are yet ever looking upon the ill they do, and are
considering and ruminating upon their imperfections and defects. And we shall
quickly see what becomes of both these kinds of men. For they who are most
considering their sins, secure their good deeds, and conserve the great
virtues which they possess, remayneing ever in humility; and on the contrary
side, those others, who are looking so earnestly upon their good deeds,
loose them, because they grow vain and proud thereof. So that good men serve
themselves of their very sins, and draw good and spiritual profitt from
thence; whereas ill men draw hurt and loss, even from their good deeds,
because they make ill use thereof. As it happens in the case of corporal food,
which, though in it self it be healthful and good, yet if a man ear of it
without rule or measure, it will make him sick. And so on the other side, if
the very poison of vipers be taken, wi^h a certain composition, and
proportion, it will become a Treacle, and give him health. When therefore they
shall bring the good things which you have done to your memory, to the end that
you may esteem and value your self. S. Gregory aduises you, to oppose your
ill deeds against them and to call your former sins to mind. So did S.
Paul, to the end that his great virtues might not blow him up, as also his
having benne rapt, into the third heaven, and made capable of those high
revelations, which were imparted to him. Quia prius blasphemus fui, and
persecutor, and contumeliosus. Alas says he, I have been a blasphemour, and a
persecutor of the servants of God, and of the name of Christ; alas I am not
worthy to be called an Apostle, because I have persecuted the Church of God.
Qui non sum dignus vocari Apostolus, quoniam persecutus sum ecclesiam Dei. This
is a very good counterpoise, and a very good countermine, against this
temptation.

Upon those words, which the Archangell Gabriell spoke to the Prophet Daniell,
Intellige fili hominis, O son of man observe, what I intend to say to the S.
Hierome says, that those holy Prophetts Daniell, Ezechiell, and Zacharias,
through the high and continual revelations, which they had, seemed already, as
it were, to con^erse amongst the Quires of Angels; and to the end that they
might not exalt them selves above them selves, and grow idle headed, and proud,
upon that occasion, as conceiving that they were grown to be of a kind of
Superior and Angelical nature, the Angel letts them know on the part of God,
that they must remember their human nature and frailty; and he calls them
sons of men, that so they might understand them selves to be frail men, and
miserable creatures like the rest; and that so they might be humble, and
esteem them selves but as they were. And we have many examples in histories
both Ecclesiastical and profane, both of Saints and other illustrious
persons, kings, Emperors and Prelates, who used this means; and ever kept
some about them, who might bring them to remembrance from time to time, that
they were but men; so to conserve them in Humility, and to keep them from
growing vain and proud.

It is recounted of our Father Franciscus Borgia, that whilst he was yet Duke
of Gaudia, a holy man gave him this council, that if he had a mind to
profitt much in the service of God, no day might pass, wherein he would not
think seriously of somewhat, which might putt him to confusion, and mean
opinion of himself. And he took this Counsel so much to heart, that from the
time that he used the exercise of Mental Prayer, he employed every day, the
two first hours there of, upon this knowledge, and contempt of himself. And
besides, what soever he heard, and read, and saw, it all served him toward
this abaseing and confusion. And besides he had another Devotion which helped
him much, and it was, that every day as soon as he rose, he kissed the ground
three times, to put him in mind, that he was dust and earth, and that into
earth he must return. And it well appeers how much profitt he drew from
thence, by the great example of Humility and sanctity, which he left behind
him. Let us therefore observe this Council, and practice it. Let no one day
pass, wherein we spend not some time of prayer, and consider not somewhat
which may tend to our confusion and contempt: and let us not grow weary, nor
give over this exercise, till we find that our soul has even drunk up, a
profound and cordial desire to be disesteemed and despised: and till we may
feel our selves to be greatly ashamed, to appear with so much baseness and
misery as ours is, before the high presence and Majesty of Almighty God.

We have very much need of all this; for our pride and inclination to be
honored, and esteemed, is so very great, that if we walk not contynually in
this exercise, we shall find our selves every hour to be lifted up above our
selves, as cork goes swyming upon the water, for noe cork is so light and
vain as we. We must ever be repressing and beating down that swelling and
pride which heaues us up, and we must look toward the feet of our deformity
and baseness, that so the wheel of our vanity and pride may be broken in
pieces. Let us remember the Parable, of the Figg tree, which is mentioned in
the holy Gospel and which the owner thereof had a mind to pluck up by the
roots; because in three years, it had borne noe fruit; but the gardner moved
that it might be suffered to grow a year longer, and said that he would digg
about it, and that if then, it gave not fruit it might afterward be rooted
up. Dig you, in like manner, about the dry and barraine figg tree o^ your
sowles, and let the dunge and miseries of your sins be cast round about it
since you have such store thereof, and so you shall be also fertile, and bear
fruit.

To the end that we may be the more animated to use this exercise, and that noe
man take ocasion to give it over, through any vain apprehensions, We are to
understand two things. The first, that no man must think that this exercise
belongs only to beginners, because it also concerns Proficients, and most
Perfect men; since we see that they, and even S. Paul himself did use it. In
the second place, it is fit for us to understand, that this exercise is no
afflictiue or melancholy kind of thing, nor causes trouble or disquiet, but
rather brings with it great peace and rest, yea and great co^tentment and joy,
for any man to consider and know himself, how many defects and faults soever
he committ, and how perfectly soever he understand, that because he is so
wicked he deserves that all men should despise and hate him. For when this
knowledge of our selves grows from ^rue Humility, that pain comes
accom^anied with such a kind of swauitie, and contentment, that a man would be
sorry ^o be with out it. Other pains and troubles which some feel, when they
consider their faults and imperfections, are temptations of the devil, who,
on the one side, procures by this means, to make us think that we are truly
humble; and, on the other, would be content to make us distruct the goodness of
God, and to be dishartned, and dismayed in his service. Indeed if we were
still to pawse upon the knowledge of our own misery and weakness, we should
have occasion enough to be afflicted and sadd, yea and to be discouraged and
dismayed; but we must not stay there, but pass on to the consideration of the
goodness, and mercy, and liberality of God, and how much he loves us, and what
he suffered for us, and in this are we to place all our hope. And so, that
which would be an occasion of dismay and sorrow, by looking upon our selves,
serves to animate and encourage us, and is an occasion of greater comfort and
joy when we lift up our eyes toward God. A man behoulds himself, and sees
nothing bu^ cause of grief, but looking up to God he confides in his goodness
without fear^ of being forsaken, notwithstanding the many faults, and
imperfections, and miseryes, which he discernes in himself. For the goodness
and mercy of God, upon which he has placed his eyes and his heart, does
infinitely exceed and outstripp all that which can be ill in us. And with this
consideration, being rooted in the very strings of the heart, a man vntyes
himself from himself, as from some broken reed, and ever goes resting upon
God, and confiding in him according unto that of the Prophett Daniel. Neque
enim in iustificationibus nostris prosternimus preces ante faciem tuam, sed in
miserationibus tuis multis. Not confiding in our selves, nor in any meritts or
good work of ours, do we presume to lift up our eyes to thee O Lord, and to
beg favor at thy hands but by putting our confidence in thy great mercy.

Of the second degree of Humility, and here it is declared, wherein this
degree consists. CHAPTER XIII.
THe second degree of Humility, says S. Bonauenture, is when a man desires,
to be held by others in small accounte. Am^ nesciri, and pro nihilo reputari;
Desire to be unknown, and disesteemed, and that nobody may have you in
accounte. If we were well grounded in the first degree of Humility, we should
already have made most of our way, toward the second. If really we esteemed
our selves little, it would not seem very hard to us, that others should also
esteem little of us; yea and we would be glad thereof. Will you see that this
is true, says S. Bonauenture? All men are naturally glad, when others conform
them selves to our opinion, and think the same that we think. Well then, if
this be so why are we not glad, when others have us in small account? Do you
know why? Because, we esteem highly of our selves; and we are not of their
opinion. S. Bonauenture, upon these words of Job, Peccaui and vere deliqui, and
vt eram dignus non recepi, says Many with their tongues speak ill of them
selves, and say that they are this and that; but they believe not what they
say, for when others say the same, yea and less then that, t^^y cannot endure
it. And these men when they speak ill of them selves, say it not with truth,
nor do they feel it so in their hearts, as Job. did when he said: I have
sinned, and really transgressed and offended God, and he has not punished me,
according to my great demeritt. Job said this with truth of heart, but these men
says S. Gregory do humble them selves only in appearance, and with the
tongue, Whereas in their heart they have noe Humility. They will needs seem
to be humble, whereas they have noe mind to be so indeed: for if in earnest
they desired it, they would not be offended so much, when they were
reprehended and admonished of any fault by others, and they would not excuse
them selves nor be troubled so much, is we see they are.

Cassianus recounts, that a certain Monck came once to visit the Abbot
Serapion, who in habitt, iesture, and words, seemed to be of great Humility,
and contempt of himself; and never made an end of speaking ill of himself,
and of saying that he was so great a sinner, and so wicked a man, that he was
not worthy to breath in the common air, nor to ^read upon the earth, and much
less would he consent that they should wash his feet. The Abbot Serapion,
after he had dyned, began to treat of some spiritual things, as he had been
accustomed, and applied also some little thing to his guest, and gave him this
good advice with great mildnes and love; Namely, that since he was young an
strong, he should procure to remain in his Cell, and labor with his hands
for his food, according to the rule of the Moncks and not tot go idly up and
down by the Cells of others. This Moncke was so much troubled at this
admonition and advice, that he could not possibly disemble it, but showed it
evidently by his countenance. Then said the Abbot Serapion, what is this my
son, that till now, you have been speaking so much ill of your self, and
so many things of dishonor and affront to you; and that now, upon an
admonition, so easy as this which contains noe injury or affront at all, but
rather much love and Charity, you have been so much offended and altered,
that you could not hide it. Did you hope perhaps, by means of that ill which
you said of your self: to hear that sentence of the wise man out of our
mouth, Iustus prior est accusator sui. This man is just and humble, since he
speaks ill of himself? Did you pretend that we should praise you, and hold
you for a Saint. Ah, says Saint Gregory, how many times is this! that very
thing, to which we pretend by our hypocrisies, and counterfeit Humilities? but
that which would feign seem Humility, is great pride. For we humble our
selves many times, to the end that we may be praised by men, and be held for
humble and good. And if you will not grant me this; I must ask you why you
say that of your self, which you will not have others to believe? If you
speak it from your heart, and if you walk in the way of truth, you must desire
that others may believe it too, and may hold you for such as you said; and if
you desire not this, you show plainly that you pretend not thereby to be
humbled, but to be valued and esteemed. This is that, which the wiseman says:
Est qui requiter humiliat se, and interiora eius plena sunt dolo. There are
some who humble them selves, after a counterfeit manner, and their heart is
full of deceit and pride. For what greater deceit can there be, then by
means of Humility, to be honored and esteemed by men; and what greater pride,
then to pretend to be held humble? Appelere de humilitate laudem humilitatis,
non est virtus sed subuersio. To pretend to the praise of humility, is not
(says Saint Bernard,) the virtue of humility, but the peruersion and
subversion thereof. For what greater peruersion can there be then this? Quid
peruertius, quid ve indignius, vt inde velis videri melior, vnde videris
deterior? What thing can be more unreasonable, then to desire to seem to be
the better, for that, for which you seem worse? What thing is more unworthy
and absurd, then to desire to seem good and to be held for such, even for the
ill which you have said of your self? Saint Ambrose reprehending this, says
thus. Multi habent humilitatis speciem, sed virtutem non habent; multi eam
soris pretendunt, and intus imp^gnant. Many have the appearance of humility,
but yet they have not the virtue of Humility, many seem exteriourly to seek
it, but interiourly they contradict it.

This pride, and inclination of ours, to be esteemed and valued, is so great,
that we seek a thousand inventions, and ways, how to compass it. Sometimes
we do it directly, and sometimes indirectly; but we are ever procuring to
bring the water to this Mill. S. Gregory says that it is the property of
proud men, when they conceive them selves to have said, or done any thing well,
to desire such as saw or heard it, to tell them the faults thereof,; their
intention yet being, to be praised. They seem indeed, to humble them selves
exteriourly, because they desire men to tell them their faults; but this is noe
Humility but pride for their dessigne thereby is to be praised At other times,
you shall have a man speak ill of some what, which he has done, and declare
that he is not pleased with it, that so he may come to know what the other
thinks; and he would feign hear it excused, and that the other should say, no
certainly it was very well said, or done; and you have noe reason at all to be
desquieted wiht your self, upon that occasion. This, I say, is that which he
sought. A certain grave Father, who was a very spiritual man, was wont to
call this, a pride, of by hook or by crook; because, by this devise, or
engine, one man fetches praise out of the mouth of another. Aman makes an end
of his Sermon, and is very well content, and satisfied with himself, and
intreates another to tell him his faults: But to what end serve these
hypocrisies, and fictions: for you believe not that there were any faults, nor
pretend any other thing, but that he should praise your sermon, and that he
should iumpe with your own opinion; and that, is indeed the thing, which you
are glad to here; For if by accident, he tell you plainly of any fault, you
are not pleased; but rather you will defend it, and sometimes it happens, that
you will judge him who told you of it; as not having so good an understanding,
and note in things of that nature, because he held that for a fault, which you
conceive to have been well said. All this is pride, and desire of praise, which
you pretend to satisfy, by this counterfeit Humility. At other times, when
we are not able to conceal the fault, we confess it very clearly, to the
end, that since we have lost a point of honor by making the fault, we may
recover it again by confessing it after an humble manner. At other times,
says Saint Bonauenture, we exaggerate our own faults, and say more then is
true, to the end that others seeing that it is neither possible, nor credible,
to have been so much as was said, they may think that there was no fault
committed at all; that so they may cast the accusation, upon the accounte of
our Humility; So that by exaggerating, and declaring more then is true, we
would conceal the fault which in truth is that which we intend. By a thousand
devises and tricks do we procure to hide and disguise our pride under the
Cloak of Humility.

And thus, by the way, you shall see, as Saint Bernard says, how precious a
thing Humility, and how base and hateful, pride is. Gloriosa res humilitas,
qua ipsa quoque superbia palliare se appetit, ne viles^at. See how sublime and
glorious a thing humility is, since even pride desires to serve it self
thereof, and to be cloaked therewith; and see also how base and shameful a
thing pride is, since it dares not so much as appear with the face
discovered; but over shadowed and desguised, by the veyle of humility. For you
would be extremely ashamed, and hold your self for greatly affronted, if
the other should understand that you pretend and desire to be esteemed, and
praised: and therefore it is, that you procure to cover your pride, with the
appearance of H^^ilitie. But now, why will you indeed be that, which you are
so ashamed to seem to be. If you would be so out of countenance, that others
should know, you desire to be esteemed, and praised, why are you not much more
ashamed, to desire it. For the defect and ill thereof, consists in the act it
self of your desiring it, and not in their knowing that you desire it. And if
you be ashamed that men should know it; why are you not ashamed, that it should
be seen, and known, by Almighty God. Imperfectum meum viderunt oculi tui.
Thine eyes O lord, see how imperfect I am.

All this comes upon us, for not being well rooted in the first degree of
Humility, which keeps us so far from the second. We must undertake this
business from the first grounds thereof; for first it is necessary for us to
understand our own misery, and our Nothing, and from this kind of profound
knowledge of our selves, is to grow a base conceit in us, and a despising and
contemning of what we are, which is the first degree of Humility; and from
thence we must get up to the second. So that it suffices not that you speak
ill of your self, yea even though you speak it sincerely, and from your heart,
but you must procure to arrive so far as that you may be glad, that others
think that of you, which you t^inke, and say of your self; and that they
disesteeme and despise you. Saint John Climatus says He is no humble man,
who is content to abase and speak ill of himself, (for what man is he, who
cannot be content to bear with himself) but that man is humble, who can
easily be glad to be ill treated, and des^ised by others. It is well, that a
man should ever be speaking ill of himself, and confessing that he is proud,
and slothful, and impatient and careless, and the like, but it were better
that he kept his patience, till he were told as much by others. If you desire
that others may think so of you, and hold you in no other estimation and
accounte then this, and that you are truly glad thereof when the occasion is
offered, this indeed is true Humility.

Of some degrees and stepps whereby a man may rise to the perfection of this
second degree of Humility. CHAPTER XIV.
IN reguard that this second degree of Humility is the most practical, and
difficult part of the exercise of this virtue, we will divide it, as some of
the Saints have done: and we will set forth four degrees or stepps thereof;
that so by little and little, and as it were by measured paces, we may go
rising up to that perfection of Humility, which this second degree exacts. The
first step is, not to desire to be honored, or esteemed by men, but rather to
fly from all that, which has any touch of honor and estimation. Our books
are full of the examples of Saints, who were so very far from desiring to be
esteemed or honored by the world, as that they fledd from honors, and
dignities, and from all those occasions which might bring estimation with them
in the sight of men, as from the most capital enemy which they could have.
Christ, our Redeemer, and our Master, gave us the first example of this, when
he fledd upon his notice, that they meant to choose him for their king; after
that illustrious miracle of having fedd five thousand men, with five loaves,
and two fishes; when yet himself, ran noe hazard in any state of life, how
high soever it might be, but only to give us example. And for the self same
reason, when he was pleased to manifest the glory of his most sacred body, to
his three disciples, in his admirable Transfiguration, he commanded them not
to speak of it, to any, till after his death, and glorious Resurrection. And
giving sight to those blind men, and working of other miracles, he commanded
them to be silent. And all this was done to give us an example of flying from
honor, and the estimation of men, in regard of our great danger to grow vain,
and so to perish thereby.

In the Cronicles of the Order of Blessed Saint Francis, it is recounted, that
brother Giles hearing the relation of the fall of brother Elias, who had been
their General, and a great learned man, and who was then an Apostata, and
excommunicated for applying himself to the Emperor Frederike the second, who
had reuoulted from the Church, brother Giles hearing this, cast himself down
to the ground, and embraced it as straightly as he could, and being asked why
he did so, he made this answer. I will get as far down as I can, for that
other fell down, because he would needs rise up so high. Gerson brings that
to this purpose, which the Poets feign of the Giant Antheus son of the Earth:
Who fighting with Hercules, recovered new strength, every time that he was cast
down to the ground, and so he could not be overcome; but Hercules observing
this, lifted him up on high, and so cut off his head. This says Gerson, does
the devil pretend to do with us. He seeks to hoyse us up with honor,
estimation and praise, that so he may cut our throats, and then cast us
down more low, then we rose high. And therefore the true humble man, casts
himself down to the earth, of the knowledge of himself, and seares, and
flies from being puffed up, and praised.

The second degree, as Saint Anselmus says, is this, Vt p^tiatur
contemptibiliter se tractari. To suffer with patience and that when soever any
occasion is offered, whereby you may seem to be disparaged, or despised, you
bear it well. We do not say; in this place, that you should desire injuries
and affronts, and that you should go in search thereof, and rejoice therein,
when you find them. That point is more high, and perfect, and hereafter we
shall treat thereof; but that which now we say, is, that when any t^i^g shall
present it self, which may seem to point at your disadvantage, you bear it
at least with patience, if you cannot do it with joy. According to that of the
wise man, Omne quod tibi applicatum fuerit, accipe, and in dolor sustine, and
in humilitate tua patientiam habe. All that which offers it self, contrary to
your sensuality and gust, receive it in good part though it trouble you and
suffer it with Humility and patience. This is a great means, both for the
obteyning of Humility, and preserving it. For, as honor and the estimation of
men, is a means to make us proud and vain, and therefore did the Saints fly
so far from it, so all that which tends to our disestimation and contempt,
is a very great means, both for the getting of Humility, and glowing in it.
Saint Laurentius Iustinianus, was wont to say, that Humility is like a stream
or brook, which in winter carries much water, and little in Su^mer, and so
Humility grows less and less in prosperity, and greater in adversity.

Many are the occasions, and they are offered us daily, for the exercise of
Humility, if we would use attention and care in profiting thereby. That Saint
says thus very well, That which pleases others shall be effected, that which
contents thee shall not be done: that which others say shall be esteemed, that
which thou says, shall stand for nothing. Others shall ask and receive, thou
shall beg and shall not obtain, others shall be great in the mouths of men;
and shall make noe account of thee: and affairs shall be communicated to others,
and thou shall be held unfit for them. Let every man take account of himself,
and go discoursing of those particular occasions, which may, or use to offer
themselves, and observe how he proceeded therein. Observe how you like it, when
another commands you resolutely, and after an imperious manner. Observe how
you take it, when they admonish you or reprove you for any fault. Observe what
you think, when you conceive that your Superior deals not confidently, but
looks upon you with a kind of wary or jealous eye. Saint Dorotheus aduises,
that when soever any of these occasions is offered us, to receive it as a
remedy, and medcine wherewith to cure and heal our pride; and to pray God for
him who ministers the occasion, as for the Physician of our souls, and to be
fully persuaded that who soever abhorrs these things, abhors Humility.

The third stepp which we are to mount, is, that we rejoice not, and take
noe contentment when men do esteem and praise us. This is more hard then the
last stepp, as Saint, Augustine says. Etsi cuiquam facile est laud carere dum
denegatur, difficile est, ea non delectari cum offertur. Though it be an easy
thing to want praise when it is not given; yet for a man not to be gladd to be
esteemed, and praised, and not to take contentment therein, when it is offered,
is very hard. Saint Gregory handles this point very well, upon those words of
Job. Si vidi Solemn cum fulgeret, and Lunam incedentem claere, and latatum est,
in abscondito cor meum. If I saw the Sun when it shined, and when the Moon
went brigh^ly on, and if my heart rejoiced in secret. Saint Gregory says, that
Job spoke thus, because he did not joy or take vain contentment in the
praises, and estimation of men. For this is to behold the sun when it
shines, and the Moon when it is bright, for a man to consider the praise,
opinion, and fame, which he has amongst men, and takes delight and gust
therein. He says therefore, that there is this difference between the humble
and the proud, that the proud rejoice when they are praised, though it be not
true, which is said of them, and they rejoice because they keep noe accounte
at all concerning that which indeed they are in themselves, and in the sight of
God, but they only pretend to be valued and esteemed ^y men: and so they joy,
and even look bigg with it, as men who have attained the end to which they
aspired. But now the true humble man of heart, when he finds that they esteem
and praise, and speak well of him, then shrinks he up, and is the more
confounded in himself, according to that of the Prophet. Exaltatus autem,
humiliatus sum, and conturbatus. When they exalted me, then did I humble my
self the more, and walked on with the more confusion, and fear. And that with
reason. Tanta enim consideratione trepidat, ne aut de his in quibus laudatur
and non sunt, maius dei indicium inueniat, aut de his in quibus laudatur, and
sunt, competens praemium perdat. For he seares, least he should be the more
punished by Almighty God, for wanting that for which he was praised, or if
perhaps he want it not, yet he fears least these praises should prove to be
his whole reward; and that so they will come and say to him, Recepisti bona in
vita tua, Thou have already received the reward of thy good works.

So that, whereas proud men take occasion to look big, and grow vain upon
the praises of men, from thence do such as are humble, take occasion to abase
and confound them selves, so much the more. And this says S. Gregory, is
that, which the wise man affirms; Q^omodo probatur in conslatorio argentum,
and in furnace aurum, sic probatur homo, ore laudantis. As silver is tried in
the melter, and gould in the Crisoble, so is a man tried by the mouth of him,
by whom he is praised.

Gould and silver, if it be not right, is consumed by the fire, but if it be
good, it is purified and clarified thereby. Just so, says the wise man, is a
man proved by praise. For when a man is esteemed and praised, if he exalt
himself and grow vain through those praises, his Gould and silver is not
good, because the Crysoble of the tongue consumes it, But he, who hearing his
praises takes occasion from thence to be the more confounded and humbled, is
most perfect Silver and gould, because that fire of praise did not consume it:
but rather it remained more purified and perfected thereby, since the man was
more confounded and humbled.

Take you therefore this for a sign, whether you profitt in the virtue of
Humility or not, since the holy Ghost delivers it for such. Consider whether
you be sorry when they esteem and praise you, or rather whether you be not
content and gladd. We read of our Father Franciscus de Borgia, that noe one
thing troubled him so much, as when he found himself to be honored, for a
Saint, and servant of God. And being asked once, why he afflicted himself so
much for this, (himself not desiring it, nor procuring it) he made answer,
that he feared the accounte which he was to give to God, When he found himself
to be so far another man, from that which he was conceived to be, which is
that which we said before of Saint Gregory. After this manner, are we to be
very deeply grounded in the knowledge of our selves, that so the wind of
praise and estimation of men, may not blow us up, and draw us out of our
Nothing. But we must rather be the more ashamed thereof, and confounded
thereby, considering how false those praises are, and that we have noe such
virtue in us, as may deserve them; and that we be not such as the world
conceiues, and publishes, and as indeed we ought to be.

Of the fowerth stepp, which is to desire to be disesteemed, and despised, and
to be glad thereof. CHAPTER XV.
THe fowerth stepp for arriving to the perfection of Humility, is for a man to
desire to be despised, and disesteemed, and he be glad of dishonors, injuries,
and contempt. Saint Bernard says, Verus humilis vilis vult reputari, non
humilis praedicari, and gaudet de contemptu sui. The man who is truly humble,
desires to be held by others, in small accounte, and not to be accounted
humble, but unworthy and mean, and to be glad thereof. This is the second
degree of Humility, and in this the perfection thereof consists. And for this
reason, Humility is compared to Narde which is a small and odoriferous
herb, according to that of the Canticles. Nardus mea dedit odorem suum. For
then dot the Odor of this Narde of Humility, extend and impart it self to
others, when not only you put little esteem upon your self, but when you
also desire, and like well, that you be despised and disesteemed by others.
Saint Bernard notes, that there are two kinds of Humility. One is when a man
considering himself, and perceiving his misery, and baseness, is convinced by
the truth, and houlds himself in noe esteem and resolves that he is worthy to
be despised and dishonored by all men. He says, that the former Humility,
namely that of the understanding, was not in Christ our Lord; for it was not
possible for him to think, that he deserved to be held in mean accounte, and
much less to be dishonored, and despised. Quoniam sciebat se ipsum. Because he
understood himself perfectly well; and ^now that he was true God, and equal
to his Father: Non rapinam arbitratus est, esse se aequalem Deo; sed semetipsum
exinaniuit, sormam serui accipiens. But the second kind of Humility, was in
him, namely that of the heart, and will. For in reguard of the great love which
he bore us, he was pleased to abase and disauthorise himself; and to seem
vile and contemptible in the eyes of men. And so he says, Discite a me, quia
mitis sum and humilis cord. Learn of me, for I am meek and humble of heart.
But as for us, we are to have both these Humilities, because the first with
out the second, is dec^ipt full and false. To desire to seem, and to be held
for other, then that which really you are, is falsehood and deceit. He who
really is humble, and indeed thinks basely and disesteemes and despises
himself, is also to be gladd, that others may d^spise and disesteeme him.

This is that which we are to learn of Christ our Lord. Consider how cordially
and with how ardent desire, and will, he embraced dishonor, and contempt for
love of us. For he was not satisfied, with abasing and emptying himself, by
making himself man, and taking the form of a servant upon him, he who was
and is the lord of heaven and earth; but he would needs assume the form and
habit of a sinner. Deus filium suum mittens in similitudine carnis peccati,
says the Apostle. God sent his son, in the habit and similitude of a sinful
man. He took not sin, because sin could not be in him, but he took the
mark and sign of sinners, for he would be circumcized as a sinner, and
baptized amongst Publicans and sinners; as if he had been one of them, and
would be less esteemed then Barrabas, and judged to be a worse man, and more
unworthy of life, then he. To conclude, the desire which he had to suffer,
affronts, and scorns, and reproach, for love of us, was so very great, that
he thought the hour to stay very long, wherein, all inebrated with love, he
might remain naked, like another Noe, to be scorned by men. Baptismo habeo
baptizari, and quomodo coarcto donee perficiatur. With baptism (says he) am I
to be baptized (which was a baptism of blood) and how am I in pain, till I
may be able to put it in execution. Desiderio desideraui, hoc Pascha manducare
vobiscu^: with desire have I desired that the hour may once arrive, wherein
there shall be nothing for me, but buffetts, and spurns as to any slave. For he
knew that they would spitt upon his face, as a blasphemour; and cloth him with
white as a fool, and with purple as a Counterfeit king, and above all that
they would load him with scourges. Which was the punishment of Malefactors and
murdering thieves; and finally with the torment of the Cross in the company of
murderers; which then was the most ignominious and reproach full manner of
death, that could be sound in the world. This is that, which Christ our
redeemer desired, with so great desire. Improperium expectauit cor meum, and
miseriam, says the Prophet in his name. I was expecting reproach, and
affronts, as one would expect ^ome what which were very pleasing to him, and
were to give him much gust; For indeed of such things as these, ought we to
have. hope, and grief, for our fear of others. And the Prophett Jeremy says,
Saturabitur opprobriis. He desired and thirsted after this hour, that he
might as a man may say, even have his bellyfull of reproaches, and affronts, and
scorns, as of things to which he carried an extreme appetite, and of which
he was very greedy, and indeed they were most sauory to him for the love of
us.

B^t now if the son of God, desired dishonor and contempt, with so great
appetite, and received them with so much contentment and gust for the love of
us, he having noe way deserved them; me thinks it should be no such strange
matter for us, who have so well deserved all kind of dishonor and contempt,
to desire for love of him, to be held for noe other then what we are, and to
rejoice in suffering those disgraces and affronts which we deserve; as Saint
Paul did when he said; Propter quod, placeo mihi in infirmitatibus meis, in
contumelijs, in necessitatibus, in angustiis pro Christo. For which reason I
rejoice in my infirmities, and injuries: and affronts, and necessities, and
persecutions and all kind of difficulties, for Christ our Lord. And writing to
the Philippians, and treating of his imprisonment, he desires them to bear him
company, in the joy he had, to see himself in Chains, for Christ our Lord.
He had such an abundance of joy in the persecutions and afflictions which he
suffered, that he had to spare for his friends, and therefore he invited them
to partake thereof, with him. This is that milk, which the Blessed Apostles
sucked from the breast of Christ. And so we read thus of them; Ibant gaudentes
a con^pectu concilii, quoniam digni habiti sunt pro nomine Jesus, contumeliam
pati. They were full of joy and gust, when they were carried prisoners, before
their presidents, and into their Sinagogues, and esteemed it for a great
fa^our, and regalo, at the hands of God, to be thought worthy to suffer
affronts, and injuries, for the name of Christ. Herein they were imitated by
other Saints, as, for example by a Saint Ignatius the Martyr, who when they
were carrying him to be martyred at Rome, with many scorns and reproaches, was
full of joy and said: Nunc incipio Christi esse discipulus. It is but now, that
I begin to be a Disciple of Christ.

And this is that which our Father desires, that we may imitate, and he
inioynes it in these words, of great exaggeration and ponderation. They who
shall enter here, and live in the Society, are to observe and consider, as in
the presence of God, our Creator and our Lord, that it is of great moment, and
must be with us of great accounte, in order to our profiti^g in the way of
spirit; to abhor wholly, and not only in part, whatsoever the world
embraces and loves; and to embrace with our whole hearts, whatsoever was
embraced by Christ our Lord. For as worldly men follow, and love the world, and
with all diligence search after worldly honor, and estimation, and fame, as
the world teaches them, so they who walk in spirit and are serious in
following Christ our Lord, do ardently desire the direct contrary. That is to
say, the same clothing, and livery, which our Lord ware for the love and
reverence which we bear him. And all this to such a proportion, as that where
soever it may not be of any offense to his divine Majesty, nor involue the
sin of any of our neighbors, nor our selves give any occasion thereof, we
must desire to suffer injuries, false testimonies, affronts, and to be esteemed
for noe better then fools, and this only, through a desire to imitate and
resemble Jesus Christ our Lord, and creator, in some poor manner. In this
Rule is decyphred all that which can be said of Humility. This is to have, in
good earnest, forsaken and detested the world, and the most difficult part
thereof, which is the appetite and desire to be valued, and esteemed, this is
to be dead to the world, and to be indeed Religious; that as they of the
world, desire to be honored and esteemed, and rejoice in it, so we may desire
dishonor, and contempt, and be glad of them. This is to be truly of the
Society of Jesus, and to be the companions of Jesus. Let us therefore keep him
company, not only in name but in dishonor, and contempt; and let us put on
his livery, in being affronted and despised by the world, with him, and for
him; and in being joyful, and glad thereof for his love. Thou, O Lord, were
publicly proclaimed, as wicked; and placed between two murdering thieves;
and therefore permit not, that I be proclaimed for good; for it is not reason
that the servant should be better esteemed then the Master. And if, O Lord,
they persecuted and despised thee, let them also persecute, affront, and
despise me, that so I may imitate thee, and appear to be thine assotiate, and
disciple. Father Franciscus Xauier, said, that he held it to be unworthy of a
Christian, who is ever calling to mind the affronts which were done to Christ
our Lord, if he, the while, would take gust, in that the world should bear him
reverence and honor.

That the perfection of humility and of all other virtues, consists in
performing the acts thereof, with delight and gust; and how much this imports
toward our perseverance in virtue. CHAPTER XVI.
IT is the common Doctrine of the Philosophers, that the perfection of virtue
consists in performing the acts thereof, with delight, and gust. For treating
of the signs whereby it may be known, whether a man have obtained the habit
of any virtue: they say they are t^eis; when a man works according to that
virtue, Prompte, Faciliter, and Delectabiliter: with Promptitude, with
Facility, and with Delight. He who has acquired the habitt of any art, or
science, performs the works thereof, with extreme promptitude and facility,
And so we see, that he who is skillful upon any instrument, and has gotten
the habitt thereof, plays with extreme promptitude and facility: and has
noe need to provide himself, nor to think much of the matter, for even
though he think of other things, he will yet play well. Now in the self same
manner, he who has acquired the habitt of virtue, performs the acts thereof.
And therefore if you will know, whether you have acquired the virtue of
Humility, look first whether you perform the works thereof with promptitude,
and facility, for if you feel difficulty, or repugnance in the occasion
which present themselves to you, it is a sign that you have not yet acquired
the perfection of that virtue. And if, for the bearing them well, you have
need of preuentions, and consideration I confess it is a good way for the
obteyning the perfection of that virtue, but still it is a sign, that you have
not obtained it yet. As he, who is to play upon the Lute, must go thinking,
where he is to place one finger, and where an other, and calling to mind the
rules which he was taught, does well toward his learning to play; but with
all, it is a sign that as yet, he has not gotten the habitt of that
instrument, For he who has got it, needs not call this, or that to mind, to
the end that he may play well. And so said Aristotle Ars perfecta, non
deliberat, tam sibi facilis est actus suus. He who has perfectly acquired
the habit of any art, finds it so easy to perform the acts thereof, that he
ha^h noe need of cogitation or deliberation, how to do them, for the doing
them well. And so the Philosophers come to say, that the virtue of a man is
known, by his sudden and inconsiderate acts. In repentinis secundum habitum
operamur; a man's virtue is not known by the acts which he performs, upon
great deliberation, but by such, as do come from him, at unawares.

Yea and the Philosophers say yet more then this. Plutarch, treating how it may
be known, when a man has obtained a virtue gives two signs thereof; and one
of them which the great Philosopher Zeno left in writing, is, by his Dreams.
If even when you are in your dreams, as you are sleeping, you have noe ill
impulses or unclean imaginations; or when, if you have them, you take noe gust
or contentment in them, but the contrary: and when you resist the temptation
and delight thereof even in your dreams, as if you were a wake, this is a
sign, that the virtue is well rooted in your souls, and that, not only your
vill is subject to reason, but even your sensual appetite, and imagination.
Just so, as when Coach-horses are well taught, though the Coachman lay the
raines on their necks, and perhaps sleep himself, yet they go on their way,
without making any fault. So, says the Philosopher: They who have perfectly
obtained any virtue, and have totally subdued the affects and brutall appetites
which repugne to it, go on their, right way, even when they sleep. Saint
Augustine does also teach us this doctrine, thus. Domine, memores mandatorum
tuorum, etiam in somnis resistimus. Some servants of God carry so great an
affection to virtue, and to the keeping of God's comaundements, and so great
detestation against vice, and are so accustomed, and inured to the resistance
of temptations, when they are a wake as that they resist them also even when
they sleep. We read in the life of Father Franciscus Xauier, that in a
certain temptation or illusion which he had once in his sleep, cast up
certain gulpes of blood. In this sort do some declare, that place of Saint
Paul: Sieve vigelemus, sieve dormiamus, simul cum illo viuaemus: which imports
only that both living and dying, we must ever live vith Christ vhich is the
common exposition: but moreover that the zealous servants of God, must ever
live with Christ, and that not only wakeing, but even sleeping also, and
dreameing.

The Philosophers go yet further, and say; that the third condition or sign,
whereby it may be known, if a man have perfectly obtained any virtue, is when
he performs the works thereof, Delectabiliter, with delight and gust, for
this is the principal sign, wherein the perfection of virtue consists. If
therefore you will see whether you have obtained the perfection of the virtue of
Humility, examine your selves by that rule, which we delivered in the last
Chapter; and see whether you be as gladd of any dishonor, and affront, as
wordly men use to be, of honor and estimation.

But besides that all this is necessary for arriueing to the perfection of any
virtue, there is yet another thing of very great importance, toward the
contynuing, and perseuering therein. For in fine, till we arrive to perform
the actions of virtue, with gust and joy, it will be a thing of much
difficulty, to continue in virtue. Saint Dorotheus says, that this was the
common doctrine of those ancient fathers: Solebant patres, and maiores nostri,
firmiter asserere; Quicquid animus alacriter non admittit, diuturnum esse non
posse. Those ancient Fathers were wont to say, and they held it for a most
certain truth, that whatsoever was not performed with gust and joy, could not
last any long time. It may well happen, that for some fit, you will keep
silence, and live with modesty and recollection; but yet, till this flow from
the very interior of the heart, and till by the good custom which you use, you
make it grow as it were to be connaturall to you, and so you come to perform
it with swauitie and gust, you will not continue long therein, but it will
pass, as being affectect and forced; Et nullum vi^lentum perpetuum. For this
reason, it imports so much, to exercise the acts of any virtue with such
constancy, as thereby to root it in the soul, which must even drink it up in
such sort, that it may fall, even as it were of it self, upon the virtue and
they may seem to be acts of our own nature, for so we shall perform them
with joy and gust. By these means we may obtain a kind of security, that we
shall continue and persevere therein. This is that, which the Prophett says:
Sed in lege domini volu^tas eius. Another translation says, Sed in lege Domini
voluptas eius. Blessed is that man, whose whole contentment, joy, and gladness,
is in the law of our lord, and who make it his delights, and entertainements;
for that man will yield the fruit of good works, like a tree which is planted
by the river side.

The perfection to which we must procure to rise, in this second degree of
Humility, is more declared. CHAPTER XVII.
SAint John Climacus adds another point to the former; and says that as proud
men love honor and estimation, so much, that to be the more honored, and
esteemed by men, they feign, and pretend sometimes to certain things, which
they have not, as namely more nobility, more riches, more capacity, and parts
then their own; so it is the sign of a most profound Humility, when a man
arriues to have so great a desire to be humbled, and despised, that for the
obteyning thereof, he procures in certain cases, to faigne, and to pretend to
have some defects, which indeed he has noth; that so he may come to be
less esteemed. Of this, says he, we have an example in a certain father
Simeon; who, hearing that the Admiral of the Country, came to make him a
visitt, as to a famous and holy man, took a piece of bread and cheese into his
hand, and sitting down at the door of his Cell, he began to eat thereof
after such an untoward manner, as some natural fool might use, which as soon
as the Admiral saw, he despised him; and the other remained with much
contentment, for having obtained what he pretended. And we read of the like
examples of other Saints, as namely, of Saint Francis, when he put himself to
tread mortar, that so he might fly from honor, and from that reception which
they had a mind to make him, and of Friar Juniper also when he put himself
to play at boys play with Children, out of the same end.

These Saints considered, that the world despised the son of God, who is the
supreme and the infinite good; and perceiving the world to be so deceiptfull
and false, and that is was mistaken in not knowing such a resplendent and
clear light, as the son of God was, and in not honoring him who was most
true and perfect honor; they conceived such a hatred and detestation against
the world, and the estimation thereof, that they reproved all that which the
world approues, and they praised and loved all that which the world despises,
and hates: and so they fledd with great care, from being praised and esteemed
by the world which despised their God, and their lord: and they held it for a
particular sign of being beloved by Christ our lord, to be despised by the
world with him, and for the love of him. This is the cause, why Saints have
taken so much gust, in the contumelies and affronts of the world; and have
tried so many conclusions, for the obteyning to be contemned thereby. It is
true, says Saint John Climachus, that many of these things were done by
particular instinct of the holy Ghost, and so are a more fit object, for our
admiration then for our imitation to work upon. But Though we arrive not to
perform that holy kind of simplicity, in act, as those Saints did, we must
yet procure to imitate them in the love, and great desire which they had* to be
undervalued and desprised.

Saint Diadocus goes on further and says, that there are two kinds of
Humility, Vna mediorum, altera perfectorum. The first is of the middle sort,
who are proficients, but yet are still in the fight, and are combated with the
thoughts of pride, and of ill motions, though they procure with the grace of
our Lord, to resist them by humbling and confounding themselves. Another
Humility there is, which belonges to such as are perfect; and this is when our
lord communicates so great light to a man, in the way of knowing himself,
that it seems, as if now he could not be proud, yea and that even the motions
thereof, could now come noe more. Tunc anima velu^ naturalem habet humilitatem.
Then haht the soul, a kind of Humility, even as if it were natural. For
howsoever he may perform great things, yet he exalts not himself one iott,
the higher for that, nor does he esteem himself the more, but rather houlds
himself for inferior to all. And he says, there is this difference between
these two kinds of Humility, that commonly the first is exercised with some
trouble, and pain, as being, in fine, performed by such a one, as has not
yet obtained a perfect conquest of himself, but still feels some
contradiction; for this is indeed that, which gives sorrow and pain: when the
occasion of Humiliation and disestimation arrive; for in this case, they may
take things with patience, but they cannot do it with joy; for still there is
some what within, which makes resistance, because the passions are not overcome.

But now the second kind of Humility; gives noe pain or grief at all, but
rather much joy (so that the man be indeed in that confusion and shame and
have that true disesteeme and contempt of himself before our lord) for such a
one, has nothing now, which can make him any resistance* in reguard that he
has conquered and subdued the contrary passions, and vices, and obtained a
perfect victory over himself. And from hence it is, says the Saint, that they
who have but the first humility, are troubled and altered, by the
adversities, and prosperities and variety of eue^ts in this life. But as for
them who possess the second Humility, neither are they troubled by things
adverse, nor do prosperous things make them giddy, or light; nor do they
cause any vain co^tentment in them; but they ever stand fast in one and the
same kind of State, and they enjoy great tranquillity and peace, as men who
have acquired perfection, and consequently are superior to all events. Nothing
can disquiet and give pain to him, who desires to be disesteemed, and is glad
thereof; for if that which might trouble him, and give him pain, namely the
being forgotten and disesteemed, be that in fine which he desires, and that
which gives him contentme^t and gust, who can ever be able to disquiet him? If
in that whereby it seems others sustain so much war, he can find as much
peace, nothing can deprive him of that peace. And so says S. Chrysostom,
Such a man as this, has found heaven, and the state of happiness here on
earth. Anima aute^ quae sic se habet, quid potest esse beatius? quicu^que talis
est, is in portu continuo sedet, ab omni tempestate liber, and oblecta^tur in
screnitate cogitationum.

Now to this perfection of Humility must we procure to arrive: and let us not
hold it to be impossible, for by the grace of God, says S. Augustine not
only may we imitate the Saints but even the lord of Saints also, if we will.
For our Lord himself requires us to learn of him, Discite a me, quia mitis
fum, and humilis cord. Learn of me, for I am meek, and humble of heart. And
the Apostle Saint Peeter, says that he gave us am example to the end that we
might imitate it. Christus passus est pro nobis, vobis relinquens exemplum, vt
sequamini vestigia eius. And Saint Jerome upon those words of Christ our Lord,
Si vis perfectus esse, says, that it is clearly gathered from these words,
that it is put into our power, to be perfect, since Christ our lord says, If
thou will be perfect. Q^ia si dixeris vires non suppetunt, qui inspector est
cordis, ispe intelligit. For if you say, I have noe strength wherewith to do
it, God knows our weakness very well, and yet still he says, that you may if
you will: For he is ever ready to help us if we will: and with his help we
may do all things. Jacob (says the Saint) saw a ladder which reached from
earth, to the heavens, and the Angels went up and down by it; and at the
upper end thereof, the omnipotent God himself satt, to help them, who were
ascending up; and to animate them by his presence, to undertake that l^bour.
And now procure you also to mount this ladder, by these steps, whereof, we
have spoken, for himself will reach you forth his hand that so you may be
able to ascend even the last stepp thereof. When the trauailer sees some steep
hill, whereby he is to pass, it seems from far off, to be a kind of
impossible thing for him to ascend there: but when he comes nearer, he finds
the way ready made and that it is easily to be ouercomed.

Of some means for the obteyning of this second degree of Humility, and
perticularly of the example of Christ our Lord. CHAPTER XVIII.
THey ordinarily use to assign two several ways or means, for the obteyning
of Moral virtues. The one, is of reasons and considerations, which may
convince and animate us thereunto; and the other, is exercise of the acts of
that virtue, whereby we may acquire the habitts thereof. To begin with the
first kind of means, one of the most principal, and efficatious
considerations, whereof we may help our selves toward being humble or rather
the most principal, and most efficatious of them all, is the example of Christ
our Lord, our M^ster and our Redeemer, whereof though we have already said
some what, there will ever be enough to add. The whole life of Christ our lord,
was a most perfect Original of Humility, from the very time of his birth, to
that other of his expiring upon the Cross. But yet to this purpose, S.
Augustine does particularly ponder, the example which he gave us, by washing
the feet of his disciples, upon that Thursday of the last Supper vhen he was
even upon the very bri^me of his passion, and death. Christ our Lord, says S.
Augustine, was not content with having given us the examples of his whole life
past nor yet with them also, which he was shortly to give in his passion, the
same being then, so close at hand, wherein he was to appear according to the
Prophett Isay, the very last, or lowest of men: and as the royal Prophet David
says, the very reproach and scorn of men, yea the very out cast of the world:
But, sciens Jesus, quia venit hora eius, vt transcat ex hoc mundo, ad patrem,
cum dilexisset suos, qui erant in mundo, in finem dilexit eos. Our Lord Jesus
knowing, that his hour was now at hand, wherein he was to pass out of this
world to his Father, hi carried a great love to his disciples and was resolved,
that he vould express it now toward the end of his life. And supper being
ended, he rises from the table, he putts off his upper garment, he girds a
towell to himself, he putts water into a basen, he prostrates himself at the
feet of his disciples, yea and of Judas too: he washes them with those divine
hands of his, and he wipes them with the towell whereby he was girt. O
unspeakable mystery! What is this, O lord, which thou art doing? Domine tu mihi
lauas pedes? says the Apostle Saint Peter, Thou, O Lord, to wash my feet? The
disciples understood not then, what he did. Quod ego facio tu nescis modo,
scies autem postea, says our Lord: you understand not now what I am doing;
but ear long, I will declare it to you. He returns to the table, and
declares the mystery thus at large. Vos vocatis me Magister, and Domine, and
been dicitis, sum etenim, si ergo ego lauipedes vestros Dominus and Magister,
and vos debetis alter, alterius, lauare pedes. You call me Master and Lord, and
you say well, for so I am. If then I, being your Master and your Lord, have
humbled my self, and have washed your feet, you are also to do the like, to
one another. Exemplum enim dedi vobis, vt quemadmodum ego feci vobis, ita and
vos faciatis. I have given you an example, to the end that you may learn of me
and do, as I have done. This is the mystery, that you learn to humble your
selves, as I have humbled my self. The importance of this virtue of Humility,
is on the one side so great, and so is the difficulty also on the other,
that our Lord was not content with so many examples, as he had already given
us, and had then so near at hand to give; but that, as one who well knew our
Weakness, and who perfectly understood the malignity of that peccant humor
whereof our nature was sick, he would needs give us this strong Physic,
against it, and put it amongst the chief legacies of his last will and
Testament, that so it might remain the more deeply imprinted, in all our
hearts.

Upon those words of Christ our Lord, Learn of me, for I am meek and humble
of heart, Saint Augustine exclaymes thus: O doctrinam s^lutarem, O Magistrum,
dominumque mortalium, quibus mors, poculo superbiae propinata, atque tran^fusa
est, quid vt ducamus a te, venimus ad te. O Sovereign doctrine, O Master and
Lord of all men, into whom death entered by means of pride, what is it O lord
which thou will have us come, and learn of thee? That I am meek and humble of
heart. This is that which you are to learn of me. Huccine redacti sunt, omnes
thesauri s^pientiae and scientiae absconditi in te, vt pro magno discamus a te,
quoniam mitis sum and humilis cord: In this are the treasures of the wisdom,
and knowledge of the Father summed up, which have been hidden in thee, that,
thou tell us, for the highest point, that we must come and learn of thee,
that: Thou art meek and humble of heart? Ita me magnum est esse paruum, vt nisi
a te qui tam magnus es, ficret, disci omnino non posset. It is so high and
great a thing, for a man to make himself little, that unless thou who art so
great, had made thy self little, no man could have learnt it of thee? Yea
says Saint Augustine, So great and so hard a thing it is, for a man to humble
himself, and make himself little, that if Gof himself had not humbled
himself, and become little, men would never have been brought to humble
themselves. For there is nothing so deeply conveyed into their very bowels,
and so incorporated, as it were, into their hearts, as this desire of being
honored, and esteemed, and therefore was all this necessary, to the end that we
might grow to be humble; for such Physic did the infirmity of our pride
require, and such a wound, such a cure. But if such a receipt as this for God
to have made himself man, and to have humbled himself so much for our sakes,
will not recover us, and cure our pride, I know not, says S. Augustine, what
will ever be able to do it. Haec medicina si superbiam non curat, quid eam
curet nescio. If to see the Majesty of our Lord so abased, and humbled, will
not suffice to make us ashamed of desiring to be honored and esteemed, and that
here upon, we yet will not grow to a thirst of being despised; and a based
with him, and for the love of him, I know not what will ever serve the turn.
And Guericu^ the Abbott, being amassed and convinced by the great example of our
Lords Humility, exclaimes, and expresses that which it is reason that we
should also say, and draw from hence. Vicisti Domine, vicisti superbiam meam:
ecce do manus in vinculatua, accipe seruum sempiternum. Thou have overcome, O
Lord, thou have overcome my pride: th^ne example has bound me hand and foot:
behold I render and deliver up my self into thy hands, for an everlasting
slave.

It is also an admirable conceit, which the glorious S. Bernard, brings to
this purpose. The son of God (says he) saw two creatures, and both were
generous, n^ble, and capable of tha^ blessed state, to which they had been
created by Almighty God, and they both, lost themselves, because they would
needs be like him. God created the Angels, and instantly Lucifer had a mind
to be like Almighty God. In coelum conscenda^, super astra dei exalta^o solium
meum: sede^o in monte testamenti, in lateribus Aquilonis; ascendam super
altitudinem nubium, similis ero altissimo: And then he carried others after
him, and God cast them instantly down to Hell, and so of Angels, they became
devils. Verumtamen ad infernum detraberis, ad profundum laci. God also
created man, and instantly the devil struck him with his own leprosy, and
poison. Eritis sicut dij, scientes bonum and malum. They fell gluttonously upon
what he told them, namely that they should be as God, and then they broke the
divine commandment, and so became like the devil. The Prophett Eliseus, said
to his servant Giezi after he took the presents of the leprous Naaman, Thou
have taken the goods of Naaman, and behold his leprosy shall also stick to
thee, and to all thy descendents for ever. This was the judgment of God against
man, that since he would needs have the riches of Lucifer which was his pride,
he should also have his leprosy, which was the punishment thereof. You see
therefore here, that man was also undone, and made like the Devil, because
he would needs be like God. And what might now be fit for the son of God to
do, finding his eternal Father to be so jealous, and careful to maintain
his own honor. Ecce, inquit occasion mei, creaturas suas pater amittit. I
see, says he, that, by my occasion, my father looses his creatures. The
Angels would needs be as I am, they overthrew themselves; man would also be
so, and he was also overthrown. They all have envy at me, and would feign be
such as I am. Well then, Ecce venio, and talem eis exhibeo me ipsum, vt
quisquis in videre voluerit, quisquis gestierit imitari, fiat ei aemulatio ista
in bonum. Behold says the son of God, I will go in such a form, that who
soever will from hence forth, become like me, shall not loose but gain; and
for this came the son of God from heaven and made himself man. O therefore,
let such a bounty and mercy be blessed, and praised, and glorified, which
moved Almighty God to condescend to that so great appetite, which we had to
be like him, for now we may be as God, not according to falsehood, and with a
lie, and according to what the devil said, but according to truth; and not now
with pride, and malice, but with much sanctity, and Humility. Upon those
words, Paruulus natus est nobis, the same Saint says, Studeamus effici sicut
paruulus, discamus ab eo quia mitis est and humilis cord, ne magnus Deus sine
causa factus sit homo paruulus. Since God being so great made himself
little, for us, let us procure to humble our selves, and make our selves also
little; that so it may not be to noe purpose, for us, that the great God made
himself so little as to become a Child for us. Quia nisi efficiamini sicut
paruulus iste, non intrabitis inregnum caelorum: Because if you become not like
this little Child, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Of some humane considerations, and reasons, whereby we are to help our selves
for being humble. CHAPTER XIX.
FRom the very beginning of this Treatise, we have been declaring many
considerations and reasons, which may help and animate us much toward the
getting of the virtue of Humility: showing that it is the root and foundation
of all the virtues, the short way to acquire them, the means to co^serue them,
and that, in fine, if we possess this, we shall be Masters of them all. But
yet, that it may appear, that we mean not to carry it all, by the only way
of spirit, it will not be a miss, that we deliver some human considerations
and reasons, which may be more proportionable and connaturall to our weakness;
to the end that being so convinced not only by vay of spirit, and of
perfection, but even of natural reason also, we may have both more courage,
and more affection to the contempt of honor, and estimation of the world, and
to proceed in the way of Humility; for all this will be needful, for the
acquiring of a thing so hard as this; and so it will be well, that we help
our selves of it all.

Let it therefore be the first, that we put our selves to consider, and examine
at good leisure, and with attention, what thing this honor, and estimation of
men is, which makes so still war against us, and gives us all so much to
do. Let us see, what weight, and bulk it has, that so we may esteem it
noe better then it deserves, and may animate our selves to despise it, and not
continue in so much error, as now we find our selves subject to. Seneca
said very well, that there are many things, which we hold to be great, not
because indeed they are great; but because our poorenes, and wretchedness is
such, that the small seems great, and the little much, to us. And he brings
the example of that weight, which is ordinarily carried by Ants: w^^ch in
respect of their body is very great, being yet very small in it self; and i^st
so it is, with the honor and estimation of the world. If you deny it, I would
ask whether you be indeed, either the better because others esteem you, or
the worse because they esteem you not? Infaillibly you are not. Saint
Augustine says, Nec malam conscientiam sanat praeconium laudantis, nec bonam
vulnerat conuitiantis opprobriu^. Neither is the ill man made good, by being
esteemed, and praised: nor the good man made ill, by being discommended and
reproached. Senti de Augustino quicquid libet, sola me in oculis Dei
conscientia non accuset. Think of Augustine what thou will, that which I
desire, is that my conscience may not reproach me in the sigth of God. This is
that which imports, the rest is soolery, for it neither gives, nor takes away.
This is that, which that other Saint says. What is a man the better for being
praised by another. And as much as any man is in the sight of God, so much
indeed he is, and noe more, as the humble. Saint Francis said, or rather as
was said by the Apostle Saint Paul. Non enim qui se ipsum commendat, illi
probatus est, sed quem Deus commendat.

Saint Augustine brings a good comparison, to this purpose. Est enim superbia,
non magnitudo, sed tumor: quod autem tumet, videtur magnum, sed non est tamen.
Pride and estimation of the vorld, is not greatness but swelling and wind. And
as when any part is swelled, it seems, but is not truly great, so proud
men, who are valued and esteemed by the world, seem as if they were great,
but they are not so; because that is not greatness but swelling. There are
certain sickly men, who sometimes are thought to be upon recovery, because
they seem to look fatt, and well, but that fattnes is not sound, and good,
but it is rather sickly, and swelling. So says Saint Augustine, is the
applause and estimation of the world, it may puff you up, but it cannot make
you great. If then it be so, that the opinion and estimation of the world is
not any thing of greatness in it self, but rather o^ sickness and swelling, why
do we go up and down like Camelions, sucking in wind with our mouths
open, that so we may be the more swollen, and sick? It is better for a man to
be in health, though he seem sick, then to be sick, and seem sound so
also is it better to be good, though he seem wicked, then to be wicked, and
be held for good. For what good will it do you, to be held virtuous, and
spiritual if indeed you be not so. Et laudent eum in portis opera eius.
Saint Jerome says upon these words, Not the vain praises of men, but your
good works must defend and praise you when you appear in judgment, before
Almighty God.

Saint Gregory recounts how in the Monastery of Hiconia, there was a certain
Moncke who was generally in the opinion of being a saint, and especially for
being very abstinent, and full of penance also, otherwise. But the hour of
his death being come, he desired that all the Moncks might be called to him.
For their parts they were very glad of it, as conceiving, that they were to
hear from him, some, matter of much edification, but he trembled, and was full
of anguish and found himself compelled from within, to declare his true state
to them. And so he made them know, that he was damned, because all his life
had been but Hypocrisy. For when they thought he fasted, and did much
penance, he eat secretly when they saw him not, and for this says he, am I
now delivered over to a terrible and furious beast, whose tail has wreathed
it self about, and tied my feet, and his head is already entringnow into my
mouth, to fetch out and carry a way my soul with him for ever. And with this
words he expired, to the great amazement of them all. And now, what was these
miserable creature, the better for having been reputed a Saint?

Saint Athanasius compares proud men, who go in search of honor, to children
who hunt butterflyes. Others compare them to spiders, who destroy and defeat
themselves, in making their webbs, for the hunting of flies, according to that
of Esaias. Telas araneae texuerunt. For so the proud man ever disinbowells
himself and casts up, as it were, his very mawe, that he may obtain a little
human praise. We read in the life of Father Franciscus Xauier, that he ever
both carried and showed, a most particular hatred, and detestation against this
opinion, and estimation of the world, for he said that it was the cause of
great mischeefs, and the impediment of many blessings. And so they heard him
cry thus out sometimes, with much earnestnes, and many sighs: O opinion, O
opinion and estimation of the world, how many mischeefes have thou wrought
already, how many workest thou now, and how many will thou continue to work.

Of other human reasons, which will help us to be humble. CHAPTER XX.
SAint Chrysostom upon those words of Saint Paul. Non plus sapere quam
oportet sapere, sed sapere ad sobrietatem, goes proueing very expressly, that
the proud and arrogant person, is not only wicked and sinnfull, but a stark
fool with all, and for this, he bring^ that of Esaias, Stultus enim fatua
loquitur the fool speaks foolish things; and by the follyes which he vtters,
you shall understand, him indeed to be a fool. Well then* let us observe the
follyes which are uttered by the arrogant and proud man: and we shall quickly
see what a fool he is. What is that, which the first proud creature uttered,
which was Lucifer. In coelum conscendam, super astra dei exaltabo solium meum,
stabo in Monte testamenti, in lateribus Aquilonis; ascendam super altitudinem
nubium, similis ero altissimo. I will mount up to heaven, and I will place and
exalt my throne above the clouds, and being there, above the Stars, I will
be like the most high. Quid stultius? What could be more foolishly and
disioyntedly conceived. And in the tenth Chapter, he setts down very arrogant
and folish words of Assure, king of the Assirrians wherewith he glorified
himself, in that, with his powerful hand, he had conquered and subdued all
the kings of the earth. Et inuenit quasi nidum, manus mea fortitudinem
populorum, and sicut colliguntur oua, quae derelicta sunt, sic vniuersam terram
ego congregaui, and non fuit qui mouerit pennam, and aperiret os, and ganniret.
As when a man takes the poor little birds out of a nest, which are bredd up,
by the elder birds, and as a man who goes to gather the eggs which are not
defended, so have I (says he) conquered all the earth, with the same
facillity; nor was there any one who durst so much as stir, yea or so much
as open his mouth against me, either in earnest or in jest. What greater folly
can there be then this, says Saint Chrysostom? And there he also bring sin
diverse other speeches of proud men, which discover very sufficiently what
fools they are, so that if you hear and mark their words, you will not
easily discern whether they be words of a proud man, or of some other who is a
mere sott, so absurd and disioynted they are. And so we daily see, that as
fools move us to laughter, with what they say, and do, so do also proud
men, in their conversation, by the arrogant words which they utter, redounding
to their own praise, and by the gestures which they use, and by the State and
foolish gravity wherewith they walk, and by the high accounte which forsooth,
they will needs have men make both of their persons, and of all that which is
theirs, and by the estimation wherein they themselves hold them. And Saint
Chrysostom adds, that the stupidity, or folly of proud men, is worse, and
worthy of greater reproach and shame, then that which is natural; for this
carries noe fault or sin with it, but the other does. From whence also
follows, another difference between these two follyes, that they who are
natural fools, cause pity and move all men to be sorry and compassionate
of their misery; whereas the folly of proud men, moves not others to
compassion, and pity, but to laughter and scorn.

But in the mean time, proud men are sotts, and so we must proceed with them
as such. For as we must condescend, and seem to yield to that which fools
say, that so we may have peace with them (though indeed the thing be not so,
or at least though we understand it not after that manner,) (but yet still we
will not co^tradict him, because in fine he is a fool) just so do we
proceed with proud men. And indeed this humor, and madness, reigns so much
in the world at this day, that now we can hardly converse with men, but we must
be feign to smooth the^, and to say that, which really is not so, noe nor is
so conceived by us. For the other takes so much gust to understand that his
stories give contentme^t and seem so well to others; that there is noe better
way to oblige him, and to gain his good will, then by praising him. And this,
says the wiseman, is one of the vanities and folyes which he saw in the world,
namely that wicked men were praised, as good, because they were in high place.
Vidi impios sepultos, qui etiam cum adhuc viuerent, in loco sancto erant, and
laudabantur in ciuitate quasi iust^rum operum* sed vt hoc vanitas est. What
greater vanity and madness can there be, then to praise men, when they think
there is noe cause for it, yea and to do, as many times is done, when some
praise others, for that which they did ill, or at least for what they thought,
was ill done. And the jest is, that they have already told others what they
really think of you, but yet with you, because forsooth you must be kept
contented, they stick not for the most part, to lie. At other times, they are
feign to seek out by-ways, that so they may be able without lying, to speak
well of that, which indeed they do not like, and the matter is, because they
must treat you, and condescend to you as they would, to some stupid set, or
fool. The while, that other conceaues, that you are of the same humor with
him, and that you are also gladd when you are dealt with after the same manner:
and that the best morsel of the meat which he can be able to give you, after
you have preached or performed some such thing, is to tell you that you
discharged it excellently well, and that all the world was highly pleased with
you, and he treates you thus, to keep you in contentment, or else to gain your
good opinion, and affection, whereof perhaps he has need; but that for which
this serves indeed, is to make you a verryer fool then you were before:
because he praises you for what you said or did ill, and so you are the more
animated and confirmed, in committing the same errors another time. Men dare
not now a days, speak what they think, because they know that truth is
grown troublesome. Veritas odium parit. And they know that as he who is
madd, and frantic refuses to take physic, and spitts in the doctor's face,
when he desires to cure him: so does the proud man resist admonition and
reformation. And therefore, men will not tell such a one that which is to put
him out of appetite, for noe man desires to buy trouble with money, but they
think it the shorter way, to make him think they like that, which yet indeed
they mislike, and the other believes all, and is well pleased with it: Whereby
also we may see the truth of that which we delivered in the last chapter,
namely, how great a vanity and madness it is, to make any accounthe of the
praises of men, since we see that in this age, all is compliment, deceit,
flattery, and lies. For even they are able to derive and interpret the word
after this manner, Complimento cumplo y miento, that is to say, I comply, and I
lie, and the cause why I lie, is that I may comply.

But proud men, says S. Chrysostom are abhorred by all. First by almighty
God as the wiseman says: Abominatio domini est omnis arrogans; Every arrogant
man, is a very abomination, in the sight of God. And of seven things which
God abhorrs, he places pride for the first. Oculos sublimes. And not only are
they abhorred by God, but by men also. Odibilis coram deo est, and hominibus
superbia. Sicut eructant praecordia faetentium, sic and cor superborum. As they
who have ill longs, have so unsavory breath, that there is no indureing of it,
so also have proud men.

But now even this very world, gives them here the pay of their pride, for it
punishes them in that very thing, to which they most pretend, and all proves
with them, the contrary way. They pretend to be valued and esteemed by all, and
they are held by all to be sotts, and fools. They pretend to be beloved by
all, and indeed they are abhorred by all. By their betters, because these men
make themselves their equals; by their equals, because these men make
themselves their betters; by their inferiors t because these men depresse them
more then they should. Even the domestics and servants speak ill of their
Master, and endure him not. Vbi fuerit superbia, ibi erit contumelia, and on
the other side, the humble man is valued, and esteemed, affected and beloved by
all. As Children who for their goodness, their innocence, their simplicity of
heart, are beloved, so, says the glorious Saint Gregory, are the humble. For
that cleerenes and plainenes of their speech, and that conuersing with out
doublenes or deceit, even robbes men of their very hearts. Humility, is a
loadstone which draws all men's affections to it: and it seems that all men,
if they could, would take this humble man, into their very hearts.

To the end that we may at length be fully persuaded that it is a mere madenes,
to go desiring, and procuring the estimation and opinion of men Saint Bernard
makes a very good Dilemma, and concludes thus. Either it is madness in the son
of God, to abase and empty himself so far, as to choose contempt, and
dishonor for himself, or else it is extreme madness in us, to be in so great
desire of the honor, and estimation of the world. It was not folly, or madness
in the son of God, neither could it be, though the world thought it was as
Saint Paul says: Nos autem praedicamus Christum crucifixum, Iudaeis quidem
scandalum* gentibus autem stultitiam, ipsis autem vocatis Iudaeis, atque
Graecis, Christum Dei, virtutem, and Dei sapientiam. To the blind and proud
Gentiles and Jews, Christ our Lord seems to be a folly or madness: but unto us
who have the light of Faith, be is infinite wisdom and love. Now if his were
infinite wisdom, it will follow, that ours is stupidity, and folly; and that
we are very so^s in making such account as we do of the opinion estimation,
and honor of the world.

That the certain way, for a man to be valued and esteemed, even by men, is to
give himself to virtue and Humility. CHAPTER XXI.
IF with all that which we have said, you will not yet forsake these fumes, and
abate that edge and desire of honor, and estimation, but will still be saying,
that in fine it is a great point, to hold a good opinion, and estimation
amongst men, and that this imports very much, even for the edification of your
neighbors, and for many other things, and that the wiseman Counsels us to
have a care thereof, Curam habe de bono nomine: I say let it be so, in the
name of God; I am content that you have care to keep the good name you have,
and that you be esteemed, and held in good opinion by the world. But yet I
give you to understand with all, that if you desire it, as you say you do, you
err, even in order to that for which you desire it, and that you shall never
obtain that end, by this means, but the direct contrary. The safe and
certain way, whereby you shall infaillibly come to be much valued, and
esteemed by men, is virtue, and Humility, as Saint Chrysostom says. Procure
every one of you in particular, to be a good Religious man, and to be the
meanest, and humblest of all the rest, and that you may appear to be so, by
your manner of proceeding; and in the occasions which shall present themselves,
and so you shall be valued, and esteemed by all men. This is indeed the
honor of a Religious man, who has forsaken the world; and whom it is a
better sight to see with a broom in his hand, and a poor coat upon his
back, in the exercise of some low and mean office, then to behold a
Caualier, with horse and arms. And on the contrary side, for him to desire to
be valued, and esteemed by men, as a dishonor and affront to him as it were to
go out of his Religious order, and return to the world; for which men would
justly despise him. Quia hic homo caepit aedificare, and non potuit consummare.
Because this man began to build, and could not finish it. And so it is with
such as desire and pretend to be valued and esteemed by men; which indeed is to
return to the world with the heart. For this estimation, is the most truly and
properly belonging tho the world, and that which you forsook, and from which
you fledd when you came to be Religious men.

Will you clearly see how shameful, and reproachful a thing it is, for such
men to affect the estimation of the world, who profess to aspire toward
perfection? Let such a desire come but once so to light, as that others may
discern that you desire it; and you will quickly find, how much your self
will be confounded, and out of countenance, that any such thing should be
conceived of you. We have a very good example of this, in the holy Gospel.
The Evangelists relate, that the Apostles went once with Christ our Lord but
yet at such distance from him that they might think he heard them not, and so
they went discoursing, and arguing amongst themselves. Quis eorum videretur
esse mayor. Which of them was to be the chief, and best man amongst them. But
when they were all come home to Cafernaum, he asked them what that was, about
which they had been discoursing upon the way. And the holy Gospel says,
that the poor men were so ashamed, and out of countenance to see their
pretention and ambition discovered, that they had not one word to say. At illi
tacebant, siquidem in via inter se disputauerant, quis eorum mayor esset. But
then did the Savior of the world take them in hand, and say. You must know, O
you my disciples, that amongst wordly men, and them who live according to the
custom of the world, they who govern and command will be esteemed, and
honored a^ great persons. Vos autem non sic, sed qui mayor est in vobis, fiat
sicut minor, and qui praecessor est, sicut ministrator. But in my school, it
is directly otherwise; for the greatest there, is to be the least, and must be
a servant to all the rest. Si quis vult primus esse, erit omnium nouissimus,
and omnium minister.

In the house of God, and in a Religious Order he who hu^bles and abases
himself most, is the great man. He who makes himself the least of all;
makes himself the most esteemed of all. This is honor here, in a Religious
house: but that other, to which some pretend, is no honor but dishonor and
insteede of being valued and esteemed they come by that means, to be the most
disesteemed, and despised men of the company, because they are held proud,
which is the greatest descent that can be made. By nothing can you loose more
then if once it come to be found, that you desire and pretend to be valued, and
esteemed by men, and that you are standing upon puntilioes, and spend your
thoughts upon such toys as these. And so John Climacus says very well, That
vain glory has many times, been an occasion of ignominy to the owners, for it
has made them set upon things whereby they have proclaimed their vani^y and
ambition and so came to infamy and confusion. Saint Bonauenture adds, that
pri^e blindes the understanding in such sort, th t many times, the more pride
you have, the leesse you know it: and so, as being blind, a proud man says,
and does such things as that i^ himself could see them well, he would not for
the world either say or do them, even though there were noe such thing as
God, or virtue, but merely for that reputation, and honors sake, which is so
eagerly pursued. How many times does it happen, that a man is troubled, and
complains, because they made noe reckning of him, in such an occasion, or that
they preferred some other before him in such a business; he conceiving that it
belonged to him, and that he received a wrong thereby, and that it will
redound to his dishonor and diminution, and that it will lie as a note upon
him, and that others will discover it, and reflect upon it, and under this
color, he gives them to understand the exception which he takes, and the
trouble which he sustaines, by means whereof in very deed, he remains more
noted, and disesteemed, because he is held now for proud, and for a man that
stands upon certain points of honor, which here in a course of Religion, is
a most abominable kind of thing. Whereas, if he would have passed it over,
and neglected himself, and given way, that Superious might do their will, he
might have gained much honor, and been much esteemed for it.

So that, though there were noe such thing as a way of spirit, but that me^
were only to live in a course of prudence, and discretion, yea and even
according to the very laws of the world, the true and certain way for a man
to be valued, esteemed affected, and beloved by men, is to addict himself
seriously to acquire virtue, and Humility. Even among the Gentiles, it is
recounted of Agesilaus, who was the chief of the Lacedaemonians, and accounted
a wise man amongst them, that being asked by Socrates, how a man should do to
make all others esteem and conceive well of him, made this answer, Si talis
esse studeas qualis haberi vis. If you shall procure to be such, as you desire
to seem. And afterward, the same man, being asked concerning the same thing
answered thus, Si loquaris quae sunt optima, and facias quae sunt honestissima.
If you speak ever well, and do better. And it is related of another
Philosopher, that he had a great friend, who in every occasion spoke all good
of him* and telling him one day that he owed him much, because where soever he
chanced to be, he praised him much, and spoke much of his virtues, the
Philosopher answered him thus, I pay you well for your pains, by liueing in
such sort, as that you may not lie, in any of those things which you have said
of me.

But now we say not, for all this, that we must give our selves to virtue, and
Humility, to the end that we may be valued, and esteemed by men, for that were
pride, and a perverse error. That which we say is, that if we procure to be
humble indeed, and at the heart, we shall be valued and esteemed much, whether
we will or not: nay and the more we fly from honor and estimation, and the
more we shall desire to be despised, it will follow us the faster, just as the
shadow does the body, Saint Ierosme, treating of Saint Paula says. Fugiendo
gloriam, gloriam merebatur, quae virtutem quasi vmbra sequitur, and appetitores
sui deserens appetit contemptores. Flying from honor and estimation, she was
more honored and esteemed. For as the shadow whilst, a man flies from it
follows him, and on the contrary side, if he follows the shadow it flies from
him, and the faster he runs from it the more it flies, and so, as that he can
never overtake it; just so it is, in the point of honor and estimation. This
was taught us by Christ our Lord, in the holy Gospel, when he discoursed of
the way men were to hold in publicque meetings. When you shall be invited
(says he) sit not down in the highest place least perhaps a ghest of
greater quality then your self may have been desired; and when he arriues,
they wish you to quitt that place, and then you descend to the lowest with much
confusion and shame. But that which you are to do, is to sit down in the
lowest place, that so when he comes who invited you, he may cause you to
ascend higher, and thus you shall receive honor, before all the company. Which
in substance is the same thing, that the holy Ghost had said before, by the
mouth of the wiseman. Ne gloriosus appareas coram reg^, and in loco magnorum ne
staeteris; melius est enim vt dicatur tibi ascend huc, quam vt humilieris
coram principe. But the parable concludes with saying: Quia omnis qui se
exaltat humiliabitur; and qui se humiliat exaltabitur. For every man who
exalts himself shall be humbled, and he who humbles himself, shall be
exalted. Here you see, how the humble man who chooses the lowest and meanest
place, is valued and esteemed, no only before God, but before men also; and
on the other side, the proud man, who seeks the best and highest seat, is
undervalued, and despised. Saint Augustine exclames and says, O Sancta
Humilitas, quam dissimilis es superbiae. O holy Humility how unlike art thou
to pride? Ipsa superbia fratres mei, Luciferum de caelo deiecit, sed humilitas,
dei filium incarnauit. Ipsa superbia, Adam de Paradiso expulit, sed humilitas
latronem in Paradisum introduxit superbia gigantum linguas diuisit, and
confudit, sed humilitas cunctas congregauit d^^ersas. Superbia Nabucodonosor in
bestiam transmutauit: sed humilitas Joseph principem Israel constituit.
Superbia Pharaonem submersit, sed humilitas Moysen exaltauit. Pride, O my
brethren, cast Lucifer down out of heauem: but Humility brought the son of
God from thence, to become man. Pride cast Adam out of Paradi e: but humility
carried the good thief in thither Pride, divided and confounded the tongues of
the Giants: but Humility, united all them which were divided. Pride tranformed
Nabucodonosor into a beast; but humility made Joseph lord of Egypt, and Prince
of the people of Israel. Pride drowned Pharao, but Humility raised, and
exalted Moses.

That Humility, is the means to obtain inward peace of mind, and that
without it, this cannot be had. CHAPTER XXII.
DIscite a me quia mitis sum, and humilis cord: and inuenietis requiem
animabus vestris. Learn of me, for I am meek, and humble of heart, and you
shall find rest for your sowles. One of the chief, and most efficatious
reasons which we can bring for the animating our selves to despise honor, and
to procure to be humbled, is that which Christ our Redeemer propounds to us in
these words: namely that it is a most excellent means, for the obteyning of
interior quietness, and peace to the soul, a thing so much desired by all
Spiritual men; and which Saint Paul setts down for One of the fruits of the
holy Ghost. Fructus autem spiritus pax. That we may the better understand this
quietness, and peace, Which the humble man enioyes, it will be well, that we
consider the disquiet and restlesnes, which the proud man ever carries in his
heart, for one contrary is the better known by the other. The holy scripture is
full of sentences, which declare that wicked men have noe peace. Non est pax
impijs dicit Dominus. Pax pax and non erat pax. Contritio and infelicitas in
vijs eorum, and viam pacis non cognouerunt. They know not what kind of thing
peace is, and though som^tymes they may exteriourly seem to have peace yet
that is not true peace; for there within in their very heart, they have a
war, which their conscience is ever making against them. Ecce in pace
amaritudo mea amarissima. Wicked men ever live with bitterness, and sadness of
heart.

But proud men are subject after a particular manner to great unquietness, and
want of peace. And the express reason hereof we may very well collect, out
of Saint Augustine: who says, that instantly envy grows out of pride, whose
daughter it is: and that it is never to be found, with out the company of this
hate full issue. Quibus duobus malis, hoc est superbia, and in videntia,
diabolus diabolus est. Which two sins of pride, and envy, make the devil to
be that very devil which he is. Now then, by this we may understand, what
mischief these two sins are likely to work, in the heart of man: since they
are badd enough to make the devil a devil. He who, on the one side, shall be
full of pride, and of the desire of honor and estimation, and sees that things
succeed not according to his dessigne: and on the other side, is also full of
envy, which is the daughter of pride, and is ever in company thereof, when he
shall see that others are more esteemed, and preferred before him, will
certainly be full of bitterness, and restlesnes: for there is nothing which so
wounds the poor man, nor reaches so near to his very heart, as those things
aforesaid.

The holy Scripture paints this vntto us, to the life, in the person of that
proud Aman. He was the favorite of king Asuerus, above all the Princes and
Grandes of his Dominions. He had great abundance of temporal goods, and
riches, and was so highly valued, and esteemed by all, that now it seemed that
there was nothing left for him to desire. And yet nevertheless, it gave him so
great pain, that one singleman, and he a mean person, who sat usually at
the gate of the Palace, made noe reckoning of him nor did him reverence, nor
rose up, nor stirred from his place whilst he was passing by, that he
esteemed not all he possessed at a rush, in comparison of the distemper, and
pain to which he vas putt thereby. This himself confessed, by way of
complaint to his wife and friends, whilst in discourse he was speaking to them
of his prosperity, and power otherw^se. Et cum haec omnia habeam, nihil me
hab^re puto, quandiu videro Mardochaeum Iudaeum, sedentem ante fores regias:
That so we may see the restlesnes of a proud man, and the high Waves, and
storms, which toss his heart. Impij autem quasi mare feruens quod quiescere
non potest. ^^ke a sea which is angry and fearce, see high goes the heart of a
proud and wicked man. And now the rage which grew in the heart of Aman, upon
that occasion* was so great, that he disdayned to lay hold upon Mardochaeus,
who was but a poor particular man, unless knowing him to be a Jew by nation,
he might also procure warrants from the king; in virtue where of all that
race of men, who were to be found in his dominions might be put to death. He
commanded also a very high gibbet to be erected in a Court of his own house,
where upon he meant that Mardochaeus should be hanged. But his dream fell out
far otherwise, and the Jews proved to be the men, who exccuted upon
their-enemies, the sentence which had been given against them: and Aman
himself was hanged upon the very gallows, which he had prepared for
Mardochaeus.

But first, there happened a sound mortification to him, and it was this. He
goeing one morning very early to the Court, in order to the revenge which he
had dessigned, and to obtain a warrant from the king for the executing
thereof, it happened that the night before, the king, not having been able to
sleep, commanded them to bring him the History and Cronicles of his times, and
when by course of readinge, they were come to those particulars, of what
Mardochaeus had done in service of the king, by discovery of a certain
treason, which some of his own servants, had plotted against him, he inquired
what reward had been given that man, for that service; and they told him none
at all. The king then asked, who was without, and whet^er yet men were come to
make their Court. They told him that Aman was there, and so he was bidden to
enter. The king then asked him t^^s question. What will it be fit to do for
that man, tho whom the king desires to do honor.

Now Aman conceiving that himself was to be the man, to whom that honor was
to be done, made this answer: The man whom the king desires to honor, should
be cladd in the kings princely robes, and set upon the kings own horse, with
the Crown Royal upon his head: and one of the prime men of the Court, should
go before him, leading the horse in his hand, and proclayming, thus in the
public places of the City, Thus is he to be honored whom the king will
honor. Well then, said the king go thou to that Mardochaeus, who keeps about
the court gate and do then all that to him* which thou have said to me, and be
sure thou fail in noe one circumstance. Think now what wound of anguish, that
wicked and proud heart would seele but in fine he durst not fail of executing
the order to a hair. It seemed to be beyond imagination, to think of a
greater mortification then this was for him; but yet instantly after, followed
that other, of his being hanged upon that very gibbett, which he had caused to
be provided for Mardochaeus. This is the pay which the world is wont to give to
such as serve it.

And now let us consider, from whence all this Catastrophe grew: Because
forsooth Mardochaeus would not rise up, and do him reverence, when he passed
by. For such a foolery as this is, able to keep proud men, so unquiet and
restles, that they shall ever be wounded by it, and made sadd at the heart. And
so we see it, at this day in worldly men; and so much more do we see it, as
the men are in more eminent place. For all such things as these, are as so
many needles points, to them, which galle, and transpearce them from side to
side, nor is there any sharper lance which they can feel, nor do they ever
want their part of this, how much soever they are extolled, and what soever
they possess; but they ever have their hearts as bitter as gall, and they ever
walk up and down the world, with perpetual unquietness, and want of rest. And
the same will also happen here in Religion, if a man be proud? for then he
will also here, reflect whether they make so much accounte of him as of
others: and in what occasions they employed such or such a man, and laid him a
side. And these things and the like, will cause as great unquietness in him, as
the puntoes and pretentions of wordly men, will do in them, and peradventure
more. How many have been put to run hazard of their vocation, by such things
as these? Nay how many have thus been drawn out of Religion, when they
conceived that they could not continue without being affronted, and that they
should never be valued and esteemed. Yea how many have by this means, been
brought by little and little, to indaunger their salvation. For not only is
humility necessary for perfection, but many times also for salvation. Nisi
efficiamini sicut paruuli, non in rabitis in regnum caelorum. O with how great
reason did Father Franciscus Xauier say, O opinion, O opinion, and estimation
of m^n: how great mischief have thou wrought do thou work, and will thou
work in his world.

From hence we may understand, another particular which we experiment very
often, namely that although it be true, that there is a sickness of melancholy,
yet many times it happens that a man's being melancholy and sadd, is not the
humor of Melancholy, or any corporal infirmity, but it is the very humor of
pride, which is a sickness of the soul. You are melancholy and sadd, because
you are forgotten and cast a side, into some corner; and because they make noe
accounte of you. You are Mela^coly and sad, because you performed not such or
such a thing with so much creditt, and reputation, as you figured to your
self; but rather you conceive that you are disgraced. The business proved not
as you desired; that sermon, that disputation, those Conclusions; but you
rather think that you have lost opinion and credit by it, and therefore you
are Melancholy and sadd, yea and when you are to do any of these publicque
things, the very fear of the success, and whether you shall gain or loose
honor^ by it, makes you afflicted and greiued. These are some of those things,
which make the proud man Melancholy, and sadd. But now the humble of heart, who
desire noe honor, or estimation, and contents himself with a mean place, is
free from all this restlesnes and disquiet, and enioyes great peace, according
to the words of Christ our Lord, from whom that saint took this saying of
his. If there be peace in this world, the humble of heart possesses it. And
therefore though there were noe way of spirit or perfection to be looked
after, but only our own interest, and the keeping our hearts in peace, and
quietness, even for this, and this alone, we were to procure Humility; for thus
we should come to live, whereas the other is but to lead a kind of dying
life.

Saint Augustine to this purpose recountes a certain thing of himself,
whereby he says, that our Lord gave him to understand the blindness and misery,
wherein he was. As I went one day (says he) full of affliction and care in
thought of a certain Oration which I was to recite before the Emperor, in his
praise, whereof the greatest part was to be false: and my self procuring to
be praised for my pains, even by them who knew that it would be false (that
men may see how far the vanity, and folly and madness of the world, extends it
self,) as I went I say with much thought hereof, and was full of trouble and
care, how the business might succeed, and having as it were even a kind of
fever upon me of consuming thoughts, it happened, that in one of the streets of
Milan, there was a poor beggar who, after he had gotten well to eat, and
drink, was playing tricks, and taking his pleasure, and in fine, was very
merry and jolly. But when I saw this, I fell to sigh, and represent to my
friends who were present there, to what misery our madness had made us subject.
Since in all our troubles, and namely in those where in we found our selves at
that time, (carrying a great burden of infelicity upon our backs, and being
wounded with the vexation of a thousand inordinate appetites and daily adding
one burden to another) we did not so much as procure to seek any other
thing, then only some secure kind of contentment, and joy, wherein that poor
beggar had outstripped us already, who perhaps should never be able to
overtake him therein. For that, which he had now obtained by means of a
little alms namely the joy of temporal felicity, I still went seeking and
hunting out, with so much solicitude and care. It is true, says Saint
Augustine that the poor man had noe true joy, but it is also true that the
contentment which I sought, was more false then his; and in fine he then was
merry, and I sad, he was secure, and I full of cares and fears. And if any man
should ask me now, whether I had rather be glad or greiued, I should quickly
make answer, that I had rather be glad; and if he should ask me yet again,
whether I had rather be that beggar or my self, I should then rather choose to
be my self, though I were then full of afflictions but yet for ought I know, I
should have noe reason to make this choice. For I ask what cause I can
allege, for my being more learned gave me then noe contentment at all; but
only desired to give contentment to others, by my knowledge, and yet that, not
by way of instructing the^, but But without doubt, (says he,) that poor man
was more happy then I; not only because he was merry and jolly, when I was
full of cogitations and cares, which drew even my very bowels out of my body:
but because he had gotten his wine by lawful means, whereas I was hunting
after vain glory by the way of tellinge lies.

Of another kind of means, more efficatious, for the obteyning the virtue of
Humility which is the exercise thereof. CHAPTER XXIII.
We have already spoken of the first kind of means which are usually
assigned for the obteyning of virtue, which is, certain reasons and
considerations, both divine and human. But yet the inclination which we have
to this vice of pride is so very great, by reason that the desire of
divinity. (Eritis sicut dij) remains so rooted in our hearts from our first
parents; that noe considerations at all, are sufficient to make us take our
last leave, of the impulse and edge which we have to be honored, and esteemed.
It seems that: that happens to us herein, which occurrs to others who are
full of fear. For how many reasons soever you give to persuade such persons,
that they have no cause to fear such or such a thing, they yet make this
answer, I see well that all you say is true and I would feign not fear, but
yet I cannot obtain it of my self. For just so, some say in our case, I well
perceive that all those reasons which you have brought against the opinion and
estimation of the world, are good and true, and they convince that all is but
mere vani^ie and wind, but yet with all this, I cannot by any means; Win
so much of my self, as not to make some accounte thereof. I would feign do
it if I could, but me think I know not how this kind of things, transports
and disquiets me strangely. Well then, as noe reasons and considerations, are
sufficient to free the fearful man from fear, but that besides this, we must
entreat him to put his hand to work, and bid him draw near, to feel, and
touch those things, which seemed to him to be bugbeares and sprights; and
advise him to go sometime by night, and alone to the same places where he
thought he saw them, that so he might find by experience, that there was
nothing indeed, but that all was his imagination and apprehension, that so by
this means he may loose his fear: so also for the making us give over the
desire of opinion and estimation of the world, the Saints affirm, that noe
reasons or considerations are sufficient: but that we must also use the means
of action, and of the exercise of humility, for this is the principal and
most efficatious means, which, we for our parts, ean employ, toward the
obteyning of this virtue.

S. Basil says, that as sciences and arts are acquired by practice, so also
are the moral virtues. That a man may be a good Musition, a good Rethorition,
a good Philosopher and a good workema^ in any kind, let him exercise himself
herein, and he will grow perfect. And so also, for obteyning the habit of
Humility, and all the rest of the moral virtues, we must exercise our selves
in the acts thereof, and by this means we shall possess them. And if any man
will tell me, that for the composing and moderating our passions, and the
affections of the mind, and for the obteyning also of virtue, the
considerations, and reasons, the docume^ts, and Counsels of holy Scripture are
sufficient, he is deceived as S. Basil says. Is similiter facit, vt si quis
disceret aedificare, nec vnquam aedificaret, and aes cundere, and quae
didicisset, ea in actum numqua^ educeret. This would be like him who should
learn to build a house, or coin money, and would never exercise himself
therein; but that all should pass in hearing the documents, and rules of art,
in which case it is certain, that he would never prove good workman. And as
little will he grow to possess Humility, or any other virtue, who will not
exercise himself therein. And in confirmation hereof, the Saint brings that
of the Apostle S. Paul. Non enim auditores leg^s iusti sunt apud deum, sed
factores legis, iustificabu^tur. It is not enough for this purpose to hear
many documents and reasons, but they must be put in execution. For practice
co^duces more to this business then all the speculation in the world. And though
it be most true, that all virtue and every thing which is good, must come to us
from the hand of God, and that we cannot compass it by our own strength; yet
the same lord, who is to give it, is pleased that we should help our selves,
by our own endeauours.

Saint Augustine upon those words of Christ our Lord: Si ergo ego laui pedes
vestros, Dominus and magister, and vos debetis, alter alterius lauare pedes,
says, that this is that, which Christ our Lord intended to teach us, by this
example, of washing his desciples feet: Hoc est beat Petre, quod nesciebas,
quando fieri non sinebas, hoc tibi postea sciendum promisit: Ecce ipsum est
postea. This is that O B. Peter which thou did not know when thou would not
consent that Christ should wash thy feet, He pr^mised that thou should know
it afterward, and now, that afterward is come, and now thou shall understand
it. And it is, that if we will obtain the virtue of Humility, we must
exercise our selves in the exterior acts thereof. Exemplum enim dedi vobis, vt
quemadmodum ego feci vobis, ita and vos faciatis. For I have given you an
example, to the end that you may do as I have done. Didicimus fratres
humilitatem ab excel^o faciamus inuicem humiles, quod similiter fecit excelsus.
Since the omnipotent, and sovereign Lord, humbled himself: since the sun of
God, abased and employed himself in mean, and lowly exercises, washing the
feet of his disciples, serving his Blessed Mother and the holy Joseph, and
being subject and obedient to them in what soever they commanded, let us
learn of them and exercise our selves in humble and mean employments, and
thus we shall come to obtain the virtue of Humility. This is also that which
Saint Bernard says. Humiliatio via est ad humilitatem, sicut patientia ad
pacem, sicut lectio ad scientiam. The humiliation of the exterior man, is the
way and means, to obtain the virtue of Humility, as patience is, for the
obteyning peace, and reading or study for the obteyning knowledge. Si virtutem
appetis Humilitatis, viam non refugias humiliationis, nam si non poteris
humiliari, non poteris ad humilitatem prouehi. And therefore if you will
obtain the virtue of Humility, do not fly from the exercise of humiliation:
for if you say, that either you cannot, or will not humble or abase your
selves; as little have you a mind to obtain the virtue of Humility.

Saint Augustine proves it very well, and gives the reason, why this exercise
of humiliation, is so useful, important, and necessary for the obteining of
true humility of heart, Cum enim ad pedes fratris inclinatur corpus, etiam in
cord ipso vel excitatur, vel si iam inerat, co^firmatur, ipsius humilitatis
affectus. The interior and exterior man are so interlaced and united
together, and the one depends so much upon the other, that when the body is
humbled and abased, the heart is stirred up toward the love of Humility. That
humbling my self before my brother, and kissing his feet, has some what in
it; that poor and mean coat, that low and base office, has I know not what
which goes ingendring, and breeding Humility in the heart, and if it be there
already, it conserues and increases it. And thus Saint Dorotheus answers this
question, how a man with a poor and mean coat, which belongs to the body,
may come to obtain the virtue of humility which inhabits the soul? For it is
certain, says he, that the body in many cases, gives a good or ill
disposition to the soul. And so we see the soul has one kind of
disposition, when the body is well, and an other when it is sick; O when it is
full fedd, and another when it is very hungry. Now in the self same manner,
the soul vests it self with one kind of inclination, when a man is seated
upon a throne, or upon a horse richly adorned, and with another, when he sitts
upon the ground, or is riding upon a jade; and one kind of inclination, when a
man is seated upon a throne, or upon a horse richly adorned, and with another,
when he sitts upon the ground, or is ryding upon a jade; and one kind of
inclination it has, when he is set out in sumptuous clothes, and another when
he is but covered with a poor coat.

Saint Basil also noted this very well; and says, that as gallant and shining
attire, lifts up the hearts of worldly men, and ingenders in them, certain
fumes of vanity of proper estimation and pride, so does a poor and mean
habit, awake in the heart of Religious men, and of the servants of God, an
inclination to Humility, and it breeds a disesteeme of ones self; and it
makes men endure better, to be despised. And the saint adds further, That as
wordly men desire rich, and glorious clothes, that so they may be the better
known, and the more honored, and esteemed, thereby; so the good servants of
God, and such as are truly humble, desire to be poorly and meanly cladd, that
so they may be valued the less: and especially, because they conceive
themselves to find much help therein, toward their conservation, and
augmentation in true Humility. Amongst all the exterior humiliations, that of
poor and mean clothing is one of the chief, and for this, we find it to
have been so much used, by such as are truly humble. We read in the life of
Father Franciscus Xauier, that he ever went very poorly cladd, to conserve
himself the better in Humility, and fearing least some little estimation, or
presumption, might mingle and wrap it self up in good clothes, as it uses to
happen many thymes.

It will also appear by another reason, that toward the purchase of
Humility of heart, or any other interior virtue, the exterior exercise of the
same virtue does profitt much, because the will is much more moved thereby,
then by bare desires. For it is clear that the present object moves us more,
then the absent; as we see that we are moved more by seeing things then by
hearing of them; and from hence the Proverb came, That which the eyes see not,
the heart rues not. So that the exterior thing which is put in practice, moves
the will much more, because the object is there present, then mere
apprehensio^s and interior desires do, where the object is not present, but
only in the co^ceite, and imagination. One great affront well endured with a
good will, shall breed more of the virtue of patience in your soul, then
four affronts will do, when you have but the only desire without the deed.
And the spending of one day, in exercising some mean and low office, and the
wearing some poor and tottered coat some one day, will help your soul more
to the virtue of humility, then many days of mere desires will do. We have
experience every day, that a man has repugnance to perform one of the
ordinary mortifications which we use; and within two or three days after. He
has begun, to do the^, he finds noe difficulty therein at all, and yet
before he did them, he had conceived many purposes, and desires thereof, and
yet still they were not strong enough to overcome the difficulty. And for the
same reason does the society use certain public mortifications, as we read
to have been done by many SS. because when once a man has performed one of
these, he getts the mastery over himself, for other things wherein he found
difficulty before. And to this we may add, that which is said by the
schole-diuines, that when the interior act is accompanied by the exterior, it
is commonly more efficatious, and intense. So that, it helps much in all
respects, toward the obteyning of the virtue of Humility, to employ our
selves exteriourly about objects which are mean and base.

And because virtue is conserved, and augmented by the same means, whereby it
is obtained, therefore as the exterior exercise of Humility is necessary for
the obteyning the virtue of Humility, it will also be necessary for the
custody and increase thereof; where upon it will follow, that this exercise is
very important for all and not only for beginners, but for others also, who
ear great proficients, as we also said when we were treating of
Mortification. And so our Father, in the Constitutions and Rules, recomme^ds
it much to us all in these words: Magnopere conseri deuote quo ad fieri
poterit, ea munera obire, in quibus magis exercetur humilitas, and Charitas. It
will greatly help that we perform those offices with all possible devotion,
wherein Humility and Charity are exercised most. And in another place he
says: Temptations are to be prevented by their contraries, as when there is
opinion, that such a one is inclined to pride, he must be exercised in such
mean things, as may be likely to help him ^oward^ Humility; and so in other
ill inclinations. And yet, in another place. As for mean and base employments,
men ought redily to accept of those wherein they find most repugnance, when
soever they shall be so ordained. So that finally I say, that these two things
Humility, and Humiliation, must help one another; and from the interior
Humility which consists in despising himself, and desiring to be held by
others in small accounte, exterior humiliation is to grow, that the man may
exteriourly show himself to be the same, that interiourly he took himself to
be. Namely, that as the humble man is interiourly contemptible in his own
eyes, and houlds himself to be unworthy of all honor, so must treat
himself also exteriourly; that the exterior Works which he performs, may
visibly declare the interior Humility, which is in his heart. Choose you the
lowest place, as Christ our Lord advised; despise not to treat with persons
who are poor, and mean, be gladd of the most inferior employments; and this
very exterior humiliation which springs from the interior, will give increase
to that very fountain also, from which it springs.

The Doctrine formerly delivered is confirmed by diverse examples. CHAPTER XXIV.
PEtrus Cluniacensus recounts, that in the Order of the Carthusians there was a
Religious man of holy, and unspotted life, whom our lord had conserved so
chaste, so pure, and so intyre, that he had never suffered any illusion, even in
his sleep. But being come to the hour of his death, and all the Religious
assisting at the bed side of the sick man, the Prior who was also there,
commanded him to tell them, what that thing in particular was, whereby he
might conceive himself to have pleased our lord most in the whole course of
his life. He made him this answer. Father you command me a hard thing, and
I should by no means tell you, what you ask, if I were not obliged to it by
Obedience. From my infancy, I have been much afflicted and persecuted by the
devil; but according to the multitude of the troubles and tribulations which I
sustained, my soul was still refreshed, by those many conforts which Christ
our lord, and the glorious virgin Mary his most Blessed mother, imparted to me.
I therefore being one day much afflicted and even ouerwrought by great
temptations of the devil, this sovereign virgin, appeared, to me, and upon
her presence, the devils fledd, and all their temptations were at an end. And
after she had comforted and encouraged me to persevere* and proceed in the way
of virtue and perfection, she said thus to me. To the end that thou may the
better do that which I have advised, I will fetch thee in particular, out of
the treasures of my son, three ways or exercises of Humility; wherein if
thou employ thy self, thou will highly please God, and shall overcome thine
enemies. Namely that thou humble thy self in these three things, in thy food,
in thy clothing, and in the offices or duties which thou art to discharge. So
that in thy food, thou must desire and procure the worst; and in thy
clothing, the most mean and course; and as for thy employments or offices,
endeavor thou ever, to get the most base and mean, esteeming it both for a
great honor and profit for thee, to exercise thy self in such as are most
refused and despised; and which other men disdain, and from which they fly:
and having said thus much she vanished. For my part I imprinted the power, and
efficacy of those words of hers in my heart: that so from that time forward, I
might do as I had been taught by her, and my soul has found much good by it.

Cassianus relates of the Abbott Pap^^nisius that being a moncke in Egypt, and
Abbot of the Monastery he was much esteemed, and honored by the Moncks, both as
a Father and a Master, for his venerable old age, and his admirable life. But
he being troubled With receiving so much honor, and desireing to see himself
humbled, despised, and forgotten, went secretly one night from his Monastery,
and putting on a secular habit, went to a certain Monastery of Pachomius,
Which was very far from his: and then flourished much in all kind of sanctity.
And this he did to the end that being unknown, they might treat him as a
nouice, and might esteem little of him. This holy man stayed there many days
at the gate, both prostrate and upon his knees, before all the Moncks, who of
purpose seemed to contemn him; and cast it in his teeth, that now, when he was
even tired with inioying the world, he came in his old age, to serve God, when
it might seem, that he was rather drawn by necessity, and to get bread to
eat: and that they might rather serve him, then be served by him. But in fine,
they received him, giving him charge of the Orchard of the Monastery, and
assigneing him a Superior, whom he was in all things to obey. But still, when
he had performed his own office with all exactnes, and Humility, he did
moreover procure to do all those things also, which others refused, as being
the most troublesome of the house. Yea, and not contenting himself with this,
he would be rising secretly in the nigh, and putting the whole house in order,
the best he could, without being seen by any of the rest, who would be
wondering at it in the morninge, as not knowing by whom it had been done. He
remained thus three years, and was very glad of the occasion which then was
fallne into his hand, of laboring hard, and being little esteemed: for this
was the scope of his whole desire. But his own Moncks being much afflicted for
the absence of such a Father, went some of them several ways, and having
sought him three years, and being then full of fear, that they should never
find him out, behold one of them passed at length by that Monastery of
Pachomius, with little opinion to meet with him, and yet in fine he
discovered, and knew the Saint, as he was manuring and dunging the soil. He
cast himself instantly at his feet, and they who saw it, were amassed thereat;
and so they were much more, when they knew particularly who he was, for both
the man, and his actions, had before, been known to them by fame. They begged
pardon of him, but the old saint bewailed his misfortune, in having been so
discovered, by the envy of the devil, and in having now lost the treasure
which formely he had found there. They ledd him though it was perforce, to his
Monastery, where he was received with incomparable joy, and from that time
forward, they looked to him with extraordinary diligence. But yet, through the
great desire he had to be despised, and unknown, and through the delight and
gust he had taken, in that humble manner of life, which he ledd in the other
Monastery, all this was not able to keep him from getting out another night,
he having formerly agreed with one, that he would pass by shipp in to
Palestine, which was very far distant from thence. This accordingly was done,
and he arrived at the Monastery of Cassianus. But our lord who ever takes care
to exalt the humble, ordained that he should also be discovered by some Moncks
of his, who went to visitt those holy places, and the Blessed old man was much
the more honored for these things.

In the lives of the Fathers, it is related of a certain Moncke, that having
lived a long time in the solitude of a desert, in great penance and
conte^plation, a thought came once into his mind, that now he was grown to be
perfect and he put himself into prayer, and said thus to God. S^ew me O lord,
what I want, toward perfection. And God being resolved to humble his thoughts,
made him hear a voice which said thus to him. Go thy ways to such a person
(who was a man that kept hogs thereby) and do that which he shall tell thee:
and at the same time it was revealed to that other, that the Hermitt was
comeing to speak with him, and that himself was to tell the other, that he
must take his whippe, and look to his hoggs. The old Hermitt came, and after
salutations he said thus. I greatly desire to serve God, and therefore tell
me, for Charity, what I should do in order to this end. The other asked him
then if he would do what he badd him to which the old man answered, That he
would. Then said the other, take this whipp and go and look to those hoggs,
The old man obeyed him, because he desired to serve God, and to obtain what he
wanted of perfection. And so he went with his whipp, and kept hogs, and they
who knew him, who were very many, (by reason of the same of his sanctity in
those parts) seeing him keep hoggs faid thus: Do you see how this old
Hermitt, of whom we have heard so great things, is turned a mad man, and goes
looking to hogs. His great fasts and his much penance have, as it seems,
dried his brain, and put him out of his wits. The good old man who heard them
say these things, took it all with much patience and Humility, and so
continued some days. But God seeing that Humility of his and that he took
those affronts and scorns in good part, commanded him to return to his
former place.

In the Pratum Spirituale, it is written of a certain holy bishopp, who
leaving his bishoppricke, and his honor, came all alone to the holy City of
Jerusalem, through a desire to be held in small account, because he was utterly
unknown there. And so putting on poor clothes, he hyres himself out to the
publicque works, which were there on foot, at that time, and mainteyned
himself by the labor of his hands. There was then a holy Conde called
Efremius, a pious and a prudent man, who took care about the reparation of
the publicque buildings of the City. This man, diverse times, saw the holy
Bishop sleep upon the bare ground, and saw also a pillar of fire, which rose
from him, and reached up to heaven, at which he maruailed much, when he
observed him to be so poor a man, and so foul with the dirt of the
building, and so over grown with hair and beard, and who lived in so mean
and conte^ptible an imployme^t. At length, he could not contain himself, but
called him one day a part, and asked him what he was. The Saint told him, that
he was one of the poor of the City, and that he spent his time in that
labor, as not being able to maintain himself otherwise. But this answer
did not satisfy the Conde, the will of God being such, for the honor of his
servant, through the discovery of his Humility, and so he persisted in asking
him often the same questions, with so great instance, that at length he made
him discover himself, for so he did, upon two Conditions which the Conde
accepted. The one, that whilst he lived, the Conde should never discover what
he meant to tell him; and the other that he should not ask him his name. Only
he told him that he was a bishopp, and that he had fled to that place, that
so he might fly from honor and estimation.

S. John Climacus recounts of a certain principal man of Alexandria, who came
to be received in a certain Monastery. And when the Abbot perceived him, both
by his aspect, and other signs, to be a man of harsh condition, and to be
haughty, swollen up by the vanities of the world, he resolved to lead him on by
the secure way of Humility, and then said thus to him. If really you be
resolved to take upon you the yoke of Christ, you must permits your self to
be exercised in all such things as Obedience shall think fit to impose. To
this he answered; that as the iron in the hand of the Smith, is subject to
what soever he will do therewith, So will I, says he, O Father, submitt my
self to what soever you shall command me. I will then says the other that
thou continue at the gate of the Monastery, and that thou cast thy self down
at the feet of all them who either enter in or go out, and desire them to
pray to God for thee, because thou art a great sinner. He performed it
punctually, and when he had continued seven years in this exercise, and
obtained great Humility, by this means, the Abbot resolved to take him into
the Monastery, in company of the rest, and to make him Priest as one who
deserved that honor. But he employing many intercessors, and in particular
Saint John Climacus himself to the contrary, he at length obtained of the
Superior, that he should leave him in the same exercise, and place wherein he
had formerly lived, till he should finish his course; as signifying, or at
least coniecturing, that now the day of his death was not fa^r of. And indeed,
just so it proved for ten days after this, our lord was pleased to take him
to himself. And seven days after that, God also took the porter of the
same Monastery, to whom the former had promised, whilst he was yet alive, that
if, when he were dead, he should have any power with Almighty God, he would
procure that the other might come quickly to keep him company, and so it fell
out. The same saint affirms moreover, that when the man was yet alive, and
bestowed himself upon that exercise of Humility, he asked him upon what he
was wont most to think, at that time, to this he answered that his exercise
was, to hold himself unworthy of the conversation of them in the Monastery,
and of the sight and society of the Fathers; yea and even to lift up his eyes,
to look upon them.

It is recorded in the lives of the Fathers, that the Abbot John told the
story of a certain Philosopher, who had a scholar that committed a fault,
and the Philosopher said thus to him. I will not forgive thee unless thou
suffer injuries from others, for the space of three years. The scholar did
see, and then went for pardon; but the Philosopher said the second time, I will
not pardon thee, unless thou reward such as do thee wrong, for the space of
other three years. He did so, and then the Philosopher told him, that now he
must go to his studyes at Athens, and so he went. Then another Philosopher
there, putting certain affronts upon such as came in to hear him the first
time, to see if they would have patience, and this scholar falling out in a
laughter, after a scorn which the other had put upon him: he said, What, do
thou laugh whilst I am using thee ill? To this the scholar answered, For
three yares together I gave presents to such as did me wrong and finding now,
that I am ill used without cause, would you not have me laugh. The Philosopher
badd him then come in, and said that he was fit to learn wisdom. Where upon
the Abbot John concluded that patience was the gate, whereby men entered into
wisdom.

Father Mafeus, in the life which he writes of our B. Father Ignatius, relates
that our Father goeing once in pilgrimage from Venice, to Padua in company of
Father Lainez with clothes upon their backs, which were old and patcht; a
certain poor Shipheard, seeing them, drew near, and began to laugh and make
sport at them. Our Father, stood still with much joy, but Father Lainez asking
him why he went not on, and why he left not the boy, our Father ansueared thus.
Why should we deprive this boy of that contentment, and delight which he is
taking; and so he staid still, that the youth might have his fill in looking,
and laughing and resting at him: he receiving more gust therein, then worldly
men are wont to do, in acquiring estimation and honor.

It Is recounted in the life of our Father Franciscus Borgia, that goeing once
upon the way, with Father Bustamante, they came to a poor house, where there
was noe bed, but only paliasses of Straw. The Fathers went to their rest: and
Father Bustamante, both by reason of his age, and through his difficulty of
respiration, did nothing in effect, all night, but cough and spitt, and
thinking that he had spitt upon the wall, he spitt indeed upon Father Borgia,
and he did it, many times, in his face. The Father spoke not a word, nor did he
turn himself of stir. But in the morning, when Father Bustamante saw by day,
what he had done in the night, was extremely out of countenance, and ashamed.
And Father Borgia was noe less contented, and gladd, and to consort the other
said: Father be not troubled for what you did, for I can assure you, there was
nothing in the whole Room, more fit to be spitt upon, then I.

Of the exercise of Humility, which we have in Religious howses. CHAPTER XXV.
THe blessed Saint Basil preferring, and exalting the life which is ledd in
Monasteries, above that other which is ledd alone, gives this for one of his
reasons. That besides that the solitary life, is full of danger, it is also
less sufficient then the Monastical, for the obteyning of the virtues, which
are necessary, in regard that it wants the use and exercise thereof. For how
shall he exercise Humility, who has noe man to whom he may humble himself?
and how can he exercise the virtue of mercy, and Charity, who has noe
intercourse, or communication with any other? and how can he exercise patience
who has no man to resist his will? But now, the Religious man who lives in
community, has great means for the obteyning of all necessary virtue,
through the many-fould occasion, which he has to live in the exercise of them
all. Of Humility because he has some body to whom he may humble, and to whom
he may subject himself. Of Charity, because he has some body, upon whom he
may show it. Of Patience because he who lives in company of many, will not
fail to have occasions for the exercice thereof, and in the same manner, might
we go discoursing of all the other virtues. We who are Religious, are much
bound to our lord, for so great a favor as he has done in bringing us
hither, where there is so great disposition, and so many means for the
obteyning of virtue, for in fine, it is the very school of perfection.

But as for us, we have a particular obligation herein; for besides the means
which are common to us with others, he has given us some, which are very
particular to our selves, and especially for the obteyning the virtue of
Humility, even by our very Rules, and Constitutions. So that if we keep our
Rules well, we shall be very humble; because therein we shall have very
sufficient exercise, of that virtue. Such a means is that, which our Rule, and
Constitutions command, and which is so principal, and important, for the
good of the Society, namely to lay our whole conscience open to our Superior,
giving him account of all our temptations, passions, and ill inclinations, and
in fine of all our defects and miseries. And though it be true, that this was
ordained for other ends, as we will show afterward in the right place, yet
there can be no doubt, but that it is a great exercise of Humility. Such is
that also which is required of us, by that other Rule which says, To the end
that we may profitt more in spirit and especially for our greater humbling,
and a basing, we all must be content, that all our errors, faults, and
whatsoever defects which are known or noted to be in us may be manifested to
our Superiors, by any one who shall come to know the^ otherwise then by
Confession. And note that reason which is given there, namely for our greater
humblinge and abaseing, for this is that, whereof we were speaking. If you
desire to acquire true Humility, you will be gladd that all your faults be
manifested to your Superiors: and so the good and humble Religious man, goes
to his Superior, to tell his faults himself, and to desire penance for them,
and procures to be the first, of whom his Superior may know them. And not
only have we this in the Society, but a far greater exercice of Humility.
For you declare your faults publicly, before all; to the end that they may
disesteeme, and despise you, for that is the end of this exercise; and not that
they should hold you to be humble, and mortifyed; for this would not be an
act, or exercise of Humility, but of Pride. With this spirit, are you also
to accept and desire reprehensions; and that not only in secret, but in
publicque, and before all, because, for as much as is on your part, you are to
be glad that they do it, in very good earnest; and that they may think it as
they say it, and may hold you for such. And generally, the use and exercise of
all the exterior penances, and mortifications, which are used in the Society,
assist much toward the obteyning, and conseruing of true Humility; as namely
the kissing of feet, the eating under the table, or else upon the knees; or else
lying prostrate, cross the door of the Refectory, etc.

If these things be done with that spirit which is required, they will be of
great use, to the getting and keeping of true Humility. When you are put to
eat upon the ground, you must do it with an interior knowledge of your
self, that you deserve not to sit with your brethren: and when you kiss
their feet, that you deserve not to kiss the ground whereon they tread: and
when you prostrate your selves, that you deserve that every one of them should
tread upon your mouth; and you must also desire and wish, that every one may
think so of you. And it will be very well, that when any of you perform any
of these mortifications, you actuate interiourly, upon these considerations; as
that holy Moncke did, who continued seven years at the gate of that
Monastery, whereof we spoke in the last Chapter: for by this means they will
be of much profitt to you, and will breed Humility in the very roots of the
heart. But on the other side, if you do the^ with out spirit, and only with
the exterior man, they will do you little good. For as Saint Paul says,
Corporalis exercitatio, ad modicum vtilis est. It is to do things but by way
of complement, and for custom, when they are only done exteriourly, without
spirit, and with out procuring to obtain that end, which is desired thereby.
If you obtain so much of your selves, as to kiss the feet of your brethren,
and to prostrate your selves to the end that they may tread upon you, and
afterward you will yet speak inwardly and harshly to them, the one suits not
well with the other, and it is a sign, that you did the former either for
compliment or with hypocrisy.

These and many other exercises of Humility have we in the Society,
according to our Rule and Constitutions. And I thought fit to bring them here
to memory, though we pointed at them before to another purpose: that so we may
still place our eyes, upon them, and let this be that, wherein we cheefely
exercise Humility. For that wherein a Religious man is cheefely to exercise an
express virtue and mortification, is the exact observing of the Rules, and
Constitutions of his own Order, thus in that, wherein your profitt and
perfection consists. And if you have not virtue, to put those things in
execution, concerning Humility, and mortification, to which you are obliged by
your Institute, and Rule, whatsoever you have else, is worth nothing. And the
like we may say also of every Christian; namely, that since the principal
cause why he has need of Humility and mortification, is for the performing of
the law of God, if he have it not, to this end, it will do him little or no
good. If he have not Humility and mortification, enough, to confess a sin
which may put him to shame; but that through bashfullnes, or to speak more
plainly, through pride, he will break so principal a commandment, what
profitt will he reap by what soever he either has or does, since for this
alone, he shall be damned. So may we also say, in some sort, of the Religious
man. If you have not Humility enough to discover your conscience to your
Superior, and to comply with so principal a Rule as this, for what serves
your Humility, and mortification? If you cannot yet endure, that another
should acquainte the Superior with any fault of yours, to the end that he may
reform you, where is your Humility? If you want Humility, wherewith to take
a reprehention, and the penance of performing some poor, and mean charge, and
to be incorporated in that very degree, into which the Society inclines to put
you, for what serves Humility, or indifferency, and to what end should your
Superiors desire it? And thus every Religious man may specify in the
particular Rules of his Order, and every other man, in all those particulars,
which his condition or vocation may require.

That we must take heed of speaking any such words, as may redound to our
own praise. CHAPTER XXVI.
THe Saints and Masters of spiritual life, Saint Basil, Saint Gregory, Saint
Bernard and others also advise us to take heed, with great care, of speaking
any words, which may redound to our own estimation or praise; according to
that which the holy Tobias councelled his son. Superbiam nunquam, in sensu
tuo, aut in tuo verbo, dominari permittas. Never suffer pride to have dominion,
either over thy heart, or over thy words. Saint Bernard ponders that of Saint
Paul very vell to this purpose: Parco autem, ne quis me existimet, supra id
quod videt in me. The Apostle had formerly spoken great things of himself, and
so it was fit at that time that he should do, for the good of hearers and
for the greather glory of God; and he might yet have said greater things, since
he had b^ne rapt up, into the third heaven, where he had seen, and wnderstood
more, then the thongue could speak; but I forbear, says he, to speak
thereof, least otherwise any man should think more then he sees, and hears of
me. Saint Bernard says: Quam pulchre dixit parco. Non parcit sibi arrogans:
non parcit sibi superbus, non cupidus vanae gloriae, and iactator actuum
suorum: qui vel sibi arrogat quod est, vel mentitur quod non est. O how well he
said. I forbear or pardon that, for this time. The proud or arrogant man,
forbeares not such things, for he suffers noe occasion to pass, wherein he may
magnify himself: yea and some times he adds, and says more then is, that so
he may be esteemed the more. Solus qui vere humilis est, parcit animae suae;
qui ne putetur quod non est, semper quantum in se est, vult nesciri quod est.
Only the man who is truly humble, letts these occasions pass: and to the
end he may be sure, that they shall not ascribe more to him then that which is
true, he conceales that which is true. The saint descends more particularly
into this subject and says: Loquens nihil dicat, vnde multum eruditus, multum
ve religiosus possit putari. You must not say any thing, whereby you may seem
more learned, or to be a man of piety and prayer. And generally, you must ever
take heed of saying any thing, which may redound in any kind, to your own
praise, for it is very dangerous, though you could say it with much truth, and
though it might be matter of aedification; and though you may think it be to a
good end, and for the profitt of another, yet it suffices that it is to your
own praise, to keep you from speaking it. You must ever walk with great care
concerning this, least otherwise by this means, you loose the good which
perhaps you did.

Saint Bonauenture says, Nunquam de scientia vel de seculi statu se iactent.
You must never speak word which may give others to understand, that you have
eminent parts, or that you were formerly of some acounte in the world. It
looks very ill fauouredly in a Religious man, to value himself by the
nobility, and riches of his friends; for all these pedegrees, and states, are
no better then a little wind: and, as one asked, Do you know for what
Nobility is good? the other answered very well, To be despifed, as wealth is.
That whereof we make accounte here, is the virtue of Humility which you have,
this is that which we esteem: for what you were, or were not before you came
hither, is all but air, and he who values himself by these things, or makes
accounte thereof, in a Religious state, shows abundantly his little Spirit,
and how vain a heart he has, Such a man as this, has not yet forsaken, or
despised the world. S. Basil says; Qui natus est ex spiritu iuxta domini
vocem, ac potestatem, accepit fieri filius dei, eum cognationis secundum carne^
pudet. He who is borne by another new birth and has contracted a spiritual
and divine kindred with God and received a power to become his son, grows
ashamed of that other carnal kindred, and lays it utterly a side.

Who soever the man be, words of praise sound ill out of his own mouth. And
so the proverb says, Laus in ore proprio vilescit. And the wiseman says
better, Laudet te alienus, and non os tuum, extraneus and non labia tua. But in
the mouth of a Religious man they do much worse, as being so contrary to that
which he professes, and so he grows to be slightly thought of; and
disesteemed by means of that very thing, whereby he meant to be honored. S.
Ambrose upon those words of the Prophett. Vide humilitatem meam and eripe me,
Behold, O lord, my humility, and deliver me, says, that although a man be
sick, and poor, and of mean condition, yet if he grow not proud, nor
prefer himself before any other, Ipse se humilitate commendat. By humility
he makes himself to be esteemed, and beloved. So that Humility, supplies all
defects; and on the other side, though a man be very rich, and noble, and
powerful: though he be very learned, and excel in abilities, and good parts,
yet if with all, he boast thereof, and look bigg upon it, Insolentia sibi
vilis est. By this, he lessens and a bases himself, and grows to be
disesteemed, and despised because he grows to be held proud.

The history of the Abbot Arsenius recounts, that although he had been so
illustrious in the world, and so eminent in learning, for he had been the
instructor, or Master, of the Sons of the Emperor Theodosius, and of
Arcadius, and Honorius who also came both, to be Emperors, yet after he
once became a Moncke, no word was ever heard to fall from him, which might
savor of greatness, or which gave to understand, that he had learning, but he
co^uerst and lived among the other monckes, with so great Humility, and
simplicity of heart, as if he had never known any thing; and he also asked
questions of the other monks, concerning the most ordinary things of spirit
affirming that in this sublime science, he deserved not to be their disciple.
And it is related of the B. S. Jerome, that he was of most noble extraction,
and yet we find not in all his works, that he has so much as insinuated any
thing thereof.

Saint Bonauenture gives a very good reason against this vanity, and it is
this. Know, that there can hardly be any good thing in you, worthy of praise,
which breaks not, and shines not out to others, so that they may understand
and know it; and if you use silence, and conceal it, you shall gain more upon
them, and be more worthy of praise, both for the virtue it self, and for your
hiding it; but if you will needs become the publisher thereof, and will needs
serve it out in a full dish, they will make sport at it; And whereas before
they were edified, and you esteemed, they now grow to vilify, and despise you.
Virtue is in this, like musk, which the more you hide it the stronger smell it
gives; but if you carry it open, it loses his sent.

Saint Gregory tells, how a certain holy Abbot called Eleutherius, being once
in journey, arrived at night, at a certain Monastery of Nunns, and they lodged
him in a certain house, not far of, where there was a young man possessed,
and tormented by the devil, who, for that night, was made companion to the
Abbot. The morning being come, the nunns caused him to be asked, whether the
young man had had any accident that night; to which he answered, No. They
related to him then, that he was nightly tormented by the devil, and they
besought him with much instance, that he would take him with him to his
Monastery: The old man condescended to their suite, and when the young man had
been a long time in the Convent, and that his ancient enemy presumed not any
more to approach him, the heart of the old man was touched with a little
inordinate joy, and vain contentment, for the young man's recovery; and talking
with his Moncks he said thus to them. The devil made himself sport with those
Nunns, by tormenting this young man; but since he came to the Monastery of the
servants of God, he has not presumed once to touch him. But even in the
speaking of these words the young man gr^w insta^tly to be tormented again by
the devil, in the presence of them all. When the holy old man saw this, he
began to weep bitterly, considering that his vain glory, had been the cause
of that sadd accident. But the Monckes comforted him and said, that not a man
of them would eat one bitt of bread, till they had obtained the recovery of
the young man. And so prostratinge then them selves all in prayer, they rose
not till the sick man was restored to his health. Whereby it may be seen, how
greatly God abhorrs such words, as have any little smacke of a man's own praise,
although they be but said in jest, for entertainment and discourses sake, as
appears by that which this Saint said.

How we are to exercise our selves in prayer, in this second degree of
Humility. CHAPTER XXVII.
Our Father in the Constitutions, setts down that Rule, which is so
princ^pa^l and of so great pefection, whereof we speak before; namely, that
as worldly men love and desire honor, fame, and estimation in the world, with
great affection, so they who walk in spirit, and seriously desire to follow
Christ our Lord must love and desire, the direct contrary, after a most earnest
manner desiring to endure injuries false testimonies, and to be held for
foolish people (so that themselves give noe occasion thereof) to the end that
they may imitate Christ Jesus our Lord and Creator, in some poor manner. And
it comaunds, that all they who have a mind to enter into the So^ietie, be
^sked first whether they have these desires or no. A harsh thing it seems
really, for a Nouice, who is but newly cut of From the world, and who comes
bleeding fresh, as we use to say, must be examined by a Rule so straight as
this; but the while, we see great perfection, which our Institute requires at
our hands. It will have men to be truly taken off, from themselves, and to be
entyrely dead to the world. But because this is hard, and of much perfection,
our Father adds, that if any man, through human veakenes and misery, do not
feel so ardent desires thereof, as has been here expressed, he shall then
be asked, if at least, he desire to have those desires. And with this, and with
having a purpose to bear them with patience, when the occasion shall be
offered, it contents it self. For this is a good disposition for a man to
learn, and profitt by: and it is enough, that a prentise begin with a desire,
to learn the trade, and apply himself so it, for by this means he will
compasso it. A state of Religion, is the school of virtue, and perfection:
enter in with this desire, and by the grace of our Lord, you shall obtain it.

Let us therefore begin with this exercise from hence forth, and let us do
it by degrees. You say that you find not desires in your selves, to be
contemned, and despised, but yet that you desire to have them. Begin therefore
from thence, to exercice your selves in prayer, toward this virtue of
Humility: and say with the Prophet, Concupiuit anima mea, desiderare
iustificationes tuas in omni tempore. My soul desires O Lord to desire thy
iustifications at all times. But how far do I see my self from having those
lively, and inflamed desires, which those great Saints, and those men so truly
humble had, to be despised by the world? I much desire to arrive at least to
have desire of these desires. I desire to desire it. You are in a good way.
This is a very good beginning, and disposition for obteyning it; insist and
persevere in prayer, and beg of our Lord that he will soften your hearts, and
detain your selves some days herein; for these desires of ours, are very
pleasing to our Lord, and he harkens to them with a good will. Desiderium
pauperum exaudiuit Dominus; preparationem cordis eorum, audiuit auris tua. God
will soon give you a desire to suffer some what for his love, and to do some
penance for your sins; and when he shall have given it, upon what can you
better employ this desire of suffering, and by what can you do more penance,
then by being despised and vilifyed, for his love, in recompense of your
sins. As David said, when Semei cursed and affronted. Let him alone, for
perhaps our Lord may be pleased to receive this contempt and these affronts, in
discount of my sins, and this would be a great happiness to me.

But now when our Lord shall do you the favor to make you feel these desires
in your selves, to be under valued, and despised, that so you may imitate
Christ our Lord; you must not yet conceive, that then your business is at an
end, and that you have already acquired the virtue of Humility; but rather you
must then make account, that you have but begun to plant, and settle it in your
soul. And so you must procure, not to pass on lightly, wiht these desires,
but to detain your selves therein, at great leisure; and to exercise your
selves long upon them, in your prayer, till such time as that the same desires
grow to be such and so efficatious, as to reach to be deeds. And when you
shall be arrived so far, as to conceive that you bear those occasions well,
which use to present them selves; yet you must know, that there are several
degrees, and stepps, in the same work, w ereby you must rise; toward the
per^ection of Humility. For the first stepp is, that you exercise your selves
in bearing all those occasions, which may be offered for your contempt, with
patience: wherein there will be some what to do, and that perhaps for a good
while. After this, you must pass on, and not stay nor grow weary, til you come
to rejoice in being affronted, and till you feel as much contentment, and gust
therein, as worldly me^ do in all the honors, riches, and pleasures of the
earth: according to that of the Prophett: In via testimoniorii tuoru^
delectatus sum, sicut in omnibus diuitiis. If we desire any thing in good
earnest we are naturally gladd when we have obtained it, and if we desire it
much, we rejoice much: and if little, little. Take you therefore this, for a
sign, whereby to see whether you seriously desire to be little esteemed or no,
and whether or not, you go increasing, in the ver^ue of Humility, and so
also in the other virtues.

To the end that we may profitt the more, by this means in our Prayer, and
that t erein, this virtue may imprint it self the more deeply in our hearts we
must go descending to those particular, and hard cases which may ocurre: and
we must animate our selves, and actuate upon them, as if we had them present
then: insisting, and deteyinge our selves therein, till at length no one thing
may be able to putt it self before us which we cannot make plain and smooth.
For by this means, vice will come to be rooted up, and virtue will be
sincking, and incorporating it self into the very root of the heart, and
perfecting it self daily more and more. That is a very good comparison to this
purpose: which the Goldsmiths use for the refyning of God: they melt it, in the
chrysuble and when it is melted they cast a grain of Sublimate in to it, and
then the gold begins to boil up with great height and fury, till the Sublimate
be spent: for then the gold begins to be quiet. The gold smith comes again,
and casts in another grain of Sublimate and the gold boyles up again but not
with so much strength as before, and when that Sublimate is also spent, the
gold lies still. They cast in Sublimate a third time, and the gold boyles
again, but gently now, and finally he casts in more Sublimate the sowerth
time; but then the gold makes noe noise or alteration at all, any more then if
they had cast nothing in, and then the gold is perfectly refined, and this is
the sign thereof.

Now this is that very thing which we must be doing in prayer; namely, to cast
in a grain of Sublimate, imagining that such a particular mortification or
contempt, is then offering it self to us: and if it begin to trouble and
stinge us, we must detain our selves therein, till the heat and fervor of
our prayer, consume that grain of Sublimate, and till we be able to make head
against it and find our hearts quiet, and reposed therein. And the next day
cast in another grain of Sublimate, imagininge that some other matter of
difficulty, and of much mortification, and humiliation is offering it self;
and if still your nature be troubled and offer to boil up, detain your selves
therein, till it be spent and you be quieted. Then cast in another, and yet
another grain, as occasion serves, and when now the Sublimate makes noe noise,
nor breeds noe trouble to you, but that what soever occasion may be offered
and represented to you, you still remain with much quietness, and peace, the
gold is then purified, and refined, and this may serve you for a sign, of
having obtained the perfection of this virtue.

In what manner we are to make a particular examination of our consciences,
concerning the virtue of Humility. CHAPTER XXVIII.
THE Particular examination, as we have said already in the proper place, is to
be of some one only thing: for thus will this means be more efficatious and
have greater force then if we carried ore many things together, and it is
therefore called particular because it concerns, one only thing. And this is
of so great importance, that Ordinarily it is necessary, to take many times
one vice, which we would avoid, and one virtue which we would obtain, into
parts, that so, by little and little, we may be able to compass that which
we desire. So is it therefore in this virtue. If you will make your
particular examination, about rooting up the pride of your heart, and of
obteyninge the virtue of Humility, you must not take it in hand, after a kind
of general way. For Humility, and pride, embrace many perticulars, and if you
take it but so in gross, as to say I will be proud in nothing, but humble in
all things, it is too much to examine your selves upon, at once; and it will be
more, if you do it upon two or three virtues at once, and thus in fine, you
will do nothing. But you are to take it into parts, and to go on by little
and little. Consider, in what you are chiefly wont to fail, concerning
Humility, or in exercising of pride, and begin there, and haueing ended with
one particular thing, take another to heart, and then another, and thus by
little and little, you will go rooting up the whole vice of pride out of your
souls, and plantinge the virtue of Humility in place thereof. Let us therefore
now go parting, and dividing these things, that so you may the better, and
with the more profitt, make this Particular examination, concerning this
virtue, which is so necessary.

The first shall be, not to speak a word which may redound to our own
estimation and praise. For the appetite of honor and estimation, is so natural
to us, and we carry it so rooted in our hearts: that, even as it were with out
thinking, or reflecting upon it, our tongues run voluntarily to say some what
which either directly, or indirectly may redownd to our own praise. Ex
abundantia cordis os loquitur. The heart is wont to speak, out of the
abundance of the mouth. As soon as any occasion is offered, whereby honor may
be gained, we instantly come in for our parts: as by saying, I was in place; I
was partly the cause: If I had been absent; I was interessed in that from the
beginning; etc.

And the while, I dare warrant you, that if the thing had not brought honor
with it, you would have been content, to hold your peace, though you had been
present, yea and partly, had been the cause there of. Of this kind, there are
other words, which many times we observe not, till they be past: and therefore
it will be very well done, to make a Particular examination upon this point:
that so by care, and good custom, we may take a way this other ill one, which
is so connaturall to us.

The second may be that, which Saint Basil aduises us; and it is also of Saint
Ierosme, Saint Augustine, and Saint Bernard: namely that we be not willing to
hear any other, praise, or speak well of us, for in this, there is also
great danger, Saint Ambrose says, that when the devil cannot beat us down by
pusillanimitie, and dismay, he procures to blow us up by presumption and pride,
and when he cannot overthrow us, by the way of affronts, he procures that we
may be honored and praised, and so to be undone by that means. It is
recounted in the life of the blessed Saint Pachomius, that he was wont to go
out of his Monastery, into some more solitary parts to pray: and that when he
returned, the devil came in many times: And as when a leader goes before a
great Army, so did the devils before him, with much noise, and just as if
they had been making place, and remoueing the impediments of their own
passage, they vould go on, saying thus: Date locum homini Dei, date locum
homini dei, Away, out of the way, make room, make room, here comes the
Saint, here comes the great servant of God. This they did, to see if they
could lift him up into pride, but he despised, and made a scorn of them. And
now do you also thus, when you here men praise you, and when thoughts of
your own honor and estimation, shall approach to you And then make account,
that it is the devil whom you here, whilst they speak to you of such
things, and despise and make a scorn of him, and so you shall free your
selves, of this temptation.

Saint John Climacus relates a certain thing, which is very particular to this
purpose. He says, that the devil did once discover to a certain Moncke, the
ill thoughts where with he tempted another, to the and that the tempted man,
hearing, from the others mouth, that which passed secretly in his own heart,
might hold him for a kind of Prophett, and praise and publish him for a
Saint, and that by this means, he might grow proud. Heerby you may perceive
how well the devil is content when vain complacence and pride may have
entrance into our heart, since he procures that it may be so, by so many
inventions and tricks. And so Saint Jerome says, Nos ergo, ad patriam
festinantes, mortiferos Syrenarum cantus surda debemus aure pertransire. Keep
your selves safe from these Sirens, for they inchaunte men, and put them out of
their wits. The Musicque of the praises of men, is so delightful and so
sweet to our ears, that there are no Sirens, which can so inchaunte men, nor
putt them so out of their wits, and therefore we hadd need to stopp our
ears, and make our selves deaf to them. Saint John Climacus aduises us, when
men praise us, to call our sins to mind, for so shall we find our selves to
be unworthy of the pra^ses they give, and so shall we draw more Humility and
confusion from thence. This may therefore be the second thing, upon which you
may p^rticularly examine your selves: Namely, that you rejoice not to be well
spoken of, and praised by others. And to this we may also join, the being
glad when others are well spoken of, and praised, which is a point of very
great importance. And when soever you find either any feeling or motion of
envy for the praise of others, or else of any complacence or vain contentment
in that others speak well of you; be sure to set it down, for a fault.

The third thing upon which we may make a Particular examination of our
selves, is concerning the not doing of any thing, to the end that we may be
seen, or esteemed by men. And this is that, which Christ our Lord aduises us,
in the holy Gospel: Attendite ne iustitiam vestram faciatis coram hominibus,
vt videamini ab eis, alioquin mercedem non habebitis, apud patrem vestrum, qui
in coelis est. This is a very profitable examination, and it may be divided
into many parts. First it may be made, upon the not doing of any thing for
human respects. Secondly upon the doing thing merely, for the love of God.
And thirdly, on the doing them perfectly well, as one who does them in the
presence of God, and as one who serves not men but God. And this diligence is
to be used by us, till the works be performed by us in such sort, as that we
may rather seem to be loueing God in them, then to be workeing of them, as we
declared formerly at large, when we treated of the rectitude, and purity of
the intention, which we are to carry in our actions.

The fowerth point, upon which we may carry our particular examination, is,
not to excuse our selves. For this also grows from pride, when comitting a
fault and being told of it, we instantly make our excuse, and, without even
marking it, we make one excuse sometimes upon another, yea and we will yet
give another excuse, for having formerly excused our selves: Ad excusandas
excusationes in peccatis. Saint Gregory upon these words of Job. Si abscondi,
quasi homo, peccatum meum, and caelaui in sinu meo, iniquitatem meam. If as a
man, I have hidden my sin, the Saint ponders these words very well Quasi
homo, as a man: and says, that it is the property of a man, to desire to
cover and excuse his sin, because it comes to us by descent, from our first
parents. As soon as the first man had sinned, he went instantly to hide
himself amongst the trees of Paradise, and God reproving him for his
disobedience, he thus excused himself presently upon his wife: Mulier quam
dedisti mihi sociam, dedit mihi de ligno, and comedi. O Lord, that woman, whom
thou gave me for my companion, made me eat of the forbidden fruit. And the
woman excused her self in like manner, upon the serpent: Serpens decepit me,
The Serpent deceived me and I did eat thereof. God examined them about their
sin, to the end that knowing it, and confessing it, they might obtain pardon
for it: and so Saint Gregory says, that he did not axamine the Serpent,
because he meant not to pardon the Serpent. But they, insteede of humbling them
selves, and acknowledging their sin, toward the obteyning of pardon,
increase and agrauate it, by their excuses: yea and by desiring, after a sort,
thus to cast the fault upon God. The woman whom thou gave me, O Lord, was
the cause. As if he had said: If thou had not given her me for a companion,
no part of this had been done. The serpent which thou did create, and suffer
to enter into Paradise, deceived me, and if thou had not suffered it to enter
there, I had not sinned. Saint Gregory says, that they having heard from the
devils mouth, that they should be like God, since they could not become like
him in the point of his divinity, they endeavored to make him like them, in
the point of their sin, and so they made it greater by defending it, then
they had done by comitting it. And now, as being Children of such parents, and
in fine, as being men, we still remain with this infirmity, and with this
defect, and ill custom, and when we are reproved for any fault, we instantly
have a mind to cover it with an excuse, as under bows and leaves: yea and
some times, a man is not content to excuse himself, but he must needs be
casting the fault upon others. A Saint compares such as excuse themselves, to
the hedge-hogge; which when it perceiues that they go about to take her, she
shrinks in her head and feet with extreme speed and remains as a bowl,
being circled on every side as it were with thorns; so that a man cannot
touch her, without pricking himself first. Vt prius videas sanguinem tuum quam
corpus suu^: So that you shall sooner see your own blood, then her body. In
this manner, says, the S. be they who are wont to excuse themselves; for if
you will but thouch them, by telling them the faults which they made, they
instantly defend themselves: like the hedgehog; and some times they prick and
gaul you, and give you also to understand, that you as well deserve reproof.
At other times, they will be telling you, that there is a Rule which forbids
one to find fault with another; and at others, that there be some who make
greater faults which yet men are content to dissemble; and in fine, do but
touch the hedgehogge, and you shall see whether he will prick you or not. All
this business grows from our great pride, who would not have our faults
known, nor be held for defective, and it troubles us more, that they be
understood, and for the estimation which we think vee loose thereby, them for
having committed them; and so we procure to conceile, and hide them, the most
we can. Nay there are some so unmortified in this kind, that even before you
say any thing, they prevent you and excuse themselves, and give reasons for
that which they think you may object; and they say, If I did this, it was for
this reason and if I did that, it was for that: and the like. But who, in the
mean time, pricks you now, that you must skipp so high? The goade of pride it
is, which you carry so deeply rooted in your hearts. This is that which pricks
you, and which makes you leap even before your time. It will therefore be well
done by him who finds this old and ill custom in himself, to examine
himself particularly thereof; till at length, he may come to part with all
desire of covering his faults; but rather since he committed them, let him be
gladd to be held faulty, in recompense and satisfaction thereof. Yea and though
you have made noe fault, and yet they reprehend you as if you had, yet do not
you excuse your selves. For when the Superior shall have a mind to know the
cause or reason, which you had for doing it, he can ask you the question and
perhapps he knows it already: and desires but to make trial of your
Humility, and to see in what manner you take the admonition, and reprehension
which he gives.

The fifth, is also very good for a man to examine himself upon, namely the
restrayning and cutting of all thoughts of pride. A man is so proud, and
vain, that many idle and presu^ptious thoughts, will be rushing in upon him,
and he will imagine himself to be in some high office, and performing of some
great function. Already you fancy your selves to be preaching in the places
where you were borne, with great allowance and likinge, and you imagine that
you produce great fruit. Already do you conceive that you are reading, or
disputinge against such Conclusions, with great applause of the hearers; and
such things as these. All this grows from our great pride, which lies
spronting, and breakinge out into these thoughts. And therefore it will be very
well done, to make a particular examination upon the clipping and cutting of
these thoughts, which are so haughty and vain. And so will it be fit so to
stopp and instantly to cut off all impure thoughts, and rash judgments, or any
other vice, whereby we may find our selves to be molested.

The sixth point shall be, to carry a particular examination upon your selves,
whether you esteem of all men as your Superiors, according to what our Rule
says, Namely that we must animate our selves, toward Humility, by procuring
and desiring to give the advantage to others esteeminge them all from our very
souls, as if they were our Superiors, and exteriourly bearing them that
respect and reverence, which the condition or state of every one of them shall
bear with plainenes and Religious simplicity of heart: and this is also taken
from the Apostle. And how soever there is to be a difference amongst men,
according to the distinction of their persons and states, yet, for as much as
may concern the interior and true Humility of our sowles, our Fathers will
is that as this Society was called by him the least of all other religious
Orders, so every member thereof, must hold himself for the least of them all
and must hold them all for his Superiors and betters. This shall therefore be
a very good, and profitable examination: but yet so, as that it be not only
speculatiue, but that in the exercise and practice thereof we procure to carry
our selves so toward all, with such Humility and respect, as if they were
indeed our Superiors. For if you esteem that other man as your Superior,
you will not be talking to him with such liberty, and harshnes, and much less
in words which may mortify and offend him, nor will you so easily pass your
judgment rashly upon him, nor be disgusted that he should treat you, or speak
to you in this or that manner. And so you are to set down, and note all these
things for faults, when you examine your self there upon.

The seventh thing whereof we may particularly examine our selves, upon this
subject, is vhether we make good use of all those occasions, which offer
themselves toward the getting of Humility. Are you wont to be troubled when
another speaks some little word to you which you would not hear, or when they
command you any things in to resolute and imperious manner, or when you
think they make not so much accounte of you as of others? Examine your selves
whether you make good use of these, as also those other occasions, which some
times present themselves, redounding to your disestimation. This is one of the
most proper, and most profitable examinations, which, we can use toward the
obteyning of the virtue of Humility. For besides that we shall thus go
providing our selves, for all those things which may daily occur, and whereof
we may stand in need, we may, by means of this examination, go increasing,
and rising up by those three degrees of virtue, which we set down before.
First, you may examine, whether or not you carry all these things with
patience. Secondly whether you carry them with so much promptitude and
facility, as that they put you to noe trouble. And thirdly, whether you carry
them with joy, and with taking pleasure in the contempt of your self; for in
this we showed before, that the perfection of Humility does consist.

The eight point upon which a man may particularly examine himself, either in
this subject, or in others like it, is to make some acts, or exercices, as well
interior as exterior of Humility, or any other virtue, about which he
examines himself, actuating upon it, so many times in the morninge, and so
many in the eueninge: beginning with fewer acts, and so rising up to more, till
at length he get the habit and custom of that virtue. And now the enemies
being divided after this manner, and we takeinge every one of them by himself,
they will the more easily be overcome, and the victory which is desired, will
be the more speedily obtained.

How it may be compatible with Humility, to be willing to be accounted off, and
esteemed by men. CHAPTER XXIX.
THere is a doubt, wont to be propounded concerning Humility, the solution
whereof does much import, that so we may know how to carry, and conduct our
selves therein. We ordinarily say, and it is the general doctrine of the SS.
that we must desire to be abased, disesteemed, and despised, and that men may
hold us in noe accounte. But then instantly it comes to be considered, on the
other side, how we shall be able to gather fruit, by the good of our
neighbors, if they disesteeme and despise us: for to that end it is necessary
that we have a kind of credit with them, and that they may hold us in good
opinion and estimation: and therefore it may seem, that it shall not be ill
but good, that we desire to be valued, and esteemed by men. The glorious Saint
Basil, Saint Gregory, and Saint Bernard, treat upon this doubt very well, and
say, that although it be true that we must fly from the honor, and estimation
of the world, by reason of the great danger which is therein, and that, for as
much as is on our part, and for that which may concern our selves, we must
ever desire to be disesteemed and despised, yet for some good end of the
greater service of God, the honor, and estimation of the world, may lawfully
and piously be desired. And S. Bernard says also, that for as much as
concerns our part, we must wish that men may think, and esteem of us as we
think and esteem of our selves, that so they may value us as our selves do:
but yet he says withal, that it is not fit many times that others should be
sure thereof and so therefore that we may some times even lawfully, and
virtuously procure that they may not know our faults, least so themselves may
receive hurt thereby, through the hinderance of their own spiritual good. But
in the mean time, it will be necessary that we understand this point very
well, and that we walk therein, with great caution, and with much spirit*
because such truths as this, insteede of doing good, do many times much hurt
to some, who know not how to make right use thereof. The Saints themselves
declare this doctrine very well, that so we may not take occasion of error
from thence. Saint Gregory says Non numquam etiam sancti viri de bona sua
opinione gaudent: sed eum per hanc, ad meliora proficere audientes pensant.
Sometimes even holy men are gladd that they have good opinion, and estimation
amongst men; but this happens when they find that it is a necessary means,
for the doing good and giving help to their neighbors souls. Nec iam de
opinione sua, sed de proximorum gaudent vtilitate, quia aliud est fauores
quaerere and aliud de profectibus exultare. And this (says S. Gregory) is not
to rejoice at his own credit, or estimation; but for the fruit and good of
his neighbors; Which is a very different case. It is one thing for a man to
love human honor, and estimation for it self, and to dwell as it were
therein, for his own respect, and contentment that so he may grow great and
be celebrated amongst men, and this is naught, but another thing it is, when
this is liked for some good end, as for the good of our neighbors, and to give
help to sowles, and this is not ill but good, and thus we may well desire
opinion, and estimation of the world, and that they may have us in good
conceit, for the greater glory of God, and because it may be necessary for the
edification of our neighbors, and for the benefitt of their sowles. For thus a
man shall not rejoice in his own honor, and estimation, but in the spiritual
good of others, and the greater glory of Almighty God. And as he who for his
health desires to take a purge, which he naturally abhorrs, may well say, that
to admit and like the purge, is to love his health; so he who admitts, and
likes human honor, which otherwise he despises (only because in that case it
is a necessary, or at least a profitable means for the service of God, and the
good of sowles) may affirm with truth, that he desires and likes nothing in
it, but the glory of almighty God.

But let us now consider how we may know, whether a man delight in honor, and
estimation for the mere glory of God, and the good of his neighbors, or else
for his own sake and for the affection which he bears to his own honor:
fort this indeed is a nice point, wherein the whole difficulty of this
business co^sists S. Gregory answered thus: Qua in re necesse est, vt cum
audientium vtilitati non proficit, mentem nostram fama laudabilis non eleuet,
sed fatiget. Our being gladd of honor and estimation, is to be so merely for
God, that when it is not necessary for his greater glory, and the good of
sowles, not only we are not to rejoice therein, but to be troubled at it. So
that our desire and heart, for as much as may depend on us, is ever to be
inclined to dishonor, and contempt; and therefore when any occasion thereof is
presented, we must embrace it with our whole hearts, and be gladd of it as men;
who have met with what they wished for. And as for honor and estimation, we
are only to desire it, and be gladd thereof, so far forth as it may be
necessary for the edification, and further good of our neighbors souls, and
for the greater honor and glory of Almighty God. We read of our blessed
Father Ignatius that if he had given way to the fervor of his own desire, he
would have been glad to go through the streets, all stuck with feathers, and
full of Dirt: that so he might be held for a madd fool, but that the Charity
and desire, which he had of the good of sowles, had repressed this so ardent
impulse, which carried him toward the acts of Humility, and put him into the
obligation of treating himself with such decency and gravity, as might be fit
for his co^dit^on, and person. But as for his desire and inclination, it was
ever to be despised and a based: and whenever any occasion was offered,
whereby he might humble himself, he embraced it, and when it was not offered
he sought it, with great desire to find it. By this you shall therefore know,
if you be gladd of honor, and estimation, for the good of souls, and the
glory of God, or else for your own honor and fame. If when any occasion of
Humility, and contempt is offered, you embrace it in good earnest, and with
the heart; and if you rejoice thereat, it is then a good sign; that when such
a sermon, or such another employment has succeeded well, and that you are
valued and esteemed for it, you rejoice not for your own honor, and
estimation, but merely for the glory of God, and the good of souls which
grows thereby. But when, on the other side some occasion of Humility, and of
being held in small accounte is offered, you reject it, or you carry it not
well; and if when it is not necessary for the good of others, you will yet be
gladd of estimation and praise of men, and procure also to have it, this
indeed is a sign, that you are gladd also in those other things, as for a
thing which has relation to your self, and your own estimation and honor,
and not merely for the glory of God, and the good of sowles.

So that it is true, that the honor and estimation of men, is not ill but
good, if we use it rightly, and it may lawfully and virtuously be desired as
when Father Franciscus Xauier, went to the king of Bungo, with great company
and gravity. Yea even a man's praising himself, may be holy and good, if it be
done as it ought. And so we see that Saint Paul writing to them of Corinthus,
began to praise, and recounte great things of himself, relating the high
favors which our Lord had imparted to him; and saying, That he had labored
more then the rest of the Apostles: Yea and he began to tell them of his
revelations, and rapts, whereby he had been carried up to the third heaven. But
all this he did, because it was convenient, Yea and necessary for the glory of
God, and good of them to whom he wrote; that so they might grow to hold and
value him for an Apostle of Christ, and embrace his doctrine, and take benefitt
thereby: and he spoke these things of himself, with a heart, which did not
only despise honor, but love dishonor, for the love of Christ our lord, and
when his honor was not necessary for the good of others, he knew, very well
how to empty and a base himself, saying: That he was not worthy to be called
an Apostle, because he had persecuted the Church of God; and styling himsemfe
blasphemous, and abortiue, and the greatest of sinners; and when the occasions
of dishonor and contempt were presented to him, therein was his contentment
and joy. Such hearts as these, we may well trust with receiving honor, and with
saying some times, such things as may conduce toward it; because they will
never do it, but when it may be necessary for the greater glory of God, yea
and even then, they do it so much without the sticking of any part thereof to
themselves, as if they had not done it it at all: for they love not their own
honor, but the honor of Almighty God, and the good of Sowles.

But because it is a matter of much difficulty to receive honor, and not to
grow proud by it, nor to take any vain co^tentment or complacence therein:
therefore the SS. through their fear of the great danger which lurcks in
estimation, and dignity, and high place; fledd as far as they could from it
all, and transported them selves into parts where they might be neither
esteemed, nor so much as known: and they procured to busy them selves in
mean, and conte^ptible employments, because they saw that they profited
thereby in Humility, which was the most secure way for them. S. Francis said
very well, I am not a Religious man, if I take not dishonor, with the same
both inward and out ward joy, wherewith I take honor. For if I joy in that
honor which others allow me, when I preach, or perform any other office of
Charity to them, for their good; (whereby yet I put my soul to run some
hazard, through the danger of vanity) much more ought I joy in mine own
good, and in the salvation of mine own soul; which I preserve with more
security, when I am scorned; and it is evident that we are more obliged to joy
in our own good and profitt, then in that of others, because Charity well
ordered begins at home. If then you joy in the good of your neighbor, when
the sermon, or other employment has succeeded well, and when you are esteemed
and praised for it, why should you not be gladd of your own good, when you
having done what was in you, are yet undervalued for your pain for this is
better and more safe for you? If you be gladd when you have a great tallent,
wherewith to do great things, for the good of others, why are you not glad of
you own good, and for your being left in contempt, because God gave you no
such tallent? If you be gladd when you have much health and strength, wherewith
to labor hard for the good of others; why should you not be glad when God is
pleased, that you should be sick and weak, and be fit for nothing, but to be
laid by in a corner and without use: for this is your profit, and this will
help you more toward Humility; and in this shall you please God more, then
if you were a great preacher, since his will is so.

Heerby it may be seen, how much deceived they are, who have lodged their eyes
upon honor, and the estimation of the world, under color, forsooth, that is
necessary for the doing good to others: and under this pretense they desire
high place, and honorable employments, and all that which looks like
greatness, and so they fly from all that which is mean, and poor: for they
make them selves believe, that they were to be disauthorised thereby. But in
this is another deceit, and a very great one, that by the very thing, whereby
a man pretends to gain authority, and by that whereby he thought to loose it,
he shall gain it. Some conceive, that by means of the poor coat, and by
exerciseing that low and mean place, they shall loose that value, and
estimation, which were necesary for the doing good to others, but it is their
pride which deceiues them: for they should rather gain it by this means: and
by the contrary of that whereby they would procure it, they shall loose it. Our
Blessed Father Ignatius, taught this doctrine very well, and was wont to say,
that the study of true humility did more help to the conversion of sowles,
then the being in authority or state, which has in it, any smacke or sent of
the wordly honor. And he practiced this not only in himself, but he taught
it in such sort to them whom he sent to labor in the vineyard of our lord,
that to the end that they might succeed, in the doing of high, and great
things, they must ever procure to walk in the way of Humility, and contempt
of them selves: for then would the work be safe, as being well funded upon
Humility, and besides, for that this is the way, whereby our lord is wont to
do great things. And according here unto, when our B. Father sent the Fathers
Franciscus Xauier, and Simon Rodriguez to Portingall, he ordained that as soon
as they should arrive in that kingdom, they should live by begging alms, and
so open the way in thither, for all that which might be to follow, by
poverty, and contempt of themselves. And when Father Salmeron and Paschasius
went in the quality of Nuncioes, from the sea Apostolicque into Ireland: he
ordained them to teach Children, and rude people the Christian doctrine. And
when Father Salmeron and Father Lainez went to the Council of Trent, the first
time, (they being sent thither by Pope Paul the third in the quality of the
Theologues of his Holiness) the instructions which he gave them, were that
before they were ever to deliver any opinion in the Council, they should go
to the Hospital, and there visitt the poor sick people, and teach Children
the principles of the holy Catholic Faith: and that when they should have
laid these roots, they might pass on, and declare their opinion in the
Council; for that then, it would be profitable and fruitful; as we know and
see that by the goodness of our lord it was. And now after all this, will it be
fit that we should go doubting, and fearinge, and dreaming on, with our
human prudence: least reputation forsooth, should be lost, by such actions as
these. I will be your warrant, never fear. Your pulpitt will not be
disauthorised by your teaching little Children the Christian doctrine; nor by
making spiritual exhortations in the market places, Hospitalls, and prisons.
Never fear that you shall loose creditt with people of quality, because they
see you attend to take the confessio^s of poor miserable people: or because
your selves go clad like poor Religious men. Nay, this is rather the way to
gain authority, and reputation with them: and you shall thus produce more
fruit of sowles, for God exalts such as are humble: and is wont to do wonders
by their means.

But now laying this last reason which is the chief a side, and to consider
the thing in question, by the way of prudence. and human reason, you cannot
employ a more efficatious means to gain authority and opinion amongst your
neigbours, and to do good to sowles, then to exercise your selves in these
things, which seem poor and base, and to do it so much the more, by how
much the more your parts are greater. The reason of this is, because the world
does so hugely esteem of honor and estimation, and of things which are high,
in order to that end, as that the thing of the whole world which it admires
most, is the man who despise^ that, and to see that one who might be used in
high and honorable employments does choose to pass his hours, in things which
are pore and mean: and thus they grow to frame a great conceit, and
estimation of the sanctity of such persons, and accept of that doctrine which
they teach as if it came i^mediately to the^ from heaven

We read in the life of Father Franciscus Xauier, that when he was to embarke
himself for the Indyes, he would not receive any provision at all, for his
navigations, and the Conde de Castaineda, who had then the office to provide for
the fleets of those parts, being very earnest with the Father, that at least he
would take some servant with him, who might assist him at Sea, alleging that
it would diminish his authority and reputation with that people which he was
to instruct by the way, if they should see him, amongst the rest of the
passingers, wash his own clothes upon the decks, and dress his own meat,
with his own hands, the Father made him this answer. My lord, the procuring
to gain authority, and reputation by this very means, whereof your Lordshipp
speaks, has betrayed the Church of God, and brought the prelates thereof, to
that state wherein now they are. And the means whereby this reputation ^s to
be recovered must be to wash a man's own ^aggs, and to dress his own meat,
without ^auing need of any other, and in the midst of ^ll this, to be
employing himself upon the serui^^ of his neighbors, for the good of their
souls. The Conde was so edified with this an^were, that he knew not what to
reply. By this means, and by such Humility and virtue as this, authority and
creditt is to be gained, and thus will you gather more fruit. And so we see
what great things Father Franciscus Xauier, did in the Indyes, by teaching
Children the Christian doctrine, and by goeing a bout, and ringinge his little
bell by night, to get the sowles in Purgatory prayed for: and by serving and
comforting the sick; and in fine, by employing himself in such low, and mean
actions as these. And by this way, came he to be a man of so much reputation,
and authority, that he robbed all men of their hearts, and drew them toward him:
and they esteemed him and called him, the Holy Father. This is that kind of
authority, whereof men have need, that so they may be able to do good to
sowles: this is the estimation and opinion, which follows humble men, and
belongs to Saints and Evangelical preachers, and this in a word, is that which
we are to procure. For as for those other authorities, and reputations, and
puntilies, which carry a smacke and savor of the world with them, they do
great hurt, and they disedifie our neigbours very much, as well them who are a
broad, as us who live at home within doors.

Upon those words of Saint John; Ego autem gloriam meam non quaero, est qui
querat, and iudicet; I seek not mine own glory; it is my Father who takes
account thereof; a doctor says thus very well: Since our heavenly Father
procures, and seeks our honor, and our Glory, our selves have noe need to
take care thereof. Take you care to humble your selves, and to be such as you
ought; and as for any such estimation and authority, whereof you think you
may have need, for the good of souls, leave you that to God: for even whereby
you shall most humble and abase your selves, thereby will God raise you most,
and indue you with another manner of estimation in the world, then that which
you would ever be able to obtain for your selves, by these other human
diligences, and devices. And let not also honor, and reputation of your
Order, stand so much in your light: for this is also another false color,
which is wont now and then to offer it self, as well in this, as in such other
things, for the disguising of our imperfection and immortification. For thus
some men will say: O I did not this or that, in any regard of mine own, but to
the end that I might authorize my Order, to which men ought to bear respect, I
pray you let those respects a love. The Order will gain more respect, if the
world may find that you are patient, quiet, and humble; for the authority and
estimation thereof, consists in that the members of it be mortified, and humble
men, and entirely stripped of all those things, which carry any savor, or odor
of the world with them.

Father Mafeus, in the History of the Indies, relates how one of our Fathers
preaching the Faith of Christ our lord, in Iapon, one of those Pagans, who by
chance passed by, at that time, in the publicque street of Firando, made a
scorn both of his person, and of his preaching: and drawing up as much fl^ame
as he could, he spitt it full in the Fathers face. The preacher took out a
ha^dkircher, and wyped his face, without speaking a word thereof, or showing
any trouble at all; but proceeded in his sermon with the same tenor and
semblance, as if noe such thing had passed. The while, one of the auditors
^n^r^kt it much, and seeing the great Humility, and patience of the preacher,
he began to think thus with himself. It is not possible, but that the
doctrine which teaches so much patience, Humility, and constancy of mind,
should be from heaven. Certainly this is Gods business. And this consideration,
made so much impression in him, that it was a motive to his conversion, and
so he went after the preacher, upon the end of the sermon; and besought him
that he might be instructed in the faith of Christ our lord, and so be
baptized.

Of the third degree of Humility. CHAPTER. XXX.
THE third degree of Humility, is when a man professing great virtues, and
gifts of God, and being in great honor, and estimation, grows not at all
proud thereby, nor attributes any thing to himself; but referrs and ascribes
it all, to the true fountain thereof, which is God, from whom every good, and
perfect guif proceeds. This third degree of Humility, (says Saint
Bonauenture) belongs, to high and perfect men: and by how much higher they are,
so much the more low, do they humble themselves. That a man who is imperfect,
and faulty, should know and esteem himself for such, is noe great matter. It
is commendable, and good, but it is noe wonderful thing, any more then it is,
for the son of a plough man, not to desire to be held for the kings Son; or
for a poor man for poor, or a sick man for sick: and that others may hold
them for such as they know them selves to be: but that a rich man should
accounte himself poor, and the great man make himself little, and so
conform himself to mean persons, this indeed deserves to be accounted
strange. The saint therefore says, that it is not to be wondered at, that a man
who is imperfect and faulty, should hold himself for imperfect and faulty:
nay rather it were to be wondered at, if being as he is, he should hold
himself to be perfect, and good: for it is, as if being full of Leprosy, he
should take himself to be sound: But that he who is mightily advanced in
virtue, and possesses many gifts of God, and is really very great in his
Divine presence, should yet hold himself for little, this indeed is great
Humility, and worth the wondering at. Saint Bernard says, Magna and rara
virtus profecto est, cum magna opereris, magnum te nescire: cum omnibus nota
sit sanctitas tua, te solum lateat, cum omnibus mirabilis appareas, tibi soli
vilescas. A great and rare virtue it is, that a man should do great things,
and yet not hold himself for great; that others should evidently see his
sanctity, and yet that it should lie hidd from him; that he should be admirable
in the eyes of others, and contemptible in his own. Hoc ego ipsis virtutibus,
mirabilius iudico. I esteem this more (says he) then all the other virtues
which he can have.

This Humility was sound after a most perfect manner, in the most sacred
Queen of Angels: who knowing that she was chosen for the mother of God, did
acknowledge her self, with most profound Humility, to be his servant and
slave. Ecce ancilla Domini (says Saint Bernard) Matter Dei eligitur, and
ancillam se nominat. God haueing chosen her to so great an honor, and for so
high a dignity, as to be his Mother, she calls herself his Slave; an being
celebrated by the mouth of Saint Elizabeth for blessed amongst all women, she
ascribed not to herself any glory for all these greatnesses which were in her:
but she gave them all back again to God exalting and admiring him for them,
and herself remaining the while, most unshaken and entire in her own most
profound Humility. Magnificat anima mea Dominum, Et exultauit spiritus meus in
deo salutari meo, quia respexit humilitatem ancillae suae. This is the very
Humility of heaven, the Saints possess this Humility. And this (says S.
Gregory) is that which S. John saw, in the Apocalipse, of those four and
twenty Elders, who being prostrate before the throne of God, adored him,
taking the Crowns of from their heads, and casting them down at the foot of
the throne. And the Saint says, that the casting of their Crowns, at the
foot of the throne of God, signifies the not attributing their victories to
themselves, but the ascribing all to God, who gave them strength, and power to
overcome. Dignus es Domine Deus noster accipere gloriam, and honorem, and
virtutem, quia tu creasti omnia, and propter voluntatem tuam erant, and creata
sunt. It is reason O Lord, that we give the honor and glory of all to thee,
and that we take of the Crowns from our heads, and that we cast them at thy
feet, because all is thine, and by thy will it is made: and if we have any
thing good, it is because thou would have it so. This is then the third
degree of Humility, when a man ascribes not these gifts, and graces to
himself, which he has received of God: but to ascribe them and refer them
all to him as to the author and giver of all good gifts.

But some man may say, if Humility consists in this, we all are humble; for
who is there who knows not, that all good comes to us from God, and that of
our selves we have nothing but misery, and sin. Who is he that will not
say, if God should take his hand off from me, I were the most miserable man of
the whole world. Perditio tua ex te Israel, tantummodo in me auxilium tuum. On
our part we have nothing but destruction and sin says the Prophet Ose. All
the favor, and all the good comes to us from the liberality of God, and this
is Catholic Doctrine: and so it may seem that we all have this Humility;
for we all believe this truth, whereof the holy Scripture is full. The Apostle
Saint James, in his Canonical Epistle, says, Omne datum optimum, and omne
donum perfectum de sursum est, descendens a patre hominum. All good and perfect
gifts, come to us from a boue, from the Father of lights. And the Apostle
Saint Paul says, Quid habes quod non accepisti; non quod sufficientes simus
cogitare aliquid a nobis, quasi ex nobis; sed sufficientia nostra ex Deo est:
Deus est qui Operatur in vobis, and velle, and perficere, pro bona volontate.
He says, that we cannot work, nor speak, nor desire, nor think, nor
begine, nor finish any thing, which may serve for our salvation, without God,
from whom all our sufficiency proceeds. And by what more clear comparison
could it be given us to understand all this, then by that which Christ our Lord
himself declares. Sicut palms non potest far fructum a semetipso, nisi
manserit in vite: sic nec vos, nisi in me manseritis. Will you see, says he,
the little or indeed the nothing which you can do without me, the vine
branch cannot give fruit of it self, unless it be united to the vine, so no
man can perform any meritorious work for himself unless he be united vith me.
Ego sum vitis, vos palmites, qui manet in me, and ego in eo, hic fert fructum
multum, quia sine me nihil potestis facere. What is more fruitful then the
branch united to the vine, and what more unprofitable, and vselesse, then the
branch parted from the vine? For what is it good? God inter^ogats the Prophett
Ezechiell: Fili hominis quid fiet de ligno viti^? What O son of man shall be
done with the branch of vine? It is not timber which i^ fit for any
Carpenters work, nor yet for any stake, or pin, where upon any thing may be
hanged against a wall. The branch severed from the vine, is fit for nothing,
but the fire. Now just so, are we, if we be not united to the true vine,
which is Christ our Lord. Si quis in me non manserit, mittetur for as sicut
palms, and arescet, and colligent eum, and in ignem mittent, and ardet. We
are good for nothing but the fire: and if we be any thing, it is by the grace
of God, as Saint Paul says: Gratia Dei sum id quod sum. It seems we are all
fully satisfied with the truth of this: That all the good we have is of God,
and that we are to ascribe noe good to our selves, but all to God, to whom the
honor and glory of all, is due. It seems, I say, that this is not very
difficult, to such as believe in Christ; and therefore that it should not be
set down, for the last, and most perfect degree of Humility, since it is so
clearly a point of Faith.

It seems so indeed, at the first sight, if we look superficially upon it;
but indeed it is not easy, but very hard. Cassian says, that to such as are
but beginners, it seems to be but an easy thing, to attribute nothing to a
man's self, and not to rest or rely upon his own industry, and diligence, but
to refer and ascribe all to God, but says that indeed it is very hard. For
since we also contribute some what on our part, toward good works, Dei enim
sumus adiutores, as Saint Paul says, because we also work and concur
jointly with God, we grow tacitly, and even as it were without finding it, to
confide in our selves; and a secret presumption and pride steals upon us,
which makes us think, that this or that was done by our diligence and care;
and so by degrees, we grow vain, and look bigg, and ascribe the works which
we do to our selves: as if we had performed them by our own strength; and as
if they had been wholly ours. This is not so easy a business as we conceive.
And it may suffice for us, that the SS. set this down, for the most perfect
degree of humility, and they say this is the Humility of the great ones; that
we may so understand, that there is more difficulty, and perfection therein,
then one would think. For a man to receive great gifts of God, and to do
great things, and to give God all the glory of all as he ought, without
attributing any thing to himself, and not to take any vain contentment
therein, is a point of great perfection. To be honored and praised for a S.
and that noe part of such honor, and estimation should stike at all to the
heart, any more then if he had done nothing, is a very hard thing, and there are
few who attain to it, and there is need of much virtue for the performance
thereof.

S. Chrysostom says, that to converse in the midst of honor, and not to be
at all touched thereby, is like conuersing much with beatifull women, and yet
never to look upon them with unchaste eyes. It is a difficult, and a dangerous
thing, and a man had need of much virtue therein. For a man to clime so high,
and not to be giddy, he had need be master of a good head. All men have not a
head, wherewith to walk on high All the Angels of heaven, Lucifer, and his
consorts had it not; and so they grew giddy, and proud, and fell down into
the bottomless Abisse of Hell For this they say was the sin of the Angels,
that when God created them so beautiful, and had enriched them with so many
both natural, and supernatural gifts, In veritate non stetit: they remained
not in God; nor gave him the glory of all, but would needs subsist in
themselves. And yet not as conceiving, that of themselves they had these things
(for they knew well, that they all came from God, and that they depended upon
him, since they knew they were his creatures) but, as the Prophett Ezechiell
says, Eleuatum est cor tuum in decore tuo: They grew proud in their beauty,
and glorified themselves in those gifts, which they had received of god, and
took delight in them, as if they had possessed the^ of themselves, and did not
ascribe or refer them all, to God, giving him the honor and glory thereof:
but they grew proud, and they exalted, and contented themselves vainly in
themselves. So that, although with their understanding, they knew that the
glory thereof was due to God, yet they robbed him of it, and took it to
themselves, with their will. By this time you see, that this degree of
Humility, is not so easy, as it seemed, since the Angels sound it so hard,
that they fell from that height wherein God had placed them, because they knew
not how to conserve themselves therein. And now, if the Angels had not heads
wherewith to walk so hight, but that they grew giddy, and fell down much
more reason have we to fear, least we may fail, when we are raised and
exalted into hight because we men are so miserable creatures, that as the
Prophet David says, we vanish even like ^moake. Mox vt honorificati fuerint,
and exaltati, deficientes quemadmodum fumus deficient. As smoke the higher it
goes, the more it scatters, and disolues it self: so man, who is so miserable
and so proud, the more he is honored, and raised up to high state, the more
idle and intoxicated he grows.

O how aptly, and how well did Christ our Lord admonish us of this. The holy
Gospel relates, that haueing sent his seauenty two desciples to preach, they
returned to him full of joy, and being, as it were proud, of their mission,
they said thus to him: Lord we have done wonderful things, yea and the very
Devils themselves, have obeyed us in thy name. But the Savior of the world
answered them thus, with great severity. Videbam Satanam, sicut fulgur, de
coelo cademem. Take heed of vain contentment in your selves, and know, that
Lucifer ^ell down from heaven, because in that high state wherein he was
created the was vainly p^eased with himself, and with those gifts and
graces, which he had received, and did not ascribe all to the honor, and
glory of Almighty God, as he ought, but would needs take it to himself.
Take heed, the like happen not to you: grow not vain by reason of the great
and wonderful things which you do in my name, and take noe vain contentment
in them. And now these words, may also suit with us. Take heed you wax not
proud, in that great things are done by you, for the good of others, and many
sowles are gained by your means. Take heed you have noe vain contentement in
the applause and opinion of men, and in the much accounte they make of you. Be
sure you take nothing to your selves, and suffer not the love of honor and
estimation, to stick at all to your hearts, for this is that, which cast
Lucifer down to Hell, and that which of an Angel, made him a devil. You may
see (says Saint Augustine) how detestable a thing pride is, since it makes
Angels devils: and on the other side how excellent a thing Humility is,
since it makes men become like Angels. Humilitas homines sanctis Angelis
similes facit, and superbia daemones ex Angelis fecit.

It is declared, wherein the Third degree of Humility consists. CHAPTER XXXI.
We have not yet sufficiently declared, wherein the third degree of Humility
consists; and therefore it will be fit to go on, that so we may the better
put in execution, this being the thing at which we aim. The Saints affirm,
that this third degree of Humility, consists in knowing how to distinguish
between the gould of the graces and benefitts which comes to us from God, and
the dross or misery, where with we abound in our selves, and then to give
every one his due: to God, that which is his, and to our selves that which is
ours: and that this be done by execution, and practice, wherein the life of
this whole business consists. So that Humility does not consist in knowing
speculatiuely, that of our selves, we are good for nothing, and can effect
nothing, and that all good things come to us from God, and that it is he, who
works the willinge, the beginning, and the ending in us, through his free and
gracious will as Saint Paul declares (for only to know this speculatiuely,
which is declared to us, by the holy Catholic Faith) is a very easy thing and
all true Christians know and believe it; but to know and exercise it, in the
way of practice, and to be so grounded and settled in it, as if we saw it with
our eyes, and touched and took it into our hands, this (as S. Ambrose says) is
a most particular grace, and high favor of Almighty God. To prove this, he
brings that passage of S. Paul, Nos autem non spiritum huius mundi accepimus,
sed spiritum qui ex deo est, vt sciamus quae a deo donata sunt nobis. We have
not received the spirit of this world, but the spirit of God, to the end that
we may know, and feel the gifts which we have received from his hand. For a
man to acknowledge, and even feel the graces which he has received from God,
so purely, as to esteem them as merely another, and to have been imparted,
and to be enjoyed by the mere liberallitie and mercy of Almighty God, is a
most particular savor, and gift of his: and the wise Solomon says, that this
is supreme wisdom. Et vt sciui quoniam aliter non possem esse continens,
nisi deus det, and hoc ipsum erat sapientia, scire cuius esset hoc donum. And
another translation says, Hoc ipsum erat summ^ sapientia. To understand and
know practically; that to be continent, is not a thing which we are able to
compass, by our own strength, and that noe industry, or endeavor of our
own, is able to obtain it: but that it is the gift of God, and that we must
have it from his hand, is a point of supreme wisdom. So that, in this which
S. Paul says, is a particular grace, and gift of God, and which Solomon
calls supreme wisdom, consists this third degree of Humility. Quid habes
quod non accepisti, si autem accepisti, quid gloriaris quasi non acceperis.
What have we, which we have not received; it was none of ours, for of our
selves We have noe good thing; and if we have received it, and that it were
another, and none of ours, Why do we glory, as if we had not received it, and
as if it were properly our own.

This was the Humility of the SS. who with being enriched by the gifts, and
graces of Almighty God, and with his having raised t^em up to the very top of
perfection, and thereby to honor and estimation, even in this world, have
notwithstanding held themselves for vile and base in their own eyes, and their
souls remained so deeply fixed in the knowledge of their own meanenes, and
misery, as if they had possessed noe such graces at all. There stuck not the
least vanity to their hearts, nor any air at all of that honor, and
estimation, which the world gave them; for they knew well, how to distinguish
between their own, and that of others; and so they looked upon all those
gifts, graces, honor, and estimation, as things extrinsecall to themselves,
and received from the hand of God; and to him they ascribed, and gave all the
glory and praise thereof; themselves remaining still entire in the knowledge of
their own unworthiness, considering that of themselves, they could neither
have, nor do any good thing. And from thence it also came that though the
whole world exalted them, they would never yet exalt themselves, nor esteem
themselves one iott the more for that, nor did any little breath thereof stick
to their hearts. But it seemed to them that these praises were not uttered, as
concerning them, but some other, to whom they belo^ged; namely God, in whom,
and in whose glory they placed all their contentment and joy. And thus it is
affirmed with much reason, that this is the Humility of great, and perfect
men. First, because it already presuposes great virtue, and great gifts of
God, which only makes one great in his sight, and secondly, because in it
self, for a man to be truly great in the sight of God, and very eminent in
virtue and perfection, and for that reason to be highly valued, and esteemed,
both before God and man, and yet in the midst of all this to hold himself for
little and base in his own eyes, is a great and admirable perfection.

And this is that which S. Chrysostom, and S. Bernard do so much wonder at
in the Apostles, and others, who, with being so great Saints, and so richly
full of graces from God, and his Majesty working such wonders and miracles by
their means, so far as even to raise the dead themselves to life, and being
so highly esteemed for these things, by the whole world, they yet nevertheless
remained so fixed in their unworthiness and baseness, as if they had had nothing
in them, and as if it had been some other, and not they who wrought those
great things, and as if all that honor, and estimation and praise, were
belonging to others, and as if they had imparted to others, and not to them.
Saint Bernard says: Non magnum est esse humilem in abiectione, magna prorsus
and rara virtus, humilitas honorata. It is not much that a man in poverty and
baseness, should be content to humble himself, for that which indeed he is,
helps him to know and disesteeme himself, but that a man should be generally
honored and esteemed, and celebrated for an admirable man, and for a Saint,
and yet remain so well grounded in the truth of his own baseness, and of his
Nothing, as if noe part of those other things, were in him, this indeed is a
rare and excellent virtue, and a point of most high perfection. In such men
says Saint Bernard, does the light shine before men, according to the
commandment of our Lord not for the glorifying of themselves, but of their
Father who is in heaven. These are those true imitatours of Saint Paul, and of
the preachers of the Gospel, who publish not themselves, but Jesus Christ.
These are those good, and faithful servants who seek noe advantage of their
own, nor ascribe any things to themselves, but all and that most faithfully to
God, to whom they give the glory of all. And so shall they be sure to hear
from the mouth of our Lord, those words of the Gospel. Euge serve bone and
fidelis quia super pauca fuisti fidelis, supra multa te constituam. Rejoice
thou, O good and faithful servant, for because thou have been faith full in
little, I will appoint and place thee over much.

The foresaid truth is more declared. CHAPTER XXXII.
We have said that the third degree of Humility, is when a man having great
virtues, and gifts of God, and withal being in great honor, and estimation
with the world, grows not proud thereof; but attributes, and ascribes all to
the fountain thereof, which is God: giving him the glory of all, himself
remayninge, the while, in his own unworthiness and baseness, as if he did
nothing, nor had nothing. But now we say not, for all this, that we do not also
work or that we have not a part in those good works which we do for this were
a great ignorance and error. It is evident, that by means of our Free will,
we concur, and work jointly with God, toward our good works. For man gives
freely his consent to the doing of them; so he comes to work, since by his
proper and Free will he will what he wills, and works what he works; and it
is in his hand, whether he will work or not. Nay rather this is that very
thing, which makes this degree of Humility so very hard to be obtained: for
on the one side, we are to use all our diligences, and to employ all the means
we can to obtain virtue, and to resist temptations, and to procure that all
things may succeed well, as if these things alone were able to effect it; and
on the other side, when all this is done, we are to distruct our selves as
much, and to hold our selves for as unprofitable, as ^ we had done nothing at
all, and we mus^ p^ace our whole confidence in God, a^ the holy Gospel
teaches: Cum feceriti omnia qu^^ pre^^pta sunt vobis, dicite serui inutiles
sumus; quod debuimus facere fecimus. When you have done all those things which
are commanded you (he speaks not of some, but of all) say that you are
unprofitable servants; and to say this right, you will have need of some
virtue, and not a little. Cassianus says. That he who comes to know well that
he is an unprofitable servant, and that all his own endeauours and diligences,
are not able to obtain any one good thing, but that all is to flow from the
gracious gifts of Almighty God, this man will not grow proud, when he
preuales in any thing, which he obtained not by his own labor, but by the
grace and goodness of God. Which is also the same that Saint Paul sait: What
have thou which thou have not received?

Saint Augustine brings a very good comparison, to declare this truth, and
says: That without the grace of God, we are noe more, but merely a body
without a soul. So that as a body which is dead, cannot move or stir it
self, so we, without the grace of God, cannot perform the works of life, or
value, in the sigth of God. So that as that body were a madd kind of thing,
which should a sl^^ne the acts of liueing, and moueing to it self, and not
ascribe it to the soul which dwells in it, and gives it life; so were that
soul to be stark blind, which should attribute the good works which it does,
to it self, and not to God, who infused into it the spirit of life, which is
his grace; to the end that so he might be able to perform them. And in
another place, he says, thas as our corporal eyes, though they be never so
sharp sighted, yet if they be not assisted by the light of the Sun, can
discern nothing; so a man, how much soever he may be justified, cannot so
much as continue to live well, if he be not enabled by the light of God's
grace. If our lord keep not the City, says the Prophett David, in vain
does he watch who keeps it. O si cognoscant se homines, and qui gloriantur, in
Domino glorientur, says the Saint. O that men would at length know them
selves, and now at length, understand them selves as to confess that they have
nothing in them selves, whereof to glory, bu^ only in Almighty God. O that
Go^ would send us some beam of light, from heaven, whereby we might apprehen^
and understand our own darkness: an^ that there is noe good, nor being, no
strength in any thing which ever wa^ created, but only so far forth, as our
lord has been graciously pleased to give it, and is still pleased to continue
it. Now in this does the third degree of Humility consist, saueing that no
poor words of ours can arrive to express the profunditie, and great
perfection which is therein, notwithstanding all that which we can say,
sometimes after one manner, and some times after another: and not only is the
practice hereof hard, but even the speculation also.

This is that anihillation of a man's self, which is so often repeated, and
recommended by the Masters of spiritual life. This is that houlding, and
confessing a man's self for unworthy, and unprofitable to all purposes. Which
S. Benet and other Saints set down, for the most perfect degree of Humility.
Ad omnia indignum, and in vtilem se confiteri, and credere. This is that
distrust of a man's self, and that being still depending upon God, which is so
recommended to us in holy scripture. This is that houlding himself in no
accounte at all, whereof we are ever talking, and hearing: but O that we might
find it once for all in our very hearts. That we might vnders^^^d and feel, in
very truth, and practically, as a man who sees things with his eyes, and
touches and feels them with his hands, that, for as much as is on our part we
neither have any thing but misery, nor can do any thing but commit sin; and
that all the good which we effect, or work, we neither exercise it, nor have
it of our selves, but only of God; and that the honor and glory of all is his.

And if with having said all this, you yet understand not fully the perfection
of this degree of Humility, do not wonder at it; for this is a very high piece
of Theology; and therefore it is not strange, though it be not so easily
understood. A certain doctor says very well, that it happens in all arts,
and sciences, that every body arriues to know such things as are common and
plain; but as for such others as are curious and choice, they are not to be
reached by every hand, but by such only, as are eminent in that science or
art. And just so it is in our case; for the ordinary and usual things,
belonging to any virtue, are understood by all the world; but such as are
extraordinary and choice, and nice, and high, can only be comprehended by such
as are eminent, and fully possessed of that virtue. And this is that which S.
Laurentius Iustinianus says, namely That noe man knows well what Humility is
but he who has received the gift of being humble from God. And from hence it
also grows, that in reguard the saints were endued with such a most profound
Humility, that they thought and said such things of themselves, that we who
fall so far short of them, cannot understand exactly what they say: but their
speeches seem exaggerations, as namely that they were the greatest sinners of
the whole world, and the like, whereof I will speak ear long. But if we
cannot say or think such things as they, no nor even understand them, it is
because we have not arrived to so great Humility as theirs was, and so we
understand not the curious, and subtle parts of this faculty. Procure you to
be humble, and to grow up in this science, and to profitt therein more and
more, and then you will understand how such things as those, may be said with
truth.

The third degree of Humility is further declared, and how it grows from
thence, that the true humble man, esteems himself to be the least and worst
of all. CHAPTER XXXIII.
TO the end that we may yet better understand this third degree of Humility,
and may ground our selves well therein; it will be necessary for us to go
back, and take up the matter nearer the fountain. And as, according to what
we said before, all our natural being, and all the natural operations which
we have, we have from God: because we were nothing, and then we had no power
either to move our selves, or to see, or hear, or taste, or understand, or
will: but God who gave us our natural being, gave us these fac^lties, and
powers, and we must ascribe our being, as also these natural operatio^s to
him; so in the self same manner, and with much greater reason must we say, in
the case of a supernatural being and of the works of grace, and that so much
more, as these are greater, and more excellent then those. We have not our
supernatural being of our selves, but of God. In fine, it is a being of favor
and grace, and therefore it is so called, because out of his mere goodness,
he added that, to our natural being. Eramus natura filii irae. We were borne
in sin, were the Children of wrath, and the enemies of God, who dr^w us out
of that darkness, In admirabile lumen suum: Into his admirable light, as the
Apostle Saint Peter says: of enemies God made us friends, of slaves sons,
from being nothing worth, he brought us to be acceptable in his own eyes. And
the cause why God did all this, was not for any respect either of our merits
past, or services to come; but only for his own bounty, and mercy, and
through the merits of Jesus Christ, our only Lord and Savior, as Saint Paul
says; Iustifificati gratis, per gratiam ipsius, per redemptionem quae est in
Christo Jesus. Now the^, as we were not able to get out of that nothing,
wherein we were, into the natural being which now we have, nor were able to
perform the acts of life, nor see, nor hear, nor feel, but all this was the
gracious gift of God, and to him we must ascribe it all without taking the
glory of it to our selves; so could we never have gone out of that darkness of
sin, wherein we were, and in which we were conceived and borne, if God of his
infinite goodness and mercy, hat not drawn us out from thence, nor could we now
perform the works of spiritual life, if he gave us not his grace to that end.
For the merit and worth of good works, grows not from that part thereof,
which they have from us, but from what they have from the grace of our Lord,
just so as the legal value which curra^t money has, it has not from it
self, but from the stamp or coin. And therefore we must not ascribe any
glory at all to our selves, but all to God, from whom both our Natural, and
supernatural being is derived; carrying ever that of Saint Paul, both in our
months, and in our hearts, Gratia dei sum, id quod sum, I am whatsoever I am,
by the mere grace of God.

But now, as according to what we said, God, not only drew us out of our
nothing and gave us that being which now we have; but after we are created, and
have received our being, we do not subsist in our selves, but God is ever
susteyning, vphoulding, and conserninge us, with his hand of prower, that so
we may not fall into that former profound Abisse of Nothing, from whence he
took us before, in the same manner is it also, in the case of our
supernatural being; for not only did God show us the savor to bring us out
of the darkness of sin, wherein we were, into the admirable light of his
grace; but he is ^uer conserning, and houlding us up with his hand, that so we
may not return to fall. And this, to such a proportion, as that if God should
take of his hand, of custody from us, but for one instant, and should give the
devil leave to tempt us then at his pleasure; we should return both to our
former, and to greater sins: Quoniam a dextris est mihi, ne commouear said
the Prophett David. Thou O Lord, art ever at my side houlding me up, that I may
not be plucked down; it is thy work O Lord, to have raised me up from sin,
thine to have kept me from returning to sin again. If I rose up, it was
because thou gave me thy hand; and if now I be on foot, it is because thou
houldst me from dropping down. Since therefore, as we showed it before to be
sufficient to make us hold our selves for nothing, because, on our part, we
are nothing, we were nothing, and we should be nothing, if God were not ever
conserning us: so this is also sufficient to make us ever keep our selves in
the accounte of being Wicked sinners, because, for as much as is on our part,
we are sinners, we were sinners, and we would be sinners, if God were not still
vphoulding us, with his holy hand.

Albertus Magnus says that who soever would obtain Humility, must plant the
root thereof in his heart, which consists in that he knew his own weakness and
misery, and understand, and weigh not only how vile, and wretched he is now,
but how vile and Wretched he may be, yea and would be even very now, if God
with his powerful hand, did not keep him, and sin a sunder: and did not
remove the occasions, and assist and strengthen him in temptations. Into how
many sins had I fallne, if thou, O Lord, through thy infinite mercy, had
not kept me up? how many occasions of my sinning have thou prevented, which
were sufficient to have pulled me down, as they pulled down the Prophet
David: if thou, knowing my weakness, if thou I say had not hindered them? How
many times have thou tied the devils hands, to the end that he might not tempt
me at his pleasure, and if he would tempt me, that yet he should not be able to
over come me? How often might I have said those words of the Prophet, with much
truth, Nisi quia Dominus adiuuit me, pa^lominus habitasset in inferno anima
mea. If thou, O Lord, had not helped me, this soul of mine had already been
little less then in the very bottom of Hell. How often have I been assaulted,
and even almost tripped up, toward falling: and thou O Lord, did hold me,
and did apply thy sweet and strong hand, that I might take noe hurt. Si
dicebam motus est pes meus, misericordia tua domine adiuuabat me. If I said
that my foot slippt, thy mercy O Lord, came to help me. O how often should we
have been lost, if God, through his infinite mercy and goodness, had not
preserved us? This is the^ the acounte, wherein we are to hold our selves:
because this we are, and this we possess on our parts, and this we were, and
this we should also be again, if God took of his hand, and custody from us.

From hence it came, that the SS. despised humbled and confounded themselves
so far, that they were not content to esteem little of themselves, and to
hold that they were wicked, and sinful men, but they thought themselves the
meanest of all others, yea and the most unworthy, and sinful men in the
world. We read of Saint Francis, that God had so highly exalted him, and so
greatly enriched him with spiritual graces, that his fellow or companyon
being in prayer, saw a chair richly wrought with enamel, and precious stones,
and this, amongst the Seraphins, which was prepared for him. And yet afterward,
asking the Saint what opinion he had of himself, his answer was, that he
thought there lived not in the world a greater sinner then he. And the same
did the holy Apostle Saint Paul affirm also, touching himself: Christus
Jesus venit in hunc mundum, peccatores saluos facere quorum primus ego sum. Our
lord Jesus Christ came into this world to save sinners, of whom I am the
first, or chief. And so he aduises us to procure to obtain this Humility
that we hold our selves for inferior, and less then all others, and that we
acknowledge them all for our Superiors and betters. Saint Augustine says, Non
fallit nos Apostolus nec adulatione vti iubet, cum ad Philippenses 2. dicit, In
humilitate superiores, sibi inuicem arbitrantes. Et ad Romanos 12. Honor
inuicem peruenientes, The Apostle deceaues vt not, when he says that we must
hold our selves for the least of all, and that we must esteem all others to
be our Superiors and betters: and he commands not hereby, that we should
use any words of Flattery, or courtshipp toward them. The Saints did not say
with counterfeite Humility, or telling a lie, that they were the greatest
sinners of the world: but merely according to truth, because they thought so
in their very hearts, and so they also give us in charge, that we think and
say the same, and this not by compliment, or with fiction.

Saint Bernard ponders very well to this purpose, that saying of our B.
Savior, Cum vocatus fueris ad nuptias, recumbe in no^s^imo loco. When you
shall be invited, sit you down in the last and lowest place. He said not,
that you should choose a middle place, or that you should sit amongst the
lowest; or in the last place but one: but he will only have you sit in the
very lowest place of all. Vt solus videlicet, omnium nouis^mus ^eas, te que
nemini, non dico preponas sed nec comparare presumas. Not only are you not to
prefer your selves before any, but not so much as to presume to compare or
equal your selves with any other: but you are only to remain in the last
place, without any equal in your baseness, esteeming your selves to be the most
miserable sinners of the whole world. It puts you, says he, to noe danger if
perharps you should humble your selves too much, and putting your selves under
the feet of all; but the preferring your selves before any one alone, may put
you to a great deal of prejudice. And he brings this ordinary comparison. As
when you pass by a low gate, the stooping too much with your head, can do you
noe hurt, but if you stoop never so little less then the gate requires, you
may do your selves so much hurt as to break your heads; so is it also in
the soul, For to abase and humble your selves too much, cannot be hurt full,
but to forbear, to humble your selves, though it be but little to prefer or
even equal your selves to any one, is a dangerous thing. What know thou (O
man) whether that one whom thou take, not only to be worse then thou (for
perhapps it seems to thee now, that thou art grown to live well) but that he
is the wicked man and the greatest sinner in the whole world, may not prove
perhaps a better man, then either they or thou, yea and that he is so already
in the sight of God. Who knows whether God will not change hands, as Jacob
did, and that the lotts will be also changed; and that thou will come to be
the forsaken, and the other chosen? Quid s^is, si melior and te, and illis
mutatione dexterae excelsae, in se quidem futurus sit, in Deo vero iam sit. How
do you know what God hatht wrought in that heart sin^e yesterday, yea and in
this last minute. Facile est enim in oculis Dei subito honestare pa^perem. In
one instant, is God able to make Apostles of a Publican, and a Persecutor, as
he did of Saint Matthew, and Saint Paul. Potens est Deus de lapidibus istis
suscitare filios Abrahae. Of sinners more stony and hard then a Diamond, can
God make sonns for himself. How mightily did that Pharise find himself
deceived, when he judged Saint Mary Magdalen for wicked, and when Christ our
Lord reproved him, and gave him to understand that she whom he held for a
public sinner, was better then he. And so Saint Benet, and Saint Thomas,
and other saints set this down for one of the twelve degrees of Humility.
Credere and pronumtiare se omnibus viliorem. To say and think of himself,
that he is the worst man of the whole world. It is not enough to say so with
the tongue, but it must be felt with the very heart. Think not that thou have
profited at all, if thou hold not thy self for the worst of men, says S.
Paul.

How good and holy men, may with truth esteem themselves less then others,
yea and affirm themselves to be the greatest sinners of the world. CHAPTER
XXXIV.
IT will not be matter of curiosity, but of much profitt, to declare how good,
and holy men, may with truth, esteem themselves less then all; and also
affirm that they are the greatest sinners of the whole world; For we have said
that we must procure to arrive thus far. Some of the Saints refuse to answer
the question, how this may be; and content themselves with believing of
themselves, that they are so in their hearts. S. Dorotheus, relates, hat the
Abbott Zosimus being one day speaking of Humility, and saying so of himself;
a certain Philosopher was there, who asked him, how he could hold himself to
be so great a sinner, since he knew himself to keep Gods commandments. To
which the holy Abbot made this answer. I say that this which I have said is
true, and that I speak as I think; and therefore ask me no more questions.
But S. Augustine, S. Thomas, and other SS. give an answer to this question,
and they do it diverse ways. That of S. Augustine, and S. Thomas is, that a
man placing his eyes upon his own defects, and considering in his neighbor
the secret gifts which he has, or at least may have of God; every one may
with truth affirm of himself, that he is the vilest and greatest sinner of
the whole world; for he knows his own defects, and knows not another man's
graces or gifts. O but say you, I see that he committs many sins, which I
committ not. But yet how do you know, what God has wrought in his heart, since
that time. In a moment, may God have secretly imparted some gift and favor to
that man, which may have made him excel you, as it happened to that Pharise, and
that Publican of the Gospel, who went into the Temple to pray. Dico vobis
descendit hic iustificatus in domum suam, ab illo, verily I say to you, (said
Christ our Lord) that the Publican who was held for so wi^ked, returned
justified out of the ^^ple, and the ^hari^e who was held for good, went out
condemned. This alone might serve to fright us, and to make us not presume, I
say not, to prefer our selves before, but even not to compare our selves with
any, and to make us keep our selves in the lowest place of all: which
certainly, is most secure. And for him who is truly humble, and from the heart,
it is a most easy thing to hold himself in the lowest and least accountt of
all others. For the truly humble man, considers in other men the goodness and
virtue which they have, and in himself he observes but his own defects; and
he is so busy and earnest about the knowledge and redress thereof, that he
has no leisure to lift up his eyes toward the faults of others, as
conceaueing himself to have enough of his own to lament: and so he houlds
all other men, for good, and himself for wicked. And by how much the more holy
any man is, so much the more easy, is this to him; for after the rate, or the
increase of his other virtues, the knowing, despising, and humbling himself
does also increase, for all these things go together. And still the more
light he has from heaven, and the more knowledge of the goodness and Majesty
of Almighty God, the more profound understanding will he come to have of his
own misery, and of his nothing, because Abyssus abyssum inuocat. That Abisse
of the knowledge of the goodness and greatness of God, calls up and discouers
that other profound Abisse of our misery, and makes us able to discern the
infinite little moates, and grains of dust of our imperfectio^s. And if we
hold our selves in any accounte, it is certainly because we have small
knowledge of God, and little light from heaven. The beams of the Sun of
Justice, have not yet entered in by our window, and so we do not only see not
the moates which are our less deffects, and imperfections, but we are so
short sighted, or rather indeed so very blind, that we scarce discern our
greater sins.

To this it may be added, that God loves Humility, in us so much, and it is
so very pleasing to him that we should hold our selves in no accounte, and
conserve our selves therein; that, in order to this end, he is wont many times,
in the case of his great servants, to whom he imparts many high benefitts and
favors, to desguise his gifts, and to communicate them in such a secret and
strange manner, that even the man himself who receives them, does not
thoroughly comprehend them, and thinks they are nothing. Saint I^rosme says,
Tota illa Tabernaculi pulchritudo pellibus tegitur, and ciliciis: All that
beauty of the Tabernacle, was covered with the skins, of beasts. And so
uses God to conceal, and cover the beauty of men's virtues, and of his own
graces and benefitts; by permitting variety of temptations, yea and sometimes
of some errors, and imperfections, that so they may be the more safely
conserved, as burning Coals under ashes might be.

Saint John Climacus says, that as the devil procures to lay our virtues, and
good works before our eyes, that so we may grow proud, because he desires our
ruin; so on the contrary side, our lord God, because he desires our greater
good, gives more particular light to his servants, that so they may see their
own faults, and imperfections, and he couers and disguises his gifts and
graces to the^, that even the man himself who receives them, may not be able
expressly to understand them. And this is the common doctrine of the Saints.
Saint Bernard says, Nimirum, conseruandae humilitatis gratia, diuina solet
pietas ordinare, vt quanto quis plus proficit, eo minus se reputet profecisse
nam and vsque ad supremum exercitij spiritualis gradum, si quis eo vsque
peruenerit aliquid ei de primi gradus imperfectione reliquitur, vt vix sibi
primum videatur adeptus. To conserve Humility in the servants of God, his
divine goodness disposes things in such sort, as that the more a man profitts,
the less he conceiues himself to profitt: and when he is arrived to the
highest degree of virtue, Almighty God permitts him to be subject to some such
imperfection, as concerns the first degree; to the end that he may conceive
himself not to have fully obtained so much as that; and of the same does Saint
Gregory speak in many places.

For this, do some very vell compare Humility; and say that it respects other
virtues, as the son does other Stars; and that, for this reason, as when the
Son appears, other stars lie hidden, and are concealed, so when Humility
is in the soul, other virtues are not seen, and the humble man conceiues,
that he has noe sollid virtue at all. Saint Gregory says, Boni soli bona sua
non vident, qui in se videnda omnibus ad exempla praebent. Their virtues being
manifest to all men, only themselves see them not. The holy Scripture recounts
of Moses, that when he came from speaking with God, he carried a great
brightness in his face, which the Children of Israel saw but for his part, he
saw it not. Ignorabat quod cornuta esset facies eius ex consortio sermonis
domini. So the humble man, sees no virtues in himself: all that which he sees,
seems faults, and imperfections, to him. Yea and he further believes, that the
least part of his miseries, is that which he knows, and that he is ignorant of
the greater, and now in the middst of this, it will be easy for him to esteem
himself below all, and for the greatest sinner of the whole world.

It is most certain, (to the end that we may conceal nothing) that as there
are many several ways, whereby God i^ wont to conduct his elect, so that h^
leads many by this way, whereof w^ have spoken, namely of concealing his
gifts from them, so that themselves may not see them, nor conceive that they
have them; but he manifests them to others, and makes them know them, to the
end that they may esteem his servants and be pleased in them. And se says,
the Apostle Saint Paul: Nos autem non spiritum huius mundi accepimus, sed
spiritum qui ex deo est, vt sciamus quae a Deo donata sunt nobis. We have not
received the spirit of this world, but the spirit of God; that we may know the
gifts and graces, which we receive from his hand. And the most sacred Queen
of the Angels, did very well both know, and acknowledge, the great graces, and
gifts, which she possessed and had received from Almighty God: Quia fecit
mihi magna qui potens est, as she says in her Canticle. My soul does
magnify, and exalt our Lord, because he who is omnipotent has wrought mighty
things in me. And this is not only not contrary to Humility, and perfection,
but it is accompanied with an Humility so very much elevated, and so high,
that for this reason the Saints are wont to style it, the Humility of great,
and perfect men.

But yet here, theere is a great error, and danger, whereof we are
advertised by the Saints, and it is when some think of them selves, that they
have more graces of God, then indeed they have In which error was that
miserable creature to whom God commanded this to be said in the Apocalipse;
Dicis, dives sum, and locupletatus, and nullius egeo; and nescis quia tu es
miser, and miserabilis, and pauper, and caecus, and nudus. Thou say that thou
art rich, and that thou have need of nothing, but thou do not understand
thine own case; for thou art miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. In
the same error, was that Pharise who gave God thanks, that he was not like
others, believing of himself, that he had what indeed he had not: and that
therefore he was better then other men. And sometimes, this kind of Pride
steals in upon us, so secretly, and with such disguise: that almost before we
know where we are, we grow very full of our selves, and of our own
estimation. And for this, it is an excellent remedy, that we ever carry our
eyes open toward the virtues of others, and shutt up toward our own, and so
to live ever in a holy kind of fear, whereby themselves will be more safe,
and the gifts of God be better kept.

But yet in fine, for as much as our Lord is not tied to this, he conducts his
servants by several ways. Sometimes, as the Apostle Saint Paul says, he
will do his servants the particular favor, of making them know the gifts
which they have received from his hand: And in this case, it seems that the
thing in question, has more difficulty, Namely, how these Saints, and
spiritual men, who know and see in themselves, so great gifts which they
have received from God, can with truth esteem themselves below all; and
affirm of themselves with all, that they are the greatest sinners of the whole
world. When our lord conducts a man by that other way of hiding his gifts,
that so he sees no virtue in himself, but all his faults and imperfections:
the difficulty is not so great; but in these others, how can it be?
Notwithstanding all this, it may be very well. Be you humble like S. Francis,
and you shall know how. His companion pressing to understand, how he could
think and say so of himself with truth; that seraphicall father made this
answer. Really I understand it as I speak it, and I believe, that if God had
showed those mercies and imparted those graces to any murdering thief, or to
the greatest sinner in the whole world which he has vouchsafed to me, he
would have been much better, and much more grateful then I. And, on the other
side, I conceive and believe, that if our Lord should take off his hand from
me, and not hold me fast, I should committ greater sins and should prove the
most wicked man in the whole world. And for this reason he says, I am the
greatest sinner, and the most ungrateful of all mer, And this is a very good
answer, and a very profound Humility, and it carried doctrine in it, of
admirable instruction. This knowledge and consideration, is that which made the
Saints diue down so low under the earth, and cast themselves at the feet of
all men, and really esteem themselves, for the greatest sinners of the whole
world: for they had that root or Humility which is the knowledge of their
own misery, and frailty, well planted and deeply rooted in their hearts: and
they kn^w very well, how to penetrate and ponder both what they were, and what
they had of themselves; and this made it easy for them to believe, that if God
should not hold them fast, but once take of his hand, from their heads, they
would have proved the greatest sinners of the world: and so they held
themselves, for such. And as for those gifts and graces which they had
received from God, they beheld them not, as any thing of their own, but as the
goods of another, and only le^t to them. And not only did the having of all
these gifts, not distract, or hinder them from remaining entire in their
poorenes, and baseness, or from esteeming themselves below all others, but it
rather helped them on toward that end, because they thought they profitted, not
thereby, as they ought to have done. So that, which way soever we turn our
eyes, whether we cast them inward upon what we have of our selves, or whether
we cast them upward, upon what we have received of God; we shall find occasion
enough to be humbled, and to esteem our selves below all.

Saint Gregory, to this purpose, ponders those words which David said to Saul,
after he might have killed him in the cave into which Saul had entered. And when
Dau d spared his life, and let him go, he yet went after saying: Quem
persequeris Rex Israel quem persequeris, Canem mortuu^ persequeris, and pulicem
vnum: Whom do thou persecute O king of Israel? thou persecutest a dead dog
and a single flea, as I am; The S. ponders it thus very well, David was already
anointed for king, and had understood from the Prophett ^amuel, who anointed
him, that God would take the kingdom from Saul; and give it him; and yet
nevertheless, he humbles and lessens himself before him, though he know that
God had preferred him, and that in the sight of God, he was a better man then
Saul. Whereby we may learn, to esteem our selves less, then them, of whom
we know not, in what condition or degree they stand, in the presence of
Almighty God.

That this third degree of Humility is a good means, to overcome all
temptations, and to obtain the perfection of all the virtues. CHAPTER XXXV.
CASSIANVS says, that it was a tradition of those ancient fathers, and as it
were the first principle amongst them: that a man could not obtain purity of
heart, and the perfection of virtue, if first he did not conceive and know, that
all his industry, diligence, and labor, would not be sufficient for that
purpose, without the especial favor and help of God, who is the prime
author and giver of all good things. And he says more over, that this
knowledge of his, must not be only speculatiue, and because we have heard it
or read it, or because it is a doctrine of Faith; but we must know it
practically and by experience, and be so convinced, so resolved, and settled
in this truth, as if we saw it with our eyes, and touched it with our hands: and
this is literally the third degree of Humility whereof now we treat. And of
this kind of Humility it is, that the authorities of holy Scripture speak,
and which promise so great and even innumerable blessings to such as are
humble. And for this reason, the Saints assign it for the last, and most
perfect degree of Humility, and say, That it is the foundation of all virtue,
and the preparation or disposition for receiving all kind of graces, and
gifts from God. And Cassianus, prosecuting this point more in particular,
says concerning Chastity, that no endeavor of ours, will serve for the
obteyning thereof, till we certainly understand, that it is not to be had, but
from the liberality and mercy of Almigthie God. And Saint Augustine agrees
very well heerewith. For the first and chief means, which he delivers for the
acquiring and conseruing the gift of Chastity, is Humility; that so we may
not think, that our own diligences will suffice for this: for if we rely and
rest upon them, we deserve to loose it. But we must know, that it is the gift
of God, and that it must come to us from above, and that we must place our
whole confidence in him. And so one of those old Fathers said, that a man
would be tempted with carnal thoughts, till he come to know very well, that
Chastity is the gift of our lord: and no acquisition of our own. Palladius
confirms this, by the example of Abbot Moses; who having been a man of a
strange corporal strength, as also of a most vicious mind, was converted
afterward to God, with his whole heart. At the first, he was grievously
tempted, especially concerning impuritie: and by the advice of those Fathers,
he employed his best means to overcome it. He prayed so long, as that he
passed six years in prayer, yea and spent the greatest part of the whole
nights in prayer, remaining still upon his feet. He used much handy labor: he
eat nothing but bread; and that in small quantity: he went carrying water to
the old Moncks in their Cells, and used many other greater mortifications and
austerityes. But yet, with all this, he came not to be free from his
temptations; but was even set on fire by them; and was sometimes in danger to
fall, and to leave the institute of a Moncke. Being then in this trouble, the
holy Abbott Isidorus came to him: and told him on the part of God, that for
that time forweard, his temptations should cease in the name of JESUS CHRIST
our Lord; and so they did, and never set upon him more. And the Saint, by way
of declaring the cause, adds this; that till then, God had not given complete
victory to Abbot Moses, least he should have grown vain and proud; as
conceiving that he had conquered by his own strength: and therefore that God
had, till then, permitted it for his greater good. Moses had not yet obtained
the gift of distrusting himself: and now to the end that he might obtain it,
and not grow proud by confiding in himself, God left him so long a time, and
he obtained not by so many and so great endeavors, the complete victory
over this passion, which others by diligence had obtained.

The like, did Palladius relate to have happened to the Abbot Pacon; for even
whilst he was seauenty years old, he was very much molested by unclean
temptations: and he says, that the other affirmed it to him, with an oath,
that after he was fifty years old, the combat had been so usual, and so
very fearce, as that there had not passed either one day or night, in all that
time, wherein he had not been tempted to that sin. He did very extraord nary
things to free himself from these temptations: but they did not serve the
turn. And lamenting one day, and even half fearing, that our lord had
forsaken him, he heard a voice which interiourly said thus to him: know, that
the cause why god has permitted this sharp assault to be made against thee,
that been to the end, that thou might know thine own poverty, and misery,
and the little or nothing which thou have of thy self; and therefore see that
thou humble thy self hereafter, and conside not in thy self at all; but, in
all things, have recourse for help to me. And he says, that he was so
comforted by this instruction, that he never felt that temptation again. In
fine, the will of our Lord is, that we put all our confidence in him, and that
we distrust our selves, with all our own diligences, and means.

This is the doctrine not only of Saint Augustine, Cassian, and those ancient
Fathers, but of the holy Ghost himself; and that in those very terms, whereby
we have expressed it here. The wise man, in the book of wisdom, setts
expressly down, both the Theory and the practice of this point in these words.
Et vt sciui quoniam aliter non possem esse continens, nisi deus det, and hoc
ipsum erat sapientia, scire cuius esset hoc donum, adij Dominum and deprecatus
sum illum, ex totis precordijs meis. When I know (says Solomon) that I could
not be continent, but by the spiritual gift of God. Now Continent is here,
the general word, which embraces not only the containing, or restrayning that
passion which is against Chastity, but all the other passions also, which
rebel against reason. And that other place also of Ecclesiasticus, Omnis autem
ponderatio, digna est continentis animae. No weight of gold, is able to go in
balance with a continent soul. No precious thing, is so much worth as the
person, who is continent. He means, that kind of man, who entirely contains
all his affects, and appetites, that they may not pass beyond the bounds of
reason. And now, says Solomon, knowing that I could not contain these
passions, and powers, both of my body and soul, within the moderation of
virtue and truth, without the especial gift of God: but that sometimes they
would exceed (the knowledge whereof is a high point of wisdom) I had
recourse to our lord, and begged this gift of him, with my whole heart. So
that, in fine, this is the only means, whereby a man may become continent:
and may be able to continue continent, to restrain and govern our passions
and bind them to the good behavior, and to obtain victory over all
temptations, and the perfection of all virtues. And so the Prophet understood
it rightly, when he said: Nisi Dominus aedificauerit Domum, in vanum
laborauerunt qui adificant eam. Unless our lord build the house, he labors in
vain who desires to build it. Nisi Dominus custodierit Ciuitatem, frustra
vigilat qui custodit eam. If our lord do not guard the City, he labors in
vain who seeks to guarde it. It is he who must give us all good things, and
when he has given them, must conserve them to us; or else all our labor will
be lost.

That Humility is not contrary to Magnanimity; but rather that it is the
foundation and cause Thereof. CHAPTER XXXVI.
SAint Thomas, treating of the virtue of Magnanimity, makes this question. On
the one side the Saints say, yea and the holy Scripture also says, that
Humility is very necessary for us, and with all, that Magnanimity is also
necessary; especially for such, as exercise high ministeries, and live in high
place. Now these two virtues seem to be contrary in them selves, because
Magnanimity is a greatenes of mind to attempt, and enterprise great, and
excellent things, which in them selves may be worthy of honor, and both the
one and the other, seem to be contrary to Humility. For, as for the first,
which is to enterprise grea^e things, this seems not to suit well with this
virtue, because one of the degrees of Humility, which the Saints assign, is,
Ad omnia indignum, and inutilem, se confiteri, and credere. To confess, and
hold himself, unworthy, and unprofitable for all things; and now for a man
to attempt that for which he is not fit, seems to be presumption, and pride.
And as for the second point, which is to enterprise things of honor, it seems
also to be contrary, because the true humble man, must be very far from
desiring honor, and estimation. To this Saint Thomas answers very well, and
says, that although in appearance, and by the exterior sound of the words,
these two virtues may seem to be contrary, between themselves: yet in effect
and truth, one virtue cannot be contrary to another; and in particular, he
says concerning these two virtues of Humility, and Magnanim^ty, that if we
will attentively cast our eyes upon the truth, and substance of the thing we
shall not only find that they are not contrary, but that they are direct
Sisters, and depend much upon one another. And this he declares very well,
because as for the first, which is to enterprise and attempt great things,
which is proper to the magnanimous person, it is not only contrary to the
humble man: but rather is very proper to him, and he who is the one, may well
do the other. If confiding in our own diligence, and strength, we should
undertake great things, it might be presumption, and pride, because we may not
undertake things either great or small, in the confidence of our own
strength, for as much as, of our selves, we are not able to have one good
thought, as S. Paul says. Non quod sufficientes simus cogitare aliquid a
nobis, quasi a nobis. But the firm foundation of this virtue of Magnanimity,
to attempt and enterprise great things, is to be by distrusting our selves, and
all human endeavors, and to put our whole confidence in God; and this does
Humility also, and therefore do the Saints call it, the foundation of all
the virtues, as we said before because it opens the soil, and sounds deep
into the very bottom, and takes out all the sand and loose stuff, till at
length it arrive to that living rock, which is Christ our Lord, that so we
may build there upon.

The glorious Saint Bernard upon that place of the Canticles. Quae est ita quae
ascendit de deserto, delicijs affluens, innixa super dilectum suum: Who is
this, which rises up from the desert, abounding in delights, and leaning upon
her beloved, goes declaring how all our virtue our strength, and all our good
works, are to rely and rest upon our beloved, and he brings for an example,
that of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, Gratia autem Dei sum id quod sum; and
gratia eius in me vacua non fuit, sed abundantius illis omnibus laboraui. The
Apostle beginns to recounte his labors, and how much he had done in the
preaching of the Gospel, and in the service of the Church, till at length he
came to say, that he had labored more then the rest of the Apostles. Saint
Bernard says, Take heed what you say O holy Apostle. To the end that you may
be able to say this, yea and to the end that you may not loose it: Innitere
super dilectum tuum* rely upon your beloved. Non ego autem sed gratia Dei
mecum. Now he relyes upon his beloved. Not I, but the grace of God in me. And
writing to the Philippians, he says omnia possum, I can do all things: and
then instantly he leaves upon his beloved. In eo qui me confortat: In him who
comforts me. In God we shall be able to do all things: by his grace we shall
be of power to do all things. This must be the foundation of our magnanimity,
and of our greatness of mind. And this is that, which the Prophett Esaias says,
Qui sperant in domino mutabunt fortitudinem. They who di^trust themselves, and
put their whole confidence in God shall change their strength. For they shall
change their strength of men, which is mere weakness, for the strength of God:
they shall change their arm of flesh and blood, for the arm of our lord: and
so they shall have strength for all things, for they shall be able to do all
things in God. And therefore did Saint Leo the Pope say, Nihil arduum
humilibus, nihil asperum mitibus. The truly humble man, is he who is
magnanimous, courageous and hardy to enterprise, and attempt great things: or
rather nothing will be hard to him, because he confides not in himself, but in
God, and looking up to him, and relying upon him, he contemnes all dangers. In
Deo faciemus virtutem, and ipse ad nihilum deducet inimicos nostros. In God we
can do all things. This is that, whereof we here have much need, a great
and courageous mind and a great confidence in God, and not a weak heart which
takes away our appetite from doing our duties. So that in our selves, we must
be humble, as knowing that of our selves we are nothing; we can do nothing,
and we are good for nothing; but in God and in his power, and grace, we are to
be strong hearted, toward the enterprising of great things. S. Basil declares
this very well, upon those words of the Pro Esaias, Ecce ego, mitte me. God was
resolved to send one to preach to his people, and for as much as he is pleased
to work things in us with our good will and consent, he said, and said it so
as that Esaias might here him: Qu^m mittam, and quis ibit vobis? Whom shall I
send, and who will go with a good will? To this the Prophet answeares, Ecce
ego, mitte me. O Lord here I am if you will be pleased to send me. Saint
Basil ponders very well that he said not Lord I will go, and I can dispatch
this business, for he was humble and knew his own weakness well, and saw that
it was boldness to promise for himself, that he would perform so great a
work which overcame his strength: but he said Lord here I am ready, and
willing to receive that which you shall be plased to give; do you send me, for
upon your warrant I will go. As if he had said, for my part I have noe
ability for so high a ministry as that, but you are able to make me
sufficient, you can put words into my mouth, which will have power to make a
change in the hearts of men. If you send me, I may well go; for goeing in your
name, I shall be able to perform the work. Then God said to him Vade Go, See
here, says Saint Basil, how the Prophett Esaias, took his degree for being a
preacher, and an Apostle of God: because he could answer very well in the
doctrine of Humility, and attributed not his goeing to himself, but
acknowledging his own insufficiency, and weakness, he placed all his
confidence in God, believing he could do all things in him, and that if God
sent him, he might go. For this reason, God gave him the charge, and bad him
go, and so made him his preacher, Ambassador, and Apostle. This is to be our
strength and our magnanimity, for the enterprising and vndertakeinge great
things. Be not therefore disanimated, or dismayed, when you consider your own
insufficiency, and weakness. Noli dicere puer sum, says God to the Prophett
Jeremy: Quoniam ad omnia quae mittam te, ibis, and vniuersa quae mandauero
tibi, loqueris. Do not say, that thou art a Child, and that thou know not
how to speak, for thou shall go and speak, about that, for which I will send
thee: and thou shall do all that which I comaund thee. Ne timeas a facie
eorum, quia tecum ego sum. Fear not, for I will be with thee. So that, for as
much as concerns this part of Humility, not only it is not Contrary to
magnanimity, but rather it is the foundation, and root thereof.

The second point, which belongs to the magnanimous person, is to desire to
do great things, and that in themselves, they may be worthy of honor. But
this also is not contrary to Humility, because as Saint Thomas says very
well: although the magnanimous person desire to do such things, yet he desires
it not, for human honor, nor is this his end. He will take care indeed to
deserve it, but not either to procure, or esteem it. Nay rather he has a
heart, which so truly despised both honor, and dishonor, that he houlds
nothing to be great, but virtue, and for love thereof, he is moved to do
great things, despising the honor which men can give. For virtue is a thing
so high, that it cannot be honored or rewarded sufficiently by men, and
deserves to be honored and rewarded by Almighty God, and therefore the
magnanimous person, values not all the honors of the world at a straw. It is
a mean thing, and of noe price at all with him, his flight is higher. For the
only love of God, and virtue, is he invited to do great things, and he
despises all the rest. Now then, for the having of a heart which is so great,
so generous, such a despiser of the honor, and dishonor of men, such as the
magnanimous person ought to have, it is necessary that he have also much
Humility. To the end that a man may arrive to so great perfection, as to be
able to say with Saint Paul, Scio and humiliar^, Scio and abundare: vbique,
and in omnibus institutus sum, and satiari and esurire, and abundare and
penuriam pati. I know how to carry my self in humiliation, and in abondance of
prosperity, and as well in hungar, as full diet. Per gloriam and
ignobilitatem, per infamiam and bonam famam: vt seductores and veraces, sicut
qui ignoti and cogniti, quasi morientes, and ecce viuimus. To the end that so
stiff and so contrary winds, as they of honor and dishonor, of praise and
murmuring, of favors and persecutions, may cause noe change in us, nor make us
stumble, or shrink, but that we may still remain in our own being, it is
necessary to have a great foundation of Humility, and of wisdom from heaven.
I know not whether you will be able, to keep your self free, for the doing
of al good works, when you are in abundance, like the Apostle S. Paul. As for
suffering poverty begging, goeinge in pilgrimage, and to be humble in the
midst of dishonours, and affronts, this perhaps you will be able to do. But to
be humble in honors, chaires, pulpits, and the higher sort of ministeries, I
know not whether you will be able. Alas those Angels once of heaven, knew not
how to do this; but they grew proud and fell. Even Boethius could say. Cum
omnis fortuna timenda sit, magis tamen timenda est prospera quam aduersa. It is
harder for a man to conserve himself in Humility, in honor, and estimation
of the world, and in high employments, and ministeries, then in dishonor,
contempt, and in the discharge of places, which are mean and poor, for these
things draw Humility, after them, and those others vanity and pride. Scientia
inflat: knowledge, and all other high things, do naturally puff us up, and make
us giddy, and therefore the Saints say, that it is the Humility of great and
perfect men, to know how to be humble, amongst the great gifts and graces
which they receive from God, and amongst the honors and estimations of the
world.

They relate a thing of the B. Saint Francis, which seems very different from
that other of his treading mortar, that s^ he might avoid that honor, when
with they were goeing out to receiu^ him. For passinge once into a Countr^
town, they did him much honor, for the opinion and estimation which they held
of his sanctity, and they all came to kiss his habitt, and his hands, and
feet, to all which he made noe resistance. His companion was inclined to
think, that he was gladd of that honor, and the temptation did so far
overcome him, that at length he acquainted him with it: and the Saint made him
this answer. This people, my good brother, performs noe honor at all in
comparison of what they ought to show. His companion was then more scandalized,
then he had been before, for he knew not what to make of this answer, but the
saint then said: This honor, my good brother which you see them do me, I
attribute not to my self but leave it all to God whose it is: my self still
remayninge in the same profounditie of mine own baseness: and they, for their
parts, get well by doing it, because they acknowledge and honor God in his
creature. His companion then remained satisfied, and admired the perfection of
the Saint, and he did so with great reason. For to be held, and honored for a
Saint, which ^s the highest estimation, and honor, whereof any creature is
capable, and to know how to give God the glory of it, as he ougth, without
ascribing any thing to himself, and without the sticking of any thing to his
hands, and without taking any vain contentment therein, but remaining so
entirely in his Humility, and baseness, as if no such thing had passed, and as
if the honor had not been given to him, but to some other, is a most profound
Humility, and a most high perfection.

We must therefore procure to arrive to this Humility, by the grace of our
Lord, we I say, who are called, not to the end that we should be shutt up in
corners, or be hidden under a bushel, but set up on high like a City upon a
hill, or like a taper upon a Candle stick, to shine and give light to the
world For which purpose it will be necessary for us, to lay a very good
foundation; and, for as much as is on our part, to have great desire to be
disesteemed, and despised; and that this may flow out of a profound knowledge
of our own misery our baseness, and our nothing, such as Saint Francis had,
when he put himself to tread mortar, that so he might be held for some
mean fool. From which profound knowledge of himself that desire grew of
being despised: and from thence also it followed, that when afterward they did
him honor, and kissed his habitt, and his feet, he grew not proud with all
this, nor valued himself one hair the more, but he remained so fixed in the
knowledge of his Humility, and meannes, as if they had done him noe honor at
all, ascribing and re^erring it all to God. And so, though these woe acts of
Saint Francis, seem to be ^oe contrary to one another, they yet proceeded from
the same root, and from the self same spirit of Humility.

Of the great benefitts, and advantages which are in this third degree of
Humility. CHAPTER XXXVII.
TVA sunt omnia and quae de manu tua accepimus, dedimus tibi. After king David
had prepared much gould, and silver, and many rich materials, for the building
of the Temple, he offered them up to God, and said these words. All things, O
Lord, are thine, and that which we have received at thy hands, that do we
render and return again. This is that, which we must do and say, in all our
good works. O Lord all our good works are thine, and so we return what thou
have given us. saint Augustine says very well, Quisquis tibi enumerat merita
sua, quid tibi enumerat nisi munera tua! He who putts himself to recounte his
meritts, and the services which he has done thee, of what other thing does he
tell thee O Lord, but of the benefitts, and gifts which he has received from
thy holy hand. This is an effect of thy infinite mercy, and goodness toward us,
to qualify thine own benefitts, and gifts to us, to be as new meritts of
ours: and so when thou payest us for our services, thou rewardest thine own
benefitts, and for one grace of thine, thou give us another, and for one
favor another. Gratiam pro gratia; Our Lord is content to proceed with us,
like another Joseph, by giving us not only corn, but he will give us also the
price; and money which it cost. Gratiam and gloriam dabit Dominus; All is Gods
gift, and all must be ascribed, and returned to him.

One of the great helps and benefitts, which is to be reaped, by this third
degree of Humility, is that it is the good, and true gratitude, and thanks
giving, for the benefitts which we have received at the hand of God. It is well
known how highly the giving of thanks, and gratitude is recomended and
esteemed in holy Scripture; since we see that when our Lord vouchsafed any
remarkable benefitt to his people, he instantly ordained that some memory or
feast of thanksgiving should be instituted: because gratitude does much import
us, toward the receiving of new graces and favors. Now this is very well
effected, by this third degree of Humility, which co^sists as has been said,
in that a man attribute nothing to himself, but all to God; and to give him
the glory of all. For in this consists true gratitude, and giving of thanks;
and not in saying with the tongue, O Lord I give thee thanks for thy benefitts,
though yet we must all praise and give God thanks, with the tongue. But if you
shall do it with the tongue alone, it will not be to give thanks, but to say
thanks. But now to the end that it may not only be saying of thanks, and not
only with the mouth: but with the heart and in deed, it will be necessary for
us to acknowledge, that all the good we have is of God, and that we must
ascribe and return it all to him, giving him thanks for it all, and retayning
to our selves noe part thereof: for in this sort, a man stripps himself of
that honor, which he sees to be none of his own, and he gives it to God whose
it is. And this did Christ our lord intend to make us know, in the holy
Gospel, when having cured those Leapers, and one only returning to give him
thanks for the benefitt, which they had all received, he said thus: Non est
inuentus qui rediret, and daret gloriam deo, nisi hic alienigena. There is none
who has returned, and given glory to God, but this stranger. And when God
admonished the people of Israel, that they must be grateful, and not forgett
the benefitts which tey had received, he gave them this aduertisseme^t; Obserua
and cave, ne quando obliuiscaris Domini Dei tui, and eleuetur cor tuum, and non
reminiscaris Domini Dei tui, qui eduxit te de terra Aegypti. Take heed that
you forgett not God, when you shall be in the land of promise, in great
prosperity of temporal goods, of howses, lands and stock, take heed that
your hearts be not then puffed up, and that you become not ungrateful and say,
that you have obtained it by your own wisdom, and strength; Fortitudo mea,
and robur manus meae, haec mihi omnia praestiterunt. This is to forgett God,
and this is the greatest ingratitude into which a man can fall, to ascribe the
gifts of God to himself. Take heed you have not once a thought of any such
thing as this. Sed recorderis Domini Dei tui, quod ipse vires tibi tribuerit,
vt impleret pactum suum. But see that you remember God, and acknowledge that
the strength was his, and that he fortified you in all things: and this, not
for any desert of yours, but only to comply with the promise, which of
himself he had franckly made, to your forefathers This is the gratitude, and
rendering of praise: wherewith our Lord God will be honored, for the benefitts
and favors which he imparts to us. Sacrificium laudis honorificabit me. This
is that* ^egi saeculorum immortali and inuisibili solideo honor and gloria,
whereof Saint Paul speaks, that God only have the glory of all.

From hence also grows another benefitt, and good, that the true humble man,
though he have many gifts of God, and be much esteemed and valued by the whole
world for them, does not yet esteem and value himself, one hair the more,
for that: but remains so firm in the knowledge of his own baseness, as if
none of that which they ascribed, were to be found in him. For he knows very
well, how to distinguish that which is his own, from that which belongs to
another: and to assign to every one his own: and so he behoulds the
benefitts and graces which he has received from God, not as his own, but as
another; by whom they were lent, and he also lodges his eyes upon his own
baseness, and misery, and upon that which he would not sail to be, if God
should take off his hand, even for one minute, and were not ever conseruing,
and houlding him up. Yea and even whilst he is receiuinge the gifts of God, he
is the more humbled and confounded thereby. Saint Dorotheus says, that as it
happens with trees, which are mightily laden with fruit, the same very fruit
makes the boughs stoop, and abase themselves; and that, sometimes so far,
as to break them with their great weight, whereas the boughs which bear no
fruit remain perking up, and high; and as ears of corn, when they are very
full, hang down their heads, so far that they seem, as if they would even
break the stalk, whereon they grow: and when they stand boult up right, it
is a shrewd sign that they have nothing in them; so it happens, says he,
in the way of spirit, that they who are empty, and without fruit, look
big, and lofty, and hold themselves for gallant men: but they, on the other
side, who are much laden with fruit, and are full of the graces, and gifts
of God, are the more humbled and confounded thereby. For even from those very
benefitts, and gifts, the true servants of God, take occasion to be the more
humbled, and to walk with the more warines and fear. S. Gregory says, that
as a man who has borrowed great sums of money, is gladd in such sort, that
he has borrowed it, as that yet his joy of haueing received it, is very
sufficiently watered, by the knowinge that he is in obligation to pay it
again; and care, to consider, whether he shall be able to co^ply when his bond
is due; so the man who is truly humble, the more gifts he has received, he
acknowledges himself to be so much the more deeply a debtor, to Almighty
God, and so much the more bound to serve him; and he is still thinking, that
he corresponds not to those greater favors, by grater services, nor to greater
graces by greater thanks; and he conceiues and believes, that to whom soever
God would have s^^wed that goodness, which he had showed to him, that man would
have made better use of it, and would have been more grateful, and a better
man. And so, one of the considerations which makes the true servants of God to
be very much humbled and confounded is this; They know that God will not only
call them to an accounte for their sins committed, but for his favors also
received: and they know that to whom God gives much, from him he will require
much and to whom he gives more, of him he will also require more, Omni autem
cui multum datum est, multum queretur ab eo, and cui commendauerunt multum,
plus petent ab eo. The Abbott Macarius says, that the humble man looks upon
the gifts and favors of God, as some depositary or treasurer would do, who
had his Masters goods in his hands; for such a one will rather be in fear and
care, then in pride, least some what should, by his fault be lost, when they
call him to make up his accountes.

From hence also grows yet another good, which is, that the man who is truly
humble, disesteemes or despises no other man, into what soever defects and
sins he may perhaps see him fall, nor will he thereby grow proud, or
esteem himself the more, for that; but rather will take occasion thereby, to
humble himself the more by having seen him fall, through the consideration
that the other, and himself, are both made of the same mould, and that when
the other falls, he also falls, for as much as he is in himself. For, as
Saint Augustine says, there is no sin which is committed by any one, which
another man would not, or might not committ, if the hand of Gods mercy
withheld him not. And so one of those ancient Fathers, when he heard that any
man had fallen, was wont to weep bitterly, and say, Ille hodie, and ego cras.
To day for him, and to morrow for me. As he fell, I might as well have salne,
since I am a weak man as he is. Homo sum, and humanum nihil a me alienum puto
I must esteem it, as a most particular blessing of our lord, that I fell not
too. Thus do all the Saints advise us, that whenever we see one man blind,
another deaf, another lame, another maymd, or sick: we must esteem all those
miseries of theirs, to be benefitts of ours, and give thanks to God, for not
having made us blind, or deaf, or lame, or maymd, as he made him. And so
also must we make account, that the sins of all other men, are as so many
benefi^ts of our own, for I might have committed them all, if our Lord out of
his infinite mercy, had not defended me. By this means, the servants of God
preserve themselves in Humility, and in not despising their neighbors, and in
not carrying them selves high against others: for what-soeuer faults or sins
they discern in them, according to that of Saint Gregory, Vera iustitia
compassionem habet, falsa iustitia dedignationem; true justice m^kes us have
compassion of our neighbors, and false justice disdain and scorn. But such
men as these, have reason to be afraid of that, which Saint Paul says,
Considerans ^e ipsum, ne and tu tenteris; I pray God they come not to be
tempted, in that very thing which they condemn in others: and that, at length,
they find not to their cost, how great that misery is, which uses to be the
punishment of this sin. In three things said one of those ancient Fathers,
have I judged others, and my self fell into them all: Vt sciant gentes quoniam
homines sunt. To the end that we may know, by experience, that our selves
also are but men, and that we may learn, neither to judge, nor despise any
man.

Of the great mercies and favors, which God shows to the humble, and why he
exalts them so high. CHAPTER XXXVIII.
VEnerunt mihi omnia bona, pariter cum illa. These are the words of Solomon
concerning divine wisdom, which say, that all good things come with it. But
yet, we may well apply them to Humility, and say that all good things come to
us thereby; since the same wise man says, that where Humility is, there also
is wisdom. Vbi est Humilitas, ibi and Sapientia. And in another place, he
says, that to have this Humility is supreme wisdom. And the Prophet David
says, that God gives wisdom to the humble; Sapientiam praestans paruulis.
But besides this, we are taught this truth, in express terms both in the old,
and new Testament; where great blessings and graces are promised to them, by
Almighty God; sometimes by the name of the humble: at other times, of little
ones, and sometimes of the poor of spirit for by these, and such other names
are they, who are truly humble, called* Ad quem autem respiciam, nisi ad
pauperculum, and contritum spiritu, and trementem sermones meos, says God, by
the Prophett Esaias. Upon whom shall I look and toward whom shall I cast mine
eyes but to the humble, and poor little creature who is even trembling, and
confounding himself in my presence. Upon these does God cast his eyes, to do
them favor, and even to fulfill them with benedictions. And the glorious
Apostles Saint Peter, and Saint James, in their Canonical Epistles say, Deus
superbis resistit, humilibus autem dat gratiam. God resists the proud, and
gives his grace to the humble. We are also taught the same, by that most
sacred Queen of Angels, in her Canticle, Deposuit potentes de sede, and
exaltauit humiles esurientes impleuit bonis, and diuites dimisit inanes. Our
Lord abases the proud and exalts the humble: he fills the hungry with good
things, but he suffers them who think themselves rich, to return empty. And
this is that, which the Prophett had said before: Quoniam tu populum humilem,
saluum facies, and oculos superborum humiliabis: and that also which Christ our
Lord said in the holy Gospel, Quia omnis qui se exaltat humiliabitur, and qui
se humiliat, exaltabitur. He who exalts himself shall be humbled. and he who
humbles himself shall be exalted. As the waters run down the valleys, Qui
emittis fontes in conuallibus, so the raines of Gods grace, fall down upon the
humble. And as vallyes use to abound with fruit, by reason of the much wather
which is assembled there: Et valles abundabunt frumento: so they, who are low
and humble in his sight, use to yield much fruit, through the many gifts and
graces, which they receive from God. Saint Augustine says, that Humility
draws down the most high God to it self. Altus est Deus, humilias te, and
descendit ad te: erigis te, and fugit a te. God is high, and if you humble your
selves, he will descend to you, but if you grow proud and exalt your selves, he
will fly from you. Quare? Quoniam exelsus est, and humilia respicit, and alta,
a long cognoscit. Will you know why, says Saint Augustine, Because (as we are
taught by the Royal Prophett) God is a high and sovereign Lord, and he looks
upon such as are humble: and his looking upon them, is to fill them with all
good things: but he says, that God sees the proud from far off, because, as
when here, we see a man far off, we know him not, so does God not know the
proud, in order to show them any favor. Amen dico vobis, nescio vos. I tell
you for a certain truth, says God, to wicked and proud people, that I know
you not. Saint Bonauenture says, that as when wax is soft, it is ready to
receive any impression, which men will make therein, so does Humility dispose
your sowles to receive virtue and grace from God. When Joseph invited his
brethren, the youngest of them all, had the best part.

But let us now look after the cause, why God raises the humble so high, and
is pleased to do them so great favor. It is, because all his goods do thus
come back again to himself. For the humble man carries nothing away, and
attributes nothing to himself: but intyrely ascribes and restores all to God,
and gives him the honor, and glory of all. Quoniam magna potentia solius, and
ab humilibus honoratur. Such as these, says God, may very well be trusted with
our goods: we may well put our riches and blessings into their hands, for they
are safe persons, and will not rise and run a way with them: and so God
proceeds with them, as in a case merely his own; because all the honor and
glory is still his. Even here we see, that a great Lord or king, houlds it for
a point of greatenes, to raise a man sometimes, out of the very dust of the
earth (as we use to say) who before was nothing, and who had nothing; for so
is the bounty and greatness of that king, the more visibly perceived, and they
say afterward, that he was the creature, of such a one. Thus says the Apostle
Saint Paul: Habemus thesaurum istum in vasis fictilibus, vt sublimitas sit
virtutis Dei, and non ex nobis. We have the treasure of the graces, and gifts
of God, in potts of clay, to the end that the world may know, that the treasure
is Gods and not ours: for clay breeds no such commodity as that. So that for
this, does God exalt the humble, and show them so many favors: and for this
does he leave proud men empty: because the proud man confides much in himself,
and in his own diligences and ways, and ascribes much to himself, and takes
a vain contentement in the good success of his business, as if it had been
dispatched by his own industries and pains, and all this, takes some what
from God, and steals away that honor and glory, which is proper to his divine
Majesty. As soon as we have once made some little entrance into the use of
Prayer with any little devotion, any little tear, which we shedd, we conceive
that already we are grown to be spiritual, and men of prayer. And sometimes
we will be also preferring our selves, before others and we will think that
they have not profited so much, nor are grown so spiritual as we. For this
reason, our lord does us no greater favors; and sometimes he takes that from
us which he had given us; least the good should to us, be an occasion of ill,
and least health should be turned into sickness, and treacle into poison: and
so his benefitts and gifts, should prove to our condamnation through our ill
use thereof: as to the sick man of a weak stomach, though the meat be good,
yet they must give him but little of it, because he has not strength to digest
more, and if they gave him more, it would corrupt and be converted into ill
humor. That Oil of the Prophett Elizeus, never gave over to run, till such
time as vessels were wanting, wherein it might be received: but then the holy
Scripture says, Stetitque oleum, Instantly the oil forbore to run. Now such
is the oil of the mercy of God, which, in it self, is not limited: for the
graces and mercies of God, have noe lymitts at all, on his part. Non est
abreuiata manus domini. God has not straightened, or closed his hand, nor is
his nature changed; for God is neither changed, nor can change, but ever
remains in his own nature, and has more desire to give, then we to take. The
fault is on our side, who want empty vessels to receive the oil of the
graces, and mercies of God. We are very full of our selves, and put much trust
in our own endeavor. Humility, and the knowledge of our own weakness,
empties the house, and takes a man off from himself, and makes him distrust
himself, and all human helps, and ascribe nothing to himself, but all to
God; and to such men as these, God shows his favors with full hands.
Humiliare Deo, and expecta manus eius.

How much it imports us to betake our selves to Humility, to supply thereby,
whatsoever is wanting to us in virtue, and perfection, and to the end that God
may not humble us, by punishing us. CHAPTER XXXIX.
THe blessed Saint Bernard says: Stultus est, qui confidit nisi in sola
humilitate, quia apud Deum, ius habere non possumus, quoniam in multis
offendimus omnes. A very stupid fool is he, who confides in any thing but
Humility: for alas, we have all sinned, and off^nded God, many ways: and so
we can plead right to nothing, but punishment. If man, says Job, will enter
into judgment with God: Non poterit respondere ei vnum pro mill: he cannot
answer one for a thousand. To a thousand accusations he will not be able to
give one good discharge. Quid ergo restat, nisi ad humilitatis remedia, tota
mente consurgere, and quicquid in alijs minus habemus, de ea supplere. What
then remains, says he, and to what other remedy shall we have recourse, but
only to retire our selves toward Humility: and to supply by that, the want,
which we may have of other things. And because this is a remedy of much
importance, the saint repeates it many times, both in these, and other words:
Quicquid vero minus est feruoris, humilitas suppleat purae confessionis. Let
that which is wanting to you in the purity of your conscience be supplied by
your being ashamed of your selves: and let that which is wanting to you in
fervor, and perfection, be made up by your confusion. And Saint Dorotheus
says, that Abbot John recommended this very much; and said Humiliemus nos
paulisper, vt salutem anima nostrae con^equamur; and, si propter imbecillitatem
laborare non possumus, humiliare saltem nos ipsos studeamus. Brethren, since we
cannot, through our w^akenes, work, and labor so much as we would: yet let
us humble our selves at least, and by this means I hope that we shall here
after be able to find our selves, in society with them who have wrought hard.
And when, after you have committed many sins, you shall find your selves
disabled to do much penance, for want of health, walk you quietly on, by the
plain and even way of Humility, for so you will meet with a most convenient
means for your salvation. If you think you be not able to enter into Prayer,
enter at least into your own confusion: if you conceive that you have no
tallent for important things, procure to get Humility, for by this, you shall
supply for all those things.

Let us therefore consider here, how little our Lord asks of us, and with
how little he contents himself. He desires, that according to our baseness, we
would know, and humble our selves. If God should ask of us great fasts, great
penance, great contemplation, some men might excuse themselves, and say, that
they had no strength for the one, and no tallent or abillity for the other. Sed
number humiliare nos ipsos, non possumus? but for the not humbling our selves, we
have no reason or excuse to allege. You cannot say, that you have not health
to be humble, or that you have no tallent or ability for that. Nihil facilius
est volenti, quam humiliare semetipsum, says Saint Bernard: there is nothing
more easy, then for a man to humble himself, if he have a mind to it. We can
all do this, if we will, and we have matter enoug for it, to work upon, with
in doors. Humilitas tua in medio tui. Let us therefore retire our selves now
at last, to Humility, and so let us supply with confusion, that which is
wanting to us of perfection, and so we shall be able to move the bowels of
God, to mercy and pardon. At least, since we are poor let us be humble too;
and we shall give contentment to God, but to be poor and proud, will offend
him much. Of three things, which the wise man setts down, to be much abhorred
by Almighty God, this is the first. Pauperem superbum: Poor and proud, yea
and even it is odious, also, amongst men.

But let us humble our selves at least, least God humble us, for thus he is
very ordinarily wont to do. Qui se exaltat humiliabitur. If therefore you will
not have God humble you, take care to humble your selves. This is a very
principal point, and worthy to be considered, and pondered at great leisure.
S. Gregory says, Plerumque omnipotens dominus, rectorum mentes quamuis maiori
ex part perficit, imperfectos tamen in aliquibus esse permittit; vt licet
veris virtutibus rutilent, imperfectionis suae taedio tabes^ant, and de magnis
se non extollant, dum adhuc contra minima innitentes, labentur. Denique cum
extra me vincere non valiant, de praecipuis actibus superbire non audeant. Do
you know how much God loves Humility, and how greatly he abhorrs pride and
presumption? He abhorrs it so much, that he permitts us first to fall into
certain venial sins, and many little faults: to the end that he may teach
us, that since we are not able to keep our selves from little sins, and
temptations, but that we still find our selves to stumble, and daily to fall
in mean things, and very easy to be withstood, we may be very certain, that
in our selves we have noe means to avoid such as are greater: and that so we
may not be proud, when there is question of great things, nor attribut any
things to our selves, but walk ever on with Humility, and fear, and beseech
our lord to show us favor and grace. Saint Bernard says the same, and it is
the common doctrine of the Saints. Saint Augustine, upon those word^: Et sine
ipso factum est nihil, and Saint Jerome, upon that of the Prophett Joel: Et
reddam vobis, auos quos comedit locusta, bruchus, and rubigo, and eruca, say
that to humble a man, and to tame his pride, God created these little animalls,
and poor base worms which are so troublesome to us, and that the proud
people of Pharao, might esily have been tamed and humbled, if God would have
sent bears, Lions, and Serpents, in upon them; but he thought fit to tame
their pride, by the basest sort of creatures, as gnatts, flies, and froggs,
that he might humble them so much the more. And so also, to the end that we may
be humbled, and confounded, God permitts us to fall into little faults; and
gives way that some poor, and weak temptations, which are like gnats, and
seem not, indeed to have any body, or bulk in them, may sometimes make war
against us. If we will pause to consider attentively, what is wont sometimes to
disquiet, and put us from our ease: we shall find that they are certain
bawblinge things, which being sifted, and discovered well, have noe substance
in them at all. I know not what little word they said to me; or else they said
it to me in such a manner: or me thought they made light of me, and the like.
Of a fly which passes through the air, a man sometimes will build a whole
tower of wind, and then adding one thing to another, it shall serve to make
his heart very unquiet. What would then become of us, if God should let loose
some Lion, or Tygar against us, when we are put into such disorder, by a gnatt?
What would become of us, if we were set upon, by some greiuous temptation! And
thus are we to draw more Humility and confusion, out of such things as these.
And if as S. Bernard says, this be drawn from thence, Pia dispensatione
nobiscum agitur, vt non paenitus auferantur. It is a great mercy and benefitt
and favor of God, that such toys as those, may not be wanting to us, and that
this may be able to make us humble.

But if these slight things will not serve the turn, then know, that God will
pass further on, and that very much to your cost, for so he is accustomed to
do. God, does so highly abhor presumption, and pride, and loves Humility,
so much, that the saints affirm, that he is wont, through his just and most
secrett judgment, to permit that a man may fall into mortal sins, to the
end that he may be humbled thereby, yea and even into carnal sins which are
the most ugly, and full of shame, to the end that they may be humbled the more.
They say that he punishes secrett pride, with open lust. And to this purpose
they bring that which Saint Paul said of those Philosophers, whom for their
pride, God delivered over to the desires of their hearts. In immunditiam, vt
contumelijs afficiant corpora sua, in semetipsos, in passiones ignonimiae. They
came to fall into unclean sins, which were most filthy, and not to be named;
God permitting it so for their pride, to the end that they might be humbled,
and confounded, when they saw themselves turned beasts, with the heart, and
conversation, and custom of beasts. Quis non timebit te O Rex gentium? Who
will not be afraid of thee, O thou king of the Nations? who will not tremble
at this punishment, which is so great as that there is none greater out of
Hell? Nay sin is even worse then Hell. Q^is nouit potestatem irae tuae and
prae timore tuo iram tuam dinumerare. Who O lord has known the power of thy
wrath or who is able to relate it through the great fear which ought to be had
thereof.

The Saints note, that God in these cases is wont to use two kinds of mercy
toward us, a greater mercy and a less. The less mercy is, when he succors
us in our less miseries, which are the temporal, and such as only concern
the body; and the great mercy, is when he succors us in our great miseries,
which are the spiritual, and which import the soul. And so when David saw
himsel e in his great misery, of being abandoned and dispossessed of God, by
the adultery and murder which he had committed, he cried out, and beggs the
great mercy of God: Miserere mei Deus, secundum magnam misericordiam tuam. They
say also that there is a great, and a little anger of God. The lesser is, when
he punishes men here, in the Temporal, with adversities, in loss of goods,
of honor, health, and the like, which only concern the body; but the great
anger is, when the punishment goes so far, that it arriues to the interior
part of the soul, according to that of the Prophet Jeremy, Ecce peruenit
gladius vsque ad animam. And this is that which God says by the Prophett
Zachary. Ira magna ego irascor, super gentes opulentas. I will be angry, with
my great Anger, with that Nation, which is proud and puffed up. When God
forsakes a man, and permitts him to fall into mortal sins in punishment of
his other sins, this is the great anger of God; these are wounds which are
given by divine indignation, and they are not as of a father but as of a just
and rigorous judge. Of which wounds, that of the Prophett Jeremy, may be
understood: Plaga inimici percussi te castigatione crudeli. I have wounded thee
with the wound of an enemy, with a cruel punishment. And so also says the
wiseman. Fouea profunda o^ leoenae, cui iratus est dominus incidet in eam. The
mouth of a lewd woman, is a deep ditch, and he with whom God is angry, shall
fall into it. Finally, pride is so wicked a thing, and so much abhorred by
Almighty God, that the Saints say, that sometimes it is good for the proud
man, to be thus punished by Almighty God: that so he may come to be cured of
his pride. So says Saint Augustine: Audeo dicere, superbis esse vtile, ca
lere in aliquod vitium apertum, manifestu^ que peccatum, vnde sibi displiceant,
qui sibi iam ceciderant. I presume to say, that it is profitable and good, for
proud men, that God permit them to fall into some visible and external
sin, that so they who were very well satisfied and pleased in themselves
and were already salne, though they perceived it not, may so begin to know,
and to humble and distrust themselves, according to that of the wiseman:
Contritio praecedit superbiam, and ante ruinam exaltatur spiritus. The same do
Saint Basil, and Saint Gregory affirm. Saint Gregory, by the occasion of the
sin of David, why God permitts that the elect, and such as he has
predestined to ae^ernalle life, and on whom he had heaped up his graces, and
gifts, should fall sometimes into carnal and filthy sins; and he answeares
that the reason of it is, because sometimes, they who have received great
graces fall into pride, and they have it so rooted, and even wrought into the
most intimous part of the heart; that they themselves understand it not, but
are so well pleased, and confident of themselves, as to think that God and
they, are all one. As it happened to Saint Peter, the Apostle, who conceived not,
that those words of his, had flowed from pride, when he said, Though all men
should be scandalized, yet will not I be scandalized: but he thought that it
had been courage in him, and an extraordinary love which he carried to his
Master. Therefore to cure such pride as this, which lies so close and is so
disguised, as that a man is already fallen, though himself perceive it not, our
lord permitts sometimes, that such persons fall into certain manifest,
exterior cornall filthy sins; to the end that so they may know themselves
better, and look more exactly in to their sowles: and may so come to perceive
their pride, which they believed not to be in them before: and whereof they
look for noe remedy, and would so have come to perish, but now by means of
such gross falls, they know it, and being humbled now in the sight of God,
they do penance both for the one and the other, and so meet with remedy for
both their miseries at once, as we see S. Peter did: who by that visible and
aparant fall of his, came to know that pride which lay so secretly within, and
he grew to lament it, and to do penance for them both: and thus was his fall
good for him. The same happened also to David, who therefore says, Bonum est
mihi quia humiliasti me, vt discam iustificationes tuas. O Lord it has cost me
dear, I confess it, but yet, upon the whole matter, it has been good for me
that I have been humbled that so here after, I may learn to serve thee, and
know how to abase my self as I ought. And as the wise Physician, when he is
not able to cure the malady out right, and when the peccant humor is so
rebellious, and malign, that he cannot make nature digest, and overcome it,
procures to call and draw it into the exterior parts of the body, that so it
may be the better cured: just so, for the cure of certain haughty and
rebellious sowles, does our Lord permit them to fall into greiuous and
exterior sins, to the end that they may know, and humble themselves: and by
means of that abasement which appears without, the malign and pestillent
humor may be also cured, which lay close within. And this is a word which God
works in Israel, which whosoever comes to here, his very ears shall even
tingle for mere fear: these I say, are those great punishments of God, the
only hearing whereof, is able to make men tremble, from head to foot.

But yet our Lord who is so full of benignity and mercy, does never employ
this so rigorous punishment, nor this so lamentable and unhappy remedy, but
after haueing used other means, which were most gentle and sweet. He first
sends us other occasions, and other more gentle inducements, that so we may
humble our selves. Sometimes sickness, sometimes a contradiction, sometimes a
murmuration, and sometimes a dishonor, when a man is brought lower then he
thought. But when these temporal things will not serve the turn to humble us,
he passes on to the spiritual: and first, to things of less moment, and
afterward by permitting fearce and greiuous temptations, such as may bring us
so within a hairs breadth, and even persuade us, or at least make us doubt,
whether we consented or not. That so a man may see, and find by good
experience, that he cannot overcome them by himself, but may experimentally
understand his own misery, and the precise need which he has of help from
heaven: and so may come to distrust his own strenght, and may humble
himself. And when all this will not serve, then comes that other so violent,
and so costly cure, of suffering a man to fall into mortal sin, and to be
subdued by the temptation. Then comes this Canterie, which is made even by the
very fire of Hell; to the end that after a man has even as it were beaten out
his brains, he may fall at length, upon the just examination, and knowledge of
what he is and may at length be content to humble himself, by this means,
since he would not be brought to do it by any other.

By this time I hope we see well, how mightily it imports us, to be humble,
and not to confide or presume upon our selves, and therefore let every one
enter into accounte with his own heart, and consider what profitt he reapes,
by those occasions which God daily sends, for the making him humble, in the
quality of a tender hearted Physician, and of a Father, that so there may be no
need of those other which are so violent. Chastise me, O Lord, with the
Chastisement of a Father: cure thou my pride with afflictions, diseases,
dishonours and affronts, and with as many humiliations as thou can be pleased
to send: but suffer not, O Lord, that I should ever fall into mortal sin. O
Lord let the devil have power to touch me in point of honor, and in my
health; and let him make another Job of me: Verumtamen animam meam serua: but
permit not that he may ever touch my soul. Upon Condition, that thou O Lord
never part from me, nor permit me ever to part from thee, what soever
tribulation may come upon me shall be sure to do me noe hurt; but it shall
rather turn to my good, toward the obteyning of Humility, which is so
acceptable to thee.

Wherein the discourse aforesaid is confirmed by some examples. CHAPTER XL.
SEVERUS Sulpitius, and Surius, in the life of Saint Seuerinus the Abbot,
relates of a certain man, who was very remarkable both for his virtues and
miracles, that he gave health to sick persons and dispossessed men of devils,
and did many other wonderful things; for which they flocked to him from all
parts, and he was visited by Prelates, and great lords; yea and they held it
for a point of happiness, if they might but touch even his clothes: and if he
would give them his benediction. By the use of these things, the Saint began to
perceive, that a certain vanity was growing to enter upon his heart. And on the
one side, finding that he was not able to divert his concourse of people, and
that he could not, on the other, deliver himself from those importunate
thoughts of vanity, which pressed upon him: he was much afflicted therewith,
and putting himsel^e one day in prayer, he besought our lord with great
instance, that for the remedy of those temptations, and to the end that ^e
might be conserved in Humility, his divine Majesty would permit, and give
liberty to the devil to enter into his body for sometime: and torment him as
he did other persons. God heard his prayer, and the devil entered into him, and
it was matter of Wonder, and a mazement, to see him bound up in Chains, as a
frantic and possessed man, and so to be carried to others to be exercised,
to whom not long before, they had been wont to bring possessed persons, that
they might be cured by him. Thus he remained five months: and at the end
thereof, the story says, that he was cured, and freed, not only from the
devil who had possessed his body, but from that pride also and vanity, which
had possessed his soul.

Surius relates another example like this and says, that the holy Abbot
Seuerinus had in his Monastery three Monckes, who were a little high and touched
with vanity, and pride. He had admonished them thereof, and yet they
perseuered in their fault. The Saint through the desire he had to see them
reformed, and humble, besought our lord with tears that he would correct them
with some punishment of his own hand: that so they might be humbled, and
reformed: and before he rose up from prayer, our lord permitted that three
devils might possess them, by whom they were greiuously tormented: and they
confessed, with loud cries, the pride and hautines of there own hearts. A
punishment very proportionable to the fault, that the spirit of pride should
enter and inhabit men, who were full of vanity and pride. And because our lord
saw well, that nothing would be so able to humble them, he suffered them to
remain so sorty days: at the end whereof the Saint besought our Lord, that
he would be pleased to free them from the devil, which he obtained; and so
they remained sound both in body and soul, when once they had been thus
humbled by this punishment of our Lord.

Cesarius writes, how they brought a certain possessed person to a Covent of
the Cistertian Moncks to be recovered. The Prior went out to meet him, and in
his company a young Religious man, of whose virtue otherwise, there was a
great opinion, besides that he was known to be a Virgin. The Prior said then
to the devil. If this Moncke command thee to depart, dare thou yet
remain? To which the devil made this answer. I fear not him, for he is
proud.

Saint John Climacus relates, how once the devil began to sow certain
praises, in the heart of a most valliant Cauallier of Christ, who was running on
a pace, toward this virtue of Humility. But he being moved by the inspiration
of Almighty God, met with a very short way, for ouercominge the malice of
those perverse spiritts; and it was, that he wrote upon the wall of his Cell,
the names of some most admirable virtues; namely Perfect Charity, most
Profound Humility Angelical Chastity most Pure and high Prayer; and the
like. And when those ill thoughts of pride began to tempt him, he made this
answer. Let us come to the proof of it, and so he redd those tytles, and
especially that of most Profound Humility: and said This have not I, I would be
glad that it were even but Profound, for I know not whether I be arrived to the
first degree thereof. Perfect Charity? Charity if you will, but as for
Perfect, it is not very perfect. For I speak sometimes quick, and Loud to my
brethrem. Angelical Chastity? No for I have many ill thoughts, yea and I
find many ill motions in my self Most high Prayer? No, for I am much
distracted, and sleeppy therein, And then he said thus to himself; When thou
shall have obtained all these virtues, say yet that thou art an unfruitful
and unprofitable servant, and for such must thou hold thy self, according to
those words of Christ our Lord, Cum seceritis omnia quae praecep^a sunt vobis,
Diciteserui inutiles sumus. But now when thou art so far off what can thou
think of thy self.

Pr^sed be God and his B. Mother.

FINIS.

