EVSTATHIA or the CONSTANCY OF SUSANNA CONTAINING THE PRESERvation of the
Godly, subversion of the wicked, precepts for the aged, instructions for youth,
pleasure with profitte.

Penned by R. R. G.

Dominus mea rupes. Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in
Paul's church-yarde at the sign of the Bible. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS AND modest Gentlewoman Mistress M. B. wife to the Right
worshipful D. B. Esquier R. R. wishes the etetnizing of her virtues, by the
daily practice of her christian life.
ALthough (right worshipful) my longer silence might justly indite me either
of ingratitude, or forgetfulness, in Senecaes censure the greater of the two;
yet I not great in fortunes grace, young in years and not ripe in experience,
was fully resolved to trauerse the indictme^t, until more store of wealth,
graver age, and greater practice, might warrant me^ to perform that indeed
which now I can but promise in conceipte. And in that resolution, considering
the undigested method was fi^ meat for foule-mouthed Momus, and the
Rhetorical dog, I determined to make an her^^icke of this illiterate
pa^phlet, and commit it to the fire; but yet respecting the goodness of the
argument, the greatness of your virtues, and many thanke-worthy benefits
bestowed both by your self, and your right worshipful husband I fell from
this faint determination to a second and more sound resolution, Phaeton-like to
carry Atlas his burden, and rather to hazard a fault in manners then incur
a blemish in nature, rather (by being to bold) to make you the patrones of so
simple a work, then by silence to seem vnthank^full. And albeit in performing
hereof I shall rather wrong my self in bewraying mine own weakness, then
right your worship in yielding a fit work ^unswerable to your vvorth; yet
my hearts hope is, that as ^he crystal stone illustrated by the glorious
beams does render ^ome (though mean) reflex of the suns immensitie: so my
self (ex^osed to your benefits) may hereby make some (though small) re^urne
of your undeserved bounty. And although the treatise ^eeme harsh and may
dislike you because it came not from Pernas^us mountain; yet I doubt not but
you will nourish it for the hill Syons sake (a special object of your godly
mind) from whence by ^nduction it is derived. The method I confess is the
more absurd by reason it was ordered without advice since my coming into the
country where as the Persians used to whittle little sticks to keep themselves
from idleness; so my self to banish sloth, have at idle ^howers b^sied my
head and hand, to whittle out this simple exercise: nothing doubting but that
time will one day furnish me with opportunity and practice with sufficiency
to pen a more perfect volume worthier your virtuous view. And hoping in the
mean time that you (Penelope like in the absence of your Ulysses) will allow
of this, vouchsafe the reading, and accept in kindenes what I offer in duty, I
leave your worship to the ancient of days, to prolonge your life in all
happiness.

Your worships unworthy, yet worthily bounden, ROBERT ROCHE.

To the Reader.
SUSANNA here, walks forth the way to glory;
To show her constancy and spotless fame.
If any fault, escape her faultlesse story,
The fault is mine; on me bestow the blame.
Which would her teach, before I could attain,
Well tuned verse, or moralizing vain.
Were she or no; were Ioachim her goodman;
Had Jews iuditiall law, and Sanhedrin,
To judge of life, in stately Babylon;
Were Daniell hence, first known a Sambethin.
Were he a child, when he so well presaged;
Or termed so, compared to these aged.
Were these two segniors here, (base slaves to sin)
Achab and Tzidk^ja, in Jeremy.
Fell this before, or when full thrall was in;
Or Cirus reign as some do verefie.
Did all things pass, as they have past the pen:
Or poeme-like to better lives of men.
These things I leave, to judgment of the wise,
(Gray headded Senate of our grave divines.)
If I should judge, I should but preindize,
And with erroneous letters, fill my lines.
It me contents, that well I may avow,
The stories subject, such as most allow.
Expect not here, th'invention, or the vain^,
Of Lucrece rape-write: or the curious scan,
Of Phillis friend; or famous fairy- Swain;
Or Delias prophet, or admired man.
My chicken fethered wings, no ympes enrich,
Pens not full sum'd, mount not so high a pitch.
Let Colin rear his flight to admiration,
And train his lovely flock, his pipe to follow.
Let Damons reach, out-reach all imitation;
And frame melodious hymne^, to please Apollo.
The swain that pend this pastoral for Pan;
Thought once to end his work, ere began.
For while I meant, to streigne these sorry noates,
Past Diapent, unto a Diapason;
There fell a chance within our seely coats,
Both graeat and sudden; able to amaze (...).
When mourning Mopsus cride, leave of thy play,
Shift noates a side, flinge pipe and all away.
Cease seely man; pull down thy wonted pride,
Enioine thy muse to mourn, and pen to moan.
(As did Amyntas, when good Phillis did)
For thou art quite forlorn, and left aloane.
Since Thestilis, (thy Thestilis) has left thee.
While death of greatest jewel, has bereft thee.
For Thestilis was she, which io^'d thy springing;
Who eake allowed thee breath, to blow thy pipe,
And idle time to whistle and be singing,
And bred thee up, till thou were wax^n ripe.
The Elixir of thy life, in love was she^;
Whose coin did qui^tessence, thy muse and thee.
Whose knight-riv'd birth, gave blazon to thy blood,
Whose godly end, does endless here abide.
Yet wanting her, thou want all thy good,
As do more flocks; the damme, and lambs beside,
Whom joyful Thomas has good will to vease,
From fruitful lawnes, unto a shorter lease.
This uncouth news, did so my senses lame;
That though sweet Cynthius, sold me by the ear*
My music after went in worser frame,
And as my music was, such was my cheer,
My look unlusty; countenance abated,
Mind make-content; muse weak and overmate^*.
Yet did I singe my sorrows to an end,
(An end betakes, the longest tided day.)
And to a virtuous patroness commend,
My homly verse, and rusticke roundelay.
Whose godly zeal, equivalent with Hanna;
Will not disd^igne, to countenance Susanna.
R. R.

Coricaeus to the Author.
I seated late, in leasures lap;
Had leisure to pervse,
Thy Firstling; termed thy Susans constancy
And at the swelling titles
Promise, long did muse.
Which how performed, let others judge (not I)
Who spent my thoughts, to be thy warning spy;
That judgment dare provoke, by bold attempt,
When time from tongues, no writer does exempt.
While deep conceited critique wits,
Of this our dainty time,
Do like no birds, but what themselves have hatched
They love no pleasant prose,
Are discontent with rhyme.
But what they please, all Poems else are patched,
Which humors still, with discontent are matched,
And wayward discontent, the censors bow;
To quippe they care not whom, they care not how.
Sometimes whole heaps of idle words,
(They quarle) are cast away.
Sometimes the matter naked, wants words.
Sometimes good matters marred,
When ill contrived, (they say)
Sometimes the sense, a caffling cause affordes.
Sometimes a sentence, or affectate words.
A tedious stir: for in Philautus brawle,
There scape^ not one: he has about withal,
Says one of these; the note is just,
Among men of better note:
Our sharpest wits, that climb the scene of fame,
In vainest follies leese
Themselves, and vainly dote.
Do spend much art, for to deserve much blame,
While they some idle-dreamed phancie frame,
And leave their works, a witness firm and stable,
What time they lost in hatching of a ^able.
Great pity sure that learned men,
Of great and rare conceate,
Should so these brave habilities debase:
That while they stretch them out
To proof, to show them great;
The praise of their imploimentes in this case,
Is void of praise; and has this only grace,
That they have wi^ely told, a foolish tale,
And smoothly set a long made lie to sale.
And yet this inconvenience great
Might find some fair excuse,
If drift of their discourse, at virtue aimed,
For often in fables foldes
Trim moral truth does use.
But when the work is matter merely feigned,
And end thereof, deserves to be disdeigned.
The writer merits pity, more then praise,
And work (unworthy press) fit flames to raise.
Thus surely speaks, this Censurer,
And does his thoughts reveal,
(As if some stern Dictator, thundered laws;
From whom on pain of death,
Unlawful to appeal.)
Yet did not well bethink him in his pawse?
For though a story true, does grace his cause:
He paintes it out with colors of invention:
And gives it words, to fit his own intention.
Which if the Censor use himself,
Thy self may use the same.
Whose levill aymeth at as virtuous end:
And to reduce the work,
And story into frame;
By reasons rule, the whole discourse is pend,
And has no cause, the godly to offend,
Or grieve the good: unless some harsh divine,
Against his sacred Poems will repine.
An other sort of snarling mates,
Do pester every age:
Who will be critickes, though they guide the cart.
And censure works of weight;
Quoat faults in every page.
Deprave the wits, of men of best desert:
And judge of all, by envy (not by art.)
Who more does malice art, then artlesse brain?
Who byteth worse then Bevi^s in his vain?
High spirited Homer (matchless man)
A baggage, deemed a block:
And did with bitter tauntes, his works deface,
Of Virgille^ dainetie vain*
Could Mevius frame a mock.
Inferring that he filch'd his chiefest grace,
By treading in the tract, of Homers trace,
Or from the fruits, of Hesiods happy brain,
And Theoc^ite the Syracusian swain.
Thus to obscure the mer^iest cry,
Where deepe-mouth'd hounds do go;
Each time has bawling curres, that bark and howl:
Which since it is so, has bin,
And ever will be so:
Of learned rest secure, well trained in school,
Thou must not fear, the ^lout of every fool.
Who in a prating vain (though thou repine)
Will blame whole books, but cannot mend a line.
C. A. R.

WHat time the judge severe, (sin-scourdging God)
(Co^peld to change the course that mercy meant,)
Withdrew his favor, and drew forth his rod,
To punish those that knew not to repent.
That time ingrate-full Judah, judgment had:
To die or suffer bondage (even as bad.)
For when they scornd, the heavenly herauldes sent,
To summon them (back-sliders) to the Lord:
Crying with yernefull voice, Amend, repent,
Else hoattest wrath, will follow this his word.
E^se will too late repentance plead for grace;
When mercy flies, and justice holds the place.
When hardened hearts, could not become so wise,
By others harms, to learn their own beware:
While fresh record presented to their eyes,
Ten brethren tribes, subdude to slavish care;
Whom the Assirian monarch, did subdue;
And made of freemen borne, a captive crew.
When eke they were unmindful how their king,
Young Ieconias, but nine years before;
And thousands more: the sanctus black did sing.
(What time they did their dismal day deplore)
While captives thence in bondage led to dwell,
They crying, weeping schreeching, say farewell.
When princes, rulers, priests and people base,
Exceeded far, all heathen in their sin.
When Sadom and Samaria might give place,
And not come near, the ways they walked in.
When harmless men, were held of none account,
But he the man that did in sin surmount,
Then as a raging flowd, long bent with baies,
Bears headlong down, what stands before the breach:
Or as rebellious soars, by long delays,
Recure-lesse scorn, the cunning of the leach;
Even so: remediless, like raging thunder,
The Lord powrd down his wrath, long time kept under.
When whistling for the Bees of Babel-land,
Came Nabuchadnetzar (sirnamd the great)
And brought with him a most puissant band,
Of soldiers; skild in every warlike feate.
For as the clustring bees, in swarms do clinge;
So flockt the Chaldeis, round about their king.
Then Salem saw, a sad heartbreaking sight;
Resolved foes entrenched about her walls,
In glittring armou^, many a warlike wight,
Most fully bent (what ever hap befalles)
By dint of sword, to win eternal fame;
Or pawn their lives, in purchase of the same.
But most of all this grief the conscience gauls;
And ever mates their minds (so overtaken,
By deep despair) to think amidst these brawles,
That God for sin, their city had forsaken.
A matchless woe; if God the cause withstand,
A fearful conscience makes a seeble hand.
Add more to this; the seige so long does lie,
That famine in the city is so soar,
The people pine, consume, do droope and die;
While horses in the field; have forage store.
Death in the house, destruction in the street:
Sword in the ^ield, distress and danger meet
Amidst these woes, the rumbling Echoes sound;
How dreadful drums, strike up the fierce alarm,
And rattling trumpe, (with bloody noates rebound)
The valiant hearts, to fell assault does charm.
When herald first, had summond them to yield,
Or to expect, a mercy-wanting field.
Then for supply, of thundering cannon shot,
Go^am and engine, to the walls (a pace.)
The Pioner he, bestirres him in his plot,
To make huge towers, to give the soldier place.
On either part, their powers they fully bend,
To give assault, and from the walls defend.
Ensigns advaunce, and glory scales the fort,
The ladders then are hoysed to the walls,
And honors hope, th'assaylantes does exhort,
To climb from whence, an other headlong falls.
While Archers shoot, from tough wel-timbred bow,
Their thirled singing shaftes, as thick as snow.
When once the eager soldier, has made way,
Within the walls; and might command the town;
Then as a hungry Lion for his pray;
He rangeth, rages, kills, knocks down.
Then might be seen, (like streams to make a flood)
The streets and channels, flow with crimson blood.
The bedlem hands, do deal forth murthring blows,
The victor rages restless, (Lyon-like)
While mercy craving vanquished, pleades his woes,
To him that has no ears, but hands to strike.
The maid, the wife, is subject to this rage;
The suckling, babe and he that stoopes for age.
For as the mower, with his keen edged sickle,
Cuts down as well the green, as seeded grass;
Eve^ so the soldiers sword, (though tears down trickle)
Permits not a breathing soul to pass.
He spares none that happen in his way;
Fair words, chaste looks, entreaties, bear no sway.
Then sounded forth, the screitching griesly cry,
Of slaughtered souls; and many a deep fet groan,
Of such as murthred, yield the ghost and die,
From wounded lungs, yielding a hollow moan.
While manly men, that whilome stoutly stood,
Dismembered now, lie weltring in their blood.
Then might be heard, and seen with woeful eyes
The living souls, lamenting for the dead;
Pouring out plaintes, with sobbes with sighs and cries.
And bitter tears, as bleeding hearts might shed.
The old lament, long life to be forlorn,
The young repent, that ever they were borne.
The wife she soundes (and yeeldes her vital breath)
To see her husband die (in woeful case)
The husband feels a fit, far worse then death,
To see his wife defild, before his face.
And seely babes, (poor hearts) to perish this,
That never did offense, or thought amiss.
The mourning mothers, tugge, and hale their hears,
To see their slaughtred seed, remediless.
The children bath their cheeks, with bloody tears,
To see their wretched parents, in distress.
While help-lesse hands, do trust unto their feet*
And leave poor infantes, crawling in the street.
For now the men of arms, were fled by stealth;
And every soul was left, to shift for one.
Counsel did want; regard was none of wealth,
Of kin, or friend, or who were left alone.
Who makes not have, death and destruction feels,
The happrest wight, does show the swiftest heels.
When soldiers slaughtring sword, embrewd with blood,
Found not a man, that durst resistance make:
Then bedlem mind, began grow to milder mood,
(If mildness be as bad a course to take)
For now unbridled lust, at large does stray;
And prowles about, for pillage, and for pray.
Had chaste Lucrecia, dwelt amongst those dames,
Full many a Tarquin, would have wrought his will.
Had good Susanna, wandered in those flames,
Her spot-lesse corpse, had bin constrained to ill.
While seely lambs, the chastest, and most just,
Became a pray unto a peysantes lust.
The matchless vessels, of magnificence,
The temples treasure, (many a millions mate)
The wealth, of Zedechias excellence,
The riches of his Lords, and men of state:
These things were sent away to Babylon;
As fit for Nabuchadnetzar alone.
What else was left, of Jewels, gold, and plate,
Amongst the meaner sort, (which might be much)
Each soldier held, what so thereof he gate;
While they with other spoils themselves enrich.
And when the pilfring hand, had his desire;
The rest was left, to be consumed with fire*
Then clims the furious flame, the stately tower;
Each priveleadge, does give the soldier place.
The pioner spares, nortemple, house, nor bower,
The time is spent, to spoil and to deface.
There was not left one monument of fame,
Which did not feel the force of burning flame.
The Heav'n-like house, the temple of the Lord;
The worlds eye, and only work of name,
Whom once he did delight, but now abhord)
Is raised down, and robbed of that fame.
The walls also, that hem the city round,
By might of men, are ev'ned to the ground.
The seely captives, that had escaped the sword,
And were reserved as Trophies, of the spoil;
Hang down their heads, and cannot speak a word,
Or sound adue unto their native soil.
The servantes loath, to see the masters face,
The subjects grieve, to weigh the princes case.
Whom hapless king, slight could not yield relief,
But as the dear, before the nimble dog,
He was enforst, to stoop unto his grief;
And for a crown, to were a heavy clogge.
What time his sons, once slain before his face,
He had his eyes put out, with great disgrace.
And so blind captive, led to Babylon,
To be a bondsman to his dying day?
He left the royal seat, of Solomon,
And now must leave commanding, and obey.
Since he that was impyring prince before,
Is now a fellow prisner; and no more.
Amongst these fettred troops, of thralled states,
You must suppose transported with the rest,
Helchia, Ioachim, and those tragic mates,
Whose natures, not their names are here expressed:
Were Susan borne, or no, (their glories shine)
Unknown, it wantes a Delius to divine.
But Daniell then, past twenty years of age,
In Babylon was grown to great regard.
Of fame in court; the mighty monarchs page,
Dream secreat Seear, and renowned Bard.
Which known; I leave both story and my skill,
Unto your courteous censure, and good will.
EVSTATHIA or the CONSTANCY OF SUSANNA CONTAINING THE PRESERvation of the
Godly, subversion of the wicked, precepts for the aged, instructions for youth,
pleasure with profitte.
WHen Chaldean glory, sat in whinged throane,
Of flying Fame; (which far and near does wa^der)
In Asian soil, in stately Babylon,
The worlds monarch, and the earthes commander;
What time no humane forces, might vvithstand her.
Then did stout Syria stoop, and Egypt bovv,
And Judah bend, before her frowning brow.
Then princely peers did ducke, and do her duty;
Then raisd she in the air, sky-kissing towers;
Then did the circled earth, admire her beauty;
Then dwelt there in her brave, and matchles^e bowers;
The hight and sovereigntie, of worldly powers.
Whose selfe-ruld hands, did sway the scepter royal,
That kingdoms kept in awe, and subjects loyal.
Standing this tipe, of sading majesty,
There dwelt within, this state-commaunding town,
A Jew; (a man of passing modesty)
Helchia hight; and he of good renown,
Right worthy (for his wit) to wear a crown.
Who took to wife, a fair and lovely dame;
Whose godly life, gave glory to his fame.
^or as the ringe (compact by curious art)
(...) of it self, right seemly to the e^e;
^ut when the Sapphire, is his true conserte,
There does appear, a fuller majesty:
^er virtue so, his fame does beautify.
Her husband was esteemed, among the states;
And decked with her glory, in the gates.
from which chaste root, in time did spring a rose,
^usanna cleapt; not borne ^o eat her food,
Or make dandling, that must feel no blows.
Her parents care, was how to teach her good,
And to invest her mind with modest mood:
Their reason, fond affection had exilde;
Not bent to make an idol, o^ their child.
^ometimes the godly mother (matron-like,)
^ith rod in hand, to keep her babe in awe;
^ith settled look, and grace demure and meek,
^ould teach her child, the precepts of the law;
and make her imitate, what so she saw,
In comely ^esture, seemly gate, and guise,
That use might manners make and doctrine wise.
And as sweet April showers, make Flora flourish;
^o her kind father (careful for his joy)
^ith choice precepts, does virtue feed, and nourish:
That grace might freely grow, without annoy,
And natures weeds, keep under and destroy.
Whereby it came to pass; at bed, and board,
There past no ill-spent time, or idle word.
And careful man, he led by mere remorse,
When book had rest, and needle leave to play;
Does entertain her thoughts, with some discourse,
From Adams age; until that present day,
And often recountes, Ierusalems decay.
Whilst eke by cunning art, chorographie,
He does present, the city to her eye.
These lines (says he) describe it triplewald,
Aleph, the plot, where stood the temple great.
Beth, Sion castle, (David's city called)
Guemell, the Senate house, and judgment seat,
Daleth the market place. He Mathkad streate.
And so by letters, of her Alphabet,
He points out, where every place was set.
And street by street, recounteth till he came,
To say here stood my, there he (speechless then)
Could not pronounce (my house) tears stopped the same,
Whilst from his hand, he flings he pointing pen,
And falling from his matter, unto men;
He curses both the auctors, and the sin,
The breeders of the bondage, he is in.
For while (sweet Suse) says he we feared the Lord,
And did his laws, and sacred hestes obey;
So long he was our shield, our spear, our sword,
Our castle, fort, and bulwark day by day,
Philistin, Ammon, Egypt, bear no sway.
Not Assure, nor fell Syrian with his bands,
Or sunburned Aethiop, could subdue our lands.
But when our rulers all, were out of rule;
When prince, and priests, and people, everychone,
Were irreligious (like the lust-led Mule)
Pleased in sin, and vile pollution;
Then kindled wrath; then was our vvoe begone.
Then did he give us over, for a pray;
In Chaldean noates to sol, fa, weal away.
Yet though he has us bruz'd, we are not broken,
Or left as out-castes in the eyes of men;
Since by his spirit-taught prophets, he has spoken,
That at the end, of threescore years and ten,
Our seed shall sit, in Sion gates age'n.
Thy self but young may live to see the day;
Our stooping age, has hopeless natures nay.
Mean time, live mindful of thy latter end,
Thou may die young: once old can not live long,
Content thy self in state that God does send,
In sweetest ioies expect some sour among,
The worlds svveete smiles, are as the Sirens song.
And human pomp, is as a vvhirling blast;
Soon gone, and saunce recall, when once it is past.
Yea man himself, is as a rain* bred bubble;
Whose shape though it be like, to Hem^spheer sky;
Yet if a vvindy blast, the water troble,
It does revert, to water by and by,
And leaves alone, the vaine-beholding e^e.
Such is Susanna dear, thy present state,
A shade, a dream, a vvriting vvanting date.
Learn then svveete soul, to loath things pleasing vain,
Learn then to love, thy souls long lasting health.
Learn then to know thy God, and him to gain.
Which well thou may, if first thou know thy self,
(Which is indeed, more peere-lesse far then pelf)
Seem less to none, then to thine own conceit,
Self-love (a servile foe) on fools does wait.
Embrace Gods promises, hold fast thy hope,
Measure thy life, by line of sacred law,
Contain thine actions all, within this scope,
Be not secure: but standing stand in awe,
Least thine affections, thy zeal vvith-dravv.
And still (svveete loving lamb) in age and youth,
With steadfast constancy, profess the truth.
Yield us thy parents, ay a lowly heart,
In guerdon of the love we bear to thee*
Offend not friends, let betters have their part.
Be careful of thy name, as of thine eye,
Let love of fame, prevent all infamy.
Ill company avoid (as from the devil)
If thou vvilt free thy life, and acts from evil.
Remember (vvench) thou read in thy book,
Two things; the ornaments of may den head.
To have a shamefast eye, and sober look.
And other two (if that thou hap to wed)
Good name, and chastity, to bring to bed.
Assure thy self, the owner of these four,
Is godly fair, and has a worthy dovver.
Delight not (child) in brave and rich array;
To prune thy self, as if thou were imprented.
Be s^emely, not a slut: be grave, not gay,
With cleanly comeliness, be still contented.
Be not fond sick, with fashions new invented.
For, it is but superfluity of pride,
To have a fashon-coyner, for thy guide.
Excessive neatness, is a badge of evil,
An antsigne, of a light unstable head.
An angling hook, and engine for the devil,
To catch such fools, as are by fancy lead,
A moath that fretteth, till thy wealth be dead.
While back does make, the belly to be sterved;
Which matrons eye should see to be preserved.
Then is she called, a huswife, (comely dame)
(Whilst cleanly fine, is void of curious parts)*
Then which in time, was not a better name.
When golden world, did want prides painting arts,
When plain content, possessed the country hearts.
When hospitality did feel no lack,
And was not climbde, from table to the back.
If that thy neighbors do possess good name,
Do thou not envy, at their worldly bliss.
Nor be thou light, to credit every fame,
Reports do often hit, and often miss,
Of all things judge the best, for best it is.
With sober look be courteous unto all,
With few familiar be, or none at all,
Hide not a wanton heart, with modest eye,
Say not thy Psalter, in the divelles book.
Take heed beware of such hypocrisy,
(He is no saint, that saintishnesse forsook)*
Be more severe in life, then in thy look.
And when thine ears have heard what other say;
Allow thy tongue abridle and a stay.
Learn good things, with good will; instruct the weak,
Comfort the comfortless, in their distress,
Stop not thine ear, when pining-poore does speak,
Hate with thine heart, sin-breeding idleness,
Let thrifty mind, be free from all excess,
Crave not too much; if riches once arise,
Observe a mean, and let enough suffice.
And if thou covet, honest exercise,
Then read good books, such as our Rabbis pen,
Or use such d^mes, as well can matronise,
With honest mirth, amongst the godly men,
With due regard, of seemly where and when.
And to conclude; where so thou hap to dwell;
Love thou thine house, as snaile does love the shell.
Thus did Helchia, (painful father) teach,
His Susan dear; sweet object of his eye;
Her mother daily, ceased not to preach,
The like precepts, of grace, and modesty,
And often would here, how well she would reply.
What time her heart, reioiced for to see,
So witty answers, with like guise agree.
While shape did hold, Symmetricall estate;
(Her manners mated with a gallant grace)
Her beauty, feature fine did emulate,
With speech composed, and with sober pase.
And this decorum sitting in her face;
The whole and parts, resembled and were like
To perfect numbers, in Arithmetike.
And she thus trained, from her tender years,
Became in time to reap her just renown:
In all respects, so far surpast her peers,
Of equal age, and wealth within the town,
That every way, her praises put them down.
Whilst wantons bent, to play, and idle pleasure;
She trained her thoughts, to seek eternal treasure.
Whereby it came to pass, that envy fell,
Pursuing virtue, with great eagerness;
When they could not come near, began to swell,
And with fine tauntes to make her praises less.
Some said, the maid, would prove a prophetess.
The booke-wise vvench, will yield a deep divine,
Or of a saint, will hardly make a shrine.
But godly grave, that best does judge and say,
Did deem her right, a work of rare perfection:
A peerless piece, to be a princess pray,
One Angel-like; a vessel of election,
Whose shining fame was free from deaths infection,
Though her time-fading beavty, dead does lie;
Which did surmount each feature seen with eye.
Why did thon beauty fade? why did thou wither?
O budding Rose, why did thou ever blast?
Why did thou prove unconstant, as a feather,
In her whose constancy did stand so fast?
Sure, it was to teach us nothing here does last.
For else thou would have lived, with Susans name;
And as a handmaide, waited on her fame.
Whose shape splendiserous was, in each man's sight,
Whose look gave argument of sober grace,
Whose eyes (two twinkling stars) never proved light,
Whose silent tongue knew well, fit words to place,
Whose faith so firm, that nothing could deface.
Though two great seniors sought, to blot her brow*
And to their lure, to make her chaste soul bow.
O that such peerless splendour, should have wrong;
And be entised, unto lawless lust.
Not Judah, but false Iudasses do long,
Pure chastity, to cast into the dust,
But leaving here, those matters vndiscust.
You heard her life, first wained from the lap,
Now does ensue, the process of her hap.
When trust-lesse time, by his swift-footed pages,
(Cleap'd; minute, hour, day, week, the month and year)
Had brought her past, her two first sevens of ages,
And set her in the ascendant, of her sphere;
And nature now gave summons, to draw near.
In nuptial court, to yield expected homage,
Since that in bar, she could not plead her nonage.
Then scruple-finding, stickler unto strife,
Propones her bashful thoughts, this bold discourse;
Twixt barren mayden-head, and bearing wife,
Which of these two did stand, in greatest force,
For with the best, she meant to shape her course:
Whilst in pure conscience court, where her soul sat,
Her pleading thoughts, it argue and debate.
Like Hebrew disputantes that had bin trained,
In Moses school; (at some Gamaliels feet)
And were not yet to christian lore reclaimed,
Sometimes they argue, marriage is most meet,
Sometimes (e contra) spider-sucke the sweet.
While sotted senses, are so Iew-beguiled,
To deem the marriage bed, a thing defiled.
At her hearts bar, these silent virgin pleaders,
With soaring high conceits, as highly rated;
Far fet their petegree, from stately leaders.
Pure Angel spirits; virgins (ere man) created,
Whose active life, no Angel ever mated.
While victory of virgins, does excel,
Which vanquish their own slesh wherein they dwell.
Each other jar not long suspended hanges;
An hour, a day, a year, does stint the strife,
Blud-died martyrs, soon do pass their panges.
But this fell battle dureth, during life.
Here daily striving; victory not rife.
So matchless is, by antique rare descent,
The maiden life; and glorious vanquishment.
Yea ancient Adam, (Iohvaes protoplast)
Was molded of his mother, maiden birth.
And old dame Evah, to commend the chaste;
Of virgin rib, was framed a maiden birth.
Just Habell lived, un married here on earth.
Melch^sedech also (our Rabbis tell)
Did virgin, priest, and king in Salem dwell.
The wonder-workinge prophettes, most of fame,
The Thesbite, and the Abel-Mecholite,
(The one transumpt to heaven in fiery flame)
Do show how god, does virgin life delight.
Fore-seeinge Esaias, where he does endite,
Messiah birth, a maidens son does make him.
And sure I am, his aim does not mistake him.
The thing we praise, is mynion to this king.
The justice, which the iustest judge, approves.
Vowed to the Lord, a secret, holy, thing.
Sacred to God, as such a state beehoveth.
And for because, her contrary she loves.
She always married lives, a spowsed wife,
Yet evermore a maid, in single life.
Whose life is termd* the Angels imitation.
And therefore is her figure* Angel faced.
She mowntes to heaven, by wings of contemplation,
And therefore is she painted, stately pased.
And for because, like Goddess she is graced.
Her train is trod, with troops of virtues nighnesse,
Like maids of honor, near a princess highness.
Whose robes (the spotless flesh integrity)
Do emulate, the white spot Ermelin.
A trophie of vice-quellinge victory,
The brannchinge palm, her fingers claspeth in.
The wimple that she wears on her chin.
An ant-signe is, of bashful modesty.
Her humble mind, declares her stoopinge eye.
The Gentiles hence, in their high observations,
Compare chaste Pallas, Goddess in their heaven.
To yield true maiden life due commendations)
Unto the full, and misticke number seven)
Compacted of two numbers, od and eaven.
The entire and incorrupted unity)
With six the secret of virginity.
For what content, but in the maiden life.
Whose fleet, wingd thoughts, ar free to serve the Lord*
Whose mal-content, if not the married wise.
Careful to please grim sir, at bed and board.
With best obedience, in her deed and word.
And so man's service is then Gods more geason.
Thus on the virgin part, her thoughts do reason.
And to amase her weak, and pusill mind,
In creep through crannies of imagination.
Deformd Idean forms, and phansies blind.
Sent forth by her sick senses, instigation.
Like staringe greisly fendes, threatninge invasion.
Presenting to her heart, the homely iarres.
And household cares, accurringe nuptial wars.
Base marriage (say these bugges) is rife to all,
Brave virgin life a perle possessed of few.
The seild found Sagda stoane, though it be small.
Exceedes huge rocks that make more often show.
What recknings made, of recklesse drops of dew.
Rare things are in request, and do surmount,
Where common, base, and vile have none accouur.
Perhaps some worldling, will thee woo for wealth,
And talk of love, when heart by lust is galled,
Pleades his playn-dealing, steps not in by stealth.
Vowing thy virtue, has his heart enthralled.
When as thy beauty, sits their enstalled,
While mucke (not modesty) has him bewitched,
With honor kin, or friends, to be enriched.
And so when causes, of his suite decay,
Lust fully gordgd, with lothsomnesse infected,
Fine beauty fled, false riches run away,
The causes gone, for which thou were elected,
Th'effectes fall down, and thou art then rejected,
What better hope, or hap may be maintained,
Of better rightes, why marriage was ordained.
If that thou wed, to tame flesh kindled sin,
The fault is doubled, if thou fall away.
If to increase, and multiply thy kin,
Thou shall for loathed pleasure, deerly pay,
We but report, what married folks do say.
Childe-getting vadinge joy, is in their creedes,
A raging toy, that rash repentance breeds.
When once the fruitful womb, has seed conceived,
The altered woman, seems not what she was;
But grows unweildy, groaning and agrieved,
As one surchardged, with some weighty mass.
Like Balams bearing Angel-frighted Ass;
No sense, no sign, no pulse, no part, no passion,
But that it feels some perfect alteration.
Some giddy vapor, does infest her brains,
And with his foggy missing dims her sight.
Inslates the secret Artires, and the veins,
Dies dusky colored, what before was bright,
Each seemly part, less seemly shows in sight.
While heart (poor heart) forefeeling passions great,
With frighted panting pulse, does thumpe and beat.
The pretty Ivory hills (the maiden pappes)
Powt now with pain, to feel chaste flesh defiled.
The nibled teates, that perch upon their tops;
Yield maiden blush, to see themselves beguiled,
Their freedom sled, their liberties exiled,
Must now be tugging stocks, for tootlesse chaps,
And subjects live, to myriads of mishaps.
Chaste loins by lawless lust; are martyred,
The breast does feel, short breathing simpathies,
The bowels by defect, are tortured.
In weakened back, do crickes and crampes arise.
What swellings feel the fee^e, the legs, the thighs?
While seemly wast (that all the members graced)
By strouting womb, is stretched and defaced.
Yea where sound appetite, did hold his seat,
There sick abhorfulnesse, has built his bower.
Fond lust does long, for sundry sorts of meat.
Sometimes it loathes the sweet, and likes the sower;
And often vile things, with eagerness devour.
Or else is subject, to such qualmes and fits,
As do deprive the sense, and dull the wits.
And thus the body, by a bodies breeding,
Becomes discrased, plethorique, oppressed.
Faintes in his faculties, erres in his feeding,
Fluds of defectes, bear down poor health distressed,
Which dangers with more danger are redressed.
While nature these, (and many mo presages)
Appointed has, birthes, hand attending pages.
And yet perhaps, conceived has this wife,
No perfect birth, but some imperfect thing.
A Mole (deformed lump that wants life)
Which direful death, remediless does bring,
Or during life, does yield a deadly wring.
Again if womb, be subject to abhorsion,
Best hope is bankrupt, by the same extortion.
Yea when fine metal, has deformed mould,
Or makes a fault, in little or too much;
Or is not of the kindred, that it should,
Then nature in true working, keeps not tuch,
But frames the seely creature, to be such.
As was the mowld; the metal, or the mind;
A minotaur, a mongrell out of kind.
Why should we name, the deadly panges and throws,
Heart-pinching pains, companions of the birth?)
The sowning fits, the weale-awayes and woes,
The broken sleeps, sad dreams depriving mirth,
The little ease, when once the infant stirth,
Whom seemingly, pain suffering mother feels,
To tear her tender fides, with thumping heels.
Let silence have, the nightly pains in noursinge,
The cradles rocks, the wrayling brawling cries.
The daily chardge in buying, and disbursing,
To bring it up, and yield his want supplies.
The hastened age, the breedinge body buies.
With millions more, of household cares and strife,
That do attend, the happiest married wife.
But if to cloak, their folly with devises,
They set the gain of fruit, against this thorn,
They buy bad wares, at to excessive prices.
For if the climbinge weed, pull down the corn,
The parents wish such seed, had not bin borne.
And equal grief, does dim (hearts lamp) the eye,
To see the bad to live, or good to die.
Of which fair bitter sweets, toil borne, and bred*
The husbands part, often stands in conceit.
When lawless lust, polluteth lawful bed,
The fathers picture, proves a counterfeit.
Some times descent, is patched by deceit,
When cradle rocks a chaunglinge foysted in,
Defeites true heir, defraudes the lawful kin.
But deem the best, and cownte them all their own
Vnhad, they are not theirs, when they would have them,
And once possessed, their title then is known,
Not theirs, but his, the mighty Gods that gave them.
Which can in youth, or age, or womb ingrave them.
Thus is the child wives choice, perplexed and sad,
And better hope, in husband is not had.
Have thou a pheere, whose faith exceeds far?
If him the mighty monarch, does command,
To prove his martial arms, in feats of war,
Midst troops of bedlem foes, in foreign land:
How comfortless, will thy poor comfort stand,
While carfull thoughts, will cause thy heart to morn,
Till joyful eye enjoy his safe return.
But if thy wedded mate, be wedlock breaker,
How much does matchless grief torment thy mind,
If that he be a churl, and cursed speaker,
It killes kind heart to see him so unkind,
Again is he to ielous lore enclind?
What toil to tie free actions of thy bed,
To fond survey, of his su^pitious head.
If he be good, what fearful thought to leave him?
If he be bad, what cunning to reclaim him?
If he be kind, it grieves thy heart to grieve him?
If he be fierce, what wisdom to refrain him?
If he be lost, what policy to gain him?
If he be loathsome, it is thy task to love him;
And no redress, til death from thee remove him.
But out fond thoughts says she, why do you reason,
Against God, my conscience, and the common weal?
Dread heresy, if that you dread not treason.
Be not blind Essees, nor so badly deal,
To beat down marriage, with a virgins veale.
Which were to be injurious, to my birth,
And leave no man, to tread the trampled earth.
You partial p^^^ders, in affections cause;
^^owd impes, that do conspire, nurse natures end.
You ^iolaters, of Gods first made laws,
You secta^^ you foes to man's most friend,
Nice, coy, unkind, to country and to kind.
Wast commonweals; and spend your wits in woing,
Loves lost; the churches downefull; man's undoing.
Whilst vnder-m^^ing marriage, with your lore,
You kill the root, whence all your good began.
The wedded life, of mankind is the mo^e,
Take marriage from the earth, and where is man?
Man ceasing to have being; what comes than?
Your own decay; your death by his decrease,
For when the root does r^t, the sap does cease.
As if your earthly being, were too base,
With trustlesse wings, you sore beyond the son.
To draw descent, from ancient Angel-race,
You spend wind-wasting words, and breathless ron.
Perdie you must come down, when all is done.
Kiss marriage hand, your ancient on the earth,
Unless you will, with baseness blot your birth.
As vain you vaunt of Angels imitation,
Angels full numbered spirits, do live for a^e;
But man was made, for fruitful propagation,
Man must increase, because man must decay,
And to that work, chaste wedlock was the way.
To tame flesh treasons, and appease those iarres,
Hels rebles raise, to breed soule-slaughtring wars.
Again, if that you hatch your single bro^d,
In Evaes rib, or Adams quickened earth;
Like reason (if it stand with you for good)
For musickes art, like consequence infearth;
Tubulcaines hammers, making maiden mirth.
Tuball from them did frame, maid Harmony,
Sweet noates consent, has named her melody.
What if just Habell choose the virgin life?
And Salems king, did die a batch'ler blessed?
What if Elias, lived without a wife?
And single life, liked Elizeus best?
What if Messiah, suck a maiden breast?
One Autumn primrose; does not prove the spring,
One winter swallow, does not summer bring.
What if some few, by gift of special grace,
(If God give not the gift, is naught at all)
Victoriously run out, this virgin race?
Yet many mo in running took the fall,
Even when they meant, most finely foot the Ball.
And so have mist the goal, and to their cost,
Lament too late, things past recovery lost.
Yea some which seem in show, to seek it most,
^n secret heart, prove trevants (treasure wasters)
One seely thought, marres all the maiden bost,
Which soon betides, these great tentation tasters,
Yea it is a booke-case, pend by our great masters.
In vain chaste flesh a maiden name does win,
Where yielding thoughts have given consent to sin.
All are not maids, that vow they will not wed.
All are not virgins, that are maids esteemed*
All are not chaste, that shun the nuptial bed.
All are not true Dianaes, that are deemed,
Chaste Sara was not single, when she seemed.
Abused Thamar wore a virgins weed,
And might have cloak'd, false Amnons foul misdeede.
A droane does sometimes in a bees place stand,
The single life, no seal of maiden head.
Some batch'lers be, but traitors in the band,
Worse foes to virgin wealth, then those that wed,
Who when the foe appears, their force is fled;
Like Gedeons host (faint cowardes prone to yield)
Scant one of ten, is chosen for the field.
Yet quaint encomiast-like, with words at will,
You paint them out, with praises at your pleasure,
While making have, to preconize your skill,
You make the coat, before you take the measure,
And to entize, young tyrons with your treasure,
Like gold-sicke Alcumistes, you pamper in,
A golden tincture, on a piece of Tin,
What praise peculiar, to the thing you paint,
Which fits not modest marriage, more divine?
Yet to canonize, maidenhead a saint,
You put no ods, between the saint and shrine,
To make a painted brow, the brighter shine,
You parasite, with praises to her face;
And causlesse clowd, dame wedlock with disgrace.
Nay rather say; this buxome pleasing wife,
While she her toilesome fields, of household tilleth,
And weanes her children, to a Godly life;
In this her care, the Lords behest fulfilleth,
Since that she does the thing, his wisdom wills,
And therefore well, may take the vpper-hand,
Of her, whose warrant has not one command.
Nay rather reason, marriage preservation,
Is lawded, loved, honored, far and near.
Whose sacred rightes, have solemn observation,
Whose ancient privilege, has not his peer,
Whose daily fruits, are dainties held most dear.
And add the cause, for which she is required;
The most commodious things are most desired.
What if her house, be neighbor to annoyes?
The blame be theirs, (not hers that dwells by them)
For if we walk, in fair, and easy ways,
That have some noisome brambles, growing nie them,
That rent our clothes, before we can descrie them;
The fault is not in fairness, or the way,
But our own folly, or the brambles stay,
In Breschith book it rests in record;
(Reporting Register, of man's creation)
That when great Ihova, by his powerful word,
Made shapelesse man, to his own shape and fashion:
He first gave nuptial rightes, for propagation.
As glorious groundwork, where he would begin,
That building, which his prescience labors in.
And did in blessing, knit this sociall band,
Endowd with vvorldly empire, and earthes treasure:
Whilst purest nature, did unstained stand,
In eastern Eden (place of passing pleasure)
When giving Adam of his Evah^ seasure;
Ioind two in one, inseparable union,
To represent him, and his church communion.
Yea when false man, fell to Apostasy,
(Misled by Satan, and his own freewill)
Had spoild himself, and plagued his progeny,
And changed his seas of ioies, for floods of ill;
The matrimonial state, continued still.
A mithredate, to cure sius poysned sting,
The Bezoar stone, that should healthes blessing bring.
For as a plaster, to repel despair,
(Pain ceasing medicine, to an aching sore)
God promise made, that Eve should have an heir,
Should bruze hell-serpents head, and make him rore;
And to repair those ruins added more,
To faith^ull Abr'am; when he thus professed,
That in his seed all nations should blessed.
(When eake loves hot-spur, Lamech over bold,
With one sweet fair, could not foul lust suffice,
But let desire go loose, and uncontrolled,
And chose him mates in number to his eyes,
Whilst following age was wedded to his guise.
True wedlock went to wrack and nature then,
Strange mixtures, made straung monsters out of men*
It greived God, to see ungrateful man,
Pollute the earth, with rape and ravishment.
While to sweet bayted sin, all headlong ran,
Ne would in time, become true penitent.
He like a champion, full of discontent,
With wreakful waters, did these wicked wast,
Not one preserved, but the wedded chaste.
And as it were a warning, heereto made,
When nature ruld, with law nun^npative)
How sore he did detest, flesh-mongers trade.
(Fell traitors that do wedlocks wrack contriue)
From Sodoms flames, he kept chaste four alive.
So to preserve, chaste Saraes bed unspotted,
He plagued kings, whom beauty had be sotted.
But in the true transcript, of Gods own hand,
Transplendant star, how bright does wedlock shine.
He underprops her empire, with commannd
Dyrectes her lore with laws, as with a line.
Condemns to death, her subjects that decline.
And when her peace is rent, by ielous iarres,
He sets the way, to cease her civil wars.
And while her lasting glass of glory ronnes,
He blots her foes fair brow, with foul disgraces
But does vouchsafe, to call her children sons,
Enfranchizing her fruit, with freedoms mace,
Does nicke their counterfeit, with name of base.
As slips of sin, and fruits of basest folly,
Whose roots, he rooteth out, as seed, vnholly.
And that fierce Mars, with stern and sower aspect,
Should nothing hinder, Venus influence;
He Mars his might, does countermaund, and check.
But g^ues her power, protection and defense,
In married mates, to act benevolence.
When to the Brides fair groom, for love he spares,
One year exempt, from wars and worldly cares.
Even so the nations, led by natures light,
(Din s^intilles of the souls synterisis)
Did patron ze her peace, with good foresight:
And to maintain, her princely port in bliss,
Restrained with laws, wild lust that walks amiss.
Denouncing death, or danger to her foes,
That dare, against their states friend, themselves appose.
Thus has all times, and tongues, well entertained her,
Gods faithful servant, and man's fastest friend:
And those condemned to shame, that have disdeign'd her;
And (if I augure right) shall to the end,
When man in vain, does against the Lord contend?
Ne can the state, or pollititian miss her,
While he for his sweet Sions sake, does bliss her.
Whose company gives comfort in distress,
Two heads at need, yield more advice then one:
Two walkers in the way, may falls redress,
Two bodies sooner warm, then post alone:
Two hands to help are better far then none.
How man man miss her comfort (do her right)
To pass the lingering day, or tedious night?
She concord does augment, by consanguinity,
Sometimes she stands, the counterpawne of peace;
She does enlardge loves bounds, by new affinity:
She (arbitrating vmpire,) wars does cease,
She still imploies the commonwealths, increase.
Her ympes in youth, are loves sweet pawnes and gages,
To parents staves, to stay by in their ages.
Whose house is held, an Academie royal,
Here Faith by doctrine, has due exercise*
Here Duty biddes, her children to be loyal,
Here Patience pressed, if that extremes arise,
Here Love in liking hearts, Hope never dies.
Here Fortitude, repelles faint fears offense,
Here Mercy does, with many a fault dispense.
Here Gratitude, gives guerdon with good will.
Here Constancy, does check false wavering Fame,
Here Humble mind, does take nor do none ill,
Here Temperance does, fond lusts entisements tame,
Here Chastity, is guardian of good name.
Here Labor (Lasies foe) does keep true ^uch,
Here Mean observes enough, and not to much.
Here does sharp Logique, prove her right with reasons,
Here Grammar trains her ympes, in grounds of speech,
Here shows Astronomy the stars and seasons;
Here to account Arethmeticke does teach:
Here Rhetoric, in bad causes plays the leach.
Here does Geometry work all in measure,
Here Music is maintaind, to maintain pleasure.
Here History, does eternize her acts;
Here Poetry paintes her never dying fame:
Here Natures clerks, do authorize her factes.
Here Physic stirs, to keep her health in frame,
Here Lawiers plead, the charter of her name.
Here Sophistes (though like newters standing mute,
Yet) do not dare against themselves dispute.
Here sits Compassion, porter at her gate,
Prudence purveis, her plenty and her store,
Housekeeping Care, is steward to this state.
Her liberal hand, is Almner to the poor,
Religion leads her life, directes her lore.
Good-order stands usher, in her hall,
Justice controwles, if ought amiss does fall.
Within her courts, attends on her train,
The high, the low, the noble and the base,
The stately monarch, and the statelesse swain,
Priest, prophet, patriarch and the princely race,
The troops of warlike gallantes, press for place.
All times, all tongues, all nations far and near,
With duties knowledgement, are present here.
No law, no learning, science art, not skill,
No craft, no cunning, knowledge, or invention*
No state that was, or that continues still,
No trade, no mystery, that man can mention,
But that it guardes her gates, with good intention,
And when she passes by, with seemly greeing,
All bow the knee, and thank her for their being.
Thus her al-blessinge auctor, blessed her prime,
Thus has she gotten glory, from her ground,
Prioritie, from venerable time,
High sovereigntie, with empire has her crowned,
All laws (their nurse and foundresse) fence her round.
Fayce Edens praise, does grace her grovnded fame,
Man's nature (then most pure) does now the same.
Thus does her high resemblannce, rowse renown,
Thus does her fast conjunction raise regard.
Thus does her sovereigne promise, praise resowne
Thus was she made, when all things else were mard.
Thus does Iehove him self, her greatness guard,
Thus does Gods church, (her child) commend their mother,
Thus commonweals (her wainlings) will none other.
Thus Nature aye ennobleth her estate.
Thus Reason does uphold, her reputation,
Thus Profit does her peerlesse estimate,
Thus Need does tend, her princely preservation.
Thus does man's life maintain her estmation.
Thus time does yield, her charters true content,
Prescription custom practice and consent.
Thus do all times, extend her excellence,
Thus do all tongues, extol her rule and reign,
Thus do all wits, afford her best defense.
Thus do all states, her sacred state maintain,
Thus do all sorts of men, attend her train.
Thus nations all, nobilitate her name,
Thus do all worldly powers, advance her fame.
Thus happy she, when all do plead for one;
But hapless you, when one does speak for all:
You might have spread your praises and bin gone,
And not chaste marriage name, in question call,
But (lide frank gamsters) since you venture all,
You that of others, speak the things you should not,
Must be content, to here the words you would not.
If you had blotlesse made, your mistress brow,
Before you spide the moate, in marriage eye;
You might her right, with better right avow,
Thus truth (though tired) never went awry.
In vain the master finds a limping fault,
Where he himself does stumble, and go hault.
Your clyent while she claims, a single gift,
Does contradict, the law of propagation;
And with a poor pretense and seely shift,
Denies man comfort, (cause of her creation)
Flies from old Eva^s faith, to newer fashion.
Depriues her seed, life's blessing in the land,
Her self the obedience, God does first command.
Yea while fine nature, works in her kind,
Deaths ruins ^o repair, in life's repriue;
(To live for aie, in those she leaves behind)
She labors still, to leave her like alive,
And never die her self, whilst they surviue.
You (while you cross this kindly work of nature)
Would live your selves, but leave none other creature.
And where the nations, to uphold their state,
Coherse with laws, and shame, the single life,
Your selves (as lawless) laws do antiqua^e,
Set barren sect against the bearing wife.
Thus wage you war thus stir you endless strife;
Thus swaying in self-will, your will withstandeth,
What natures biddes, and God himself commands.
And thus your life, resembles desolation,
Your bodies graves, to bury babes unborn,
Your vow a cord, to strangle propagation,
(Far better ill-kept vows, wear left unsworn)
Your thoughts fierce foes, to leave you kin forlorn.
Your wills flat worldlings, (while you temporize)
Your tongues in wedlockes wrack, do scandalize.
God marriage made, in commanding mood,
And what he biddes, the same we must obey;
But maiden life, commended is for good;
Where is command, commending bears small sway,
Therefore to stint this strife I boldly say,
If God give grace, the single life does well,
If not such gift, then marriage does excel.
Be quiet then sweet thoughts, lets rest agreede;
Let marriage have, deserved commendation:
Let virgins have (that virgins are indeed)
Due praise, renown, and sacred observation*
True maid, true wife, in thought and conversation*
Both holy in the Lord; the one as wife,
The other as a maid, in single life.
Thus her souls senses, held a long dispute,
And sillogize their reasons pro and con;
While mind (the moderatour) stands mute,
What Is vnresolved, to resolve upon:
At length she thus co^cludes, (when thoughts were gone)
Since God made Eve, least man should live alone,
She was of man, and not P^gmalions stone.
When Fame the light-foote (titling babe by birth)
False spy, that into secrets makes intrusion,
Tale-bearing paritour, to moan and mirth,
Foule-fleering blab, truths traitor and confusion,
Had taken by top, the tale of her conclusion,
She spreds with speed, the motive of her marying,
Pretending have, as if there were no tarying.
Whence came to pass, that troops of corrivals,
Like eager hounds to get a gallant pray;
Do poast with speed, not caring what befalls,
To win the goal, and bear the price away,
They flaunt it out, in train and rich array.
To get the favor, of this gracious fair,
That is so buxome, and so debonaire.
Some offer stately dower, some princely gifts,
Some honors hight, and to advaunce her kin.
Some b^re of these do sue with loue-sicke shifts*
Pawn sighs sad looks, straung vows, they make no sin,
To swear for-sweare, this golden fleece to win.
Each streignes his thoughts, his rival to beguile.
Whilst in her iowre lurks death, life in her smile.
But as the mounting Eagle, in the wind,
Disde^es to stoop and check base flocks of flies,
Or as club griping Hercules, by kind,
Does single combat, with a dwarf despise*
Whose force his manhood, does not equalize,
So she does scorn, to fawn on such a friend,
Whose faith does soon beegin, and sooner end.
Yet as in gardens, whear all herbs do grow,
Some fragrant are, whose sweetness does excel,
Though some eie-pleasing lillies trimly show,
When as they yield the sent, a loathsome smell,
So some there wear, might please her eye full well.
And by sweet virtues odor, fume her sent,
With grace automaticke, and redolent.
For as, while those bright globes of rare accoumpt,
And splendant plannets, in their spheeres do run,
One is superior, and does all surmount,
Without compare, aye glorious shininge son,
So in this gloabe of gallantes, thea^ stood one,
Whose neat beehavior, grace, and bounty bright,
Did dim the rest, as son the candle light.
Renowned Ioachim, thou the man admired,
Both of the Chaldees, and the Jewish nation,
Thou weart of all regarded, and desired.
Great was thie wealth, so was thie reputation;
Thy life an object, worthy contemplation.
That did with Titus, purchaze thee a friend,
Each day before the soune, his course did end.
Thou did not with gnuffe Craesus, hoord thy wealth.
Thou weart with Cato rich, when once contented*
Thou hatedst Cesars pride, which was the pelf,
That causd his death, which he to late repented,
Thou had Jobs waxen heart, which still relented,
If orphans cride, if widows wanted right,
If poor men said, they wear oppressed by might.
Thou weart a Moses in maintayning laws.
Thou did fell Pharaos, government detest.
Thou with the Macbies, in thy countries cause,
Would pawn that heart, that harbord in thy breast.
Thou ever heldst Manasses ways, unblessed.
Thou weart a politician, grave and wise,
Yet free from that sly trick, to temporize.
What heart so iudurate, that Would not yield,
Whear virtues puissant valor, strove to win?
What mind so obstinate, to take the field,
Against those fine parts, whose matches scant-have bin
Sure causeless to reject him, t'weare foul sin.
Whearfore her thoughts, well trained in their good,
Do entertain his suite, with gracious mood,
For as a Diamond rich, (through virtue rare)
To it the gads of sturdie steel does draw:
And as the youth^worne let, by like compare,
Bestows h^s power attrative on the straw,
So sweet Susanna, not compeld by awe,
But led to love, by like hearts Simpathie,
Did yield his ears, his wished hearts reply.
Who thought him self to be the happiest wight*
When she became (not hers but) his desired,
When she had made surrender of her right,
The joy, the comfort, which his heart required,
While to obtain that pray he more aspired,
Then conqur'ing Alexander, to subdue,
A world far wider, then the world he knew.
O peerless purchaze fownd by few or none.
O pleasant conquest, pleased conqueror.
Whilst true content, triumphs in loves throane,
More rightly rich, then Asiaes emperor,
The price was virtue, thou the vanquishor.
For in thy prisoner, with a princely port,
Residinge virtues, held their royal court.
Within the closet, of whose cloysest pleasure,
(Neat cabbonet for virtues sweet repose)
Nature and Grace, had hid their finest treasure,
And left it all to Constancies, despose.
(A trusty guardian, for such goods as those)
Amongst which glorious graces, in her breast,
Bright Chastity was seen, above the rest*
She seated in a seat which virtue places,
A royal throne (the soul and mind divine)
As only grace, that every virtue g^aceth,
Is canopied with Faith (most pure and fine)
Like milkie-way, with circling Cristalline.
And at her knees, are kneel, (and part not thence)
Transparent purity, and (Gods gift) Continence.
And to uphold her high, and heavenly state,
She has for guard, attending on her train,
Sobriety (truths friend, and vices hate)
Foresight (that evil occasions does refrain)
Dumb tongue, dead heart, blind eye, deaf ear, sad brain^.
Well guided thoughts; a hand and foot not idle;
Stern abstinence, that headstrong lust does bridle.
O chastity (thou beauty of the mind)
Unspotted purity in things vnpure,
The comliest ornament of woman kind;
Were not this seat most slipprie and unsure,
Thou would in all and not in few endure.
But thy light foes, false title, of true pleasure,
Thee loathed makes, her loved out of measure.
Yea since thy friends in show, but foes indeed,
Vain Tutors taught, their pupils how to spell,
For cast, caute; and to serve foul need,
If chastely want, that cloasly does do well;
This motive made, some subjects to rebel.
Who by pretense, to underprop thy crown,
In secret make assaults, to pull thee down.
Whose proud Essenian high priest, Rabbena,
To canonize thy saint, will kiss thy shrine.
Yet not with Aaron choose chaste El'saba,
But like that Levite use his concubine,
Yea if thou do thy self, in marriage join,
They bless thy name, as sacred one of seven,
Yet ban thine act, as most unworthy heaven.
O neighing Iades, fast friends to infamy,
Nu^ses to naughtiness, lewd bawdes to lust,
Base vassalles, to your wills Apostasy,
Why does not Conscience, check your deeds unjust?
Why does not sad Despair, drown in distrust,
Those temptors of these sacred Nymphs to sin?
Whom rape may not enforce, nor flattry win.
Delightsome flowers, do quickly fall and fade,
And budding beauty blasteth, in small space;
But constant Chaste, thy son goes not to glade,
No age nor eating time, can thee deface,
While virtue thee, thou virtue, do embrace*
Thou gracest Susan, having thee in hold,
As richest Iemmes, do grace the finest gold.
Her Ambe^ tresses, made a seemly show;
Her milke-white skin, adorned natures skill,
Yet all did vanish, as the liquid dew,
While Chastity remains eternal still,
Why then are women vvedded to vain will?
That for a wanton momentanie pleasure,
They (wilful) vvast an everlasting tre^sure.
Had Susan bin, of their unstable mind,
To sell eternity to get a toy;
She had not left such noted fame behind.
But had bin titled, faith-lesse, fondly coy,
Which did relinquish lust, for lasting joy.
And left her loved name, to be eternal;
But those that wronged the same, like fendes infernal.
For when her choice, did yield a worlds delight,
And ioies did soar, above the reach of sorrow;
When settled thoughts, secure of worldly spite,
And barge of bliss, high fortunes seas did forrow,
Then fl^ttring night, brought forth a doleful morrow.
What time her gracious God, did hold it best,
To blaze abroad, what harbord in her breast.
For as he faithful Abraham's heart, did prove,
By willing offering* of his guiltless son;
And tried Io^s stable faith, and constant love,
What time she Satan, his consent had won,
To leave Jobs health forlorn, and wealth undone:
Even so he sifted, Susans constancy,
^f that she would, her pure faith falsify.
And to complot this treason, by temptation,
False Satan had fit men, fit time, fit place;
Was never foe so fitted for invasion,
The plot once laid he would not bate an ace,
The price was shame (her glories dim disgrace)
The means, the men, the time, the place, thus fitte^;
Yet Satan proved a fool, and shallow witted.
While flattring time, could not her thoughts content,
Convenient place, had no convenient pray,
Though nobles sought her fames disparagement;
Yet had more noble heart, a constant naie,
A Judges words, against justice bear no sway.
Gray hairs, (grim suitors) argued youths green folly,
Their vele of Priest-hoode made them more vnhollie.
Such were the wightes, that would this Lady wrong,
So were their hearts, addicted to vile actions,
That their lust-fostred thoughts, did wholly long.
On harmless Chastity, to raise exactions.
Why should stout nobles stoop to base detractions?
Why should such ympious ympes, have rule of all,
Whose thoughts are base, and bond-slaues unto thrall.
VVoe to that place, where law is turned to lust,
VVoe, to that land, where rulers fall to sin.
VVoe to that state, where might does say I must.
VVoe to the wronged, that seeks right of him,
Who forces not of good, or right a pin.
But makes the earth, the object of his eyes,
Because he would, both God and heaven despise.
Thou God which do, fell tyrans rage detest,
Why suffrest thou such wolves, to tyrannise?
Why are thy seely lamkins so oppressed?
And does not mercy in thy breast arise?
Sure thou art merciful, in this thy guise.
In giving Tyrants time, for to repent,
And fruitful patience, to the innocent*
A rare example, of which righteous love,
Does in this ladies life, at large appear;
Whom tyrant stride, whether she would remove,
Her heart from thee, (her loving Lord most dear)
But she in thee, remaind the vanquisher;
When thou did raise, young Daniell in her right,
And put her shameless foes, to shameful flight.
For when the nuptial rightes, had due dispatch,
And solemn laws, fast knit the sociall band,
By writing made, attenticke of the match.
When first Helchia, gave his daughters hand,
Before the states, and seniors of the land;
That year advaunced were, to judgment seat,
Those hell-taught hirelings, fit for Satan's feate.
For while this tender lady, taught her will,
TO attend her liked love, and Lordly mate,
The captive Jews, in troops resorted still,
To iet in Ioachims courts, and there debate,
Of means, to manage their forlorn estate;
To rowse religion, and awake their law,
Borne down by bondage, breeder of their awe.
So to erect a secret Sanhedrin,
They singled forth two seniors, from the best,
Grave, Aged, learned, wise, of noble kin,
For to expound the law, and rule the rest,
But they which seemed in show what they professed,
In proof were Be^als brood; base slippes of Ca^ne,
In faith false Apostates, men vile, and vain.
These long frequented, noble Ioachims place,
Grim sires severe, like Aristarchus brow,
Seemed nothing popular; could not the grace,
To kiss the hand, or stoop the stately bow,
But (though with halting) only well knew how,
To render right, without regard of gain,
Which made contending troops, attend their train.
But modest lady, (Lady modesty)
She to avoid the press, in this repair,
And shun the gaze, of every glauncing e^e,
Would to her garden walk to take the air:
A fine contrived plot and passing fair;
Hemmed in with stately walls which liked her well,
(Chaste cloistred nymph, within ^o sweet a cell.)
And when the press was past, and coast was clear,
Unto her home, her settled pase she bendes:
Where often she finds her Lord, and loving Pheere,
Conferring with those seniors, his good friends.
To whom (for Ioachims love) good look she ^endes.
Secure of lust; she deemd their age more stable,
Their faith more holy, thoughts more honorable.
But in plaine-meaning trust, false treason lurkes.
Sly Satan hence, gate breath to blow lusts fire.
At which their melting hearts, he softly works,
So that they take, the impression of desire,
And so did bend, to what he would require.
Thus with fair stales, he bai^eth buzzardes eyes,
To teach these dotardes tricks, to wantonize
The silver hears (stern sum'nors to the grave)
Are dipped in die-pot, and well taught to fall,
In curled tuftes, like yonkers neat and brave.
(No Peruge yet had Peru seen at al)
While withered limbs would youths delights recall;
The spundge, the comb, the glass, do wait at hand,
To clear the wrinckled skin, that age had tand.
The Arabian odors, mend a noisome fault:
Each word, each look, each gesture smackes of art,
The limping leg begins to leap and vault.
When Cup^d shootes, where death should thrill his dart,
Old wagges exceed to play the wantons part.
And then though folly, give themselves the fall,
Yet must sweet beauty bear the blame of al.
So things well meant, are oftentimes mistaken,
Sometimes the harmless eye, does fee^e offense,
Sometimes fair duty, makes his friend forsaken,
Sometimes foul faults, are hid by fair pretense.
So were these seniors, snared by true sense.
When (burnd not by the fire, but by the light)
They were entrap'd, by that true spy, the sight.
While chaste, concentricke circles of her eyes,
Like sphericke sections, cut by curious art;
Reflect the wanton beams, which against them flies,
Back to the darkesome dungeon, of the heart,
Makes Liver loue-sicke, poisons every part.
Makes reason, and hearts passions, disagree;
Makes that which was not, what it should not be*
Fie on fine beauty, that do bane thy breeder,
Fie on false honor, that betraist thy friend,
Fie on thee foolish feature, thou eye feeder.
Fie on unsteadfast riches, friends unkind.
Fie on choice education (art thou blind?)
Fie on fit time, alluring bawd to evil,
Fie on fit place, a broker for the devil.
These were the traitors, that entisementes gave,
To blind concupiscence, and bedlem lust,
To hood^winke virtue, and at reason rave,
That bids be bold, and banish faint distrust.
Pretendes the purchase good, and title just.
Persuades it cowardi^e, to daunt for shame,
Where greater conquest winnes the greater fame.
And yet they deemed her virtues, far to great,
Her thoughts to high, to stoop to base desire,
Which did not cool, but much augment the hea^e.
Great logges laid on, do most increase the fire,
Beat down by doubts, stout lust does ^im the higher.
When struggling streams, with strongest ba^es are bent,
Then flowdes do swell, and rage most insolent.
And so while raging lust, out-reacheth reason,
(Like bended waves they surge above the banks)
Displease their friends, and selves, and al to please one,
Leave law, and right, to play unlawful prankes;
Vow great attemptes, not worthy smallest thanks.
Grow careless, resolute in dissolution;
Bewitched with beauties blaze, to work abusion.
That those, which vvhilome did like Martial vvightes,
VVeild Mars his weapons, and were manly men;
Become nice Sybarites, faint hearted knights,
Forsake the field, to diue in Cupids den,
Resign the Eagles empire, to the wren.
Obscure Herculean fortitude, and fame,
By childish service, of some Lydian dame.
For as the fish that (of his force to stop)
Hight Remora, (much like the seely snaile)
Can stay the ship, of lofty tallest top,
Against force of oars, and furious winded sail;
So some whose fame, high fortune could not fail.
Amidst their happiest course, are forced to stay,
By lust-fed love, or else as weak delay.
So sovereignes often, come subjects to their sin,
Whilst those that should not, soonst are slaves to lust,
Men what they must not, most are prone to win,
Which makes trim virtue, dragled in the dust.
When rulers are (as iron worn with rust)
Consumed with love, then countries fall to sin,
As here you see these judges do begin.
Who often were bent (by reasons Ecstasis)
With club-fist violence, and clownish force,
To break into that princely Pyramid,
And batter down, her wel-built walls perforce,
If mild entreatie, might not move remorse.
Or bold persuasions, blind the eyes of reason,
Or subtle feats, surprise the fort by treason.
Thus often they meant, to make a rash assault;
More often they seek, vile opportunity,
And most do muse, how they may cloak the fault,
If mad desire, accomplished might be,
Their withered hoping hearts think long to see.
The fruit of their untimely, sprowting lust;
The event whereof, they held in deep distrust.
Each day these graybeardes, kiss the garden door,
To see at least the shadow of their Saint,
And through the slender crannies, pry and pore,
To feed the humor that does make them faint,
So does her peerless hue their eyes attaint.
That aie to gaze on her, they do require;
As on sweet speckled Panthers beasts desire.
Each day for fervent love, of this fair goddess,
They gad on pilgrimage, to her sweet shrine.
Each day foul lust, did feed in fainting bodies,
On fresh recording, of her beauties shine,
Each day they be repleate, and yet do pine.
While outward object nursing inward anguish,
Abates the look and makes the life to languish.
Thus does delay, not lessen but increase,
The furious fittes, of their rebellions soar.
And though they would, a parlee for their peace,
Yet want they means, her favor to implore.
Which makes them wish, to be within the door,
With her alone, that they might work their will,
To pray or force her, to that cursed ill.
They wondered greatly, at each others grief,
Yet want the skill, the secret cause to know,
Though friendly hand, be pressed to yield relief,
Yet singred pulse, cannot bewray their woe,
And shame does blush, such shameful parts to show.
While neither knows, that either is entangled,
With that sharp hook, wherewith himself is angled.
Til time, that pend, the prologue in this play,
And did pretend, some pleasing comedy:
By stately rufling actors, did bewray,
She meant to stain the stage, and standers by,
With tragique blood, in fell Catastrophie.
And sending opportunity with speed,
To fit occasion, bids them both proceed.
For on a day, when Cynthius lamp of light,
Had with his golden beams, embost the sky,
And (climbing from the circle-bounding sight)
Near to the noone-steed line, was mounted hie,
When Nature did on customs lore rely.
To vnder-propt her weakness, with repast,
That now grew faint, and feeble with long fast.
Then at kind Ioachims gates, these seniors part,
(V^trustie traitors, to so true a friend)
And to their several houses, do revert.
But leave in pawn, unbodied hearts behind.
(Not where it lives but loves remains the mind)
They do repose, their friend-shippe on their foe?
They leave sweet life in gage, yet home they go.
Where lazy rest, did ransacke all their veins,
Choice of delights, do breed no choice of ease,
The wayward worm, within their adled brains,
Was nibling still, nothing but one could please,
The feathered seat, does seem a nest of fleas.
The princely banquets, held a homely diet,
The Doricke music, makes the mind unquiet.
The cooks controld, the meat not seasoned well,
The courtly waitor, seems a cartly clown,
The fragrant odors, yield a loathsome smell.
Who looks sad, he thinks on him does frown,
Who laughes outright, does envy his renown.
Who wispreth in the ^are does him reprove,
Who praises beauty, robbes him of his love.
His love? not she grave lady, first his love,
Whose breasts did breed, youths sweet conte^tments well,
His eyes as blind in choice, he does reprove,
For Ioachims choice, all choices does excel,
His neighbors sheep (not his) must bear the bell.
Sweet Susan (none but she) is worthy honor,
His Debora not worthy to wait on her.
Fond, testy, wayward, waspish, out of tune,
His giddy head, does toss his trencher round.
His hasty heart is fierce, does fret, and fume,
His knife does ^eele, his passions to abound,
His restless foot, does gra^e the harmless ground.
Each punct of time, does seem a lingering morrow,
The meal is short, when as the sauce is sorrow.
Therefore to seek more ease, in pleasing place,
They post alone, unto the garden door.
Where one of them not staide, a breathing space,
But that his corryvall, is come to shore,
Where never boath, (till then) did meet before.
And then to soon; for false occasion then,
Did plot the fall, of these unfaithful men.
For trained by time, each one acquaintes the other,
H^w beauties blaze, in Susans modest eye,
Had set dry lust on fire, which did not smother,
(Within their withered breasts) but burning fly,
Like fiery dragon, in the flaming sky.
Which forced them to forget, their God their king,
And bind best hope, unto a hopeless thing.
They pause a space, what best to do resolving,
Like two fi^rce Bears, of greedy appetite.
Devising means, and in their minds revolving,
If that she will not wrong, her Ioachims right,
They would enforce her then, by force and might.
Yet here a guilty conscience, lays a bar,
To stop this course, and their devises mar.
Says one of them shall we commit this evil?
Shall freemen borne, be bond-slaues unto sin?
Shall we embrace the flesh, to kiss the Devil?
Shall we controlling vice, to vice begin?
Shall we so famous, thus defame our kin?
(My Lord) we must suppress, these proud assaults,
Else shall we great ones, make the greater faults.
The rule by which all other rules, are tried,
Must bear a true proportion, every way.
And want the smallest faults, that may be spied,
So kings and seniors, that do bear the sway,
Must live to rule, and yet the laws obey.
Else how should they black sin, rebuke and blame,
When they themselves are guilty in the same?
A mole is speed'lie spied, in the face,
When in the body blaines, are vnperceaved.
One seely mis^e will yield us, more disgrace,
Then though the vnder^ing, and poor aggrieved,
Were of al royal virtues, quite bereaved.
For rulers are, the looking-glass, the book,
In which all subjects eyes, do read and look.
O let us then remember, there is a God,
A God, whose searching eye, has deepest seeing,
A God, whose providence, does never plod,
A God, in whom we move, and have our being,
A God, to whom each sin, is disagreeing.
A God, that will not wink, at this misdeede,
A God, that will inflict revendge, with speed.
But here I see, a cursed fawning pleasure,
That freez'th my soul, yet burn'th my heart with lust.
That does torment my mind, beyond all measure,
And overrules (me ruler) with I must.
Then tell me brother whereto both shall trust.
For my poor trembling heart, is so tormented,
That I the act (vnacted) have repented.
His sad colleage, who all this time gave ear,
With good attention, to this wavering tale,
Did seem as though, he held his counsel dear;
But in his breast, they bred most deadly bale,
So sorrow sucked his blood, that he looked pale.
And staggring paused, what answer best to make him,
Or take advice, what course he should betake him.
At length from sin-flowing soul, (as flame from fire)
He belloweth out, hoat-breathed brutish words:
I must with speed, effect my hearts desire,
Commanding lust, no longer pawse affords,
No, though mine object, were ten thousand swords.
Ne can my spirit repress, so fierce a foe,
My vvil is bent, my heart vvil have it so.
A good physician, may his patient cure,
If he be careful, of the vvound in season:
But careless, if he let it long endure;
He finds at length, not one sufficient reason,
How of a festred ulcer, he might ease one.
So if in time, I had this plague prevented,
I should have had no time, to have repented.
But now my wound, out-reacheth reasons skill,
It festreth inward, and so hurts my heart,
That I must bend, to my rebellious will.
(Unless I will endure, an endless smart)
I would some Pythonisse could work by art.
Or man of God by prayer obtain the skill,
To turn my heart, from this intended il.
But it will not be; I cannot have redress,
Despair does stop the way, to former state.
I must therefore to her, my griefs express,
And work by griping might, and forced hate,
If that she will not be, compassionare.
Thus I resolve, my thoughts are past relenting,
And careless I (my Lord) of your consenting.
Yet while sins grief, would heal his fowls consu^ption
Forth steps the temptour, and to stop restraint,
Does bear him up with wings, of proud presumption,
Biddes hope be stable, and his faith not faint;
Thy God (says he) with mercy heeres complaint.
If thou to him, thy acted sins deplore,
He heales with speed, and salues thy smarting soar.
And what? thy slip is but a venial sin,
Fine natures fault, (or else no fault at all)
The saved Saints themselves, have sinners binne,
The steddiest foot, sometimes does take a fall,
No shame to trip, but being down to crawle.
What if grave age, of wantonness reprove thee?
The blame be hers, whose matchles parts did move thee.
Thus subtle Satan, faines (to shift a card)
That vice is virtue, and foule-sinne salvation:
And that condign, our works are of revvard,
When as our deeds, are worthy condemnation,
To build presumptuous sins, on Gods compassion,
He brings sins warnings, warrants unto sin,
While thus to pray, his pupil does begin.
O God (says he) do not behold this sin,
But if thou do, yet do thou not reject us,
For more thy servantes have offenders bin,
Therefore (O Lord) do not to shame detect us,
Nor with thy heavy-falling hand, correct us.
Since we are not the first, that have transgressed,
Thy sacred precepts, in thy law expressed.
Old Adam fell, and yet thou did relieve him,
Thou have forgotten, Nohahs drunkenness:
Lottes sin was greater, yet thou did forgive him:
Thy hearts-loue David, Vrie did oppress,
And made his wife, his lusts adulteress.
High-seated Solomon, (that held his throne)
Fell to fond lust, and had more faults then one.
Al these (and more thy servants) left thy laws,
Yet did thy mercies largess pardon all:
Why should I then, have longer time to pawse?
Or dread the storm, ere it begin to fall?
No, no, poor heart, I will no thoughts fore stall.
Invent the way, to win thy choice delight,
And this my hand, shall help with maine and might.
He making might, the period of his speech,
Entreates his mate, to censure his conclusion,
Protesting that no reason, should out-reach,
Or interrupt, his settled resolution.
While thus he rests careless of confusion.
His partner does impart, his thoughts reply,
And leads amiss, what went before awry.
Senior (says he) rash is this enterprise,
Hast-making marchantes, often mar good mart,
Lettes pawse a space, our have may prodigize,
Let first a fawning eye, to her impart,
The loue-sicke passions, of a friendly heart.
Let sighs entreat, let looks o^r love unfold,
Lets tempt her truth, with traitrous gobs of gold.
Lets hire some B. to board her with perswations,
That letter has more cunning, then the Ka.
Lets court her often, with stately salutations,
Lets sift the secrets, of our Cabala.
Lets look in Bresith book, and Marcana.
What herb, what stone, what word, has power in love,
Lets try their force, and every virtue prove.
We read in books of pendants, and of potions,
Of figures framed, with quaint charecter^smes,
Of Mawmets made by art, to plannets motions,
Of direful words, and powerful exorcismes,
Of curious feats, to raise loves paroxismes.
If heaven will not here, lets sue to hell,
The Fayries have great force, old wives can tell.
Lets then hunt out, some old Hecatean hagge,
That can eclipse the moon, and cloud the son:
Sweep hills away, and cause the grownd to wagge:
Make headlong streams, back to their heads to ron,
Rai^e spirits (as Saul in Endor saw was done)
Work minds as wax, make wayward will, loves thrall,
Lets try their skill, before we venture all.
But out fond lingering leaches, to sick love,
While you provide, your patient does decay:
Let leasures guests, your paltry physic prove,
Our sickness is impatient of delay,
Therefore (sweet Senior) let us have away,
Into this happiest orchard, there to hide us,
To try what better fortune does abide us.
Which said: these dotards sneake in at the gate,
(False traitor to take in his ladies foes)
And (being in) sly foxes they debate,
Where best to find fit couch, for to repose,
And shroud themselves, from gazing eyes disclose.
Till trustlesse time* might pay the hoped hire,
Their hunger-starved lust, did so desire.
And standing thus at gaze, at length they spy,
A spreading palm, (fit arbor for to feast in)
Whose wreathed boughs, and branches clowd the sky.
This lovely bower, these brothels choose to rest in.
(To neat a perch, for such night owls to nest in.)
Where flowring Camomill, did cloth the ground,
With Rose and Eglantine, encloased round.
While here they lurk, with pleasing shrubs inshrinde,
Fair sights, fresh air, does yield them little ease.
While conscience sting does gaul, the guilty mind,
Their swelling thoughts, do strive like struggling seas,
No object of the eye, or ear, does please.
They dread the leaves, with wavering will bewray the^,
Or twitling birds, with taunting tunes betray them.
The whistling wind, amongst the trembling trees,
Does force the head to aile, and heart to ache,
The harmless humming, of the toyling Bees,
Does cause the legs to quiver, hands to quake.
Least Ioachim them suspect, and tardy take.
Wherefore the fearful eye, does loath the light,
And long to have, sin-shrowding darkesome night.
And while they both revolue their case; (says one)
I had a dream, (God turn my dream to good)
Me seemed we sitting, on the judgment throne,
Our seat fell down, into a stream of blood;
And both we drenched in the crymsen flood.
In sleep I strove, and strugled (wanting breath)
To escape those waves, that did conspire our death.
Which terror made my fearful flesh so tremble,
Vnneathes I could, my perfect senses find.
Cease (quoth his mate) no more, dreams often dissemble.
Dreams are deceites, as wavering as the wind,
They never daunt, a full resolved mind.
A fainting heart, shall never loose the pray,
Which (mawgre dreams) I mean to win this day.
Thus are those seniors, sold to desolation,
Who does not see their souls subdude to sin?
Whilst their lust-hardned hearts, by no persuasion,
Can be recald, from what they did begin.
But bent to venture all, unsure to win.
Like ravening bears, bereaved of their whelps,
They sit alone, devising many helps.
Devising many helps, to work their will,
To wrest or win her, to their loathed lure:
O that such Tigers fierce, her seek to spill.
O that such drowsy droanes, should be secure,
To creep into a hiue, unstained and pure.
To taste that Nectar, and Hyblean Honey,
That none but one could win, for love or money.
O hearts much harder, then the Adamant,
O chartes of sin, mappes of impiety.
Are you the men, that vices should supplant?
Do you (in show) adore the dietie?
And seek in secret, sins variety?
O do but think, there comes a judgment day;
Where such misdeedes, cannot be wiped away.
But your hearts, harbor naught, but ravishment,
You follovv Tereus vain, in villainy.
You careless how to die, or to repent,
Do live secure of shame, and infamy,
And think on naught, but opportunity.
To perpetrate, your wicked lewd intent,
In which already, many days are spent.
But all days now, are passed and expired,
In which you lived twixt hope, and grimme despair
When time has brought you, where you most de^
Even to that orchard, where most wholesome air,
Does kiss the creature, which you held most fair.
Injurious time, why did thou serve her so,
Which never was or meant to be thy foe?
Why did thou seek, to enthral a sacred soul?
Why did thou seek to train her unto lust?
Why do not opportunity control?
Which seeks to draine her honor in the dust?
O flattring opportunity unjust.
Fit slave to sallie Satan's lewd designement,
When thy compeere, fit place, yeeldes entertainment.
O God why have thou set, the ravening wolf,
Upon the poor, and harmless lamb to pray?
Why did thou let her escape, Charibdis gulf,
For to (by Scylla rock) be cast away?
Thou have vpheld her, happy to this day.
And now must light, in Lions ravening jaws,
And plead to ears, that know no right nor laws.
For when the sun (near summer tropicke seated)
With bright reflected beams, did all repeat:
And westvvard from the southern line, retreated,
Did make the foggie heart, in shade to sweat,
And croaking raven, gape and pant for hear.
Then did Susanna, to her walk repair,
In shadowed seat, to take fresh cooling air.
Where with her mates demure, (two modest maids)
She shrowds her self in shrubs, near pleasant spring:
(Like harmless Elfes the fountain fairy Naids)
Where waters rush, and chirping birds do sing,
And art with nature, framd a curious thing.
A stately conduit, whence sweet streams distilled,
Which underneath, a sumptuous cesterne filled.
In which this virtuous dame, was wont to bath her,
When lawful rightes, such homage did require.
And now (to soon) induced much the rather,
Because sun-burning beams, did fry like fire,
Wherefore (she says) good wentches home retire.
And bring the soape, the clothes and things I need,
Shut fast the doors, return again with speed.
With due obeisance, and a bashful smile,
They yield the look, of ready servitude,
And with officious foot, they post awhile,
Unto the garden doors, and them occlude,
To stop each stranger out, that night intrude.
And by a posterne gate, they post away,
And yet quick wantons, make to tedious stay.
Thus left alone (good lady void of fear)
She serves her God, with solitary muse.
Secure what birds of rapine, roosted there,
That meant her wretch, in their sharp claws to bruise,
And vnprophaned body, to abuse.
O little does she know, what serpents lurk,
In traitrous place; to pray on natures work.
Had she Diana bin (as poets feign)
When these Acteo^s, pried through the vvood;
She as Diana did, would them constrain,
To be transformed, in her angry mood.
She could not do her glory, greater good.
But what Acteo^s seek, to serve their will,
She little knows, that never knew such ill.
The seely fish, that hook has never angled,
Does seldom fear, what is hidden in the bait.
The bird that never was, with snare entangled,
Does shun no place, for that she fears deceit,
So careless she, what curres lie at receite.
To take, entangle, wrong, her guiltless mind;
Does nothing fear, she should such treason find.
But Satan (that had smothered, long his fire)
Brings now three blazes flaming, hies apase,
To kindle bright, the brand of their desire,
With beauties pray, commodious time, and place,
Up (says he) beasts: faint sluggards: are you base?
Cheer up your sp^rits, let groaning thoughts be glad,
So fair a day* no Lordings ever had.
While faultlesse she, sits trapt by false occasion,
When once her maids were gone, and all things fast;
Forthwith these lust-breath'd Lords, made rash invasion,
To make profane, the soul that is so chaste,
Like hunger-starved, vultures they make have.
To get the bait, within their ravenous beakes,
To kiss those coral lips, and roseall cheakes.
And though with have, they fall upon the ground;
They rise again, and headlong forth do run.
The fall does say, this fact shall you confound.
Your seat is dipped in blood, and you undone,
O leave it of, that is so ill begone.
But while rebellious Satan, runs by them,
Good motions cannot enter, or come nigh them.
When she (good lady) savv these straggling Lords,
To press in presence, with such heedelesse speed;
She wondered greatly: Ignorant what words,
(When as they came) would from their hearts proceed,
They straight with circled arms, her bondage breed.
While gazing eyes, behold her comely hue,
And maffling mouths, these graceless speeches spue.
Quoth one of them (for one did speak for boath)
We must, with that false heart began to fail him.
To tell the rest his guilty mind was loath,
Thinking (perhaps) dumb shows would most avail him,
And she amazed, with merveile what should aile him.
To greet her (helpelesse captive) with I must,
Did fear the fury, of the tyrant lust.
And quivering stands, as does the harmless dear,
Beset with greedy curres, and eagre hounds:
She looks about, and pries to find a clear,
To escape these Crocodiles, that pass their bounds,
Whose clasped arms, do yield her deadly wounds.
While shame does tie their tongues, and make the^ mute,
And conscience seeks, their conquest to confute.
At war was wit and will, for best endeavors,
Contending thoughts, did hold a civil schism,
As freezing fittes, preceede hoate burning fevors,
So conscience feels, a shaking paroxisme,
In vain does reason, fight with Rhetorisme.
The weaklig wit, constrained is to yield,
And bedlem lust, left owner of the field.
For when he had a time, him self be thought.
Right, shame, and fear, exiled from his heart,
And love with lust, a cruel combat fought,
And strived one, the other to converte.
Then he began, his passions to imparte.
Yet bent to speak, and douptfull of her nay,
He faintes again and knows not what to say.
Then (as those cheating mates in conny-catchinge,
Cogge, prate, and lie, to furnish forth their feate)
He beats and settes, his brains a brood in hatching,
Straung sleightes, to gain this more then golden cheat,
And Epitheme, to cool flesh-burning heat.
At length twixt faltring hope, and faint despair,
He fawnes, he frowns, he threats, he speaks her fair.
Sweet lady now (says he) we must enjoy thee*
If no or lives, will soon unbodied be.
Consent therefore, if no, we will destroy thee.
And say we saw one here, embracinge thee.
Nay we will vow by heaven, we did thee see,
To act adulterouse sin, with some base slave.
Then yield if thou will lief and honor have.
If thou demand, how our sin-seas'ned hearts,
With out remorse can harbor this misdeed.
Then know that love, and duty played their parts
Within our breasts, some better thoughts to breed.
But lust did blot, what reason still decreed.
Thy look (fair lady) worthy to be loved,
So bownd our hearts, they might not be removed
Thy stature like, the statly Cedar trees
Thy peerlesse beauty, passing all the rest.
Thy seemly iestures, which each noat^ and sees.
These are the things, enthrall the mightiest.
And make commanding monarchs, to be pressed,
To fall from honor, justice, law, and right.
And bannish those, which love them, out of sight.
These are the traitors, which betray thee now.
These (like false guides) do lead us from the Lord.
These things make lawful kings, and Lords allow*
Things most unlawful* and to be abhord.
What man (fair lady) could not well afford,
To try fell pains, to purchaze such a love?
Yea pains of death, and thousand perils prove,
Did ever read, those high conceyted stories,
In which the lives^, of worthy loves are writ?
If so, thou see, the trophies of their glories,
Wear raysd on love and how inspired with it,
They pawn their lives, by farthest reach of wit,
To make loves name, eternal and admired.
That else to fame, had not with cost bin hired.
O then but think, thy Lords are more tormented.
Who dare suscept, more perilles then them all.
And yet we know, our deeds may be repented.
Since greater men, do take the greatest fall.
For when they slip, the Echo is not small,
That does reflect their faults, to every ear,
Which makes contented minds, not climb for fear.
Had not (the Charmer) beauty us be witched*
We should have held, the freedom of our state.
And have bin richly, with Gods gifts enriched.
And never feared the spite, of daring fate.
But why do we, our fortunes now relate,
Which may (perhapes) our rash attemptes ensue?
We came not now, our future state to rue.
But came our over burning hearts, to cole.
Enflamed by reflection, of thine eyes.
Let them (sweet love) be quenched in that poole,
That may thy Ioachims use, and ours suffice.
But say the word, and we will means devise,
That thou fair dame, shall never be suspected.
For why, our deed, to none shall be detected,
What if thy parents be, right dear unto thee?
Thy children dear, good Ioachim deerst of all?
Yet fly faint fear, this fact shall not undo thee,
Beat down distrust, and all his thoughts appall.
For this misdeed, shall not in question call,
Thy spotless fame, which all men hold vnfracted,
And deeds unknown, are ev'nas thoughts vnacted.
Q^oth he we both, are linially descended,
From Judah race kinsmen to Zedechias.
Thou may sweet fair, in us be princely frended,
Yea more, if thou will bend unto our byas,
Thou may be mother, to the great Messiah
And ^o be famosed, by royal birth,
Of absolute commander, of the earth.
Thus fleshly speaks, this carnal Cabalist,
Pawninge his souls dear life, to ransom lust.
Or like a kingdom dreaming, Thalmudist.
That in an eartlhy empire, puts his trust.
For Judah scepter, then lay in the dust.
And then as now, they hoped an earthly king.
But to his tale, this Sophist more does singe.
If treasure want, thou shall have gold at will,
Or what thy wish, or pleasinge thought desires.
If honors hight thie honor lasts still.
While secreasie, our age and state requires.
Yea place and time, thie free consent now hireth.
Thie maids away, do wink at thine offense.
The cloased doors, will with thie fact dispense.
If douptes obiecte, our words in jest are spoken,
And that our love is conninge deeply feigned.
Then here by hollyest vow, (for never broken)
We deeply do protest (and vnconstreigned)
Our suite is love, by true affection trained.
Then yield, if no, this arms, consent shall draw.
For needs we must, and need obeyes no law,
Else if thou do persist, in flat denial,
Be hold extremes at hand, thie doom is teemed.
Adultery, shall breed thie death in trial.
So shall thou dead, an hipocrite be deemed.
So shall thine end, be infamous esteemed.
So shall thou stain thiekin, and blud debase.
Defame thie pheere, and bastardize thy race.
For we well known (grave fathers in the land)
VVil in thy trial, judge and witness be.
By oath of two, each verdict given must stand.
Our selves will swear, we found embracing thee,
A beardlesse groom, in foul adultery.
Then better twere, to live and have good name,
Then have thy death, sepulchred in defame.
As for our selves, we have at large debated,
What shame, what infamy, this fact may gain.
How that we may be pointed at, and ha^ed,
Yea more then pointed; da^lie die like Cain,
While drowping life, is buried in disdain
A loathsome grave, a death far worse then death,
Because the scandal, shall reviue on earth.
Thus have we thought, what may ensue the deed,
Who fears what may be, misseth Ladies love,
Faint hearted carpet knights, do seldom speed,
If fear of what may be, does them reprove,
No fear shall daunt my heart, or may be move.
So strongly has desire, enchaunted me.
That I must needs, embrace mine infamy.
Sweet let us then, feed on thy coral lips,
If that will not suffice, lets farther feed.
For raging lust, has gotten bedlem whippes;
And beats our hearts, so that the wounds do bleed,
And naught can cure them, and contentment breed.
But thine embracings, and thy bodies use,
Which can recure the hurt, procure thy truce,
Be brief therefore, report to us thy mind,
If thou will yield, we will rest thy secret friends,
If no; thou know what friendship thou shall find.
Thou know who so against the stream contends,
Does strive in vain; his health but sickely mends.
Contract thy tale, do not at large debate,
For know; delays are dangerous to thy state.
She drowned in gulf of grief, to hear him charm,
Like Hobbies pray, lies quivering in their hands.
And panting so, as if she felt the harm,
That would ensue, if she their will vvithstandes,
For well sheeseess, their ship sticks fast in sands.
They care not how they bear, their wind-blown sails,
And less she knows, what counsel best availes.
If that she yield, she is betraide to shame,
If no, she leaves her friends, her ioies, her life.
Which of these two, deserves the greater blame?
To die with shame, or l^ue a wicked wife,
She schools her wavering thoughts, about this strife.
Shall Susan do, what most she does detest?
Shall Cuckowes hatch their birds, in Ioachims nest?
Nay rather Susan, die an innocent,
And render up, a pure life-breathing spirit.
Then make thy quiet conscience, malcontent:
And purchase death, and hell, for thy demerite,
For harlots shall, no heavenly seats inherit.
And sure I am; if guiltless here I die,
My Habels blud, for vengance hence will cry.
Why then I will resign, fond lust to these,
And fall into the hands, of God my king.
Since far it is better, God then man to please,
For if I yield unto this cursed thing,
My conscience has, a penetrable sting.
Which will torment, my soul far worse then hell,
That I shall bide, more pains then tongue can tell.
The fact would aie, be written in my brow,
The blushing humor, would bewray my case.
If I should here one say, Adultresse thou,
The reddes would rise, and muster in my face,
As if the words, were meant to my disgrace.
My husbands loving eye, in blotted book,
Would read my fault, imprinted in my look.
In sleep condemning dreams, would haunt my head,
And shamefast thoughts, record my shameless folly.
The coverings would cry out, of Ioachims bed,
And say fair hypocrite, thou art unholy,
Pull down thy plumes, and never more be iollie.
My smiling babies, would bewray their mother,
And yield their fires, resemblance, to some other.
Accusing conscience, ioinde with sad remorse,
Would whip me, with remembrance of mine act.
My guilty mind, suspicion would enforce,
To think each whispring tongue, did tell my fact.
And smiling looks, deride my creadit cract.
And that each nibled lip, did lend a mock,
And glauncing eye, behold a gazing stock.
Thus did she, in her secret thoughts debate,
What best to do; before sh'would answer make.
Mean time they long, her to contaminate.
Yet wondered at her looks, before she spoke,
Which Angel-like might move them to forsake.
Their lewd intent, if ever mild remorse,
Or tender mercy, might their hard hearts force.
With hands displaid, she looks, unto the skies;
And down from thence, upon th'aggrieved ground.
Which might move stones to tears, if they had eyes,
Her to behold, which did with grief abound,
Whose heart lodged cares, while tongue these words does sound.
And eyes gush tears, true tokens of deep sorrow,
Thus hearts from eyes fell obiectes, passions borrow.
O you (quoth she) that sway Gods Israel,
Repel proud Satan, who does seek your soul.
Fly, fly, for this my heart does hate as hell,
O fly with speed, least God your sins control,
Rest thus resolved, you never gain this goal.
For never shall be said, there lies that wife,
Which left her God, to live a brothels life.
Some birds and brutish beasts, by natures lore,
Do fly this fact, as most abominable.
Then are you worse then they? who should have store,
Of reason, and in judgment be most stable,
What do you think, Gods book is but a babble?
O be not beasts, though you be made of clay,
But have regard, unto your souls decay.
What if I (wicked) should your wills content?
What gain you if you gain, your whole request?
Why nothing worth a straw, a rush, a bent,
A small thing got will gain your great vnrust,
For once obtainde, you will vvish to be releast.
Yea loath the deed, your selves, and me (perhaps)
Therefore my Lords, be ruled fly afterclappes.
One drop of poison, put into the cupp,
Infectes the whole, and makes it venomous.
So one bad thought, in heart once harbord up,
Does cause the body, to be vicious,
Then fly such thoughts, as are so poysenous.
And let not nature, have the upper hand,
But seek by grace, her ticementes to withstand.
1st not foul shame, for him to miss the but?
Which shutes with levied aim, to hit the prick?
Then it is more shame, when states in practice put,
To win renown, and yet like slaves do stick,
At honesty, O do but note this trick.
First know your selves, then what you undertake,
So you like conquerours, shall such sins forsake.
Do not debase your blood, by base design,
Your place should foster^ worthies free from blame.
What though your branch, has root in Judah line*
You should depend, upon deserved fame,
And not leave all to nobleness of name.
For nature proves, a tainture in the blood,
Where life laments, that nature is not good.
Phie, Phie, grave Rabbis, grow to be so rash,
To royst like ruffians, and exceed in sin.
Shall seasning salt, become vnsav'ry trash?
What? leese your selves that others seek to win?
Shall fair without, be cloak to cloak to foul within?
No, no; since great ones, are example givers,
Seem not to be, but be indeed, good ^ivers.
Let virtue be the ground work, of your greatness,
Set God your guide, in conscience bower of brass.
For glories fort, not founded is in neatenesse,
A coursers name, does naught beseem an ass,
It Is folly, frenzy, fury (out alas.)
To stand a tiptoe, on the title point,
If life be loose, and virtue out of joint.
You ask if I have conned, histories?
Then know I have, both human and divine,
Wherein I find, the lasting infami^s,
Of such as shrouded, under sins black shrine,
And how these glorious men, like stars do shine,
In glories spheere; which have such faults forsaken,
And unto virtues guide, themselves betaken.
What was the cause of raging cataclysme,
That did with ghastly waves the sinful smallow?
But beastly life, and brutish barbarism?
While Sodom did, chaste natures hestes unhallow,
Who, (wantons nice) in lusts delight did wallow,
God purdged the polluted place, with fire,
Made rebel lust, a subject of his ire.
When Sichem (Hevite) did perforce deflower,
Fair Diana (Jacobs dearling and delight)
Did not sin-hating heaven, at it lowre?
And raise revendge, for this abhord despite?
Yes it was the cause, that Jacobs sons did fight.
Against Hemors sons, his subjects and his town,
All which by them, hand-smooth were beaten down.
What bloody war, fierce wrath, and raging spoil,
Fell on the fatal tribe of Beniamine?
What time the men of Gibea, did defile,
(By beastly rape) the Levites concubine,
Which made their brethren tribes, so sore repine;
That of the Beniamites, there lost their lives,
Five times, five thousand men, be^ides their wives.
With Sittim plague, fell thowsandes twenty four,
Because they gave their lives, to luxury.
Did David escape, for that he did deflower,
Vriahs wife? no sure the child did die,
That thus was gotten, in adultery.
Yea God did swear; the like disgrace and sword,
Should light on his, for leaving of his word.
What did proud Paris gain, to gad to Greece,
To fet that mynion, Menelaus wife?
(Fames Phoenix; beauties saint, a peerless piece)
She cost a kingdom large, and many a life,
Sardanapalus, living void of strife.
Became lusts wanton; wallowed in her pleasure,
Which life did leese, his empire life and treasure.
And well; for if the Lord in wedlocks cause,
Plague commonweals, and play the vanquisher,
When one foul fornicator breaks his laws,
What shall be done, to that adulterer,
(...) st^^kler of this strife, and bloody stir?
Were he not worthy, (breeder of this brawle)
(...) end esse death, to pine and die for all?
Your selves of late, (in practice of the law)
(...) doom of stoning death, for like offense.
(...) can desire, your hearts from right withdraw,
That lawless now, you can with laws dispense?
What brainsicke humor does your brains incence?
To deem that fact, death worthy in an other,
Which you your selves, do foster, feed, and cover?
If speeches d^^, but breath and labor leese;
If former (...), cannot forwarne your ears;
Then yet behold, I offer on my knees,
A (...) of sig^es, and stormy tears,
P^t^y the pain, that in my look appears.
Let these my wringed hands, awake remorse,
Use favor (good my Lords) abuse not force.
Consider what you are: not base borne slaves,
Bu^ chief conductors, of Gods chosen sheep.
Then as a cr^zed ship, that is tossed with waves,
Does let the waters, at the chinckes in creep,
And drown'th her self, withal in whelming deep.
So you the ship, wherein your subjects sail,
Your subjects sink, when you begin to fail.
Therefore I conjure you, by great Iehove,
For countries cause, for subjects happiness,
Eor your dear souls estate, no further move
Me poor afflicted soul here succorlesse.
O do not seek to drown me, in distress.
Least now you see, old Sodom flaines descendinge.
Suppress your suite, serve God who waits amending.
But what avayles, to sownd to beasts retreyt?
Or quench the blaz^, that burns in the straw?
Though Croco diles do weep, they mean deceit.
Though Lions cowch, they hide a hurtful paw.
So though these Lords, be moan the te^res they saw:
Commend her zeal, extol her good intent,
Yet still untamed lust, grows insolent.
The softest drops, do pierce the hardest stoanes,
Through gentle words, ungentle hearts will yield.
The tenderest zutho, softneth toughest boanes.
Mild music can, mad beasts allure and weild.
Then are your stubborn heads, so strongly s^eeld?
Or are your hearts so heard, so rough, so fe^rce,
That naught can enter, soften, season, pierce?
Behold the melting teeres, this lady sheds.
Behold what greef, lies harbord in her heart.
Behold what modesty, her over-spreds.
Behold how soar, the wound unmade does smart.
Behold her soul, repining at this part.
Behold hart-renting sobbes, assault your eyes.
Behold up heaved hands, for mercy cries.
But as the wilful Aspis, stoppes her ear;
When charmers chaunting words, (like baits entise)
So these enchaunted adders, will not here,
The words of health, or wisdoms sound advise,
So bendded will, is bent to win the price.
That neither may, this ladies plaint or moan,
Make pity pierce, their hearts more hard then stone.
For when her hearts, deep oracles were ended;
And that they saw such resolution in her.
While chastest fair, fair chastity defended,
Against those who sought, with fawning words to win her,
As far from hope, as though they had not seen her.
Persuaded now, faint means would mar their matter,
Her with strong hands, (weak fort) they seek to batter.
For savage Satyre-like, they would uncover,
What bashful nature, bids secreat hide.
And close as hungry Ravens, they do hover,
To do that great disgrace, she may not bide,
But when she saw, foul lust was at full tide.
And that her lingering girls, did stay so long,
She cride amain, before she felt the wrong.
Help, help (she says) help, help I am undone,
O help a woeful wretch, in wretched case.
At which her cry, the junior judge does run,
And open settes, the garden door (apase)
As if some fellon fled, out of the place.
And she for help, does not so often cry,
But they as fast, stop, keep, the thief does fly.
The servantes netled, with this sudden noyes,
Of help, help, help, stop, keep, the theif does fly.
Run to the posterne gate, (maids men and boys)
To find the author, of this mutiny.
(The cursed cause, of that lamenting cry)
Who staring, gazing gaping run about,
Like men amazde, to find their mistress out.
At length they do desire, their lady fair.
Her beauty blemished, with blubbring teeres.
(As Phebe mantled, with the mystie a^re,
With watrish beams, unto the sight appeeres)
Officious duty, bids her bannish fears.
Relate her hap and let her heart be strong.
Where hands and hearts, are vowed to right her wrong.
But she good lady, that did deem her grooms,
Unequal vmpires, of her high disgrace,
Leaves her bad hap, unto the^ better doomes,
And by her self aloane, with-drawes the place.
And bears her grief, imprented in her face.
That loachims eye might see, and seeing rue,
Her wronged faith, in her deformed hew.
Who when he saw his love, and his lives breath,
To quake in every part, (as palsy shaken)
And cheek, and lip, to look as pale as death*
Whom fresh (life feeding) humor had forsaken.
Himself by fainting fear, is overtaken.
But when he sees, her sinkinge to the ground,
With girdling arms, he does embrace her rovnd.
And sobbing words, through his tongue stopping teeres,
He says, O sweet, sweet heart unfold thy grief.
O speak my love, and bannish bashful feeres.
Here is a hand, shall yield thee lardge relief.
Whose hearts true tenure holds of thee in chief,
If all the world, should vowt' ware wronged by thee,
Yet should it not appear, a wrong to me.
At which his quickening words (as Phoebus shine
With powerful beams, and heat vegetative,
Vnshrowdes the earth, from her congealed shrine,
And makes the wythering shrubbe, and grass reviue,
So) she begins to spring, and seem alive.
And with her faltring tongue (yet all a mort)
Of traitrous men, does render true report.
And as we blame misfortunes, in their bringers,
She blames her maids, as fawtors of her wrong,
She feels impatient fittes, and they her fingers,
That durst neglect their due return so long,
Whose sad excuse, (permixt with tears among.)
To seek the things, her self had laid amiss,
Returned her self the blame, that wronged her bliss.
Mean time, the vnresolved servaunts fear it,
What spiteful ill, their lady did surprise.
And though their itching ears, did long to hear it,
Yet a king hearts, did rather sympathize,
Then know from whence, their passions did arise.
At length with bashful boldness, and good grace,
They ask the seniors, of their mistrisle case.
Whose irefull eyes, when first they did behold,
This giddie rowt, (to press with speed in place)
Did first condemn their deed, as overbold.
While fainting hope, did much distrust their case.
Their lustful hearts, did murthring thoughts embrace,
For bashful nature, once to boldness bent,
Grows shameless bold, and boldly impudent.
And as a hot and eagre dog in hand,
When he beholdes, his game before his eyes.
Does fawn, and leap, and lick, to loose his band,
But when he sees, him keeper surer ties,
Then feirce against him, he begines to rise,
So they when fawning, could not win their will,
Raise like cursed curres, and have a mind to kill.
For to the sad demaundantes, there they say,
Here fownd we Susan, in adulterye,
Whose yongue companion, fled from hence away,
Be fore we could, what wight he was descrie.
Believe us (gentle friends) we tell no lie.
For these our eyes, are witnesses, we saw them.
And here is the place, to which thee did with draw the^.
Which cursed sight, did so our eyes offend,
(And much the more for noble Ioachims sake
Our honorable kinsman and good friend)
That we did do our best, the groom, to take.
That speedy death, (for wrong) a mendes might make.
But he for us, to nimble at strong hand,
Fled by that door, which yet does open stand.
The dutious servitors with bashful brow,
Blush now with sylent shame, at this her fact.
Who never (till that day) was thought to bow,
Unto so base a sin, or vile an act.
Wherefore they did suspect, some plot compact.
And in her cause, would shape some sharp reply.
Well armed in her right to give the lie.
But when they saw, those elders of the land,
Were vouchers of the fact, and filthy deed.
They dare not contradict them, or withstand.
And yet their inward parts, were touched with meed,
To think how ill (poor prisoner) she should speed,
When as the judges mouth, (the witness breath)
Should verdict give, that gives the doom of death.
And so sad men, grief laden home they go,
To pry what comfort, in their ladies look.
And leave these judges, plotting of her woe.
Who straight the way, unto their howses took.
Where they their goodly being, badly brook.
While eagre envy, restless does invent,
The overthrowe, of this chaste innocent.
O Envy wayward witch, foul hagge of hell,
Why do thou make men pine, at men's prosperity?
O you fond fools, that in her den do dwell,
And theare torment your selves, with her severity,
Whose slave is slannder, and her page Temeritie.
Why wast you, restless service on a dame,
That restless wishes, virtues servants shame;
Pale fretting fury* furious sorceresse,
Bel-dame to madness, and yoke mate to woe.
Thy mother pride, a mortal murtheresse,
Thy father Plutus, man's immortal foe.
Thy brattes blood shedding hate, that has no hoe.
Contention, strisse, debate, revendge, and slander,
Which vex the life, and after death do wander*
Thy guts are gald, cholers boiling foam,
Like Aeinaes womb, that belkes sulphurious flames,
Thy cabin carrin thoughts, a hell thy home.
Thy habit like, those fierce Tartarian dames,
Whose flesh consumed, there rests but the rames.
For while thou know not how, to hold a mean.
To eat thy neighbors fatlings, makes thee lean.
Their hearts have anguish, souls have bitterness.
Whom thou do learn, to laugh at virtues woe.
Thy path is blind, and pau'd with slippernesse.
They walk to hell, that in thy ways do go.
Yet are these elders thine, devoted so,
That living now, they live but to deprive,
The life of her, they loath to see alive.
The filthy roades, infect the fowntaines clear.
Where others suck, the venom that they leave.
And serpents spue, their poison every wheare.
Which yet them selves, do not of life bereave.
But these false seniors, do themselves deceive.
That spet forth enuies, venom on this dame.
Yet kill them selves, by sucking in the same.
For on the following day, of this disgrace,
The (...) with the people, make repair,
To keep their usual courts, in wonted place.
In Ioachims house (a spacious room and fair)
Where feeble hope, vpholdeth faint despair.
While their blud-thrishe thoughts, do wholly long,
To do her fame, and body deadly wrong.
And mounted on, the powerful seat of life,
They will their summ'nors, to ascite and call,
Susan, (Helchias daughter, loachims wife)
To make appearance there before them all.
And answer in an action criminal.
Thus they pretend with right, root out evilles,
But why should right be prophand in such divelles,
And she good lady, (loyal to the laws)
(Armd with assurance, of her innocence.
And guarded with the goodness, of her cause.
In conscience brazen fortress of defense)
Feignes none excuse, or shifting ^lie pretense.
But does obey the summons, and proceed.
And leaves to Godth' event of her good speed.
And so attended, with a mourning train,
She makes appearance, in the fatal place,
Where standers by, cannot from teeres refrain.
To see the gallant prisoners, woeful case.
Her pheere, her friends, her parents, children race,
Repleate the air with woes, and grownd with teeres,
While hearts eclipse, in clowded eye appeeres.
And standing in a robe, of finest black,
(Deep sorrows sign, by causlesse infamy)
There overspreades* her shoulders head and back,
Avail of lawne, (to note integrity)
Which hid her whiter beauty, from the eye.
This shadow they command, to be removed.
That they at least might look on what they loved.
Which when the officious officers, had done.
Sweet beauties blush, did yield her such a grace,
As when a clowd, is taken from the son.
When sorrow suckes, the reds forth of her face,
The machlesse white, aloane does hold the place.
But when the crymson humor, steines the white,
Coral seems shadowed, in the Galactite.
Such is the beauty, that enchauntes their eyes.
And charms their hearts, through it so sore attaynted.
That they both God and goodness do despise.
And with naught else, but sin are now acquainted.
O That she should, with such fair shape be painted,
To make commanders minds, to lust obey.
And sh^e her self, exposed for their pray.
For when they had full gordgd, their ravenous eyes,
On beauties dainties. (with a short repast)
They two amid'st, the people do arise,
To give their witness, against this constante chaste.
And as the law does will, their hands they plast,
Upon the head, of this pure innocent.
(Two woulves foul paws, a seely lamb to rent)
VVheare swearing by Gods name, a solemn oath,
To set aside, all partial love and hate,
And speak the truth, and nothing but the troth.
Perjured judges (foes to truths estate)
Unto the people, thus they intymate.
This noble dame, that showed a sant in sight,
Is fownd unconstant, fickle, lewd, and light,
For yesterday, in Ioachims orchard walkinge,
To recreate our spirits, with wholesome air,
This dame with her two damselles, thither stalkinge,
Thear did to her, an unknown youth repair.
Whose shape was comely, and his feature fair.
But er he came in sight, that none detect it.
Her madens she disnust least they suspect it.
Who being gone, and doors ybarred fast,
We (shrouded from their sight) with wakefull heed
Perceu'd the wicked, to their sin make have.
And creaping cloasly, with convenient speed,
We did surprise them, in the shamfull deed.
And him we caught, but yet away he fled.
For him from us, his strength delivered.
But her we held, and thear examined,
What youth he was, that did her body use.
And though confessing shame did die her red,
Yet to resolve our doupt she did refuse.
And with still silence did her self accuse*
Thus have we showed the fact, of this lewd wife.
For which misdeed, law biddes her lose her life.
She all this space, with patience on her knee,
With hands and eyes, vp-reared to the sky,
Commends her cause to God, which all does see.
While groaning spirit, in anguish plundgd does cry,
Help, help, me God, or else in shame I die.
Thou ru^'st right, then stretch thine arm so strong,
And overrule the rulers of this wrong.
While thus she does appeal unto the highest,
Her burning zeal does plead her innocence.
Her modest look, does say, false judge thou lie.
Her bashful silence, speaks in her defense
Her good report, reproves their ill pretense
The streams of tears, that on her cheeks at spilt,
By secreat verdict, quittes her from the guilt.
Yet much amazed, to here this devil speak,
(For well she wist no manlike mind he bore)
She shapes him answer, else her heart would break.
Although her torments, should be much the more.
She saw pale death attending at the door.
To take her thence, if that she held her peace.
And if she speak, she could not death increase.
Wherefore even as a man, that's senseless stricken,
When as he commes, unto himself again,
And feels his body, wounded, brus'd, or broken,
By swarting cause, cannot from wrath refrain,
But letteeh fly, his irefull blows amain.
Even so her conscience, netled by dispight.
Fights with fierce words, weak champions of her right.
O admyrable patience (says she)
And depth in^erachable of Gods intent.
Whether this hap for trial unto me,
Or for these helhownds, greater punnishment,
He only knows, which only has it sent.
Why does he not, with righteous hand repress,
This scum of sin and filth of filthiness?
Why did not womb, before these babes did sprawle,
Abhorse such seed, unworthy for the breasts.
Why entered life, within such bitter gaul?
Why harbor souls, within such filthy nestes?
Why did the air, give breathing to such beasts?
Why did the heav'nes, permit so foul an eye,
For to behold, the pure unspotted sky?
Why did not nature, mould deformed clay,
So foul misshapen minds, for to ingerth?
Why swell not floudes, and swiftly sweep away,
This seed of Cain, from the polluted earth?
Why did not hell, devour them in the birth?
Why do not angry elements, conspire,
To power upon them, hot consuming fire?
Why did the earth, eat Corach and his crewe,
And suffer these to trample on her browe?
Why did wild bears, those idol ympes subdue,
And do wild beasts, these beasts to live allow?
Why do not thunderboltes, enforce them bow?
What should I say? why does not God in ruth,
Command each power, to punnish their untruth?
But thou O Lord, art free from this offense,
When rav'ning woulves such seely lambs devower,
Thou righteous, do not punish innocence.
It Is not thy work, it is they abuse thy power,
Thy power is just, the imperfection our.
The air is good, that does the voice dispense,
Though faultly used, to give false evidence.
Then judges (most unjust) behold the skies,
Think thear's a God, those glorious globes that guides
Let not despair, your souls dear health despise,
But have regard, what law you go besides,
Perpend in deepest thought God not abides,
Such wrathful Cains, as vvast the guiltless blood,
Then have respect to me, for your own good.
Perchance you think, your sins so far exceed,
That God is never able, to forgive.
O fly those thonghtes, which swift destruction breed,
And that our God, is merciful believe.
Do not so willingly, to dark hell diue.
But these your heinous deeds, from heart repent,
And God will then, remit ^innes punishment.
Let not foul sin, be seeded in your age,
Let not your virtues die, before they spring.
Do not commit on me, so great outrage,
But let true justice rule, in every thing,
Consider what defame, such wrong will bring.
What do you think, God sees not what you do?
Yes sure he does, then have respect thereto.
Your conscience can control, your hearts of folly,
Your hearts can say, your tongues do falsehood tell,
Your tongues can tell, your action is unholy,
To wrong a seely woman, meaning well,
And hating this offense, as hateful hell.
Let pity raise remorse, and bannish wrong,
Be not to stout, because you are to strong.
But if your hearts blood-hardned still remain,
To shed her blood, that has no laws offended.
Then work your wills on me, (O sons of Came)
Would God in this good cause, my life were ended.
So that your lives, and manners were amended.
Which if you do not right, with speedy pace,
Mine honors wrong, your honors will deface.
A tree but young, one may both bow and bend;
When as the old, will hardly bend at all.
A whelpe with tricks, is taught to fetch and send,
When as old dogs, to it you hardly hall,
Who can reclaim, wild haggards to the call?
Even so these men that seas'ned are in sin,
To serve the Lord cannot tell how begin.
For when they heard, this oratresses tale,
With constant speech, and gesture so declaimed.
Fierce envies ^retting poison, made them pale,
Fearing to miss the mark, whereat they aimed,
They do infer it falsehood, merely feigned.
To frustrate justice, with a sly persuasion,
And from deserved death, to make evasion.
No credit give (say they) this cunning dame,
Which with lip-lavish words, would shift her death*
A man huge myriades of untruths, would frame.
If he by them, could buy life-feeding breath.
Is It not a judges word, that witnesses?
Is not our oath confirmed with our hand?
What two do witness, law does will to stand.
Which said; they do proceed to doom of death,
(By process had from the imperial state)
And one the doleful sentence, utters;
She should be led, forth of the city gate*
And there (as Moses does the law relate)
The multitude (a ^ickle wavering head)
Should press her down, with stones til she were dead.
Thus does the law, by witness wrested deal,
Thus is the virtuous dame condemned to die,
The judge reiectes, the husbands grave appeal,
He stops his ears, at parents sad reply.
He will not here, the infantes woeful cry.
(No doubt a pase that godly land does flourish,
Which does such lust-affected judges nourish.)
But loath to be interred in shames nest,
Stabbed with heart-wounding words, falls on her knee,
She wakes her thoughts, with thumping on her breast.
Flies to her last refuge, to set her free.
Entreates her God, with humble teeres that he.
Would not for sake, or leave her in distress,
But send his comfort, to her comfortless.
O righteous God, my judge (says she)
Which see the secret heart,
And do inflict, revenge on those,
That do thy laws subvert.
Repress the pride of tyrants stout,
Which do my life assail.
Here now and help, thy handmaide help,
For help of man does fail.
Do not expose me for their pray,
Because they do not right.
But hunt in heart to bring about,
That Is hateful in thy sight,
And of a mere malicious mind,
False witness here have brought.
And causlesse laid unto my chardge,
The things I never thought.
Thou see (my God) what they have done,
Thou see their envious heart.
Thou know they sought to lawless lust,
Thine hand-maide to convert.
Thou know, I dread not d^ring death,
No force his might a pin.
No, no, I do desire to die,
A better life to win.
I tender not fair beauties trash,
I tender my good name.
Least leesing life, I be by death,
Entombed in defame.
For this cause rise (O Lord) make have,
Repel my souls despite.
And show the nations, far and near,
How much thou tendrest right.
I know my sins are passing great,
Which acted are each hour.
Yet let my teeres thy mercy treat*
And shield me with thy power.
If no (defamed wretch) I die,
For keeping of thy law,
And causlesse thou shall seem (my God)
Thy comfort to withdraw.
Have then O Lord, make have I say,
Least guiltless blood be spilt.
Yet not my will be done in this,
But be it as thou vvilt.
When she her godly, oraysons had ended,
And that no means was left, to make delay.
The fawning officers, in court attended,
With profane hands, to hale her thence away,
And though she were as ready to obey,
Yet still this soar, does smart in guiltless mind,
That she should leave, an ill report behind.
When once the streets, did act this tragaedie,
Vaultes, and resounding Echoes from the stones,
Report the mothers teeres, her childrens cry,
Her parents plaintes, her husbands hideous moanes,
Her kinfolkes sighs, her friends heartbreaking groans,
The peoples pleading tongues, to God to free her,
While thick tumultuous troops, do run to see her.
Who passing forth, with passing seemly port,
(Her look abated, with her languishment.)
She does the gazing lookers on, exhort.
Good people pray for me, poor innocent,
That's gultlesse, faultlesse, free, from al intent,
Of this misdeede, for which weak wretch I die,
Whom still with deepest hate, I did defy.
While thus with plaintes, they do Gods aid implore,
The Lord did here, and help her woeful case.
For as when tyrant Pharaoh, scepter bore,
(A Pharaoh fierce, that knew not Ios^phes face)
And did the Israelites, oppress long space.
They being tired, with his tirannie,
In deepest grief, unto Gods favor fly.
Who when their moanes, did mount unto his sight,
D^d single forth, their speedy preservation.
From Pharaos train, a courtly trained wight,
Moses (an Hebrew borne) by education,
His daughters son (which bred his estimation)
So now; God seeing, Susans great distress,
Even in the nicke did speed her due redress.
For in the Chaldean court, did then attend,
A noble Jew (a youngling for his years)
The monarchs mynion; and his chiefest friend;
One of his sage and sharpest ^ighted Seeres,
In which high feate, he past his grave compeeres,
While Isrels God, did rear his fortunes hie,
To bear a stroke, in Asias majesty.
He Daniel cleaped, by his native name,
(The Chaldees called him, noble Balthazar)
Whom neither courtly glee, nor phrase of fame,
Could in fair Sions zeal, ought make or mar,
But would (to keep the captive Jews from iar)
In private sort, at times repair and pry,
Into his brethernes state, with wakefull, eye*
And standing now, in this tumultuous thronge,
He saw blind zeal, imployd in good pretense.
What time Gods truth, enform'd him of the wrong,
And raisd his sp'rite to speak in her defense,
Bad him be bold, to plead her innocence.
Step forth in place, do not thy thoughts conceal,
Cry out amain, from divellish doom appeal.
Then Daniell (as the Lord commanded him)
Cride in the streets; I from this blood am clean,
While gazing heerers, looked sour and grim*
To muse what these, unlooked for words should mean*
Foul toades (s^ith he) infect the crystal stream.
Because you would the stream far purer find,
You kill the fish, but leave the toades behind.
Are you such sots, O seed of Israel?
Are you so blind, you see not what you do?
Are you so deaf you hear not what they tell?
Know you not right, and what be longes thearto.
Survey you not, your steps before you go?
Why have you here, condemnd this dame to dies
And would not here her just appeal and cry?
O turn with speed, turn to the judgment seat.
And then behold, what God will thear relate.
Your seviors sins, have grown exceeding ^greate,
Repelled lust, ingendring with foul hate,
In them the bastard perjury, begat.
Bold perjury did breed false witness bearing.
False witness wrested iudgmente, by for-swearing.
At which his words, the people young and old
Do make a stand and backwardes thence retire.
Whear daunting sins, the seniours hearts make cold.
While danger wounds, the depth of their desire.
Yet past shams bowndes, their shamlesse thoughts aspire
And forth they pass, into the sessions hall,
And hide in crabbed brow, their conscience gaul.
The elders of this circumsized race,
(Which with repriued pris'nour turn a ge'n)
When every one, had taken his usual place,
They say unto this stately stripling then,
Use thou the room, of these malicious men.
Declare to us, Gods iudgmente and decree,
Since God has given, an elders spirit to thee.
Then Daniell took, the powerful place of life.
And thear to intimate, God will to all:
Where are (quoth he) the wrongers of this wife?
Put them a part, out of each others call.
And bring forth one (by one) in to the hall.
So you shall see, their tray trouse tongues reveal,
What wicked hearts, do cover and conceal.
The formal officers, perform his mind.
And brought forth one, to be examined.
Who lookd like murthrous marked Cain, unkind,
When brothers blood, he guiltlessely had shed.
His color showed, what harbord in his head.
His joints (as if unjointed) were at jar.
False judge (now prisoner) pleading at the bar.
And standing thus, before the balefull bench,
The beardlesse judge (to check him uncontrolled
That conscience as a cooling carde-might quench,
The heat of his bravado overbold)
Says, thou sin seasned wretch, that waxest old
In sin thy wicked life is come to light.
Whose falsehood harmed, many a harmless wight.
Thou have abused thy life, God lent to thee,
To mend thy life, and passed sins repent.
For nothing but oppressions, he could see.
Therefore he will, thie glory from thee rent.
Which have condemned, to death an innocent.
And let the guilty, go for gifts a way.
While lust and bribes, did blind thee day by day.
Since sworn thou have, (eye witness) thou did see,
This comely dame, with her companion sin:
Report the trurh; and name to us the tree,
That hid the fact, you did surprise them in.
Pause not but speak, (if words shall creadit win)
Be brief, let not oblivion bear the blot,
Things done so late, are not so soon forgot.
Then pawsing twixt despair, and tired hope,
(As one that had no constant yea, nor nay)
Would fame entreat, some longer time and scope,
But that he finds impatience in delay,
While to himself he faies; shall I obey?
Confess my fault wherein I have offended,
And pardon crave that all may be amended?
No, no my heart shall never stoop so low,
To bow to those, that used to bend to me*
I am not sure, what favor such will show,
Wherefore I will devise, some kind of tree,
Whose braunching bowghes, might shroud adultery.
Thus reasons he (a bird of Balams brood)
That will not be reclaimed, to any good.
At last the gapes for breath yet doubts to speak,
(Because his partners doubts he does not know)
Yet through his teeth, this tragique tale does break,
(While foaming fury makes him puff and blow)
Says he in Ioachims orchard, there does grow,
A Masticke tree, whose branches clowd the son,
In whose dark shade, the brothels act was done.
When Daniell heard, this vncomposed speech,
False are (quoth he) the words thou do report.
Thy lying lips, thee partial do appeach,
Gods mind to me reavealed; does exhort,
Thy sinful body, from thy soul to sort.
As one (deserving endless death to die)
That dare, against God, and conscience swear a lie.
When this was acted, him they lead away,
And bring his brother forth, in open place,
In whose fell heart (foul cabin) envy lay,
Her wild and staring look, sat in his face,
(A wrinkled brovv, a pale, and megre grace.
Did murder, mischief, malice fierce, resemble)
While conscience cold, does cause him quake and tremble.
To whom young Daniell says in zealous mood;
O seed of cursed Cham, ympe of dispight.
In vain thy vaunt, does boast of Judah blood,
When as thou art, lin life a Cananite,
True nobles should, in noble acts delight.
But thou bewitched with beauty, weart beguiled,
When thy misleading lust, thine heart defiled.
Thus have you past, your passed lives ill-spent,
Since first your wanton hearts, did train you in,
To draw the dames of Israel, to your bent.
Whom you with fear did force, and flattry win,
To join with you, in acting secreat sin.
But this chaste Jewish here, of Judah race,
Resisted has, your folly to your face.
Now since thy tongue, has testifide an act.
Which fame did not report but eye did vewe
And thou death worthy, deemed have the fact.
Dissemble not be still a witness true.
Tell us what tree, and in what place it grew,
Whose shamlesse shad, did shroud this shamfull sin.
Pause ere thou speak, yet speak, and soon begin.
He gravield now in grief, and grim despair
(Like bowged barge, that sinkes in swallowing sands)
Gapes ere he speaks, as if he wanted air.
Which often with cloased lips, he countermaundes.
At length (says he) in Ioachims orchard stands,
Near fowntain fair, a green th^ck braunching Holly,
Under whose shad, these wicked wrought their folly.
Quoth Daniell then, your tongues have you betrayed.
Your forged he, shall light upon your pates.
Your wicked hearts, your words have here bewrayd.
The sword of Justice (that injustice hates)
Is ready here, to slay you (sinful mates)
Provide therefore a treble death to die,
Of body, soul, and lasting infamy.
For as you boath, have caussesse sought to spill,
The guiltless blood, of this chaste Isralite,
By witness false, therefore does Moses will,
Your blood be shed; and we will do you right,
Since that your tongues, death-worthy you indite.
You shall be led, where she should leese her breath,
And there with stones, your selves be done to death.
Which doom did much delight, the standers by.
With great applause, the people do rejoice.
They clap their hands, and fling their cappes on hie.
The roof reflectes, the Echo of their voice.
While thankful hearts, their eyes to heaven vphoice.
And tongues pronownce, Our God be praised ever,
Which helps his and does for sake them never.
These judges thus disgraded, from their states.
The multitude with readiness, does run,
To do that doom, on these condemned mates,
They to acquitted Susan, would have done.
While zeal would act, what wrong had ill beegonne.
Thus careless commons, right or wrong support.
When they are swayd, as sovereignes do exhort.
For as in man, when vapoures vex the brains,
The giddie head, does feel a whirling fit.
So fickle heads, to feed superiors veins,
(When as affection, holds the seat of wit)
Sway to and fro, as ruling vapors flit.
If they say yea, an yea does answer stand,
If they say no, a no is pressed at hand.
And yet (sometimes though sotted with content
That every act does seem, to breed their case)
Some whiles (when wayward vapors gets a vent)
A toy (the least occasion does displease)
While thoughts do eb, and flow like surginge sear.
For who so deals, with multitudes he finds,
In many heads, a multitude of minds.
While hearts do harbor, heaps of homely toys,
And heads ar fraught, with Chaos of conceiptes,
There coms continual trade, of changing ^oyes.
Which barter novelties, for elder feats.
As changing time, does offer choice of cheates.
So those which yesterday, wrought wrong with might.
Are busied now, in acting of the right.
For now with have they hal them from the bar,
Whom late before, they heaved to the bentch.
No treaty could, a day their death defer.
While teeres the peoples fury, could not quentch.
Which drue them forth, unto the fatal trentch.
And (piniond) bownd them to the stubborn stake,
Where they their wel-deserved death should take.
Who living now forlorn (past liffes repair)
Have not the heart, Gods mercy to entreat.
But rather seek with Saul in deep despair,
With bluddie murthring hands, life to defeat.
While against the stake their hands they bawle and beat.
And mind in vain, their dream their fall their hight.
Who wanted grace, to take Gods warning ^ight.
The pitying people pray, God turn their hearts.
But when they see, repentance place had none,
To yield those reprobates, their due deserts,
The happiest man, does hurl the heviest stone.
To make them give, the last life-yeelding groan.
Which done they part and leave the ded their room.
And lawd the lord, and Dan^l for his doom.
Whom God had made, selected instrument,
To overthrow these wicked and unjust.
And save the blood, of this chaste innocent.
That with stout Constancy resisted lust,
And did not in distress, de frawd her trust.
But saw her teeres, and heard her plainting voice.
Which made the hearts of thowsandes to rejoice.
Amongst the rest (whose hearts sweet comfort cheeres)
He^chia happy man, and his compeere,
(which erst did weep for woe) shed joyful teeres.
When Ioachims joy, had past this plunging feere.
And kinsfolks clowded e^e, shone bright and clear.
All with sweet noates consent, in Susa^s name,
Praise God, that had preserved her from defame.
But chiefly she (like lark on mounting wings)
While inward zeal* breaks out in open sight.
Tryumphing in her tunes, most sweetly singes,
The praise of God, his mercy, and his might,
That did relive her wretch and wronged wight.
And justly judge her foes, the death to die.
That would en^ombe her fame, in infamy
Yea while her silent heart, does thanks record*
Her restless notes, do reach beyond the sky.
Whose endless joy, was in her gracious Lord.
To him in hymns, and tuned psalmodie.
(Which did transmute, her mones to melody)
she gives the glory of her victories,
As David when he foyld his enemies.
The mighty Lord (says she)
Is my defense and might.
My king my guide, my God;
My champion, for to fight.
The combat of my truth and conscience trial.
He is my Anchor-hold,
My refuge, rest, and port.
My horn of saving health,
and eke my strongest fort.
Against whose command, there stands no denial.
When overflowing floodes,
Of raging fierce despite.
And great command, of Lords
And men of power and might,
With dreadful threats of death, did make me quiver.
I did implore his aid,
In deepenesse of distress.
Who heard my ^ust complaint,
And wrought my due redress.
He sent me aid, and did my soul deliver.
On him therefore I will,
In danger cry and call.
Who can both here and help,
(He heeres and helps all)
He (none but he) is worthy to be praised.
Deaths swallowing sorrows hemmed,
Me round on every side.
With renting pains of hell,
In danger to have did.
But he my life, from ravening gra^e has raised*
He from my strongest foes,
Has set me captive free.
Because he had a love,
And favor unto me.
Who^ cunningly they sought to have prevented.
But while he held me up,
I could not swaie nor swerve.
They sought in vain to spill,
The thing he did preserve.
And so to late (their labor lost) repented.
By him I made escape,
From hands of Tyrants stout.
His power did put them down,
And help his hand-maide out.
That power also, will strongly keep them under.
He trampleth with his feet,
Bold traitors that rebel.
He makes their hurtful tongues,
Their own destruction tell.
Thus for his saints, he acts works of wonder.
Whose works are all divine,
Whose mercies manifold.
His ways past finding out,
his word as finest gold.
His judgment just, his providence unspotted.
O let thine arm O Lord,
My feeble hand sustain.
O let thy holy sp'rite,
Within my heart remain,
O let thy love be still to me allotted.
I look with wakefull eles,
Unto thine holy laws.
Thy statutes are my staff,
And stay in every cause.
To do thy will, my will I find affected.
That which I see is ill,
And hateful in thy sight,
That do I seek to shun,
And fly with maine and might,
Least that my soul, by sin should be infected.
Thou art a living God,
O blessed be thou my king.
Which have thy servant freed,
From tempting Satan's sting.
And reard my fame on high (by wicked wro^ged)
And have confounded them*
That sought my greatest ill,
By working of my heart,
Unto a wicked will.
To act such lewd designs, as lust had longed.
They fought to end my life,
And gave me doom to die.
Because my holy faith,
I would not falsify.
Pretending right; they work what wrong them listed.
They used power to put,
Integrity to shame.
And meant an innocent,
To bury in defame.
Had thou not (Lord) their judgment false resisted.
Thus have thou bin (my God)
Most merciful to me.
Not won by my desert,
But of thy mercy free.
My works (I know) deserve to be rejected,
But thy kind promise made,
To help the godly hearts,
Does bind thee more then all,
Our deeds or good deserts,
To keep, protect, and save, thy saints elected.
Therefore I will sown forth,
Thy praise to every ear.
And show thine endless power,
To nations far and near,
To Satan's and his kingdoms, great confusion.
I have bin, am, and will
Remain thine handmaide still.
Mine heart, my thoughts, mine eyes*
Shall wait upon thy will.
This is my vow, and settled resolution.
Thus did she spend, her following time of life,
In heavens contemplation, and delight.
And lived long, a ioious happy wife,
Of passing carriage, and a worthy wight,
A foe to frawd, and fastest friend to right.
Who living in the world, no worldling was,
But pressed to bring a world of good to pass.
And as a bird, escaped from the ginne,
Thinks every bended twigge, to be a trappe;
So she, that dangerously, had snared bin,
(With true remembrance of her former hap)
Surve^es her steps, to shun each afterclap.
And fears to give a fawning eye good grace,
In old, or young, in noble, or in base.
At length when age, had plotted life's decay;
And sickness wrought, in weakness more and more.
And that she thought, death had no long delay.
She called her children, taught in godly lore,
And did bestow these precepts kept in store.
Who come in place (with dutious loving hearts)
She thus to them, her careful mind impartes.
Dear children cease, with sad lamenting grief,
And malancholicke moanes, to wail my state.
Your sobbing hearts do yield me no relief,
But vexing torments in my heart innate.
Leave then, for plaintes and tears are not in date.
No, no, if they could life in body hold;
VVeaye would weep, we would buy tears for gold.
But vain it is to kick against a prick*
And sin to take Gods scourge impatiently.
My debt to death, to pay I must not stick,
For why, you know that all are borne to die,
Then must I yield, for there is no remedy;
And pay my due that I to nature owe,
For time requires, and God will have it so.
The strongest Lion, stoopes to conquering death,
The aged oak, at length does change his hue.
In time the long lived Phoenix, leeseth breath,
Thrice aged Enoch, yeeldes to natures due.
Since then it is so, and what I say is true.
And time does try that all things must decaie,
Then sure I know, I have not long to stay.
Therefore mark well, the counsel that I give,
Revolue it in your minds (my children dear)
For it shall most prevail (if that you live)
When friends and worldly goods you have not here,
First worship God, and to his laws give ear.
Set him your load-starre, and your lamp of light,
His laws the line to lead your lives aright.
Use diligence, in doing of your duties,
To those superiors (rulers over you)
Do good to all, bend thereto all your studies.
Sing not the Sirens song, that proves untrue,
Though trothlesse Absalon, be fair in view,
With Jonathan, do faithful still remain,
Shun Ismaels bloody tears, and subtle brain.
Play not the cowards in your countries good,
Spend in her canse, your dearest breath and wealth.
And though prosperity has you withstood,
And frowning world denies gal-sugred pelf,
Be not dismaide, esteem your heav'nlie health.
For that shall yield you comfort in distress,
When world and friends, have left you comfortless.
Fly still aspiring minds, yet seek renown,
VVin it by virtue, and by manly might.
Frank not rebellious flesh, but keep it down.
Like not those painted dames that do delight,
Lyllies are foul in smell, though fair in sight.
And though they tice with baits, with teeres, with moanes,
Yet mind, that painted tombs, have rotten bones.
My sons if you must live, in wedlock bands,
Love for virtue, and like the modest chaste.
Set neither fading beauty, goods nor lands,
Before that hue, that in the heart is plast.
Be never prodigal, your goods to wast..
Learn with the busy ant, the way to live,
Spare not to much, but do by sparing thrive.
If you with childrens store, be blessed of God,
His richest gifts account that pretty crew.
Enstruct and bring them up, to fear the rod,
With those precepts your parents taught to you,
Though all things want, let them not want this due.
For sure (my sons) it is not said for naught,
Better unborn, then borne to live untaught.
Esteem the wavering world as it is,
Where swiftest time, brings all things to decay.
Esteem your selves, here void of io^es and bliss,
And think each morrow, is your ending day,
Desire of God on earth not long to stay.
Where naught but sin, and grief does reign (be bold)
And naught is got, but sin in waxing old.
The little babe once coming to the birth,
Is borne as bare, and naked as my nail.
The puling wretch his woeful state on earth,
With tongue, and teeres, new born does weep and wail.
To see his soul shut up, in sinful gaile.
And swadled lims, fast fettred round about.
Like captive wreth, that no way finde^th out.
His childish actions all, imperfect are,
To sit, to eat, to speak, to stand, to go,
The child is taught and nursed up with care,
And pampred eke with pain, and wakefull woe,
He proves the pikes, of many a pangue also.
With furious foes, he has continual war,
His flesh this world and raging fiend they are.
His life is like, the raging seas recoile,
His choysest things, are in event but vain,
His wealth is want, his rest is restless toil,
His health mishap, and all his pleasures pain,
His chief companions linked in one chain.
Are hopeless hope, deep danger, care and fear,
While dying life, does daily dread the bear.
He often times (beset with deep distress)
Does call for death, before his dying day.
And dead man like, by sleeping in excess,
Does spend the half, of precious time away,
The rest misspent in idleness or play.
Or spent to serve our own occasions so,
As least we care, whear God have part or not
Thus man is made, the pray and spoil of time*
A tipe of mis'rie and mishap (God woat)
A sink of sinfull-sin, an heap of crime.
A ship that still on billowing waves does flote
When age comes on, then all his senses dote.
He waxes deaf, his eyes with dazing dim.
His teeth currupt, he has no lively limme.
Can such a dying man, be said to live?
What kind of life? what living call you this?
No life but death, a shade that life does give.
For perfect life, by death obtained is.
Why then do mortal worldlinges go amiss?
Why love they life why do they death detest?
Which sets them free from ill, and brings rest:
Hence learn (poor hearts) your life uncertain is.
Still heaps of harms, are hovering on your head.
Keep these my words, and fear to do amiss.
More would I say, but life is partly fled.
Whom death (with seely triumph) does down tred;
Fare well (sweet joys) sometimes my hearts delight
The grownd my corpse, to God I yield my spirit
Epilogus.
Thus here you see, how God preserves his*
And those that do them iniurize, confowndeth.
Hence may you learn, what it is to live amiss.
What falls to him, that with proud sin abowndeth.
That he which steadfast hope, in Gods help growndeth
Against him not hell, nor hell hounds shall preveile.
For God will help, when help of man does fail,
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
In foll, 4. Page. 1. make content malecontent, 5. 1. surely surly, 15, 1.
maiden birth, m^ide^ earth, 15, 2. married wise, married wife. 18, 1. mu, murne,
23, 1. faice fair, 23, 2. thus this, 30, 2. that those: thus etc. 37, 1.
repeat repleate, 40, 2. this these, 42, 2. smallow s^^llow, 46, 1* ^heethey.


