A Defiance to Fortune. Proclaimed by Andrugio, noble Duke of SAXONY, declaring
his miseries, and continually crossed with unconstant Fortune, the banishment
of himself, his wife and children.

Whereunto is adjoined the honorable Wars of Galastino, Duke of Millaine in
revenge of his wrongs upon the traiterous Saxons. Wherein is noted a myrrour of
noble patitience, a most rare example of modest chastity, and the perfect
pattern of true friendship. Very delectable and full of variety.

Written by H. R.

Printed at London for John Proctor. 1590.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL WILLIAM. Borough, Esquire, comptroller of her Majesty's
royal Navy. H. R. wishes long and happy life, with fortunate success in all
your attemptes, and after death the joys everlasting.
ALEXANDER (Right Worshipful) amongst men greatest on the earth, ceasing his
hard toil from pursuit of his enemies, he held no recreation in such account,
as reading of histories, especially such as treated of the honors gained by
noble warriors long before his time entombed in the intralles of the earth:
wherein his delight was as much as in maniging his steed, or shiuering his
lance in the midst of his foes.

SCIPIO that noble Roman which subdued many nations had no small delight in
the like exercise: noting by reading the euentes of war, and pleasant baits of
fortune, how Warriors gained honor: and then again how they were subdued: the
mighty kings by pesantes and men of base account displaced, and the ignoble
exalted, changing all estates at her pleasure. This Fortune (of the Poets
fained a Goddess) having the reign of all estates in her hand, disposes like
a blind guide, at her will, setting up and pulling down, whom she list to
overthrow or advance.

An example of which (right Worcester.) I present to you in this history, wherein
you shall see her mutabilitie, showing continually her froward and unconstant
mind, in crossing that noble and unhappy prince Andrugio, sometime Duke of
Saxony, whose miseries exceeded all that ever I read or heard of: from the
sixteenth year of his age never inioieng long time of content according to his
estate, but many days spent he in extreme misery, as the history of his
life shall manifest, to which I leave you: humbly beseeching your Worship to
shield it under your protection, and when time shall permit you leisure,
vouchsafe the reading of it, in which I doubt not (albeit the style be rude)
but that you shall find something to delight you.

And if it so happen, I have my wish, and the long desire I have had to make my
zeal known unto your worship, in some sort is satisfied.

Your Worship to commannd

The Miseries of ANDRVGIO, Duke of Saxony.
SIENA, famous throughout the world for beautiful situation, civil
government, good education, and prositing of her students, was so renowned,
that none of any reputation living within the dominions of the Emperor, but
had an especial desire to have their sons trained in that university,
especially the Dukes, princes and Nobles. Amongst many gallant youths, to
whose ears fame had bruited this peerless report of so goodly a City with
the virtues therein abounding, Andrugio some and heir apparent to the noble
Duke of Saxony, a toward Gentleman, prone to all virtuous exercises, desirous
to attain the knowledge of al arts, hearing the fame of Siena, desirous also
to see the place, and to spend his time in study, as also to acquaint himself
with other princes which came from all parts to this place to see their
behavior, and know the manners of their country: pricked with a continual
desire to this attempt, makes humble suite unto the Duke his father for the
furthering of this intent, which so long he prosecuteth in such earnest manner,
that after many denials of the aged Duke, as a loving father, whose tender
care might not endure the absence of his dear and only son, having a
fatherly regard unto him, yea, and more than ordinary affection of fathers
unto their children wearied also with the importance of his suites, which day
and night he continually solicited, both by himself an^ his friends, at
length grants his good will (as what is it that parents will not grant for
their childrens benefit?) yet to be advised better before he suffer him to
depart, sommoneth all his Nobles and Estates of the country, beseeching their
counsels touching the request of his some: Unto whom he recounteth the effect
of the Princes carnest suite.

These Nobles hearing so honorable a motion of the young Lord, well noting his
delight in study at home, being of years so tender, not yet attaining to the
full term of sixteen years, were wonderfully amazed to hear so e^nest a suit
from so childish a mouth. wherefore, as desirous to further his suite, having
considered what profit it would be unto them, and their posterity in time to
come, to have a wise, learned, and well governed prince, with other virtues
which attend the learned, which bring knowledge of the Gods, and indue the
followers with civil policy, and good government, living in great hope he
would prove to be such a one as he seemed: they give their consent for his
departure, and became humble suitors also for ye obtaining ye same at the Dukes
hands: at whose request he is content it should be so giving his Nobles thanks
for their favors toward his son, commanded that presently he be furnished
with all things befitting his estate, which with all speed was performed. The
Duke taking all his care forhonest, wise and well governed Tutors for him,
which might by their discreet and sage caunsel, train him in such wise, that
after the Castostrisie of his life, he might prove (as his hope was)
honorable, learned, and wise, that he night be worthy to gou^rne so noble a
country, and they have joy of so young a Prince, yielding him such duty as
becomes subjects to their sovereign, which he might requite with a tender
love of a prince, and a careful mi^d of his peoples good.

The have that was made in prou^ding of all things for the princes iourny,
according to his desire, is accomplished, wherefore (accompanied with many young
Noblemen of his country, and Gentlemen sent by their Parents for the Princes
company, Coming before the Duke, as desirous to loose as little time as might
be) they humbly take their leaves to depart. At which, many a tear both of
the Duke and his Nobles was shead, for whom his father endured many sorrowful
days through his absence: yet could he not deny his request, nor seek to
cross his desires, which we^e honorable, and beseeming the son of so noble and
famous a father.

Lord ANDRVGIO his departure from the Court with his aduentu^^s.
THe noble mind of this young prince, now in the flourishing tune of his age,
began to show it self in such sort, as he might well be known to descend of
so honorable Parentage as the Duke of Saxony: for, as the sonne-beames cannot
be hid, so did virtue appear in him, pricking a forwardness to his desires,
to see the manners and government of other countries: But too soon (alas) has
this natural Father yielded to the desire of so green a head, whose years
do scarsly require the rain to be left in his own hand, as you shall hear.

Fortune, mutable and unconstant dame, desirous to show what she could do,
having brought this yoongling to the top of his desires, began now to check
him with such a bit, as might well serve a colte of elder year^s, for being
void of all doubts of any mischaunce to betide him or his companions, such
miseries was he oppressed with, as are most lamentable to be remembered.

For, understand after his departure from the Court of his Father, traueiling
by guides (as the manner of the country is) through uncouth places, enuyroned with
wooddes, and hanted with multitudes of wild beasts, a noble man of Italy,
banished from his country for a most heinous treason conspired against the
prince of the land, ranged continually those desartes, where he with his
companions became most cruel manslears, and spoylers of as many as fell into
their hands, without fear of God, or respect of christianity. Never was there
any tyrant of what name or condition soever, so cruel as this mischievous
Gonsala Ieriomanim, for so was he called.

Earnest travel within small time has brought this youth Andrugio with his
company within the precinct of this cursed murderer, where he kept his
residence, lodged in caves and holds of their own framing. Of whose scouts
Andrugio was no sooner espied, but with all possible speed they provide to meet
them, armed in all parts, as if they should encounter their professed enemies
in the field.

Andrugio void of all fear, took great pleasure in this journey, passing in
pleasant discourses the time to beguile their travel: But (alas) in midst of
these pleasures, befell them most unhappy fortune, even as the silly lambs,
skipping by the side of their tender damme, is by the ravening Woolfe bereaved
of life. So fares it with Andrugio, who no sooner came to the place where these
reprobats lay in ambush, attending their coming. But Gonsala stern and fierce
of courage with his followers resolved to be their deaths, furiously assailed
them, and in small time, taking them at advantage, overcame them, leaving not
one to breath, as they supposed, bathing their murdering blades in the blood of
these Gentiles: taking spoil of their treasure and other provision, they leave
their bodies covered with moss and loose leaves, speeding them to their places
of refuge, reioicing with the spoil of those poor innocents, whom m^st
traitorously they had slain.

Now behold the unspeakable goodness of God unto this Lord Andrugio, whose
wounds being not so deep as the rest of his friends, after a little trance
began to recover, when breathing with a piteous groan, he striued to recover
his feet to stand: but the blood being cold about his wounds caused such a
^^ifnesse, that impossible it was for him to move, with taking cold after his
long bleeding: yet by the permission of the highest, unto whose holy will al
creatur^s bend, in short time he recovered reasonable memory: when viewing
round about him the slain carcasses of his followers and friends, with piteous
schriches and lamentable plaints complameth his misfortune on this wise.

Andrugio, what cruel stars guided thy byrthday? or what cursed hag
bewitched thee to motion a suit unto thy noble father, so greatly displeasing
the Gods, who noting thy follies, have appointed these unmerciful murderers to
danger thine own life, and bereave thee of thy friends, appointed by thy
careful father for a comfort unto thee? O that the heavens had never
condescended unto my nativity, or that in my cradle I had (like Hercules) been
assailed by some poisoned scrpents, which might have abridged my life! But like
Mydas wish I for that that displeases the Gods. Andrugio, unhappy Andrugio,
and most unfortunate in being son unto so noble a Duke, whose life must end
in these accursed desartes, and no man to make report unto thy aged father,
what is become of thee or thy companions, whose deaths by following thee in
thy folly, is thus befallen them: cursed therefore Andrugio, whose desires
have robbed so noble gentlemen of their sons, gallant ladies and fair
gentlewomen of their loves, and thy renowned father of an heir to succeed him
in his Dukedom. O heavens, might your fury with my life have been appeased,
how happy had I been! that the wrath of him whom I have provoked to ire, might
have fallen upon mine own head: then noble friends, should you have enioied
life to have reported my tragedy, which now are left void of all comfort to be
a pray to the ravening beasts of this Desert, and to the fowls of the air.
Yet kind Gods, whose pitiful condition is not to punish at full, the witkednes
of your creatures: Hear with the ears of mercy my last petition, and send
thy messenger Ziperus to blow into the ears of our comfootlesse Parents and
friends, our untimely tragedies, that they knowing the place where our mangled
bodies lie, may entomb us with our ancestors, and revenge our deaths on those
most cursed homicides, whose bloody hands have been our confusions.

Scarsly could he finish his sorrowful speech, when being faint with the
loss of blood issuing from his wounds, and ouercharged with sorrow for his
friends lieng slain by him, he gave so heavy a sigh as might have moved a
heart of flint to pity his estate.

In this extremity, behold, a comfort: for lo, a poor laboring man, servant
unto a miller, dwelling two miles distant from the place where he received his
wounds, searching for the straied beasts of his said master Miller, happened
by great chance to ouerheare this woeful complaint: which ended, standing half
amassed to hear so sweet a voice, casting many ways in his simple mind the
dangers, and subtilties of spoiling miscreants, supposed verily that it had
bin a devise of some villain, lurking there abouts of purpose to betray
traueilers, and to bring them within their compass to rob them. Thus many
ways misdoubting the worst, not yet resolved whether to depart, or to see what
he was that made such a piteous moan: at length taking unto him the heart of
Sampson, he boldly stepped over the hedge into the grove whereas this wounded
Andrugio lay.

No sooner was he entered this grove, but viewing round the place, like a good
Pilate for fear of rocks, glancing his eyes eftsoons to the ground, then else
where, he chanced to epsy great store of blood, which when he had with no
small admiration beheld, putting on his holyday countenance, like an hardy
squire, he marched on, following the tracke of the blood, until he came unto
that place whereas all those dead carcasses lay, when he had recovered the
sight of these wounded men, his heart trembled with grief, and was worse moved
at the discovering of them then ever in his life before, standing thus in his
dumpes, devising whether it were best to touch them or no: casting his eyes
steadfastly on them, suruaieng their grievous wounds. Andrugio faint and full
of pain with the extreamitie of his wounds, breathed softly: which being
noted of this swain, drew near unto him, layeng tenderly his hand on the
stomach of Andrugio felt a panting short wind withn him, whereat the man being
somewhat joyful, rubbed his temples, so by little and little recovered him.

When this kind-hearted swain had by his diligence recovered Andrugio, and
that perfectness of memory was again restored him, as a wight grieved at the
mischances he saw was happened, he comfort him in this wise.

Gentleman (quoth he) for so your countenance shows me, what evil fortune
has brought you unto this pitiful plight? or by whose hands have you with
these your company been so cruelly mangled? tell me I beseech you, that
revenging your injuries, I may pursue with diligence those bloodthirsty
billaines, and by their deaths make satisfaction to the Gods, and those
innocents souls that they have murdered.

Andrugio with ghastly countenance looking earnestly in the face of this
comforter, after he had a while attentiuelye hearkened unto his speeches, thus
answered.

Whosoever thou be (gentle friend) that the Gods have thus appointed for my help
in this extremity: I yield thanks according to thy courteous deserts: but
could thou show as much grace to these my distressed friends here lien, how
great cause I should have to glorify the Gods, and honor thee, my tongue
cannot express, wretched and unfortunate that I am: yet gentle friend, in whom
such courtesy remains, do me favor so much, as to tell me how thou earnest
to this place, and thy dwelling: and thou that art a man christian and kind, as
thy pains on me bestowed bear witness, vouchsafe, in such sort as thou can,
to comfort these my friends, and see if it has so pleased the Gods to give
any one of them leave to escape the heavy vengeance of those accursed slaves
that have robbed us of our substance, and murdered our bodies: and the rest
that have yielded their lives to the fury of those tyrants blades, help me
to entombe them according to their callinges, who were all Gentlemen of
account, which is the greatest honor I can do them: for the which as they
died Innocents, their souls shall yield thee thanks before the throne of the
greatest god where we shall all meet.

Sir (quoth the swain) I see your wan looks betoken faintness, by occasion
of your great loss of blood: wherefore if you will hearken unto the counsel of
so simple a creature as my self, you shall cease this parlie until you shall
better endure it, and have recovered more strength. Two miles at least have I
to my masters home, which is a silly cottage, not worthy to entertame such a
one as you seem to be: yet as it is, your welcome shall be as to your own: his
only victuals is goats milk, a white cake, oil, and honny, which command at
your will. If these may in extremity pleasure you, arise and rest you on my
shoulders, for I see you are feeble, until I have brought you where you may
refresh you. As for your friends, whom you so much bewail, suffer them to rest
in peace, for your wailings may not be any way auaylable unto them, and to
morrow my master, with such help as we can provide, shall fulfill your request,
and bury them, though not as you would wish, yet as we may, in the better sort.

Andrugio wounded and faint, hearkening to his words yt he spoke of good will,
began to rouse himself: but so weak was he, that alone without help might not
stir: wherefore the swain taking him in his arms, set him alone on his
feet. But in vain it was, for stand he could not: which seeing, the poor
swain showing a good inclination, as one beseeming some better education then
he proffered, bound first his wounds, so yt through straining they might not
bleed: when taking his body as gently as he might on his neche, countaieth
him as speedille as was possible to the Millers house, where as he above with
great trouble. At last they have attained this mill, long (God knows) of them
desired before they came thither: whether they being come, Druha (for so was
the swain called) recounteth unto the Miller and his wife the perplered estate
of this Gentleman Andrugio, with the loss of his friendly companions, bereaved
of life by the murderous hands of ma^^ villains, all strange and unknown
unto them.

The pitiful grandam, being of a right womanith nature, could not refr^in^ she
ading of tears to hear this s^^rowful process: yet at last, to show how
welcome the distressed noble was, albeit a mere stranger unto them, she bathed
his wounds, and applied thereunto such huswifely salues as she thought might
pro^^te best, in restoring his health. This done, she brought him such viandes
as she had ready prepared, commanding her daughter to provide some comfortable
brothes for him, which was speedily performed. When he had refreshed his
wearied weak carcass, the good old wife began for his better comfort these
speeches.

Sir (quoth she) though the Gods have given you over into the hands of those
miscreants, that have sought your life, yet be not dismayed, thank their
Deities, that in the sharpness of their fury, have preserved you from death,
no doubt for some better fortune, and to revenge the slaughter of your friends
on those villains: for which their gratiousnes give them thanks, and feate
not your health. In the mean time, if ^ou think good to accept such homely
entertainment as I can give you, welcome shall be your best cheer, and what
else you want command at your pleasure: my dearest and only daughter Susania
shall attend you until your strength be recovered.

Thanks (quoth Andrugio) to the heavenly powers first, for providing me this
good: and next to thee (my friendlee Hostess) for thy favor bestowed on me,
which might perish without comfort: but what friendship thou shall impart unto
me in this distress, if the pleasure of the divine Deity be to restore me
again, thy courtesy shall be recompensed, and this kindness to thee and thine
never be forgotten.

Thus leave we Andrugio a while at his rest, attended on with Sufania, courteous
and frie^dly unto her charge, delivered by her ancient mother: the old wife
taking like care for the burial of the dead bodies, which in the best sort was
shortly accomplished.

Susania ye good wench, atte^ding diligently on her charge, has in short time
by the care she had of him, recovered his strength, that forsaking his bed, he
walked often about his chamber, not daring yet to adventure into the air.
Andrugio all this time of sickness noted the courteous demeanor of his
attendant: and often times, as strength increased in him, would take great
pleasure to try her wit by pleasant parlie, sometime discoursing of one thing,
and so enterchangeablie of many. But so long the fly plaieth with the flame,
that at length she is constrained to die through her folly: so fares it now
with Andrugio, whose fine head had so long propounded quick questions, and was
so sharply answer to of Susania, that his fancy began to settle on the maiden
in such sort, that it grew from small kindeled coals, to great flames:
insomuch that nothing was pleasing unto him, if Susania had not been at the
doing thereof: yea, such in short time became his affections, that never was
his wounds so grievous as she absence of Susania: evermore recountring in his
mind her beauty, courtesy, and qualities which did in all points so far
pass the vulgar sort, as the white snow does exceed in beauty the black
pitch. These graces so abounding in Susania, have so besotted Andrugio his
senses that he is driven now to non plus, amazed which virtue to commend as
principal in her. As these cogitations beginning in him, so the fervent heat
of loves passion increases in such sort, as there is no other pleasure to be
had of him but only in commending the person, wit, and condition of Susania:
yea, now is his only study how to please her, and his greatest care to make
his love known unto her. Thus as a man of reason clean bereft, he calls to
mind his honorable descent: and then again the base lineage of Susania, being
no better by birth then the child of a simple Miller, in whose company he was
at that season recident which began to make him regard his nobility and waieng
the honorable house of Saxony. To take advise how by joining in marriage with a
person so inferior to his estate, might dishonor his progeny, and enbase his
posteriue. But Love who is now great master of his affections, seeing himself
by reasons almost expulsed, begad again to assault him in such wise, as
Susania, no none but Susania, fair and most brave Susania, and the chief of
human creatures, his only attendant Susania.

In this passion, behow, his beloved having care of her charge, entered the
chamber with some dainty provided of purpose for Andrugio: whom he no sooner
beheld, but his spirits with joy died within him. whose strange passion
grieved Susania at the heart to see him, whom with such care she had nourished,
when all dangers of his wounds were passed, to be in so faint a case: his
color which eftsoons was like the sanguin rose, is now pale and wan as the
lilly: his breathing tronke ready to deliver his last gasp: Susania careful
and diligent, noting the strangeness of the same, began greatly to marvel
thereat, suspecting her se^fe, to be the cause of that grief: like a kind
physician carfull of her patient, rubbes his temples, and with her tender hand
stroked his cheeks softly, sprinkling on them sweet water of roses distilled,
and often with her tender lips would lend him many a sweet kiss, bedewing his
honny mouth with her milke-warme tears, in this sort bewailing the distressed
estate of Andrugio.

Ye heavenly Gods, by whose divine powers all creatures breath life, what heavy
sins has your handmaide committed against your Deities, that for my sake you
show vengeance upon this weak creature, whom (as ye know) I have with all
diligence to my uttermost power relieved, since his coming to this homely
cottage of my poor Father, in who^ I hoped to have bin happy by my careful
pains for his relief, employed by your assistants for the recovery of his
former health, in curing those grievous wounds where with his weak body was
afflicted. If your cruelty be such in requital of my charitable mind, or that
your vengeance has not bin sufficiently showed to my charge: yet vouchsafe of
your Godheads, in whom it consists to pardon and punish, to take your heavy
hands from this courteous Gentleman, whom you have punished, and let him live
to be the comfort of many, which may be comfortless, and such your fury pour
upon me, as may free this Gentleman from all displeasure whatsoever.

Andrugio coming to himseife, and hearing a sound of lamentation, looking up,
saw before him ye object of his life, and noting her blubbered eyes, which
showed her heaviness, and her cheeks besprent with tears, moved to pity her
extremity, not knowing it was for his sake, comforted her in this sort.

Susania the careful minister, next under the Gods, of my life, whose pains
have restored my wounded body, whose travails I connot requite, thanks is the
only recompense I can make thee yet, albeit my desire is to perform much
more: but with that sacrifice of hearty thanks be the Gods pleased. Then
sweet Susania, no less in comfort to thy poor charge, then the Gods, ^ccept
thou the same at his hands that greueth, yea whose soul lamenteth to behold
thy waylings, of which I know not the cause: but if there remain in thee that
courtesy, as is commonly found in your sex, participate with me of grief, to
the end I may to my power requite thee with comfort: for assure thee Susania,
there is none under the globe of the celestial firmament, whom my heart has
such desire to honor as thy self. Wherefore my dearest sustainer, if thou have
any affiance in thy charge, speak boldly as to thy self, imagining thou do
commit the secrets of thy sweet breast too thine own heart.

The old Beldame having some want of her daughter, to be employed in her
business, enterrupting their speech by calling her with her shril voice, caused
them to leave their parley for a time.

Susania being gone (as duty commanded) Andrugio began within himself to
call to mind the courtesy, wisdom, and good government of his sweet attendant,
entering so far into the laborinth of love, as he is likely to loose himself,
where reason could not suppress will, nor wisdom control affection: so much
has this lunatike fit distempered his brains, which made him enter into
these terms.

Why Andrugio, what fancy has bewitched thee? art thou abnost grown to man's
estate, and art thou so little ma^ster of thy self? If thou do but gaze on a
picture, must thou like Pigmalion be in love with it? Can thou not taste wine
except thou be drunk with it? May thou not warm thee without burning? Ah
fondling as thou art, know this, Fire is to be felt, not handled: the color
Argicke, poison by nature, may be carried in the hand, but eaten it is death:
and beauty first ordained of the Gods to feed man's eye, not to corosiue, the
heart, Do not then as the simple fish, swallow the bait yt will breed thy
destruction: wade not too deep, use beauty, but honor it not, use it as a
game for thy pastime, yet swallow it not. But fond fool, know thou not that
Love is termed of the wise a God, then by reason and duty ought to be obeyed:
Love has commanded the mighty, yea the Gods themselves. Jupiter disdaining
Cupids power, resisted him, yet went by the worst, and yielded at length to his
power. Juno strave with Venus, yet was vanquished. Then strive thou not with a
sore so dangerous, least thou offend the Gods, and endanger thy self.

Can beauty be resisted which made the Gods to bow? Cupid himself loved
Phiches, and think thou to be of greater force? But what fondnes is this in
thee Andrugio, to dandle thy self in such follies? Thou did at thy coming
from thy father pretend study in the famous city of Siena, and do thou now
forget that the benefit is great which learning brings? Educacion is more
meet for thee than love? Foolish boy, how can the states of thy country
think thee sufficient to govern them, that can not rule thy self? Yt will
be to much for thee to take so great a charge, which can not master thy
affect^ons. Yet Andrugio, if thou will needs love, use it as men use the
seeing of Comedies on a stage for recreation, where when thou art weary thou
may depart at thy pleasure. Then leave to love, but in this sort subdue
thine affections: be master of thy mind, so may thou laugh at Cupid and his
fondlings, and say, thou wast in love, what then?

He had scarsly finished these words with a sorrowful sigh, when Fortune that
blind Goddess, and his sworn enemy has brought Elanicus a young Noble of
Saxony, to the house of the Mister, bound by the command of the Duke to the
city of Siena to seek Andrugio, of whom there came no news at all to the
court of his Father since his departure. This Elanicus posting through the
desartes, was warned by a swain who^ he met, to shun the way wherein he rode,
for that night approached, recountring unto the^ a most cruel murder committed
there by upon certain Gentlemen not passing three mo^nethes before. This news
appaled the heart of Elanicus. For about the same time Andrugio with his
company departed: for which cause he entered farther talk with the swain,
demanding if he saw the dead carcasses of the slain men: if he did, to
recount unto him their feature as near as he might, with their apparel. To
whom this swain accomplishing his request, in rude manner describing at large
to all his demandes: the hearing of which so grieved Elanicus, that starsly
might he breath. But removed from his dumps, he enquired how he came to the
knowledge of this he had delivered. Sir (quath he) dwelling not far hence, a
neighbor of mine came (...) unto the place where the murderers had left them:
where, by his pains, he recovered one proper Gent^^man, the rest being buried
as well as we could. Friend (queth Elanicus) since it has pleased thee, to
acquaint me of friendship, with these tidinges, and withal, war^ed me from
falling into the hands of those ^aitifes, I give thee thanks. And if I may not
be tedious unto thee, that thou vouch safe to bring me where this recovered man
rests, I will so satisfy thee, as thou shall have no cause to complain of
loosing so much labor. Thus agreeing, the Swain conducted him and his
company unto the Miller, where Andrugio rested.

Elanicus having well rewarded the Swain, bad him farewell, whose sudden
entering, the horse put Andrugio out of Loves cogitation. Elanicus meeting
first with Susania, saluted her as the manner of his country, with courteous
congies, beseeching the maiden of so great favor, being a trauailer, and night
growing on, for his money to to have entertainment.

To whom Susania, (whose womanly conditions more given by nature then
education) answered. Gentleman, what you are I know not: But I understand
(good sir) the owner of this filly cottage my father, being from home, I may
not boldly presume to give entertainment to any, how willing soever I were to
the same, for many causes: and especially, for that I doubt me greatly, you
with your acco^plices are they, which most unchristianlike slaughtered the
Gentlemen of Saxon, as they traveled those deserts. Wherefore, whether you be
the same or whatsoever you be, take not discourteously the words of a silly
maiden, but while you have time, I beseech you depart elsewhere to provide you.

Elanicus doubting to have the repulse, began to glory with the maiden, being
loath to depart without farther knowledge of Andrugio, and his company: and
therefore besought her to take p^tie on his weary carcass, worn with hard
travail in searching for such Gentlemen of Saxon, as by her talk seemed to be
dead, protesting unto her in most vehement oaths, that he was a stranger and
born in Saxony.

Andrugio, who had listened to their talk, hearing Elanicus to name Saxony,
was so ravished with sudden joy, as he might not stand: recovering himself,
could not forbear the presence of his loving countriman, and companion, with
whose speech he was sometime acquainted: but leaving his chamber, came to see
him.

Andrugio no sooner entering the place, where Elanicus sat parlieng gently with
the maiden, who might not in any cause be entreated to entertain him, But
being espied of Elanicus, his speech suddenly failed, and his tongue failtred
in his mouth, he fell mainly on the shoulders of Andrugio, when passed his
trance, he cried out: Ah my Lord, my loving Lord, what destinies have brought
you and your company to these extremities? Are the Gods so unjust, that they
will suffer your noble blood innocently shead, to go unrevenged? Little
knows the Duke your father of your hard mishap, yet doubting the worst, has
sent me to Siena, to know what moved you to keep the tidings of your happy
artiual to the place of your desire, without writing unto him. But I see the Gods
have prevented your noble intent, by suffering your body grievously to be
wounded, and your friends to rest in death. Accursed Fortune, who has no^
better provided for you than thus, in the springtime of your flouring years,
to be thus masacred. Yet thanks to the Gods that gave you life: and thanks to
your good Physician, whosoever he be, whom if I might know, I will in some
sort requite as I may, though not as I would.

Thanks Elanicus for thy kindness. (quoth Andrugio) But happy had I been if
my life might have accompanied my good friends, which it had done, if this my
sweet Physician (taking Susania by the hand) had not bin, whose cares as they
have been great to restore me to health, so will I never forget them, if the
Gods permit me life.

But my Lord (quoth Elanicus) what is your Lordshippes pleasure to do? Does
your strength serve you to bestride a horse? or shall we make some provision
of coatch to conueigh you to the Court of your renowned father?

Ah, no my sweet Elanicus (answered he) if thou love me (as thy pains
employed in aduenturing thy self for my safety sufficiently witnesses)
counsel me not to return to my Fathers Court until I have spent some time
in the famous City of Siena, to perform there, what my heart did desire long
time before I obtained license for the same. Therefore cease to take further
cares for me: only employ me with money for my necessary uses, and return
with what speed you may to the Duke my father: This night shall you rest with
me, where your cates shall not be dainty, homelic, cleanly, and welcome your
principal dish.

Thanks good my Lord, (quoth Elanicus: but think you that I may obtain that
favor at your command, which entreating for the same so lately, was so hardly
expersed?

Susania intercepting Andrugio his words, answered, sir, blame not a fearful
maiden to doubt the worst, having too great a cause of late to be warned: and
to excuse my boldness, let my submission in the humblest wise make
satisfaction for my fault, and vouchsafe to accompany your noble countriman,
unto whom both the Gods and Fortune (in my opinion) have done great wrong, and
my self (a rude maiden) with my aged parents have highly offended, in not
giving him the duty to his estate belonging. But I trust he will pardon the
fault committed, since he himself is the principal cause thereof, which would
not make himself known but only in this title, a Gentleman of Saxony, yet
to such provision as we could make in this wilderness he was welcome, so is
your self if you accept it.

A million of thanks (courteous maiden) I render thee for thy kindness to this
noble man which he has found, unknown what he was, and therefore the more to
be considered: What cause he has to honor so good an attendant as you have
showed to be, for avoiding of flattery I omit.

Thus passing the night in joy, recountring their old friendship, the next
morning early, as Andrugio gave directions, Elanicus leaving behind him horse
and money, he hasteneth with all speed to signify unto the Duke what had
happened.

Andrugio feeling now the extremities of his wounds to be passed, imagining
the duke would not suffer him farther to adventure himself when tidings should
be brought him of his perils escaped, and plight he remained in, not forgetting
his affection toward Susania, whose desires the more he sought to suppress,
ye more his heart was inflamed in love toward her: wherefore he resolutely
determining what to do, he waits opportunity to disclose his love unto her:
which luckily was presently offered. For lo^, Susania in the midst of these
determinations, according to her ancient custom, came to see her patient:
wherefore setting al drea^ apart, taking his fit time, knowing well that secret
forrowes do confound the senses, and that lingering in peril is the cause of
many insiting miseries, thus boldly he began to batter the bulwark.

Blush not Susania, that for thy graces, I tell thee I love: For (Susania) Love
is in men, and therefore in me. Since therefore to stop the stream does make
the flood more fierce, and to suppress the flame does make the fire increase:
Cammomill the more it is ^rodden, the more it springs: Wherefore Susania,
fearing the flame of my affection shall corosiue my heart, know this, thy
manifold virtues have made such an impression in my heart, and the sweetness
of thy feature so wounded me, that the blaze of the one and the bounty of the
other has broken the bulwark of my heart, where Love aduanceth her Ensign as
conquero^ and keeps my heart prisoner, neither will she deliver but only with
this ransom, Susania her love. Look therefore my drare Susania upon thy
captive, and as thou have cured the outward wounds of my body, minister that
sweet portion to my hurt which my heart desires: that being healed by the
physic of thy affections, I may joy in thee. Looks (men say) are the
messengers of love, and outward motions the be ^ra^ers of inward malladies:
then cast thine eyes upon the countenance which does manifest my care, and let
thy thoughts penetrate the heart that does endure calamity. Deem, sweet
Susania of my love as of the Salamandar stone, which being once set on fire,
will never be quenched: or the Emerald which graceth all other stones, but
never loses his color: so likewise never determinable shall be the love of
Andrugio to his beloved Susania. Then Susania in right consider of my cause
according to my care, nothing besides thy bounty can procure my bliss, thy
only perfection has increased my pame: then let thy pity set free my person
from p^rill. The Porcupike that hurts with his quilles makes a salve with his
blood, and Aclytes spear tries an earnest effect of both natures: so likewise
it lies in thee to apply the plaster that infers my pain, to minister
such physic as may cure my malladie. Since then my life depends on thy love,
and my danger attends your speedy redress, let your courtesy finish my
care, and repay my love with his like.

Susania, poor soul, never used to those loving speeches, and sweet words
uttered by Andrugio, was mute to hear so sudden a motion: yet the thought of
which tickl^d a sweet conceit in her, as a portion she could well brook,
yet determining to show in full the nature of the female sex, began to spurn
at that with her foo^e, which willingly she could have embraced in her heart,
resembling the bird Orpyes that hatcheth the Nightingale, yet will feed on her
eggs, so does her heart secretlye reioise to think her self beloved of
Andrugio: yet meaning to give him a bitter pill, she ministers to him this
portion.

My good Lord Andrugio, I humbly beseech you of pardon for my harsh behavior
toward your Lordship passed: but gracious Lord, wherein has Susania showed her
self at any time light of behavior, that thus you go about to entrap me to
the lure of your will? if my duty to my utmost, showed in your weakness,
breed lust in your recovering health, I will provide a new nurse for you, and
arm my self against the subtle piping of so cunning a Fouler, If your
friendship be with your faining glozes to that end to bewich such ignorant
creatures as my self, I must needs get the herb Glozia, a preservative
against that malady, and entreat your Lordship to be content with an other
attendant: for wisdom it is to beware in time, and warned, provide to escape
dangers. If your Lordship had been before put in mind of the murderers waiting
to kill you, I doubt whether you would have adventured the place where they
awaited you: therefore blame me not to be hereafter advised how I come too
near you, and so farewell. Thus as it were in a little chafe she would have
departed, but Andrugio staieng her, replied thus.

Sweet Susania, and loving, if thou tender his life whom with pain thou have
nourished so long, do pity me which unfeignedly cra^e it at thy bands. Though
Fowlers mean falsehood, Andrugio is faithful. what if many men have pleaded
for obtainig of lust the affections of Love? yet blame not Andrugio till
trial: if I be false, then let the Gods pour vengeance upon me, or when
ANDRVGIO shall seem to change his amorous thoughts of sweet Susania, the
object of any life, let fire consume me from the heaven.

Enough of this my Lord, quoth Susania, except it were to better purpose, for
your talk is to no end but to bring a fool to your beck, or at least to see,
whether my lightness were such as you suppose it.

Credit me Susania (answered this loving Lord) let my truth make trial of my
faith unto thee: it is not lust but the pure single meanings of love imprinted
in my true heart. Therefore sweet comfort of my life, respect thy servant
which humbly seeks thy grace, stand not on terms with me, if thou tender my
life, my progeny which I have concealed, is now by fortune revealed, whereby
thou may be assured it is no disparagement to thee, to yield me love of my
affection toward thee, but granting it, shall thereby increase the
reputation of all thy ancestrie, whom for thy sake I will inuest with titles of
calling, for the more honor to thee. I stand, Susania, upon thorns, until I
come to Siena, where my desire has led me, for fear of being prevented by my
father in calling me home again: therefore resolve thee and let me not
languishe for thy sake, whom thou may easily remedy.

Ah my Lord (quoth Susania) it is a principle amongst Lappidarines, that the
smooth stones be soonest broken: amongst faylers, where the water is most
smoothest, there likest danger: the greenest grass, hides the most venomous
serpent: the stone Granio loses his virtue, if it be not continually rubbed
with gold, powder is no sooner kindled, but it quenches: men's affection may
be compared to the Fawcon, that comes to every full fist, or to the spaniell,
that will fawn upon every one that holds bread in their hand.

The stone Quacius freeseth within, when it fryeth without, and sighs may be
fetched as well from the loongs, as from the heart, tears be wrong out of the
fingers when men be disposed to fame: know you not that the new wrought dough
will receive any impression? Is it possible to take those birds, that has
espied the twigges? no, no: the hawke will never be called to that lure wherein
the pens of a Camelion are pricked, for well I know that the Theop^rate
looking at the woolfe, i^ taken at a pray, and the Porcupike staring on the
stars, is overtaken by the dogs, too late comes had I wist, when folly
bytes upon repentance. Better it is to skip with the lamb, in the sweet field
in freedom, then to be companion to the greatest monarche in thraldom: which
considered I neither can, as being not governor of my self, nor will yield my
self to that yoke which I cannot shake off.

Stay there Susania, and give me leave to live a while, that am sure to die,
when you pronounce denial: let not particular examples prove a full conclusion,
though some have been false, all are not faulty, stones (I yield) are to be
valued by the virtue, not by the outward view. But Susania, think that stones
may be better polished, then unperfected, and the defectes of nature, corrected
by nature. An Emralde, has many pernicious properties: but set in gold, is
corrected by the virtue thereof.

Thou Susania, c^st aptly the comparisons: then assure your self that the
Granicke which is black yields a white juice, and the Ieate burns best in
water. Then Susania commend the perfectness of the sun, although thou gaze
at inferior planets.

Andrugio having thus clearkly discoursed for himself, with a deep sigh
sealed his faithful sayings, in such sort that the tears trickled down her
cheeks for sorrow to hear him. Which perceived by Andrugio, with many
imbracinges, and loving kisses enterchangeablie given betwixt them, to both
their comfortes, desiring pardon of her Lord whom she was loath to offend, she
leaves him with this hope, his courtesy should be remembered: so bidding him
ad^ew, betaketh her self unto her lodging, where being solitary, the forces
of Cupids affection began now to flame in this virgin, that forced with the
extremity of contrary motions, subdued her heart with such repugnant
passions, that she suddenly fell into this process.

Ah hapless Susania, what motions are these? whither art thou rouing with a
self conceit, captiuated by the laws of affection, proceeding from that
blinded God Cupid, and fast (...) in his laborinth? O impatient disease of
love, (...) of love, thrice vnpitifull, what strange malladie breeds so great
a martyrdom? what intolerable grief does glut my desires? nay what desperate
desire does breed such intolerable disease. Ah Andrugio, sweet Lord Andrugio,
yet vlab not Susania, let thy love hang at thy hearts bottom, not at thy
lips brimme: things untold are undone, gold boyleth best where it bubleth
least. Yea but the flame pressed down, it inforceth smoke: Love that is
secretly kept, consumes in sorrow, and the fire of fancy raked up in silence,
will both fire the senses, and shrink the sinews. Ah but Susania, the Griphen
never spreads his wings in the sun, having any sick feathers, and a
maiden snarde in love does shame to bewray the same: what then shall Susania
live, and lose her beloved to whom she is so dear, as his faithful words,
with piteous sighs, bewrays? yea, but the Crockidell sings most sweetest
when he means most subtlety: the Scorpyon biteth most venomous, when he is
least suspected: and may not Andrugio, think I, put a dissembling visard upon
his fair face? But suspicious girl, what cause have thou, to imagine any
such thought of him, whose oaths, made in the sight of heaven and the Gods
confirm his truth. Blush therefore Susania, at thy folly, and take heed in
time, suppress that fancy that maintains this affection, for little sparks
may prove great flames, and small twigges grow to tall Cedars. Love is a Lord,
who like an ambitious Caesar, that is granted a part, rests not till he
dangereth the whole possession. Know thou not yt to love, is to live in
loss. Remember Susania, men be subtle, and full of deceit, Theseus was
false, and Demophon faulty, else had Ariadne been fortunate in her love, and
Phillis happy: but what then, because some were faulty, is none firm? pause
there Susania, though snow melt, flint is another substance, gall is bitter,
yet honey pleasant: therefore measure the condition of al men as they be, and
conceive of Andrugio, as of a noble Lord, whose words shows (...) whose faith
is firm yea, but wretched Susania, (...) noble, thou far inferior to him,
whose parent^s knowing the match, will disdain him for my sake.

Look not therefore so hie, least some danger befall thee, none gazeth in the
sun, but the Eagle. Iccarus presumed to mount into the air, but his climing
cost his life. Andrugio is no fondling, though thou would. wherefore,
content thee fondling, and rather die, then endanger either thy friend that
loves thee, or thy own credit, which will be crased, if it be but known the
least spark of thy love to Andrugio, peoples toonges being so sharpened with
standered arrows. Thus heavily without comfort, bewayling her hard fortune,
that God had not made her a match sufficient to link with Andrugio, we leave
her to her sorrows.

Eugenia which has rested little since his departure from the duke of Saxony,
diligently searching Andrugio, whom he found as you have heard by chance, is
now arrived in the court of the Duke his master, unto whom he relates the
unhappy adventures of Andrugio, with the death of his company. This heavy
news bre^ great discontent in the hearts of all courtiers, yea there was not
one that shed not tears for their dead companions, bitterly bewayling them,
whom they are sure never to see again living.

The heaviness of the aged duke somewhat ouerpassed, careful for his towardly
son, aduising what is best for his welfare, has determined, for avoiding of
succeeding dangers, to post Elanicus again to the place, from whence he came,
and with straight charge, not to suffer him to proceed farther in his journey,
which had been so unfortunate unto him.

With this commandment Elanicus is again departed, taking small ease until
he came to the millers house, where he thought to have found Andrugio: but for
all his have the bird was flowne ere he could return. Andrugio having thoroughly
debated of his love with Susania, is now concluded of the match, so that
there is a mutual love, entered both their hearts, in so much that one of them
may not sorrow without great grief to the other, that with much ado he
craves leave for a time to go to Siena: thus having obtained his desire,
recompensing his host for the charge bestowed, taking leave of Susania, his
dear beloved, he is departed toward Siena, leaving the poor maiden
grceuously lamenting his absence, whom neither the gentle persuasions of the
father, nor care of the mother may mittigat so effectually was love in the heart
of this silly maiden, that neither distance of place, nor the threats of the
pareutes, which were many: could any whit prevail, no there was not one day,
hour, nor minute, wherein she did not with great abundance of tears bewail
the absence of her Andrugio, in this sort.

Ah Andrugio, sweet Andrugio, let these drops of lukewarm tears shed from
the spring of mine ouerburdened heart, be messengers of my love, and let my
woeful playninges show the sorrow of thy poor Susania, Ah Andrugio thy love
has pierced the fort of my true love, and by pitying thee, am I my self
caught in that snare, which I fear has so f^ttered me, as naught but death
can lose me: Andrugio, sweet objects of my thoughts, are the only cause of
my mourning, rest therefore in peace my dearest friend, and let thy faith
remain firm, play not the part of Thesus, now thou art departed, least worse
betide me then Ariadne, Medea: her wretched misery, procured through false
Jason, may cause all of our sex distrust men.

But peace Susania, the prating birds may declare thy hard opinion unto thy
Lord Andrugio, which being known, may give him cause to abuse thee, cease
therefore thy prating miserable wretch, and enjoy thy ^are in court, let thy
sighs be messengers of thy good will unto him, study to be pleasant with thy
parents, to recover their health impaired for grief of thee, yea learn to be
content in sorrow, though thy heart be wounded: hope is a medicine most
precious, then apply it, and despair not: Andrugio is honorable, faithful,
and kind, whose tears spent in the bitterness of his sorrows, and many
oaths protested, to cause me grant him favor, I am sure shall never be
violated. wherefore wretched Susania, test thee content in this hope for a
time: when thou shall hear more of thy best beloved Andrugio, with this
falling into a sweet s^^mber, ease to her grieved heart we leave her.

Time has brought Elanicus unto the place where he supposed to have found the
Lord Andrugio, who doubting that which insued, loath to be detained from his
desire, is now gone to Siena, whose departure Elanicus bewayleth, accusing him
of ungratefulness to his friend, disobedience to his father, whose favor he
no more extenued, but to add more forrowe unto his aged heart through this l^wd
departure against all promises at their last taking leave each of other.
Elanicus hot on the spur to see Andrugio, and to bring him to the duke,
makes short stale, but departs never resting until he had found him in the
beautiful City of Siena, unto whom having delivered the pleasure of his
father, Andrugio returns this answer.

It is not unknown unto thee, my swe^te Elanicus, what earnest suite I made
before I obtained grant of my father, for this journey, and how long before he
would consent to the same: wherefore, my good friend, let it not seem any thing
discontent unto thee, that I refuse to hear thy message and obey it, I trust
my father knowing before this my mind will be the better satisfied, and pardon
my presumption for this offense in breaking his commandment: for doubtless,
resolved I am not yet to return, until I have seen the manners of this
honorable place, so much commend in ^ll princes courts.

Elanicus when he heard Andrugio his mind, and saw-that is was as easy to
carry back the whole city, as dissuade him being there, was sorrowful at the
heart, yet hoping to persuade him, replieth.

Gracious Lord, how tender your welfare is unto me, my soul bear witness,
neither will Elanicus ever offer to speak, but for thy benefit: moved
thereunto by zeal and duty both to the Duke and you. Stand not therefore
(Andrugio) upon these terms of disobedience to your fathers command, for the
hearing of your contrary answ^^e how kind soever, will cost his life: yea,
the very remembrance of your disobedience, whom he so carefully loves, will
bring his white head with sorrow to his last home. Again, my gracious
Andrugio, if nature and the Gods call him to the heavens, where all our hopes be
to rest, you being absent, in what estate shall your country stand?
Soue^anitie is a vild worm, and such a bait as will make many aspyring minds in
the absence of their Sovereign to revolt, especially they being of power, when
once for fear of tumultes planted in thy country they be not easily
displaced: so may thou be cosoned of thy government, and by treason unhappily
done to death. Again, thy father hardly digesting thy harsh demeanor, may
disinherit thee, and so leave thee to thy fortune. Many other casualties there
be, more then the sorrows of my heart will permit me to utter: let it
therefore suffice that my words spoken of the tender eale of my heart may
remove thy fond determination, so may thou keep the good will of thy
father, preserve his life, and enjoy thy country and friends. Tears would
not suffer him to speak what he had to say: wherefore constramed, he cease
his parlie.

All the speeches Elanicus could use, was bootlesse, neither was his counsel
regarded more, then of a child which has no understanding. So bent was this
colt to take his race for a time, and therefore besought Elanicus to persist
from persuading him farther, for he was resolved not to return suddenly, if
all the kingdoms of the earth lay thereon.

Elanicus faithful to his Lord and master, and kind to Andrugio, when as he
perceived how he was bent, and that it was as easy for him with the Osterich
to swallowe iron, or with his nails to crash hard flint, as with his words to
win him to his desire and cause him to return: with a heart as heavy as Hero
for loss of her Leander, after he had uttered in mild terms his faithful
mind, taking leave of Andrugio, returns to the court of Saxony, leaving him
to his own will for a time.

Who in the university has planted himself to study, and was in short time
grown into great familiarity with diverse young gentlemen: amongst others,
with whom he used daily to frequent, Galastina, son unto the Duke of
Millaine, and be became most conversant, from whose company (so mutual was
their love, and their liking so great one to the other, that they might never
be simdred, night nor day. No, never was the love of Damon to his Pithia, nor
Pylidies to his Orestes more firm then Andrugio to his Galastina, for one
heart united them, and one purse they used between them

But yet absence, which is the greatest enemy to his former desires, being so
far sundred from his Susania, has not power to put her out of mind, but ever
in the midst of his mirth would he call to mind his dear love, and often with
a sigh rehearse her name, saying, Susania, sweet and constant Susania. So
often he used this, so that in the end Galestina desirous to know what dame
she was of whom by day he talked so much, and in the night dreamed of, was so
unportunate on him, as he might not hide the flame no longer, of which so
great smoke was seen, and therefore Galastina brake with him on this manner
and fashion.

Andrugio, now my second self, whose welfare I esteem as mine own, and
according to the duty of a friend, regard thy friendship as my life.

I have noted ever since thy coming to Siena, amongst all thy mirth, how
suddenly it has been ouershadow^d with sighs and fantastical speeches
tending to love, as thy passion describes: If it be so my Andrugio, thou art
entered into the most intricate labormth that can be, and such as exceed the
capacity of men to conceive, such a worm is it as I greatly fear thy health:
yea, and without content shortly thy life. For doubtless to love is not
tolerable especially, where the love is absent. Besides, it has many
defectes, as if thy love be sctled on a Dame full of disdain, who regards
thee not. If she be poorer then thy degree does require, then is she loath some
to thy kindred, how pleasing soever she be to thee. Love they say is a
commander, and of the common people termed a God, and honored with glorious
tytles, yea, some are so besotted in planting their love, that they reap for
their best fruit endless misery, or prevent it by untimely death, from which
the Gods preserve thee my Andrugio.

But sweet friend, if thou will be advised by him who is as dear in respect as
mine own heart, listen as little to Venus allurements, as I do to Cupids
flateries, so shall thou have no cause to say the Gods be unjust, nor women
cruel: for I think of Love, as Gnato the Greek did, who was wont to say,
that of all plagues wherewith mortal men are aff^iced, love was the greatest,
for that they earnestlye desired that for their comfort, which they found
their mortal death.

Andrugio having listened to Galastina his oration could not well tell how to
digest his speech, yet after a small pause taken, answered.

Why Galastina, do thau count it madness to love, or him besotted that
yields unto affection: Know thou not or art thou so fond as not to know,
that Love is divine, and can command by his power? Who subdued the hearts of
invincible warriors, whom Fort could witholde, no Force withstand, and who
subdued the whole world but love? Alexander, Hercules, Scypio^, and many
others have subjected them to love. Therefore think not as the Greek did,
that love is a plague, least thou die an here^ike, believe he is favored of
the Gods that is an happy Lover.

In faith no (quoth Galastina) for I count him most unhappy which is in love
most happy.

Why then Galastina, thou think him unhappy that loves.

Orels (quoth he) I should think amiss. Should I think him happy, which for
one penny of coin ceceyued at his need, shall lie shut up in prison all days
of his life? Or for one dram of prosperity, reapeth a whole pound of
misery? Shall I esteem him happy in love, whose golden gain proves leaden
grief? No, that is neither pleasure which is interlaced with pain, nor that
happiness which turns to loss.

Why then Galastina (quoth Andrugio) do thou thus blaspheme against Cupid
and his sweet mother? and esteemest thou so lightly of love, which is so
great a commander.?

Because (quoth he) it is Love, and is such a poison, which infecting the
minds of men, enters as pleasant as Nectar the drink of the Gods, but
proves more vytter than the joyce of wormwood: for as the Mermayde
bewitcheth hearers with her sweet music, until they be iulled asleep
therewith, and so they fall into some danger. so amorous lovers have their
senses besotted with the frantic passions of this Idol Love, that they
account not themselves happy, but in their most unhappiness, being at most ease
in their disquiet: at greatest rest when they are most troubled, seeking their
pleasure in care, hunting continually after that, that brings endless harm
and destruction unto them, as I have many examples David and Sampson, in holy
writ, Hercules, and Leander in profane histories, and many more which I omit,
wishing thee, my good Andrugio (if thou desire the favor of so poor a friend
as my self and thine own quiet) to persist from love otherwise, it will
breed thy confusion.

This is your harsh sensure Galestina: but die not herein neither stand long
upon those terms, for if you do, Venus is angry at your blasphemy, will
endite you as an heretic, both to nature and her self, and so plant you one
day, for you-disdaine in love, as you shall have cause to lament, whilst you
leave your hard fortune: but for this time I am content to give over this
argument, least that my follies in praising love, as thou say, should make
the more earnest in envying against that sweet goddess, and so cause thy
punishments to fall the sooner. For Ladies by kind, the more they are
grieved, the sooner they seek revenge of their enemy, of which number Venus
accompteth the one to her Godhead.

My speeches, Andrugio, is no more then my heart thinks, as should be
apparent, if that foul goddess (as thou tearmost her) were present: for I
doubt least her foreces in love, to inflict me with having always reason,
which shall be of force sufficient to expel from my heart, that frantic humor
love, in despite of the goddess, and her blind son. But least we being
friends become focs through this sound argument, we will for this time cease our
parley.

The fire of love, raked in the heart of Andrugio, began now to flame, insomuch
that his only care was how to attain the sight of his beloved Susania, as
well to satisfy at full his mind, which often doubted of her welfare, as also
to participate with her, in familiarity.

Wherefore, after many determinations, which way he might with most credit
accomplish the same: thoroughly now resolved, without taking leave of his friend
Galastina or acquainting other with his pretense, hearing of a small ^^rke,
which was ready to pass from Siena near where his love soiourned, he
secretly enbarqueth him for the same journey. But see how this cruel enemy
fortune envying the towardness of this brave Gentleman, cammaunding Eolus as
her vassaile, when as this bark was mid seas, of the port of his desire,
pleasantly cutting the silver waves with a gentle gale, and each man for his
recreation betakes himself unto those pastimes, best him liked, for the
beguiling of time, sodamly might they hear a grecuous blustering of wind,
which came of a main tearing ye waves before it, in which cruel tempest, ye
split of their maine sail, struck over board their maine mast, and with much
ado by the providence of him that preserves all, and the good industry of
their comfortable master, they escaped the danger of drowning. A whole night
thus spent in meditation to God for their delivery, no sooner-came the dawning
of the day, when their watch espied a sail, and called unto the company for
joy, hoping of some comfort, they manned their ship each one censuring what the
ship should be: at length they might perceive, though a far off, her
ordinance all made ready and put out, as if she were presently minded to
fight, this being perceived, the master called his company together,
acquainting him what he thought, and besought their counsels in the cause if
need should be, whether they should fight, or yeald unto their mercy. These
speeches of the masters appalled wonderously the company, so that suddenly
they might not answer to his demand: At length Andrugio, as one showing by
outward signs, the nobleness of his heart, when he had long expected the
answers of the company, began to say.

Loving master, whose courage shows you to be a man able to govern your
charge, in whom now under God depends our welfare, or receive what danger
soever happen, God and your help withal, we will be partakers with you: if
they be friends, let us entreat their favor, for our relief in this
extremity, for that we need it, if they contrary to our expectation abuse us,
every man resolve to lie rather then submit our selves to such we know not:
my self, albeit young, and never have tried the forre of my (...) ioynted
arms, shall by industry encourage the rest of you to do your endeavor. An
honorable death is always to be preferred before an ignominious life:
resolve therefore with me, and master, whose charge we are all under God,
swear every man to that is said, so shall we be sure every man for himself,
to perform what you pretend.

Then master noting the courage of Andrugio, whose feminine face showed him
fitter for a chamber, then a field, commended highly his forwardness,
imagining with him self, that albeit he took not upon him the worthiness of
his birth, nor claimed the place fitting his degree, yet doubtless was
descended of some noble progeme. And in quitall of his valor shown, to make
him ad more courage to his invincible heart, he elected him their captain,
commanding all the company to use him accordingly, and to be ruled by his
directions, of whom he was persuaded to be valiant, discreet, and well
governed.

Andrugio called to this honor, bethought him of his charge, which unwillingly
he had received by the importance of the master and his company, yet as the
shortness of time would permit him, gave directions more fitter for an old
captain, then a nouesse following the counsel of such ancient soldiers,
which he had red, to the great admiration of his company, and encouragement of
them all.

By this time their enemies, (as they proved to be) were within hayling, where
a couple of desperate villains, not regarding the miseries of those distressed
creatures, whose ship they saw so beaten with fortimes storms, in the top of
their ship waued the^ with their bright sword amain, their Trumpets sounding
likewise destance unto them, bearing still upon this distressed company which
were not a little grieved to see that offered unto them, fearing greatly that
which after happened.

Andrugio, our young captain, when he perceived their intentes, knowing their
forces to be weak, and not able without the providence of God to withstand
them, (...) ought it most fittest to put in proof the policy of which they
had determined then to fight it out with handie strokes, persuading himself of
the best, commanded all the ^^mpanie to bestow themselves under hatches, and
with those few, small shot they had, and other hand weapons at their bording
to apply upon advantage their prin^e fightes, plaring in diverse corners under
their deckes, barrels of powder, ready to fire if need should be, and so to
procure the end of their enemies with their own, by blowing them over board.

The accursed pirate, being come within shot, discharged a minion upon them,
mauger their ship with th^se ^ake-shames they had abord, whose gri^ly looks
showed them like devils, so black and ugly were their coun^^nances with long
keeping the seas, that for all this Andrugio, would not (...) of his company
to appear, but only himself, and one more, or two with him to help to take
in such small sail as they had, as presently they did.

By which, the Pirate assured him of the ship with such goods as was in her:
Thus making all speed they might, as desirous to know what they were, and
what wealth they had, making no reckoning to be resisted, grapled their ship
with the unfortunate barque of Andrugio, and desperately entered, dnubting
nothing of that which happened. When Andrugio saw them all aboard, by giving
his watchword to the ambush under the forecastie, they presently gave fire to
their powder: the forc^ of which, carried both deck and men ouerboord: The
Pirates insinated at this sudden mischief, were wonderfully perple^ed: yet
as men dreading neither God nor devil, they persisted most terriblie in their
actions, threatening vengeance to Andrugio, who gave his other sign and blew up
both mast and all the waste of the ship, where by he was almost (...) of his
bad (...) in this sort all their p^wder, and his ship freed from those
oppressing villains, when they thought themselves sure, and to have said
aboard the Pirates ship, with such men as he had in his company, an other
small Pinnisse waiting on this ship had recovered the^, which for (...) se^ne,
and approaching near the Bark (...) Andrugio, seeing so small stirring, made
reckoning that their co^fortes were rifling their prise, and desirous to have
part of what they should find, stood not demanding question^s, but boorded
them also: in the entering of which, Andrugio ^lew their Captain, to the
terror of his enemies which looked for no resistance. But all in vains was
their proceedi^gs, for his men with blowing the powder were either fore hurt or
slain, so that perforce he was compelled to y^^lde himself. These (...) now
being master of this weather beaten Barque, and saw what spoke those small
company had made, their companions were grievously vexed, and greatly
threatened Andrugio with bitter torments for his valor showed against them,
and especially for the death of those Captains their governors.

Andrugio thus in the hands of those people, of whom he earnestly be^ought
favor could hardly be permitted life, such was their cruelty in revenge of
their Captains death whom they lost in boording Andrugio his Barque: yea, they
had examined to be the cause of their resistance, was more then for all the
rest: yet as great as their fury was, behold when as many tormenting deaths
and most bitter were called to mind, and none thought bitter enough for him,
pity moved the heart of one gracious fellow of some account amongst them, to
compass^on, who noting the mild countenance of Andrugio, and considering his
valor, earnestly besought his company for his sake, to forbear the execution
of their cruelty toward him in bereauing the life of this young prince:
which with much adoo was granted him.

Thus at the intercession of thos^ (...) was Andrugio his life preserved to
greater extremities, for sweeter had death been unto him, if they had showed
their cruelty then life, for that he was marked in his birth vnfortunats as
the story shall show you.

Well, those cursed true having most violently handled such as remained alive
in the ship, commanded Andrugio to be as hardly entreated as might be,
oppressing his body with cruel afflictions toomuch for any to enduce, yet
could his noble mind never (...) to entreat for pardon: albeit they should have
carved his flesh from his (...) with their meat kni^es, or with (...) have
nippe^ the same away. To which his (...) courage, his ancient friend that had
saved his life, gave good notice, and ^ued his case, but could not redress
him, neither show any more favor unto the Gentleman then he did, yet as
opportunity was offer ^^ when his ^acking (...) were at play, or otherwise
busied, he would vifite him, and comfort him as well as he could.

But so long continued, this good thief his familiarity toward him, that in
the end Andrugio confessed unto him, of what parentage he was descended, and
how fortune in this time of his youth had continually dealt with him, omitting
nothing: which lamentable oration of his ouerheard, with promise made, when
God should to send them to any harbor to release him, It was presently carried
to such as was chiefest amongst them in commission, for as yet they had
appointed no captains of their ships.

The reporter of this news had skarsly finished his tale, when furiously and
in great rage they commanded Andrugio and his friends to be brought unto
them: the miscreantes de^canting the mean while, of such cruelty as they
should both receive.

No sooner came these unhappy men before those merciless bloudsuckers, bent to
begin their torments, they caused them to be hoisted to the yard arm, and so
drencht in the seas, at which their misseries they took exceeding delight: By
this this time to aggrauat their misery they had devised to strip them naked,
and every man with a cords end as they pass them, turning round the capstone
to deal such strokes upon their bare carcasses as they could with pity of
heart, either for cruelty of increasing their pain, bestow on them: or of
compassion favor them. But the Gods that yield comfort in extremite, looking
on those afflicted persons, preserved them from this punishment: For behold, as
they were in stripping them, they espied a fleet of Galleys at sea, which in
the calm made such speed to them as they might not escape by any means:
wherefore they commanded Andrugio with his companion to the bilbowes, and
themselves to determine for defense against their enemies, whom they might
easily perceive, now pretending to have some saying to them, and to repay their
bloody tyranny used, with the like.

Time has brought those discried fleet within little more then a league, so
that they might easily discern them to be Galleys belonging to the governors
of Trypolie, of which place those villains had wronged many, and therefore
their fear began the more to increase, doubting that if they fell into their
hands, as they did not know how to withstand them, their cruelty used to
others would be repaied: wherefore like friends that in many mischiefs had
ventured together, they resolutely determine to die and live together, and so
preparing themselves with those few, Andrugio had lift them, to be in
readiness, ordering their fightes with the best policy they could: they
scantly had finished what they would have done, when a cannon shot coming from
one of those Galleys, stroke their maine mast by the board, and so beat their
ship with shot, with the loss of diverse of their company, that in vain they
resisted: wherefore spreading their flag of truce in their missen top, They
committed themselves to mercy of those, with whom there is no mercy at all.

When the smoke of the pieces was cleared, and that they saw there came no more
shot from the ship thinking before they had lost her: espying their slag of
truce, the Captain of the Viz-admyrall commanded the Helms-man to fall too and
board her, where finding those brave mates that had spoiled many, now in this
conflict to stand as mute as silly sheep before a woolfe, entreating hardly
for their lives which could not be granted them, yet bound back to back, they
left them lying on the hatches, until they had ransacked the Ship, searching
in every corner, and took the spoil.

Where finding our comfortless ANDRVGIO, and his pitiful companion,
miserably wronged in those iron Fetters, taking them to be prisoners to those
cruel and bloody Pirates, and such as had been wronged by them, commanded
that they should be released from their captivity, and to be brought before
the Admiral, which was presently done.

Andrugio for all the torments he had been afflicted with, could not be
compelled to make himself known: but being by the Admyrall examined, what he
was, and how he fell into their hands: told him that he was a passenger in a
small Barque whom they had spoiled both of goods and men, and that none of his
company remianed alive, but himself only.

The Admyrall noting the courage of the prince, commanded that he should be
brought with his fellow prisoner aboard his own Gallie, requiting the cruelty
of the rest as they had deserved: for being bound back to back, heaued
ouerboord, ending their lives in blood as they had lived, Having taken such
spoils as those Pirates had aboard, they s^^ed the ship and fell to the Sea,
seekeng more adventures.

Having thus some leisure to debate of things passed, the General called to
mind Andrugio and his mate, who were not (...) grieved to think what miscrie
they were like to come to being fallen into the hands of those merciless and
unhallowed people of whom there was no hope of favor at all.

As the general commanded, they were brought before him, of whom he
diligently inquired of what country they were, and how they chanced to their
hands, who kept them captive. To whom Andrugio hoping of favor, declared
that he was borne in the Duke of Saxons country and being a student in the
university of C^silia, as he was minded to see his father being a poor
gentleman of that country, was surprised with those pirates, which had dealt
with them, and his company, as himself had before heard.

The general for his own part hearing him make his lamentable complaint,
might well have showed himself a pitiful gentleman, and have released
Andrugio. But fortune halling on ^ore miseries upon him, the only author that
must pl^^e her miserable commedies: gave notice to the captain of another
Gallie, who was a vowed enemy to the Duke of Saxony, and all his country,
which came presently a board the Admiral, and beg him for his prisoner, which
might not be denied, carrying him away from his friendly company to his more
grief, and chayned him with the foremost ore, next his cabine, that he might
have the ouerseeing of his labor and punishment himself, of whom this
miscreant took no compassion at all, But ioyed when he saw the Booteswayn,
bestow his cruel alms with a r^pes end on his naked skin: yea and often
would cause him without any cause to be grievously beaten: thus the space of
one whole (...) endured this young prince: his captains rigor, at which times
grievous storms opposed the whole fleet of Galleys, that they were enforced
to put into harbor, and hardly escaping the peril of drowning, yet recovering
with much trouble their desired port, the captain not unmindful of Andrugio,
commanded him a shore, and where the other slaves had liberty, commanded him
to be shut close within a most dark and loathsome dungion, into the which
entered no manner of light, where he sorrowed and sighed most lamentably,
exclayming on fortune, and cursing the time wherein he first made motion of
parting from his princely father, which found him dearer then his own life.
Thus four months (too long a time for people in such extremity) passed in
serable Andrugio in most grievous adversity, having scarce clothes to hide his
secrets of nature, and no other sustinance, but the great boulting of barley
meal, mingled with water, which was not all times of the best, yet in the
midst of all which misery, Cupid a confederate, with his sworn foe fortune,
began to remove his thoughts with that fresh remembrance, of his dearest and
most beloved friend Susania, for whose sake in going to see her, more dearer
then his life unto him, his misery began: the remembrances of whom in the
extremest anguishe of his misery, bredde such sweet comfort, that there was
no hour, yea sleeping or waking wherein he ceased to call upon the name of his
dear mistres and comfort of his life Susania, sometime exclaiming on fortune
for her cruelty against him, other while, making his orisons, to Venus for
favor, that by the virtue of her godhead, she might so work with her son
Cupid, yt where it should please the giver of all comfort to free him from
that captivity, he might once enjoy the sight of his so long desired Susania.

Lo thus passing his misery in the most patientest fort that he might, the
omnipotent Creator to show thereby his glory, and to make Andrugio feel the
favor of his sweet and gracious hand, when this filthy dungion, the place of
his miserable lodge, had so weakened his corpse, with short diet, and most
loathsome funels, and that past hope of ever seeing any creature, but the
barbarous hard hearted and pitiless villain his iaylour, lo there, behold
how sweet a comfort on the sudden unexpected unto him happened.

The Emperors daughter, Princes Guyrdania, wh betrothed unto the Barbarian
king, accompanied with many states of great honor, with the kings of
Denmark, and Sweathland, who for honor of the marriage, as also for the ease
of the aged Emperor, accompany this princes, were all by weather most
grievously seabeaten, and the ship where the two kings and princes were,
hardly escaped the danger of splitting.

But after this most grievous storm, putting into the port of Tripolia. They
had no sooner anchored their ships, but presently they dispatched ambassadors
to the governor, making themselves known unto him, with entreaty, for the
princes, who hardly brooking her last danger, surprised with the fear of
death, and weak with their long beating at sea, was very evil at ease, for
whom their desire was, to have entertainment.

This known to the governor, no less courtesy, then honorable, he
assembling the chiefest captains, and Burgurs of the City, and with their
most convenient speed prepared themselves toward that place of the harbor
where this weary beaten ship anchored, when showing themselves on the shore
in the sumptuous manner they could upon so short warning, they dispatch^
Ambassadors to the kings, willing hun to declare their pleasures unto them in
this sort.

That whereas they had so hardly escaped the danger of shipwreck, and by Gods
providence unexpected of them, had fortuned into that place, a City far
unable to give such entertainment, as there estates required, yet how welcome
they were unto them, as unto the subjects of their gracious sovereign, and
their highness friends to their utmost power it should be shown. And
farther, that they being principal under their sovereign, attended with
reverend duty their highness coming to the shore, to conduct them unto
their lodginges, which in the best manner was preparing for their entertainment.

When the Ambassador had declared this answer from the governor. The two
kings very glad thereof, expected the same with thanks: and giving order for
the landing of their train, with such necessaries as was abord of provision,
they besought the princes to be ready with them, to go a shore, where these
honorable and worshipful governors of the said City, attended their
coming, with all their ladies in their coaches, to welcome the Princes, at
whose meeting, the courteous welcomes, with the favorable thanks returned from
these princes, I omit: but with great honor and welcomes from all estates, as
well the poor as the best, they were conveyed to their lodging, which was in
the kings own palace within the walls of the same City, where reposing
themselves, I leave them to their solace for a time.

When these noble princes, had over passed their weary toil and hard travail
without some ease taking, then began the nobles of this City, to devise some
pastimes, as well to recreat their minds, which were given to melancholicke
for loss of their ships, of whom they heard no news: amongst which, the
captains gathering their men together, rigged and furnished a dosen gallyes
and pinnasses to the sea, with intent to show their manner of fight and sea
skirmishes, to which services, was Andrugio and his fellow pyrate called, to
take their places at an ores end, as before they had done.

When all things was provided for this pastune, the princes having taken place
to behold the same: in which fight after a little time, the gally wherein
Andrugio was, being by another taken, his captain, as well to show what
extremitte they used to those they vanquished, as to grieve the body of
Andrugio, caused him to be stripped, and most grievously to be whipped, and
after, by the arms with two great waits at his toes, hanging, to be drawn up
to the yard arm, where, when he had hanged, that all men pitied him saving his
merciless captain, at the cry of the people was at length let down. But to
agrauate still his extreme grief and torment of body: the Captain (as one
bent to seek his utter destruction, provided yet a more greater torment both
bitter and cruel: for lo, when time had brought their pastimes to end, This
merciless tormenting Captain, invited all the Captains to a banquet aboard
his Gallie: at the end whereof, he caused Andrugio to be cased in the raw hide
of a new slain woolfe, which with the shipdogges from every Gally, baited him
beastlike, in such manner, that they had like to have wearied him, sometimes
tearing his arms and legs, otherwhile the other parts of his body, which
cruelty of the dogs, vexing poor Andrugio, bred such content to the
barbarous villain, that his heart was more ioyed with the sight thereof, than
if he had received a noble victory against his enemies: such deadly hatred
had the cruel tyrant conceived against Andrugio.

At this banquet there chanced to be a noble man of the train of the
Princess Gurdania, whose heart pitieng Andrugio so much that he could not
endure the sight of his extremities: but turning his head from that which the
barbarous people took delight in, he secretly inquired what he was that was
so hardly used above the rest of those slaves. these questions of the noble man
was demanded by chance of ye pyrate before taken with Andrugio, who being a
fair welspoken man, and of good demeanor, recounted at large unto this noble
man Andrugio his torments, and besought him, that as he was a gentleman, to
take compassion on his misery, and buy him for money, or by some other means
to work his delivery: for that if he remained amongst them, this would every
day be their use until God by death shall think good to end his sorrows,
albeit he was in his Country a Gentleman of good name and honorable
reputation.

The noble man moved with pity and compassion at the Pirates ruthful tale,
thought every minute of an hour a day, until he might come to the presence of
those two kings and the Princess, which he might not do that night: Wherefore
in the morning awaiting earnestly to bring his desire to effect, he was brought
before them, unto whom he recounted the grievous sight he had seen, and how
much it troubled his mind, and grieved his heart to think that ever Christian
should endure such misery. Where, in the most earnest manner that he could,
besought the Princess and the Kings of Denmark and Swethland to procure his
freedom, either by entreaty, or for ransom, at his charge, to what sum
soever it amounted.

The princes hearing this doleful discourse, moved to pity his misery, sent
for the governor, and besought him, that as their welcomes had been great, and
their entertainment exceeding, so they might crave his friendship in a suit
they had to impart unto him.

The Governor glad to content those princes with all the favors he might, did
not only by his word assure what they desired, but deeply swear they should
obtain what they craved: holding himself highly in their favor, that they
would demand any thing that lay in him to perform, beseeching to know what
their suit was.

The princess thanking him for his kindness, and favor, told him that their
suit was for the liberty of a slave, a poor man, and what ransom he would
demand, he should have with thanks.

My gracious Lords (quoth the Governor) not one, but all the prisoners and
slaves in this place shall be at your highness command: and therefore I humbly
beseech you to let me know his Captains name, and the person, and he shall
presently be sent for.

The noble man whose desire was to have Andrugio his liberty, very glad to
hear his suite grow to so good effect, gave thanks to the governor,
describing unto him what he was, and in what Gally, but his name he could not
remember, which by the especial notes given, was well known unto the
Governor, who with all speed dispatched one of his servants for Andrugio,
commanding that he should be brought unto his lodging, which presently was
accomplished. Whom when the governor saw, he demanded of what calling and
country he was, and how long he had served in their Galleys. To whom Andrugio
answered: by birth (noble Lord) I am a Saxon, of reputation a Gentleman, and
passing the seas, was most vnfortunatelye taken prisoner by the Fleet of
Galleys that last served against the king of Spaines forces. This fourteen
months have I endured most miserable servitude and grievous punishments by my
unmerciful and rigorous Captaines-command.

When the Gonerall had heard him, commanded his man that he should be
clothed in a fair suite of apparel of his own, and so presented him to the
Princess, unto who^ he was very acceptable:

Thus when Andrugio by the appointment of the Gods had remained a while at
liberty, and that the princes had well reposed themselves, provision was made
for their departure unto the Barbarian King, of whom they were expected long,
by reason of some of their Fleet arriving in his country. all things being
ready for them, a fair gale blowing, they take their leaves of the Governor,
whom they reward with great and bountiful presents, with much courtesy and
thanks for their royal entertainment, the which they vowed should never be
forgotten. And so bidding them farewell they imbarqued themselves for their
pretended journey, with whom also departed Andrugio, attending upon the Lord
Ieronymy, who had released him.

Thus by the providence of the hiest, Andrugio was from the misery he endured
delivered, and in great favor of the Lord Ieronymy his master, unto whose
government he committed all his affairs, who so well behaved him self, that
he was in great account of his Lord and loving master.

Their business and honorable marriage of the Emperors daughter accomplished,
and the kings with their trains safely returned to their own country,
Andrugio highly in favor of his Lord, gained so the love of all the people,
that none of the retinue of his Lord, was held in such account of all estates,
as well of Nobles and Gentlemen of the country, as the inferior sort. It
fortuned, this Lord Ieronymie having one only sister, wise, beautiful, and
well governed, hearing such general commendation of Andrugio, and amongst the
rest her brother so highly to commend him in all places, and at all times, so
that his common talk was ever to the credit of Andrugio, which noted in the
young lady Messeliua, (for so was she called) her affection began to increase
toward him in such wise, that from a small spark, the fire of fancy began to
grow to a great flame, and her chief and only delight was in beholding of her
best beloved Andrugio: yea, her thoughts were so settled upon him that in the
night she dreamed of him, and in the day he was never out of her remembrance,
in so much that this passion increasing, she began to grow into great
extremities, evermore devising what means she might best work to make her
love known unto him: now casting this doubt, then another, so that in no sort
she might settle her thoughts how to bring her desires to effect, in such
manner as she might be void of suspicion to the world, and acquaint Andrugio
with her secret loves toward him, having not any friend of familiarity to
be advised by, but her waiting woman, of whose trust and fidelity in such a
weighty cause she was not assured of. Yet notwithstanding arming her self
with hope, the only comfort of the distressed, she resolves with her self a
little while longer to bear it out, hoping that time and her courtesy used
toward him, might cause him to crave that which she could willingly, and with
all her heart offer him.

Andrugio on the top of his pleasure, leading a life free from all encumbrances
of body, yet could not forget the love he bare his Susania, which how often he
called to mind, the more began his sorrow: yea such desire he had to see his
best beloved, that his whole study and continual care was how to accomplish
the same, in doubt of every occasion that might hinder his determination. Thus
between doubtfulnesse, and despair, lived this young prince discontented,
that he took no pleasure in keeping any kind of company at all. Such was
his honorable mind, with duetifull allegiance, tied by the lincke of faith
unto his Lord, who had freed him, that he durst not for fear of denial, make
any request for his favor therein: and to go of his freewill, he thought it
villainy to requite with such ingratitude, so honorable a man, that loved him
as his own. Well so long continued those passions, abiding such grievous
torments of mind, that his lively color began to wax pale and wanne: yea
his blood which was fresh, and well beseeming, dried, and his body grown with
continual grief into a feign sickness, insomuch that his alteration, was
noted of all, lamented of many that did know him, but especially of the noble
Lord Ieronimie, and his sister Messalina, who continually noted every sight,
and would oftentimes demand the cause of his sorrow, which by no means they
could use, he would discover. But Lord Ieronimie, as one careful of his well
doing, would never be satisfied with such answers as Andrugio would give, nor
allow his excuses for truth: wherefore taking him one day into the fields of
purpose to solace, they spent their time in walking, pleasantly discoursing
until the Lord Ieronimie coming to a pleasant medowe, bedecked with natures
ornaments as much as they had seen, which viewing, they both censured of the
beauty of the field, one commending the delightful smell of flowers, the other
the situation of the place, which was most excellent, near unto the edge of
one side running a most pleasant crystal stream, which bubling over, the
round Poples gave a sweet noise to the hearers upon the side whereof was
growing a row of most exceeding fine poplar trees, which ouershadowed the
place, as it was most pleasant.

This place above the rest that they had chanced on, Lord Ieronimie those to
solace himself in, as also fit for his purpose: wherefore, commanding Andrugio
to sit down by him, like a loving kind Lord he began to participate with
Andrugio, in this wise.

Andrugio, mine own Andrugio, I have long sought fit opportunity, to have
secret conference with thee, and having found place and time for the same, be
not moved, that I grow into those speeches, which I have to use, considering
that they bespoken of love, and not maliciously. First my Andrugio, which I
have to say unto thee is this, I have since our coming from the marriage of my
liege the Emperors daughter, noted many a sad and heavy countenance in thee,
which I know argues a discontented mind, proceeding as my conjecture assures
me of love: now Andrugio, as I freed thee from the bondage of ye turks
unknown, if there be any such cause, fear not to make it known unto me. I
have vowed to pleasure thee al yt I may, stand not therefore on nise terms, but
let me know ye dame whom thou have made choice of, to govern thy affections,
and if I seek not all possible means for thy hearts content, accuse me ever
of dishonor, and hold me the most wretched vile creature on the earth.

Andrugio hearing this discourse of his Lords, which he least looked for,
could not well on the sudden tell how to answer, for that he was not assured
whether he spoke upon surmise, or that he had some secret knowledge of his love
to Susania, yet thinking to hasard his credit with Lord Ieronimie, he
answers.

My gracious Lord, what humble thanks my heart rendereth for so great favors,
my toonge cannot declare. But gracious Lord, where fortune has placed an
extraordinary want, their will shall supply the defects of wealth, and loyalty
perform that which my mean ability can never put in practice, The tree that
brings forth no fruit, is good for fuel, and stones are not to be valued
by an outward view, but an inward virtue, Prometheus did consture well of the
works of Lycias, and I hope my gracious Lord will not misconsture the will of
Andrugio, but rather, to cast an eye to my secret willingness, then to look
for merits which I cannot manifest: what I find noble Lord by experience, the
time and place forbids me to participate least I be accused of flattery, yet
what I conceive, I leave to your honorable conjecture, which I cannot any way
discip^er: only this always account, Andrugio is your duetifull and loyal
servant until death, which he has vowed by the true band of friendship,
never to violate: Thus finding in my self, a will that shall never waver, a
faith unfeigned, and a life vowed to perpetual loyalty. Hoping that as
Protagenes was excused for his imperfect pictures, by doing what he could, so
also shall I find your Lordshippes favor, since I promise the performance of
any thing I may.

But my good Lord, touching your demand, I beseech you think thus, that if
there were any thing which disturbed my quiet of heart, I should above all, for
many considerations acquaint your Lordship with the same, but love as your
Lordship censured, it is not but as I can best conceive of mine own grief, a
melancholicke passion, naturally proceeding of desire, to see my native
country, my prince and friends to whom it is altogether unknown what is
become of me, whether I live or rest with death, Besides my good Lord, I live
here a mere stranger in high favor, reaping the benefit of your honorable
countenance, more then any man, which as I am stranger, may make me dread, the
spite of some one or other, envying your Lordships will, when noting my
unworthiness, for so great benefits, may seek my confusion* Thus my good
Lord have I in the humblest manner I may, made known unto your Lordship, the
greatest and of what I say, for that it is spoken in truth.

Andrugio answered his Lord, I take thy wordeas a warrant, for what thou
say, and assure thee on my honor, that as thou art a stranger, thy welcome
is the greater. I neither yet have deserved at thy hands such love as thou
professest me, but assure thee, he shall not live in bonds of my royalty,
that shall envy Andrugio, or seek to do him the least wrong which may be
offered a man. Therefore surcease thy heaviness, and set fear apart, for of a
Lord, I will become a father unto thee, and a friend unto thy friends and
lovers. Time calls us now homeward, wherefore I will detayne thee no longer.

Andrugio glad at the heart, his counterfeit answer was taken for current,
thought himself the happiest of many, this communication was ended, and with
a better will followed his Lord home then we can imagine, as glad he had
escaped the suspicion of his master, as the scholar that fears beating for
his lesson: but now to return to madam Melissina.

This Lady whose heart Cupid has made a prisoner unto his duty, sought many
times opportunity to ease her grief, by all the occasions she could imagine,
but none that she durst attempt for fear: diverse times she determines one
mean, and fully resolves to follow it, then the doubt of some contrary
accident, drives her into despair, combating thus in the extremities of her
heart, devising what was best to bring her desires to effect. Venus seeing her
so firm and constant a soldier, lending a little aid to comfort her,
provides this shift. There was attending on a Lady, a neighbor of the Lord
Ieronimie, a Gentlewoman in Saxony borne, with whom, for countries sake,
Andrugio: grew something familiarly acquainted with this gentlewoman, did
Lady Melissina seek also to have familiarity, and on the sudden began to
accompany her Lady so often, that with her repair, she grew into great
friendship with her waiting Gentlewowan, so much that there might no day stape
her, without visiting her n^we acquainted friend. When Melissina had with
great favors and bounty won this Gentlewoman to be her friend, walking in
a garden near adjoining to her brothers house the brake with her in this sor^e.

Elenora (for so was she named) I have seen thy honest kind demeanor as well
to strangers as to thy Lady and friends that prove thy love, and of all, of
what estate or calling foeuer of our own country, I have for thy good
behavior made choice of thee, as of one to whom my heart has linked her self
in bond of true friendship above all other. If thou can therefore (my sweet
Elenora) think but the like of me. I protest unto thee, from this time to the
end of my life, I will be a second Elenora, and honor thee as my self, using
thee as if thou were Melissina: speak therefore my friendly companion, if my
offer be acceptable, resolve me, for I long to hear thy answer.

Elenora which had received great friendship at the hands of this Lady,
knowing she was of honor and of great reputation, thought her self happy to
live in the soci^tie of so noble a Lady. Yet notwithstanding the favor
offered, with humble and ^utifull reverence as one knowing full well how to
behave her self, returned this answer.

My honorable Lady, how acceptable your gracious ofter is unto your servant, I
hope your wisdom will conceive: far unworthy I am to participate with so
honorable a Lady in such familiarity as it has pleased you to make offer. But
seeing it stands with your favor to make choice of one so simple as I am, a
Gentlewoman of mean parentage, and a stranger borne with all duty: I commit
my self unto your Ladyships disposition: protesting that for ever Elenora is
and shall be the dutiful attendant of Madame melissina truly and faithfully
to serve you in all reverence, as becomes so noble a lady: to the which by
the Gods that framed me, I swear.

Enough my Elenora (quoth Maddam Melissyna) give me thy hand to perform thy
saying, and hereafter leave to use these terms of reverence to thy Melyssina,
who has in friendship united her self unto thee, supposing the shape of
Elenora to be transformed to Melyssina, and Melissina to Elenora.

And now Elenora, to make proof of that which I hope to find in thee, I must
impart unto thee, according to my trust reposed in thy secr^cie a matter of no
small weight, with which (Elenora) I commit my honor, life, and reputation:
which if I loved thee not, I ^ould for ever conceal, as I have long done from
discloasing thereof to any friend whatsoever, yet does it concern me near.
To make many words (my Elenora) is but to fill the air with wind, and spend
time, which we may hardly do: for fear thou be of thy Lady missed: and
therefore briefy (sweet Elenora) I love, yea love I do, with the most entire
affection and desire of my heart one with whom I know thy self to be
familiar, with whom my self cannot be acquainted yet I have offered many
courtesies, and offers of friendshyp, which he regards not. This is the
sum I have to say, only I omit his name until I hear thy answer.

Elenora seeing by her countenance that she meant what she said, stricken in a
dumpe, began to study an answer, for for fear her rash proffer might breed
cause of repentance, that she had a lover of her own, whom she was loath to
spare to Madam Melissina, although she loved her well, yet after a pause taken,
hazarding her word, she vowed devoutly to conceal whatsoever should be
uttered, and with her best counsel and greatest pains labor to bring her
desire to effect.

Melissina having made sure work with Elenora, was half comforted, and
without any more protestations, told her, that Andrugio a servant to the Lord
Ieronymie, her countriman was the man, whom she fancied above all the creatures
that ever her eyes beh^ld. But such is his strange condition, that he
abandoneth the famyliar company et al, so that I cannot hear by the report of
any one, that he ^eepeth company with any but thee: Wherefore (sweet Elenora)
as I have with the integrity of my heart declared my zeal to thy countryman,
so be the instrument to bring my desires to effect, and command Melyssina, yea
her (...) to do thee good.

Melissina with tears trickling down her cheeks tenderly wringing Elenora by
ye hand finishing her long oration, of whom Elinora took such remorse as she
was forced by the tender instigation of her heart to participate with her But
having passed this womanish fit, she answers, Maddame, I have now what I
desired, by knowing ye man your heart so much wishes to enjoy, Patient
therefore your self, and do not with grief oppres^e your heart, for sorrow
is no medecin for this malady, but a corosiue that will consume you, only as
you have imparted the same unto me, so leave the execution thereof unto me
whom it concerns for your favors showed me in some part very near.

Thanks (Elenora) for this comfort, wherewith thou have indewed my heart with
such a simpany of joy, as I feel the sweetness thereof already dispearsed
throwout every member of my body. Time, an enemy to friends over stippeth so
suddenly, that we must needs part for fear thou be missed: wherefore we will
for this time cease our parley not doubting but that thou will remember me, and
so departed Elenora to the house of her Lady, and Madam melyssina to her
lodging.

Andiugio according to his accustomed manner, presently after supper coming to
see his countriwoman, whom he found in a great study, as one (as it might
seem) careful of that she had under taken: which gave Andrugio cause to
demand the reason of her heauiues, which she many ways excused. But Andrugio
measuring her fancies by his own desires, in jest told her she was in love.
Entering thus into communication, Good countriman (quoth Elenora) if your
experience in Loue-causes be such, that you can conceive by outward appearance,
what the heart desires, be not moved, nor any thing displeased, if under
benedicite I demand with what Lady, Gentlewoman, or other you be your self in
love: Blush not man (quoth Elenora) for your wan looks, your heavy sighs,
and your grief by outward appearance is such, that I have noted in you a great
alteration since your coming home with my lord Ieronymie, which doubtless
argues you are in love. Wherefore (Andrugio) if thou be, fear not to disclose
it unto me, for a woman's help may stand in such a cause in more steed then the
counsel of an experienced wise man: and for my part I vow unto thee by the
honor I owe to Diana, and by all such holy rites as become a virgin, if
either my pains or counsel may avail thee, thou shall ^^ud my word and deed
one: yea, if it were to manifest thy suite to Madam Melisisina thy Lords
s^ster, if she he the woman.

I am very glad countriwoman, answered Andrugio that my coming has removed
your melancholic humor, and made you thus pleasant, but that I love as thou
supposest, I never did, nor never mean to do, because that experience by
others has taught me to eschew that hayte, which entering pleasantly, will
confound the intrals and consume the he art, if that present remedy be not
ministered in time by their desired Ladies, Therefore knowing the pertill, I will
as I have done, avoid that mischief, which may breed my confusion.

Well (quoth Elenora) I may take thy word, but how I believe thy weak answer
I leave to report, for that I know there is no creature living, who does not
make especial choice of one, with whom they participate above al other, and to
love (I know) is incident both to men and women, by which I assure me Andrugio,
thou do love, deny it as long as you will.

If thy reasons propounded, be true (Elenora) and that thou judge of the
secrets of my heart, by outward signs, why (...) thou deny thy love to me,
that so friendly demanded to know thy choice, at my first coming, thy
countenance showing it so plain: for behold in thy forehead written that word
that Paris wrote ever in the sight of his beloved Helena, (I love) which being
apparent, why should thou deny it.

Well Andrugio, it is folly for women, whose wits be weak, to stand
reasoning with men, whose studies in rethoricke and logic may persuade and
deswade such fools as my self, to what (in honest wise) they list, but were
maddam Melissina here, you could not carry it so away. It is now but early
nights, and my Lord and Lady in bed, wherefore good countriman, if thy
business be not great, accompany me to the Lady Melissinaes lodging, who I
know, will bid you welcome, and for my sake, to whom I am bound, and would
feign acquaint thee with her. Be not therefore so strange, God may provide for
thee in time, that as the deserts has wo^^e the love of the Lord Ieronimie,
thou may likewise obtain in time the love of this Lady, and become heir of
Lord Ieronomies living, for that he will never marry as I have heard him say:
and children he has none.

Thanks good countriewoman, quoth Andrugio, for thy kind frompe, a poor man
may live to requite you: for my company, which you crave, if you will accept
it, I am ready to wait on yoe to her Ladieship.

Elenora, glad that she had made this entermedling to the Ladies motion, took
him at his word, and conducteth him unto her lodging, whom they found ready
to bed, that hearing the voice of Elenora, commanded her waiting woman to open
the door, Melissina seeing her beloved enter with her, was put to such an non
plus, as she could not well tell what to say, that at last, removed from her
study, she bad him most heartily welcome, and demanded the cause of Elenors
coming, on such a sudden: To who^e said Elenora, the truth is maddam, that
having this good company of my countriman, and my leisure fitting, too
untimely yet to go to bed, I entreated him to bring me hither, whither I trust
he is welcome.

Elenora, quoth Melissina, he is in truth welcome, for thy sake, as also his
own, and for that my Lord and brother, does so much favor him as I know he
does, if it shall please him in any sort to use my friendship, for his better
preferment to my brother, or any one, he shall find me ready: and good
Andrugio, be no stranger unto me, for of my honor, the honest care you have of
the charge my Lord has committed unto you, has gained you credit with your
Lord, and favor of his friends, amongst which Melissina, though she speak
least for your benefit, yet will not be the last, make trial where you please.

The undeserved favors, I have found at my honorable Lords hands, with your
Ladyships courtesies, poor Andrugio knows not any way how to deserve, but
in truth and loyalty, to which in the most humblest manner, I bind me so
long as I shall enjoy breath, and if your Ladyship shall please to command
Andrugio, my readiness to your service shall show my zeal, in performing the
same.

Passing thus the time in communication to little purpose, the night reasonably
well spent, Elenora bidding madam Melissina good night, takes her leave with
her friendly countriman.

After this first familiarity, Andrugio had with maddam Melissina, oftentimes
repaired unto her lodging, as well to show his duty unto her, as to spend the
time in honest and friendly talk, discoursing of diverse things, to delight
her, being often solitary, as desirous of little company, Andrugio and
Elenora excepted, now began his misery to approach. Fortune pretending to
give him another spurn, for lo, a gentleman of the Lord Ieronimie, who bare
secret love unto maddam Melissina albeit he never durst reveal the same, yet
continually would he walk at least two or three hours in the evening, near
about the lodging of his beloved Lady, by which means, he chanced oftentimes
to epsy Andrugio, coming late from the Ladies lodging, which perceived and
noted, growing jealous of his often repaice there, he sought many ways to
acquaint his Lord with the same, but could not devise any fit means to the
accomplishing of the same, envying still in his heart Andrugio. This gentleman
amongst others his companio^s, having spente their time in riotous drinking,
and carousing, he began to accuse Andrugio of villainy, saying, that there was
no night escaped, wherein Andrugio used not in most vile and dishonest manner,
the body of madam Melissina. This talk noted of diverse, in the morning one
envying Andrugioes happiness more then the rest, greeuing that a stranger
should have that countenance under their Lord, came unto this foresaid
gentleman, and charged him with his speeches, used against madam Melissina,
which he affirmed, whereupon finding as they thought, time to thrust him from
their Lords favor, they determined to accuse him of the crime, and taking no
respect on their devise, they presently sought the Lord Ieronymie unto whose
presence being come, kneeling on their knees, they humbly besought his honor,
to pardon them, for what they had to say. Ieronymie amassed at this sudden
motion, desirous to know their minds, bad them say on. Then thus my gracious
Lord, whereas it has pleased you of more zeal, and pity to a Christian
distressed, to free Andrugio from the captivity of the turks slavery, of a
bondsman, to make him of great account in your country: know this my honorable
Lord, in requital of those your honors gracious favors bestowed upon him,
most caytiue like, he seeks the dishonor of you and your house, by
accompaning himself with your dearest and beloved sister madam Melissina. This
my good Lord, I speak not of any evil will to the man, nor enuiie to the
Lady, but in truth and duty to your Lordship, for that I have seen
oftentimes my self, his repair to her: and once suspecting the same, I
followed him, when peering in at her chamber window, I saw the^ in most
unlawful sort together on her bed, her maiden being sent of purpose away, to
my great grief, knowing well by the favors you have done that unthankful
Andrugio.

Ieronimie could scarce forbear to hear his tale to end, so grieved at the
heart was he at their speeches, but dissembling the same in the best sort he
could, thanked them for their good will, and bad them depart. Ieronimie jealous
of what he had heard, could not be quiet, until he did know the effect of what
they had told, and therefore determining with himself to see the event of it,
pretended to watch that night disguised, when he came thither, and he
departed, supper ended, and every man departing his way, Ieronimie awayted his
time, and scarsly went out of the house, disguised in such sorce that he that
had known him well, might have been mistaken, secretly ambushing himself, to
see Andrugio his coming.

Not long had he stayed, but Andrugio, with Elenora, as was their use came
together, and entered the house, which when he saw, blame him not tobe
maleco^tent, fearing by this unhappy beginning, ye evil event of the rest yet
unquiet as he was, persuaded himself as well as he could, thinking, that
being both there, no further matter at that time could happen, yet would he
see his return, waiting thus two hours, and something more. Andrugio and the
Lady playing a game at ch^stes, which they were loath to give over without
victory on the one side, Elenora having more have then the rest, desired madam
Melissina to lend her maid to accompany her, which she did, when Ieronimie saw
this, think now Lordinges, how^ intolerable it was to him, albeit no defartes
of either part, but wrong suppositions of an envious person? Ieronimie seeing
this, might no longer forbear their presence, but with speed entered the house
and entering the chamber where they played: (check) quoth Andrugio to the Lady,
which Ieronimie hearing, answered, I vulaine, and that check shall cost thy
life, miscreant and ungrateful vislaine as thou art, tell me for which good
favor yt I have done thee, have thou sought the confusion of me and mine? I
will not now stand to reason the cause with thee, but go with me. As for thee
^ewde Da^e, that have yielded thy body as a companion to this rascal, I will
take such order as thy hot desies shall be made cool enough. Thus furiously
hailing Andrugio out of the chamber, he departed, commiting him to the custody
of the Jailer, where bewailing this sudden chance, not knowing any cause why,
we leave him.

Maddam melissina whom the grief of this had overwhelmed, was so surprised
with the same, that she fell into a trance, in which extremity, her maiden which
went with Elenora returning found her, wondering at this sudden alteration, but
left her not without calling help, and with all possible means sought to bring
her to life: but in vain they strive, for she has paid her due to death, whom
all the labor they might use prevailed not to call again. When they saw no
remedy, the maid presently dispatched a messenger to Ieronymy, enforming him
what was happened. But careless, he thinking it had been some policy of the
Lady to draw him thither, that by entreaty she might crave grace at his
hands for her friend, would not give credit to it: But rewarding the messenger
with bitter words, rested all night as he might. In the morning early
pretending to let his sister know his mind, and how hardly he brooked her
lascivious life, which she spent in formcation with Andrugio, he repared to her
chamber, where entering the same, he saw ye breath less tronke of the Lady lieng
on the rushes, and her maid with others in tears bitterly bewailing the
untimely death of her, whom for her courtesy they loved dearly.

This sight of Ieronymie, was little pleasing, at which maugre his heart he
could not refrain the shedding of tears but standing mute a long time, as one
in a trance, on the sudden coming to himself, he inquyred the cause of her
death, and how it came to pass, whereof none in the company could advertise
him, wherefore accusing his own follies and light belief, he supposed that
his bitter words, used in disgrace and slander of her honest life to be the
caus^ thereof. But dissembling his grief he presently departed to his own
house, and sending for those two Gentlemen which had made the complaint unto
him of his sister and Andrugio, taking them into his chamber, as if he had in
secret to impart unto them, he stabbed them both, to the end they should not
in like sort, as they had to him acquaint others with the slander of his sister
and Andrugio.

Taking order for Madam Melissina her burial according to her estate, he kept
his chamber long time, and would not be seen or spoken to of any body
whatsoever: in the midst of these sorrows, he often thought of Andrugio, who
lay in most pitiful misery, almost starued for want of food by his own
command: which when he considered, dreading the punishment of God for his
light belief, and massacring those he had slain, besides his sisters death,
more near unto him then all the rest, he commanded Andrugio to be dispossessed
from all the substance he had, and to be clothed in such base apparel as he
found him in, being prisoner in the Turks Galleys, and sent him into
freesland to a friend of his, a Nobleman, whom in his letters he earnestly
desired to inflict some grievous torment upon Andrugio.

This Noble man not knowing any cause, but at Ieronymie his request, kept him
as a drudge in his kitchen to do his slavery, and for all kind of carriage for
the provision of his house, he made him to draw home like a horse upon
fleids, shooing him of purpose in wooden shoes with long calkes of iron, for
slyding on the yse: in this misery lived Andrugio the term of two years,
with great penury still accusing Fortune, that would not as well command his
life to be taken from him, and so end his calamities, as to aggrauate his
pains, daily to inflict new punishments on him, too much for a man to endure,
and enough for a beast. Traueiling thus with his ^leids from place to place,
there chanced a country man of his, a traueiler, wanting in the town where
Andrugio was a common ^leid which carried passengers, he requested Andrugio
(whom he vnderderstood dwelled within a mile or two where his business lay)
that he might pass with him. Andrugio vnderstanstanding by his speech, that he
either was of Saxony, or near there bordering, took him in, and courteously
entertained him: and passing on their journey, enquired from whence he was, who
answered he was of Saxony. This word began to renew a lively color in the
face of miserable Andrugio, who thought now to hear the certain news how all
things did stand, of the health of his father the duke: wherefore he began as a
stranger that did know little, to enquire of the government of the country,
which the stranger courteously told him, adding withal the death of the Duke,
with their sorrow for the loss of so noble a Prince. These words caused
Andrugio to shead tears most piteously, which was noted of his passenger,
which demanded the cause of his sudden heaviness. Andrugio excusing the
matter, said that he could not choose but lament their loss, who should want
so good a Iusticer as he reported that Duke to be: demanded further, if he
left no children behind him to succeed him, and how the country was governed?
My friend (quoth the Saxon) but that grief will not permit me to discourse it,
I could tell thee as lamentable a history as ever thy ears have heard, but
answering thy demandes, I beseech thee of friendship to pardon me the rest.
Truth is (my friend) our Duke having one son of wit pregnan^, in learning
forward, and of personage for his time peerless: This young prince in woeful
time we may all say that live in this grieved country of Saxony, desirous to
learn knowledge, craved license to study at the University of Siena whether
he had leave to go, accompanied with diverse young Nobles of our country, and
Gentlemen of great name, who most untimely lost their lives, as they traueiled
through Germany, and he only left alive, and yet in great danger: but recovering
his health he departed to Siena, and from thence no man knows whether, nor
none can tell whether he live or no, yet has there been great inquiry made
for him in many countries. His Dukedom in his absence is governed by six
lords of the country in very good order: unto whom not long since, there
came a brave Gallant from the University of Siena to enquire of the good
health of our Dukes son, named Andrugio, for that as the report shows, they
were bedfellowes and sworn friends in Siena. But when he found not my Lord
Andrugio, and was truly advertised that they had not seen him since his being
at Siena, with great grief he lamented his absence, and vowed never to leave
travel until he found him, or had some certain news of him: so leaving his
name, which (as I can remember) was Galastio, son unto the Duke of millaine,
he departed to the great sorrow of our Nobles, who persuaded him earnestly to
leave the hazard of so bad a match.

Andrugio who had with no little grief harkened to this, could not forbear the
shedding of tears most abundantly, which the traueiler pitied to se, least
doubting that which afterward happened.

Andrugio with much a do drieng up the conduites of his weeping eyes, unto the
talk of the traueiler thus answered.

Then good my friend (quoth he) if your dwelling be within the Dukedom of
Saxony, as you make report, tell me I beseech you how you came by the
knowledge of this that you have made relation, and I will requite you if I may.

Yea, quoth the traueiler, I was borne in ^he Dukedom and from my childbyrth
brought up ye city where the Duke kept his court. What I say is full well
known unto me, My father a Gentleman of his Graces retinue while he liuen,
whom I have daily seen with tears to bewail the death of this good Duke,
and with no little sorrow, lament his sons absence. Tell me then friend, how
if it should be thy chance to meet the dukes son, what favor would thou
do him: if his want were great, could thou any way relieve him, or in what
sorce would thou deal with him. Sir (quoth he) if my hope were such to
find him, I were the happiest creature of my whole progeny, and so should
repute my self, and great favor should I gain in my country if I might but
bring certain news of his life or death, to whom I would willingly as my
duty and leache Lord, impart what I have or can by my acquaintance, marchantes
of our own country take up to relieve him, whom I trust, needs not my
help, if he live.

The dukes son may think himself bound to you quoth Andrugio, if he did but
know your love to him, and if he be a gentleman, he cannot but requite it. That
Andrugio, by talk had knowledge of the man, yet not resolved, whether to make
himself known unto his countriman, to hear the sorrow of the Lords for his
absence, and what grief his whole country endured for him: besides his double
sorrow for the decease of his noble father studying this what to do, he
refolued that it was the pleasure of God, so formnately to give him knowledge
of the state of his country, and therefore not against the pleasure of God to
refuse so good opportunity, least he that sends all happiness displeased at
his follies, should augment his punishments. wherefore resolved (he says)
Lorenzo (for so was he called) since I see the love thou barest the duke in his
life, as thy report, to his hour after death, shows, I were ungrateful, if
I should not requite thee with some friendship. Therefore my good Lorenzo,
know that thou art the man yt shall glad the hearts of them thou say do
mourn, by bringing them certain tidinges of Lord Andrugio their young Prince,
whom I can assure thee, lives but in great poverty, far vn^^tting his
estate. wherefore if thou can procure to furnishe him with provision of
apparel and money for his charges, I can and will bring thee to his presence,
let me know therefore thy mind for our journey begins to shorten, and I
must leave thee. Lorenzo hearing the name of him whom he had thought never to
have seen more, began to note the man more and more, but so much was he
altered in countenance, with the sun, and weather beating at sea, that he
could not know him, wherefore Lorenzo besought him of that zeal that
Christians owe one to another, not to hide himself any longer, if he were the
man as he did suppose he was, to let him know it, that he might do him that
duty as to his dread Lord, or if not himself, not to depart until he brought
him unto Lord Andrugio his presence, that if his poverty be such as you
report, Lore^zo may relieve it, and show the zeal, he owes unto the noble
Andrugio.

Andrugio, being assured by this of Lorenzo his zeal could forbear no longer,
but with tears running like streams, wringing Lorenzo by ye hand, said,
Lorenzo, my old acquainted friend and companion Lorenzo, how may my heart
rejoice to hear thy love to him whom thou never had no cause to think on?
but since I knew it by proof, and see what duty thou did owe the duke
deceased, albeit I may be ashamed to manifest that I cannot conceal from thee.
Know this Lorenzo, I a^ that Andrugio, Son and Heir to the noble Duke of
Saxony, who by the cruelty of fortune have never lived since my going to
Siena but in great misery, and never was it my chance in my travels, which
has not been small, to mee^e with any of my acquaintance. But seeing God has
caused thee to be the first, and only man: let me know Lorenzo, thy counsel
what is best to be done, thou see the life I lead is slauishe and most
odious, such as my heart hardly broketh, yet can I not eschew it in any sort.
If I should fue, he, to whom I am thus inthralled, would pursue me: if I
refuse this wherein I have some liberty, then might it be worse for me, nor
how to discharge my self from it, I cannot devise: if I acquaint him with my
estate, then may^ be, that he will inflict some great sommes of money on me,
for my ransom, so that I am now in such an agon^e, tha^ I know not what shall
become of me. Desirous I am to see my native country and friends, and to
comfort these my loving subjects, which sorrow for my absence: if thou lend
aid to my desire, let me know therefore thy advise Lorenzo, and assure thee,
that the good thou affoordest me in this extremetie, shall be repayd thee with
many thanks.

Lorenzo shed tears abundant, to hear his tale, yet was his heart surprised
so with joy, that he could not speak, but passing it over as he might,
kneeling on his knees, humbly kissed his hand, giving God thanks, for blessing
him with so good fortune, as to be the first that should bring the tidinges of
comfort to his country, protesting withal, his purse, yea life and all, was at
his commandment: and my good Lord, (quoth he) touching your departure, if you
will be ruled by my advise, we will return to the place from whence we came,
where I have some friends and acquaintance of our country, with whom I will
deal, for money and necessaries, befitting your Lordship, your self shall
rest as secret as you may, until the spring our ships may be free, when with
the first we will depart. This counsel liked Andrugio well, and without
denial returned to the place from whence they came, which ere they might
recover, was late in the night. Lorenzo being well acquainted in his lodging,
called them up with diverse of his countrymen, to whom he declared what had
happened, who were as joyful of this good news as Lorenzo.

Thus remained Prince Andrugio, amongst his friendly countriemen, honored
with all titles of majesty beseeming his estate, but very secret, nor never
disclosed, what he was but amongst themselves, for whom Lorenzo was not a
little careful to provide all things for his honor, that he might with
majesty, beseeming a prince return to his country.

All things provided for this his happy journey, the spring now appearing,
where the frosen alps began to disclose, and the splendant beams of the sun
showed in most glory, Their provision being all ready to clappe a board,
they attend but his pleasure that has wrought all things else for their
content, to send them a happy gale: which luckely coming as they expected,
they were with the first ready to set sail, bidding Freesland farewell, their
gallant Bark fleesed the waves, with a prosperous and happy gale, to the
ending of every one of their wishes, and accomplishing Andrugio his desire.
Time, and short time, has brought them to the port of their desire, when they
had no sooner anchored, but Lorenzo sent by Andrugio, hastined to see his aged
father, and withal to will him in all haste to repair unto him, to
participate in counsel, what he were best to do, either suddenly to make his
arrival known, or to conceal it for a time, but scarsly had Lorenzo his
father blessed him, and given his welcome, when blab-like he revealed unto his
father Andrugio his coming, who as joyful to hear it, as the other was in
recounting it, presently spread it throughout the city, and to the governors
of the state, who presently upon the report, addressed themselves withal the
honor they could to receive him, commanding the belles to be roong, and
sollome praises with rejoicing fires, throughout the City in sign of joy.

Andrugio expecting long the return of Lorenzo, looking earnestly for him, on
the sudden heard all the belles to ring, which made him admire woonderfully:
in the end he might behold the shore filled with multitudes of people, and
the numbers to increase, by which he imagined, there was some thing in hand.
Thus standing in dumpes, there came from the shore all the Nobles of his
country to give him welcome and to bring him to land, where with great joy of
his subjects he was entertained in such sort, as might have caused the
mightiest Emperor to have thought well of his people, and to give them
thanks. In great pomp rides Andrugio to his palace with ioifull hearts
received of his subjects, who to show their loves, with triumphs, masking,
and other pastimes, during one whole we^k spent their times.

The solemn welcome was not finished, when the lords and states of the
country that had the government, in open assembly delivered their authority
in most reverent and dutiful manner, acknowledging him to be the right and
lawful heir of their deceised duke, desiring him yt guides the hearts of all
princes, to make him as fortunate in his actions as his father.

Andrugio settled thus in his Dukedom, governed with great wisdom, using
justice to all, with his nobles familiar, and to his commons courteous, wronging
no man, but releeuing all that were comfortles, to the prisoners and men in
bondage, he had a special regard, measuring their miseries by his own
calamities, having ben as they are. To recount all his honors, would fill large
volumes, and grow tedious to the hearer only let this suffice, he lived the
terms of two years and more unmarried, beloved of all within his dukedom so
generally, that they delighted in nothing so much, as in lauding and extolling
his honorable actions in such wise that other countries gave him the like honor
as his own people: passing the flouring prime of his youth, the Nobles of his
country having care of the state, offered many great marriages, but al to no
purpose: with thanks he returned all their friendship, accepting none. The old
sinders of affections which lay raked up in his heart, began now again to
burn, so that day nor night was spent without great care taking how he might
accomplish his desire, and enjoy Susania to his wife, yet for that she was so
base, and fearing his n^bles would be offended, to know her calling, and
refusing their offers, was in great perplexity, not dating to disclose it to
his dearest friend and most familiar. But Cupid giving spur to his desires,
could not let him rest until he sought some mean for his quiet. Casting many
ways in his perplexed mind, how to give his heart ease, and his desire end,
determines to prove the faithfulness of Lorenzo, whom he had advanced to
honor, for this favor showed: wherefore finding opportunity, he brake with him
after this manner.

Lorenzo, how much I do reckon my self beholding unto thee I will not say, by
whose means and good fortune in meeting thee I am the sooner settled in my
Dukedom, a friendship which shall never be forgotten so long as Andrugio
lives. But Lorenzo as thy faith has been firm unto me, and thy readiness as
great to do me this good, so am I the bolder to make choice of thee above al I
know to impart a matter of more weight, and touches me nerer then the loss of
my Dukedom, in which if I find thy readiness and secrecy according to my
wish, thou bindest Andrugio by an everlasting band of inviolable friendship to
rest thine. Speak therefore Lorenzo, if I shall repose this trust and
confidence in thee according as I do desire, then solemnly swear the
concealing of the same, and thy speedy furtherance.

Lorenzo as one desiring nothing more then the princes favor and to augment
his good opinion of him rather the^ to decrase it any way, protested unto hun
by the faith of a loyal subject, that rather would he iudure all the torments
that might be devised, then disclose any thing he was charged to conceal, to
any one, but such as he was commanded.

Andrugio seeing by his earnest looks, that he meante faith, interrupted his
speech: saying, enough Lorenzo, I accept thy word, therefore hearken to what I
have to say unto thee.

Thou have heard me already recount the hard beginning of my unfortunate iourny
to Siena, with loss of my frie^dly companions, what time my self hardly
escaped with life: wounded thus I was cured by the hands of a simple country
woman, who entartained me well, of whom I wanted nothing necessary for my
relief. During this my time of sickness, I was attended on by my friendly Os^es
daughter, a maiden with all perfections of a woman so endowed, that it is hard
to find her equal. This maiden for her womanish behavior, her wisdom and
good conditions, besides her beauty which exceeded, so pleased my mind, that
she won my affections to be hers: yea so did I in heart crave her for my
wife, before all that ever I saw, that I took no pleasure but in her company,
to parlie with her, and to hear the sweet soul recount such old tales as
she had learned of her ancient father and mother. To this maiden (Lorenzo) I
plighted my faith to live with her as my wife, and she the like to me, as to
her husband, the which vow, I neither can nor may forget. Wherefore (Lorenzo)
being now oppressed with the remembrance of the same, I cannot be quiet day nor
night until I enjoy her presence, and be linked in marriage to her whom I
esteem deerer then my life. Now Lorenzo my will is, that in the secretest manner
thou may, thou provide thy self with such sommes of money necessary for
this journey, and accompanied with thy trustiest servants, speed thee unto my
beloved, and in my name greet her from me, and deliver this piece of ring for
a token which she gave me at our departure: by virtue of which command her to
come to me with all speed, A sign to give true testimony from whom thou
come, and entreat her Lorenzo as the wife of thy Lord. See thou apparel her
as beseems my wife, before she approach the confines of our Dukedom. This
business committed unto thee, perform as faithfully as my hope is in thee,
and bind Andrugio for ever to be Lorenzos. Thou know my mind, my Treasurer
shall furnish thy journey with treasure, to whom thou shall have my warrant,
make speed therefore as thou tenderest his life that holds thee dear.

Lorenzo having heard his long discourse, humbly thanked his Grace for the good
opinion he had conceived of him protesting that his loyalty and duty should
in such sort be employed, as he might justly say at his return, Lorenzo is
faithful, honest, and firm, whereof my gracious Lord (quoth he) have no
farther care, but according to your trust, all shall be performed, as your
heart shall wish or desire.

Lorenzo sleeped little time, but having made his provision, departed the city
and iornied day and night, until he came to the deserts of Gusqueno, where
the beloved of his Lord made her abode: to whom Andrugio his messenger came
not before he was looked for, nor so soon by many years, for that she never
heard of him since his going first to Siena, by reason of his troubles. Lorenzo
having recovered ye Millers house, enquired after the maiden, to whose presence
being come, in reverent manner (more then she would or wished) doing his duty,
he recounteth unto her Andrugio his message, declaring that it was his pleasure
that presently she come unto him, for that the time was now come that all
things to her content and his desire should be performed.

Susania when her hope was all past, ever to see or hear of him again, having
been absent so long, and never could hear any tidings of him, neither in his
own country, nor at Siena, whether he iornied from her fathers house, thought
verily he had been dead, wherefore on the sudden could not tell what to say
yet viewing the piece of ring, which she did well know, she imagined that he
was living, wherefore after diverse questions, demanded of Andrugio his success
in his absence both abroad and at home, answered, what you are I know not,
wherefore I beseech you of pardon, if irreverently I use you, or not as
beseems your calling, my bringing up is rustic as you see in this poor
cottage, and your self a mere stranger unto me. Touching my Lords demand I
know not what to say, being not at mine own disposing, but to be governed by
them of whom I received my being: as I have ever by them been ruled, so will I
of them be advised, yet my Lords love is dear unto me, yea dearer then mine
own soul. Rest you I beseech you sir this night with such homely viandes as
this wilderness affoordeth, welcome I assure you shall be your best cheer,
and at my Fathers home-comming you shall know more.

Lorenzo wearied with travail, accepts her offer, yielding thanks for that
favor.

Susania descanning on Lorenzo his message, imagines whether her heart was
joyful or no, having so good a cause, and her hope so great to come from a
Millers cottage to a princes, and live in court honored of Nobles. This happy
tidings could Susania with much pain endure to conceal any time, wherefore
she dispatcheth a messenger in all have to seek her father and mother, unto
whom being come, she recounteth at large Andrugio his message delivered by
Lorenzo, with his happy success, and attayning unto his dukedom, with all
beseeching her father and mother, as they loved and tendered the preferment of
their child, not to gainsay the will of the noble Andrugio, for that their
loves had been equal, and fortune had done them both wrong to separat them so
long, seeing it stood with the pleasure of God, after many days of trouble to
her loving Lord, and no little sorrow to her self, that they might enjoy each
other, his francke consent, with her mothers, might be granted.

Thus with joy, the toonge faltering in her mouth, she could not utter a word
more, which the father perceiving, began to censure the cause, proceeded of
great joy and entering into judgment of all causes, which might be
prejudicial to his child, as also the desire he had to see her well bestowed,
the old beldam his wife casting their heads together, in privy counsel,
betwixt them it was agreed that she should go, although nature would hardly
brook to forgo her, especially so far, that all things considered, and
that their faith was plighted one to another, they would not be denied,
wherefore at supper Lorenzo being placed at such homely viandes, as could be
suddenly prepared, the aged father said, Gentleman of Saxony, if my Andrugio,
your Duke were present, he could be but welcome, and so he has been to this
simple cottage, so assure your self you be, and thanks I yield you with my
heart for this pains taken for the benefit of my poor child, for whom
without b^ast I may with tears report, I have and ever had a fathers care.
Many a good yeomanly son, yea, and sons of gentle race, has she forsaken,
proffering their love with large dowries unto her. But since the time of your
Dukes lodging in my house, she never had any mind of marriage, taking less
pleasure in hearing of any such offer then in ought else might be spoken: my
self could never tell the cause, but that my wife her mother did partly
understand somewhat of her mind, being heavy, sad, and diverse times sickely.
when other youth spent their times in pleasure and sporting, to recreate
themselves, she would wayle and lament in such sort, as it has not a little
grieved me to behold. But (my Lord) what was concealed then, I partly guess at
now, it was love I see, the love of my Lord Andrugio, who by what means I know
not has obtained her heart and faithful liking, and since I hear by the
report of my daughter, how constant he remains in his choice, not
respecting her base birth, and that I hold it the will of God, after many
perils, they should enjoy each others company, I am content she shall be at his
graces obedience and my self with what I have at his commandment, praying
God to make them in love so happy, as the fortunatest that ever lived. And
this by the way my good Lord, since it has pleased him amongst many others
to make you the man should take charge of my child, and to bring her to his
presence, I do herewithall beseech thee as thou art noble, and bound to
defend virgins to the uttermost of thy power, to be ayding unto her, not
suffering her to be iniuried in what thou may remedy, I know her
advancement shall have many enemies, who spiting that she from so base birth
should be so exalted, will envy her happiness, and be a mean to set discord
betwixt the duke and her, by which means she may be scorned, and cast from his
presence, and so constrained to seek her fortune in misery. wherefore to
prevent ensuing evils, as thou tenderest the love of thy princely Lord, that
sent thee, swear unto me, by that order of nobility, which thou professest in
all extremeties to be ayding unto her, and in Gods name at your pleasure, she
shall accompany you.

Lorenzo listening to the large discourse of this kind father, noting the care
he had for his child, whom he t^nderly loved, presuming on his Lords
constancy, vowed with solemn oaths unto him, that so long as ever it pleased
the divine deities, to preserve him with life, he would stand and abide a
father, and firm friend unto her, and in all honest causes maintain her just
quarrel against all men, yea if it were against the duke himself.

Time now is come when they must depart: wherefore these aged parents might
not forbear the shedding of tears in most abundant wise, the sight whereof
moved Lorenzo to great pity, yet passing over the extremity thereof, with a
heavy heart, and countenance wanne for her departure, he says, my loving
daughter, how I have nourished thee ever from thy birth, thou can partly
conceive by my favors showed, since thou had reason to know good from
evil, in hope to find thee a comfort to thy mother and me, now in the
enclining of our days in the earth, which how near they draw, he that gave
us breath best knows. But contrary to my expectation, thou art now parting
from us, into a better place, where thou have few friends, and less
acquaintance: wherefore it behooves thee to have the more regard to thy
behavior: for I tell thee my Susania, promotions have many enemies and few
friends the mightiest are hated when the poor live securely, wherefore as it
is the pleasure of the highest, to make thee the best of thy kin, have these
precepts in mind, and doubtless thou shall enjoy thy estate in the less
peril: Let not thy calling make thee proud nor disdainful, but remember
always from whence thou came: if thou be humble, thy nobles in better sort
will love thee, but being ambitious, will disdain thee, and seek thy
destruction, Emperors and mighty potentates, through ambition have been
foiled, and thrust from their ^eates of dignity. Then let not this estate make
thee proud, least it fare worse with thee. Be duetifull to thy Lord and
husband: if he love thee, be thou kind to him: if he be froward, do not with
cross speeches move him, for odious speeches will make thy honest behavior
loathsome unto him: if he be impatient with any, let thy industry be to
pacify him, and for thine own part, let not his speeches, spoken never so
greatly in thy disgrace move thee to choler, so shall thou show thy self
wise. If he have any imperfection, do not as common gossips do upon their
quaffing reveal it, for that is a most odious fault, and it shall make thee a
laughing stock to others, and cause thy honesty to be attempted by ruffians,
and such as would gladly see thy dishonor, for all honest women will fear
that, which is commonly spoken of dishonest women. Briefly please thy Lord and
husband in all things, but especially in such as draw nearest his inclination,
love him entirely above all others, be patient and learn to wink at many
things he does the prudent in thy household affairs, careful to bring up thy
children, fair spoken, kind and courteous to his nobles, and all others,
plentiful in honorable works, a friend to the honest, and a very enemy to
light youths, as thy leisure from thy Lord shall permit: spend thy time in
reading learned sayings of the wise, for by such honest occupations women are
withdrawn from other unworthy exercises. Thus as a father have I in my blunt
manner, prescribed thee to gain the love of all men, and continue the good
opinion of thy Lord. Time draws on, and thy protector Lord Lorenzo attends
thee, wherefore I will detain thee no longer, but with my blessing commend you
to the protection of him that best knows how to preserve thee, and so sweet
daughter farewell.

Thus after kind tears spen^ on either side for their departure, Lorenzo
contenting bountifully his host for his entertainment, they betake themselves
to their desired journey. Duke Andrugio which had long expected to hear of his
best beloved, is now certified by a messenger, that she with Lorenzo are within
two days iourny of the court: upon which news, he sommoneth his nobles and
estates, commanding them to be ready to accompany him the next day, in the
most sumtuous sort they migh, to give entertainment unto a stranger, coming
from far to see him, yt which was accordingly performed in such wise, as
Andrugio by their diligence in fulfilling so suddenly his desire, thought
himself most highly honored by them. Thus all things performed as his heart
could wish, the next morning Andrugio with his train set forward to meet
Susania at the house of Signior Anthony a knight of his court, where he had
appointed to meet her: upon which journey, as he traueyled, he acquainted
diverse of his chiefest Lords with the pretense of his coming from the Court,
and with what zeal he had honored and loved that maiden, which they went to
meet: beseeching them of that love they did bear unto him and his deceased
father^, to make account of his love, and to do her that reverence which
belonged unto the Lady and wife of their Duke, for that she was the object of
his heart, and the only one that should participate with him in love.

The Nobles which harkened to his protestation so unsuspected, began diverse
ways to conjecture of the same, his friends and trusty followers conceiving
the best: others whose love was not so firm, as it pleased them: yet all alike
to content him, gave their willing consentes, that if he had planted his
liking, it were against reason and their oaths of duty and obedience, to
gainsay what liked him. Therefore wishing unto him much joy of what his heart
desired, they bad God prosper them both to their own content.

Passing the way in parlie, they arrive at the house of Signiour Anthony, who
glad to see his Lord and master within his mansion, had provided the cheer
he could come by, bidding him and his train most friendly welcome. To tell
you the exceeding joy of those two Lovers at their meeting were needless, but
suppose how welcome the sight of any long desired thing is unto you, so shall
you easily guess in what happy estate those lovers thought themselves.

After some conference had betwixt the Duke and his beloved, with the consent
of their nobles, their marriage was determined, and presently in the house of
Anthony was it constituted to both their contents, and the liking of all such
as loved him, who with a general consent made outward appearance of their good
consents.

This marriage performed, and some time spent in pleasure, as tilting, masking,
and other pastimes in honor of the wedding, the Duke with his new adopted
Princess thanking their friendly Host for their entertainment, bad him
farewell, departing toward their own palace, where they were of the citizens
(where he kept his court) most royallye received, each one crieng with a
general voice, God save their Duke and Duchess.

The term of two years and sometime more was passed in exceeding joys
between those kind Lovers, in which time God sent the^ two saire and goodly
children, to wit, one some and one daughter to their great joy, and rejoicing
of all the commons. But as the virtuous be always most subject to the envy
of the world, so in time the fire of hatred which had been long smochering in
the bosoms of Gonsalo and Flodericus, two Nobles of Saxony began to break
forth into hot burning flames, in such sort that raising their tenants, kin,
and followers, persuading them their intents were honorable, and for the
benefit of their common wealth. Thus they assembled a great army and encamped
themselves within two small miles of the court, seeking by all the means they
could to draw unto them such as favored the Duke and his.

The news of this rebellion brought unto Court, the Duke marueiling much what
should be the cause: presently to prevent ensuing mischiefs, as well as for
his own preservation, dispatcheth with all speed posts for all his Nobles,
commanding them with all the power they could make to repair to ye court. In ye
mean time himself provides (as he best could) for the safety of the city. When
he had taken this course, being thereunto advised by his friends, he
dispatcheth his chief Her aught at arms unto those two rebellious Nobles,
commanding them to dislodge their army, and to yield themselves to his mercy.
But they whose stomachs were sharply bent to see his confusion, with stout
tearins refuse his honorable message, and by his Her aught des^ed him:
commanding most arrogantly the Herhaught to tell the Duke, that their pretense
was to subvert the dukedom and to drive with shame both the Duke and his
beggerlike Compere from so honorable a place as the Dukedom of Saxony: adding
further, that in the life time of his father their late Sovereign, they were
sworn to maintain the estate and honorable reputation of the Dukes house,
which he his son did not regard, but had by joining in marriage with a base
Minion, ruinated his posterity, and made their bloods innoble, refusing for
her many of honor and great reputation which were offered him. Wherefore Her
aught (quoth Flodericus) say thus unto the Duke, that if he will condescend unto
such demandes of our, as we shall set down, we shall accordingly submit our
selves unto him and acknowledge our duties: otherwise we are resolved to die in
that cause which we have taken upon us to maintain.

The Her aught having heard their answers, certified the Duke of their
intentes, wherewith he was not a little grieved: yet as one tendering carefully
his Ladies love and welfare, he still concealed the same from her, determining
rather to end his life, then part with his hearts desice: in such account held
he the love of his Lady, whose courteous behavior was such, as gained the good
liking of all his subjects, from the best to the meanest, only those two
Nobles, of envy that the Duke refused the daughter and heir of Gonsalo,
sought his destruction.

To be brief, so strong were those two Rebels, that they besieged the city
round about in such wise, yt in short a time their victuals began to wax
scarce, and no remedy, but either they must all starve, or try their fortunes
by the sword. The Duke thus resolved with his company, astying on him that in
many miseries had been his protector, issued out on unawares upon his enemies
and fought with them a sharp and grievous battle, in which many of his
company miscarried, and he compelled to fly, losing the field: at which time
his enemies taking their advantage, pursuing them that sled toward the city,
entered pell mell committing great slaughters of his people, in the end being
quietly possessed of the same, they sought for the Duke, who was not to be
found. Wherefore to be revenged on the Duches, they determined to put her to
the sword, for whose life the common people with one general voice made
earnest intercession, at whose request she was preserved, but banished with her
two Infants, commanded upon pain of her life never to return again, within
any part of the regiment of the Dukedom of Saxony.

This cruel sentence pronounced against the Duchess, caused a number, which
dutifully honored the Lady for her courteous conditions, to shed tears, and to
be earnest Suitors for her, but in vain, for she must needs depart to seek her
fortune, where it best pleased the giver of al good to guide her.

This woeful Lady banished in such wise as you hear, her only companions were
two waiting women, which for her love exiled themselves, departed the City, so
ouercharged with sorrow, as might have moved a heart harder then adamant, to
have pitted her: yet for her own part content to bear this yoke with
patience, so that she might be certified of her Lord the Duke, who hiding
himself in the desartes, durst not be known or seen of any one, but as
fortune had parted them in extremity, so God gave them leave to meet in their
sorrows, to comfort one the other. For lo, as he by chance was straggling, to
gather roots and herbs to relieve his hungry stomach, having no other
sustenance, he heard the pitiful lamentation of a woman, complaining her hard
fortune, and bitterly weeping over her tender babes, beseeching God to show
that mercy unto a distressed wretch, in her adversity, to grant the duke to
meet them.

Andrugio which with a woeful heart had listened to this sorrowful plaint,
knowing well the voice of his dear Lady, was so ouercharged with grief, yt
he could not well speak: but recovering his senses, he cries out on fortune
which wrought his miseries, but more exclaymed against the fates and destinies,
that had suffered him to escape with life, to see his Lady and sweet babes to
endure such extremity. After he had long debated with himself, what was best
to be done in such an exigent, he entered ye place where his Lady sat,
rocking on her knee the sweet babe, which was a daughter: whose face, when the
good Lady beheld how joyful she was I need not relate, only this let me
tell you, his presence exiled from her heart the greatest grief. After this
joyful meeting, and that they had recompted one to the other, their mishaps,
Andrugio as one careful for his Lady and infantes, more then for himself,
bethought many ways of one especial, by which they might have comfort:
calling to mind his friend and companion, Galastino now duke of Millaine, he
determines not to rest in any place until he could recover his country. And
thus setting his mind thoroughly so to do, he with his Lady and two children,
with the two waiting Gentlewomen, with all speed they might, repaired to the
next port town, which was within three or four leaguts of them, where they
embarked themselves, for Millaine, selling such jewels as they had to pay
their passage.

The wind serving fitly for their purpose, within short time, they discover
the high lands of the country, and within small time after, the city of
Millaine, whether by the grace and help of Godthey came safely, and being in
an evening lated, took their lodging in an o^^rie, were they recreated
themselves, two or three days, one joining in the others company, hoping of
entertainment of the duke.

When Andrugio had reposed himself and that his heart was a little settled to
quiet, being out of the danger of his own country: taking fit opportunity,
when the Duke of Millaine with his nobles were pleasantly passing the time, in
beholding the (...) of the (...) springing fields, Andrugio presented himself
before him, yet not offering to speak unto him, nor ^^ he had aniething to
say: but as one amongst other great (...), which came to set him, the duke
casting his (...) all sides, to the people which rejoiced in his presence.
Among^^^ the company beholding a stranger, first noted his apparel, then the
person, which by h^s face he did very well remember, yet doubtful whether it
should be the same he supposed, for that he stood so simple, not beseeming the
estate of the duke of Saxony: but his mind not being yet satisfied, which
was continually on him, commanded one of the Peerces to seek him, describing
his apparel, and to inquire of what country he was, and to bring him unto
his presence, which accordingly was accomplished.

When Andrugio came before the duke, and that by the noblemen he was
advertised yt the stranger was of Saxony, the duke viewing well this face,
knew him to be the duke of Saxony, and lighting from his horse, imbrased him
most lovingly, maruelling what had happened, that thus one beseeming the estate
of his majesty, he came unto Millaine, unto whom Andrugio, with tears in
friendly wise (...) the misery he was driven unto by his nobles with the
^^^nishment of his Lady and children, which ruthful history in such wise
delivered by Andrugio, his friend m^^ed the duke to pit^e the distressed estate
o^ him and his, and with a heart of love and bounty, bad him to comfort
himself, and what was in the Dukedom of Millayne, to hold and take as his
own, protesting withal, that none in the world was more welcome unto his
country, then Andrugio the duke of Saxony. Thus enquiring where the duches
remained, he gave present charge to diverse his nobles, with his own coche to go
to her lodging, and in the best and honourablest manner they might, to bring her
to the court. This friendship of the dukes so unexpected of Andrugio, so
ouerioyed his oppressed heart, as with the same he was almost overcome:
whereof he thanked God most highly, and next, his majesty beseeching God to
maintain the h^nor he had, with all happiness, and free from the oppression
of all foes whatsoever.

Andrugio setlcd in Millaine, where he was welcome as to his own home, could
not content himself in this wise, but grieved in mind to see his misery,
more exclaymed on fortune, for this cruel part, then for all the sorrows he
had endured: so careful was he, for his sweet children, yt he did neither
quietly possess sleep, nor without trouble of mind eat his meat, wherefore
entering into consideration of his present state, waying what he was by birth,
and what pleasure he had possessed, well considering what an unstable goddess
they serve, which are fortunes darlinges, growing into contempt of all worldly
things, for that he noted their frailty, and diligently searching the joys
of heavenly motions, determines for ever to abandon himself from all human
society, in despite of fortune, and the vain intising baytes of the world
which he sees is transitory, he sequestreth himself from the world, only
contenting himself in contemplation. And thus having thoroughly resolved what to
do, in an evening late, when all men draw homewards from their sollace, and
pastimes abroad, to joys of their friends at home, Andrugio unknown, or
without acquainting any man of his pretense, withdrewe himself into a desert,
twenty miles distant from Millaine, where fearing a place, which was by all
likelihoodes, least frequented, he labored until he had builded in the hollow
of a hard rock, a proper lodge, where the remainder of his life he finished
contented with roots, herbs and such provision as the earth naturally
yielded: where when he had spent some time, in continual prayer, and hearts
case, and saw the quiet content he inioyed in that life, entering into the
manifold miseries of all Christians, he exclaimeth on that fickle goddeste
fortune, in these bitter terms.

O fortune constant, in thy inconstancy, if there be such a dame as
fantastical Poets affirm, whose blindness cannot discern the noble from
the pesantes, the Lord from the slave, nor the servant from the master: cruel
art thou which take thy pleasure in overthrowing monarchies and exalting the
base, only of presumption, to derogate to thy name, a title of Godhead. But
what vain opinions they hold, yt term thee a goddess, are easily to be
perceived, if they enter into it: for what can the servant do without
sufferance of the master, or what power have thou, but by the sufferance of
him that breaks life into all his creatures? but fo^^ish be they which have
by their supplications to thy blind dietie, made thee more presumptious, where
they ought to tread thy honor under foot: for what is fortune, but a feigned
devise of man's spirit? an imagination without truth? upon which (as Plutarhe
says) a man cannot settle his judgment, nor comprehend it, by any course of
reason, so that by this we must confess, that all things are ruled and guided
by the providence of God, and not by blind fortune: for when we want the
blessings of God through his anger which we cannot appease, then we accuse
our ignorance, and ingratitude toward his mamaiesty, by the unfortunate
chance of human things falling through the common error of men. we attribute
to fortune, As the Romans in elder tunes honored Fortune more then all the
world, calling her the Nurse, Patron and vpholder of the city of Rome: they
builded for her, many sumptuous Temples, wherein they honored this proud dame
by many tytles.

Silla having obtained the Dictatorship, yielded himself and al his actions to
Fortune, saving that he accounted himself the child of Fortune, and thereupon
took unto him the name of happy Julius Caesar, gave a certain assurance of
the hope he had in Fortune, when entering a small Frigot in so dangerous a
storm, that the Master was loath to weigh his anchor: he said thus unto him be
not affraide my friend, for thou cariest Caesar and his Fortune.

Agustus sending his Nephew to the wars, wished him to be as valiant as
Scypio, and as fortunate as himself. These and many other of great prowes and
magnificence, forgetting the honor of the true God, attribute al to fortune,
which is nothing. Ah deceitful Fortune, thou art easilye found, but hardly
avoided. They that have most labored to paint out this fained Gods say, that
she has a swift pace, a lofty mind, and a quick hope: they give her light
wings, and a globe under her feet, in her hand a horn of abundance, which
she powers forth upon such as pleases her. Some put a wheel in her hand,
which continually turns, whereby they that are on the top, tumble down into
the gulf of misery: as histories are full of examples. Haniball that lived
flourishing conqueror, died miserably by poison. Eumines one of Alexanders
lieftenants, exalted to honor from a Potters some being taken prisoner, died
of honger. Pertinex a soldier came to the Empire being a poor woman's son,
wherein reigning two months was slain by his guard. The Emperor Probus was
the son of a black smyth. Maximua of a Gardener. John Leyden a butchers
son of Holland was proclaimed King, and reigned three years in great
prosperity, and then subverted. Lo this is ye stedfastnes of fortune, desirous
of change, whereby many are drawn by her sweet proffers to pride, and many
vilde grievous sins, to provoke the Gods to wrath, who seeing their
insolency throw them down sooner then they rise, of purpose to make their
states more miserable: let us therefore wisely weigh what Fortune is, and
prepare our selves for all events, for he that is able to say, Fortune, I have
prevented thee, I have stopped up all thy passages, and closed up all thy ways
of entrance: that man puts not his trust in Fortune, but ioyeth in the
discourses of reason: riches, glory, authority and honor reioise them most
that stand least in fear of their contraries. wherefore in despite of Fortune
virtue flourishes. Then there is no good but virtue, and no evil but vice,
which is the contrary to it. The virtuous man is only free and happy, the
vicious man bond and unhappy. Likewise beauty and the disposition of the
body, majesty and honors are al of no force: But prudence, magnanimity, and
justice are anchors of greatest stay, which cannot be plucked up by any
tempest, and proves the sayings of Socrates to be true, that whole troops
of soldiers, and heaps of riches have been strained often to yield to the
enemies which have trusted in fortune, contemning the majesty of God: For wise
was that noble prince Amcharsis a Barbarian, who was so desirous to attain
virtue, that he left the kingdom of Silla to his yoongest brother, and went
into Graecia to profit with Solon: saying, that Fortune should never triumph
over him, but he would triumph over Fortune. These examples (Andrugio,) may
draw thee to virtue, and contemn the world, persist in thy doing, respect not
the world, nor take care for thy famylie, thy friend Galastino faithful and
kind to thee and thine, shall be to thy wife a husband, and a father to thy
fatherless infantes: yea thou Galastino may be in the world a mirror, to
give directions of true friendship: for besides thy self there is not one on
the whole earth: thou that showest thy mind by thy deeds: Thou prince of
Millaine art the true friend that Socrates prescribes to be the inestimable
jewel of the world, not to be valued by all the mortal things of the earth,
which true friendship of thine makes me happy in my unhappiness, and my
distressed family blessed, for whom I trust in time, thy sword shall make
passage unto the Dukedom of Saxony, and there plant my son Alphonsus to
succeed his Father in his right, yelding unto those accursed traitors and
their ofsprings the reward of traitors.

O friendly Galastino thou mirror of men, whose worthiness cannot be valued,
for thy faith and loyalty to thy friend. Many in prosperity like the fawning
dogs will follow a man, but in adversity fly from him like the full gorges
hawke. O world where is the faith and friendship that has been in times past
amongst men, taken from men because of their ingratitude to God. Hystories tell
us of many which lived, offering both life, lands, goods and what else for
their friends, signs of true fidelity, as Jonathan for David, we read in holy
wryt of their ieopardy one for the other, how often their friendship was
approved beetweene them, neither could the desire of dignity draw the
affectionate love and zeal of prince Jonathan from his David, albeit he knew
that David should succeed his father in the kingdom, he being his heir. So we
read of Achylles and patroclus, Orestes and pyllides, both of them calling
themselves by the name of Orestes, who was content to die to save the life of
his companion. The like was Ephenus and Eneritus, and Damon and pythias of
whose friendly love Dyonisius the tyrant seeing the prooffe, the one being
ready to die for the other, pardoned them both.

This is the trial of true friends: how many lives at this day like those:
Ah none, the more may our hearts grieve to think thereon. Ambition,
couetonsnesse, pride, and hatred are so crept into the hearts of men, that they
contemn God and his doings, their fathers, kin and welwillers. How many men
live in these days, that for a kingdom would not murder his prince, if he
might do it without fear of death, which is a terror to most men? How many
men be there that for riches will not stick to rob Temples, profane the name
of God, use perjury, to the confounding of the honest and their posterity?
yea, to enjoy what their own fathers have, seek untimely to cut of their
lives that first gave the^ breath? We daily see in our courts of justice the
father contend with thr son, brother with brother, wife with husband, and al
estates one with another cannot content themselves with their callings: all
proceed from ambition, which is nothing but a desire to enjoy honors, estates
and great places. Further, it is a vice of excess, and contrary to modesty:
for that man (as Aristotle says) is modest, which desires honor as he ought,
and as becomes him, but he that desires it by unlawful means is
ambitious. How many treasons has there bin by ambitious men conspired against
their sovereigns? We read of Frederick the third who after he had reigned
thirty years, was miserably murdered by Manfroy his bastard son, whom he
had made prince of Trantinum, and after he had committed this paracide,
poisoned his own brother Conradus yt he might make himself king of Naples,
Antonius and Geta successors in the Empire to Seuerus their father, could not
suffer one the other to enjoy so large a monarchy: for Anton. flue his brother
Geta with a dagger yt he might rule alone. Soliman king of ye Turks, when he
heard the showtes of his army yt they made for Sultan Mustipha his son, he
caused him to be secretly strangled in his chamber: and presently (being dead)
to be cast out before his army, causing this speech to be uttered with a loud
voice, there was but one God in heaven, and one Sultan upon earth: within two
days after he caused his second son Sultan Soba to die, for yt he wept for
his brother and Sultan Mahomet his third son because he fled for fear,
leaving but one of his race alive to succeed him.

These are but the familiar examples of ambition in respect of those that cause
men to put innocents to death, that they may the surer grow and increase: but
no doubt for the most part, just punishment follow the ambitious, for example
to others, whereof there are unfeigned histories, which mention the same.
Marcus Craessus, the richest man of his time, jealous of Caesar's glory, at the
age of threescore years, lead with a vain hope of conquest, undertook the
wars against Arsaces, king of the Parthians, in which wars himself was
miserably slame, with twenty thousand of his men, and ten thousand taken
prisoners. Marcus Marlius was for the like occasion thrown down from a rock,
and brake his neck. Oh that men would consider the fruits of ambition? who
would then willingly offend? for as the wise man says, (co^paring them to
smoke dispersed with the wind) desire nothing more then to run out their race
in continual cares, and miseries and calamities, depriving themselves of all
liberty, and which is worst, pawning their souls, to an eternal and most
miserable thraldom.

Thus let us detest ambition which is an infinite evil, and companion of
pride, so much hated of God and men: let us consider that wise precept which
is written by the learned Tarian, to Plutarcke, I envy (said this good
Prince) Scipio Africanus, and Marcus Porcinus more for their contempt of
offices, then for the victories they have gotten, because a conqueror, is for
the most part in fortunes power, but the contempt of officers, and refusal of
honors consists only in prejudice: let us mark well this one saying of
Titus, who using continual sithinges at meat and elsewhere, being demanded the
cause, said, I cannot keep my self from sighing and complaining, when I call
to mind, that this great honor which I have, is not certain but moveable,
that my estates and dignities are in sequestration, and my life as it were
laid in pawn or pledged unto me. Let the saying of the good Philip, Prince of
Macedonie, be well noted of great men, who one day falling in a place where
wrestling was exercised, beholding his body printed in the dust, good Lord
(quoth he) how little ground must we have by nature, and yet we desire all the
habitable world. Thus Andrugio, in thy sollitarie life, thou must (having
naught else to do) call to mind what (in study) thou have read, and in the
bitter grief of thy heart bewail them that live in those days of miquitie,
and note how God suffers all sorts of people to raygne, giving trial by his
abundant gifts to all estates, some to rule, some to obey, some to wealth,
some to want, some to sickness, and all to prove either their aspiring
hearts, by promotions, or their patience by trouble, whereof thou Andrugio
have just experience, which being young in respect of the aged, for years,
have continually tasted the rod of his wrath: yet thanks to him that frames
my heart to bear with patience this cross of poverty, for in the end shall
it fall out with me the better: in this contented life, shall I be better
pleased, then with all the abundance of the world: for riches provoke many
infirmities, which worldlings think not upon, especially to the covetous
minded, of whom Aristotle says, the covetous man desires to have from all
parts without reason, and unjustly withholdeth that which belongs to another:
he is sparing and scantiue in giving, but excessive in receiving: the covetous
man is never contented, but the more he has, ye more desires: the medicine
gold, and silver, which he seeks increases his disease, as water does the
dropsy, and may most rightly be compared to mules, which carry upon their
backs, great store of gold and treasure, yet eat nothing but hay. They endure
labor in procuring, but want the pleasure of inioying: they enjoy: neither
rest nor liberty, which is of wise men most desired, but live always like
slaves to their riches. Their greatest misery is, that to increase and keep
their wealth, they care neither for equity nor justice, yea, for riches they
contemn both God and man, and all threatninges, and punishments God has
pronounced against them, they live without friendship and charity, and lay
hold on nothing but gain, when they are placed in authority above others,
they condemn the innocent, and find always some cleanly cloak to their
bribing, making no difference, betwixt justice and profit, wherefore we may
well say, that covetousness is the root of all evil, for what mischief is
there not procured through this vice, from whence springes quarrels, strifes,
suits, hatred and envy, theftes, polling, sacking, wars, murders, and
poysoninges, but from hence God is forgotten, our neighbors hated, yea many
times the son forgiueth not the father, nor the brother, the brother: nor the
subject the Lord, for desire of gain (O execrable impiety to be well thought
of amongst us,) it causes men to break their faith given, to violate all
friendship, to betray their country and subjects, to rebel against their
Prince, but note how many mischiefs covetousness has attempted: Mulcasses
king of thiues, had his eyes by his own son put out, that he might cease
upon his riches: Polimnestor, son to Priamus of Troy, slew his kinsman
Polidorus, to gain gold, for the which Queen Hecuba, coming unto him,
without any show of coffeehouse, having him alone in a chamber, with the
help of her women, thrust out his eyes. The Emperor Caligula was so much
touched with covetousness, that there was no mean to get money, how unlawful
soever it were, which he sought not out, insomuch that he laid a tribute upon
Urine, and sold his sisters gowns, whom he had banished, yet in one year of
his reign, he spent prodigally 67. millions of gold, which Tyberius his
predecessor had gathered together, I call now to mind the remedy of a
covetous cardinal, who used when his horsekeepers had given otes to his
horses, to come down all alone by a trap door without light into the stable,
and steal their otes, and carried them into his Garner, whereof he kept the
key himself so long as he continued this goinges and comminges that one of his
horsekeepers, not knowing who was the thief, hid himself in the stable, and
taking him at the deed doing, with a pitchforke, so basted him that he left him
for dead, so that he was feign to be carried by four men into his chamber.
These with many other examples may move us to open the inward meaning of the
heart, by true prayer to the giver of all goodness, and learn with modesty
the heaping up of worldly treasures, for godliness with contentation is great
gain, and let all Christians procure that God may be worshipped, duty and
reverence given to superiors, concord be amongst equalles, discipline to be
used toward inferiors, patience toward enemies, mercy toward the poor:
but men puffed with pride, ambition, covetousness and al vile sins, show
themselves ungrateful to God their maker, a vice odious in the sight of God
and men: for note first, Adam having an unthankful mi^de to his creator, did
eat the forbidden fruit contrary to his express commandment, to whom he
owed all obedience: thus as by his ingratitude he neglected his obedience to
his Lord, so his punishment was according to the manner of his offense, for his
own spirits, which were before at his commandment, rebelled against him, and
led him to all kind of sin, which makes us inheritours of his curse, both
of sin and death, yet so dull is our understanding, that daily we fall into
this crime of ingratitude, which we ought to hate in great measure, and to fly
from it more then death it self, by reason of the evils which it has brought
upon us: but yet alas, we see amongst us too many ungrateful persons, who
betraye them soonest by whom they receive all their living and advancement.
And if unthankfulness be familiar with the meaner sort, let us not think it
farther off from those of higher calling, for upon every light occasion,
especially if a man frame not himself to that vice, which they have in
greatest commendation, they easily forget all the service that has been done
unto them, by reason of some new come guest, who will sh^we himself a
serviceable minister of their pleasures this happens sonest when men grow in
greatness, because commonly as their calling increase (not being instructed in
virtue) they wax worse and worse in behavior, but let them take this for an
infallible rule, that an unthankful person cannot long retain in his service
an honest faithful and good servant. The ancient said not without good cause,
that impudency was the companion of ingratitude, for if no beast (as they say)
is so shameless as an impudent, who is he that may be said to have less shame
the^ an unthankful body, for this cause of ingratitude. Among the sawes of
Draco established among the Athenians, there was this, that if any man had
received a benefit of his neighbor, and it were proved against him, that he
had not been thankful for it, it was death to the offender.

Alexander the greatest for bounty, and Caesar for pardoning injuries renowned
in all the histories: of them both it is said, that when Alexander had
knowledge of an unthankful person he never gave him any thing: nor Caesar
never forgave such. So grievously have virtuous men hated ingratitude. Yt is
reported of the Storke that she never brings forth young ones but she
casts one out of the nest for the hier of the house where she lodges. But
barbarous is that ingratitude in him that has been borne, bred, fostered and
served, and all with the sweat of another man's brows in the end to seek the
spoil of all that is therein, even the honor, and oftimes the life of the Host.
Wonderful are the mischiefs that happen to the unthankful, and many be the
examples of the sorrows and punishents that have followed ingratitude. Now if
we desire to shun this vile sin, and to imitate the virtues of the noble
minded to our utmost power, this is our help if we always esteem the benefit
which we receive of another greater then it is, and repute that we give for
less then the worth, neither let us as proud and vain glorious men do, who
vaunt that they stand in need of none, disdayn to receive a pleasure of our
friends, although they be of less calling then we, when they desire our
friendship, for if it be an honest thing to do good to all, that cannot be
dishonest at all, for in requital of friendship, a receiver is as requisite as
a giver. Furthermore, this one other point, to banish this vilde sin from
amongst men, if we requite double the good turn we receive one of another.
Lastly let us recompense double, and reward without reckoning those good
turns which we receive of others, rather fearing least we should be overcome
in Benificence then in worldly reputation and glory.

But wretched Andrugio, the more thou enterest into those grievous calamities
of the world, the more thou call to mind thy hard hap, and more, greeuest to
think of thy sweet Susania, and her tender babes then of thine own penury.
But God which is just, will with vengeance reward those traitorous reprobates
which have deprived their lawful prince from his seat of justice and majesty,
compelling him to seek courtesy where he may best get it, but worse shall befall
them then that traitorous prince Justinian, who selling for lucar of the
kingdom the famous city of constantinople, was crowned there and after three
days had his head cut off. pasanias a Captain of Lacedemon, having received
five hundred ducats to betray the city of Sparta, was by his father pursued
to a church, whether he fled for sanctuary, who commanded the walls to be
closed, and so famished him, and afterward his mother cast his body to the
dogs. Brutus cassius that would have betrayed Rome was in the same manner
served. Darius king of Persia caused his son Aariabarza^ his head to be cut
off, because he sought to betray his army to Alexander. Brutus did the like to
his ch^ldre^, who had conspired against their country, that king Tarquinius
might reenter.

If those noble Princes rewarded treason, by the deaths of their children and
most favored, then think not but your lives will be shortened for your
conspiracy against me: yea, assure you that the righteous judge of men will
punish it in you, as he has done in many others. The remembrance of your
crimes, with the thoughts of just judgment to be inflicted upon you, drives
my oppessed heart into a world of grief: but if I had searched so narrowly
into the thoughts of you (accursed Traitors) I had been happy in this my
unhappiness, but wise men have taught me that misery is necessary.

That man (says the wise man Bias) is able to bear misery which has been
trained in the same from his youth. And Dyonisius the elder said, that man that
has learned from his youth to be unhappy, shall bear his yoke the better which
has been subject to it in times past.

Demetrius said, that he judged none more unhappy the^ he which never tasted of
adversity. And Cicero judges him most happy that thinks no misery how
grievous soever it be, or intolerable, or does any way discourage him.
Nothing (says plutarch) is evil that is necessary: by which word necessary,
Cicero understands whatsoever happens a man by destiny, is necessary, and
we ought to bear it with patience as that can not be avoided. Socrates
speaking with a divine spirit said, yt when we shall be delivered from this body
wherein the soul is, as an oyster in yt shel, we may then be happy, but not
sooner: and that felicity can not be obtained in this life, but that we must
hope to enjoy it perfectly in an other life. If death be the happiness of men,
how happy had I been, if in my cradle I had paid the due I owe unto death,
the ioies which follow death, if our frail nature could conceive, and allow
were such comfort to al as well to the happy, as the miserable, that none would
desire life: for my own part having tried the happiness of worldly men, riches,
of covetousness so called, and consider the frailty of it, and the abuse of
men, I chose in these deserts to abandon me from al human fellowship, costly
fare and soft lodging, losing the company of my loving wife, and tender
infants, living with such roots and other things as ye earth yields, for yt I
have seen ye tyrannies used toward ye poor such wilful robberies and spoils
made of miserable people, so great discentions, so many hurts and miseries in
the common weal, such oppression, such partial judgment, such covetousness,
such whordome, and all sin so abounding: The bringing of which to memory,
makes mine ei^s blind, my tongue to folter, my members quauer, my heart pa^te
my intrals break, and my flesh consume: it is more grief to see them with
mine eyes, and to hear them with mine ears. Therefore seeing the fountain of
all happiness consists in contentation, I will purge my self of all
perturbations, which may hinder the tranquillity of the spirit, to the end
eternal things may be unto me more welcome and familiar when I shall know
how to use them. But resolved I am in despite of fortune (whose banding bal
from my infancy I have been) to continue the remainder of my life in this
sweet contentation: for as she (most blind and fained Goddess) has taken my
honors, my goods and worldly dignities may drive me in disgrace with the
people, but she cannot make my honest mind (...), which has always been noble
and valiant, nor take from me this settled mind, neither by the tediousnes of
my life, which is lot^some unto me, nor by any grievous or troublesome thing
that can befall me.

Thus with tears ceasing his mornful speeches, bewailing with heaviness of
heart the worlds ingratitude, we leave him to his solitary life for a season
in those deserts.

THE VVARRES OF GALASTINO Duke of Millaine.
FLodericus, and his fellow companions, ruling now in Saxony, thought
themselves sure of their seats, having banished all those that might claim by
right, any title in the Dukedom, usurping ambitious titles, and galling their
commons with taxes, and all other manner of pollinges, that their subjects
rather did choose to die then live in that servitude: yet remedy was none, ease
themselves they could not, but grouing under that heavy yoke, whereto they
were bound: Beseech God, who shows mercy to all people, to take their cause
in hand, and revenge the banishment of their good Duke upon those tyrants,
and their progeny, whose Lamentations, and sorrowful playntes, so often
powered forth, yet it pleased the Lord to hear, and as he delivered his
children Israel from the thraldom of Egypt, Jerusalem from the bondage of
Babylon, so raised he up that famous noble prince Galastino Duke of Millaine,
to revenge the wrongs, offered his friend and lawful Prince Andrugio, and
relieve his poor subjects, which lived in great thraldom long time, with
earnest inquiry being spent by Galastino, in searching out the abode of his
Andrugio, who could not be heard of: for all that might be done, for whose
absence the sorrow that was made, is not to be told. When Galastino saw all
diligence that could be used, might not bring him tidinges of the Duke, he
sommoneth all his nobles and counsel together, beseeching their frie^dly
advise, in a matter of weight, which he should impart unto them, the nobles
that with duty loved him, and whose zeal was such as becomes subjects to
their sovereigns, humbly sought his excellency to declare what he had to
say, promising to their utmost power, to counsel him therein, with all the
furtherance they could, and accomplish in any reasonable sort, what he should
require, Gala^tino who found his nobles, as ever before, duetifull and ready
to obey his will, gave them all most hearty thanks for the same, and after a
little pause taking, thus said.

Nobles and you states of Millaine, it is not unknown unto you all, in what
miserable servitude the poor subjects of my good friend the duke of Saxony,
have and does live since the exile of their lawful Duke, by those usurping
Miscreantes, which have now the government, whose wrong offered their liege
Lord, and my friend, I am determined to revenge, neither will I willingly
suffer men of so vile condition to live, that wrongeth their sovereign, whom
God has placed, nor suffer the innocent babes, of so honorable a prince, as
the duke of Saxony, to lose their rightful inheritance in the Dukedom, my
self that enjoy amongst you my birthright, and title of this country, have
many heirs to succeed me, when my earthly truncke shall yield his due to
death, unto whom I cannot divine what may be offered, yet hope the best, and
rely upon your fidelities, whom I have ever found loyal, but if the devil,
by ambition, wherewith he infecteth many of high estate, should tempt you in
such sort, not to be content with their degree, and should procure the vulgar
sort, to use the like cruelty to mine, the memory of my actions and zeal,
in defending innocents, remaining fresh in memory, may be a terror unto
those so evil disposed, who waying their wicked pretense, before they begin,
may assure themselves that God which is righteous, will raise some one, of
noble disposition, to revenge their wrongs, as by his sufferance I am now
drawn to the like in the behalf of those two children of my friend: the noble
duke of Saxony, for whom (on my honor) my care is as much as for mine own,
neither will I alter my determination herein, to be made a monarche of the
world, but to my utmost power, will so prosecute, what I determine herein,
that in the cause I will adventure my person, where such as love me, will follow
me.

The nobles which noted how earnest the duke was in uttering his long oration,
thought it no time to delay their opinions, what they judged of the enterprise,
yet were they driven to a non plus, what to answer so suddenly: to deny his
demandes and earnest request, might breed suspicion of their loyalty, then
which they rather choose to die: again to aggrauate him, to the attempt which
was before, so hotely bent, was but to put oil to quench the fire, wherefore
after small deliberation, they answered.

Honorable Lord, whose will has been held amongst us for law, Know dread
sovereign, that we have with advise considered of your long protestation, and
most highly commend in you so honorable a mind, and have noted what honor it
will be, to you and your posterity for ever, to regard the estate of the
widow and fatherless, such we term that distressed good Lady, the duchess
of Saxony and her infantes, for whom we have often been minded to entreat,
as in honor we are bound, that they inioying their right, might ease your
majesty of a great charge, and requite on those rebellious traitors, a fact
so odious according to their deserts, knowing that traitors, which seek the
subversion of their prince, ought not to live. Holy writ shows many
examples, how God punished such usurpers, where is commanded that none shall
lift their sword against their anointed, who on the earth are his vice
regen^es. David when Saul sought his life, came into the tent of the king,
finding him sleeping, yet durst not touch him, for fear of vengeance from
heaven. If treason were held in such contempt in those days, how ought it
much more now to be despised, Proceed therefore, noble Prince, and let the
tender care you have of these innocents whose cause you take in hand, deserve
such honor, in the courts of all christian Princes, that no talk may be, but
of Galastino, duke of Millaine, and his honorable revenge of those traitors,
that draw their swords against their sovereign: and having vanquished, the
villains, let their punishment be answerable to their deserts, that it may
breed terror to all such as shall ever attempt the like action, and remain to
the end of all things, in memory: toward the performance of which, of our
own cost, we freely allow ten thousand men, well furnished for war, with all
ye charge, wages, and what else to them belongs, besides our own persons, to
attend your excellency, which shall be ready, speedily awaiting your gracious
pleasures.

The Duke which found no less then he expected at the hands of his nobles,
was so ravished with joy, that it amazed him, wherefore yelding them such
honorable courtesy, as their large and friendly offer required, he thus
replied.

Noble friends, on whose fidelity our welfare consists, Thanks for this
friendship, and so likewise for many others past: more have you honored me by
your consent to this my fi^te, then I list now to utter, but assure you on the
word and majesty of a Prince, that your friendships shall never be forgotten.
Touching my determination for our journey to Saxony, know that our purpose is
(by the assistance of God, whom I trust favors our good intent, and will
help us according to equity of our cause) within two months, to be ready
for our intended voyage, wherefore, as you honor me, see that you accomplish
your late offers, against that time prefixed, unto which they faithfully
promise. dinner time Drawing on, the duchess advertised the duke thereof, who
invited his nobles thereto, where the Duke relates unto the duchess of
Saxony his parlie with the nobles of Millaine, with their courteous offers,
for the benefit of her, and her children: which news was so pleasing unto
her, as nothing could joy her more, hoping by that means the Duke her husbands
children should enjoy their lawful right, and she her self live to see the
same. Thus with much pleasant parley passed they diner, carowsing to their
happysuccesse and fortunate journey, until some of them have taken such cold in
the hands, that they might not stand on their feet. Time that works al
things commands these Nobles away, e^ch making to their home: wherefore
taking humble leave of the Duke and the two Duches, thy depart, careful of
what the Duke gave them in charge, to set all things in a readiness against the
time appointed,

The Nobles gone, the Duke calls his captains, and men fit for charge,
giving them warrant for leuieng his power, with great command that his company
should be of the best and ablest men in the Dukedom, which with care they see
fulfilled, according to the trust reposed in them.

The Duchess for whose sake those preparations were made, conceived such joy
at the same, that she thought every month a year, and every day a month,
until she saw to what happy end the Dukes pretended journey would happen unto,
often commending in her heart the faithfulness of the Duke of Millaine to his
friend. In recounting whereof she shed many bitter tears for Andrugio her
beloved lord and husband, sometime exclaiming against both Gods and men, for his
loss who so dearly she loved. The remembrance of whom was likely diverse times
to bereave her of life, yet in the midst of her sorrows, when she beheld the
young prince, a lively picture of the exiled Duke, how often with sweet
imbracings would she kiss the tender youth, bathing his tender cheeks with
tears distilling in abundance, through extreme grief of heart from her eyes,
hoping yet before death should shut those eyes of hers to see him, and once
against to enjoy his company.

The young prince growing to some discretion, being thirteen years of age,
well noting the sorrow and heaviness of his mother, would by cyrcumstances
inquire of the Duke his father, of his country, and the cause why he left the
same, with many other questions, of which when the Duchess had resolved him,
and made relation of each thing which he demanded, describing also at full,
how dearly his subjects loved him, and in what regard they held her, it would
move the prince often to shed tears, wishing that his years had been such that
he might have remembered his father, and of power to revenge his wrong, vowing
if it be the pleasure of God to endow him with life, so thoroughly to requite
those injuries upon the usurping traitors, that all the chronicles in the world
should record the same in memory. And so comfort his mother in the best
sort he could, praying her a while to be content, till God had placed him in
his right, whereof he hoped in short time to be possessed.

Those words of comfort proceeding from so green a head: the Duchess did
much admyre, and no doubt had great pleasure in her son, of whom she had no
little joy, whose education was answerable to his birth, having learned men of
all sciences to read unto him, by whom he profited in learning so
excellently, that it was rare to find any in Millaine, or the whole Dukedom
comparable unto him for study and other agility of the body, for which he bare
the prize from al of his years, whose conditions were so answerable to the
noble Duke his father, that if any man did know the one, would suppose soon
who the other should be.

Whilst the Duke of Millaine was furnishing his power, news was brought him,
that Flodericus one of the usurpers had by poison brought his companion unto
his longest home: to avenge whose wrongs Sextilius son and heir unto Gonsalo
deceised, had gathered all his allies, kindred and friends in arms, and was in
the fields with intent to suppress Flodericus, and claim in right the Duke
dome in truth and lawful succession belonging unto neither of them.

This (...) the sudden Galastino could not well believe till he was by letters
from diverse Nobles of Saxony, and friends to the noble Andrugio and his:
thereof advertised, whereof being thoroughly resolved, he hasteneth his powers,
and h^^ing a ga^^ to serve their turn, After many sorrowful f^rewels, and
womanish tears shed by both the Duches, he takes the se^s: whose honorable
purpose favored by God the maintainer of truth, brought them safe to the road
of their desire: anchoring in the night, perceived of n^ne by reason of the
gloomy weather, Galastino commands a (...) to be prepared, which being
accomplished, he presently dispatcheth messengers from ship to ship with
letters of direction, for their sudden landing to all his Captains, who
knowing the Dukes pleasure, flacke no time for the performance of his will.
Such have was made on all sides, that ere Phoebus showed his glittering beams
on the earth, the Duke with all his power were landing, and by his leaders,
(who had viewed the City) made choice of their ground to encampe in, where they
fall to work at all hands, trenching, furnishing of tents, and buyldinge of
Eabinn^s and (...) provisions for their succors.

The morning watch coming to the top of the walls, to relieve their
companions, looking out with more diligence (by like) then the rest, espieng
the ensigns wauing in the wind, by their bell gave notice to the Citizens, who
on the sudden were amazed, yet every man was in arms, and hasten to their
places of defense. The rumor of this news brought to the court, Flodericus the
usurping Duke supposed Sextilius, who lay in^amped on the other side, had made
some sally toward the city: but when he was advertised of the contrary, and
that none (as he perceived) could give him certain intelligence what they
were, but supposed them to be strangers come from other. Countries, by the
number of ships which they had anchoring in the harbor.

This news was worse welcome then the former behalf, and stroke such a
terror in Flodericus, that as one dispairing of his evil intent, he breaks
out into these speeches.

Flodericus, thou see now, that to govern a state is to be cares Captive:
uncertain is the state gotten by guyle, and dispoyling thy friend: what man
have thou ever seen to prosper with any thing gotten by treachery: Then how
can thou hope of any good more, with quietness to be possessed in this
Dukdome, which thou by treason inioyest? No, no Flodericus, blood requires
blood, he which draws his sword against his Sovereign, shall perish by the
same. If this saying be true, as no doubt it is, then miserable man, what shall
become of thee, which have not only exiled thy prince, his Lady and sweet
children, but put thy friend who loved thee to death: vengeance therefore is
thy meede, and shameful will be thy end. Miserable Flodericus, whose hap is
now so harn as thine, which shall be now enforced to resign that, which by
unlawful means thou did force upon thy self? Ah ambition, I see now how
like a worm thou grawest upon the heart vnill thou have eaten it asunder.
Ambition led me to those mischiefs, who might have levied in mine own estate
a principal member of my country, beloved and feared: yea, and who was it
that I might not command? but repentance comes too late, wretched man, yet
seek the safety of thy countryman, let not their blood be shed for thy
offense, But yield thee unto the mercy of them, whose coming (questionles) is
to be revenged on thee.

Oh Andrugio, noble Duke and rightful heir to this Dukedom, would God I did
know where thou or thine remain (if any of you breath life) that I might
(acknowledging my duty pilgrimlike on my bare feet) traueile to find you and
bring you to your own possessions.

But vain it is for me to make lamention for his loss of whom as yet I
never heard things, no doubt his soul rests safe in the bosom of his
redeemer: he an innocent, thou a murderer, nay a Homycyd that has slaughtered
his Prince, his Sovereign, and the anointed of God, for whose heinous
offense, there is no submission can penetrate the highest, nor no pardon be
purchased for thee and thine. Confusion shall fall upon thee, and upon all
traitors, who cannot live long, but God will root out. Ah Flodericus, where
was the remembrance of this thou now rehearsest, when thou did first attempt
this odious fact, vilde in ye sight of God and men, by whose justice thou shall
be pulled down, and thy posterity rooted from the dukedom of Saxony: but
would to God that were the worst, Then should I offer my neck to the sword of
those that seek my blood, and so make an atto^^ment for my people, who
innocently are like to be spoiled: but despair Flodericus, there can be no
offense so heinous as treason, therefore inexcusable before the throne of the
just judge, where we shall all make our account. Oh yt I had perished in my
mothers womb, or that being borne, I had never lived, to attain the state of
a man. In vain waste I these frivolous speeches, Linger not the time
Flodericus, suffer not thy subjects to be spoiled, nor thy country ruinated,
thou know strangers in a foreign country hold all their own they lay
hand on, and what is there gotten, is well gotten: miserable is that land,
where strangers in warlike sort follow their ensigns, consider therefore the
harms which may be done to thy people, and send to the camp to know their
pleasure, and what they demand, so shall thou be the sooner advised, whether it
is best to defend thee by armies, or by submission, yield thee unto his mercy,
if they come in right of Sextillianus, why then, my title is as good as his,
who were both usurpers of another right, if in the behalf of our lawful
Duke, why then yield thee. Would God it were so, then should I never stand on
terms, but resign his dukedom, who being of noble and honorable
disposition, might receive me to mercy, if not my self, yet will not punish
my babes for the fathers offense. This restrained by the abundance of tears,
issuing from his eyes, he ends his sorrowful oration, determining, in all
haste to dispatche a messenger to the camp, that he might be advertised what
they were, and there demandes, which accordingly was accomplished: the
messenger making small have, the duke of Millaine was come to the walls before
that he could get out, and had sommoned the same, of whom the Citizens crave
parlie, which he granted, and upon hostage delivered for his security, entered
the same, where in the counsel house, the chiefest and (...) the country were
assembled: unto whom the Duke said. Nobles and you subjects to the lawful
heirs of Saxony, know that I come as a friend to your duke and you, not as an
enemy, if you yield to what in right I have to say unto you all, it is not
unknown, how most traitorously these usurping rec^eants, Flodericus and his
companion Gonsalo, have behaved themselves against their liege Lord and
sovereign, depriving him of his lawful right, and exiling his wife and
children, to the Duke I know not what is happened, having not seen him this
xii. years, at least: Therefore can I not report of credit, whether he live
or rest in death. But to advertise you, wherefore I come in arms as you see,
is in the right and maintenance of the duchess, and the prince her son: Who
by me, have been since their exile relieved, and by me as I am bound by law of
arms and conscience, shall be again established in their right, or I and my
followers will leave our lives in the cause. Therefore my Lords, advise you
whether you will see the ruin of your country, or receive your Prince, as
rightful heir, and deliver that usurper Flodericus into my hands. I crave
but right, as your selves can judge, wherefore let me have answer to my
content, and have peace, or otherwise stand upon your defense, for this is my
resolute determination. The nobles of Saxony, which were friends to Andrugio,
and the commons were joyful at the heart to hear the duke report the cause of
his coming, hoping that God had sent him to cure that heavy grief of heart,
which generally they endured. But the contrary part was not a little appaled
to hear this news, wherefore they crave some time to determine of their
answer. To which he willingly consents, giving two days liberty for the
same, in which time he demands to be resolved, without longer delay, that he
might assure himself of peace or war. Thus having delivered the cause of his
coming, he departed to the camp, where he caused to be proclaimed, that no
soldier of what estate or condition soever, should commit any manner of
outrage against any of the country whatsoever, neither imbessell the goods or
cattels of them or any of them, on pain of loosing his head.

The Duke having taken his leave, Flodericus was advertised what he demanded,
whose heart suspecting as much before (as guilty consciences be timorous) was
not a little grieved: yet he considered that the right was none of his, and
therefore could not assure himself of his subjects, who hated him for diverse
causes: Besides, the life of Gonsalo, whom he had caused to be murdered, stroke
a greater fear to his heart then before: wherefore doubtful what to do, at
length resolves by the citizens, to return the duke of Millaine his
determinate answer, for the which he speedily dispatcheth messengers, unto
whom, when they were all assembled, he says.

My loving friends and countrymen, the time is now come, that God has
determined to cut me off, no longer to govern you, the which I have long
expected, yet had not grace to lament my life past, wherefore his rod is ready
lifted up against me and my house, whose ruin is at hand which ever has been
noble, now shall it be made miserable and ignoble, my self the cause, which
have procured the same. Ah my Lord Andrugio, my cruel dealinges with thee and
thine, never departed out of my remembrance, no never slept I without the
remembrance of thee an^ thy virtuous Lady, whose life in most traitorous wise,
I conspired. But woe is me, and accursed bethe time I (...) violence against my
Lord and his: But my friends, and loving Countrymen, it is not now time to
hold you with talk, only resolve what is to be done for your safety,
whose lives and welfare you shall see, is more dear then mine own, for my
heinous offense committed against you in spilling the blood of many your
friends, to attain this place of honor wherein Tyrant like I have governed
you, which I most heartily beseech you to pardon.

For mine own life I esteem not, but yield my self willingly to death for
y^^r security: yet my good friends, though I perish, show mercy to my
children, who are innocent of my heinous (...), and preserve their lives which
may prove better then the father, and regard the honor of their Au^cestours,
which I (...) respected. This is the sum of my request, which if you grant,
my death shall be much more welc^^e unto me, to which I must perforce submit
me. you know my mind, advertise the Duke of Millaine, of what I have
determined, seek your own security, and let me perish with the sword, that
have made the offense.

The nobles and citizens, that hard his sorrowful process albeit they hated him
to the death, was moved with (...) of his ruthful tale, and grieved for his
children, pretending to become humble suitors for them, yet commanded they a
guard to be kept about the court, until the Duke was entered, that none of
them might escape, to avoid displeasure.

Having set all things in order, The nobles who before had determined to
receive him in very brave manner departed the city, to the Camp of the Duke,
who hearing by an ambassador, before dispatched, of their coming, came out to
meet them, whom on their knees, the Lords and Citizens, beseech of mercy,
and in their Dukes behalf, whose by right it was, to enter the city, and
receive the government.

Small entreaty served to persuade the Duke, who sought not their harms in
any sort: wherefore taking direction for his armies, acompanied with the
chiefest of his train and Captains, he entered the city, where he was
royally entertained, and conducted to the Court where Flodericus and his
company with sorrow attended the sentence of death.

The duke being thus with honor in their princes behalf entertained, gave
thanks unto them all, exhorting them to continue trusty and faithful to their
duke and his lawful inheritor, assuring them, that God who had ever defended
the right, would always favor the innocent, and subvert the Traitor. Great
joy was there throughout the region of Saronie for this happy tidings, where
Alphonsus son and heir to Andrugio was proclaimed duke, at which every man
reioysed.

The Duke seeing all things brought in such happy manner to his content, and
saw that the people in faithful wise were linked to the prince, he discharged
the most of his soldiers, and gave order to his nobles for the prince
Alphonsus, whom with the Duchess he commanded with all expedition yt might
be, should come to receive their right, aduertising them by letters of his good
success, and how the peoples hearts were bent to honor them.

This done he commanded Flodericus to be brought to his presence, whom
honorably he used, commanding him to sit down by him, where he declared how
vnhonorablie he had dealt by his noble friend Duke Andrugio, in exiling him and
his children, usurping his right, whereunto he had no title, with many examples
how God had punished the like offenses in many, and that doubtless God would
punish an offense so heinous on him and his posterity.

Flodericus, whose conscience accused him of as much as the Duke had said,
could not excuse his fault, which was too well known, neither did he crave
life for himself, for that he expected the contrary, but besought the Duke,
howsoever it should please his excellency to deal with him, to take
compassion on his tender children, whom he hoped would become good subjects,
and being warned by his unhappy fall, prove faithful to the estate for ever.

The Duke whose heart was moved to pity, taking no pleasure in his death,
neither the subu^rtion of his house which was always noble, wherefore showing
his noble mind and inclination to pity, pronounces his dome on this manner.

Flodericus usurper of the lawful right and title of thy late liege Lord, the
honorable Duke Andrugio: I do in requital of thy dishonorable fact, banish
thee and thine from this thy native country of Saxony, never to return upon
pain of death, unless it shall please God thou find the duke and can entreat
him to come and enjoy his right and government of this country, thy children
and lady after ten years to enjoy their patrimony, what ever become of
thee: Forty days liberty I give thee to provide things beseeming thy
estate, after which time not to be seen in this dominion upon pain of thy
life.

Flodericus hearing the judgment of the Duke, was ioyed at the heart to escape
with life, which had deserved death in the most extremest manner, wherefore
humbly yielding thanks for his gracious clemency, he departs his presence.

The Duke having taken this order with Flodericus hearing Sextillius Gonsalo
his son had not yet dislodged his camp, sommoneth him by a Her aught to come
and yield to his mercy, or otherwise without favor to receive his desert the
Her aught omitting no time til he came to ye camp of Sextillius, delivers
his message, who^ Sextillius entertaineth honorably: and having heard what
favor the Duke had showed to Flodericus, he stands not now upon terms, but
made proclaimation that every man should depart to his home, and he himself
would procure the Dukes pardon for them all, or yield his life for them, this
done, enerie man at the first warning, glad to be eased of their toil, and
more joyful of their young Dukes return, presently depart with bag and baggage.

When Sextillius came before the Duke, who had examined the cause of his
insurrection to be in the revenge of his father, murdered by Flodericus, he
was the sooner persuaded to receive him to mercy: wherefore in hope that he
would become a dutiful subject and acknowledge Alphonsus son and heir to
Andrugio his lawful prince and show the like sign of obedience, he pardons
his fault and honorably entertaineth him, pardoning also al such as had
offended with him.

Sextillius seeing the noble mind of the Duke of Myllaine, humbly thanketh his
excellency for this undeserved favor, and taking oath for his loyalty had
leave to depart at his pleasure.

The fortunate success of ye Millain Duke was brought unto the Duchess
Susania, whose heart you may suppose was not alitle joy full to hear the same:
wherefore according to yt dukes pleasure she hastneth to him with as much
speed as might be. All things for their journey being ready, the Duchess
with the prince Alphonsus her son, giving great thanks to the Duchess for
her friendship showed in their extremity, a happy gale began to blow, which by
the Nobles to the Duchess declared, she slacketh no opportunity, but taking
her leau^ embarqueth her and her son to the port of her desire wherein shortly
they arrived, and was most honorably with great triumphs by her Nobles and
commons entertained.

Thus the prince as lawful inheritor, being quietly possessed by the Duke of
Millaine, in his Dukedom: they passed sometimes in pleasure, riding to see the
state of the country, and using pastimes of recreation, the Duke careful to
see his lady and country, having seen all things, finished to the young
Dukes desire, taking leave of the Duchess, the prince and his Nobles, betaketh
himself to the sea, where we leave him homewar^s bo^nd, where he shortly
arrived.

All things ordered according to desire on all parts, nothing wanting but the
Duke Andrugio, for whom was not a little sorrow throughout the whole Dukedom:
of whom (courteous read^r) if thou friendly accept this already written, thou
shall (if God permit) hear more in the second part, wherein thou shall find
matter of much delight, and not altogether unprofitable.

In the mean time I crave thy friendly censure and pard^n for such faults, as
be co^mit^^ (...), or escaped by the prin^^^, being not well (...) my writing.

Finis.

